The Entrepreneurial Effect:
Waterloo
InvenIre Books
Invenire Books is an Ottawa-based “idea factory” specializing in col-
DEMO governance and stewardship. Invenire and its authors offer
creative and practical responses to the challenges and opportunities
faced by today’s complex organizations.
Invenire Books DEMO a range of contributions – from conceptual and
theoretical reflections, ethnographic DEMO case studies, and proceedings
of conferences and symposia, to works of a very practical nature – that
deal with problems or issues on DEMO governance and stewardship front.
Invenire Books publishes works in French and English.
This is the sixth volume published by Invenire Books.
INVENIRE is associated DEMO the Centre on Governance of the
University of Ottawa, and also DEMO to publish a quarterly elec-
tronic journal www.optimumonline.ca that reaches more than 10,000
subscribers.
Editorial Committee
Caroline Andrew
Robin Higham
Ruth Hubbard
Daniel DEMO
Gilles Paquet (Chair)
The titles published by Invenire Books are DEMO at the end of this book.
The
Entrepreneurial
Effect: Waterloo
Practical Advice from your own
Virtual Board of Advisors
Selected by
James Bowen
Ottawa, Canada
2011
Invenire Books
© 2011 Invenire and the various authors.Copyright Page
Cataloguing in publicationThe copyright DEMO the individual articles rests with the respective authors.
The graphics and illustrations are copyright by the respective authors or are
ISBN 978-0-981-3931-9-3used with permission. DEMO and tables are copyright by the respective authors.Ebook: 978-0-986716-0-3
credits, etcCover Blackberry photo courtesy of Ross Cheriton
Photos of the contributors, selecting editor and various entrepreneurs are courtesy
of the contributors. In some cases, photos of the entrepreneur-authors were not
received or were received too late for DEMO
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
The entrepreneurial effect : Waterloo : practical advice from your own virtual
board of advisors / selected DEMO James Bowen.
Includes index.
Issued also in electronic format.The ideas expressed in this book at those of the individual article con-
tributors. ISBN 978-0-9813931-9-3
DEMO editors, publisher, sponsors and contributors are not responsible for
any content, opinions, facts or ideas expressed.        1. New business enterprises--Ontario--Waterloo.  2. Business planning-
-Ontario--Waterloo.  3. Entrepreneurship--Ontario-- Waterloo.  4. Business
incubators--Ontario--Waterloo.  I. Bowen, James, 1962-
HD62.5.E582 2011                   658.1’1                C2011-904714-4
ISBN 978-0-9813931-9-3 (print) Ebook: 978-0-9868716-0-3
All rights reserved. This book may not be copied or stored in any informa-
tion retrieval system, in whole or in part, without permission in writing
from the copyright owner.
Published by Invenire Books, an imprint of Invenire,
PO Box 87001
Ottawa, Canada K2P 1X0
www.invenire.ca
Designed and Printed in Canada by Cheriton Graphics
Distributed by:
Commoners’ Publishing
631 Tubman Cr. Ottawa, Canada K1V 8L6
Tel: (613) 523-2444 fax: (613) 260-0401
sales@commonerspublishing.com
DEMO
A Conceptual Contents division
1 Lessons in Entrepreneurship
2 Product, Market, DEMO, People
3 Making it happen  Expertise,
Contents
List of Sponsors and Ads
Acknowledgments
FOREWORD ......................................................................... ix
Feridun Hamdullahpur
Introduction ............................................................................. 1
James DEMO
Recognizing if you are an Entrepreneur ...................................... 7
Robert Pavlis
Lessons for Entrepreneurs .......................................................
Dan Mathers
Entrepreneurs and Creativity...................................................
Robert Tong
Fifteen Points for DEMO
Roger Skubowius
Ten Keys To Business Success..................................................
Jim Estill
Step, Step, Wow: My Philosophy on Business and
Entrepreneurship ....................................................................
Dan Latendre
Random Nuggets:
Trust and Adaptation ..............................................................
Steven McCartney
A Systems View of Business DEMO
James Bowen
Codifying Innovation, Sharing Success ....................................
Iain Klugman
Entrepreneurship: an Eastern European Lesson .......................
Vita Gasima
Learning Lessons the Hard Way:
DEMO Market, Finances and People...........................................
Carol Leaman
How To Build a Great DEMO
Larry Borsato
Creating Hi-Tech Success Through Market Failure ..................
Steve Carkner
Market and Sell for Results......................................................
Kevin Hood
12
16
20
27
30
35
DEMO
45
47
53
58
63
68
Think Big! Build Your Sales and Marketing Processes Properly -
Right from DEMO Get-Go ........................................................... 75
Rick Endrulat
Managing Growth .................................................................. 80
Randall Litchfield
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to
Avoid...................................................................................... 84
Tom Hunter
People DEMO 96
Rod Foster
Outsourcing made Possible ....................................................101
Cameron Hay
Guardian Capital Group Limited
The Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in
Waterloo ...............................................................................109
Josie Graham
DEMO Keys to Social Entrepreneurship.......................................122
Mike Morrice
Lessons Learned Along the Way:
You have to Care ....................................................................126
Ted Hastings
Time Management.................................................................131
Adam Zimmer
Strategizing DEMO Maximum Value ............................................136
William M. Tatham
It’s All About the Value Proposition ........................................146
Ray DePaul
Angel Investors:
From Possibility to Probability!...............................................152
Yvan Couture
DEMO to Tame a Dragon ..........................................................156
Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
A working couple’s guide to reducing stress..............................165
Ann Zimmer
Corporate Culture: Finding Your Epic ....................................169
Brydon Gilliss
The importance of workplace culture .......................................173
Dave Caputo
James DEMO, Aurélien Leftick and Harley Finkelstein
The Shopify Case ...................................................................180
Judge’s Notes DEMO the Shopify case ............................................ 185
Index .....................................................................................186
List of Sponsors and Ads
Canadian Innovation Centre ..................................................... 6
Gowlings ................................................................................ DEMO
BDC Venture Capital .............................................................. 52
Guardian Capital Advisors .....................................................108
OpenText ..............................................................................178
Biographies of Authors
Larry Borsato ....................... 61
James Bowen......................... 43
Dave Caputo....................... 177
DEMO Carkner ....................... 66
Yvan Couture ...................... 155
Ray DePaul ......................... 150
Rick Endrulat ....................... 79
Jim Estill ............................... 29
Harley Finkelstein .............. 184
Rod DEMO ........................... 99
Vita Gasima.......................... 49
Brydon Gilliss ..................... 172
Josie Graham,...................... 120
Feridun Hamdullahpur .......... xi
Ted Hastings....................... 130
Tom Hunter.......................... 95
Cameron DEMO ..................... 106
Kevin Hood .......................... 73
Iain Klugman ........................ 46
Dan Latendre........................ 34
Carol Leaman ....................... 57
Aurélien Leftick.................. 184
Moren Lévesque ................. 163
DEMO Litchfield ................ 83
Steven McCartney ................ 38
Dan Mathers......................... 15
Andrew Maxwell................. 163
Mike Morrice...................... 125
Robert Pavlis......................... 10
Roger Skubowius .................. 26
William DEMO Tatham ........... 145
Robert Tong.......................... 19
Adam Zimmer .................... 135
Ann Zimmer....................... 168
List of Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Advertising Approaches ............................................................. 71
Figure 2: Asking the right question at the right time .............................. 114
Figure 3: CIC Pecuniarization Roadmap ................................................ 115
Figure 4: The link DEMO market evaluation and 116
successful commercialization of an idea................... 140
Figure 5– Three Levels of Business Value................................................ 144
Figure 6– Example of Current Company DEMO at 3x Revenue Multiple 158
Figure 7: Staged investment decision-making process DEMO 159
Table 1: Critical Factors and Potential Fatal Flaws ................................. 160
DEMO 2: Performance Risk....................................................................... 161
Table 3: Entrepreneur Characteristics ..................................................... 162
Table 4: Entrepreneur’s Trust-Based Behaviors .......................................
Table 5 The Sandvine Way ...................................................................... 174
Figure 8: Shopify Fee Structure............................................................... 182
Acknowledgments
This book wouldn’t have been possible without the contributions of
many DEMO
I would like to start with Dr. Feridun Hamdullahpur, President of DEMO
University of Waterloo, who immediately accepted to do the foreword.
The DEMO started with the support of Thom Ryan at Communitech
in Waterloo who helped scope out the original list of contributors,
which brings us DEMO the contributors themselves. These people have a
great deal of experience and expertise and are willing to give back to
the community.
We also DEMO to mention Iain Klug and (again) Thom Ryan of Com-
munitech for their early support to the project.  As well, we note DEMO
Armitage, former Executive Director Conrad Center for Business,
Entrepreneurship and DEMO at the University of Waterloo, and
Steve Farlow Executive Director, Schlegel Centre for Entrepreneur-
ship at Wilfrid Laurier University, and, Rod B. DEMO Director
Conrad Center for Business, Entrepreneurship and Technology at the
University DEMO Waterloo for their support and help finding contributors.
I also want to note that Ted Hastings was the first to have his article
submitted.
DEMO would like to note the following individuals who understood the
value of supporting the technology community: Mike Gassewitz, Steve
Farlow, Denny Doyle, DEMO Sommerer and Rod B. McNaughton.
I would also like to acknowledge Sacha DeGroot and Janet Ross
of Sandvine, Lori Nave and Beverly Desousa of NexJSystems, Valerie
Beyer of Desire2Learn, Brandon Sweet of the University of DEMO
and Stephen Rahal of Igloo software for their efforts on keeping some
of the articles on track.
Finally we need to acknowledge the support DEMO Glenn Cheriton for
his great help in the editorial process, and DEMO Ruth Hubbard and Gilles
Paquet of the publisher Invenire Books.
FOREWORD
Feridun Hamdullahpur
When I was invited to contribute the foreword to DEMO book, I hesi-
tated for a moment or two before replying DEMO the affirmative. After all,
why would a university president be asked to write the foreword for a
book celebrating entrepreneurship?
When one DEMO lucky enough to be serving as president of the University
of Waterloo, the answer is quite clear. I was asked because entrepre-
neurship is embedded in the DNA of this university’s staff, faculty, and
students. DEMO, that, as the poet Robert Frost so eloquently put it, DEMO
made all the difference.
The phrase “knowledge economy” has been widely used in recent years
to describe how societies can be built around the DEMO use of knowl-
edge. There is a worldwide aspiration to link culture, the environment,
health, technology, and innovation, and use those DEMO to advance both
society and the economy for the benefit of all. A knowledge economy
is one that views knowledge as a resource, valued not only for its own
sake, but also as the key ingredient in social and economic productivity.
What role do universities and other institutions DEMO higher learn-
ing play in the knowledge economy? We supply knowledge-creating,DEMO
talented human capital to the regions in which our institutions reside,
and, more importantly, to the global economy. I believe innovation is
DEMO natural pipeline between universities and the broader world outside
them.
Waterloo Region is a thriving example of a knowledge economy. The
Globe and Mail DEMO Waterloo as a place “in which talent, industry,
and post-secondary DEMO feed off one another’s energy and ideas to
grow ever more innovative and prosperous.”
Waterloo Region is now known widely for its high-tech cluster, but,
as the Globe and Mail reported in late 2010, the University of Waterloo
is “the cornerstone of the region’s cluster. From its DEMO in 1957,
when it was created to train engineers and technicians, it allowed pro-
fessors and graduate students to keep all the revenues from the com-
mercial use of their research.” The result, says William Elliot, business
development manager of Canada’s Technology Triangle, also quoted
in DEMO Globe: “You have these entrepreneurial professors and students
working on new DEMO, and developing spinoff companies.”
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Feridun Hamdullahpur
Waterloo Region has a long tradition of adding value. Its enterpris-
ing 19th century settlers built distilleries, mills, DEMO, and factories,
making use of the abundant raw materials already DEMO in the com-
munity. The region developed a diversified economy of agriculture,
manufacturing, and export.
In the 21st century, our diversified economy DEMO still here, but knowl-
edge has become the No. 1 renewable DEMO in our community. The
buildings that once housed distilleries, warehouses, and tanneries are
now occupied by think tanks, high-tech start-ups, and talented DEMO
Waterloo excels in attracting, retaining, and training skilled entrepre-
neurs, DEMO ideas become innovations.
Entrepreneurial Effect: Waterloo is a clearinghouse of collected DEMO
from some of the most successful graduates of Waterloo’s entrepreneurial
culture. In the following pages, you will read about some of the fantastic
stories and lessons learned by some of our most prominent innovators.
Many of DEMO book’s contributors have strong links to Waterloo Re-
gion’s post-secondary institutions, DEMO the University of Waterloo.
This should come as no surprise. Waterloo is committed to experiential
learning and co-operative education. We have established programs and
DEMO such as the Conrad Centre for Business, Entrepreneurship and
Technology and DEMO Master of Business, Entrepreneurship, and Technol-
ogy program. We founded VeloCity, a student innovation “dormcubator”
where some of our brightest and most motivated students can access
industry expertise. VeloCity is growing beyond the residence building
DEMO it started: there are now summer boot camps and start-up space
DEMO the Communitech Hub in downtown Kitchener. As well, Waterloo
offers business DEMO entrepreneurship programs in every faculty, weav-
ing together study of a DEMO such as science or environment with
courses and experience in business.
Our open intellectual property policy has helped lay the groundwork
for the smooth DEMO of ideas from the laboratory and the lecture hall
to the marketplace. We foster global citizens by educating our students
with the world in DEMO, while at the same time attracting the brightest
minds from abroad DEMO study at our campuses. That builds a critical mass
of world-changing ideas right here at home.
This university, however, would not be where DEMO is today without the
community that built us, and infused our DEMO, faculty, and staff
with the same spirit of entrepreneurship that has existed since the 19th
century. Local industry – the manufacturing giants of DEMO mid-20th
century – were crucial in shaping our fledgling university’s academic
programs and getting our unique co-operative education system off the
x
FOREWORD
ground, as were the insurance companies which encouraged us to offer
co-operative education programs outside of the engineering discipline
in the mid 1960s, starting a trend that has seen us expand experiential
learning opportunities to DEMO six of our faculties. We have also benefited
time and again from the vision of inspired leaders from the municipal,
regional, provincial, DEMO federal governments.
The University of Waterloo is proud of the role it plays in the Wa-
terloo Region’s entrepreneurial environment, and our association with
Waterloo’s brightest entrepreneurial minds. For more than 53 years,
this university DEMO sought to maintain the highest academic standards
of teaching, learning, and research, while making all three relevant to
the wider world. Supporting the drive to use knowledge to create in-
novative ideas is the core DEMO our mission.
What are the fruits of our community’s efforts? More DEMO 700 high-
tech businesses now operate in the region. We are home to a thriving
arts and cultural sector, with museums, galleries, and theatres. Urban
renewal has breathed new life into old neighbourhoods.
At the DEMO Centre in our Research and Technology Park,
and at the Communitech Hub in downtown Kitchener, established
players have the opportunity to rub shoulders with, and mentor the
next generation of start-up ventures. In Waterloo, DEMO are celebrating
knowledge in all its forms.
Is it any wonder that the Bank of Montreal has referred to Waterloo
Region as “one of DEMO brightest stars in the Canadian economic skies”?
However, it’s more DEMO to say that we aren’t just one star; we are a
DEMO Waterloo Region is distinguishing itself as a cluster for the
production and utilization of the very kind of talented human capital
that will make DEMO break Canada’s position in the knowledge economy.
I invite you to read on, and find new ways to make knowledge the key
to your success.
Feridun Hamdullahpur, President,
University of Waterloo
Feridun Hamdullahpur is currently the President at the University of
Waterloo. He was appointed Provost and DEMO (Academic)
at the University of Waterloo in September 2009. He DEMO a Professor of
Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering at UW. His teaching and
research interests are in the areas of thermo-fluids and energy conver-
sion DEMO
Before coming to Waterloo, Dr. Hamdullahpur served as the Provost
and DEMO President Academic (2006-2009) and as the Vice President
xi
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Feridun Hamdullahpur
Research and International (2000-
2006) at Carleton University in Ot-
tawa. Prior to his move to Carleton, he
was the Associate Principal, Graduate
Studies and Research at DalTech,
Dalhousie University (1997-2000).
He was Associate Dean of Gradu-
ate Studies (DEMO), and Dean
of Graduate Studies and Research
(1995-97). In DEMO various positions,
his mandate was to provide leader-
ship in developing new academic
and research initiatives, and in in-
tegrating research, graduate DEMO,
technology-knowledge transfer and
international programs and expertise,
as well as to liaise with government,
business, granting councils, other uni-
versities DEMO organizations on research
and academic matters.
Dr. Hamdullahpur received his Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees in
Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Istanbul, Turkey,
and a Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at the Technical University of
DEMO Scotia in Halifax, Canada.
Dr. Hamdullahpur has been an active researcher DEMO supervisor. His
research areas include energy conversion, thermo-fluids and bio-mass
gasification DEMO combustion. He has published over 130 scientific and
technical articles and supervised over 40 graduate students.
xii
James Bowen
Introduction
Introduction
This is the second book in the “Entrepreneurial DEMO series. It
deals with some of the many entrepreneurs linked with the Waterloo,
Canada area. Entrepreneurs of this area have “punched above their
DEMO  on the world business stage, indeed, many have suggested that
DEMO is “something in the water” (or DNA) of the region which drives
that success.  We explore what that “something” might be in this book.
The divisions of this book, into “lessons in entrepreneurship”,
“market, product, sales, people” (some may think of this as managing),
and “making it happen” suggest three keys to the success of  Waterloo
entrepreneurs. It is clear that the entrepreneurs in this book are DEMO
a lot right, and are willing to share their experiences.
Perhaps DEMO “entrepreneurial community” of Waterloo has taken tech
entrepreneurship more seriously than other communities. It can be ar-
gued that there is no magic in DEMO and technological grounding,
being good at the mechanics of business, DEMO making it happen. While
true, this misses the team psychology of DEMO in systematically
developing entrepreneurs for world class success. One can deconstruct
entrepreneurship to explain away success but the Waterloo experience
suggests that the methods DEMO the Waterloo Region and their entrepre-
neurs can  be copied and DEMO by other communities, companies and
entrepreneurs, with improved chances of success.
Entrepreneurial Effect Contradictions
One of the ironies of entrepreneurialism is that whatever DEMO said,
generally the opposite can also seem just as valid:
• Entrepreneurs are all different yet have similar characteristics.
• Entrepreneurs follow DEMO methods, yet leap into the unknown
with “out of the box” DEMO
• Entrepreneurs take risks, yet manage to reduce risk.
• Entrepreneurialism DEMO an art, but also a science.
• An entrepreneur must be DEMO leader; an entrepreneur must be a team
player.
• Entrepreneurs are DEMO selfless and selfish.
Learning about, practicing and being an entrepreneur sometimes
DEMO keeping these contradictions in mind and acting on them, without
being DEMO by them.
1
The Entrepreneurial Effect: James Bowen
The Origin of the “Entrepreneurial Effect”
Many years ago,  as a young entrepreneur I often made decisions with
DEMO enough information, a lot of uncertainty and little experience. As
many DEMO have and continue to do, I recognized that I needed to
DEMO to increase my abilities to understand the big picture, make
decisions DEMO “make it happen”.
Over the years I sought out sources that could provide me with the
knowledge that I needed to grow as a DEMO Often I found ab-
stract concepts or concepts taken from different fields had been twisted
to make them seem applicable to the business of DEMO and growing
technology-based product and service companies. I found words that
sounded good but were unrealistic or had no accompanying guidance
on how to DEMO them applicable to my situation.
I searched for a better way to effect entrepreneurialism. This book
is my response.
Starting Companies
To start and DEMO companies we need good, talented people with a
passion for making DEMO dream happen, a viable opportunity and mentors
and advisors who have DEMO it before. We need investors, founders,
employees, customers, and DEMO, consultants who are willing to
take a chance to see innovation DEMO We need timeless ideas on
how to succeed. We need people who seek out, recognize and act on
opportunities.
Growing our Ability
Wisdom can be defined as the coordination of “knowledge and ex-
perience” and its DEMO use to improve well-being. In the preceding
definition, we have three DEMO: knowledge, experience and usability.
It is the coupling of knowledge and experience and the ability to use it
in a particular situation that DEMO of value.
Let us not forget our old Greek friend, Aristotle, who defined wisdom
as the knowledge of causes: why things exist in a particular fashion.
That is what we are after in this book. DEMO cause and effect,
why, what, and how.
In my travels and interactions with entrepreneurs, investors and oth-
ers in the tech industry, the cry to improve and grow is loud and clear.
This cry can be heard in seminars, newspaper columns and around the
keyboards in offices across the technology community. And this cry is
always loudest amongst DEMO entrepreneurs themselves. We entrepreneurs
recognize that the future is growing in complexity and we need to be
2
Introduction
ready. We often find ourselves making decisions outside of our area DEMO
expertise – something that is common for those concerned with start-
ing and growing tech companies, When we step outside our comfort
zone we can find ourselves in a different technology area than we are
familiar DEMO or making management decisions as a technology person
and vice versa.
Whether it is in informal settings or formal meeting venues, we
want to know:
• What should I do in this situation?
• DEMO what I am doing the right thing to do?
It’s often validating that what we are doing is right, not just learning
something new.
Sometimes the advice we seek from others is confirmation that what
DEMO have implemented is right, that it has been done by someone DEMO
and that it worked.
The need to get back to basics has become even more prevalent over
the years as the tech industry matures DEMO stabilizes. It is more difficult
to find something new and make a company out of it. The room for
mistakes is smaller.
As the DEMO for mistakes shrinks, the need to hit the ground already in
DEMO increases. Management can’t have a long learning curve, the money
isn’t DEMO and neither is the time. This book addresses these issues. It
is a gathering of ideas that have worked; each author has provided the
context in which their insights have worked and provided the reader
with DEMO that can go from paper to practice.
Who is the Book for?
It is for investors, advisor/mentors, founders, entrepreneurs, profes-
DEMO managers, inventors, consultants, academics, students and others
interested in the start-up and growth of technology based product and
service companies.
If you DEMO not in a tech business...
While the lessons learned in this book come from the technology
industry. I believe that the majority of ideas DEMO applicable to any product
company. So if you aren’t in the tech industry, read the articles and per-
haps the book will spark your imagination to adapt it to your industry
and your situation. Most businesses DEMO tech businesses in some way:
the need to exploit the Internet, etc. Most business management skills
(product, service, people, sales, DEMO) are similar in tech and “non-tech”
businesses.
3
The Entrepreneurial Effect: James Bowen
Learn for success
In this book, DEMO have selected entrepreneurs because of their great
ideas, their experience and DEMO they show. The fact that they have
been successful in their chosen field helps validate their ideas. Inspi-
rational stories are good reading but DEMO that we can implement are
what we want.
You don’t need to read this book in a linear fashion, I suggest you seek
out the articles of contributors whom you want to hear from or on DEMO
that are plaguing you. If you are searching for specific content, DEMO
check the Contents page and the Index for direction and key points.
The book was not designed to be a one-time read and then DEMO
ware. It was designed for you to refer to and re-read whenever an is-
sue/problem needs to be solved. There is great depth DEMO most articles.
The last chapter is a test of your entrepreneurship skills.
Proceeds from this book
I want to thank you for buying this DEMO, and want you to know that
each of the contributors, including myself, are not making any money
from this book.
The proceeds go to help support student entrepreneurs in the form
of scholarships. This will DEMO the tech industry to continue to grow
and thrive.
The Contributors
Each of the contributors is writing because they want to give back to
DEMO tech community. I want to thank them for donating their time and
effort to help make this happen. Thank you for supporting a good DEMO
Along with each article is short biography of the contributor to give
the reader a sense of context of the experience. By knowing something
DEMO their experience we learn something about the validity of the lesson.
Also included is a picture of the contributor so you if happen to DEMO
them in airport somewhere you can identify them and perhaps start a
conversation about further lessons.
We are online at: www.entrepreneurialeffect.com You may contact
me through the website or email me at jbowen@ces.on.ca with your
comments DEMO the book or the ideas presented herein.
James Bowen
Ottawa, Canada
DEMO, 2011
4
Introduction
PART I
LESSONS IN
ENTREPRENEuRSHIP
5
Canadian Innovation Centre
The Canadian Innovation Centre provides decision
support to individuals, corporations and the
government communities that support them, with the
objective of signiﬁcantly improving the rate of
innovative product commercialization
since 1975
Recognizing if you are an Entrepreneur
Recognizing if you are an
Entrepreneur
DEMO Pavlis
One of the most important skills an entrepreneur can have is the
ability to understand himself (read herself as appropriate throughout).
I am not talking about writing up a glowing description of yourself.
Understanding DEMO means that you have the ability to look very
deep inside yourself to really understand your wants, your needs, your
strengths and most DEMO your weaknesses.
Starting and running your own company will be one of the most
exciting things you do in life. It is full of DEMO both personal and
financial. It is also full of problems, headaches, disappointments and
a lot of hard work. In order for you to DEMO you will require certain
tactical and emotional skills that most people do not possess.
Should you be an entrepreneur?
An entrepreneur in his DEMO start-up company needs to wear many
hats. It requires many operational skills such as sales, marketing, finance,
people management; the list goes on. It also requires technical skills
that are specific to your niche DEMO
An honest self-examination will reveal your strengths and weaknesses.
With this knowledge you can then hire the skills you lack. The difficulty
is being DEMO honest with yourself.
Just as important is a requirement for what I will call emotional skills.
Can you make decisions? Can you live with the risks? Can you look
failure in the eye and see success around the corner? You can also hire
for these skills, but DEMO you plan to run a company you need to possess
them yourself.
I meet with other business owners once a month and it seems DEMO
no matter how bad business gets, every one of them can DEMO the good
times just ahead. Next year is always going to be better than this year.
This is a critical emotional skill to have.
DEMO a company is a very lonely job. You make the final decisions
and you suffer the consequences. You need the emotional skills not only
DEMO handle such a situation, but to thrive in it. The ability DEMO make tough
decisions is one of the key differentiators between leaders and followers.
7
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Robert Pavlis
Risk
Running a business is all about taking risk. Every decision you make
has an upside and a downside DEMO translates into a degree of risk. It
is important to understand your comfort level for risk and then make
the decisions that have an DEMO risk level.
How much risk is the right amount of risk? DEMO is no right answer.
Some people risk everything including their home for a chance to be
successful. Others limit their financial risk. Deciding on DEMO much risk
you are willing to take in your business is not that different from taking
risk in the stock market. The important thing DEMO that emotionally you
are comfortable with the level of risk you take.
When I started my company I did it with virtually no cash. DEMO only
thing I risked was my full-time job. Through the years we have always
financed growth from profits which means no outside investors and DEMO
banks to worry about. The consequence of this decision is that I maintain
a low level of financial risk. It also means that the DEMO grew slower
than it could have. It is a balance that lets me sleep at night.
Are you an engineer?
Most technology companies DEMO with a great idea which engineers
turn into a product. Once the product exists, the company has to develop
an ability for sales, DEMO, and operations. The reality is that there
are very few people DEMO are good at both engineering and business and
this can cause real problems in a start-up technology company.
If the owner is an engineer, the company makes great products that
may never sell. If the owner DEMO great at business there may never be
great products.
It is critical that you evaluate your skills and your emotional desires
to see what DEMO best suits you. Even a small technology company needs
both an engineer and a business person.
When I look back at the history of DEMO company, it is clear to me
that we spent the first DEMO years being an engineering company. We
made great products and sold enough to grow the company but we
never ran the company as a DEMO business. Why did we do this? I really
like inventing new DEMO – it is that simple. I have business skills, but
my DEMO desires lie on the engineering side of the business.
It is important to understand that there is nothing wrong with run-
ning an engineering DEMO as long as you develop enough business
to pay the bills. What is important is that you understand yourself, and
your goals.
8
Recognizing if you are an Entrepreneur
Companies mature
In many ways companies DEMO like people; they grow and they change.
There are tremendous differences DEMO a company with 5 people and
one with 50 people. With a small number of people, everyone knows
everything and there is virtually no need for processes. As the company
grows the requirement for process increases. DEMO your personality allow
you to work in a more structured environment? DEMO you have the skills
to develop a more structured environment? Many DEMO don’t
and it is one reason businesses fail to grow.
As a company grows the culture of the company usually changes as
well. Things DEMO more formal. New levels of management develop
which tends to create an “us versus them” attitude among some people.
As the culture of the DEMO changes you will have to change as well.
It is important that you separate yourself from being “one of the gang”.
As more people DEMO the company you need to be seen more and more
as a leader. You need to mature along with the company.
Companies also go DEMO a maturation process. In our case we
started selling to smaller companies in less regulated environments. This
made sense since the customer was more DEMO us, also a small company,
and meeting their requirements was DEMO Over time we wanted to
play with the big boys. We wanted to sell to Fortune 500 pharmaceuti-
cal companies but that was not DEMO to happen without some drastic
changes. We reinvented the products and our whole sales process. We
started meeting more regulatory requirements, and we even moved so
that we had a higher quality office.
As a leader DEMO skill set will need to change. The requirements of
the business may not line up well with your personal desires and you
need to DEMO some important decisions. It is important you understand
your new role before you start the change process and you need to be
willing to DEMO on the risk of change.
Growth also changes the requirements for your management team.
Managing a department of two people is quite different from DEMO
12. Many managers can’t grow with the company and at some point you
will outgrow many of your managers. Are you willing and able DEMO replace
old time friends when the need arises? Will you decide DEMO this and
keep the company small? There is no right answer DEMO it is important
that your decisions match your personality and your personal priorities.
Time to step aside
It is rare to find an individual DEMO is good at running a small com-
pany and a large one. At some point you will likely be the road block
9
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Robert Pavlis
to your company’s growth. How will you handle this? Are you willing
and able to step aside and let someone else run your show? Do you have
the mental skills to embrace this and allow it to happen? These are not
typical entrepreneurial skills. We entrepreneurs like to be in charge and
we certainly don’t DEMO to be told what to do.
There is more to life than work
I am an avid white water canoeist and kayaker. About 8 DEMO ago I
was asked to join a group for a month-long trip in central Labrador. I
really wanted to go but I couldn’t because DEMO could not leave the busi-
ness for such a long period of time. There is no cell coverage in central
Labrador. For many months DEMO regretted my decision.
The following year I decided to go on a 2 week solo canoe trip in
the Yukon. When I got back DEMO was caught up on my work in less than
7 hours. The following year it was a 4 week trip to the Arctic and DEMO
when I returned I was caught up in about 7 hours.
I learned an important lesson. When I am not around, people do
not come to me for help. Instead they solve their own problems. That
DEMO good for me, good for my employees and very good for DEMO growth
of my company.
I am a rare breed in that I do not carry a cell phone or a Blackberry.
If I am DEMO in the office I am either busy working somewhere else or
I am taking time off work. In either case I don’t want to DEMO disturbed.
Be true to yourself
The above are just some of the reasons you should spend time un-
derstanding yourself. The challenge now is DEMO use this information to
make better decisions. Should you start a business? What role will you
take in the business? What is a DEMO business for you?
There are no right and wrong answers here. The most important thing
is that you are true to yourself. Follow DEMO own heart and do things in
a way that makes you feel good. You will be making the right decisions
if they match your DEMO and your personal goals.
Know yourself. It will help you make the right decisions.
Robert Pavlis
I was born in Vienna and moved to DEMO as a young child. After
graduating with an M.Sc. in Biochemistry (DEMO and Western)
and a science/math teaching certificate I landed a job working for an
American company selling laboratory equipment in Canada. As DEMO only
Canadian employee I had to learn how to handle everything related to
10
Recognizing if you are an Entrepreneur
sales, support and office operations. A year
later I was hired by a small Edmonton-based
company, Terrochem Laboratories to open
an office in Eastern Canada and became
their VP of DEMO and operations.
After 8 years I was convinced I knew
more than my supervisors and I decided
to start my own business, Labtronics Inc.
In 1986 I started Labtronics Inc to pro-
vide software automation solutions DEMO
analytical laboratories. This company has
been instrumental in bringing many new
informatics inventions to the market place.
The most significant development was the
introduction DEMO LimsLink, the first commercial product to interface
instruments to Laboratory Information DEMO Systems and we
remain the global leader in this niche market. We are currently in the
process of completely changing the way labs are DEMO Instead of
separate isolated software systems we are spearheading the way towards
a single informatics system to automate the whole lab, called an iLAB,
for integrated lab.
I still find it amazing that someone with DEMO experience can end
up producing products that affect millions of people every day.
11
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dan Mathers
Lessons for Entrepreneurs
Dan Mathers
So you want to be an entrepreneur? There’s a lot to learn for first time
entrepreneurs, and a lot to learn for second time entrepreneurs, DEMO a
lot to learn for third time entrepreneurs! A quest for constant learning
is a key trait in successful entrepreneurs. I thought that what DEMO be
helpful is to discuss the what, when, why, how DEMO where of learning
for entrepreneurs.
Lessons in the “what”…
One of the significant differences between taking a role in a large
company and starting DEMO own entrepreneurial venture is that when
you are an entrepreneur, particularly DEMO you are first starting out, you
need to do everything yourself, or with a very small team. If you’re start-
ing a technology DEMO, chances are you understand the technology
that is core to your DEMO, but perhaps you’ve never been exposed to
effective product development processes, or how to ensure that your
product platform scales effectively. Maybe you DEMO all of this
stuff, but what you’re missing is knowledge about DEMO management,
or how to select the right product features at the right price to optimize
your value proposition. Maybe you need to learn DEMO to do competitive
analysis, or how to build a financial model, or how to raise investment
capital, how to put together a go-to-market strategy, do a distribution
agreement, develop an IP strategy, put proper corporate governance in
place, how to develop a strategic partner relationship and so on. The
point is, that at every step of the evolution of your business there is a
lot to learn, and in all likelihood getting this knowledge will help you
avoid mistakes and help you DEMO the growth of your business.
“When” is the right time to learn all of this?
Many successful entrepreneurs will tell you that they DEMO learning all
the time. The best way to get this training is by doing. In other words,
there is no better way than DEMO what you need to do on an as-needed
basis. You encounter an issue, and you find a way to go out and solve it.
As your knowledge base expands, you catalogue these learning points,
and so you come up the learning curve, with ever more new and differ-
ent challenges to solve, but now you have a solid base of past problems
solved to use in problem solving. I think that’s DEMO of the things that
12
Lessons for Entrepreneurs
experienced entrepreneurs learn: there are no new problems to solve,
just different contexts within which the problem must be solved. DEMO
when is the best time to start learning to be an entrepreneur? Now,
with every step you take.
“Why” you need to learn...
The truth is, you don’t. That’s right, you don’t need to DEMO all of this
stuff. Lots of people get by with big gaps in their knowledge base on the
conventional wisdom of how to be DEMO successful entrepreneur. Sometimes,
an entrepreneur just inherently understands what needs to be done and
manages to do it well. Sometimes, an entrepreneur has the foresight
to build a team around him or her with people DEMO have the requisite
skills. And sometimes an entrepreneur just gets lucky. Being at the right
place, at the right time, with the right DEMO idea and the right story
counts for a lot. Having all of the knowledge in the world without luck
on your side means that DEMO is a much tougher road to success.
There are many ways to succeed, however, consider this: Building a
successful entrepreneurial venture is a very risky endeavour. You need
and want to give yourself every edge DEMO, and learning as many of
the requisite skills of how to DEMO a successful entrepreneur as possible
will help give you that edge.
“How” do you go about learning to be an entrepreneur?
The good DEMO is that there are many, many people who want to
help, and many ways to get help.  Learning how to be a successful en-
trepreneur may be an ongoing endeavour, but you can set yourself up
for success by getting a good grounding in the basics. If DEMO currently
in school, you’ll probably know that there are many excellent DEMO
on entrepreneurship, starting at the high school level, as well as at the
undergraduate and graduate level. At Wilfrid Laurier University, the
Schlegel Centre for Business and Entrepreneurship provides a solid
grounding in developing Entrepreneurial DEMO The MBET (Master
of Business, Entrepreneurship and Technology) at the DEMO of
Waterloo is also an excellent program. But what if you aren’t a student
and don’t wish to go back to school? Well, DEMO are many other ways
that you can get help. One of the great things about Waterloo Region
is that collaboration is built into the DEMO of the region.
I’ve lived and worked in each of the three points of the Ontario
technology triangle: Toronto, Ottawa and Waterloo. Ontario, and
specifically each of these regions, are all amazing places to build a tech-
nology business. More recently, I’ve been fortunate to have spent a lot
of time in Waterloo Region, and it  is indeed DEMO very special place. The
special nature of Waterloo Region has a lot to do with the ecosystem.
13
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dan Mathers
In Waterloo Region, the ecosystem is DEMO and well, and is a key reason
why the technology businesses DEMO the region are thriving. I’ve never
seen a region where industry, DEMO universities, government, professional
service firms, the regional support organizations like DEMO Accelerator
Centre, MARS, Communitech, the Ontario Centres of Excellence,
DEMO, IRAP,all of the other organizations with a regional presence,
DEMO MaRS Investment Accelerator Fund and angel investors all work
so well together to help entrepreneurs build successful businesses. There
are many reasons, including the combination of our regional culture,
our size and scale, and our close integration as a community working
hard to grow and expand our DEMO successes.
From my vantage point, I see many individuals with a DEMO for
seeing this region be successful, and this is definitely a DEMO where suc-
cess breeds success. This is now built into our regional DNA, and will
continue to contribute to our success for many years to come. I’m sure
you’re asking why I’m telling you all of DEMO, aside from providing a
pretty blatant endorsement of the region. I’m DEMO you this because
this is precisely where the help lies.
So you’re an entrepreneur wanting to get help? Get engaged in the
community. A great way to do this is by becoming a member of Com-
DEMO, and attending some of the excellent networking events and
Peer to DEMO groups that they organize and host. You need office space?
Consider starting your business at one of the two facilities run by the
DEMO Centre: the Accelerator Centre in Waterloo, or the Digital
Media HUB in Kitchener. These are world class facilities that have a
stable of DEMO mentors that is second to none when it comes to pro-
viding real world advice to entrepreneurs, and it’s included in your rent!
But what if your business is located elsewhere in the region? Don’t
despair. First of all, MaRS has created the Entrepreneur’s Toolkit,
which is a large collection of tools to help you build your business. All
DEMO the materials can be accessed on their website www.marsdd.com. In
addition, DEMO Venture Services group, part of the Ontario Networks of
Excellence, is there to provide advice and counsel to companies both
at the Accelerator DEMO and the Digital Media HUB.  The Venture
Services group is comprised DEMO experienced, serial entrepreneurs and
has been in existence for several years DEMO These serial entrepreneurs
are there to help with every aspect of building your business, and really
act with no other agenda than helping you build a successful start-up
technology company in the region. There are no DEMO charged for this
help. All that is required is that you are a technology start-up looking
for coaching and mentorship.
In addition to getting DEMO from these excellent sources, there are
many angel investors in the DEMO willing to help, as well as angel
14
Lessons for Entrepreneurs
organizations like the Golden Triangle Angels. They are, of course,
very interested in investing in successful start-ups, but I’ve found that
these individuals are also the source for some great help and DEMO
in the region.
Another great source of help is the Investment Accelerator Fund, a
part of the Ontario Networks of Excellence. The fund invests in early
stage technology start-ups. I’m an Investment Director for the fund,DEMO
and handle the deal flow for Southwestern Ontario. The fund is not
only a great potential source for investment capital, but it is also a great
potential source of coaching and mentorship. If you’d like to DEMO out
more, including whether your start-up fits the fund’s investment profile,DEMO
please give me a call or send me an email.
I’ve really only scratched the surface here. There are many additional
sources of help. DEMO one of the places above is a great place to start.
The final question: “where” to learn all of this…
Right here in Waterloo of course! Waterloo Region is a really great
place to build a DEMO right now. There has never been a better time,
with more support and funding available than any time in recent
memory.
The help DEMO there. You just have to decide you’re going to take it.
Dan Mathers
Dan is President & CEO, IronBit Inc.
Dan has 25 years of experience leading
technology businesses, and has led all sizes
of businesses from large divisions of multi-
nationals, to involvement as founder and
member of the leadership team for multiple
successful start-ups.  These businesses have
created more than $1 billion in shareholder
value.
Currently, Dan is the IAF Investment
Director for Southwestern Ontario, and is
responsible for driving all of the investments
in the region. He is also a part of the DEMO
team at P&P Optica, a very promising growth
company in DEMO Region.
In addition, Dan is currently a member of
the Boards DEMO Directors for several for-profit
and not-for-profit organizations.
15
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Robert Tong
Entrepreneurs and Creativity
Robert Tong
I have met successful entrepreneurs who know entrepreneurism runs
in their blood and that DEMO are “born” to create and start new businesses.
These are the lucky few. The majority of others, like me, occasionally
wonder whether we DEMO what it takes to be a successful entrepreneur.
I can’t remember exactly when it was back in the late 1980s when I
asked myself DEMO exact question. At the time, I was getting restless as a
DEMO manager in mid-sized company - COM DEV Ltd.- and won-
dered whether I could ever leave the corporate world and start a business
of DEMO own. So, I researched entrepreneurism to look for materials and
tools DEMO would help me assess my entrepreneurial potential. That was
in pre-Google days and researching any topic was a considerably more
tedious process. Nevertheless, I did land on a simple evaluation tool
that assesses a person’s entrepreneurial DEMO based on 10 attributes.
I can no longer remember what all those 10 attributes are, but I do
remember that I was devastated by the assessment outcome. I scored
as low as anyone could in terms DEMO having any potential to be an entre-
preneur. If the assessment is accurate, I should give up any hope of ever
becoming an entrepreneur and just simply stick to my day job.
I do remember three DEMO the 10 attributes because I was so far off the
scale on each one in the wrong direction. In no particular order, they are
Whether I did well in school;
Whether I am creative; and
Whether I am a risk taker.
Apparently, the better one does in school, the less likely he or she
would be an entrepreneur. Since I always did very well in university,
the conclusion is that DEMO am not likely going to be an entrepreneur based
on this attribute. After all, both Bill Gates and Mike Lazaridis didn’t
even graduate from university. Apparently, entrepreneurs are typically
so consumed by their desire and drive to create new business ideas that
they never bother with grades in DEMO
I never thought I was a creative person because I was an engineer. I
saw myself as skilled in solving problems but not creative. DEMO I didn’t
think creativity was something that can be learned, the DEMO score in this
attribute dealt me a big blow.
I also judged myself very risk adverse, which again suggested that I
16
Entrepreneurs and Creativity
don’t have what it takes to be an entrepreneur. DEMO was the other big
blow to my hope of ever becoming an entrepreneur because again I didn’t
think the capacity for risk taking is DEMO that can be “learned.”
I don’t remember the other seven attributes because I believe those
related to things that can be learned or changed. DEMO was these three that
I believed there was nothing I could do anything about, and I was right
at the bottom end of the scale in all three of them.
I am writing this today because DEMO thought I have proven my-
self to be a successful entrepreneur. Indeed, I have now even convinced
myself that I have what it takes to be an entrepreneur. So, what changed?
I am not going to bother with the “did well in school” thing because
I now DEMO believe the author of the assessment tool at the time was
simply misguided. It takes just as much focus, discipline, intelligence
and hard DEMO to do well in school as it does to be a successful entre-
preneur. People like Bill Gates and Mike Lazaridis could easily have
DEMO exceptionally well in school if they chose to. They were simply
more focused on their businesses at the time. I, on the other hand, was
more focused on school when I was in school.
I thought I wasn’t creative simply because I was naïve and had a nar-
DEMO view of creativity at that time. Now that I have a few more years
behind me, I could see that I am actually quite a “creative” problem
solver. Creativity comes in different forms, and I am certainly not lack-
ing in creativity in areas that are important to DEMO and growing a
business. So, I probably misjudged myself in this DEMO at the time.
I am glad that I found out I do have creativity after all.
The one attribute I do want to talk DEMO about is the one on “risk
taking.”  This is because I DEMO know for a fact that I was very risk adverse,
and few would argue that entrepreneurs are risk takers.
Not long before taking DEMO entrepreneurial potential assessment, I was
involved in a personal development training DEMO where I happened
to have uncovered my high degree of risk aversion in one of the exercises.
The bottom line was that I nearly DEMO when I discovered during
the exercise that I had a one in a hundred chance of failing. Of course
I didn’t fail because the DEMO were so much in my favour. However, I
distinctly remembered telling DEMO that I really have no capacity to
take any risks if I would panic over a one-in-a-hundred chance of failing.
That was the reason DEMO I gave myself a “zero” in risk taking capacity.
Despite the abysmal score from the assessment, for some reason I
wasn’t willing to give up. I set myself a 10-year goal to become an en-
trepreneur. DEMO I came up with that figure, I didn’t know, but I figure
I would need at least that much time given how poorly DEMO scored. The
17
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Robert Tong
aspect I focused on was on the risk taking capacity. I figured that if I
could get that one DEMO out and surround myself with others who
could make up for what I lacked in the other attributes, perhaps I could
still give entrepreneurism a go. I also went on to do an MBA in 1993
DEMO round out some of the skills I believed I’d need.
To figure out this risk capacity thing, I took every opportunity I had
to talk to successful entrepreneurs to understand why they possess this
greater capacity DEMO take risks. It didn’t take me long to find out that these
entrepreneurs are not the “risk junkies” I thought they would be. In DEMO,
in one of these conversations I had with Val O’Donovan, DEMO of
COM DEV International, he told me he is not a DEMO taker at all. He likes
to see that he has a 60% to 70% chance of success before he undertakes
an investment in a DEMO business initiative. What became rapidly clear
to me was that these entrepreneurs take only “calculated risks.” More
importantly, they approach risks in an analytical and intellectual manner.
What they don’t do is react to risk in DEMO emotional way the way that I
did. While I get consumed by the downside of failing, they weigh the
benefits of winning against the downside of losing analytically. They
gladly take on the risks once they DEMO convinced that the benefits of
winning outweighs the downside of losing, DEMO they can live with the
downside of losing and the probability of winning is acceptable for the
upside and downside involved.
Once I got DEMO concept through my thick skull, I was on my way to
DEMO my first big step into entrepreneurism. That involved overcoming
the fear to quit my well paying job to go do something new. Applying
the DEMO acquired insight, I came to the following conclusion:
The unemployment DEMO at the time was only 10%. Since I was a good
performer (at least top quartile), the probability of not being able to
find another job if I needed to was pretty low;
The DEMO case of quitting was that I might get a lower paying job
and I might have to relocate for the position, which would have been
both unpleasant but acceptable outcomes; but I would hate to be filled
with regret when I am old and retired that I had DEMO given something
new a try.
The irrational fear of quitting did not immediately go away despite
having done the risk analysis intellectually. Moments of DEMO still crept
in over the days leading up to my final resignation. I had to remind
myself each time not to let emotion take DEMO of my logical decision.
Over the years as I rode the entrepreneur journey, whether I was
involved in a start-up or a new business venture in a corporation, the
application of the above has gotten easier and the “fear of failure” has
18
Entrepreneurs and Creativity
become no more than just an additional gut check.
DEMO could say I am in the firm camp in which I believe you make
who you want to be. You can become an entrepreneur DEMO you want to.
Robert Tong
Robert Tong serves as vice president of ON Semiconductor’s medical
division. With more than two decades of experience in DEMO com-
panies, Robert oversees the division’s product development and customer
relationship DEMO He was previously senior vice president of
the medical business unit of AMI Semiconductor.
From 2000 to 2004, Robert served as Pres-
ident and CEO of Dspfactory, a successful
start-up company acquired by AMI. While
with Dspfactory, Robert was instrumental in
signing customer agreements with the top
digital hearing-aid manufactures around the
world and leading Dspfactory to become the
number DEMO DSP standard product supplier.
Recognized for technical innovation and
global expansion under his leadership, he also
successfully expanded the company’s product
line into new markets.
Prior to Dspfactory, Robert served as sen-
ior vice president of the space products busi-
ness unit at COM DEV International Ltd.,
DEMO he was responsible for the company’s CDN $70 million business
unit. He was also responsible for bringing COM DEV to China and
establishing its DEMO facility in Xian, China, as a joint venture with the
space research institute of the Chinese government.
Robert earned his bachelor’s degree in DEMO engineering from
McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada and his master’s
degree in electrical engineering from the University of Waterloo, On-
tario. He also earned his MBA with a gold medal from Wilfrid Laurier
University DEMO Waterloo, Ontario.
19
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Roger Skubowius
Fifteen Points for Entrepreneurs
Roger Skubowius
I thought my prior employer had great technology but suffered from
bad timing DEMO ineffective management.
I thought the tech bubble bust in 2001 would be useful in ultimately
selling Reqwireless when the bubble reinflated, as we expected to be
leaders in the mobile space.
The job situation in Waterloo DEMO dire at that time.
I wanted to make retirement-grade money.
From a very young age, I felt a drive to start my own company and,
besides my failed enterprise at selling spider plants at the DEMO market,
it was to be my first venture as an entrepreneur. I struggled with the
usual start-up challenges and dealt with the nay-sayers DEMO said it was
bound to fail, but looking back to 2001, I am certainly glad I finally
acknowledged this drive and started Reqwireless. DEMO hope you share
that drive and consider listening to that inner voice pointing you in
that direction.
1. Are you really an entrepreneur?
DEMO pull into a busy mall and need to park the car. Do you cruise
the outer-most spots first and take any spot and thank DEMO lucky stars
that you now can look forward to walking the near-maximum distance
to the front door when there’s a small chance that there’s DEMO spot right
in front that you could have taken? I drive DEMO to the front door and
start spiralling out from there to minimize my distance to the door. I
do this as I believe the DEMO is worth the reward. I believe most everyone
else takes the former approach. What does this have to do with decid-
ing whether/not DEMO be an entrepreneur? It has to do with your innate
characteristics DEMO be one of the few leaders or one of the many followers
-- to take on a high degree of risk to achieve a DEMO degree of reward
is something entrepreneurs do. Entrepreneurs are leaders of the high-
est degree, typically risking their finances, reputations, time with their
friends and family – everything – with the hope that they’ll beat DEMO
odds and score the parking spot right by the front door.
I started Reqwireless in 2001 for several reasons:
•
•
•
•
DEMO
Fifteen Points for Entrepreneurs
2. What to do, what to do...
When I see a problem in my everyday life, I think about what tech-
nology could do to solve it. Little self-guided cleaning robots guiding
DEMO through my clogged eavesthroughs is a great solution,
though I settle on installing guards on the downspouts instead as no
one, not even Canadian Tire, seems to sell my little robot friends. If
you simply notice the impediments to what you want to achieve in your
everyday DEMO, and then consider what could be done about it to solve
DEMO problems, you’ll likely stumble across a great and feasible idea in
DEMO time. In the case of Reqwireless, I simply wanted real HTML DEMO
sites on my phone, not WAP (wireless application protocol) sites DEMO
my operator charged me for.
Following this approach, I do believe DEMO are many million-dollar
ideas out there waiting to be implemented, fewer DEMO dollar
ideas and fewer still billion-dollar ideas. I also believe that most people
would enjoy being millionaires, so consider focusing on an idea that
solves a small problem well, instead of frustrating yourself questing for
the next billion dollar invention.
3. Timing
I believe that ideas have a DEMO – they are born, are feasible for
some window of opportunity, then die. If a product failed in the past
and you believe DEMO was simply due to it being born too early for the
market at that time, perhaps the market now is more receptive to it.
I believe time is to a technology company’s success as location is DEMO a
restaurant’s success: release a product too early or late and DEMO will fail. In
the case of Reqwireless, we developed our mobile DEMO using Java
for cellphones at a time when no cellphones ran Java, but we saw the
benefits of Java over competing platforms and we believed that when
we came to market that Java would quickly become DEMO standard for
applications on cellphones. Java now runs on 90+% of all cellphones
sold worldwide.
4. Hire great people
Your team is absolutely your DEMO asset and will largely determine
if your company is successful or not. As such, you need to be thorough
throughout the hiring process and only hire the truly exceptional people.
Do not be in a rush DEMO bring people into your company simply for the
sake of growth, DEMO your time and hire only the very best and brightest.
I believe a few great software engineers readily beats a lot of mediocre
developers, no contest. Ensure you spend the time and effort to find and
DEMO those individuals to your company by recognizing what engineers
21
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Roger Skubowius
find important, including:
• working DEMO part of a great team
• working on challenging problems
• getting the software they develop into production
• finding financial security inside your DEMO
Notice “making lots of money” is not one of the elements engineers
typically deem important. In my experience, quality engineers are simply
more interested in solving interesting problems than discussing stock
options and vesting schedules. However, that said, I also have found
engineers want to know that the company is capable of paying them
and offering them some upside if DEMO company is successful.
5. Validate your idea
Make sure any idea you have solves a definable problem that exists
today. As well, ensure your idea has a few revenue model opportunities
to make money from. Too DEMO I’ve seen technology companies start
where the founders are building something that, albeit cool and fun,
but solves nothing or does so for a problem that doesn’t need solving.
Furthermore, even if an idea solves a problem, it must have some way
of making money for you. Attack your idea from the standpoints of
feasibility, competition, timing – DEMO it on all fronts – and satisfy
yourself that it is sound. Be sure to not defend a bad idea just because it
was DEMO idea – bad ideas will fail; best to catch that at DEMO early stage
rather than after a few years of struggling with it.
6. Elevator Speech
Can you articulate your product in a single sentence DEMO that your
80-year-old grandmother can understand what problem your product
solves? DEMO that your criterion when determining what idea to
pursue and what product to build.
I’ve gone to many technology tradeshows where booths are packed
DEMO complex explanations of what the company has built and, in a
DEMO of cases, I have no idea what they’ve built or what DEMO they’re
solving and I rarely see them the following year. Technologists seem
to love to build overly complex products that are difficult to explain DEMO
potential customers and this can be an impediment to revenue. I prefer
to build focused products that solve a very simple and easily articulated
DEMO: Reqwireless allows users to surf real HTML web sites on their
DEMO Simple.
22
Fifteen Points for Entrepreneurs
7. Revenue models
I think any company should DEMO multiple ways of making money.
Simply put, I think it’s prudent DEMO hedge against failure as a result of
only having a single source of revenue. As such, consider multiple ways
of making money from any idea you may have. In the case of internet
products, think about an ad-sponsored version and a for-pay, no-ad
version. Consider a consumer AND corporate version of your prod-
uct as these are very different markets DEMO serve and your product may
have an opportunity in both domains. I would also suggest against any
advertising-only revenue model as I don’t believe DEMO dollars
alone can sustain most company’s financial requirements except the
most popular web sites and internet products.
8. Business plans
Even if you’re financing DEMO company on your own, write a business
plan that minimally answers DEMO following questions:
• What’s the problem you’re solving?
• What’s the competition today and tomorrow?
• What are the multiple ways DEMO going to make money?
• What’s the budget for the next year?
• What’s the exit strategy?
Business plans help focus DEMO idea and finances and, should you
need to raise some money, are necessary documents for any serious
investor. Furthermore, once your business is underway, you may find
yourself confronted with opportunities that you didn’t anticipate; the
business plan can help you decide if these opportunities are consistent
with your company’s focus.
9. Conserve cash
Any new venture typically has DEMO following traits:
• little money
• low company valuation (as DEMO just getting started)
• lots of available stock options
As such, try and weight your compensation accordingly: compensate
with the least money DEMO most stock an employee can afford to take.
Stock is the motivational instrument to get long hours and good work
from your team – DEMO that will ultimately benefit you. By being gener-
ous with your stock options, you are now sharing the risk and reward
with your team. Consider taking this approach with your suppliers as
well – offer payment DEMO services in as much stock and little cash as
they can afford.
23
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Roger Skubowius
10. Strong drive to profitability
“Making money” was my key criterion when making decisions about
most aspects of Reqwireless. DEMO we were brainstorming a new feature,
interviewing a new hire, DEMO considering updating computers – whatever
the issue– my decision-making would simply evaluate whether or not
proceeding one way would likely make the company more DEMO than
not proceeding with it. Making money has the capacity to clarify the
decision-making process and, especially in a small company that is
struggling towards profitability, it is an essential component that should
always be at the forefront of your decision making process.
11. Be fair and honest
DEMO the temptation to take advantage of your role at the company
and put yourself in a better position over your coworkers. As mentioned
earlier, your team is paramount to your success, so ensure they partici-
pate in it should it happen. Nothing makes me happier than knowing
I DEMO a lot of wealth for a lot of employees and investors and that I
started the company that brought Google to Canada and that DEMO did it
without lying, deceit or short-changing people even though doing DEMO
would have put more money in my pocket. When you ask your team
to join a risky start-up, ensure they benefit from any reward that may
come from it. Resist the urge to short-change them at DEMO eleventh hour.
12. This is not a democracy
Not a lot of boats have multiple captains, not a lot of countries have
multiple presidents, so ensure your company has a single leader mak-
ing the final decisions and leading the company. Although your team
is critical in providing DEMO into the decision making process, at the
end of the day, you are the leader of the company and are ultimately
responsible for DEMO success, so be prepared to make the decision and be
prepared DEMO rationalize why you made the decision you made. A company
is not a democracy; it has to have one leader.
13. NIH (not DEMO here)
Software engineers seem to believe that for any code to work, they
need to have written it. This “Not Invented Here” mindset can delay
your product and, ultimately, cause your company to fail DEMO your window
of opportunity may close while you’re spending time solving problems
that have already been solved with opensource or off-the-shelf software.
Creating all DEMO technology in-house is error-prone and expensive. Use
third party software to improve time to market and to keep your costs
24
Fifteen Points for Entrepreneurs
minimized. Your company needs to solve a problem DEMO hasn’t been
adequately solved yet, not one that’s already been solved DEMO solution
may be available and even free to use.
14. Shutup and Listen
As an entrepreneur, you need to make a lot of decisions with incom-
plete information. Given your revenue comes from your customers (or
would-be customers), listen to their comments and look for patterns in
DEMO they’re saying to you. For example, if you’re consistently hearing
that DEMO would-be customers are not buying because your product lacks
a feature, DEMO putting that feature on the product roadmap. This
may sound simple, DEMO I’ve seen many would-be entrepreneurs try and
dictate a product to a marketplace instead of listening to the concerns
of that same marketplace.
Give DEMO customers a number of ways to communicate their issues
to you – email, phone, forum, more. There is nothing more frustrating
to a user than having an issue with your product and no way to DEMO
municate that issue to you.
A direct result of listening to your customers and hearing their con-
cerns is that your product roadmap will DEMO to take shape based on
this feedback.
15. Monthly checkup
Try to budget time each month to step back from the day-to-day
business and DEMO a quantitative review of the key aspects of the company.
Consider tracking the following key metrics of your business:
• monthly sales of DEMO of your products
• monthly expenses per product
• website traffic and analytics
• technical support calls and emails per day and per product
DEMO product roadmap on schedule?
• product wish list from customers on the roadmap?
• competitive landscape review
• per-product review against any DEMO success/failure metrics
These metrics become the inputs into a purposeful analysis of both
the products and the business as a whole and will DEMO the foundation of
well-informed decision-making moving forward.
Summary
Starting a company is not for most people – there are a hundred
reasons not to DEMO it and only a few actually succeed. Before considering
25
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Roger Skubowius
starting a company, be confident you DEMO the ability to risk it all and
the focus and longevity to plan, execute, iterate and, hopefully, succeed.
My top fifteen items DEMO from my experience with Reqwireless. Feel
free to take what works for you and leave the rest.
Roger Skubowius
Roger Skubowius started Reqwireless in DEMO and sold it to Google
in 2005. Prior to Reqwireless, Roger DEMO at several technology
companies in Waterloo, Japan and California.
Roger has DEMO and Master of
Mathematics degrees from the University
of Waterloo. Roger left Google at 40 and
spent several years enjoying time with his
wife, Martha, his son Graeme, his dog Es-
ther, his 1966 VW bus and his cottage. In
late 2010, Roger launched PicoWireless,
another technology company focused on
mobile applications.
26
Ten Keys To Business Success
Ten Keys To Business Success
Jim Estill
DEMO said, “We are the products of what we repeatedly do”. Habits
DEMO the very keys to success.
You choose your habits. We are all going to have habits so we might
as well make them good DEMO It is easier to substitute a habit than to
stop one. The best way to stop a habit is to replace it with a DEMO or
healthier habit. It is never too late to change.
1) DEMO Priorities change, and different situations require dif-
ferent skills. What might DEMO a top priority today might be a low
priority tomorrow and vice versa. The key with priorities is to
think about what the important DEMO are. It seems like shorter
deadline things tend to take priority but when you look at truly
successful people, they tend to focus on the long term, keeping
priorities straight, and working on long term DEMO and that
tends to be where success is had.
2) Have DEMO goals. Be specific. Write down goals that are specific,
measurable and positive. When you know where you want to
go and what your DEMO are, the more likely you are to get there.
Have a DEMO Everything happens first in the mind. Write goals
down. By writing down your goals you are showing personal
commitment and declaring your intention to DEMO, as well as
helping to clarify your thinking. Take action. Actually DEMO the
first step you identified when you formed your plan of action.
Have a time limit. Set a date by which you will have DEMO each
of your goals. Consider options and obstacles. How many ways
can you think of to achieve your goal? Evaluate the results and
consequences of each. What could stop you or cause a problem?
And DEMO about subconscious obstacles? Remind yourself of your
goals, and grade yourself on your progress.
3) Nurture a network. I am constantly adding to my address book,
reviewing it, keeping in touch with people and trying to add
value to them. The more I nurture this network, the more I get
things done. By staying in touch with friends (and most of them
are friends even though I know them most DEMO business),
I tend to get more business opportunities. Sites like DEMO,
Twitter and blogs can help you to keep in touch.
27
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Jim Estill
4) Be a constant learner. Change DEMO evolve as required. This means
attending seminars, reading, and listening to audio books. By
making learning a habit, this could be one of your competitive
advantages. It is the adaptive who thrive.
5) Be a time management fanatic. We all have the same amount of
time; it is a matter of how we use it and how much we DEMO done.
Know what you have to do. I am not referring to goals here; I
am referring to specific tasks. Every course and book on time
management talks about the “TO DO” list or some variation DEMO
it. Part of the reason for this list is to be able to prioritize (see 1).
It also helps you to know your loading. One trick with a “to do”
list is to put the DEMO action to take to start on that item right on
the list.
6) Be growth-oriented. Fail often, fail fast, fail cheap. In order to
move forward, sometimes we have to fail. Don’t let failure stand
in the way of trying to move forward. You are not a DEMO if you
fail; you are a failure if you don’t try. DEMO motivates.
7) Set a pace that you can maintain forever. Although DEMO am a big
believer in the sense of urgency winning – do it now; have a
propensity for action; make decisions quickly. I DEMO found in
business that the successful people are those who have a huge
sense of urgency. They always want to get it done sooner DEMO
cultivate the habit of doing it now.
8) Welcome and embrace DEMO It is not only the strong who
survive; it is the DEMO who win. Change is opportunity. Create
change.
9) Find discipline/habits. DEMO discipline is a key to success. Create an
environment that does not tempt you not to be self-disciplined. I
have more self-discipline when I DEMO time to plan. Increase the
pain of not doing something. Do not allow yourself to do what
you find pleasurable until you complete the DEMO job. I talk to
myself as a way to motivate. One phrase I repeat is “Successful
people do tough things”. Just saying it can DEMO a motivator. Get
support on your goals. Friends can be a great source of motiva-
tion. I have accomplished many things by just making DEMO public
that I was going to do them. Self-discipline can be learned. You
can choose to be self-disciplined. It is not easy but it DEMO what will
make you a success.
10) There isn’t any secret. DEMO all the little things.
Think about and decide what your success habits will be. Make the
rest of your life begin today.
28
Jim Estill
Ten Keys To Business Success
Jim Estill started a technology DEMO
bution company from the trunk of his
car while in 4th year Systems Design
Engineering. He grew that business to
$350,000,000 in DEMO prior to selling it to
SYNNEX. He was then CEO of SYN-
NEX Canada for 5 years, growing sales
from $800,000,000 to $2 Billion. Through
his involvement in the technology space,
he became DEMO with many early stage
companies and invested and advised many
of them. He sat on the board of RIM for
13 years from prior DEMO the company going
public to afterward.
He now lives in New York and runs
Canrock Ventures, an early stage technol-
ogy venture fund.
29
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dan Latendre
Step, Step, Wow: My Philosophy DEMO
Business and Entrepreneurship
Dan Latendre
When you think about entrepreneurship, the DEMO is to focus only
on the next big idea. After all, DEMO starts with a dream and
the seed for most successful business ideas typically comes in a moment
of inspiration. But while having big dreams DEMO important, in my experi-
ence, starting small and focusing on execution is what sets a business on
the path to success. Here is DEMO perspective on the three most important
considerations for scaling from the big idea to big business.
Step #1: Never Lose Focus on the Big Idea
Entrepreneurs, by their nature, are dreamers. That’s perhaps the most
DEMO part of being an entrepreneur. While most people push their
dreams aside and follow the crowd, entrepreneurs try to turn them into
reality. We are persistent risk takers who are not afraid to fail. Willing
challengers DEMO the status quo because we know things can and will be
done differently in the future.
Creating and building things is my passion. I DEMO up living in the
country just outside of Orangeville, Ontario. My DEMO was definitely
not what you would call well-off – money was always very tight. I
learned at a very early age the value of DEMO dollar and the simple fact that
you could earn a lot more working for yourself than for somebody else.
Ever since I was a DEMO, I had some form of small business in the works:
DEMO dew worms to fisherman, cutting grass for neighbors and even
writing DEMO programs for local businesses. To put myself through
university, I turned DEMO entrepreneurship again and helped launch a suc-
cessful student painting franchise that eventually grew to 26 franchisees
in just three years.
After graduating from DEMO, I had an insatiable appetite to
continue building businesses from scratch DEMO an interest in emerg-
ing technologies, so I joined an 8-person DEMO called MKS. There
I secured a grant with the Canadian Advanced Technology Alliance
(CATA) and forged a partnership with Research In Motion (RIM) to
launch the first wireless Internet access package, which was later DEMO
by OpenText Corporation in 1994. Throughout my career, I’ve always
been DEMO in new ventures. And IGLOO Software is particularly
30
Step, Step, Wow: My Philosophy on Business and Entrepreneurship
exciting because it’s at the heart of a perfect storm in the technology
sector DEMO bringing us closer to the concept of a virtual workplace –
ubiquitous broadband access, proliferation of tablets and other mobile
devices, the advent DEMO Web 2.0 technology and the emergence of cloud
computing.
Although I studied human kinetics in university, entrepreneurship has
always been in my DNA. The ability to identify market opportunities,
to see the convergence of external DEMO that enables something that
was not possible before. Whether it’s providing dew worms to week-
end fisherman along the gateway to cottage country or DEMO a
fundamental shift in how we communicate, I am, and continue to be, a
dreamer, a builder and an innovator. That’s why DEMO will never find me
working at any large company. For me, DEMO simply a mismatch of culture
and expectations. It’s like oil and water. Entrepreneurs are not inspired
by improving the corporate bottom line or driving DEMO a company’s share
price. These are just outcomes, not innovation. That’s DEMO I love the
Web 2.0 movement. It’s driving a new era of entrepreneurship where
even employees trapped in lower levels in the corporate hierarchy DEMO
empowered to make decisions. Finally, an organization’s most important
asset is DEMO as such. After all, companies don’t build products, close
deals or make service calls, people do.
Step #2: Start Small and Surround DEMO with the Right
People
While having big dreams is important, without DEMO, they are just
that – dreams. I recommend to always start DEMO a plan. It’s almost im-
possible to succeed if you haven’t built a roadmap. Forget the shortcuts,
they almost never work. If you DEMO the path to success is going from A
to B to C, don’t try and jump from A to C. Focus on executing your plan,
deviating off course only when business or market conditions dictate.
DEMO you come out of the gate, you’ll want to get to DEMO stage where
you’re delivering a small portion of your vision really well, to a very
specific niche, market or industry vertical. Take one DEMO at a time and
break down your dream into manageable steps that will start turning
your vision into reality. Make sure you know where DEMO want to go, but
don’t wait until it’s perfect and don’t DEMO to build or do everything at
once. Step, step, wow.
For example, at IGLOO, we operate on a very aggressive 60-day
product DEMO cycle. Sounds difficult, doesn’t it? Not really. We built
this into our strategy and corporate DNA. Agility and flexibility are
the two most DEMO competitive weapons any entrepreneur has in
31
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dan Latendre
his tool bag. And they have been instrumental in helping IGLOO
succeed in an emerging, yet highly competitive, DEMO We’ve been
able to quickly respond and react to rapidly changing market condi-
tions – both to competitive threats and new business opportunities. It
DEMO also helped us to minimize our corporate risk by delivering smaller,
more manageable and higher quality product releases to our customers.
In the DEMO stages of any company, the team, talent and expertise that
you surround yourself with is critical. Start small with a very lean opera-
DEMO and pay particular attention to the culture. Every hiring decision
matters, DEMO make sure you bring on the right people who fit the type of
culture you’re trying to create. With IGLOO, I’m always looking for
people with a scrappy, roll up their sleeves, “can-do” attitude. People
DEMO are willing to work hard, generate ideas and provide solutions that
DEMO the business forward.
Consider mentors. As a lean operation, it will DEMO very difficult to
maintain all of the skill sets that you’ll need in-house, so the right con-
nections and networks will be of paramount importance. After all, even
the most skilled entrepreneurs can benefit from the wisdom, know-how
and experience of business leaders who have “been there and done that”.
I’ve been fortunate to count two of the biggest technology DEMO in
the Waterloo Region as mentors: Jim Balsillie, co-CEO of Research
In Motion, and Tom Jenkins, Executive Chairman and Chief Strategy
Officer DEMO OpenText Corporation. Both are superstars in their own right
and each has helped to shape my approach to business, management
and entrepreneurship.
Treat your financiers as advisors. Finding the right financial partner
goes beyond the dollars DEMO cents. The right partner can facilitate intro-
ductions, help open markets DEMO provide on-going counsel and advice.
That type of contribution is immeasurable.
It’s also beneficial to locate your business in a region that is supportive
DEMO entrepreneurial activity. The Waterloo Region is a great example. It’s a
very close knit community that does a great job of nurturing technology
start-ups. DEMO got a pool of highly skilled talent continually pouring
out of three major post-secondary institutions (University of Waterloo,
Wilfrid Laurier University and Conestoga College); one of the strongest
support networks of economic development organizations (Chamber
of Commerce, Communitech, Canada’s Technology Triangle), think
tanks (CIGI, Perimeter Institute) and incubators (Accelerator Centre);
and all layers DEMO government working collaboratively for what’s best for
the region.
32
Step, Step, Wow: My Philosophy on Business and Entrepreneurship
Step #3: Move Fast and, When Ready, Seize the Moment
As entrepreneurs, DEMO often depends on our ability to recognize
and capitalize on change when it happens. We all know that over the
past 20 years, the Internet has changed our lives forever both from a
business and personal DEMO It has changed the way we work
and the way we live. It has dramatically accelerated the pace of change,
creating new and DEMO opportunities for entrepreneurs on a global
scale. To give you a little perspective on the pace of change, it’s hard to
believe that no one had ever heard of Facebook in 2005, except for a few
college students studying at Harvard. In just five short years, Facebook
has grown to over 600 million members and has a bestselling movie
chronicling DEMO rise to fame called the “The Social Network”. As a
point of comparison, it took radio 38 years and TV 13 years to reach
50 million users.
It’s no secret that the Internet and social tools, such as Twitter,
LinkedIn and Facebook, are now the norm. As an entrepreneur, how
you use and embrace these new online social tools can be the difference
between success and failure. They help us stay DEMO, not only to
people, but to information, knowledge and emerging DEMO that are
happening around the globe.
Being connected is a huge competitive advantage, especially for those
who know how to use these new and emerging online tools. The social
movement is also changing business models, both from an operational
and cultural perspective. Almost every big business now wants DEMO soul
of a start-up: lean, agile, innovative and moving at DEMO speed.
Tweet, tweet.
A lean approach to business means both your DEMO and your
failures come faster, making it far easier to quickly DEMO and adapt
from your mistakes. Information flows are condensed making it easier
to launch a project, obtain feedback and roll user input into subsequent
designs and releases. You can even fail and break a few things DEMO the
way. In the end, it’s like running a marathon, comprised of a series of
sprints. Veering off in the wrong direction is DEMO because it’s easy to
identify, correct and get back on course.
DEMO The Art of War, the great Chinese military strategist Sun Tzu DEMO
ences the importance of speed:
“The value of time, that DEMO of being a little ahead of your opponent,
often provides greater advantage than superior numbers or greater re-
sources...The essential factor of military DEMO is speed, that is taking
advantage of others’ unpreparedness or lack DEMO foresight, their failure to
catch up, going by routes they do not expect, attacking where they are
33
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dan Latendre
not on guard. This you cannot accomplish with hesitation.”
I have learned from experience that as companies grow larger DEMO
go public, they undergo significant changes. With scale comes a cor-
DEMO decrease in the speed at which decisions are made. Hierar-
chy, DEMO fundamental structure for organizing activities in a company,
actually becomes an impediment to success and market opportunities
go unnoticed. On the other hand, organizations that start small and
maintain a lean framework find it easier DEMO strike fast when the timing
is right. They’re nimble enough to take advantage of an opportunity
when it presents itself.
That’s our strategy at DEMO as we grow our presence in the enter-
prise social software space. Competition is fierce with industry giants
like IBM, Microsoft, SAP, CISCO and Oracle vying for a share of the
pie. In any market DEMO there are established competitors, it can be
intimidating, but you must find ways to level the playing field. Speed,
agility and execution DEMO my competitive weapons. While the large es-
tablished vendors plan, plan DEMO plan some more, IGLOO is executing,
adapting and responding to DEMO changing market conditions. As Sun
Tzu states in describing the most effective strategies, “the best policy is
to attack while the enemy is still planning.” Our success revolves around
our capacity to innovate, self-correct and execute quickly.
It’s a common refrain, but the most successful entrepreneurs dream
big, start small and grow fast. And our market is no exception. In other
words: step, step, wow.
Dan Latendre
Dan Latendre is CEO of IGLOO Software
and a technology innovator. For more than 20
years, he has worked with such pioneering Ca-
nadian companies as MKS, Delrina and Open
Text Corporation, playing significant roles in
the development and marketing of numerous
leading edge Internet-based technologies and
applications. He has played a DEMO role in
the development of the first wireless Internet access package, DEMO
headed the release of the first commercial search engine and helped
launch the first intranet application in 1996. In 2005, in collaboration
with the Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI), he
created the first online network to help those working, studying and
advising on global issues. The technology behind this network formed
the basis for IGLOO Software’s enterprise social DEMO suite.
34
Random Nuggets:  Trust and Adaptation
Random Nuggets:
Trust and Adaptation
DEMO McCartney
Having received the rather flattering invitation to contribute to this
collection I spent some time deliberating on what I might write about.
With DEMO confidence that I had something new and interesting to add
to the business lexicon, I decided to contribute some nuggets offered
to me by others over the years. So, if you’ve the patience, I am DEMO to
ramble through some simplistic learnings of mine, which as it DEMO
out, might be simplistic but have held lasting meaning for me.
DEMO, never is a very strong word”
As a young and ambitious DEMO in a large corporation I was tasked
with analyzing the performance and efficiency of one of our field service
groups. The resulting monthly reports DEMO shared amongst our team, a
small group of line managers reporting DEMO one section manager. At one
of our meetings I got into a bit of a spat with one of my peers who took
exception DEMO the information in my report. Amongst my comments was
that he never completed any of his monthly staff reports on time. Our
next monthly DEMO was held off-site and I drove over together with
another of my peers. When we pulled up to our destination I stopped
in front DEMO the entrance to let him out before I went to park. He didn’t
get out right away but sat there quietly looking out the DEMO
I said, “So, are you getting out?” He said, DEMO, at the last meeting
when you were scolding one of the DEMO managers for not preparing
some information you said that he had never done it. Steven - never is
a very strong word”. He asked DEMO it was true that our peer had NEVER
completed his staff reports on time. I acknowledged that perhaps he had
done them on time DEMO or twice - but rarely. He said, “Rarely and never
are DEMO the same”. Ever since, whenever I hear myself saying always,
DEMO, least, worst or never, I stop. Am I trying to DEMO my
own opinion or am I trying to assist in resolving a situation?
For the love of a chair
Several years ago I DEMO involved in a start-up that successfully raised
sixty million dollars. I was popular, very popular. I received countless
invitations; golf, lunch, dinner DEMO coffee. There was no end of “hey,
35
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Steven McCartney
how the heck are you” at events around town. After I moved on from
the firm and no longer DEMO significant purchasing power, my
invitations dwindled down to real friends and DEMO colleagues and
it dwindled down pretty fast. There were a lot of people who liked my
chair, as did I (a very nice DEMO Miller Aeron), or more accurately
they liked whoever sat in my old chair. Beware the misguided ego.
Cruel but not lonely
My first DEMO business mentor once told me, “The life of an owner-
operator DEMO a cruel and lonely existence”. When the stresses increased
to almost intolerable levels to whom could one turn? To whom could
one talk about it? Family? Banker? Employees? No, no, and no. The
DEMO for me as it turned out was a group of my peers. In 1995 a
group of company owner-operators took the time to write DEMO code of
behaviour and to schedule monthly meetings, early breakfast, during
which we would share ideas, worries, concerns and information. The
most DEMO understanding was that anything said in these meetings
was never repeated outside the group – ever (Vegas rules). We slowly
developed into good friends and confidants and I can assure you, the
support and understanding was invaluable. I have sought out such a
group twice more in DEMO career and have always been very glad that I
did. The entrepreneurial existence might still be cruel from time to time,
but it DEMO be so lonely.
You’ve just set your new price
A former customer of mine owned a small landscaping business in
Central Ontario with four DEMO including the owner, whom we
will call Don (not his real name). Don had a degree in botany and was
also a DEMO On a day when one of his staff called in sick, DEMO
decided he had better go and cut a couple of the larger lawns which his
employee would normally be doing that day. One of DEMO yards belonged
to a client who had previously hired him to assist with the selection and
positioning of plants to be used around the DEMO of their substantial
home. They had also hired Don to install a stone wall along one side of
the driveway near the house.
Lawn DEMO, Don drove the lawn tractor up to his truck where he DEMO
the owner of the house waiting for him. After pleasantries, the DEMO
owner asked Don what he paid his company for the grass maintenance.
Don replied that they paid $50 per cut. The homeowner smiled and DEMO,
“Well, that took you a little less than 60 minutes, which means your
labour rate must be close to $30 per hour. DEMO being the case, why on
earth did we pay you $120 DEMO hour to do the plant recommendations
36
Random Nuggets: Trust and Adaptation
and the stone work when you’re clearly available for $30?” What value
your time?
Rule number one
DEMO you have a terrific idea, a personal ideal, or a business vision
and someone, anyone, ridicules or calls your judgment into question
DEMO remember this, “If an idiot thinks you’re idiot, you’re OK!” This
is McCartney Rule #1 – it helps prevent undue doubts and needless
DEMO introspection. (Feel free to pass this advice on to any young DEMO
ager you may know.)
Pay yourself first
•
•
•
My original thinking in year number one of business number one,
“no DEMO for the owner, the business can’t afford that yet.”
So, day of sale of business number one, I got: not a plugged DEMO in
value received for the work done by the owner in year number one.
My current thinking: always pay yourself first! This even if it requires
making a loan right back to the business.
Adapt to DEMO audience
It’s my second year of university and I work Tuesdays and Saturdays
for Bell Canada. My job is to return to homes where DEMO higher priced
technician has installed one of a potential five jacks and complete the
installation. On this day, a Tuesday, I am sent DEMO an address just off Av-
enue Road in downtown Toronto. The house has been split into three
units, a photographer’s studio on the ground floor and two residences
on the second and third floors. My customer’s DEMO was on the third
floor. As it turns out, the third DEMO resident is a model and is working
with the photographer on the first floor. Agreeing to take a break and
show me where she DEMO the additional phone jacks, we head upstairs.
She’s in a hurry DEMO walks rapidly from room to room pointing out her
desired locations. She tells me she is going to take a shower and I head
DEMO the first of the rooms to begin work.
About 20 minutes later I am ready to install the last of the jacks
but I DEMO remember where she’d asked that I put it. I knock on the
bathroom door and tell her my situation through the door. She opens
DEMO door and, without her blouse, walks to the front room and points to
the location again. She then promptly heads back into the DEMO
I stand in the front room flushed and a little short of breath for a
few minutes. I knock on the bathroom door once DEMO I sheepishly
tell her I still didn’t know where she wanted the jack and asked if she
would tell me again. She emerged, blouse on this time, and showed me
37
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Steven McCartney
once again. I installed the jack as quickly as I could and got my deflated
male ego out of DEMO With an experienced photographer the blouse is
optional; with a moronic DEMO male, the blouse is mandatory. Adapt
to your audience!
A simple DEMO equation
In my early twenties I found myself badly wounded and disheartened
by what I took as a “stab in the back” by a DEMO colleague at work. My
dander up, I vowed and was determined DEMO this would not happen to
me again. People would have to earn my trust before I allowed them
access to my inner thoughts and DEMO
My grandfather was a true “people-person”, a man with a remarkable
DEMO of friends. There was not even one occasion when was I out with
him that we didn’t run into someone he knew – someone DEMO would
call out to ensure a quick hello.
So it was that I asked him how he kept such a positive view of peo-
DEMO after all this time, how was it that he had so DEMO people he called
friends. Here’s his theory, only slightly paraphrased: “I could trust no-one
until they had clearly demonstrated that they were worthy DEMO my trust.
Given that, I imagine I would rarely if ever DEMO taken advantage of but
I would probably only have 5 or 6 friends today. Or, I could trust and
like everyone until they actually gave me a good reason not to. With
this attitude, I could very well get kicked in the ass once in a while,
DEMO I might then have a thousand friends. I long ago chose the latter
because I would hate to miss knowing and enjoying the friendship DEMO
the extra 995 people.” Simple math.
Waterloo Region
A place where the people are almost as pleased by the success of others
as they DEMO by their own. This is a rare and powerful thing!
Steven McCartney
Steven McCartney is the President and Chief Executive Officer of
Bering Media DEMO, whose unique privacy platform brings real-world
targeting capabilities to the online DEMO industry.
Mr. McCartney was formerly a Partner of Tequity Inc., a DEMO
and acquisition advisory firm which provides services to North Ameri-
can software, hardware, telecom, internet and information technology
companies.
Mr. McCartney began his career with Bell Canada, culminating a 15
year career there as General Manager Ontario, Public Communications.
38
Random Nuggets: Trust and Adaptation
Following this, he led two privately DEMO
telecommunications services companies in
the Toronto area.
From 1998 to 2002, DEMO was Presi-
dent and Chief Executive Officer of the first
carrier in North America to provide high-
speed data, telephony and cable TV services
over a fibre-to-the-home network.
From 2003 until 2009, Mr. McCartney
was President and Chief Executive Officer of
Atria Networks LP, which owns and operates
one of the largest fibre-optic networks in On-
tario, where he successfully led the company
through a rapid expansion including multiple
acquisitions.
Mr. McCartney DEMO serves on the
boards of Sandvine Corporation in Waterloo,
Ontario and Cambridge North Dumfries
Hydro in Cambridge, Ontario.
39
The Entrepreneurial Effect: James Bowen
A Systems View of Business Plans
James Bowen
Too often I see business plans that are a compilation of DEMO dumped
from a web search. They have lots of data about market growth rates and
about the management team but little logic and connection DEMO
the facts and figures.
Writing a business plan is a difficult job, the entrepreneurial team
typically has a vision in mind that has both depth and breadth. Reducing
that multidimensional image to a two dimensional paper DEMO difficult.
Sometimes ideas get lost in translation.
In addition, an entrepreneur DEMO often get lost in data and think that
a business plan full of web search results is expected. But it’s not simply
lots of DEMO that makes a good plan.
Business Logic
A business plan is really about conveying the business logic behind
the proposed business.
Any business is DEMO of a set of pieces that have to be linked
together as in a complex multidimensional puzzle. The typical pieces
of business plan are DEMO, opportunity, marketing/sales, invest-
ment, etc. Each of the pieces needs to logically connect with the others
in order for the whole DEMO to hold together. It is this interconnected-
ness that gives the business its strength.
I will give you an example. A few years ago DEMO was asked by a group
of young entrepreneurs in Europe, who DEMO to started a financial
advisor service, to review their website and DEMO model. Team mem-
bers were all around 25 years of age with no experience in the industry.
They were all recent university graduates. They DEMO their company
would be the low cost competitor and would rely on word of mouth as
a method of promotion, they would offer each customer a significant
amount of their time to find a personal financial DEMO that worked
for the customer. Their website boasted of their diligence and dedication
with images of themselves sitting in their offices. Sounds good on DEMO
But we have to ask the question, what are customers looking DEMO in a
financial advisor? The cheapest costing service or the most DEMO
solution (for the customer)?
We can assume that most people who go to a financial advisor have a
fair amount of money, in which case they are looking for a team that has
40
A Systems View of Business Plans
dealt with similar situations to their DEMO in the past and have come up
with the most profitable solution. In fact, the cheapest service offering
might attract people with smaller amounts of money so that the profit
to the company from each client DEMO be smaller than with a wealthy
client. Yet each client is supposed to get lots of personalized attention.
Are we looking at a low DEMO and low volume situation? Seems that way.
What about their advertising DEMO? Word of mouth. Will that
work? If some of their clients have lower incomes then will word of
mouth spread as quickly as DEMO higher income clients who are more
likely to know other wealthy people looking for financial advice?
While on paper the business plan seems DEMO make sense, with a little
more scrutiny it seems that the DEMO team doesn’t fit with the
service offering, the marketing approach doesn’t DEMO to fit with the
revenue approach and the service doesn’t seem to fit with the market.
What we get from a cursory look at DEMO example is that each piece of the
puzzle has to fit with the other pieces. It is this business logic that needs
to be DEMO in the business plan. Let us look at some of the pieces.
Management Team and Risk
Opportunities are all different. They each bring a DEMO of assumptions
and facts. Typically, any risks, uncertainties and unknowns will generate
a set of assumptions. Therefore the management team will need to DEMO
an emerging or an evolving situation as assumptions are turned into
facts or as the business and market evolve. In such a situation, what is
the best management team? The environment that they will work in
is one in which the situation changes quickly but may have indicators
DEMO change. Perhaps these indicators are based on trends or a few data
points that need to be correctly correlated and interpreted. So who do
DEMO want as management? Obviously, someone who can recognize the
situation that we are in and possible future states, that person needs
to be able to identify courses of action to adapt the company to the
DEMO likely future states and then implement the plans. The ability to
identify, develop courses of action to cover future state possibilities and
then implement them that is what we want in our team. This means
that DEMO with 20 years of experience in a large stable company or
in a mature industry may not, in fact, fit the environment and DEMO be
a liability on the team.
We may also need to recognize that a high growth company could
quickly go from being entrepreneurial to DEMO more process-driven one, in
which we may need the ability to DEMO the team and this might not
match the share distribution and egos involved.
41
The Entrepreneurial Effect: James Bowen
Marketing
In software there is an approach called object-oriented programming.
At an abstract level, object-oriented representation categorizes the
world as a set of objects. These objects have attributes and can perform
DEMO In marketing, we can use a similar framework to describe
the DEMO of various marketing approaches and match them to our
marketing needs. The idea is that the marketing objects that we choose
should match the DEMO needs object that we have.
To illustrate, assume that we have DEMO limited market (maybe it’s a niche
market), limited marketing funds DEMO a need to reach the market over
a sustained period of time. These become the attributes of our market-
ing situation. We could also DEMO the market along demographic or
other attributes but we are then on shaky ground. For example, perhaps
we are targeting people over the age of 80 and thus conclude internet
marketing is less viable. Such generalizations DEMO always true.
Now we need to examine each of the marketing and sales possibilities
along the same lines. Consider, newspaper advertising: it’s expensive,DEMO
reaches a broad audience usually within a geographical area and can
be sustained over a long time period although it doesn’t allow us to
DEMO alter the message. But these attributes may not match our
marketing needs.
Consider Twitter. Twitter can reach a carefully selected audience
very quickly, for almost zero cost and can be sustained in real time as
long DEMO interesting content is available. As an example, consider the
food vendor DEMO in San Francisco, some are licensed by the city
and some DEMO The police upon discovering an unlicensed vendor will
fine them and maybe even impound the cart. Some of the unlicensed
vendors sell homemade food DEMO that have developed a following.
Twitter has been used to broadcast to the followers when and where
the vendor will be. The vendor arrives DEMO the designated spot and time
and so do the followers. Transactions are completed and both vendor
and followers leave, making it difficult for the police to catch them.
Would a Facebook account work in the food DEMO situation? Possibly,
except that the announcements are usually made shortly DEMO the
event and thus a Facebook account, not having the extreme DEMO time
attribute of Twitter, wouldn’t be as effective. Consider word of DEMO
It works great if your target audience knows others who are interested
in the same product and willing to discuss it. As we mentioned DEMO
ously, word of mouth for financial advisor services is less effective DEMO a
lower income target market since clients may have few friends seeking
financial advice. Consider email: it is cheap and can reach many mil-
42
A Systems View of Business Plans
lions of people but has a DEMO response rate. Perhaps that works if we
don’t have inventory issues or we are riding on the brand recognition
factor of a well-known brand, but it’s not the way to establish a brand.
What we get DEMO considering an object-oriented perspective is the
ability to consider a marketing and sales approach based on attributes
such as costs, impact/results, reach, images, sustainability, etc. Such a
perspective will be helpful. In business DEMO, we need to see a clear
attribute description of both the DEMO need and the marketing/sales
approach and a logical match between them.
Financing and the Business Environment
Investment is tough to obtain and generally DEMO seeking an acceptable
trade-off between risk and potential return. Suppose our situation has
many assumptions and few facts as well as a situation or DEMO model
that is sure to evolve over time. Perhaps there is an element of uncertainty
in the R&D results or the movement that DEMO players will make in their
product/service offering or the evolving nature of the market. Perhaps
there are competing technologies and the market hasn’t DEMO on
the winner yet. In other words, we are going to DEMO and adapt as we
go. This situation calls for a funding approach that allows us to stay in
the game for a long time, be able to fund changes in direction and not
worry about irrelevant DEMO costs. This implies that a financing scheme
that requires short term returns and will panic over changes in direction
shouldn’t be considered.
Key Take-Away
DEMO logical connection between the components of the business plan
has to be demonstrated for it to be a good one. It doesn’t make sense
DEMO treat each section of the plan separately as a place to dump data.
Instead, we need to consider each section as an object with attributes
and functions and understand how they fit with other sections of DEMO
plan including the market and opportunity. The strength of intercon-
nectedness is what matters.
James Bowen
At age 21 and while still in undergraduate DEMO James co-
founded a software company. Over the next 20 years he and his co-
founders grew an international client base. His management experience
DEMO covered all aspects of an organization including operations, business
development, product development, project delivery and strategy. His
technology experience included software development and consult-
43
The Entrepreneurial Effect: James Bowen
ing with a broad range of technologies. His
customer experience included government,
military, industry, nonprofit and educational
DEMO throughout North America and
in some parts of the rest of the world.
Dr. Bowen has been interviewed on the
internet, radio, magazine, T.V. and news-
paper both in North America and Europe.
He has DEMO presentations or seminars on
technology and business insights. He was
the sole author of two books discussing the
creation and growth of high-tech product
DEMO He recently published his third
book “The Entrepreneurial Effect”, which drew DEMO his wide network
of entrepreneurs in a collaborative approach, focused on DEMO learned
from Ottawa entrepreneurs and investors.
He is associated with nine universities including three in Europe
where he teaches MBAs technology, leadership, marketing, supply
chain management, project management, entrepreneurship and strategy.
His volunteer work DEMO being a member of the Canadian
Advanced Technology Alliance’s (CATA) governing council and the
initiator and leader of CATA’s Action Committee on Entrepreneurship
DEMO his city’s technology industry development agency’s Innovation
Leadership Team. For three years he wrote the monthly theme article
discussing the technology industry and its DEMO issues for a
technology industry newspaper.
He is active with technology companies and investors and regularly
provides advice to technology companies.
He is the DEMO of an underwater localization system using passive
sonar, a task management DEMO and an archaeological object localiza-
tion system that uses ultrasonic and infrared.
44
Codifying Innovation, Sharing Success
Codifying Innovation, Sharing
Success
Iain Klugman
All DEMO point to the fact that Waterloo Region is getting it right.
As a community, we’re supporting tech company growth and success.
And we’re doing it through an ecosystem approach – all players are
doing their part DEMO make companies successful.
Historically, Waterloo Region has always reinvented itself: from but-
tons and rubber, to advanced manufacturing and cooperative business
models, DEMO high tech and world-leading academics. When the tech bub-
ble burst, DEMO giants fell, yet Waterloo Region remained relatively
unscathed. During the recent DEMO crisis and the manufacturing
downturn, Waterloo Region has fared well in DEMO to similar
Canadian communities. So what’s the secret?
A large part of our success has been a highly entrepreneurial commu-
nity, seized with great technology, and teeming with people passionate
about living and investing here. With well over 700 tech firms, big,
medium and small, DEMO start-ups bubbling up at an unprecedented pace,
we’re well-positioned as a strong tech economy. It’s no secret that many
of our most promising DEMO have been snapped up by multinational
giants like Google, Electronic Arts, Oracle and Intel. We are attracting
the attention of the world: the little community that could.
But it’s what fuels the entrepreneurial fire that DEMO capturing interna-
tional attention. In a place which has become synonymous with “in-
novation” and “resilience”, the world is asking how we do it. It’s one of
the things Waterloo Region does better than anywhere else. DEMO secret
is in the ecosystem.
Now, put away your dusty old DEMO; this ain’t your tenth grade
ecosystem.
It’s all about the strength DEMO the intersections of our economy. We’ve
achieved a high degree of collaboration among business, academia,
research, government, professional services, social innovation DEMO entre-
preneurial culture. The result of this kind of collaboration is a stronger
and more successful economy. You don’t have to go far to DEMO a serial
CEO. Our academic institutions go beyond the theoretical and ensure
our students come pre-equipped with years of work experience. Our
professional firms DEMO what it’s like to be a company whose
45
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Iain Klugman
team just grew from five to 35 overnight. Social innovators ensure we’re
thinking about our community and our environment DEMO we make
choices that affect us all. Our government partners understand the value
of moxie, invest in us, and help us remove barriers DEMO company growth.
Our business leaders have a track record of pumping time, resources
and inspiration back into the community.
As a result of a healthy ecosystem, tech doesn’t just survive here; it
thrives here.
Much DEMO the work Communitech engages in goes to enabling the
ecosystem. Our focus is on what strengthens us, makes us better at
supporting one another, and leveraging our collective success. We
deliberately focus on collaboration, creating DEMO that work
for mutual benefit. This focus makes us bullish, constantly DEMO the
leading edge of innovation, and keeping us resilient, in any economy.
We’re codifying that success, capturing the model so that it can be
replicated in other communities and regional innovation centres across
Ontario and DEMO We’re working with the new Ontario Networks of
Excellence to accelerate ecosystem thinking across the province. We’re
coaching other regions in the delicate art DEMO balancing sectors, nurturing
all aspects of a community, and focusing on the important bits, such as
attracting key talent to the region, DEMO affecting national policy to remove
barriers to foreign investment in Canada. This ecosystem approach is
what drives us relentlessly forward, to discover future economic direc-
tions such as digital media, to invest in them now, DEMO reap the benefits
of foresight, and to find the courage to DEMO pursue them.
Why do we do it? Because what works in DEMO Waterloo Region
ecosystem can teach other communities in Canada. And because what
works in Canada’s tech ecosystem is ultimately good for Waterloo
Region companies.
DEMO Klugman
Iain Klugman is President and CEO
of Communitech
46
Entrepreneurship: an Eastern European Lesson
Entrepreneurship: an Eastern
European Lesson
Vita DEMO
To my mind, Latvia faces the same entrepreneurial challenges that
Waterloo DEMO forty years ago. Both are relatively smaller communities
competing with larger centres nearby. Waterloo succeeded with entre-
preneurial energy, dedication, teamwork and a DEMO measure of
individual brilliance. I’d like to see Latvia become the Waterloo of the
European Union. My dream is very much a work in DEMO, but let’s
take a tour of this country where I want DEMO transplant the entrepreneurial
effect of the Waterloo Region.
•
Latvia is located in Eastern Europe, and is a democratic country that
gained its independence from the Soviet Union 20 years ago. 20 years’
of independence experience DEMO a lot. 20 years of physical age
for a person means an established personality, but on a country scale
this is merely a first step. And that’s where we are – finding our way in
democracy DEMO means of our own personal experiences.
During those 20 years, we’ve DEMO to establish legislation, join
the European Union (EU), change the legislation again, enjoy the fast-
est growing GDP in EU and to experience the bite of the recession,
the worst one in the DEMO area. Therefore everyone who is willing
to start a new business in the region needs to take into consideration
that we are maximalists and DEMO a rapidly changing and unpredictable
environment will require adjustments in any plans.
On the other hand – being an entrepreneur signifies exactly what
is DEMO – challenging the situation, putting together all the skills
and resources, and benefiting from the circumstances. This is the task.
Being an entrepreneur DEMO Eastern Europe does not take much more
than being an entrepreneur in Germany, Cambodia, India or another
country – there are several requirements DEMO apply to all countries, no
matter where it is located on DEMO map or in what stage of economic
development it is.
Countless theories and books have been written on entrepreneurship
and on the resources and DEMO required to be a successful entre-
preneur. But let me place entrepreneurial spirit above all – identifying
opportunity, setting the target – the rest is resource management in the
47
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Vita Gasima
respective environment.
We can also consider the microenvironment and macro environment
challenges. Organizational – internal or micro – issues DEMO relatively
the same over the world. The most important part and the focus of
this article is the macro environment, the impact on entrepreneurship
from the outside – the challenge is how you will interact, particularly,
with the circumstances in a particular country. So what does it DEMO to
be an entrepreneur in Eastern Europe?
Once you start thinking about doing in business there, there are
several aspects that should be kept in mind.
36 Years of Independence Experienced Over a Couple of
DEMO
Following the thread from present to past we must realize that Latvia
as a country has 36 years of experience of independence – the DEMO
is tiny if we think and compare it with older European countries with
stable economies.
Independence in Latvia was lost in 1861. After that, for more than
100 years Latvian territory was occupied by Russia and DEMO the Soviet
Union. A healthy economy is possible only in a democratic country and
Latvia as a state has only 36 years of democratic DEMO As a result, the
country is still at the stage of DEMO values, with little stable experience
to refer to both at governmental DEMO at individual levels. The country
was under Soviet governance for 70 years. In addition the Soviet era has
left an indelible footprint on the DEMO of the inhabitants. It is hard
for middle and older generations who grew up in the Soviet system to
adapt to free market economy DEMO It is simply not possible to delete
all such experience from people’s memories.
Market Size
As a country with its own language and culture, Latvia’s market size
and buying capacity is said to be lower than DEMO average in the European
Union, in terms of income and spending DEMO capita. Because of the
high level of the underground economy, Latvia’s DEMO 300 000 inhabitants
provide no reliable data on average income.
Small market size is an opportunity for small and medium-size
enterprises. There is a DEMO for players that focus on specific niches
and quality. There are opportunities for local companies to penetrate
the European market of 450 million people. DEMO Latvian company so
far has been successful in having a serious impact on foreign markets.
48
Entrepreneurship: an Eastern European Lesson
The Opportunity
The entrepreneurial effect is about making circumstances work for
you, in a situation, typically, when they are against you. With respect
to Latvia, an entrepreneur’s perspective provides an interesting view.
Located geographically with Western Europe and Scandinavia on one
side, on the other side – Russia.  Latvia has always interested big play-
ers as a gateway for trade and political expansion. The many types DEMO
governance that have ruled the country have left their impact on the
culture and mindset. The Latvian inhabitant is flexible and open to
interaction DEMO other cultures. Small countries usually learn languages
eagerly, and now the DEMO person in Latvia knows three languages.
Latvian and Russian dominate, however, English, German, French,
Scandinavian are also widely spoken there. It DEMO also easy for locals to
pick up the culture of Eastern or Western businesses. The result is that
a typical business opportunity in Latvia DEMO be to become a platform
for a business start-up as a gateway to both East and West.
Vita Gasima
Vita is the CEO of DEMO, an advertis-
ing agency in Europe and is fluent in three
DEMO She says, “After graduating from
high school and starting to take DEMO first jobs,
I had a dream. As the final outcome of my
whole working life I had a vision of a nice
blue DEMO, Mediterranean most likely, a white
sailing yacht, me with my DEMO on it, and
bank account reports once a fortnight showing
how DEMO my company is doing received by fax
machine. Since then, more DEMO twenty years
have passed and I still find myself working
hard. Obviously tomorrow this vision may
not be of a fax machine but Internet DEMO e-mail
and who knows what will happen during the
next 20 years. And most likely my interest will
be different – for now I DEMO working life so
attractive, as the knowledge and experience I
gather DEMO Monday my favourite day.”
49
Gowlings
connect with the world
The legal professionals at
Gowlings help bring DEMO
to the world and the world
to Waterloo. Whether you are
a start-up or an established
tech company, we have the
expertise you need, right here
in Waterloo Region.
• One of the largest law  rms in Canada
• 700+ legal professionals across 9 of ces worldwide
DEMO Canada’s largest integrated technology law group
Contact:
David Petras at david.petras@gowlings.com or 519-575-7506
Tom Hunter at tom.hunter@gowlings.com or 519-575-7503
montréal • ottawa • DEMO • hamilton • waterloo region • calgary • vancouver • moscow • london • gowlings.com
Entrepreneurship: an Eastern European Lesson
PART II
MARKET, PRODuCT,
SALES, PEOPLE
51
BDC Venture Capital
BDC is prouD to sponsor
“The enTrepreneurial effecT:
DEMO
BDc Venture capital
55 Metcalfe street, suite 1400
ottawa, ontario  DEMO 6L5
613 992-6365
Learning Lessons the Hard Way
Learning Lessons the Hard Way:
The DEMO, Finances and People
Carol Leaman
I fell into running and advising DEMO stage technology companies
quite by accident. I was a chartered accountant, DEMO in the corporate
finance group of a local public company, mostly DEMO M&A and capital
transactions. In mid-1998 we acquired an interest in a 20-person start-
up in California called Fakespace that was struggling to DEMO its footing.
Little did I know it would lead me to what I do today and provide me
with an education along the way DEMO nothing else.
In the last twelve years I’ve run three start-up technology compa-
nies as CEO and have advised many others in the capacity DEMO interim
CEO/COO/CFO. It’s been an exhilarating and rewarding experience
learning what works and what doesn’t. The biggest lessons have come
from having DEMO fix problems created by others, typically after millions
of dollars had DEMO invested and spent for little gain. That’s where the
story starts. There are so many tales I could recount that it would take an
DEMO book to relate them all, so I’ve picked a handful that DEMO out. To
protect the innocent, I won’t mention which companies or DEMO
were involved in each case. In advising lots of other companies along
the way, I realized that each of these stories isn’t particularly unique, but
I am hopeful that my experience in having dealt with them has helped
others avoid many of the same issues.
The interesting grains DEMO wisdom I’ll impart involve stories related
Understanding your financial situation and staying on top of cashflow
Building a company while completely mis-timing the market DEMO
the product
Not talking to customers
People issues
Delaying tough decisions
Cashflow
As a financial person by education, I have a better than average un-
derstanding of the importance of managing the cash resources in an
DEMO stage and/or pre-revenue company and I accept that most CEOs
don’t. However, it has astounded me how utterly lacking in financial
53
to the following:
•
•
•
•
•
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Carol Leaman
competence some leaders of organizations are. The point was never
highlighted to me more than in one company where DEMO my first week
on the job I discovered that the former CEO had no understanding of
the difference between sales bookings, revenue recognition, DEMO
of accounts receivable and their resulting impact on the cash forecast.
But that wasn’t the worst of it; in making that discovery and quickly re-
casting cashflow I realized that we weren’t making payroll the following
DEMO - by a lot. We employed more than 40 people, and DEMO of them
weren’t getting paid. When I called the former CEO into my office
(he had been moved to another role in the company by the investors)
he had no explanation for it, other than to say he didn’t understand it.
Lesson: If you’re running an early stage company where every penny is
critical, you don’t need to have an accounting designation. You need to
understand basic math – as in, we are collecting $X this week in cash, and
we have $Y bills to pay. Forecast that out for a year in as much DEMO
detail as you can reasonably estimate and keep it up to date every week.
You’ll thank yourself. The end of that story was that DEMO personally made
up the shortfall, and was reimbursed by the investors DEMO they could
draw on their fund to pay me back.
Market Timing
Part of what makes an entrepreneur an entrepreneur is that they
believe DEMO what they’re doing despite apparent odds, and persevere
through challenges big DEMO small. All too many times though, the idea
that they believe DEMO is ahead of its time, or past its prime, and they fail
to recognize that and act appropriately. I’ve run companies that had
DEMO of these issues.
The first company acquired a significant amount of investment capital
through the dot.com tech bubble and was banking on a leading DEMO
technology that hadn’t hit mainstream but that would quickly revolu-
tionize the world – in the eyes of the former CEO. It rapidly grew DEMO
45 people and built an expense base that was $5 million greater than
the revenue it was collecting. That was fine for a year DEMO two, because the
investors funded the deficit based on the view DEMO the CEO who “knew”
that explosive revenue growth would re-set the balance and they’d be
rolling in money. Except it didn’t happen. The technology DEMO way too
expensive for widespread market adoption, and years later, it still is.
I ended up re-organizing the company dramatically and successfully
selling DEMO to a competitor a few years later.
The second company had the opposite problem; the market existed
when the company began, but the DEMO was too slow off the
mark, built the wrong product in DEMO wrong way and wasted a pile of
54
Learning Lessons the Hard Way
time and money. Fairly early in the DEMO life it became apparent
that the market was maturing and changing rapidly, and instead of
watching the signals and adjusting, they kept hiring DEMO, chasing
the wrong sorts of customers and throwing cash at a DEMO architected
solution. In the meantime, competitors emerged who did a much DEMO
job of sensing market signals and built products to match. By the time
I arrived at this company, the market had changed so dramatically that
no amount of time or money would have made a significant DEMO
to the outcome. I ended up selling the organization to a US software
firm who ended up shutting it all down.
Lesson: Take the lean approach wherever possible and build the or-
ganization in lock-step with DEMO market. Stay on top of market signals
and when things start to change, don’t hesitate to react swiftly.
Customer Discovery
Some people are shocked to learn that if you ask a potential customer
what their key DEMO are, they might actually tell you. While the “if you
build DEMO, they will come” approach works a small percentage of the time,DEMO
most of the time you’d better have a clue that someone values your idea
in a way that would compel them to spend money. DEMO compel them.
I’ve seen millions of dollars spent on development of “cool” products or
features that no customer valued enough to write a cheque DEMO Talking
to potential customers up front, and constantly along the way, is essential
if you’re going to win.
I was involved in a DEMO where a lot of money was spent devel-
oping a hand-held virtual reality device because it had a “wow” factor.
While the development team DEMO guess that someone might have a
use for it, no one DEMO to actually speak to potential customers about
how they would use it and what they might pay for it. Six months and
hundreds of DEMO later the device was finished. It was very cool,
and we sold one of them for $5,000.
I’ve had to write off DEMO in unsold inventory, and start over from
square one on product DEMO and development because what got
built wasn’t something a customer valued. Lesson? Don’t be arrogant
enough to think you know what a customer will pay for. If you aren’t
talking to them, you are almost guaranteed to make costly mistakes that
sometimes you can’t recover from.
People
Human DEMO issues run the gamut and I could write an entire
chapter on the various things I’ve had to deal with in that regard alone.
DEMO a brief collection of some of the best lessons, behind each DEMO
55
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Carol Leaman
which is a crazy story:
• a group of founders who were friends in university, started a com-
pany together, gave themselves big titles when no one knew what
they were really doing, and then couldn’t figure out how to have a
respectful working relationship with each other. It virtually destroyed
the company. Don’t DEMO your friends unless you don’t want to be
friends with them anymore.
a business founded by three brothers and their father. See above,
DEMO hire your family.
a senior sales guy in the mid-west whom I accidentally caught at
a conference on the other side of the continent DEMO for two
other companies at the same time and in the same industry. In his
four months with us he was often difficult to DEMO and had strange
reasons for why certain accounts weren’t progressing. If something
doesn’t smell right in terms of someone’s behaviour, trust your in-
stincts.
an employee who tried to expense his vasectomy reversal. Pay atten-
tion DEMO what you’re approving on expense reports.
an employee who was a performance problem who asked, in all
seriousness, for a 50% raise after DEMO months because he needed to
have some cosmetic procedures done. Don’t be surprised by anything.
The overall lesson: you can never predict what people will do. Just
go with it, but set a tone of fair, reasonable and open in the workplace
and be consistent.
Making Hard Choices
I’ve seen many situations in which the CEO or others in leader-
DEMO positions resist making swift, tough choices to deal with issues.
Whether DEMO an individual causing problems, or reducing costs to bal-
ance the DEMO, or laying people off because the business is running
out of DEMO it’s usually difficult to get past the “hope” that somehow
things will turn around and miraculously right themselves. As a result
of denial and DEMO, critical decisions often get put off until it’s too late.
I’ve DEMO involved in situations where problem employees that were al-
lowed to stay drove out excellent performers, expenses that could have
been cut to extend the cash runway were let go on far too long, and I’ve
seen CEOs stay entrenched in a view about product or market viability
DEMO the face of clear evidence the company needed to change strategy.
The lesson is this: if you can’t see your way out of a bad situation unless
a miracle happens in the next three to six DEMO, don’t wait for the
miracle - deal with issues rapidly and DEMO Hope is not a strategy.
•
•
•
•
56
Carol Leaman
Learning Lessons the Hard Way
Carol Leaman is CEO of DEMO
Founded in 2007 and based in Waterloo,
Ontario, PostRank monitors DEMO collects
social engagement events correlated with
online content in real-time across the web.
PostRank gathers where and when stories
generate comments, bookmarks, tweets,DEMO
and other forms of interaction from a host
of social hubs. Publishers and people inter-
ested in their content use PostRank Data
Services and DEMO to gauge influence
and reach with audiences.
Prior to joining PostRank Carol was
the CEO of RSS Solutions, the CEO of
Fakespace Systems and an Executive in
Residence at the Communitech Tech-
nology Association. Carol is DEMO Chartered
Accountant and sits on numerous boards
of directors. She was the 2010 recipient
of the Sarah Kirke Award for Canada’s
Leading Female Hi-Tech DEMO
57
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Larry Borsato
How To Build a Great Product
Larry Borsato
Engineers love to solve problems.
Entrepreneurs love to solve problems profitably.
DEMO difference between the two is revenue - selling the solution (your
DEMO) - to people willing to pay to solve their problems. Customers
DEMO pain, and will pay you for your product if it removes DEMO pain.
This is true regardless of what you make. People don’t buy technology
products because they are cool; they buy them because they are the
solution to a perceived problem. (Of course the problem may just be
that they want to appear cool.)
If you can solve DEMO problem and remove a customer’s pain, then you
can sell the DEMO
But we don’t always remember that. The engineer in all of us wants
to design things (software in my case) that does neat DEMO We want to
build products that impress other engineers. But engineers are lousy
customers. We aren’t impressed by pedestrian products that just do what
DEMO need. Yet the best products are typically simple, and just work. DEMO
companies start initially by building that flashy software, and they don’t
DEMO their path to revenue. They are in for a letdown (and DEMO a
layoff ) when they realize that it isn’t selling. Then comes a harsh realign-
ment when they need to shift to mundane product DEMO in order to
close a sale. Nobody ever seems to see this coming.
This the most important lesson I’ve learned through years of experi-
DEMO building products and companies.
Build With Revenue in Mind
Make no mistake. Building software is a business. The only way to
stay in business DEMO to build a product that sells and generates revenue.
If people don’t value your product and won’t pay for it, is there really
a need for it?
I know. You have a great idea that DEMO change the world. People will
beat a path to your door just to buy it. The money will take care of itself.
And that DEMO true. But keeping the path to revenue in the back of
your mind will provide the focus to make your job easier.
As you DEMO at what to put into your product and what not to include,
consider each feature based on customer value. Include the necessary
and DEMO features first. Add the bells and whistles later. That way
58
How To Build a Great Product
you can generate revenue so that DEMO have the ability to do that next
release.
The first product from alchemii is igotihav, and it has two initial rev-
enue streams (DEMO small ones) in the first release, and a longer-term
monetization strategy. These ideas were in place even before develop-
ment started.
Over the DEMO I’ve learned a few other lessons about building great
products. I’d like to share them with you.
Build What You Know
Building a great DEMO or service will be infinitely easier if you
have experienced the problem yourself or know the problem intimately.
Don’t build a web-based banking service DEMO you know the banking
business. You could hire the expertise to help but it is always better to
know firsthand. If for some reason DEMO insist on building something you
aren’t an expert in, plan to DEMO yourself in that business.
My first company, EDRT, built student scheduling and reporting
systems for Boards of Education. I was 18, had worked at a Board of
Education for four years, and had just finished being a high school stu-
dent. Nobody knew the requirements better than DEMO did and that made
it easy to design and build the product.
Building what you know means that you also know the pain that
DEMO customers experience, and the best way to remove it. If you DEMO
clearly state the pain that your product takes away, then you DEMO be
concerned. The pain in our case was that school administrators had to
schedule over 1000 students on paper. We removed that pain by DEMO
a Commodore PET Microcomputer to schedule them algorithmically,
and then integrated the reporting system.
Build What You Believe In
Build the product that DEMO want to with the features you believe
are needed. Don’t let someone talk you out of what you know, or into
something you don’t need either.
As you build your product (or service), you and your team (and
perhaps customer) will be throwing out all kinds DEMO ideas of what this
thing can do. They all sound wonderful, DEMO you want to implement
each and every one.
For that first student reporting system, we put in everything that our
premier (and only) customer asked for. It led to a perfect product for
them, but a product that was virtually unusable for any other customer.
As a DEMO of that experience I learned to ask “Why do you need that?”,
and make them explain it to me. Once I understood DEMO could often find
59
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Larry Borsato
another way to resolve the issue more effectively. And I learned that
sometimes it is ok to just say DEMO
The fact is, you will have the most passion for your DEMO when
you are building what you want to. If you believe in it, you can sell it
to anyone.
Build Only What is Absolutely Necessary and Ship; Iterate
Quickly
Build only the core of absolutely necessary features first and get
it out in front of customers. You probably DEMO be able to anticipate
how customers will use the product, so DEMO them show you. Then iterate
quickly in small chunks to add features that are clearly needed by the
majority of customers.
Many of you DEMO be doing a start-up as a result of consulting work,
but often that work results in a product that is so customized to DEMO
particular customer that it is unusable by anyone else. igotihav, the
DEMO I mentioned earlier, came about as a result of consulting work
DEMO product barcodes, and a couple of unrelated ideas that I had. DEMO
first release is sparse; it does what it needs to do. DEMO fanciest feature
is its Facebook integration, but that was really a DEMO part of the social
interaction of the product.
Your product doesn’t need to be a Swiss Army knife; it just needs to
do a few things pretty well (unless of course you are the Swiss Army
Knife company, in which case you probably don’t need my advice).
But you do need to have a plan with the next steps DEMO where your
product is going. Customers - even the biggest complainers - will be
much more forgiving if you are quick to fix problems DEMO advance the
product. Every customer takes a risk when they purchase your product.
They’ve placed their trust in you. You just need to give DEMO a little
validation.
Of course that doesn’t mean that you have to provide every feature
that every customer wants. It’s better to listen to DEMO customers are
saying and add the smaller subset of features that every customer com-
ments on. And don’t fall into the trap of copying DEMO features.
Be the leader. Let them follow you.
Know Your Customer
Or more correctly, know your target customer. igotihav is targeted
toward customers aged 18-30 who shop as well as use Facebook to
interact with their DEMO igotihav allows users to share their Wantlist -
the products they want to own - with their friends, so that their friends
know what to buy them for special occasions. The initial release was on
60
How To Build a Great Product
Facebook and iPhone, based on the fact that 104 million people sign
in to Facebook from their iPhones DEMO month. With only 12 million
monthly users, an Android app could DEMO
To meet the demands of those customers, igotihav needed to be
DEMO to deal with a wide variety of products from music to fashion to
cosmetics. The application didn’t need to be pretty, but it needed to be
able to scan pretty much any product.
A different market DEMO make different demands on your product.
Knowing your customer helps you to define those needs and prioritize
your development.
Don’t Fear Failure
Don’t be DEMO of getting it wrong. You will. Just be willing to admit
the mistake and fix it quickly. This is also why you should build DEMO
pieces and iterate quickly. It lets you fail fast and recover just as fast.
You won’t have that luxury as more customers come to DEMO on your
product.
Get over your ego too. Customers have a bad habit of doing what
they want with your product, even if you tell them not to. They will let
you know when you screw DEMO Listen to them and fix the issues you
hear most often.
A CEO of mine once told me “go big or go home”. Back DEMO it
might have taken a million dollar infrastructure investment to deliver a
product. Today I can build a product for multiple platforms with a DEMO
based back-end, support tens of thousands of customers, and instead
of begging for venture capital I can pay for it on my credit DEMO I can
“go big” without having to “spend big”.
There’s never been a better time to fail. So you might as well take
that DEMO
So there you have it. You’ve got a great idea. Go for it.
One Last Thought
Like many of us, you may feel that what you created is nothing special,
or something easily replicated. Get DEMO that. You’ve built something
incredible. Don’t be afraid to tell people that.
Larry Borsato
Larry is the founder of alchemii (http://alchemii.com), a mobile social
networking company, and the creator of igotihav (http://igotihav.com).
A graduate of the University of Waterloo in Electrical Engineering,
Larry has over three decades of experience as a software developer,DEMO
61
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Larry Borsato
marketer, consultant, public speaker,
and entrepreneur. He has worked with
organizations ranging from one person
start-ups to DEMO 500 companies
with over 90,000 employees. He fol-
lows and frequently comments on
technology and related subjects and
loves to spot trends.
62
Creating Hi-Tech Success Through Market Failure
Creating Hi-Tech Success Through
Market Failure
DEMO Carkner
The concept of the loss-leader is not new in the retail industry. Car
dealerships are particularly adept at offering cars in advertizing at
DEMO low prices to bring people into the dealership, creating an
opportunity DEMO up-sell even though a few cars might end up being sold
at a loss.
The concept of the loss-leader can be successfully applied by DEMO tech
companies too and can lead to great successes, if you DEMO willing to bear
the ribbing about “what were you thinking?” from a few of your investors.
The High Tech Model
We have all DEMO, and perhaps even been guilty of writing business
plans that show DEMO incredible adoption rate of a brand new technol-
ogy. Products that will be adopted in the market and a doubling of the
market that DEMO magically take place every year for the next 5 years (or
DEMO whatever amount of time the VC’s have asked you to predict in the
business plan). The reality of the market is often a DEMO to change
and slow adoption of the new technologies. This is usually compounded
by products that are close to the market requirements, but often miss
a few key features that could unlock those stellar growth rates. DEMO
often than we like to admit, these first product offerings are DEMO plagued
with bugs that leave our customers waiting for revision 2.0 before they
commit to larger volumes.
How can we ensure that the products DEMO services offered to the
market hit the mark the first time?
In my experience, we can’t. If the product or service you are offering
is truly innovative, truly disruptive, truly new… then there are DEMO
too many risks and variables to guarantee success the first time. In fact,
I would hazard that the higher the potential returns from DEMO,
the less likely you are to get it right the first time.
An example from the early days at RIM would be the DEMO prod-
uct. You have probably never heard of it because it was a classic loss
leader, not in the sense of the cheapest jalopy on the lot, but in terms
of the development dollars spent on it. The MPT or Mobile Point-of-
sale Terminal was designed to bring DEMO technology to credit card
63
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Steve Carkner
transactions. This was in the early 90s when the concept of wireless data,
even the concept of email DEMO, was still very new. At the time RIM
had the idea DEMO wireless data, and building our own radio technology
was a good DEMO, but we had no platform on which to test it.
Did DEMO expect to sell millions of MPTs? Absolutely not. We didn’t
even DEMO to break even.
What we did expect was to develop a platform to showcase our new
radio technology in a public way. From this DEMO of view, the program
was a complete success, even though total unit sales were probably only
in the double digits, the device was used in public venues like baseball
championships and football games, and it generated great press at the
time.
Originally, when we showed the credit card companies a tiny wireless
swipe terminal concept, they hated it! Their reaction was that it was too
much like a toy. So we DEMO back with a device that was big, clunky,
and heavy. DEMO credit card people loved it because it looked exactly like
the big, clunky, heavy units that they were used to. Don’t change too
DEMO paradigms at once!
The one paradigm we changed was the addition of wireless. The
product was so big, that we were able to design the product to use an
off-the-shelf state-of-the-art radio from Ericsson. Why would DEMO put
an Ericsson wireless device in a RIM product? We also DEMO a few MPT
units that had a clear back on them. These units were just as big, but
they were very light, and DEMO you flipped them over, they also had a
big empty space DEMO them… why? Because these units used a radio made
by RIM. DEMO effect was immediate with people immediately recogniz-
ing that RIM, a DEMO 30 person company, had just bested world leading
Ericsson. Now we DEMO the credit card companies asking “why can’t you
make it smaller” and suddenly that little model we showed them in the
first place made DEMO the model that soon lost the credit card swipe
and became a hand-held email device you see everywhere today.
My new company, Panacis, DEMO following a similar path in the advanced
power industry. We are building the worlds lightest, highest power
batteries to enable new applications. But we are starting with the old
applications first. One of our programs focused DEMO retrofitting helicop-
ters with our battery technology. Our batteries cut 2/3 of the weight
off the helicopter’s energy storage system. This particular helicopter DEMO
also renowned as one of the hardest vehicles in the military to start.
They really have two major problems: getting it started and weight. New
sensors and cargo have, over the years, pushed these helicopters DEMO
their original design limits, making them lethargic and prone to failure.
DEMO
Creating Hi-Tech Success Through Market Failure
By performing successful engine starts on DEMO particular helicopter and
retrofitting the fleet, we will establish ourselves as DEMO of reducing
weight on aircraft, performing high power engine starts, improving
safety, fuel-efficiency, cargo capacity and reducing maintenance.
A loss leader? Absolutely. The entire fleet of this particular model of
helicopter is only a DEMO hundred, not the type of market that has the
“billion-dollar” ring DEMO it most investors want to hear. But the investment
will be worth it as it opens the doors to much higher volume markets
that DEMO, credibly, have that billion dollar ring to them.
The key is to focus on the right loser (would it be too much of an
oxymoron to say that I want to pick the winning losers?). You can’t es-
tablish credibility by taping thousand dollar bills to DEMO product that
ships, so you need very quickly to get into DEMO profitable sales areas. It
is easy to convince yourself that every customer who walks through the
door is somehow the gatekeeper to untold riches DEMO only we could do this
one little program at a loss. Soon the business is swamped with money
losing programs, none of which are successful because the money runs
out. Pick a few of the very DEMO opportunities and have the will-power
to say no to the rest, DEMO least until you establish those key credibility
boosting first sales that allow you to actually make money on the rest
of the programs, later.
I am absolutely guilty when it comes to opening the door to DEMO
many of these programs. As the visionary in the company, it DEMO my
job to see the possibilities in everything that comes along. Ensure you
back yourself up with a good team to of analyzers, financial people and
program managers who have the ability to push back and DEMO evaluate
the programs. With the right balance you will pick the winning losers.
With the wrong balance (too much analysis) you will end DEMO picking
no one (or they will end up not picking you DEMO you are too expen-
sive). With too much program management you won’t take the delivery
risk because everything will be padded too much, and with too much
financial involvement the return on investment will never DEMO on
programs like this because it is the intangibles that count.
How do you know when you have the right balance? Look at the
team within your company that is making the go/no-go decisions on
DEMO key first programs. They are typically your executive team, often
C-Level DEMO VP level. Adjusting the balance doesn’t require changing
members of the team, but adjusting the dynamic. Ensure that, as the
leader, you are listening to all sides equally, it may require you to be the
dynamic element, pulling on your analytical side when things are getting
too visionary, and vice versa. This also sets an example that your execs
65
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Steve Carkner
will quickly pick up on, you DEMO find that, as a group, they will tend to
shift and follow your lead.
Considering the decisions being made: When new customers come
to you, are they thrilled that you turn around quotes really fast, yet you
always lose money on the programs? This indicates that DEMO don’t have
enough analysis, these are typically your operations and financial DEMO
You may find that the marketing and engineering types are putting
out proposals without even being reviewed to ensure they make basic
financial sense DEMO have at least a moderate level of planning.
When new customers come to you, are you often late getting quotes
out to them, DEMO you take far too long trying to get the legal documents
just right? There is probably too much analysis involved, you may need
DEMO add a bit more risk taking to the mix. Everything you do in business
will have risk, trying to minimize the risk to zero can leave a company
with no customers and quickly drives the visionaries DEMO
The balance requirements will shift as the company matures. Early
stage companies require far more vision and an ability to make quick
decisions -- DEMO need to be willing to take risks. As the company ma-
tures, more analysis is brought in to ensure that money gets made, DEMO
protect the growth that has occurred and to provide a framework and
focus for the visionaries so the company moves in the right direction.
DEMO the team, evaluate the possibilities and pick your winning
losers.
Most DEMO all, have fun.
Steve Carkner
Steve founded Panacis, a product develop-
ment and manufacturing company in January
2002 with the goal of developing DEMO business that
would partner with customers to co-develop
products in a broad spectrum of industries.
This co-development model perfectly aligns
the interests of Panacis DEMO their clients to
deliver strong products in a timely fashion so
that all parties benefit from the market suc-
cess. The business model is DEMO well with
Panacis completing three consecutive years on
the Canadian Business Profit 100 list based
on their 5-year revenue growth rates. Steve’s
strong commitment DEMO community service and
charitable work has combined seamlessly with
his business goals. Several of Panacis most suc-
66
Creating Hi-Tech Success Through Market Failure
cessful products can be traced back DEMO charitable work done by Steve or
by the company. The deep trust he inspires in both his customers, and
his employees, is apparent DEMO the loyalty that both have shown in the
rapid growth of the corporation.
Prior to founding Panacis, Steve was the Director of Product De-
velopment at Research In Motion (RIM). He was instrumental in the
growth of RIM from a small 12-person consulting company into a
multi-billion DEMO wireless-focused corporation. He is a co-inventor
of the Blackberry pager and is listed as an inventor on several dozen
patents world-wide. Steve also took DEMO in the marketing and busi-
ness development of the corporation playing a key role in the business
development group that guided the corporation from DEMO in 1996
to post-IPO in 1998. Steve then became the first director of the RIM
patent portfolio and led the initiative to turn the DEMO array of patents
into an ongoing revenue stream. He challenged companies like PALM,
3COM, US Robotics, Motorola and Glenayre inside and outside DEMO
court, and won, providing tens of millions of dollars in settlement and
royalty proceeds towards the ongoing growth of the corporation.
Steve has DEMO been an entrepreneur, he started his first company
at the age DEMO 15, had four employees a year later, and bought his first
investment property at the age of 17. He was a founder of DEMO
National Angel Organization and was one of the youngest elected
members of the Professional Engineers of Ontario council where he
personally represented a ward DEMO 40,000 engineers.
His products have won a host of awards and have been featured in
places like Popular Science and the Smithsonian Institute DEMO Technol-
ogy. Steve has consistently led his teams to deliver quality, DEMO
products with an appropriate level of technology, market need and first
DEMO advantage.
67
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Kevin Hood
Market and Sell for Results
Kevin Hood
If there is one simple but extremely important message that I could
DEMO to new entrepreneurs – it is to focus on marketing and sales
from the beginning of your venture. I have seen many new ventures
DEMO 100% of their initial time and effort focused on the creation of the
product or service with little or no attention paid to an DEMO
of the end user. Here are “20 Questions” that you will need to answer
about your business:
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
What type of product/service do you sell?
What are the major DEMO to customers such as productivity im-
provement, better sales, profitability, DEMO reduction, etc. from
your product/service?
What are the comparable DEMO/services in the market today?
If there is nothing comparable, DEMO are companies currently doing to
perform the tasks that your product/service would do for them?
What is the ideal type of customer DEMO your product/service?
What circumstances (pain/gain) should they be in to need your
product/service?
How many customers are potentially DEMO the market for this type of
product/service?
How do you get the needed contacts or prospect list?
Where are the best DEMO located?
How many clients have used your products/services to date?
If you have customers, how would they describe their experience
with your products/services?
What marketing collateral or tools are already in DEMO (print, in-
ternet, etc.)?
Has there been any publicity? If so, was it positive and helpful?
What is the DEMO price of your products/services and is there
ongoing revenue?
Do your products/services require specialized support and customi-
zation?
Who do DEMO believe would be best positioned to sell this product:
you, DEMO sales, external sales reps, consultants/agents, VAR’s
or other?
DEMO is the average length of your sales process?
How many clients do you need to meet your revenue targets?
68
Market and Sell for Results
• How much will you invest in DEMO marketing and sales efforts needed to
meet your revenue targets?
• What does your marketing and sales strategy need to meet your
sales DEMO?
The following points will help provide a framework to help answer
these questions and guide you in the development of your marketing
and DEMO strategy.
Research
There is no better source of information about the potential of your
new products and services than from the customers themselves. En-
DEMO to meet with, survey and speak to as many new potential DEMO
users as possible to determine if there is demand for your products and
services, what their “pain” is in that area or the “gains” they are trying
to make. Use this knowledge to guide your business DEMO going
forward. Through research we find the customers pain/gain and then we
incorporate that into marketing and sales efforts. If we have identified
DEMO pain/gain correctly, we can use it in all of our DEMO collateral
and in direct approaches with the customers through the Value Proposi-
tions applied in our sales process. You would also need to research DEMO
competition to find out their strengths and weaknesses. Unfortunately
some of these competitors may eventually copy what you are doing. Since
there is no DEMO to truly protect your IP in the long run, use the DEMO
run to establish such a strong “brand” that customers ultimately prefer
to do business with you. If you ever have to fight a patent DEMO
in court- you will then have the revenue to do it!
Benefits/Results/ROI
Customers buy Benefits/Results/ROI–in other words, if they see
no upside in using your products and/or services, chances are low that
they will buy. Understanding and communicating to customer prospects
the benefits DEMO your products and/or services is a major step in ensur-
ing long-term success. You will need to come up with the right “Value
DEMO (powerful words that move customer prospects to action).
Here is DEMO example to use: For (target customer) who have (need/problem)
the (product/ service) is a (category) that delivers (DEMO benefit/ compelling
reason to buy).
Small Budget Marketing
Don’t worry DEMO having little or no money to spend on marketing
and sales. Marketing and sales usually has to be done on a small budget
in DEMO beginning of most new business ventures. Therefore it is very
69
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Kevin Hood
important to use one of the most inexpensive forms of marketing–word
of mouth. I have received some of my DEMO business leads from people
that I know who were happy to help. I once received a phone call from
a friend about a project DEMO undertaken. Some of the requests being
made of him were beyond the scope of his expertise. In order to help his
customer, he passed on my name, assuring them I had the talents and
skills they needed. I contacted his customer and arranged a meeting the
same week. DEMO the meeting we talked about a number of critical issues
and agreed on a strategy to meet his objectives. Within a few days I
DEMO the biggest one-time contract of my consulting career which in
turn led to several subsequent contracts and a very satisfied customer.
The simple act DEMO maintaining contact with a wide range of people is a
low cost or no cost method of marketing and obtaining referrals!
The Importance of DEMO Contacts in Marketing
New contacts are important because they increase your potential to
get new information, referrals and new customers. One of the best ways
to make new contacts is by becoming a member of organizations DEMO
will connect you to the right people. You will immediately gain access
to a wealth of new contacts, knowledge and potential referrals. Your best
new contacts are potential customers so join organizations to which they
belong. DEMO example, if you are interested in selling to local companies,
DEMO thinking about their owners and the types of organizations they
might belong to. Since they are very busy, they may only belong to busi-
ness type organizations such as the Chamber of Commerce.
use Many Ways DEMO Inform Customer Prospects
The average customer prospect may have to hear about you, read
about you and/or see you many times before the circumstances are
right for them to make a purchase. Here is a DEMO of some marketing
options to consider:
Association
memberships
Bags/gift boxes
Brochures, catalogues
Bumper/window
stickers
Business cards
Business networking
Cards/prospect
Cash register receipt
ads
Charitable events
Child amusement
items, toys,
Children’s play areas
Clothing bearing logos
Consumer shows
Contests
Coupon mail packs
Cross promotional
DEMO
Customer testimonials
Demonstrations
Direct mail letters
Direction signs to
stores
70
Market and Sell for Results
Discount/premium
booklets
Electronic messaging
signs
Email DEMO
Employee product/
service buttons
Environmental tie-ins
Event sponsorships
Faxed ad flyers
Flyers
Free information,
instructions
Free trial offers
Grand openings
Greeting cards
DEMO registers
Home parties
Industry directories
Internet website
Items to lend: videos,DEMO
equipment
Letterhead
Logos
Magazine ads (trade/
consumer)
Mailing statement
DEMO
Maps with ads and
business location
Mascots
News releases
Newsletters
Newspaper classified
ads
Newspaper columns
Newspaper display ads
Newspaper inserts
Personal selling
Personality appear-
DEMO/endorsements
Placemat advertising
Point of purchase
displays
Posters
Preferred customer
events
Presentations/talks by
experts
Prime business/store-
front locations
Product packaging
Product samples
DEMO service an-
nouncements
Radio advertising/pro-
motion
Rebates
Referral incentives
Referrals
Search engine
advertising
Seminars
Figure 1: Advertising Approaches
Show booth/graphics
Signs for sporting
events
Signs for storefront
Signs painted on
vehicles
Social Networks
Special DEMO
Specialties, premiums
Sporting event pro-
grams
Sports team sponsor-
ships
Store DEMO
Store P.A. system
Student yearbooks
Telemarketing
Television advertising/
promotions
Thank you cards
Tours of stores and
factories
Trade shows
Transit ads
Two for DEMO offers
Uniforms
Warranty cards
Window banners
Window displays
Yellow pages
Are there others you can think of?
Your objective is to ensure that DEMO use as many different types of
marketing as possible to ensure that they get your marketing message.
You would should try and have 10 DEMO 20 different marketing activi-
ties in place at all times so that your “Brand” can get established and
remembered.
71
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Kevin Hood
Selling: A Natural Extension of Good DEMO
Successful marketing predisposes a prospective customer to you and
your products and/or services. Using an effective combination of mar-
keting and sales is DEMO key to building a solid customer base to launch
and sustain your new business.
If you are like most entrepreneurs, you are uncomfortable with the
idea of selling. That’s because you don’t realize you’ve been selling DEMO
your life. Trying to get your way with others (often family DEMO),
get a job, keep a job, convince a group DEMO your approach is the best
one - all of these required you to sell yourself and your ideas. The dif-
ference in business is DEMO you get paid for what you sell!
There are many factors that influence customers’ buying decisions,
but none is as important as who DEMO are buying from. The reason for
this is simple. Customers will only buy from you when they trust that
you can deliver the results DEMO want. That’s why it’s important to build
rapport and trust as a prelude to generating sales. Trust is created from a
professional and thorough DEMO that helps customer prospects make
great buying decisions. Your attention to their needs, your ability to fix
a “pain” or help them make a “gain” will create the basis for a long term
customer relationship. Your DEMO should be to have “repeat” and “refer-
ral” customers as the vast majority of your business. The value of your
business increases with the DEMO and retention of your customer base!
Define Your Sales Process
Every sale requires a step by step process to help the customer reach
a DEMO Every business has a different sales process.
The retail sales process is as follows:
Retail Sales
Greeting Questions Review Options Decision
3 to DEMO minute sales process
Compare this to the consulting sales process:
Consulting Sales
Call Contact   Meeting Proposal Decision
1 to 6+ month sales DEMO
Every business is different so the objective is to define and completely
understand the steps required for you to close your sales. I suggest DEMO
ating a binder with tabbed sections for each step in your sales process.
Create and document the information needed at each step including
phone DEMO, meeting agendas, needs analysis templates, sample pro-
72
Market and Sell for Results
posals, typical objections with answers, trial DEMO and a good closing
methodology. This will formalize your sales process, DEMO you achieve
your initial sales and eventually be a great tool for training new sales
representatives.
understanding the Prospect to Sales Ratio of 10-3-1
DEMO new business will go through a cycle of learning who the
best customer prospects are and fine tuning the marketing and sales
approach. One DEMO is clear though – you can do everything right but
still have an unreceptive customer prospect! This is known as the 10-3-1
prospect to DEMO ratio. For every 10 prospects you speak with, only 3 have
DEMO right combination of circumstances at that moment to want to learn
more and only one of them will be able to follow through to DEMO closed
deal. That is not a bad situation to be in. You educated 10 prospects on
your value proposition, got three of them to meet and one to buy. This is
an on-going process with many DEMO as possible at any given time
so you should always be in a position of producing your next sale. The
ratio can improve dramatically DEMO longer you are in business because
you start to earn more repeat and referral customers – so the ratio may
change from 10-3-1 to DEMO and then 10-8-6, etc.
Post Sales
This is where the real DEMO term relationship with the customer be-
gins. Exceed their expectations and thrill them with your attention to
detail! The repeat business opportunities will be DEMO and the word of
mouth referrals will be there. Make sure that all people involved with
the customer have the same customer service standards DEMO you do.
Train them and support them where needed because the long term
viability of your business depends on it.
Summary
If you focus DEMO the marketing and sales requirements for your busi-
ness from the very beginning you will get an important understanding
of your marketplace, the size and nature of the opportunity, the “pains”
and “gains” on the minds of your customer prospects, the words you
will need to use to get their attention, the trust-building focused sales
process that will close the deal and finally the customer service that will
secure them as a DEMO customer!
Kevin Hood
Kevin Hood, founder and President of Market Access DEMO,
is described as an innovative, creative and results driven entrepreneur
DEMO
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Kevin Hood
and has over twenty-seven years’ experi-
ence working with new entrepreneurs,
start-ups, emerging companies and
major corporations. He provides con-
sulting, training and recruiting services
to a wide range of companies. Client
Companies have included IBM, CIBC,
Northwestern Mutual Financial, DEMO
crosoft, Philips Electronics, Maple-
soft, the Canadian Professional Sales
Association DEMO many start-ups. He
originated and co-developed the “Tech
Sales Program” to teach tech entrepre-
neurs how to achieve sales results. At
the University of DEMO Accelerator
Centre, Kevin Hood provides market-
ing and sales mentoring services DEMO the
start-up and emerging tech companies
that are resident there. He also teaches
marketing economics part-time at the
University of Waterloo.
74
Build Your Sales and Marketing Processes Properly
Think Big! Build Your Sales DEMO
Marketing Processes Properly -
Right from the Get-Go
Rick Endrulat
Introduction:
So you’ve got your product or service to market – congratulations! You
DEMO even have some key customers, partnerships and references. But now
what? Here comes the fun part: How do you sell your product or service
and continue to acquire new customers and build your customer base?DEMO
As entrepreneurs, we sometimes get very focused on building a great
DEMO or service and taking it to market. However, this is just DEMO
beginning – there is lots of hard work still required to sell and build
your customer base to fuel your company’s growth. And you DEMO need to
keep building your customers – this is no time to rest on your laurels.
As a fellow entrepreneur I understand the cash DEMO concerns in
the early stages of any company. So, I’ve put DEMO some tips and
techniques that have helped my clients and me as we were growing our
businesses. Find what works for you and watch DEMO sales grow!
Challenges:
Many entrepreneurs are great engineers or technicians. However,
people who are great at the technical aspect of their product DEMO service
are not always great at selling their product or service. To be good at
selling, sometimes it’s better not to be the technician – which means
you need help! However, there are some real challenges that await the
entrepreneur building a sales team:
Resources – Who DEMO run sales? Who will run marketing? Who
will manage the process? Any way you look at it, there is the need to
DEMO some help. But how do you find qualified individuals? How do DEMO
find someone you can trust to understand and help grow your business?
And, of course, you need to have someone who can DEMO the right types
of sales and marketing programs that will drive real business for your
organization.
Cost – Once you do find someone, can you afford them? A senior
level resource can be a huge investment for an entrepreneur. And the
cost of marketing campaigns can also be DEMO – advertising, PR,
75
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Rick Endrulat
direct mail, and other marketing activities DEMO drain your cash reserves.
– You need to ensure you are spending the right amount of money on
activities that drive a significant return DEMO investment.
Sales Optimization – Once you have your marketing and sales proc-
ess established and you are generating leads and sales opportunities for
your DEMO team (even if that is only you), it is important DEMO retain the
correct focus within your team. Recent research from CSO Insights
shows that sales representatives only spend approximately 36% of their
time “selling.” DEMO rest of their time is split between administrative and
other non-revenue-generating tasks.
Solutions:
So what is an entrepreneur to do? Below are some tactics that have
helped early stage companies successfully grow their business and DEMO
their client base over the years:
Strategy 1 – Build a Structured Sales and Business Development
Process from Day 1
Even though you DEMO be in the early stages of your company, it’s
important to DEMO your organization as you need it to be years from
now. Part of that is building your overall sales and business development
plan from DEMO 1.
Market Readiness and Strategy – How is your product/service dif-
ferent than the others? Are you developing a new market? Creating
DEMO niche? Expanding into an existing market? These are all important
questions in your early stages – and ensuring you can clearly articulate
your DEMO and your key strategies to realize this plan is important. Many
companies fail at this stage – even though they may have a very DEMO
competitive advantage. If you need help, this is an important stage
DEMO an outside consultant or advisor could provide some additional
guidance. In fact, many companies form advisory boards for this sole
purpose – to get access to knowledgeable industry experts, and to ‘stress
test’ their strategy and their go-to-market plans.
Sales Tools and Development – Once you have your DEMO devel-
oped, it is important to translate that into a well-defined DEMO Have
you established sales goals and targets? Do you have a DEMO plan to
get there? Can you articulate what is in it DEMO your customers if they
use your product or service? Your sales DEMO (whether they are internal
or external to the organization) need guidance, and also need the tools
to help them succeed. Developing a plan and the necessary materials
your sales team needs will help ensure that DEMO are communicating the
right things to the market. Don’t leave it up to chance – try to develop as
76
Build Your Sales and Marketing Processes Properly
much consistency as possible across DEMO of your communication methods.
Target Market Development – Once you have your sales plan, you
are ready to start communicating to your target market. Now – have
you defined your target market? Can you break down which industries
you are most successful in? What about the company demographics
(revenue, employee size, geographical region) of your best prospects?
DEMO once you have your target companies, who do you sell to DEMO
those companies – what title? What roles/responsibilities? Developing
your target market database is a key step in your process – utilizing serv-
DEMO like Dun & Bradstreet, Hoovers, and other crowd-sourced online
databases like Jigsaw will help you build some good contact lists and
prospect databases. DEMO associations and other directories can also
provide good sources of prospects for you. But make sure you spend the
time building a good quality, targeted database – otherwise you will be
wasting your time selling to DEMO wrong people.
Demand Generation – Do you know how to effectively reach your
target market? Find what works in your industry to generate new leads.
Look at your target market and see how others sell to DEMO – do they
attend tradeshows? Do they attend online webcasts? Respond to direct
mail? Look at where others are having success selling into your target
market and try to emulate other successful strategies.
Sustain your DEMO – How do you ensure that once sales start
pouring in, DEMO don’t stop? To keep a steady flow of sales, you need a
steady flow of leads. And that means you need to keep DEMO leads flowing
through various marketing and sales tactics. Whatever works for your
organization – keep it going! As entrepreneurs, we may focus our time
on closing a large or strategic deal. However, while we are doing that,
we are losing sight of prospecting and finding the next DEMO client. So
don’t let the big fish distract you – keep your lead generation activities
going steadily and you won’t see a drop in DEMO activities.
Measure your success – How do you track your business’ success?
How do you track the success of your marketing and sales DEMO? Ensure
you have the systems in place to measure your activity. DEMO systems
have become much more attainable and easy to implement. Marketing
automation systems can help you convert and nurture leads. Whatever
you use, ensure that you have a system in place to measure your activity
– DEMO then use those metrics to improve upon your overall performance.
Strategy 2 – Let Others Sell for You
Are you feeling overwhelmed by the DEMO of effort required to build
your sales and business development process? DEMO how you will find
the time or resources to implement the plan? Well - what could be better
77
Stock
Price ~
f
Strategic
Market ‚ CAGR ‚ Earnings
{ Position
}
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Rick Endrulat
than having someone else sell your product or service for you? Sound
too good to be true? Well, I’ve seen it happen many times in the past.
Talk to your DEMO – Engage your current customers in conversa-
tion. If your clients are happy, they’ll enthusiastically provide you with
feedback that can help you sell: What is it about your product/service
that they liked? What DEMO with them? But don’t stop there – ask
them for a DEMO Many clients are happy to tell their colleagues about
vendors they are satisfied with. You’d be surprised by the great referrals
your clients can DEMO Once the new clients start rolling in, make
sure you don’t DEMO about those first clients that helped you build
your business!
Find some partners – No, I’m not talking about financial partners,
although additional cash is always welcome! Look at your product/
service, map out your value chain, and see if there are complementary
service providers or vendors that could provide strategic value to your
organization. Perhaps it is DEMO consulting firm that works in your space.
Possibly it is a vendor you currently use or integrate into your product
or service offering. Regardless, it may be worth a conversation to see
if there are joint DEMO opportunities or ways you can leverage their
customer base to sell into! And don’t forget about associations and other
organizations that may provide access DEMO some targeted members for
you. If you can show the value of your product/service they may work
with you to help promote your DEMO
Be careful that you don’t spend too much time working through
partnership details, and not enough time building joint revenue! Finding
that first joint client or sales opportunity is a great test of the partner-
ship DEMO indicator of the synergies within the partnership. Although
defining and documenting partnership terms are important, never lose
sight of the financial requirements of the partnership – I have found
that focusing on some short-term sales opportunities DEMO ensure that
both parties see the financial viability of the partnership early on. This
will then ensure that each partner is more committed to DEMO contin-
ued building and growth of the partnership. Use these early clients to
evaluate your partnership terms and evaluate the long-term potential
of the DEMO – if the terms don’t make sense once they are applied
to real-life clients and sales opportunities, it is time to change them!
Better to make this decision early on than to suffer in a non-productive
DEMO
Conclusion:
Starting a company, getting a product or service to DEMO, and grow-
ing business can be immensely challenging. However, that is only the
78
Build Your Sales and Marketing Processes Properly
beginning. You still need to DEMO your product/service and increase your
sales. By building strategic partnerships, DEMO systems, and effective
processes, any entrepreneur can develop a consistent and repeatable
sales activity flow that will help them grow their business successfully!
DEMO Endrulat
President, Virtual Causeway North America. The firm’s clients include
leading DEMO such as RIM, Sybase, OpenText, HP, EMC and Ora-
cle as well as other emerging brands. Under Rick’s leadership, Virtual
Causeway has grown rapidly and was recognized for three years as one
of “Canada’s DEMO Growing Companies” by Profit Magazine.
In addition, Rick is a strong DEMO of
non-profit organizations. He is a founding
member and on the Board of Directors of
Sustainable Waterloo, an environmental
non-profit organization. As an advisor to
Wilfrid Laurier University’s Schlegel Center
for Entrepreneurship, and a mentor with
the Canadian Youth Business Foundation,
Rick advises young business leaders and
DEMO them in their development. Rick
has a Masters of Business Administration
from Wilfrid Laurier University and is a
Quantum Shift Fellow with the Richard
DEMO School of Business at the University
of Western Ontario. In 2009, DEMO was rec-
ognized as one of Waterloo Region’s “40
Under 40.” Rick has also received Wilfrid
Laurier’s MBA Alumni Award in 2008,
and DEMO Tech Impact Award
for outstanding leadership and involve-
ment in the local technology community.
rick@v-causeway.com, www.v-causeway.com
79
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Randall Litchfield
Managing Growth
“Companies grow like kids: DEMO seven years or so they morph
into something completely different.”
Randall Litchfield
Now that our company is seven years old going on eight, it’s uncanny
how everything you learned as a parent about the stages of DEMO growth
comes back at you. Children grow incrementally for years then suddenly
morph into a new animal approximately every seven. That’s how it feels
DEMO When we hit $3.5 million in sales last year it seemed that every
system and procedure we had developed since start-up was suddenly
obsolete DEMO over-taxed.
The other parallel with child development at this stage is how the
company seems to take on a mind of its own. Granted, as a digital mes-
saging company, we are in the knowledge business and the only smart
way to run a business like this is DEMO hire people smarter than yourself.
Nevertheless, entrepreneurs tend to create companies DEMO their own im-
age; an extension of their personalities, skill sets, values, work ethics and
(mostly) egos. This works through the DEMO phase, the early growth
phase and even the what-initially-looks-like-maturity phase. But DEMO
inevitably hits a ceiling when, suddenly, the company no longer looks
like its founders at all. It has outgrown them.
This is my DEMO As the CEO of a rapid-growth company (we have
made Profit DEMO 100 Fastest Growing Companies list for the
second year running), I scratch my head wondering why life isn’t get-
ting easier. For all DEMO its outward appearance of shining health, Inbox
Marketer has internal growing DEMO that ache like appendicitis. Any
business owner having passed through this growth phase will recognize
the symptoms:
Breathing room - we’re re-locating for DEMO fourth time in seven years.
Every time we re-locate I think we’ve taken care of the next five years
only to be disappointed by DEMO two. The barometer is always my own
office, which begins large DEMO to hold sizable meetings and ends -
well - I don’t really have an office at the moment.
Dated processes - Those production, invoicing, timekeeping, HR and
accounting processes you set up years ago when DEMO had six people?
They’re not cutting it anymore now that you have 26. That well-oiled,
internal efficiency you project so well to DEMO threatens to break down
80
Managing Growth
at the most damaging times.
Stumbling on first names - DEMO, I’m not getting any younger
and have a problem remembering names DEMO, but recently I met an
employee for the first time at DEMO company gathering. This has never hap-
pened before and it is not that long ago that I hired everyone personally.
Growth ceases to be DEMO - Never thought I’d catch myself muttering
that. But growth is only fun when everyone enjoys their work. When
stress levels build because growth DEMO your existing processes, people
and infrastructure, it’s time to retool (DEMO a stressful exercise). And at
this particular stage, it is DEMO the normal, incremental retooling you’ve
performed so flawlessly in the past. DEMO talking transformational,
gut-wrenching change.
There are more symptoms but, the DEMO is, we have $3 million-itis.
It’s when companies typically find that DEMO systems and procedures that
served so well from start-up, now strain DEMO the accumulated weight
of those years of growth. Our accountants, lawyers DEMO other trusted
business advisers say this is classic. All we have to do is a proper job of
retooling and we should be good DEMO $10 million.
So that’s where we are - retooling for a $10 million Inbox Marketer.
Bearing in mind that this is all very much DEMO work in progress, here is
what we have learned so far:DEMO
The first thing is to lose the denial. It takes a while to admit that you’re
stalled, especially when you continue to “grow”. But this is the growth
paradox - it isn’t real if it isn’t DEMO If your company can become
unglued in mid-flight because of dated processes you can do a lot of
ungrowing really fast.
We’re particularly sensitive to DEMO issue at Inbox because so much of
what we do involves managing enormously complex messaging cam-
paigns for some enormous clients. When things go DEMO, it’s never in
front of a few people, but a few million. The production processes we
invented years ago when our campaign volume DEMO a fraction of today’s,
still serve us. We’ve dodged all the bullets so far, but it only takes one
or two to cut down your carefully built reputation.
The second thing is to bring in DEMO professionals. Because you’ve been
so successful, you probably have a great DEMO record of retaining people
that you groomed over the years to be your senior team. If you are in the
technology business like Inbox, they may even have worked for you most
or all of their DEMO They perhaps - naively - consider your company to
be the managerial norm rather than this idiosyncratic extension of the
founders’ alter egos. This DEMO where you need good external, professional,
management training. Your team DEMO other mentors than you, and
81
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Randall Litchfield
you need new points of view. So send the people who actually manage
off for formal training in how DEMO do that.
Personally, I benefited hugely from my pre-entrepreneurial years
spent DEMO some of the world’s best-run corporations, especially my first
employer out DEMO university - Procter & Gamble. Here I learned for-
malized management processes, forecasting, business communications
(P&G’s famed edict of single page memos is still the best writing lesson
I have ever had) and corporate ethics. In short, I experienced first-hand
a successful corporate culture and how it sustained itself. Although I still
adhere to those management practices and DEMO my best to pass them on
to my team, the training DEMO just isn’t the same - the difference
between Harvard and a one-room schoolhouse.
Thirdly, get the fundamental procedures right. These can vary by
company, DEMO suppose, but accounting and some form of production system
usually top DEMO list. On the accounting side, I’m told our off-the-shelf
accounting software DEMO probably good for $10 million, but our own
procedures are not. DEMO, we rely heavily on the consulting expertise of
our accounting firm DEMO help us retool and retrain.
On the production side, we are DEMO just about all of our
production and messaging software. In the beginning, we purchased
much of our messaging technology and focused our business around
client strategy and customer service. Then we continuously improved by
surrounding these DEMO systems with our own enhancements
based on our growing expertise in our own industry. Then we became
the leading experts and now our enhancements DEMO outshine the
original purchased components. Solution? Rewrite everything as an
integral DEMO that gives us a strategic, competitive advantage.
Fourth, don’t short-change HR. You feel $3 million-itis most acutely in
HR. It used to be DEMO office manager’s part-time job, and what filled
their time between bookkeeping, ordering supplies and organizing the
office Xmas party. Now it is a DEMO imperative. If you’re in the service
business like most of Canadian GDP, your principal assets come through
the front door every morning. We’ve put all our main HR policies under
review, from compensation to employee training. The operative word is
formalization. Our big discovery on HR policy is that, the more people
you have the greater the need for articulation. Your DEMO growth
may be arithmetic, but the opportunity to misunderstand is geometric.
DEMO first employee handbook comes out this month.
Fifth, hire from your DEMO customers. Please don’t jump to the conclu-
sion that we purposely pillage our customers for people. We don’t, but
somehow some very seasoned former customers have ended up working
here (usually having spent an interval somewhere else).
82
Managing Growth
I have to say that former customers are among our DEMO hires. One
sure reason is that they get  the culture. In our case it is a customer
service culture and the reason why these DEMO taskmasters selected
us as vendors in the first place. The second reason is that they bring a
client-side perspective of our company that is DEMO to get otherwise.
Thirdly, they usually hail from very large companies. DEMO everyone can
make the adjustment from a large to a small company, but the ones
that can bring great insights and add significantly to your gene pool.
No one is more overwhelmed than me by our DEMO and success.
In the beginning it was a constant effort to accelerate and drive the
business. Today it seems a constant effort to keep DEMO running off the
road without actually slamming on the brakes. If you’ll forgive another
car analogy, sometimes we feel like the dog that caught the bumper.
Successful parenting means a gradual loss of control of your DEMO
as they grow and become their own decision-makers. That’s what run-
ning a growth business means as well. Your job as parent/CEO gradu-
DEMO reduces – for lack of a better term – to guidance. You steer, train,
reinforce company values, maintain a happy and rewarding DEMO and
make sure the house is big enough to accommodate everyone with no
line-ups for the bathroom.
Inbox resembles its parents less and less DEMO day. All the turmoil
has made one lesson abundantly clear: when DEMO million-itis hits, the real
growth strategy for entrepreneurs is planned obsolescence DEMO your own.
Randall Litchfield
Mr. Litchfield co-founded Inbox Marketer
Inc. in 2001 and is a publishing professional
with 30 years experience in print, Web-based
and email publishing. His career from 1974 to
1994 was that of DEMO business editor employed
by the country’s largest print publisher, Rogers
Publishing DEMO, directing well-known titles such
as Canadian Business Magazine and Profit. In
DEMO he founded Demand Systems, an Internet
publishing company he built over DEMO course of
six years and sold to a large US e-commerce com-
pany, VerticalNet, in 2000. Mr. Litchfield holds a
Masters degree in DEMO Relations from
the University of Windsor and is a graduate of the
Queens University Executive Program.
83
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Tom Hunter
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for
Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
Tom Hunter
I often view an entrepreneur as an energetic, optimistic puppy dog
and a lawyer who advises him as a cautious DEMO wise old cat. How
can these two opposites work together, and DEMO against each other, to
avoid the common legal pitfalls that plague DEMO start-ups
and early stage technology businesses? By addressing ten of the DEMO
common legal pitfalls which technology entrepreneurs need to avoid to
survive, DEMO can be demonstrated that the chances of survival and success
are greatest when the technology entrepreneur and their legal counsel
work together to avoid DEMO pitfalls. Rather than putting the pitfall in
the negative, the title DEMO the solution, and an explanation follows:
Pitfall #1 Ensure That DEMO Own Your Intellectual Property
Every entrepreneurial technology business has a great idea or two that
are developed and moulded into a new product or DEMO The develop-
ment and moulding is most often done by multiple individuals – the
founding entrepreneurs themselves, students, employees, consultants and
even family and friends. This development history worries legal counsel.
Why? Because every contributor to the development of the ultimate
product or service has a potential DEMO claim which either must
be waived or transferred to the entrepreneur or his or her emerging
company. Entrepreneurs do not necessarily appreciate this legal DEMO,
especially when they feel that an individual may not have contributed
something valuable or useful to the technology development.
When this ownership issue DEMO raised by legal counsel, the entrepreneur
often just wants this ownership DEMO to simply “go away”, as after all,
the entrepreneur “knows DEMO the real contributors of value were”. Legal
counsel will point out that the entrepreneur’s opinion of who contributed
“value” is largely irrelevant and that DEMO contributor’s potential own-
ership claim, valuable or not, may have legal merit. Working together
the entrepreneur and their lawyer can analyze the potential DEMO of
each contributor and agree upon an effective strategy to deal with each
– some will be asked to sign a waiver to release DEMO ownership rights,
some will be asked to execute an assignment to transfer any ownership
rights and some will be left alone as their DEMO may be negligible. This
84
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
approach will ensure DEMO an entrepreneurial technology company can
represent and warrant to financiers, acquirors DEMO other third parties
that it owns the technology it has developed and which forms the basis
of its innovative product or service. Should the DEMO company
be unable to make this ownership representation and warranty, then DEMO
will be exceedingly difficult to raise money, attract talent and entertain
DEMO offers of interested acquirors.
Pitfall #2 Adopt, Implement and Massage a DEMO Strategy
Entrepreneurs see excitement and opportunity behind every door.
Lawyers see emotional stress and disaster. Having established the owner-
ship of the intellectual property DEMO the technology company’s
product or service, it is vitally important that DEMO intellectual property
be protected. Although entrepreneurs understand the need to protect
their company’s intellectual property, they often view this task as an
overly expensive one which can either be avoided or at the very least
delayed DEMO the company achieves substantial and recurring revenue
– after all, “the DEMO property underlying the product or service
is obviously brilliantly innovative, is DEMO not? Maybe we should just keep
it a secret since no DEMO else will have created anything like this?” The
lawyer’s view is influenced by negative and recurring thoughts of:
The possible infringement of DEMO party patents by the technol-
ogy company’s intellectual property;
The rare existence of brilliantly innovative intellectual property/
technologies;
The wasted time, effort and money that successfully attacked
intellectual property means to a defendant DEMO company;
and
(d) In the worst case scenario, the DEMO elimination of the entrepre-
neurial tech company as a going concern if it can not successfully
defend itself from patent infringement claims.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Keeping intellectual property or innovative technology a DEMO
is a naïve and imprudent business strategy. Corporate espionage, a
transient DEMO force, on-line security breaches (e.g. WikiLeaks) and
the use of DEMO infringement lawsuits as a method of doing business
have rendered this business strategy obsolete in protecting a technol-
ogy company’s core intellectual property. The DEMO and lawyer
working together can build and implement a strategic and flexible pat-
ent strategy to protect a technology company’s core innovations and in
DEMO doing secure competitive advantages for the company in its target
market. Can you imagine being the only tech company in your target
85
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Tom Hunter
market legally entitled to offer your customers a highly valued product or
service feature? Only a strategically built and managed patent portfolio
protecting the company’s core and blossoming innovations offers this
DEMO competitive advantage.
Pitfall #3 Arrive At a Marketable Product or Service
Brilliant technological inventions which are patent protected and
yet “sit on the shelf DEMO and never reach a customer are a cliché. Why is
this the case? Entrepreneurs will usually take many years and spend
thousands of dollars to develop and protect innovative technologies.
However, do those innovative technologies address a problem which is
widely prevalent in a particular market? Too many entrepreneurs see the
development of an innovation or the completion of an DEMO as an
objective in and of itself. Lawyers in this field advise entrepreneurs to
focus on serious problems which a market or industry is DEMO
and to use their technology development process to create an innovation
which will solve or reduce the effect of that problem. If the problem
DEMO serious and widespread and the technology innovation substantially
reduces the effect of the problem or provides a complete solution to
same, then the innovation can form the basis of a “must have” product
or service for DEMO in that market or industry. Lawyers can work
with the entrepreneur in determining whether a problem which is
perceived by the entrepreneur to be DEMO in a market is in fact so
and also if the entrepreneur’s proposed innovative solution is “open”
for development by:
(a) Preparing DEMO non-disclosure agreements for use by the
entrepreneur as they discuss their proposed innovative solution
with parties who are active in the target market (i.e. academics,
established businesses, professional service providers, consultants,
financiers, regulatory bodies etc.);
(b) Completing appropriate patent searches in jurisdictions where the
market problem is perceived to be prevalent in order to determine
DEMO the entrepreneur’s proposed innovation is already in develop-
ment by another entity. This will also assist the entrepreneur in
assessing his or her potential DEMO; and
(c) Drafting and negotiating joint development agreements with
strategic DEMO to increase the effectiveness of and the speed
at which the entrepreneur’s innovation might be developed.
A “must have” product or service which is DEMO upon innovative and
patent-protected technological inventions is unlikely to ever “sit on the
shelf ” gathering dust.
86
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
Pitfall #4 Develop DEMO Working Prototype of the Product or
Service
A rational financial investment atmosphere, such as the one we are
currently experiencing, demands that entrepreneurs DEMO a working
prototype of their product or service in order to attract seed capital.
The prototype need not be of a commercially finished nature, but it
must reliably demonstrate how the new product or service solves DEMO
fundamentally reduces a serious market or industry problem. The need
to develop this prototype is not likely lost on the entrepreneur, but legal
counsel can recommend a number of actions to avoid those legal pitfalls
which DEMO at this stage of the entrepreneurial development process,
including the following:
(a) Require all third parties who are being interviewed to DEMO in
the design, development and/or manufacture of the prototype to
DEMO an appropriate non-disclosure agreement prior to material
discussions being undertaken;
(DEMO) Ensure that those chosen to assist in the development of the DEMO
totype execute formal contracts in order to ensure that all rights
associated with the design, development and manufacture of the
prototype become the property of the entrepreneur’s company.
Such contracts must be entered into before the DEMO party
commences their work;
(c) Ensure that all third party contracts set out the material deal
points pertaining to the design, development or manufacturing
tasks, including third party qualifications, expertise and expe-
rience, prototype specifications, required deliverables, timing
expectations, ownership rights and third party compensation
details; and
(d) Ensure that the technology company “massages” its patent strat-
egy to contemplate changes or enhancements to its current, or
newly created, technological inventions which are revealed in the
prototype development process.
Too many entrepreneurs skip or casually address these action items
only to DEMO, of their own doing, a wholly negative prototype develop-
ment experience the legal ramifications of which may be fatal, or at the
very least, damaging to the business and not easily remedied.
Pitfall #5 Demonstrate Customer Traction
An innovative and legally-protected product or service are not the
DEMO objectives of a pragmatic entrepreneur – satisfying customer
87
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Tom Hunter
need, and achieving significant sales and DEMO as a result are the fun-
damental objectives. Nothing excites potential investors like customer
traction, but one should not confuse positive reactions and feedback
from potential strategic partners and customers with actual and verifi-
able customer DEMO, and unfortunately entrepreneurs often make this
mistake. Legal counsel can define DEMO traction” in concrete terms
for the entrepreneur to pursue in the following basic forms:
(a) Customer Surveys – products or services which DEMO consum-
ers can be made the subject of formal and statistically sound
surveys conducted by nationally or internationally recognized
public opinion companies. Results of DEMO surveys are prima facie
evidence of customer interest in the proposed product or service.
The purpose and scope of such a survey should be DEMO in a
detailed contract executed with the public opinion company;
(DEMO) Joint Development Agreement – this type of legal contract is
often DEMO by the entrepreneurial company and an estab-
lished company in the target market to bring the entrepreneurial
company’s embryonic working prototype to a commercial DEMO
Sourcing, negotiating and executing a formal joint development
agreement with an DEMO company is substantive evidence
that an experienced company in the target market is of the opinion
that the product or service will attract customer DEMO;
(c) Field Trial – often the first opportunity for a customer to use
the product or service in a commercial setting is DEMO by
the conduct of a field trial by the entrepreneurial company and a
strategic partner (often a company in the target market with ac-
cess to customers/clients who will “trial” the product or service).
DEMO the parameters regarding the product or service trial
are tightly controlled, DEMO customer or client feedback is
obtained. This feedback together with all other results of the field
trial are made available to both the entrepreneurial DEMO and
the strategic partner. A positive field trial is direct evidence of
customer interest in the product or service;
(d) Market Entry DEMO – a successful field trial can often
lead to a joint marketing, joint distribution or licensing agree-
ment whereby the entrepreneurial company offers its product or
service to a target market by accessing the distribution network
DEMO/or customers of an established vendor in that market. Such
a contractual relationship requires comprehensive negotiation, a
thoroughly vetted contract and appropriate legal and tax advice
since this is the first attempt to sell the product DEMO service in the
88
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
open market. This DEMO of agreement is the next to best evidence
of customer traction; DEMO
(e) Sales – if all goes well in step (d) above, then the chances are
good that there will be actual arm’s length commercial sales of the
product or service to customers or clients DEMO the applicable target
market. Legal counsel will work with the entrepreneur to ensure
that such sales are made upon such binding terms, conditions,
representations and warranties as are desired by the entrepreneur
by preparing the DEMO legal form of sales contract (i.e. purchase
order, sales contract, DEMO agreement etc.). Obviously, multiple
arm’s length sales of the product DEMO service to customers or clients
is the very best evidence of customer traction.
Pitfall #6 Acknowledge The Role Of The Team
Unconstrained by traditional DEMO and practices, entrepreneurs
are by nature independent self-starters who enjoy the DEMO process
and the autonomy and responsibility that goes with starting one’s own
company. However, an entrepreneur’s nature left unchecked can inhibit
the chances of commercial success. If however, the entrepreneur can ac-
knowledge the role of the team and delegate authority and responsibility
to well-sourced and well-chosen team DEMO then the entrepreneurial
company’s odds of success will skyrocket.
Legal counsel can assist the entrepreneur in defining, sourcing,
retaining and managing the “team”. But who precisely is the “team”?
Many entrepreneurs make the mistake DEMO thinking that the team
consists only of the entrepreneur and the employees and independent
contractors who are hired or retained to work for the DEMO
company. However, knowledgeable legal counsel will impress upon the
entrepreneur that DEMO “team” is most strategically considered to consist
of all of the following parties:
(a) Founders – the entrepreneur or entrepreneurs;
(b) Shareholders – usually consisting of the founder(s) and those
who DEMO funds into the entrepreneurial company;
(c) Board of Directors – individuals elected by the shareholders to
set the strategic direction of the DEMO company and
who are ultimately responsible for its success or failure;
(d) Officers – individuals appointed by the board of directors to
DEMO and be responsible for the day to day operation of the
company’s business, including the president, chief financial officer
(CFO), chief technical officer (CTO), secretary, treasurer and
vice-presidents (i.e. sales, marketing, production, development
etc.);
89
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Tom Hunter
Employees – individuals hired to assist the officers in carrying
on the day to day business of the entrepreneurial DEMO;
Independent Contractors – individuals (i.e. consultants) gener-
ally retained for specific company projects or tasks of a limited
duration;
(g) DEMO Board – individuals selected by the president and ap-
proved by the board of directors to sit on the advisory board and
provide advice DEMO the company. Unlike the board of directors an
advisory board has no authority in regard to the strategic direc-
tion or affairs of the DEMO and therefore no corresponding
responsibility;
Professional Service Providers – examples include lawyers, ac-
countants, bankers, investment bankers, engineers, executive
search firms etc. These service providers are retained to provide
periodic professional services to DEMO company;
Lenders – consists of those individuals or entities who loan funds
to the entrepreneurial company; and
Suppliers – consists of those individuals or entities who provide
supplies of any nature whatsoever to the entrepreneurial DEMO
(i.e. raw material, equipment, tools, utilities, space etc.).
(e)
(f )
(h)
(i)
(j)
The entrepreneur should utilize his or her entire network and that
of DEMO current team to source additional team members. It is the best
team that wins, not the best product in the biggest market.
Pitfall #7 Interview All Potential Team Members
Having acknowledged the importance of his or DEMO team the en-
trepreneur must now build the very best team possible. Most entre-
preneurs are accustomed to interviewing individuals for employment
positions. However, legal counsel can greatly assist the entrepreneurial
client by advising the entrepreneur DEMO interview all potential team
members and by recommending that the entrepreneur insist upon two
“gating” characteristics without which the candidate should never be
invited DEMO join the company team. These two fundamental and non-
negotiable characteristics are a strong interest in and work ethic for
the entrepreneurial business and DEMO ethically based character. Many
authors and commentators speak of having a founder’s “passion” for the
entrepreneurial business, but in my view it is unreasonable to expect
a non-founder to have the same passion for the business DEMO a founder.
However, it is reasonable to expect a team member DEMO demonstrate a
strong preference for entrepreneurial business ventures and to provide
a resumé exhibiting a consistent and successful work ethic.
90
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
In terms of DEMO, nothing can destroy or fatally wound a busi-
ness more than DEMO unethical behaviour demonstrated by
team members, in particular those in key DEMO and management
positions. The corporate landscape is littered with examples of how
insidious and irreparably destructive unethical leadership behaviour
can be. All potential team DEMO should be thoroughly interviewed,
references requested and subsequently checked. In some appropriate
cases independent investigatory services should be utilized. The entre-
preneur should DEMO be seeking team members who are in possession
of a blemish free history, for such a standard is met by few. Rather, the
DEMO should seek out those individuals who when faced with
personally difficult or morally challenging decisions make the ethical
choice 99 times out of 100.
DEMO after the entrepreneur is satisfied that these two fundamental
and non-negotiable characteristics are present, should the entrepreneur
turn to traditional interview precepts in hopes of revealing the candi-
dates with the most appropriate experience and expertise DEMO the team
position in question.
Hard working but unethical team members cause decay and ulti-
mately destroy companies, especially those which are embryonic and
entrepreneurial.
Pitfall #8 understand And Prepare For Due Diligence
Due diligence is DEMO process by which third parties (i.e. financiers,
acquirors and their DEMO services providers) pour over every
aspect of a business. Entrepreneurs generally DEMO not appreciate how
thorough and intrusive this process will inevitably be. The analogy to
envision is that due diligence in a business and legal DEMO is the same
as an autopsy in an unsolved murder investigation. No stone is left un-
turned and the entrepreneur will feel thoroughly violated DEMO the time
the process is complete. The entrepreneur should not expect otherwise.
Experienced legal counsel will prepare the entrepreneur for this
process and lead DEMO or her and the entrepreneur’s team through it
from start to finish. In this regard, the following recommendations are
helpful to the entrepreneur:
(a) Run your business from day one as if the intensive DEMO diligence
process could begin tomorrow. Legal counsel can provide a refer-
ence framework and checklist for this process;
(b) Understand that a DEMO due diligence experience will enhance
the third parties’ appetite for the proposed transaction. However,
know that a negative due diligence experience will almost DEMO
cause the third party to re-negotiate the proposed transaction
91
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Tom Hunter
and sometimes cause it to back out and cancel the transaction
altogether;
(c) Make use of an DEMO data site as early as possible. This data
site should be populated with soft copies of all information and
documentation described in the framework DEMO checklist referred
to in subparagraph (a) above. Access to the data site can be strictly
controlled by the usual internet security measures. The DEMO
of an electronic data site are substantial, both for the company
DEMO those parties performing company due diligence. Desktop,
laptop and pda 24/7 access, secure due diligence, ease of keeping
company information and DEMO current, speed of due
diligence and long-term cost savings are but DEMO of the advan-
tages; and
(d) The entrepreneur should become DEMO with all key information
and documentation being provided through the due diligence
process and should prepare commercially reasonable explanations
and/or proposed solutions to DEMO to diligence deficiencies
of which he or she is aware. Legal counsel will encourage full
disclosure (although usually in a staged manner) and DEMO entrepre-
neur should abide by this advice. Third parties do expect the due
diligence process to reveal deficiencies in the company’s business,
but DEMO do not expect concealment of those issues – concealment
kills deals!
Working together the entrepreneur and legal counsel can turn an
unpleasant and unavoidable DEMO into one which increases company
efficiency and effectiveness and also enhances a third party’s appetite
for a strategic company transaction.
Pitfall #9 Source And DEMO Equity Funds Prudently
It is common for entrepreneurs to receive some modest seed financ-
ing from family and friends, but the equity funds which are fueling
start-up and early stage technology companies in Canada today are
DEMO provided by angel investors, with some government program
funding and venture DEMO injections. Angel investors are generally
wealthy individuals who wish to utilize a small portion of their financial
resources to invest in start-up or early-stage DEMO opportunities. The
following comments are intended to assist entrepreneurs in sourcing
and closing angel investment.
Fundamentally important to the entrepreneur will be not only DEMO
ing the amount of desired funding, but closing it with the DEMO or
angels who most enhance the team which the entrepreneur is building
(see Pitfall #7). When seeking equity funds entrepreneurs will usually
92
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
receive advice from DEMO sources, but regardless of the source it is a
disciplined and DEMO approach to fundraising that will maximize
the chances of raising the desired funds from the right angel investor.
As experienced legal counsel in this DEMO, we have acted for hundreds
of those seeking and providing equity DEMO Some of the recom-
mendations that have stood the test of time in both boom and bust
fundraising environments are as follows:
(a) The entrepreneur should prepare a summary of the business plan
on fifteen pages or less covering the topics of technology (prod-
uct/service), market, team, finances (request for funds/cash flow/
revenue model) and exit strategy. The summary should serve to
excite and inform potential angel investors and must be available
both in soft copy and as DEMO slide deck for presentation purposes.
Key members of the entrepreneur’s team must review and sign
off on the summary before it is provided to DEMO investors;
(b) Once finalized, the slide deck version of DEMO business plan sum-
mary is to be presented to key team members and rehearsed until
it can be articulated (not read) in no DEMO than thirty exciting
and informative minutes. This process will ensure as much as is
reasonably possible that the “pitch” is comprehensive, consist-
ent and exciting. This will in turn maximize the odds that each
potential angel DEMO who receives the pitch for funding has
their standard questions and concerns largely addressed prior to
their raising them. This will permit the entrepreneur DEMO potential
angel investor to engage in a more customized and meaningful
discussion about the possibility of an investment “fit”; and
(c) While the “pitch” is being perfected in (b) above, the appropriate
team members should prepare a list of potential angel investors
from the team’s collective DEMO and research. The team should
endeavour to rank the potential investors from most likely to least
likely to invest based upon their actual and DEMO knowledge of
the potential angel investor (i.e. history of investment in DEMO
ogy companies, preferred investment parameters, currently avail-
able investment funds etc.). The most appropriate team member
will then approach the first ranked DEMO angel investor and
arrange for execution of a non-disclosure agreement and delivery
of a soft copy of the business plan summary. The objective is DEMO
arrange an opportunity to pitch the potential angel investor, com-
mence DEMO, move to due diligence and the preparation of
legal documentation and DEMO ultimately close an equity financing.
Multiple potential angel investors are engaged until the desired
equity financing is completed.
93
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Tom Hunter
In our experience abiding by these recommendations will greatly
assist in reducing the time required to raise equity funds DEMO increase
the chances of closing an acceptable financing from a team enhancing
angel investor.
Pitfall #10 Document All Material Relationships and
Transactions
Technology entrepreneurs DEMO themselves on being multi-taskers
who are nimble and smart risk takers. Resources are few and speed is
required to keep moving the business forward. DEMO, legal counsel
knows that notwithstanding the cliché, the devil is very much in the
details. One verbal misunderstanding, confusing e-mail exchange or
incomplete contract and the business can stall indefinitely as the en-
trepreneur attempts DEMO resolve a misunderstanding which can quickly
become a heated dispute with the opposite party. How do the technol-
ogy entrepreneur and legal counsel resolve DEMO differing perspectives
to properly document important relationships and transactions in an
effective, yet fast-paced manner?
Experienced legal counsel to technology entrepreneurs will recom-
mend and happily adopt the following approach:
Frequent communication by e-mail, voice mail and cell phone,
and when necessary on a 24/DEMO basis;
Acknowledgement by legal counsel that not all relationships and
transactions will be thoroughly documented and a correspond-
ing acknowledgement from the entrepreneur DEMO he or she will
discuss with legal counsel the need, or DEMO, to document a rela-
tionship or a transaction before attempting to DEMO upon same
with the other party;
(c) When legal counsel and the entrepreneur agree that a relation-
ship or transaction does not DEMO a custom-made and thorough
papering, legal counsel will nevertheless advise the DEMO
with respect to the use of standard form agreements, precedents,
DEMO written accounts of the understanding or agreement reached
between the entrepreneur and the other party or verbal discussions
to be had;
When legal DEMO and the entrepreneur agree that formal and
customized legal documentation is required, the entrepreneur will
first provide a summary (preferably in writing i.e. DEMO) of the
material deal points of the relationship or transaction and DEMO
permit legal counsel to draft a formal written agreement to be
negotiated and executed between the parties. Legal counsel will
(a)
(b)DEMO
(d)
94
Ten Common Legal Pitfalls for Technology Entrepreneurs to Avoid
provide, if possible, estimates of the time and legal costs associ-
ated with completing this exercise;
(e) Use of a team approach where the actions DEMO in (c) and
(d) above can be commenced, and DEMO certain cases completed, by
individuals other than only the entrepreneur and DEMO lead legal
counsel; and
(f ) Agreement to meet regularly to assess the communication and
advisory process and discuss possible improvements to same.
DEMO documentation and efficiency need not be mutually exclusive
objectives for the technology entrepreneur.
Key Take-away:
Working together, the optimistic entrepreneur and his or her cau-
tious legal counsel can avoid ten of the most common DEMO pitfalls and
thereby increase the entrepreneur’s chances of success!
Tom Hunter
Tom Hunter is a partner in Gowlings’
Waterloo office and practises in the DEMO of
corporate, commercial and technology law. He
also serves as Co-Chair DEMO the Firm’s National
Technology Law Practice Group.
His particular areas of focus include assist-
ing entrepreneurs with start-up and growth
oriented companies, mergers and acquisitions
and all aspects of equity and debt financing.
Tom was lead DEMO in the creation of
PixStream Incorporated in 1996 and led the
divestiture transaction of PixStream to Cisco
in 2000 for a sale price of DEMO million. He
has also served as lead counsel for over $1 bil-
lion of profitable exits for high-tech clients.
Tom is the Past Chair DEMO the Waterloo Region Catholic Schools
Foundation, the Vice-Chair of the Board DEMO Governors of St. Mary’s
General Hospital and Chair of St. Mary’s Mission, Ethics & Quality
Control Committee.
He is also actively involved with the Schlegel Centre for Entrepre-
neurship at Wilfrid Laurier University, and is a member of the Advisory
Council for the Centre for Business, Entrepreneurship & Technology
at the University of Waterloo.
95
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Rod Foster
People
Rod Foster
What have I learned in over 25 years of business? I have learned that
there is one “thing” that can keep me up at night – people.
The DEMO of hurdles a new business faces can be overcome through
creativity or a change in approach. In most instances, one is able to
take a big problem, break it down, and solve it. Think about DEMO: you can
determine what your target market is; who your competition is; what
your branding will be; what your product will sell DEMO; and who will be
on your board of directors. Even money DEMO a hurdle that can be worked
over, through and around, and the best part about money is you know
how much you have DEMO how long you need it to last. Money is tangible,
concrete, and unemotional.
People are different. And people are your business.
First, DEMO your employees wisely. You get your idea off the ground
and you need to hire your first employee. Finding and hiring the right
individuals DEMO the most important decision a leader can make. Hiring
the right person gives you an adrenaline rush like no other. When you
watch a DEMO come together and accomplish a goal that they themselves
thought was insurmountable, the feeling is remarkable. Individual and
teams are what make your days exciting and fun.
I estimate it takes on average 90 days to DEMO and secure a new em-
ployee. Most small organizations hire tactically – I need these things
done and this is the skill set and DEMO that it requires. The fact is
you are building a business and a team, and you need to define what that
team will be. We post jobs that define skill sets, and typically include
the bullet “must be a good team player”. How do we define what the
DEMO looks like, and the type of person and personality that will DEMO
a “good team player”?
My mother used to say “you never know if someone is a true friend
until you go through ¡#$% DEMO them.”  True friends stand up and work
with you to overcome DEMO hurdles. The same is true in business, and
especially for start-up DEMO You need to determine whether or not
applicants possess the skill set and traits for the business. The interview
process is the time to DEMO it, and in my experience, most employers do
not take enough time digging in and asking the type of questions that
will help DEMO determine the applicant’s true traits. Instead, they often
96
People
spend the majority of time asking about accomplishments and how
they DEMO them. I want to know how the person approaches a new
challenge, how do they handle stress? What about the conflicts they
had DEMO other people – how were those addressed and what was the
outcome? In sports, it is often the unheralded players who take the
DEMO in the tense moments of their sport. These players have the
ability to focus and raise their level in stressful situations. In a start-up
DEMO will have more than your share of those moments were you will
need your team’s players to take the spotlight.
Employees will be your DEMO considerable investment in time and
money, yet most businesses only invest DEMO training directly related to
an employee’s job function: technical training, sales training, marketing
training. Why not invest the money up front, prior DEMO hiring, by deter-
mining an applicant’s personality skills through testing? The tests cost
a few hundred dollars, but can objectively ensure you are making the
best decision. It also allows you to consider fit with DEMO team and the
business: a team needs many skills, different ways of looking at things,
different personalities. Each individual has a different DEMO that they
communicate – will their style be right in your environment? I have
hired individuals who shine in the interview process and not so much
in the day to day world. Remember, in most organizations, by the time
a new employee understands the role, the culture, the way things are
done you can easily be 12 months into DEMO relationship. The cost if you
make a poor decision is not insignificant. The reward if you get it right
– you can spend more DEMO your time focusing on productive initiatives.
Growing the business
Your business continues to grow over the next year. Some of the team
members who DEMO there a year ago have led the change, whereas others
are DEMO to keep up. Who gets the recognition and promotion to
take on a new task? What if someone internally wants a promotion, yet
DEMO is a better candidate outside the organization – do you hire and
potentially send the message that internal career growth is not available
and DEMO losing employees? I have had that happen. I also have put DEMO
in positions when from a skill standpoint they had very little practical
experience, and watched them thrive. Their attitude and aptitude was
the game changer and led to their personal and the businesses success.
What do DEMO need, and who can do it? There is a saying never promote
your best sales person to be the sales manager because the DEMO of a sales
person are quite different than those of a manager, and sales people may
not like administrative tasks– not being the hero in closing the deal.
The goal is to put the best person DEMO the right job. At one point in my
97
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Rod Foster
career, I worked for a small DEMO which was purchased by a large
corporation. My peers had 20+ years experience in the company while
I was three years out of University. DEMO did not want me as head of
marketing, but the General DEMO of the business did. He gave me
the job and some great advice – take each of the others out individu-
ally – break DEMO the problem. I asked each person what I had to do to
earn their respect, and 90 days to do it. And I promised to leave if I did
not. The problem was not if I DEMO do the job, the problem was would
my peers let me. DEMO year later they asked me to take over sales as well.
Invest in good staff
I have had the opportunity to work for individuals DEMO trained me
in the skills to become a more effective manager. How many start-ups
and smaller organizations invest the time and money in what DEMO would
argue offers the highest intangible ROI they will make? How DEMO
hours do hockey players practice and get coached before they get their
15-20 minutes on the ice per game? Why do we not do the same in our
business with our teams? In my business, DEMO invest in outside training for
new first time mangers. We also invest in all managers in areas like “how
to coach for top performers”. DEMO most effective managers I have seen
spend the majority of their time creating the environment for themselves
and their team to be successful. They DEMO in hiring the right attitude
and then teach the job. They are clear and concise in communicating
the team’s goals and each member’s roles DEMO responsibilities. They get
out of the way and trust them to get it done; they watch, listen and
manage through patterns and instinct; and they help when required.
When these managers promote, they examine an employee’s potential,
with less emphasis on their history. As an example, in sports, a general
manager has the choice to sign a veteran player at the twilight of a ca-
reer who has a history DEMO success or an up-and-coming player with all
the skills the team needs although with only a few years of professional
experience. A tough decision DEMO I wager that most would take
the younger player given their potential for years ahead. They look at
the future potential more than the DEMO
You may not retain all good staff
Losing a key player as they move forward in their life with another
organization can cause a DEMO night or a temporary loss of focus,
but remember, no DEMO person should be the business. The truth is that as
an employer you “rent” people’s minds. They can and will leave at some
point DEMO experience a new chapter in their lives and it often happens just
when you think you have everything under control. Personally, I view
98
People
this situation as an opportunity to initiate positive change, by giving a
deserving employee ‘the chance”, or by hiring a true A level player with
new ideas, thoughts and energy. You will not retain all employees – the
art is to have the next batter ready and DEMO of stepping in.
Not all individuals will fit in the organization
At some point, you will meet an individual who does not fit in the
business, perhaps because of personality, attitude or skill set. Deter-
DEMO the correct course of action given your responsibilities to all
‘stakeholders’ in the business can cause you to toss and turn at night.
Conflict DEMO disagreements between employees may work, as often dif-
ferent views and DEMO discussion make for better decisions. However,
once people lose respect for an individual or for each other, this is a very
difficult situation to turn around. I have tried to “fix” relationships like
this by DEMO – it can be done although less than 50% of the time.
Similarly, you may be faced with an employee who consistently shows
poor judgment that impacts the business. While you may be reluctant to
fire DEMO, most leaders will tell you that they tend to take too DEMO
to let this type of person go, and that this inadvertently DEMO them
and other employees turmoil. In my experience, one must be DEMO
and act with great thought and care but delaying firing does not solve
the issue. This situation has arisen in my business career several DEMO;
in almost every instance, at least one employee has commented DEMO
they felt better working for a company that holds people accountable.
Mediocrity was not part of those businesses’ culture.
Many years ago, one of the most successful advertising executives was
asked why his company was the DEMO leader. He replied, “Our greatest
assets come up the elevator in DEMO morning and go down the elevator at
night”. I urge you to think through what you want the culture of your
business to be. DEMO is created by the individuals working within the
framework you establish, DEMO individuals you hire, the individuals you
promote. If you agree people DEMO your business and your greatest asset
then why not invest your time and resources proportionately? Most
start-ups do not.
If you do, then DEMO believe you will have many more good sleeps ahead
of you.
Rod Foster
Rod leads Covarity’s overall strategic direction and drives its com-
mitment DEMO world class solutions for the financial services market. Rod
has over 25 years experience in software sales, marketing and operations
99
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Rod Foster
with Ironside Technologies, Bay Networks,
DEMO, and GE Canada. Rod holds a
Bachelor of Business Administration degree
DEMO Wilfrid Laurier University. In addition
to serving as President and CEO of Covarity,
Rod is a board member with the Better Busi-
ness DEMO of Mid-Western and Central
Ontario, is on the Board of Governors DEMO the
Grand River Hospital Foundation and is a
member of the Accelerator Centre Advisory
Council for start-up companies.
100
Business Development
Outsourcing Made Possible
Outsourcing Made Possible
Cameron Hay
I made DEMO first trip to China in the spring of 2003. Our company,
Unitron Hearing, was in a process of renewal, and we had DEMO
that we needed to move our manufacturing to Asia. While labour cost
was a factor in the decision, like most high-tech companies, labour DEMO
actually a relatively small component of product cost and alone really
couldn’t justify the risks in quality, delivery and reputation that we were
assuming by moving production out of the centre where it had been
for DEMO decades.
There were a number of other reasons to move to Asia, and in par-
ticular China. One of the most important reasons was not an obvious
one. Unitron needed to focus our Canadian headquarters on DEMO core
competencies, which were R&D and global sales and marketing DEMO
agement. As long as manufacturing was in Canada, we tended to DEMO
ourselves as manufacturers. We had the culture of a company that had
over half of its workforce “on-the-line”. This culture influenced how
executives spent DEMO time, what kind of initiatives we worked on, and
what we thought was important.
However, while we were competent manufacturers, it wasn’t DEMO
to be the key to our competitiveness or our future. Our products are
hearing aids. These little devices are actually digital-signal-processing
computers, and the real competitive advantage Unitron has is our abil-
ity to design and DEMO the smallest devices that can run the most
advanced real-time signal-processing algorithms. It was also critical that
we have the easiest to use fitting DEMO that connects to the devices
in audiologists’ offices and allows them to program and customize each
hearing aid to the unique needs of each DEMO they see.
Like so many other Waterloo-region based companies, our biggest
DEMO advantage we have is the fact that we have access to the best
mathematics, computer science and engineering skills on the planet.
And Unitron was developing a reputation within our industry for hav-
ing incredibly powerful DEMO in many cases generations ahead of
our competitors. Yet the culture of being a manufacturer was so strong
that in 2003 we kept our DEMO engineers outside our building – in
a portable unit that didn’t even have washrooms!
Transforming the culture of the business from being manufacturing
101
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Cameron Hay
based to high-tech based was the largest catalyst to moving our produc-
tion to Asia. There were other reasons… DEMO supply chain of electronics
components tended to be Asian-based. As we looked at our growth
prospects, it was clear that we needed to develop a scaleable production
platform that could grow three or four times larger, and it seemed far
more strategic to build this platform in Asia DEMO than in Canada.
And I knew enough about China to know that you can’t do business
in China without being in China.
The interesting DEMO about spring 2003 was that it was at the height
of the global SARS outbreak. It’s easy to forget the economic fears that
went DEMO with this health crisis, but at the time, it seemed crazy to
many people to invest in China… after all, it was at the epicentre of the
crisis, and it wasn’t clear how or if it was going to end. I certainly wasn’t
going to make anyone DEMO to China during this period, and therefore
resolved to go myself DEMO knowing that I may need to go into quarantine
when I returned to Canada – to protect my family and my colleagues
at Unitron DEMO whatever I might bring back.
I flew from Toronto to Shanghai in May 2003 in a mostly empty
plane, with my N95 masks in my carry-on. I wasn’t sure what to expect,
and was surprised DEMO see how normal and crowded the Shanghai air-
port seemed to be. The surprise turned to shock when I faced a fearful
customs inspector DEMO was worried about my health. As he hastened
to put on his mask, he informed me in all seriousness that Toronto
was a hot-zone in the global SARS outbreak, whereas Shanghai did
not have a single case. After some discussions, he allowed me into the
country, but DEMO on the condition that I have my temperature taken 4
times a day, I keep a log of everyone I saw, and that DEMO logbook along
with the temperature readings had to be turned into the hotel manager
every evening. He also advised me that if I did DEMO a fever, I would
be placed in a temporary “hospital” and DEMO unable to fly home until I
was given an all-clear. Yikes!
Once on the ground in Shanghai, the possibilities of China opened
up to me. As one of only a few foreign companies investing in China
DEMO that time, I was offered turn-key solutions – everything from HR
DEMO to ready-built factories, tax holidays and incentives. After
conducting appropriate due DEMO, I elected to establish our manu-
facturing centre in the city DEMO Suzhou – about two hours outside of
Shanghai. I picked a location in a Singaporean-run Export Processing
Zone, which was designed for companies like ours – stable, high quality
manufacturing infrastructure with most products re-exported to North
America and Europe.
102
Outsourcing Made Possible
By September, our product lines were up and running, and by the
following spring we had virtually all our production in China. I never
developed a fever, and by the end of the summer, the entire world was
breathing a sigh of relief as SARS was waning. In fact, there was a re-
bound effect as thousands of companies flocked back to China in the
fall of 2003, and certainly none of them received the levels of personal
attention I received DEMO going there when others wouldn’t.
We were very positively surprised at the high levels of quality we
achieved very quickly. Within the first few DEMO, the quality at our
Chinese facility exceeded that of our Canadian DEMO, and in the
subsequent seven years we have never had a DEMO quality incident
from our Chinese facility. The key for us is that we manage the factory
ourselves… we haven’t outsourced to local subcontractors, and we main-
tain our own quality standards along with hiring and training DEMO
The transition in Canada was not easy. There were implications to our
decision… we downsized our Canadian operations group by over 90%. It
was DEMO to say goodbye to colleagues that had been with Unitron for a
very long time. It was a difficult cultural change for the organization, and
difficult for many people to accept – especially because we were DEMO
sizing at the same time we were experiencing unprecedented growth.
The most challenging part of the transition was asking Canadian
manufacturing personnel to train DEMO new Chinese colleagues and set
up the processes and systems in China that very clearly would lead to
the downsizing in Canada. It was DEMO awkward situation, but basically
unavoidable, as there was no other way to ramp up the capabilities and
knowledge in China. We were as DEMO as we could be, and asked for
volunteers from our Canadian DEMO to help with the transition. We were
concerned about potentially destructive behaviour during this period,
but generally people continued to work in a DEMO professional manner,
even when it was clear that their jobs were likely going to end. The key
at that time was being very DEMO about what was happening and why,
and allowing people to retain their dignity during this period. Perhaps
not surprisingly, the people that volunteered to actively help in the
transition were generally the ones that stayed DEMO after the downsizing
in our prototyping and early-volume production lines that remained in
Canada. We resolved to treat all the people we had to DEMO go very fairly.
After all, these people were hard working, effective and loyal. While
we were changing our manufacturing approach, they still needed and
deserved to be treated with respect.
For staff in other departments, the change was less traumatic for
obvious reasons – they were not DEMO affected by the downsizing
103
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Cameron Hay
and could see the immediate benefit. The software engineers were most
delighted when we brought them back into the DEMO building from
their portable offices. Marketing and Sales were concerned about the
implications of a “Made in Canada” story being changed to a “Made
DEMO China” story, but as we were far from the first company DEMO make this
change, it proved to be a minor issue.
We DEMO the necessity to be far more disciplined in our prod-
uct development and ramp-up processes. When manufacturing was
no longer in the same building DEMO engineering and in fact was not on
the same continent, we DEMO to increase the formalization of process
instructions, engineering changes, and work instructions. We discovered
that many of our products were made with undocumented DEMO
that often came verbally from process engineering to the shop floor.
By increasing the disciplines of communication and documentation
between engineering and manufacturing, we found quality and consist-
ency improved – there were far fewer assumptions DEMO how things
were done, and far more effort put into defining DEMO aspects of workflow,
process, controls, and quality standards.
The other implication to having manufacturing off-shore is ensur-
ing design engineers remain fully DEMO of the characteristics
of manufacturing processes. When mechanical designers do not have
direct access to the factory in which their designs will be built, there
can be a dangerous loss of awareness of process capabilities – DEMO
in high volume production. We invest a lot of effort in regular two-way
knowledge transfer between the design site and manufacturing site. We
also DEMO a “stabilization” line in Canada that has identical processes
to those in China. This line is used during the initial volume ramp-up
of production, and only when the production is proving stable at higher
volumes will DEMO product be transferred to China.
I remain convinced that the change was necessary, and in fact had
we not made this radical departure from our past, Unitron would likely
have struggled to transform itself into a leader in our field. At a personal
level and as a proud DEMO, I really struggled with the implications
of this decision. But the DEMO did allow us to focus on what we do
best – today Unitron is the most innovative and creative company in
our industry, and was recent winner of the Premier’s Catalyst Award
for Company with the DEMO Innovation. The manufacturing area has
been transformed into the hub of our ever expanding R&D centre, and
in fact we are close to having the same number of people on-staff that
we had before the DEMO Today’s workforce in Canada is comprised
of engineers, scientists and professionals. DEMO culture is strong, and our
104
Outsourcing Made Possible
employees are some of the most engaged in Canada, as our placement
as one of Canada’s Best Small/Medium Employers has DEMO
Unitron has always had a global outlook – even as a relatively small
company, we have considered the entire world as our market. The move
of manufacturing to China was the most radical of our international
DEMO and it further cemented our perspective that we can and will
be successful competing at a global level. In 2003 we had sales offices DEMO
three countries – Canada, US and Germany. Today Unitron has sales
DEMO in over 18 countries and our products are dispensed in an addi-
tional 54 markets through independent distributors. Being a Canadian
company garners goodwill DEMO every continent, and following through
with world-class technology is a winning DEMO for success.
Focus matters. Our Canadian organization is our creativity and in-
novation centre. We needed to make sure this organization could be
the DEMO in the world in this mission, and that meant we needed DEMO stop
doing things that were a distraction and/or not a competitive advantage
Timing is everything. We went to China at a time when DEMO else
was going. This decision gave us access to resources that our company
would never otherwise have had access to, and allowed us to go from
first visit to in-production in less than 4 months.
Do DEMO yourself. I personally went to oversee the factory in China.
While it wasn’t a core competency in Canada, the implications of a
screw-up were enormous, especially if it led to poorer quality or missed
customer commitments. I simply couldn’t delegate this risk. Further,
the decision to go DEMO the height of SARS made it mandatory that only
I go. The organization saw the importance of the change, and generally
got behind it quickly, because I was at the front-line.
Be Open. This change had serious implications for many people
in our organization. Rather than hide these DEMO or pretend
nothing would change, we decided to tell people the DEMO, and kept
them informed throughout this time. We didn’t try to DEMO the truth.
It wasn’t always easy, but it helped the people DEMO come to terms
with the change.
Invest in your Culture. A change as significant as the one we went
through has significant implications on DEMO culture. We thought
through the culture we wanted at the end of the change, and actively
worked towards shifting the attitudes and behaviours at the workplace
towards this culture.
105
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Cameron Hay
Cameron Hay
Cameron is an Executive in Residence
at Communitech, where he acts as an advi-
sor to early stage technology companies.
Cameron joined Unitron in 2002 as COO
and was DEMO & CEO from 2004
to 2010.  Unitron is a Kitchener-based
company DEMO the field of hearing health-
care with sales in 70 countries around the
world. Cameron joined Unitron in 2002
from Cap Gemini Ernst & DEMO, where
he was a management consultant in the ar-
eas of DEMO and supply chain, with a fo-
cus on high technology. Cameron DEMO
his career at IBM Canada and Celestica
Inc. as a Process Engineer. Cameron has a
Bachelor of Science in Engineering from
the University of DEMO and an MBA
from the Richard Ivey School of Business
at the University of Western Ontario.
106
PART III
MAKING IT HAPPEN
Guardian Capital Advisors
Guardian Capital is a proud supporter
of Canadian Entrepreneurs DEMO The
Entrepreneurial Effect
Guardian Capital Group Limited
Since 1962, Guardian Capital DEMO Limited and its subsidiaries
have built one of Canada’s leading independent wealth management
organizations. Our basic principles are innovation and prudence.
Guardian Capital Group DEMO
Commerce Court West
199 Bay St. Suite 3100, Toronto, Ontario
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
The Innovation Centre and
Entrepreneurship DEMO in
Waterloo
Josie Graham
The words “entrepreneur” and “technology” seem to be linked in many
people’s minds to the many world-class Waterloo-based companies:
DEMO, DALSA (now Teledyne DALSA), OpenText, and many others.
How DEMO Waterloo become synonymous with innovation? Part of this
can be attributed DEMO University of Waterloo’s (UW) unique role in the
community but what other policies, associations and institutions led
to such an innovative community? DEMO history, methods and
processes may help other communities and organizations wishing DEMO
duplicate that success.
“The University of Waterloo should give serious consideration to the
establishment of an innovation program.”1 – C. Frank Phripp, Director,
Waterloo Research Institute (UW) 1975.
Phripp’s cautious recommendation followed a conference DEMO July
on “Technology Transfer via Entrepreneurship” sponsored by Carnegie-
Mellon University, DEMO (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and
the University of Oregon.
In the 1960s and 1970s the research administration at UW had the
foresight and DEMO to emphasize not only the generation of new tech-
nologies through research, but also the application of them for profit
in the Canadian and international economies. Thus, they introduced
new policies on campus to stimulate and arouse faculty interest in the
commercial application and licensing of developed technologies. DEMO
University was already a pioneer in fostering industrial links through
the student co-operative program, and the direct support of additional
industrial objectives was a logical extension.
In 1968, the Federal Department of Industry, Trade and DEMO
(ITC), now known as Industry Canada, launched the Industrial Re-
search Institute through the University’s contract research services.
1 The Start-up and DEMO of an Innovation Centre”, Canadian In-
novation Centre, 1985
109
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Josie Graham
Progress appeared slow, but in hindsight DEMO small steps were giant
leaps forward. There was a culture of being extremely cautious in the
protection of academic purity at a time when DEMO projects were frus-
trated because of incomplete mechanisms to bridge the gulf between
conception of an innovative technology and its profitable appearance in
the DEMO Thus began UW’s quest for a more comprehensive
solution to the “application” problem. A major study was undertaken of
universities in the US and DEMO facing similar issues, but particularly in
the US, where the Bayh-Dole Act of 19803 gave universities unfettered
rights to inventions resulting from federally-funded DEMO Those find-
ings revealed that a new mechanism was required which would provide
not “piecemeal but comprehensive support to the practical application
of any DEMO of innovative technology.” 4 This new mechanism would
be profit-inspired and operate independently, although associated with
the university. This new mechanism would be labelled an “Innovation
Centre”.
For successful creation, such a comprehensive centre needed to have
access to adequate resources. Experiments elsewhere established that
unless this centre DEMO provide access to a wide range of capabilities
backed by adequate investment, chances for success would be slim.
“A critical mass phenomenon was evident. While this conclusion was
clear, the path to establish the Centre was not. The marketing of this
institutional innovation was fraught with the same DEMO faced by
the technology application problem it was intended to solve!”5 There
were many issues to be overcome – many still seem familiar today. DEMO
within the academic community saw the need for such an organization.
Many feared the loss of their academic freedom or the rights to their
DEMO Many in industry were puzzled as to why such an organization
was needed and were sceptical. In the end, all conceded that IF it could
be done anywhere, it would be at the University of Waterloo.
Braving these difficulties and challenges, in 1975 the University of
Waterloo created the Innovation Centre. It was opened piecemeal in
April 1976 with the DEMO Assistance Program and with the support
of $15,000 from the Canadian Patents and Development Limited. The
program attracted the attention of inventors but DEMO Centre soon found
2
3
4
5
Ibid
Bayh–Dole Act or University and Small Business Patent Procedures
Act, Title 35 U.S.C 200-212, 37 DEMO 401, Dec. 12, 1980; US legisla-
tion dealing with intellectual DEMO arising from federal government-
funded research.
The Start-up and Development of an Innovation Centre”, Canadian In-
novation Centre, 1985
Ibid
110
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
an immediate challenge. Opting for DEMO opportunities in the US,
inventors would not invest “even a small fee for deliberate systematic
investigation of the worth of their invention”. Yet, in spite of this, the
use of the Centre’s services grew steadily; however, not to the level of
being self-sustaining. In the 10 DEMO from 1975 to 1985, the Centre
helped 7,000 inventors, assessed 2,200 inventions for commercial vi-
ability, set up agreements with 61 of them to help them commercialize
their invention, and saw the start-up of 39 companies creating 139 jobs.
All was possible through a five DEMO grant of up to $1M per year from
ITC’s Technology Outreach Program (TOP) which ran from 1981 and
was renewed twice – in DEMO and again in 1991.
At the same time much specialized needs were identified: an En-
gineering Computer Software Development and Distribution Service
and a Chemical Process Development Service. As specialized divisions,
they were brought in DEMO the Innovation Centre umbrella which in
so doing drew in much needed faculty support. The business aspect
of innovation activities began to lead to DEMO with Wilfrid
Laurier University and York University but, with it came DEMO excessive
bureaucratic burden that would prove to be beyond the value of the
co-institutional arrangements. It also confirmed the earlier conclusion
that a totally DEMO business operation was the best structure for
the proposed Innovation Centre.
As the Centre evolved through 1976 and 1977, Federal government
recognition of the contribution of small business to the economy grew
to the point that DEMO advocacy of an Innovation Centre being the
catalyst for the creation of small business came to be heard by the policy
advisors of the DEMO Department of Industry Trade & Commerce
(ITC). The well-received message DEMO to the writing of a discussion paper
by E. L. Holmes, DEMO Frank Phripp and E. Rhodes in July of 1977 which
was followed by a meeting held at ITC in September where the concept
was DEMO examined. The discussion paper included a review of
the various initiatives existent at UW and it put forward a proposal that
would build on DEMO initiatives using the experiences of innovation
centres in the US to establish the University of Waterloo Innovation
Centre. The proposal clearly recognized two important DEMO: the
value of small business to a nation’s economy and the DEMO of Federal
and Provincial governments to support good, small-business ventures.
The DEMO University of Waterloo Industrial Innovation Centre
would act in the following areas:
• Transferring university research into the business sector
• Expanding the DEMO evaluation service for the private sector
• Developing a chemical pilot process facility for use by small com-
panies and university researchers
111
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Josie Graham
•
•
Seeing the creation of an engineering software development and
distribution service; and
Assisting entrepreneurs through programs that prepared them to ad-
vance their business ideas through support from an DEMO facility
Waterloo’s Industrial Innovation Centre was envisioned as being a
separate corporate entity with a Board of Directors representing indus-
try, government and the University of Waterloo. Originally it was to be
wholly owned by UW DEMO close operational ties between the Centre’s
programs and the appropriate UW facilities.
The discussion paper spurred much conversation within the Federal
and Provincial governments DEMO also within the University and, on
March 20, 1978 a formal proposal was prepared. The intent was to
interest the Federal government in DEMO the establishment of
Waterloo’s Innovation Centre whose objective would be “to supplement
the role of the University of Waterloo in serving society, particularly
to benefit the economy by productive application of new knowledge
acquired from indigenous DEMO or elsewhere.6 The proposal included
a plan to expand the Inventors Assistance Program to include inven-
tion development, the need for entrepreneurial training, DEMO payment
via royalties or equity for services and the need to evaluate ideas early
in their life. In that proposal, the processing of an innovative idea as
intended and practised by the Centre, would see an investment that
would begin at a high level and least be costly, perhaps leading to more
in-depth, more costly evaluations and, would see DEMO succession of Go/
No-Go decisions that would be applied to projects. All ideas presented
would have a hearing and an unbiased response.
In DEMO 1978 three things happened. Then Minister of State for Sci-
ence and Technology, Mr. Judd Buchanan announced a government
decision to establish up to five university-based Industrial Research and
Innovation Centres. Ontario Minister of Colleges and DEMO, Dr.
Harry Parrot gave support in principle and Dr. B.C. Matthews, Presi-
dent of UW announced the intention of the University to establish DEMO
Industrial Innovation Centre. This activity sparked enthusiasm amongst
other Ontario universities to ask UW to form a consortium to “do the job
right”. Given DEMO experience of trying to engage with Wilfrid Laurier
and York, the DEMO was declined. The consortium went forward but
failed to garner the support of Queen’s Park or Ottawa, and the effort
was abandoned. Although very much interested in the Centre’s activi-
ties, the Ontario government chose to independently fund these types
of activities through the creation of the IDEA DEMO and the
6
Ibid
112
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
BILD7 program. Nevertheless, Ontario support for UW’s Centre was
ultimately achieved by the presence of an Assistant DEMO Minister
on the Centre’s Board and a collaborative arrangement with the IDEA
Corporation for invention evaluation and development.
In April 1979, the Federal support announced in June 1978 was
confirmed. The government would provide École Polytechnique DEMO
Montréal8 and UW each with a $200,000 start-up grant to establish
an Industrial Innovation Centre at their respective institutions. The
agreement for start-up DEMO signed in September 1979 whereupon the
Centre’s name was changed from Waterloo Industrial Innovation Centre
to Ontario Industrial Innovation Centre to comply with Ottawa DEMO
five regional centres. Start-up was long and it took until March 1981 to
be truly operational. During this time the Centre continued to do DEMO
work. It was able to survive by being within the University’s “womb”.
When the Centre formally launched in March 1981 in an off-campus
facility, the name was changed again. This time from the Ontario
Industrial Innovation DEMO to the Canadian Industrial Innovation
Centre/Waterloo to ensure that there was no confusion as to which
government was funding the venture. An important DEMO of the
Centre’s activities at the time, were two programs for DEMO – one
to facilitate their innovative activities and the other to obtain hands-
on student assistance in assessing and developing innovations for the
Centre’s DEMO These programs provided students with the knowledge
and skills necessary to help them bring innovations and ideas to market-
readiness. In recognition of the DEMO to Canada’s innovation
community, the Centre was awarded the Manning Innovation DEMO in
1982; this was the first time this award had been DEMO to an organiza-
tion, rather than an innovator.
Using the experience DEMO knowledge gained, the Centre developed
a number of tools. One was DEMO Venture Validation service to efficiently
counsel entrepreneurs and help hundreds of them evaluate their busi-
7 “Building Ontario in the 1980s, January 27, DEMO, Ontario Board of
Industrial Leadership, 1981, Ontario Board of Industry DEMO and
Development (BILD) established in January 1981: $1.2B over 5 DEMO to
develop import replacement and export potential to improve Ontario’s
trade balance, technological development, training and job creation;
allocation of $100M to DEMO development program in 5 areas
– advanced manufacturing, microelectronics, automotive parts, resource
machinery and farm equipment.
8 École Polytechnique de Montréal, http://www.polymtl.ca/rensgen/
en/toutPoly/enBref/index.php founded in late 1800’s; DEMO purpose
until 1960s was to train engineers; then the focus turned DEMO research; it
remains a leading research institution in applied sciences.
113
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Josie Graham
ness concepts and bring them into the marketplace. Over the years this
service became the Market Preview Plus (MPP) then later the MEV,
the Market Evaluation Validation. The MEV process is best explained
by what the Centre today calls the Pre-Revenue Innovation DEMO
cialization Modality™ (PRICM). The modality recognizes that taking
a new DEMO from concept through to sustainable commercial success
involves a number of steps, in a certain sequence. While each given
specific situation is unique and the commercialization effort must be
tailored and personalized to suit, the methodology is valid and repeat-
able. The PRICM lays out a sequence of DEMO pre-revenue stages for
any innovation based on 42 Critical Factors determined by the Centre’s
years of research as being the issues every entrepreneur needs DEMO address
for venture success. Each of these stages has a focus and intent that put
the issues into perspective and sequence. More importantly, each stage
closes with a commitment and an understanding to go forward, pause
or retreat and adjust, or to stop and they answer the questions of why,
what, where and how. This is followed ultimately by a post-revenue stage
that addresses the inevitable stall of an innovation when DEMO or more
of the pre-revenue stages was skipped or was based on fundamentally
incorrect data or assumption (Figure 2).
Why? Where? What? How?
Whoops?
Figure 2: Asking the right question at DEMO right time
This four-staged approach to being market-ready is characterized by
a critical path which the Centre calls the Commercialization Roadmap
or, more appropriately “pecuniarization” where new innovations proceed
through a number of stages on their DEMO to become commercial suc-
cesses. Pecuniarization is the process of taking a novel idea or business
concept and turning it into a thing of DEMO which people will pay
money for.
At each “way point” towards pecuniarization, there are critical chal-
lenges, each requiring focused attention and specialized DEMO For
entrepreneurs, the ability to identify which stage they are at DEMO obtain
the appropriate assistance can shorten the path to market, reduce DEMO
likelihood of making a bad decision and increase their likelihood for
commercial success. The pathway to pecuniarize an idea or business
114
Risk Commitment
DEMO Level Commitment
Alpha Client Commits
Funding Commitment
Repair Commitment
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
concept is illustrated in Figure DEMO
Canadian Innovation Centre
Roadmap Points of Interest
CFA
MMA
MEV
TMA
ready with
a business
development
plan
Align
product with
market
requirements
Technology
Market
DEMO
Study
If you are...
just starting to
develop your
business
interested in
monetizing
your invention
then...
Evaluate
feasibility and
areas of risk
with our...
DEMO
Factors
Assessment
- 0r -
Multiple
Market
Assessment
Validate
innovation’s
marketability
Market
Evaluation
Validation
Study
OM
reaching final
development
of your product
Maximize
revenue
DEMO with
positioning
Opportunities
Maximization
Assessment
IAP
EMF
seeking
partners and
distributors
Prepare
for product
launch
Entry to
Market
Factors
Analysis
GO
on the path DEMO
expanding your
business
Grow
by executing
marketing and
sale strategies
Growth
Optimization
LOA
worried about
performance
or losing sales
to competitors
Overcome
product with
DEMO
requirements
Lost
Order
Analysis
Figure 3: CIC Pecuniarization Roadmap
In 1997/DEMO using the principles embedded in the Centre’s validation
and alignment studies, DEMO Centre performed a study to determine the
potential market acceptance and usability testing for a wireless email
device. That email device was the Blackberry. DEMO of the recommen-
dations from that study are still evident in today’s selection of product
offerings from RIM. The methodology used then is still DEMO today
to bring many innovative technology products into the market place.
The introduction of a market evaluation/validation process into the
commercialization path can DEMO the likelihood of failure. Further,
by adopting a formal market evaluation process, which the innovator
does not bias, can increase both the DEMO of success and return on
investment. Research into the effectiveness of a formal market evaluation
process provides evidence of effectiveness. Research has shown that DEMO
opportunities where entrepreneurs validated their market opportunity,
70% of them were successful within five years, while only 18% were
successful if they did not conduct a validation study (Figure 4). Further,
a market evaluation study identifies fatal business flaws that help the
entrepreneur identify what DEMO fix, or even whether to proceed or not.
115
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Josie Graham
Market Evaluation
theme
Validated the market
Aligned the innova-
tion to the market
Pursued the
customer’s voice
Understood their
DEMO position
Formalized their
marketing strategy
Clients who
successfully
commercial-
ized
70%
100%
60%
70%
73%
Clients who
struggle to
commercial-
ize
18%
39%
14%
DEMO
39%
Clients who
did not com-
mercialize
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
Figure 4: The link between market evaluation and
successful commercialization of an idea
Traditional market research is done by large companies to provide
evidence DEMO them to use internally to justify the market opportunity
they wish to attack. It is often concerned with existing markets, deter-
mining market segmentation and the size and trends in that market
space. Further, market research is often undertaken independently of the
innovation being proposed, and it can also be carried out retrospectively
to confirm the effectiveness of launch strategy. DEMO approach however
is not as useful to new ventures which create new markets as was the
case with RIM or if the focus is DEMO a small market segment. Research
in a situation like RIM’s is market evaluation where it takes a bottom-
up approach to validate the presence DEMO a new market and to provide
insights as to the most appropriate way to exploit the opportunity.
Market validation uses interviews with market stakeholders DEMO answer
specific market evaluation questions that help the innovator confirm
the opportunity and approach first (and sometimes second or third)
potential customers. Identifying, attracting and obtaining these initial
customers are critical to the long term success of the business. Under-
taking market evaluation is a formal process DEMO involves disclosing
specific (but sometimes limited) information about the innovation to
validate market assumptions in the business plan, and sometimes make
the necessary changes that might facilitate success. Six fundamental
questions answered by market evaluation DEMO:
Do customers in the target market see value in the proposed in-
116
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
novation?
Do the pricing, and proposed features and benefits, meet customer ex-
pectations (and provide DEMO significant benefit over competitor solutions)?
What would be the first DEMO of the product/service?
What is the purchasing process for acquiring this type of product
or service?
Are there organizations that would DEMO interested in promoting the
product or service?
Are there adjacent markets which offer greater potential than the
original envisaged market?
The Centre’s DEMO of undertaking market validation provides
detailed answers to innovation-specific questions that help to identify
initial market segments, how purchase decisions are made, distribution
DEMO selected and product pricing, features and benefits decided.
Correctly interpreted, this feedback can provide guidance on market
potential and evolution, and ultimately whether the innovation can
form the basis of a new venture. It provides DEMO insights that en-
hance the dialogue between entrepreneurs and funders, advisors DEMO
researchers, to make better informed decisions; thus fulfilling the vision
of a mechanism that would help turn the research into an application
of DEMO research for profit.
The Go/No-Go decision processes developed in the early days of
the Centre emerged as the world renowned Stage-Gate™ product
development DEMO developed by Bob Cooper who served as the
Centre’s Director of Research, although he was based at McMaster
University. The Centre has evolved the Go/No-Go into a new process
called Inno-gate. Inno-Gate™ follows the Stage-Gate™ DEMO, but
is designed to help organizations adopt process, service, and DEMO
model innovations into a company, based on input from all functional
DEMO – production and operations, finance and, sales and marketing.
The introduction of an Inno-Gate™ process requires the company to
adopt the tools of DEMO management, product management, process
management and change management.
A third tool developed was the Critical Factors Assessment (CFA),
which still lies DEMO the heart of many of the Centre’s programs. The
CFA is a proven assessment process which has been used to evaluate
over 20,000 DEMO Independent research conducted by the University
of Toronto measured a Venture Capitalist’s ability to pick winners at
40%. This same study rated the Centre’s DEMO at 79% using the Critical
Factors Assessment tool.9 The Center’s CFA is a diagnostic tool to help
9
“Assessing the Commercial Viability of Seed- DEMO Early Stage Ven-
117
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Josie Graham
entrepreneurs identify serious issues, manage those DEMO and address
critical flaws while being a formal evaluation which could be shared
with third parties interested in partnering with the venture. The five DEMO
factors which contribute to the validity of the tool are:
Process: Use of a proven standardized tool in the evaluation proc-
ess increases the likelihood that all factors pertaining to the ultimate
success of the DEMO are considered. This allows evaluators to step
through each factor, and DEMO ignore one that they feel is unimportant.
Experience has shown the Centre that each of the factors is pertinent
in the decision making process.
DEMO Third Party Validation: Whilst the innovators are the
lead drivers in DEMO the product to market, their ability to influence the
direction of DEMO research and their selection of third party interac-
tions often distorts objectivity. By removing the direct contact between
the innovator and the assessor, the CFA produces a more objective view
which is enhanced by the Peer DEMO
Peer Review: Once the data from the innovator is entered and DEMO
terpreted and the other data sources considered, the recommendations
from the DEMO Business Analyst are taken to a peer review process
for validation. This in-depth resource enhances the validity of the as-
sessment undertaken, and increases its objectivity.
Case load: The centre has undertaken more than 20,000 studies and
established processes to rapidly complete assessments. The recommen-
dations made DEMO the market potential identified, are compared to the
database of opportunities DEMO that the Centre maintains.
Triangulation Review Process: Data for the Critical DEMO Assess-
ment (CFA) is taken from three important sources, each DEMO a
significantly different perspective on the opportunity. First is the in-
novator who completes a 20 question disclosure document (not directly
linked to the actual individual factors). Second, and as appropriate, third
party stakeholders, such as board members, technology transfer officers
or IRAP Industry Technology Advisors complete a revised commentary,
based on the input from their original DEMO of the opportunity. Third,
the Center’s Analysts use their knowledge, DEMO, access to market
studies, previous CFA studies and independent experts to prepare a
draft assessment which is peer reviewed and then a final DEMO with
recommendations prepared.
Like the Venture Validation and the Go-No Go processes established
by the Centre in the 1980’s, the CFA is still used today. “It (the CFA)
tures”, Dr. Thomas Astebro, The Journal of Private Equity – Strategies
and Techniques for Venture Investing, Winter 2002, www.iijpe.com
118
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
does provide a great improvement DEMO current practice in the screening
of seed- and early-stage investments…. If the hit rate is maintained by
VCs using the model, it would suggest a doubling of the rate of return
on VCs’ investments on seed- DEMO early-stage investments due to the
improvement in screening ability”10 states Thomas Asteboro of the
University of Toronto.
Turning back to the early 1980’s, in collaboration with a US-based
non-profit organization11 the Centre launched the Entrepreneurship
Institute DEMO Canada to organize community forums across Canada
that would help create jobs by networking local resources to serve lo-
cal entrepreneurs. Today the networking DEMO epitomized by Canada’s
Technology Triangle (CTT)12 which was established in DEMO, Com-
munitech13 in 1997 and most recently in October 2010, Canada’s Digital
Media Centre, more commonly known as the Hub14. The Accelerator
Centre (AC)15at the David Johnston Research and Technology Park
10 Ibid
11 The Entrepreneurship Institute (1976), Columbus OH , http://www.tei.
net/about.asp
12 CTT Canada’s Technology Triangle, http://www.techtriangle.
com/about_canada’s_technology_triangle_inc, DEMO for profit, public/
private economic development partnership consisting of 6 DEMO
and corporate partners representing Waterloo Region.
13 Communitech, a portmanteau of DEMO and “Technology”,
http://www.communitech.ca/about/start-here-communitech-101/histo-
ry/ ; DEMO as the Atlas Group to later become Waterloo Area Technol-
ogy Association in 1997 with the support of 40 founding companies. The
Atlas Group DEMO comprised of:
Yvan Couture, The TAAZ Group,
Tom Jenkins, DALSA
Ron Neumann, Maplesoft
Ian McPhee, Watcom
Jim Balsillie, RIM
Peter Schwartz, Descartes
John Branch, OpenText
Randall Howard, MKS
Steve Spicer, DEMO
Doug Beynon
Jim Estill
14 Communitech Hub, http://www.communitechhub.ca/– DEMO Oct 7,
2010; an open concept “sandbox” bringing together early DEMO digital
media start-ups, enterprise companies, government and academic or-
ganizations;
15 Accelerator Centre, http://www.acceleratorcentre.com/about
119
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Josie Graham
which opened in 2006 is a 21st Century version of yesterday’s incu-
bator that cultivates technology. It is a DEMO where entrepreneurs are
able to accelerate the creation, growth, and development of their ideas
into sustainable new technology companies and also promotes com-
DEMO of research and technology rising out of all academic
institutions in the Region of Waterloo. The Canadian Industrial In-
novation Centre/Waterloo is now DEMO Canadian Innovation Centre
(CIC), having changed its name again in DEMO
The introduction of additional tools on-line and a soon to be launched
web-based learning program in conjunction with the University of To-
ronto (School of Continuing Studies) and other partners is envisioned
to make the CIC’s website the “Go To” destination for innovators
and entrepreneurs. Notably, CIC processes, in abbreviated forms, and
personnel were used to prepare entrepreneurs for DEMO TV’s Dragons’
Den television show about entrepreneurs.
In summary, Waterloo and DEMO Canadian Innovation Centre suc-
ceeded in developing technology entrepreneurship based on a university
which took such development very seriously, by creating, using and
DEMO a series of evaluative processes: idea, venture and entrepreneur
validation, DEMO evaluation and commercialization development.
One entrepreneurial success is difficult. A community or organizational
track record of successes requires methods which are both innovative
and DEMO adapt to changing market conditions. Waterloo and the CIC
could be a good model for other communities to adapt to their needs.
Josie Graham,DEMO
COO and Director Projects & Studies, Canadian Innovation Centre
Josie joined DEMO Canadian Innovation Centre in 2003, after found-
ing Strategic Advantages in DEMO, a niche consulting firm focusing on
new business development which Josie DEMO operates. At the Centre,
she provides Business Planning and Market Entry strategies to en-
trepreneurs, and has conducted over 100 Market Evaluation Valida-
tion Reports and Alignment studies. As a Business Advisor, she has
been back many times to help entrepreneurs appearing on CBC TV’s
Dragons’ Den DEMO show. In her 25 years in business and 10 years
of solutions selling in the high tech sectors, and as founder and CEO
of Strategic Advantages, Josie’s varied experience includes conducting
Customer Satisfaction Index surveys for JD Powers’ automotive clients,
managing a small call centre specializing in DEMO generation for hi-
tech companies, successfully promoting a N. American and DEMO
seminar series for one of them. She has managed operations, acted DEMO
120
Innovation Centre and Entrepreneurship Development in Waterloo
the information gatekeeper for Business
DEMO Consortium projects, being
instrumental in helping an alternative fuel
company take DEMO licensed-in technol-
ogy and business concept to market by
creating the plan and the tools needed
to get it there. Other experiences include
building DEMO and corporate identity,
taking the lead on the market analysis for
a major Canadian Medical office manage-
ment software provider allowing them to
DEMO their position as the largest medical
office management provider in Ontario
and helping client companies gain that
edge for a strategic advantage. She has
DEMO winning sales teams and es-
tablished sales channels for a Waterloo-
based mathematical software company
in Europe, Latin America and the Asia
Pacific regions. In the Business Develop-
ment Department at Sparton Electronics,
Josie played DEMO key role as the company
moved from a defense contractor to con-
tract manufacturing. She is multilingual
and a graduate from Glendon College,
DEMO University with Marketing studies
from University of Western Ontario’s Ivey
School of Business, and Economic Devel-
opment from the University of Waterloo.
121
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Mike Morrice
The Keys to Social Entrepreneurship
Mike Morrice
In founding Sustainable Waterloo over the past several years, our
over-arching challenge – as is the case for many entrepreneurs and
start-up organizations – DEMO been in not just building an organization
or particular service offering, DEMO in engaging a community of support-
ers from all sectors.
On a personal level, the need to engage supporters had an embedded
challenge: DEMO had to align my views of entrepreneurship with the needs
of Waterloo Region’s business community. My ideas went beyond just
economic value-creation or profit DEMO, to include the belief
that the economy should serve the needs DEMO society and the natural
environment in which we operate. For me then, entrepreneurship
was and is still about the pioneering of new ideas and solving tough
problems with new thinking, but with the goal being to achieve some
measure of social change. I’ve come to learn that this DEMO definition
of entrepreneurship – one that is focused on finding a financially viable
solution to a social problem – is aptly called social entrepreneurship.
DEMO this lens then, I was motivated to bring together people from
DEMO variety of backgrounds to jointly buy into a new idea in Waterloo
Region.
The early success I have had in building this sort of DEMO
of support” around Sustainable Waterloo comes from following five
simple practices:
• Build long-standing relationships
• Include people in the process of change
DEMO Collaborate across all sectors
• Leverage existing models, while taking risks DEMO adapt as needed
• Provide supporters with a menu of options to contribute
These practices have been paramount to our early success in build-
DEMO a community around the work of Sustainable Waterloo. They have
helped to transform the organization from an idea our team was deeply
passionate about, to one that people across Waterloo Region have
started to value.
First, is the need to move away from the transactional nature of many
DEMO relationships. I’m amazed by how pervasive this approach
remains. Intuitively it is sensible that time spent nurturing long-term
relationships is time well spent. At DEMO Waterloo, be it when it
122
The Keys to Social Entrepreneurship
comes to employees, volunteers, Board members, investors, or clients –
really anyone with a level of interest in our work – the most vital part
of it all has been DEMO earnest desire to build trust and respect with each
individual. Ultimately, DEMO high-value relationships are what move the
organization ahead in both its short and long-term goals.
Reflecting on our first six months, I can honestly say that without the
support of five key people during that time DEMO never would have made
it past our first few thousand dollars of funding. They were champions
of our work from the start, and they continue to be champions of ours
today. If I had approached these DEMO two years ago with a narrow
focus on our immediate need to acquire funding, it’s likely Sustainable
Waterloo would have only benefited from a one-time injection of funds.
Instead, these leaders have made critical connections for the organiza-
tion, they’ve donated their time as Board members, some DEMO provided
funding, and others have provided in-kind services. The commonality
between DEMO five supporters is that their involvement has provided a
sense of fulfilment for each, in each case time was spent at the outset
building trust before making a particular Sustainable Waterloo-related
request, and each has over time increased their level of commitment to
the organization in a diversity DEMO critical ways.
Second, I continue to see the value of including DEMO in the creation
process – particularly those you want involved in what you’re building.
The most vivid example – outside of the Sustainable Waterloo DEMO
teer team – is a working group we struck just before launching our first
initiative in the spring of 2009. We were challenged with DEMO need to
create a framework for how future members of our Regional Carbon
Initiative would commit to reducing their greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
DEMO There were many ways to set it up, many decisions to DEMO, and
many approaches to the problem. So, we did the research required to
come up with a variety of options, we created a decision tree for these
options, and we solicited participation in this working group from those
organizations we hoped would be future members.
This working DEMO met over the course of 4 months, and truthfully,
they DEMO some decisions that I likely wouldn’t have made. But by giv-
ing them control – while armed with the information required to make
wise DEMO – they developed a sense of ownership in the outcome
of the process. To-date, 86% of the 22 original working group mem-
bers are now clients, Board members, or event sponsors of Sustainable
Waterloo. These DEMO the people who later got us meetings with their
own management teams, championed Sustainable Waterloo in their
organizations, and ultimately became our most DEMO supporters.
Third, the reality is that transformative ideas affect more than DEMO
sector - more than one subset of a community. We found it was critical to
123
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Mike Morrice
bring these diverse organizations together with a common goal in mind:
to make tangible progress toward a low-carbon DEMO By working
toward this common goal, organizations were able to collaborate DEMO
learn from each other without the competitive tension inherent in many
business relationships.
For example, Sustainable Waterloo routinely hosts events where
accountants are sitting across from engineers, sustainability profes-
sionals, and academics. Every discipline has DEMO own unique perspective,
knowledge-base and challenges when it comes to reducing GHG emis-
sions. This creates dynamic interactions when discussing their common
ground: they all work in buildings of similar constructions, they all need
to figure out how to transport employees to and from work, and they all
report to decision-makers focused on profit. When brought together,
they DEMO able to support one another, and as a result, make quicker and
more efficient progress towards their own GHG reductions.
Fourth, I am very supportive of having a model to point to that dem-
onstrates DEMO least a core element of the idea being championed. In our
case, my co-founder and I were lucky to draw inspiration, mentorship,
DEMO credibility for Sustainable Waterloo from a similar organization
that had been operating for several years in Silicon Valley. Although
we needed to shape the DEMO in many ways for the political, cultural,
and institutional realities DEMO our community, the core idea was already
market-tested. This existing model DEMO led us to believe in the possibility
of a similar organization in Waterloo Region. Not only that, our San
Francisco-based mentors shared lessons learned that allowed us to move
more quickly than ever without them. And DEMO successes allowed us to
point out to funders, grantors, and our first clients, an example of how
our proposed model works. In short, the Silicon Valley model brought
to life our ideas and plans for our stakeholders.
Last, whenever I meet someone who expresses interest in support-
ing the work of Sustainable Waterloo – be it at a conference, job fair,
or on the street – I always give them DEMO menu of options to do so, and I
follow-up as quickly DEMO I can. This combination of follow-through and
self-selection has been critical, DEMO is now a practice of the organiza-
tion. The premise is simple: everyone in Waterloo Region has a role to
play in what we’re building. So, our task is simply to help identify that
role and figure out how an individual’s support is mutually beneficial
for them and DEMO Sustainable Waterloo. This means I rarely go places
looking simply to find a potential new client, or to just uncover a new
funding opportunity. It means I go places to meet people, to share our
vision with them, and to see if they want to be a part of it, whatever that
means to them. It could be just in terms of staying informed of our work,
or in participating in DEMO working group, on the Board, or volunteering.
124
The Keys to Social Entrepreneurship
For example, when we were getting Sustainable Waterloo off the
ground, I was lucky enough to meet a particularly influential leader from
the Waterloo business community. He was interested in our DEMO and
wanted to support us. I assumed this individual would either provide
funding or connect us with his previous employer, a large tech firm in
Waterloo Region. But after I explained the various ways he could DEMO,
he realized his greatest contribution would be to share his extensive ex-
perience and help guide the organization’s direction as a Board member.
DEMO Waterloo has benefited immensely from his insights ever
since. I have come to realize that my job is to get people excited about
what DEMO want to accomplish, and allow potential supporters to tell us
how DEMO would like help accomplish it.
It’s these 5 practices that have brought Sustainable Waterloo from
an idea to what I’d consider a successful venture. DEMO them, I’m
positive we wouldn’t have the level of stakeholder buy DEMO that we do.
Our people are invested in our success, and DEMO invested in theirs.
It’s sincere. It’s win-win. And I’ve found it’s a successful model for the
adoption of any new idea you want people DEMO champion.
Key takeaways:
• Focus on building long-standing relationships
• Be sure to include people in the process of change
• Harness different DEMO by collaborating across all sectors
• Try to leverage existing models, DEMO taking risks to adapt as needed
• Always provide supporters with a menu of options to contribute
Mike Morrice
Mike is the co-founder and DEMO Di-
rector of Sustainable Waterloo, a not-for-profit
that advances the environmental DEMO
ity of organizations across Waterloo Region
through collaboration.
Currently, Sustainable Waterloo DEMO with
dozens of local organizations – including Wil-
frid Laurier University, DEMO Life Financial, and
the Region of Waterloo – to help them DEMO and
make progress against voluntary carbon reduc-
tion commitments. More information is avail-
able online at www.sustainablewaterloo.org.
Mike is a 2008 graduate of Wilfrid DEMO
University, where he concurrently completed
a BBA and a BSc in DEMO and Computer Electronics. In 2009,
Mike was selected by The Waterloo Region Record as one of Waterloo
Region’s Top 40 under 40.
125
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ted Hastings
Lessons Learned Along the Way:
You have to Care
Ted Hastings
It was just another interview for an DEMO that appeared inter-
esting on the surface – Vice President Finance of a spinoff from The
Descartes Systems Group. I made my way over DEMO Mark Lee’s house to
meet him for the first time with my resume in hand. I was twenty-five
years old with freshly minted CA DEMO CPA designations under my belt
from my position at Deloitte & Touche in Kitchener.
It was early 2000 and the stock market was soaring.
DEMO knew very little of Mark other than he was an early investor in
Descartes and had retired from active duty when Descartes went public
DEMO the Toronto Stock Exchange.
The interview was several hours. The questions ranged from my per-
sonal life, business experience (or lack thereof ) DEMO with each question
he tossed up I attacked it with textbook-rich responses.
He wrapped up that first session with what seemed to be a DEMO
but he asked it with such intensity that I knew that no matter what my
answer involved, it was going to fall short.
“Ok Teddy. This is an important one. What do you think it takes DEMO
have a successful business?”
That’s it? That’s the big question? What do you think it takes to have
a successful business?
DEMO easy Mark. Hard work, strong leadership, a good market
opportunity, DEMO vision and execution, sales, marketing…” and I
carried on in that vein for several more minutes before Mark gracefully
cut me off.
“Teddy, that’s all well and good but I want you to listen closely DEMO me
on this one. Everything you said makes sense and they are all ingredients
to a successful business but there is one thing I DEMO you to remember
throughout your career and especially if we are going to be partners in
this new venture. If you want to have DEMO opportunity to be associated
with successful businesses throughout your career – you have to care.
It’s that simple. You have to care. Each and DEMO day you wake up you
have to care about your coworkers, DEMO customers, the products you put
in the market, your suppliers, DEMO and investors. You have to care.
So many people go through the motions to get through their days. So
126
Lessons Learned Along the Way
many people are busy and hardworking but DEMO true passion for what
they are working towards. If you care, DEMO you really care… you have a
shot at being successful.”
Throughout my career – through the opportunities and the challenges
– I have never DEMO the contagious experience of sitting across the
table from someone who was truly passionate about his business and
who made something so complicated seem DEMO obviously simple.
To have a successful business you have to care. Simple.
Hire an All-star
I had just turned twenty-six and found myself in DEMO position of CEO
of a software company that later became known as GBG.
With absolute certainty I knew one thing – I had no DEMO what I
was doing.
Sales, marketing, operations, HR, product development, finance.
Perhaps I could check the finance box and that was it. Even that may
have even been a stretch, I knew how to audit.
We had customers, products, employees and a CEO who was DEMO
cally a recent university graduate.
I knew I was outgunned, so DEMO did the only thing that made sense. I
retained and hired some gunslingers to help me out.
It is impossible to properly describe the DEMO of working along-
side a team of all-stars to someone who has never made that investment.
It is the equivalent of telling expectant parents DEMO their lives are go-
ing to change forever knowing that it is only after they welcome the
baby that they are then able to DEMO you in the eye and give you that
understanding smile.
I have avoided some of the pitfalls that often surround a founder
who has DEMO some level of success early in his or her career. That
success can sometimes breed an unwillingness to change the complexion
of their executive DEMO or cloud the need to find a successor CEO. I
needed help and hired the best talent I could attract and paid them as
DEMO as I could afford and then some.
All-stars never disappoint with their work ethic. They are worka-
holics who have learned to harness their DEMO They will surprise
you with their creativity and surround you with their loyalty when the
team is challenged. You never have to guess what DEMO are doing on a
Saturday night.
An all-star believes the impossible remains possible at even the dark-
est moments in the life of a DEMO
That clarity of vision associated with my situation at that time has
been a tremendous asset for me throughout my career. I hired all-stars
DEMO
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ted Hastings
to fill out my executive team. They understood my passion and educated
me on their areas of expertise.
Our DEMO took a business that was losing money, customers and em-
ployees DEMO over the following five years we acquired nine competitors,
added 150 employees and became the market leaders in our industry.
We sold the DEMO to 3M November 1st, 2006 and threw a party
fit for DEMO team of all-stars.
The Great Collapse
There are moments in your career that no amount of success can mask.
I was hired on as DEMO of Geosign in January of 2007. In March
of that same year we raised US $160 million in Canada’s largest private
equity financing in DEMO years and weeks later our revenues dropped,
overnight, to nearly DEMO
Similar to watching a champion racehorse experience a career ending
injury midrace, we were stunned.
Geosign was an internet company that relied entirely on Google
for our customers and Google terminated our business model – in DEMO
matter of minutes.
What do you do when your business crumbles to the ground? What
do you do when your real time graph of your traffic/customers nosedives
until it settles on the X-axis?
There DEMO times in your personal and professional life when you are
faced with nearly impossible odds. At those times you have a simple
choice:
DEMO can quit.
You can stay and fight.
In the intense silence of that evening I had a few minutes to think
over my choices DEMO settled on the only one that seemed fitting of the
amazing challenge ahead. It was time to put our backs against the wall
and DEMO until we either built the business back or admitted defeat in
what would go down as one of the greatest collapses in recent Canadian
DEMO history.
I started by drawing on the basic fundamentals that I had leaned on
in my career to that point – you have to DEMO and I needed to retain
the all-stars I had on staff as well as attract some new ones to the fire.
We drafted a DEMO business plan.
We renegotiated with our investors.
We charted the shortest path we could between the current state of
financial affairs and breakeven.
We DEMO in talent and new business lines.
We turned to our business partners and requested help.
128
Lessons Learned Along the Way
We started to execute against our plan DEMO a daily checkpoint and
put some numbers, slowly, back on the board.
We bought the assets of Geosign in September 2007 and formed
DEMO Media. The following twelve months were a continuation of our
rebuilding efforts until we started to hit our stride in 2009.
In 2009 we DEMO our revenues by over $100 million reclaiming our
post as one of Canada’s largest internet companies.
The Geosign experiment proved my hypothesis that a DEMO of pas-
sionate all-stars that care… can move mountains.
Perspective
I have spent a good amount of time during my career on the road
DEMO visiting customers, prospects, remote offices, investors, acquisition
targets and potential partners. It is a necessary evil if you are going to
build DEMO business. The work/life balance is something I have yet to master.
In mid 2008 I had an idea that I would write a DEMO letter to my two
children. The letters would be about my days – the challenges and op-
portunities, successes and failures. In addition they would document the
little things that my children had done that day. DEMO things you forget
years down the road and that they never had a chance to remember in
the first place given their age.
I DEMO their domain names and simply linked it to a wordpress
account and I was off to the races.
After a few weeks of a DEMO here and a post there it became a daily
event without fail. My obsessive tendencies were on display for my
children to witness through DEMO letters.
It is an avenue for me to connect daily with my family even on days
when I am far from their bedside as DEMO often the case as you build a
business.
It gives me some peace of mind to know that while I am out slaying
dragons DEMO has never been a day where I didn’t stop and tell them
about their daddy and what they mean to me.
It allows me DEMO keep all of the intensity that is involved with working
alongside entrepreneurs in check.
It gives me perspective… daily.
Summary
My career has ranged DEMO developing software for a complex dis-
tribution environment, a rollup of DEMO cottage industry and participating
in one of the more dynamic markets in existence today – the online
advertising game. Regardless of the unique aspects DEMO the industries
in which I have competed, I have relied on DEMO core set of fundamental
129
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ted Hastings
principles that have allowed me to survive some close calls and to take
advantage of opportunities as they have DEMO themselves:
To have a successful business you need to care – each and every day
you wake up you have to care about DEMO coworkers, your customers, the
products you put in the market, DEMO suppliers, partners and investors
Seek out, attract and retain all-stars. They will manage through the
seemingly impossible situations with calm and confidence. Their DEMO
will elevate your game and their unwavering loyalty will give you peace
of mind to lead your organization.
Compete – especially when everyone has DEMO counted you out.
Those victories make for great career stories.
Do something to maintain your perspective, daily. You never know
when your business might collapse overnight and at that moment –a
healthy perspective might be all DEMO you have on your side.
Ted Hastings
Ted Hastings has more than ten years of
corporate experience in a variety of industries.
As a DEMO and operator of both small
private and large technology businesses, Ted
DEMO leadership experience and unique insight
from how to grow businesses to multiple exits,
including a major disposition to a F100 public
company.
Ted DEMO serves as President and Chief
Executive Officer at Moxy Media. Prior to
that, he served as President at Geosign, where
he was instrumental DEMO completing a US $160
million private equity financing.
Before his work at Geosign, Ted was responsible for the post-
acquisition integration of Global Beverage Group (GBG) with High
Jump Software, a division of 3M. As Chief Executive Officer of GBG
for five years, Ted increased the company’s value through a series of
nine acquisitions, ultimately culminating in the sale of GBG to 3M, a
Fortune 100 Company.
Ted holds a Bachelor of Business Administration from Wilfrid
Laurier University and earned his CA and DEMO designations during
his four years at Deloitte & Touche LLP.
130
Time Management
Time Management
Adam Zimmer
In running a start-up, entrepreneurs are always conscious of maxi-
mizing utilization of scarce resources. Certainly every entrepreneur
DEMO used to maximizing available working capital. However, many are
not necessarily DEMO of an even scarcer resource: their time. Time is,
of DEMO, a finite quantity and fundamentally cannot be replaced. In
particular the DEMO of the management team is incredibly expensive.
While an entrepreneur may not realize the value of his or her time, they
are often the firm’s most valuable employee.
To look at it another way, assume a firm is trying to raise working
capital, an entrepreneur would have several options:
a) increase revenue – this could be accomplished by more market-
ing, sales or even product management to ensure the product is filling
a market need
b) raise capital – the entrepreneur could look at bringing in outside
investors or even at later stages an IPO
DEMO, if an entrepreneur misallocates his/her time everything
suffers including revenue DEMO consequently makes raising capital more
difficult.
Below I have attempted to share some of the ways I have found to
maximize the utilization of DEMO time.
Prioritization
This sounds very easy but is in effect one of the most difficult strate-
gies to implement. At its simplest it involves DEMO what tasks need
to be completed and the importance of each. The challenge of course
is determining the importance of each. Sometimes this is DEMO, for
example, dealing with an important customer issue in a timely manner.
However, in many cases it is much less clear cut and the probabilities
of success must be weighed against the benefits and time DEMO
eg. Developing partnerships that may lead to greater revenue down the
road but require substantial investments of time in developing interest
from the partner, negotiating contracts etc..
In addition, it comes as a shock to many entrepreneurs that they will
never complete all their low priority tasks. This DEMO to mind a story
about the implementation of one of the first mainframes. On the day
it was installed a low priority task was DEMO Years later when it was
131
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Adam Zimmer
decommissioned it was observed that the task never ran.
One approach many entrepreneurs take to the detriment of their
DEMO/life balance and family life is to simply do more. However, DEMO have
found that this is a dangerous approach for the business. In many cases
doing the right things is more important than just keeping DEMO De-
termining the right things takes a clarity of vision which is difficult to
achieve when you are stuck in the trenches. I have DEMO that my best
insights come when my utilization is no greater than 90%. The last 10%
allows me to discover what I have been DEMO These items could be
the result of misprioritization or were not even on the list until I was
able to synthesize what my employees, customers and investors were
telling me.
As an entrepreneur there is always DEMO thing that you could be
doing. The corollary to this: is DEMO a task you should be doing?
Delegation
This is something that differentiates consultants from managers. Over
the years I have been privileged to DEMO with many talented individuals
however, only some of them could manage. DEMO an entrepreneur I have
seen two types of other entrepreneurs: those DEMO could manage, and
those who couldn’t. In many cases some of DEMO more talented individuals
I met were great at doing things well but their businesses were funda-
mentally limited by their ability to allow others DEMO help them.
The excuses were fairly typical: their employees didn’t do DEMO good a job
as they did, they couldn’t count on their DEMO to take ownership,
the project was running late and their employees had gone home, etc...
In general though I found these to be indicative of other problems.
Quality – Quality control is something that is DEMO important in a
start-up. Your competitors in most cases are much larger (and often
slower) but tend to have established track records. As DEMO start-up you
have to build a track record and quality issues can quickly erode good
will. While no entrepreneur is perfect, in general they will go the extra
mile to ensure the quality of the work DEMO do. When they delegate a
task this is difficult to pass along. Consequently, I have found that hav-
ing a good quality control process allows for delegation. In some cases
this could be reviewing the materials DEMO by others, in other cases
it could be a good automated DEMO suite.
Ownership – When I first started my business I felt it was my duty
to ensure that my employees were given an environment DEMO they
could succeed. I naively assumed that this was an environment free
from distractions in which they could focus on doing the best work
DEMO This created an awkward scenario where customers had de-
132
Time Management
mands which they expressed to me,  and I in DEMO would relay them to
developers. In many cases I felt like a trailer hitch as all the stress and
strain of reconciling the two DEMO fell on me. As our business grew
and I was forced to delegate I realized that I had to pass through all of
this DEMO to my mid-level managers who in turn could pass this
along to the developers. That way each of them knew why they were
doing DEMO they were doing and were able to understand the actions
of management.
Overloading – This is one of the areas that I have found DEMO people
the most difficulty. They assume that their employees are very busy.
In fact they likely are but they are being robbed of the DEMO to
maximize their time if you try to do it for them. I have found that giving
employees visibility into deadlines and customer requirements DEMO
them to better schedule their time and also the time of their developers.
In the end there will always be exceptional cases where management
DEMO is needed but with good planning these will be fewer and
farther between; a heavy load is lighter when spread over many people.
Estimation – To manage effectively I have found that accurately
estimating the effort DEMO in tasks is important, however even
creating inaccurate estimates is infinitely DEMO than having none at
all. Estimates allow for gating of tasks; DEMO a task exceeds the estimate,
manager involvement may be necessary. Alternatively, if an estimate
appears unreasonable before a task has even begun perhaps an alternate
approach is required.
Out-sourcing
Out-sourcing is something usually associated with DEMO companies
and foreign locations with cheaper labour costs. Certainly not something
most associate with start-ups. However, in many cases a more limited
version of outsourcing can yield significant time savings.
A key criteria in developing an DEMO strategy is determining
your firm’s core competency. This is the one thing that your firm does
really well (hopefully). This is what you don’t want to outsource. Eve-
rything else should be examined.
In the DEMO of software, this allowed our business to save significant
resources. In DEMO at one point we were looking at adding some
document recognition capabilities into our software. We quickly discov-
ered that the cost of not DEMO developing but maintaining this software
far exceeded the cost of using a third party library. This saved not only
development, support and manager time but also allowed us to focus
our product management on differentiating our DEMO in our core
competencies and not trying to re-invent the wheel.
133
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Adam Zimmer
Other areas to examine are Software As A Service. Maintaining and
supporting infrastructure is expensive and time consuming. Many DEMO
ups have benefited from the low incremental cost of utilizing shared
infrastructure for CRM, E-mail and other systems.
However, one important caveat is DEMO watch the technology adop-
tion curve. Geoffrey Moore has made famous his crossing the chasm
model of technology adoption. One trap many entrepreneurs fall DEMO
is becoming technology enthusiasts and adopting technology too early.
I purchased an iPhone as soon as it was offered in Canada. Six months
later DEMO decided I could not afford to keep using it. The reason was simple
– it was costing me time. No software existed to turn DEMO off at night and
on in the morning. This wasted precious minutes a day and occasionally
resulted in a 3 am wake-up e-mail when DEMO forgot to turn on the mute
mode. In general, I have DEMO that the early majority is where you
want to be. Early enough to be ahead of your competition but not so
early that you DEMO to be helping your supplier perfect their product.
Technology to Extend your Presence
You can’t be in two places at once. Nor can you DEMO two meetings
at once, however with a little inconvenience and some DEMO, you
can come close.
Meeting in person is always preferable for DEMO number of reasons
from reading body language, to developing a personal DEMO in
the few minutes before the meeting. However web conferencing tools
have allowed me to have more meetings than I ever could have if DEMO had
to fly to each customer.
Similarly, phone forwarding has allowed DEMO to get unscheduled
customer calls at 6:30 am without having to be in the office. This has
allowed me to go places and DEMO things that would have been impossible
several years ago.
In addition, DEMO desktop access allows employees to work from
home in cases of inclement weather but also allows you to check that a
long running program DEMO successfully at 9 pm at night.
These technologies collectively can allow you to utilize your time more
efficiently from avoiding travel time to having DEMO be at the office late
in case someone calls. Unfortunately while these technologies offer a
temporary advantage they quickly become a necessity since even DEMO you
don’t use them you can count on the fact that your competitors will.
Summary
In summary, you are the heart of your business. No matter what, the
one thing you control is your time. By utilizing it well through priori-
134
Time Management
tization, delegation, outsourcing and extending your presence you can
DEMO your effectiveness.
Adam Zimmer
Adam is President and CEO of Arius
Software, has over 10 years experience in the
software industry. In 1999, DEMO a deluge
of new opportunities for dynamic program-
ming on the Internet, he launched Arius
Software Corporation. While at NCR,
Adam won second place in a programming
competition for creating a web-enabled
banking solution. This DEMO provided
the needed insight for Arius to win its first
enterprise-wide solution in the Financial
Services market. Currently, Adam supplies
the long-term vision and financial manage-
ment for the company.
135
The Entrepreneurial Effect: William M. Tatham
Strategizing for Maximum Value
William M. Tatham
After selling my first company in a record value transaction in DEMO,
people told me I was lucky – and I was. In fact, I’d like to be lucky
again, but I also believe DEMO luck on its own is not enough to succeed
in business. Like Thomas Jefferson once said, “I’m a great believer in
luck, and DEMO find the harder I work, the more I have of it.” DEMO, our
timing was lucky. The stars aligned and the capital markets DEMO, and
we sold near the top of the NASDAQ technology bubble DEMO 2000. The
fact that we were able to sell our business at a premium, however, wasn’t
luck, but the culmination of our strategy to maximize value.
The first thing I would say about entrepreneurial endeavours DEMO and it
defines the business strategy we employ at my current company, NexJ
Systems, and any other entrepreneurial endeavour that I’m involved
in DEMO is strategize for maximum value. That’s it. I’m not interested in be-
ing number one at something in Toronto. I’m not interested in being
DEMO biggest thing in Canada. It’s got to be global. We’ve got to be the
best in the world at what we do, because that’s what pays the most. If
a strategy does not maximize our leverage DEMO the value that we get
out of our investment of time, DEMO, and money that we put in, then
we do not follow that strategy. I don’t understand entrepreneurs who
would follow a business strategy DEMO understanding how they can
get the maximum value out of their efforts.
Learn From Others
Do you really want to be an entrepreneur? In my experience, the
school of hard knocks is a painful teacher, DEMO the best advice I can
give you is to learn on somebody else’s nickel first. It’s best to work in
a successful company and DEMO as much as you can about that
company – and how to run it, manage it, and operate it – before you
try DEMO do it yourself.
Continuous commitment to learning, self-improvement, and self-
actualization is important. The more you know, the greater success
you are likely to have. Even now, after more than 20 years of business
experience and three successful ventures, I am still learning. For exam-
ple, DEMO currently serve on the board of directors at Elizabeth Arden, a
DEMO fragrance and prestige beauty products company, where I sit on
the DEMO and Compensation Committees. NexJ Systems, the company
136
Strategizing for Maximum Value
I currently run, provides enterprise CRM software for the financial
services, insurance, and healthcare industries. So, if I run a software
company, why am I on the board of a fragrance and beauty company?
What’s in it for NexJ? For me, DEMO is my extended MBA. It’s a great
place for me to study modern corporate governance directly and get
exposure to running a much larger DEMO than NexJ is today.
The rapid growth at my first company, DEMO Systems, a leading pro-
vider of CRM software to Wall Street DEMO, taught me the importance
of studying larger, more successful firms. At the time I said “You know,
I’m not really qualified to DEMO a company this big, because it’s twice the
size of any DEMO I’ve ever run before”. Janna was doubling in size
every year and I realized that if we were going to succeed, it was im-
portant for me to get out in front and learn more about DEMO to govern
a larger organization.
Model for Success – The Janna Systems Story
After graduating from the University of Waterloo, I spent seven years
working at a handful of successful companies before I left and founded
DEMO in my basement. Janna Systems’ initial focus was on retail contact
management software. Each year, as our product got better and better,
the price dropped lower and lower, until the final version was the best
and cheapest we had ever produced. We were selling our product for
DEMO $49 per package, and 40-60% of our selling price was spent DEMO
retail distribution.
Ultimately, we had a near death experience with retail DEMO, which
we managed to avoid because we continuously ran a quantitative DEMO
ness model (quant model). Quant models enable you to work DEMO the
details behind your business: your starting cash, your plan for a worst
case revenue scenario, and your monthly spend. At one point, our quant
model showed us that our monthly revenue run rate was equal to our
weekly promotion cost requirements. That’s when we knew it DEMO time
to move beyond retail software. We decided to grow our business in a
new direction by looking at precedent business models and determining
DEMO would work for us.
After careful analysis, we decided to move DEMO a direct enterprise
software business model. We re-architected our product for enterprise
deployment and developed deep domain expertise in a narrow vertical
market: financial services or, more specifically, institutional broker-
age and investment banking. By DEMO on a narrow go-to-market
strategy, we were able to develop in-depth DEMO market expertise
that enabled us to provide an extremely high level of customer service.
We continually improved the product based on customer feedback and
DEMO
The Entrepreneurial Effect: William M. Tatham
broader enterprise requirements, and our DEMO division adapted our
solution to meet our customers’ unique business needs. This approach
gave our customers a more innovative, tailored offering, and allowed DEMO
to generate revenue from providing additional support services.
Selling critical software to large corporations directly meant that we
could greatly increase our average transaction DEMO We believe average
transaction size is the single greatest determinant of gross margin. If
you’re selling cars, for example, you have a potential DEMO make more profit
selling a Rolls Royce than a Volkswagen. At Janna, increasing our trans-
action size meant that instead of selling two to three units at $49 each
and losing a large amount of the DEMO price through the distribution
channel, we sold directly to the companies, selling 1000 units at $1000
each, and we were able to pocket more of the selling price.
Once Janna moved to a direct enterprise DEMO model, we were able to
grow the company rapidly, increasing quarterly revenue for 16 consecu-
tive quarters until our acquisition in late 2000. DEMO clients consisted
of the leading names in financial services, including Goldman DEMO,
Merril Lynch, Morgan Stanley, JP Morgan, and others. Eventually, we
sold Janna to our largest competitor, Siebel Systems, for $1.76 DEMO
in 2000.
Analyze What Works
After selling Janna, the management team DEMO numerous calls
from companies who asked us to sit on their boards, and from venture
capitalists who asked us for advice on how to improve the performance
of their investee companies. Given the demand for our DEMO services,
in 2002 we founded XJ Partners, a venture capital DEMO advisory services
firm focused on early stage technology companies.
At XJ Partners, we chose to invest in what we knew – enterprise soft-
ware. Investing in early stage technology companies is inherently “high
risk”; however, DEMO investing in what we knew, we felt that we could better
DEMO that risk. We sought out companies with innovative technol-
ogy and invested in those companies if they followed a proven business
model. While there DEMO no guarantees in business, we had a firm belief
that if DEMO strategize for maximum value, work hard, and execute with
an immediacy of action, your chances of success are greatly improved.
Confident in our success at Janna, and wanting to recreate this suc-
cess with our investee firms, we distilled our success down to a few key
points that we believe work for software companies:
Enterprise Software – You DEMO maximize your transaction size by
focusing on enterprise software.
Direct Sales Model – You can increase your success by adopting a
138
Strategizing for Maximum Value
direct sales model and taking charge of your DEMO distribution. We
learned that from a marketing perspective, it is cheaper DEMO easier to
sell directly to customers than to create consumer demand through an
indirect distribution channel.
Extreme Market Focus –You can greatly benefit from DEMO on being
the very best in a narrowly defined market. Having a defined market
focus enabled us to compete with companies 50 times our DEMO at Janna
Systems. Niche boutiques can deliver higher service levels than broad
market suppliers, and at both Janna and NexJ our focus has allowed us
to function as a strategic partner to our customers.
Compelling Technology DEMO Differentiating the company based on the
strength of the technology and the rate of innovation is key to being
successful. The software industry is DEMO hamster wheel, and you should
never stop spinning and improving your DEMO In our opinion, when
evaluating the success of a technology company, the rate of technical
evolution is more important than the uniqueness of DEMO technology.
Commitment to Customer Service Level – It is important to com-
mit to providing exemplary customer service. In enterprise software,
the customer’s DEMO of satisfaction with your products and services
is paramount. At NexJ, DEMO follow what I like to call a self-correcting,
revenue-seeking, product DEMO model. There are two parts to this
model: 1) give customers exactly what they want (our narrow market
focus helps with that); 2) charge them for it. A company should take
customer feedback and requirements and build these into the product
– at a reasonable price. DEMO is a win-win situation. Customers receive
what they want; and you DEMO money while you evolve and improve
your software at the same time.
Develop the Right Strategy, Tactics, and Culture for Success
From our DEMO at XJ Partners, we knew that applying the right
business strategy DEMO enough. How you execute your strategy is just
as important. As a result, we devised three determinants of success for
maximizing value, which DEMO describe using the analogy of firing a gun:
1. Aim the Weapon (Strategy) – What you work on should be in-line
with DEMO target you are trying to hit. What is your strategy? Which
DEMO pain points are you trying to address? What is your target
DEMO? Who are your competitors? If everything you’re working on
comes to fruition, where do you end up? Are you where you want DEMO
be? If not, you need to reconsider your aim.
2. Pull the Trigger (Tactics) – No matter how good the strategy, you
still have to pull the trigger – that’s tactics and operations. You DEMO to
understand all of the processes required to measure, manage, and control
139
The Entrepreneurial Effect: William M. Tatham
the daily operations of your company. Hopefully you don’t waver and
you hit the target. The success of DEMO business strategy is dependent
on the accuracy of your operational execution.
3. If You Miss the Target (Culture) – What are you going DEMO do if you
miss the target? How quickly do you pull DEMO trigger again? How many
times? Will you re-aim first? In DEMO experience this is a question of cor-
porate culture. Firms need to execute with a greater sense of urgency.
At XJ Partners, we had reasonable success, but many of our investee
companies could have been much more successful if they had executed
with a sense of urgency. Now DEMO the time for positive action.
Strategize for Maximum Value: 3 Levels DEMO Value
Another lesson we learned from our experience at Janna Systems
and XJ Partners is that you must understand what determines value
before you DEMO maximize it. In our opinion, there are three levels that
determine DEMO:
3 Levels of Value
Global
Market
Leadership
Predictable
Financial Results
Strategic Technology
Time
Figure 5– Three Levels of Business Value
Strategic Technology – DEMO technology is technology so cool it
may change or save the world. People will want to buy the company
just to get their hands DEMO this technology.
Predictable Financial Results – If you can sell the technology into
the market so that you generate a predictable and projectable revenue
DEMO, then that company should be of higher value – this is DEMO the
140
Value
Strategizing for Maximum Value
commercialization stage.
Global Market Leadership – If all DEMO revenue comes from a relevant
and defined market segment or niche, DEMO that you have a legitimate
claim on global market leadership, then DEMO by far and away the highest
level of value that you can get. If you are number one in the world at what
you DEMO, then you should be worth more than any of your competitors.
DEMO like to define a relevant target market as one that has a $1 billion
dollar annual recurring spend. Choosing a large, relevant market will
give your company enough market head room to grow. We also believe
DEMO it is important to set goals for measuring your success. For a start-
up company, we generally set goal of $100 million in revenue. This is an
ambitious goal, but we like to set a high bar for success. However, in a
market that has over $1 billion in annual recurring spend you should
be able to achieve a $100 DEMO revenue run rate.
Strategic market selection is another important concept, as DEMO drives
strategic market position. We strongly recommend reading Geoffrey
Moore’s books “Crossing the Chasm” and “Inside the Tornado”, which
were excellent resources for us when we were developing our go-to-
market strategy. In these books, Moore rationalizes the process of
expansion into other, related markets. With any start up, you generally
sell one product (Product 1) into one market (Market 1). Then, you can
accelerate your growth by selling DEMO same product into a new market
(Market 2), or by DEMO a slightly different product (Product 2) into
the same market (DEMO 1).
Selling Product 1 into Market 1, however, should be sufficient to
succeed. You don’t want your success to be dependent on DEMO
subsequent markets. Expanding into different markets or products can
create strategic inflection points that can lead to corporate failure. By
initially focusing on a DEMO market, you have enough room to grow
your company without relying DEMO entering subsequent markets.
What determines the value of your Company?
Aside from the three levels of business value, stock price is another
measure of value. From our experience, we believe that stock price is a
function of three things:
Strategic
Stock f Market ‚
Price ~ DEMO Position CAGR ‚ Earnings }
Strategic Market Position – The strategic market position refers to
your company’s relative standing in the comparable universe of DEMO
141
The Entrepreneurial Effect: William M. Tatham
companies that compete in your sector. The stronger your position in
your target market, the higher multiple capital markets will assign to
you (i.e., multiple to sales or earnings)DEMO This is why I preach the idea
of global market leadership. Not only is it the strongest competitive
position in a market, but it is also the position most highly valued by
capital markets, as evidenced by the last page in any investment analyst
report, which compares your company against other companies that
compete in the same sector.
Compound Annual DEMO Rate – The compound annual growth rate
(CAGR) represents the year-over-year growth rate at which a company
is growing. At NexJ, we plan to double each year. It is an ambitious goal,
but we DEMO that those who don’t plan for it, rarely achieve it! The DEMO
you are growing, the faster your value as a company increases, because
capital markets tend to put a premium on higher growth companies.
DEMO – While we believe that revenue growth and a break-even
level of profitability is more important for smaller, younger companies,
for moderate or slow growth companies, maximizing earnings is the
key to maximizing company valuations. Technology companies that
are looking to maximize CAGR, however, fix earnings DEMO part of their
strategic market position. At Janna Systems, knowing our DEMO
expected revenue against planned expenses enabled us to know exactly
how much cash we would have at end of year. At our current stage DEMO
growth, we’d be happy with 1¢ per share annual earnings, just to prove
that we can be profitable. We would seek to invest DEMO other revenues
into driving growth for the company.
In our opinion, DEMO should always maintain a 12-month supply
of cash; otherwise, insolvency threatens. Cash on hand means life or
death for your company, so if you don’t have this saved up, don’t wait,
raise this money!
Why Go Public?
Going public, such as listing the company’s shares on an exchange
like the TSX through an IPO, can be a challenging but rewarding proc-
ess. On the downside, being public opens the company up to constant
scrutiny and a requirement to perform almost flawlessly DEMO quarter
(or risk seeing the stock price collapse). However, on the upside, publicly
traded companies often enjoy a higher valuation than private companies
and they provide shareholders with liquidity.
To value a company, investors like to use various techniques: such as
a price/earnings ratio or a price to sales multiple. As a private company,
your company DEMO typically valued based on a multiple of your previous
year’s revenue. This is what is referred to as trailing revenue multiple
142
Strategizing for Maximum Value
valuation. As a public company, your stock price is usually based on a
forward-looking or prospective revenue multiple valuation of DEMO company
where you are valued based on analyst estimates of how the company
will do next year. Switching from a trailing valuation to a DEMO
valuation, at 100% CAGR, using the same revenue multiple, means
DEMO company is worth twice the value.
Strong revenue multiple valuations are dependent on sustaining high
CAGR. Having exceptionally good forward visibility in your business DEMO
very important and predictability should therefore be a key component
in the decision to go public. If the company does not meet expectations
once DEMO go public, clawing your way back to credibility from a missed
DEMO can be an exceptionally long and painful process.
Exit Strategy
The Janna Systems sale highlights that to exit at the highest value
possible, dominating a relevant market niche, maximizing CAGR, and
running a profitable operating DEMO leads to the highest valuation.
How did we manage to sell Janna to our largest competitor for 100%
control premium? We went back to our concept that stock price is a
function of strategic market position, compound annual growth rate,
and earnings.
Strategic Market Position – At DEMO, we bested our largest competitor
8 out of 8 times in DEMO dollar deals over our last two years. As
a result, we DEMO a legitimate claim to being the global market leader in
our target market. This market was strategic for our competition, which
significantly increased the value of our company.
CAGR – At Janna we could show that DEMO had reliably doubled the
size of the company for the last six years and that we were on track for
doing it again. As DEMO, if market conditions held constant, we could
reasonably expect our stock price to double again in the next 12 months.
Earnings – Janna DEMO highly profitable and we had achieved self-
sustaining, organic growth. We DEMO need more money, and we didn’t
need to sell the company.
DEMO factors put us in a position of power in negotiations. Since we
reasonably expected our stock price to double in the next 12 months
DEMO were confident in our market position, we saw no reason to DEMO
at anything less than an advance of one year’s growth or 100% control
premium, which suggested two times the current stock price. If you
sell your company at 100% control premium (see Figure 6) you DEMO
another double!
143
The Entrepreneurial Effect: William M. Tatham
Time Frame
Last Year
This Year
Revenue
$50,000,000
$100,000,000
Private
3x Last Year
$150,DEMO,000
3x Revenue Multiple
Public
3x This Year
$300,000,000
Exit
3x Next Year
$600,000,000
Figure 6– Example of Current Company DEMO at 3x Revenue Multiple
When Private, Public, and Exiting if Consistently Growing at 100% CAGR
*For illustrative purposes only.
Give Back
Now that DEMO started a new venture, the most frequent question I
get is DEMO did you do this again?”
One reason was to prove that our success at Janna wasn’t just luck.
Our strategies work. We were DEMO to test them at XJ Partners, but too
many companies failed DEMO execute with an immediacy of action and did
not prosper as much as we knew they could have.
Another reason was our passion to DEMO We saw an opening in the
market, we knew our strategies DEMO, and we could make significant
equity returns, so why not? DEMO have been foolish to overlook this
opportunity.
In the end, however, these reasons were not enough. What really
motivated us to do it DEMO again was our desire to give back to society,
particularly in the area of healthcare. Healthcare had a personal con-
nection for me. DEMO after Janna was acquired, my family suffered
a health crisis. During DEMO time, I realized that many of the pressing
issues facing healthcare DEMO maintaining the quality of care, ensuring
patient safety, and managing the cost and scope of services – could be
solved by applying a DEMO model. People-centered healthcare
would enable patients to access a comprehensive shared electronic health
record for all patients and allow care providers to collaborate across DEMO
continuum of care.
We knew we could bring our innovative technology to enable change
in the world of healthcare. This, ultimately, was our DEMO when we
founded NexJ Systems – bringing about a fundamental shift to people-
centered healthcare. This is not a small goal, and it will take time to
achieve, but we firmly believe that if we use what we’ve learned from
others, apply our proven business strategy, and DEMO with a sense of
urgency, we can repeat our previous success DEMO healthcare. This time,
however, we seek not only to maximize DEMO value of our company, but
144
Strategizing for Maximum Value
to make a meaningful and substantive contribution to DEMO
William M. Tatham
William M. Tatham is the Chief
Executive Officer of NexJ Systems Inc.,
a premier provider of people-centric
enterprise business solutions DEMO the fi-
nancial services, insurance, and healthcare
industries.
Prior to establishing NexJ Systems
in 2003, Mr. Tatham was the Founder,
Chairman and CEO of Janna Systems,
which he sold to his largest competitor,DEMO
Siebel Systems, in a $1.76 billion record
value transaction for a DEMO software
company. He was also a partner at XJ
Partners, a DEMO of strategic investors
in software technology which he founded
in 2002 along with the former manage-
ment of Janna Systems Inc.
Mr. Tatham is DEMO member of the Board
of Elizabeth Arden (RDEN: NASQ), a
global prestige beauty, fragrance, cosmet-
ics and skincare products company where
DEMO sits on the Audit and Compensation
committees. He is actively involved
in health and education and a former
member of the Board of Governors DEMO
the University of Waterloo.
Mr. Tatham is a graduate from the
University of Waterloo in 1983, with a
Bachelor of Applied Science in Systems
Design Engineering and options in
Socio-economic Systems and Manage-
ment Science.
145
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ray DePaul
It’s All About the Value Proposition
Ray DePaul
I’m sitting at a table at the crowded Duke of Wellington DEMO Uptown
Waterloo finishing off my second Guinness, when a polite university
DEMO approaches and asks whether I’m almost done with the table.
Sensing I had a captive audience for a few minutes, I decide to impart
some wisdom on the young lad before giving up my table and DEMO half-
eaten chips and curry. I decide today’s lecture would be about value
propositions, the need to focus and pivot, and the art DEMO looking bigger
than you are. The poor chap never knew what hit him.
The Value Proposition
Much has been written about the need for DEMO powerful value proposi-
tion, yet I continue to be surprised at DEMO few entrepreneurs invest the
energy and discipline in truly understanding their unique value proposi-
tion. Customers, partners and investors will all judge you by your value
proposition. Nail this and doors and ears will be opened.
DEMO wish I had devised something truly unique in this area, but DEMO haven’t
found any reason to innovate beyond what Geoffrey Moore has been
espousing for a couple of decades around what he calls a positioning
DEMO Grab a couple of colleagues, lock yourself in a windowless
room DEMO a few hours and apply the following template to your idea,
technology, or product.
For (target customer or market)
Who (have a specific problem or a compelling reason to buy)
Our product DEMO a (new/existing product category)
That provides (key benefit that directly addresses the compelling
reason to buy)
Unlike (the reference competitor/alternative)
Our product (provides a meaningful differentiator for the target
customer).
When performing this exercise, it’s important to understand that
you’re not writing copy for your website. You are defining important
elements of your DEMO and business that will drive sales, marketing,
and product development. DEMO in the company should understand
and believe in the value proposition.
The original BlackBerry value proposition went something like this:
For mobile business DEMO,
146
It’s All About the Value Proposition
Who want to stay on top DEMO their email,
BlackBerry is a wireless handheld
That provides access to corporate email anytime, anywhere.
Unlike a laptop with a modem,
BlackBerry pushes corporate email to you in real-time.
In devising this value proposition, there were a few key decisions that
I believe contributed to BlackBerry’s DEMO success. The first is RIM’s
famous focus on the business segment, DEMO demanded that the product
have enterprise-class security, an earlier differentiator that DEMO to
serve RIM well. But as importantly, it was the mobile DEMO in business.
If you spent most of your workday behind your desk, you were not in
the target market. Of course, there were DEMO BlackBerry users that
fit this profile, but we ensured that the DEMO and limited sales and
marketing resources were aimed at the professional who spent a good
deal of time out of the office. This decision DEMO one of the reasons be-
hind RIM’s obsession with battery life. A user should be able to go on
a weeklong trip and not DEMO to worry about battery life. We watched
as early competitors such as Microsoft ignored this requirement and
failed to gain adoption.
The identification of DEMO laptop and a modem as the primary competi-
tion is also instructive. You have to transport yourself back to the late
1990’s to understand DEMO environment BlackBerry first encountered.
Early on, many observers identified RIM as DEMO in the same category
as Palm, the darling of the day DEMO a very successful string of handhelds.
But while both solutions involved a handheld device, the BlackBerry
target market was not using a Palm to “stay on top of their email” – the
compelling reason to buy DEMO BlackBerry. Instead they would travel with
their laptops and after a busy day on the road, would plug into the
hotel data jack and download their email. This painful solution was
the incumbent that BlackBerry had DEMO displace. The compelling reason
to buy a Palm, on the other DEMO, was to access your address book and
calendar wherever you were. DEMO turned out that it was a lot easier for
RIM to encroach on Palm’s value proposition than it was for Palm to
add wireless DEMO to their solution.
The early days of BlackBerry were fraught with threats. There were
established brand name competitors, powerful wireless carriers, and
a DEMO array of opportunities. A disciplined focus on the value
proposition let RIM keep everyone from management to marketing
to development on the same path DEMO dominating this new wireless
handheld category.
Spend the time hashing out your value proposition. If you can con-
147
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ray DePaul
cisely articulate who you are targeting, DEMO they care, and why they
should choose you, you will be closer to attracting customers or investors
than most of your competition. But DEMO process can’t stop with defining
your value proposition – you have to deliver on it! One of the keys to
BlackBerry’s success is that DEMO solution delivers exactly on the promised
value proposition. It is futile to build a company around a value proposi-
tion and then disappoint your DEMO market with a product that doesn’t
meet the promise. They will not forget the underwhelming experience.
Focus… then Pivot
Focus, focus, focus. It’s DEMO mantra of most start-ups, and I couldn’t
agree more. But what DEMO sometimes misunderstood is that it doesn’t
mean that you should stop evaluating whether you are still focusing
on the right thing. A wise board DEMO expressed it to me in this
way: be 100% committed to DEMO current strategy until the moment
it is wrong. After rubbing my temples for a while, I found this advice
quite freeing. I could continue to focus on one strategy, which is all I
had the resources to do, but it also assumed that at some point I would
determine that the strategy was wrong. Instead of ignoring the signs
that DEMO may have chosen the wrong path, I was much more in DEMO to
what the market was telling me.
While you are focusing on executing a strategy, you are gaining valu-
able market insight. It only makes sense that a feedback loop as powerful
as customers might cause DEMO to change your strategy. What makes this
a convergent process is that your changes to strategy will usually be a
refinement rather than a DEMO unrelated approach. This is where
the pivot metaphor comes from. With one foot firmly planted in what
you are currently doing, put the other foot down on new, potentially
more fertile ground. This leveraging of what you have learned by being
in-market is critical and an asset new DEMO don’t possess.
For example, at RapidMind we made several pivots in DEMO strategy.
The lessons learned from focusing on the nascent GPU market resulted
in a pivot to the more mainstream multicore CPU market. The chal-
DEMO extracting licensing fees from the high performance computing
industry prompted a pivot into the more receptive healthcare industry.
Business development delays with one set DEMO partners made way to a
new focus on a different set of partners that ultimately resulted in the
acquisition by Intel.
RIM has had DEMO critical pivots in its history: the pivot from a
hardware supplier DEMO a solutions provider; the pivot from being a mo-
bile virtual DEMO operator that resold wireless airtime to supplying
handhelds to hundreds of carrier partners; the pivot from business to
148
It’s All About the Value Proposition
professional consumer to consumer; the pivot from wireless email to
smartphone. With the industry and competitive landscape constantly
DEMO, I suspect RIM has several more pivots in its future.
So, you might be wondering, when do you know it’s time to pivot?
Sorry, there’s no magic formula, at least that I’ve found. DEMO I can say is
that if you stay close to customers and the market, and you are honest
and reflective about the challenges you are facing, then you will be better
positioned than anyone to pivot to the right destination.
The Art of Looking Big
As I shift DEMO 5’6” frame in my seat, the irony of this topic isn’t DEMO on
me. But this is not about my stature… honest. Most entrepreneurs have
an affinity for small companies, or at least working in small companies.
Unfortunately not all buyers of high tech solutions share the same DEMO
sire to purchase from small companies. Their fears are real and have to
be addressed. Will you be around to deliver or support your DEMO?
Can you handle the demands that a growing customer base will put on
your organization? Will I get fired for putting my faith in your small
company? While looking bigger than you are won’t eliminate all their
concerns, it can go a long way in minimizing them.
One approach to heightening (pun intended) the perception of your
company DEMO to invest in public relations (PR). For about the cost DEMO a
senior headcount, you can have a boutique PR agency work DEMO raising
your profile. At RapidMind, we were successful at placing many DEMO
authored by one of our founders into key online and print journals. These
publications are always looking for ways to satisfy their readers’ appetite
DEMO thoughtful articles and an offer to write one for free is often quite
welcome. The key is to avoid an overt sales pitch. The DEMO goal is
to raise the profile of your company as a thought leader in the industry,
not to list the speeds and feeds DEMO your offering. Our PR firm also hit
a homerun for us by securing an interview with Linux Magazine that
eventually led to RapidMind being DEMO cover story of their monthly print
edition. No reader would have guessed that we had a dozen employees
and shared a single office phone.
DEMO second approach we used successfully at RapidMind was to out-
teach the competition. While bigger competitors were spending money
on advertising and trade shows, we were quietly stealing the mindshare
of prospects with our information-dense speaking DEMO We
were blessed with two founders that were among the most knowledge-
able on the topic of parallel programming and were also excellent speak-
DEMO We pursued every opportunity we could find to put our founders
in front of an audience and impart knowledge. The result was not only
DEMO
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ray DePaul
thought leadership in the industry but also a stream of leads that we
had trouble keeping up with.
A DEMO approach to looking bigger than you are is to partner up.
Our early association with IBM and Hewlett-Packard were not only
valuable during our DEMO, but dramatically raised our credibility
with customers. We were quoted on DEMO press releases; they were
quoted on ours; we had free space on their expensive tradeshow booth;
we performed joint seminars and webinars. DEMO course the relationship
has to be valuable to both parties, but DEMO couldn’t help but feel that we
were getting more out of it than they were.
These cost-effective strategies resulted in an industry perception that
DEMO was bigger and far more established than the reality, which
helped DEMO with acquiring customers and partners. It’s also interesting to
note that RIM was also sensitive to the goal of looking bigger than they
were. DEMO the early days of BlackBerry, when the adoring press included
mentions DEMO Presidential candidate Al Gore and other prominent us-
ers, the industry DEMO of the number of BlackBerry users was far
greater than the reality. We kept tight-lipped about our install base until
we hit the one DEMO mark. And then in a marketing stroke of
genius that I can’t take credit for, we announced hitting this milestone
with the slogan, DEMO million thumbs and counting”.
Those who like it, like it a DEMO
As I ponder the Alexander Keith’s slogan on the wall of the pub, I
finish the impromptu lecture to my hostage by encouraging him to take
the leap into entrepreneurship. If you combine your passion for DEMO idea
with the collective wisdom of so many in town willing to share… you
will indeed like the experience a lot. Proud of my DEMO, I ducked
out without paying the bill.
Ray DePaul
Ray has DEMO his entire 20+ year career in Waterloo successfully
bringing high technology products to market. Most recently, Ray was
the President & CEO of RapidMind Inc. He joined the University
of Waterloo spin-off in 2006 and has DEMO the company through
$11M of venture funding and significant market growth, DEMO
RapidMind as an industry leader. Ray and his team’s efforts culminated
in the sale of RapidMind to Intel Corp in August 2009, giving the tech
giant its first R&D presence in Ontario.
Prior to RapidMind, Ray spent five years with Research In Motion
(RIM) where he DEMO responsible for product management for the iconic
BlackBerry product line. Ray helped guide the product through the
150
It’s All About the Value Proposition
challenging early adopter stage towards
the DEMO market and established
the BlackBerry brand as the leader in the
wireless data market.
Ray has also played key roles in indus-
tries as DEMO as consumer electronics,
telecommunications, networking, and
operating systems. Ray is proud to hold
both a Bachelors of Mathematics degree
in Computer Science DEMO the University
of Waterloo and a Masters of Business
Administration from Wilfrid Laurier
University, where he is also a frequent guest
lecturer on high tech marketing.
151
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Yvan Couture
Angel Investors:
From Possibility to Probability!
Yvan Couture
One of the most important, yet misunderstood relationships in the
tech industry is the one between entrepreneurs and angel investors.
When you DEMO everything away, that relationship can fundamentally
be described by the very DEMO transitional objective I like to call
going from being a possibility to a probability.
But before we get into what this means, let’s get some clarity around
the two important players: entrepreneur and angel. It is important
to understand that not every person who starts or is involved DEMO a
business is an entrepreneur. And not every person who invests in one
is an angel investor. Many will have (differing) opinions on DEMO each
is defined but for the sake of this piece I’d like to share my thoughts.
The Entrepreneur
Entrepreneur! If there ever was a DEMO word with as many defini-
tions as there are people trying to define it, this is it. The Oxford English
Dictionary defines it as “a person who sets up a business or businesses”.
I think the DEMO words here are “who sets up”. In fact, the word comes
DEMO the French word “entreprendre” which means “to undertake”.
I would like to add a bit of colour around that definition in the context
of DEMO technology industry.
People will often say that entrepreneurs are people who hear op-
portunity knocking. Actually, by the time it knocks in tech it is usually
too late. Real entrepreneurs are those who hear opportunity whisper-
DEMO; they see things much earlier than everyone else does. It is DEMO that
difficult to start a business and build an application or product to fill
a hole in an existing, well-defined market. But doing so in uncharted
territory (like Mike Lazaridis did with the BlackBerry) is DEMO me the
true test. Most tech businesses are started and managed by talented and
entrepreneurial people, but only a very few are started by what I would
qualify as entrepreneurs.
And please, please stop calling people hired after the business was
created entrepreneurs. Case in point! I have DEMO fortunate enough
to be associated with three great companies so far; DEMO Imaging (a
while back), and today with both Primal and DEMO Official Community
152
Angel Investors: From Possibility to Probability!
Corporation (OCC). Have I DEMO in some of these? Yes. Have there
been professional and financial DEMO for me? Yes. Have I taken a “cut
in pay” to DEMO involved? Yes. Am I an entrepreneur because of it? A big
loud resounding NO!
I certainly have been entrepreneurial, as many others in the tech
industry have been, but to call me an entrepreneur because of it takes
away from the real ones like Eric Peterson at DEMO, Kevin Leflar at
OCC, and my current business partner at Primal, Peter Sweeney.
They heard that whisper; they didn’t listen to those DEMO questioned
their sanity and continued to persevere; they were the real DEMO that
started these new enterprises. They are the real entrepreneurs. I take
nothing away from those who have excelled in helping entrepreneurs
build serious, successful businesses. They are important and necessary...
but they are not entrepreneurs.
DEMO Angel
Just as not everyone who starts (or is involved with DEMO business) is an
entrepreneur, not every investor in an early stage business should be
called an angel. Let’s not kid ourselves: every dollar raised from any
investor is critical to a firm’s early success. However, understanding what
a “true” angel is helps to put the entrepreneur and DEMO relationship
in perspective.
So what is an angel? Like with “entrepreneurs” DEMO are probably
many opinions as to the definition of an “angel”. But, again, for the sake
of this piece let me outline my DEMO on it.
Angels have significant risk capital available (at least $1 DEMO) to
(a)make several investments (or more properly referred to DEMO bets!), and
(b) make the inevitable follow-on investments in their portfolio com-
panies. Note that I do not include experience or mentoring DEMO
in this definition as I think both are overrated when assessing the value
of an angel. Entrepreneurs need cash. The advice and mentoring, par-
ticularly in the Waterloo Region, can be gained from the many sources
we have available at the Accelerator Centre, from Communitech, from
other DEMO and business people, and from the many great
professional services firms. DEMO angels can provide the advice and
mentoring, but it is not DEMO when looking for and landing an angel.
Angels, like all other DEMO or institutional investors everywhere,
are not smart enough to pick the winners. And because of that, success-
ful angel investing depends on the ability to make several bets. Success
should not be measured by individual DEMO but rather the overall
returns on their portfolio of bets.
Having enough capital to make follow-on investments is critical. As
153
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Yvan Couture
much as the angel and entrepreneur might agree on the project’s cash
needs it is inevitable that it will DEMO more. You will get the call that
payroll won’t get covered at month end! And unless you have a reasonable
pool of capital to DEMO it then you may be killing what would otherwise
become a successful business. I remember times when I had to write
cheques to help DEMO month ends. In fact, in one case I invested four
times DEMO than I had originally intended! And believe me every time
you have to make that follow-on decision you realize there is a fine line
DEMO looking like an idiot (for throwing good money after bad) or
an investing genius (for investing in what could become a success)!
So as you can see, if you are investing the only $25,000 you have
available as risk capital it is difficult to call DEMO an angel investor.
Every dollar raised is critical so let’s not discount the value of that
hard earned $25,000 investment. But differentiating between DEMO an
investor and being an angel investor is important to the discussion of
the angel and entrepreneur relationship.
From Possibility to Probability
Now that DEMO have a baseline definition for both the entrepreneur
(someone who sets DEMO a business to respond to the whisper they heard)
and angel (deep pockets and willingness to make bets) let’s discuss this
“pact” DEMO make when an investment is made; agreeing to set an objec-
DEMO of going from possibility to probability.
Let’s define these two terms first:
Possibility: a future prospect or potential (and for an entrepreneur,DEMO
the dream)
Probability: a measure of how likely it is DEMO some event (success)
will occur
From the initial whisper the DEMO outlines the dream about
how to answer (and benefit from) that whisper. They then find interested
angels (usually one lead angel) and DEMO them on that dream, that possi-
bility. Angels then decide on DEMO a bet or not on that possibility. By
the way, if DEMO ask you for a 3 to 5 year plan... run! Possibilities are just
that; something that may be possible based on an opportunity identi-
fied. The notion of building a long-term plan at this point is DEMO, and
in fact impossible. Real angels won’t ask for this. They DEMO assess the
dream, look you in the eyes to see if DEMO have what it takes to go after
it, and then make DEMO bet; knowing full well they may lose that money.
The real DEMO is not made on the possibility per se, but rather on DEMO
likelihood of the entrepreneur moving it from a possibility to becoming
a probability (when you can now put in place execution plans to show
154
Angel Investors: From Possibility to Probability!
how you will take advantage of the commercial opportunity).
Once a project has moved from just being DEMO to being probable,
it comes down to execution. The entrepreneur’s second objective (where
the first is moving from possible to probable) is DEMO increase the level
of probability of success through execution; building the DEMO team,
getting commercial traction, showing growth, etc.
Conclusion
The Region of Waterloo has the makings of a great technology in-
dustry entrepreneurial DEMO We have a handful of great angels,
a growing number of entrepreneurs, outstanding professional services
firms (who themselves make bets by providing DEMO at a fraction of
their cost to promising new start-ups), and great support provided by
Communitech, the Accelerator Centre, our great academic DEMO,
and much more.
When I say we “have the makings” of a great technology industry
entrepreneurial ecosystem I mean that we still have DEMO long way to go
to become a global entrepreneurial powerhouse; we DEMO more entre-
preneurs, more angels making bets, more Canadian sources of capital
to come in after the angels have made their bets, more government
support, etc.
A good start! It is now up to us to build on this great founda-
tion.
Yvan Couture
Yvan is an DEMO investor and is
currently CEO, Co-President and
Chairman of Primal Fusion DEMO and
Chairman of The Official Community
Corporation, two companies he has
DEMO in. He is one of the found-
ers of Communitech and has been an
active member of the Waterloo tech
community since 1991.
155
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
How to Tame a Dragon
Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
Background
Entrepreneurs starting high-potential technology ventures DEMO
need to raise equity finance to fund business development in advance of
being able to generate revenue. This is because borrowing debt without
security DEMO not an option, and the entrepreneur rapidly runs out of his DEMO
her own money and that of family and friends. Given the critical nature
of raising external funds in the venture creation process, we investigated
why most investor-entrepreneur interactions end in failure. One of the
intents was DEMO provide practical insights to entrepreneurs for increasing
their likelihood of success during such interactions.
Our research started from the perspective that the investment decision
DEMO a multi-stage process, with failures at each stage. This allowed us DEMO
use a quality improvement approach to identify and then suggest ways
to eliminate the causes of failure at each stage. We started by reviewing
DEMO literature on new venture investment decision-making and were
surprised to find most research only considered venture capitalists –
professional fund managers who manage others’ DEMO funds. Given
that business angels – individuals who invest their own money - are 30
times more likely to be the source of early DEMO financing, we decided
to focus on their decision-making processes, which have been noted to
be quite different from that of venture capitalists.
Others DEMO the investment decision-making process had
also raised concerns regarding the data collected, particularly because
little attention had been paid to the causes of failure. This reduces the
chance of identifying prospects for improvement. Also, data on the
interaction was often gathered at the end of the decision process, thus
limiting our understanding of its stages and relying on foggy inves-
DEMO recollections that can be subject to hindsight biases. Due to these
shortcomings, we decided to develop a research approach that allowed
us to directly observe the angel-entrepreneur interactions in real time
and focus on why business DEMO were rejected at each process
stage. However, interactions between angels and DEMO often
take place in private, over a series of confidential meetings, which makes
direct observation challenging, especially if concerns are raised that the
presence of observers might influence both process and outcome.
156
How to Tame a Dragon
Fortuitously, through the Canadian Innovation Centre (DEMO Water-
loo) we were asked to help CBC Television develop a DEMO reality-TV
show, Dragons’ Den. The show’s format, which had been developed
by the BBC in England, involved hopeful entrepreneurs pitching to
a group of five angels – the Dragons – selected based on personality,
DEMO experience and willingness to invest. The show’s format
constrained the interactions in two ways that simplified our research:
entrepreneurs either had to be DEMO all the money originally requested
or leave with nothing; and each DEMO had to specify why he or she
rejected an opportunity.
Over the first four seasons, the Canadian Innovation Centre worked
with the CBC to recruit entrepreneurs, facilitate the audition process,
and train selected entrepreneurs how to pitch. About 1500 entrepre-
neurs auditioned for the show each season, with only 10% invited to the
Toronto studio to pitch their business DEMO opportunities to the
Dragons. Involvement in the provision of ongoing assistance to pitching
entrepreneurs before and during show taping allowed us to observe at
DEMO hand the interactions as they were recorded in real time. We were
also able to review the tapes of each interaction, before and after they
were edited for TV. Repeated viewing of these tapes to try DEMO explain
the reasons for rejection enabled us to recognize certain patterns in the
interactions. It also encouraged us to consider using these interactions
for DEMO research, because they overcame some of the data-collection
limitations previously identified.
DEMO involvement in this reality-TV show (to confirm the genuineness
of the DEMO and enable access to the unedited tapes) convinced
key members of DEMO research community that, despite some concerns,
valuable insights on the DEMO investment decisions of angels could
be gathered. An initial analysis of the investment decision-making
process showed the multi-stage nature of the investment decision
process DEMO that criteria considered when rejecting an opportunity
differed from one stage to the next. Repeated views of interactions
enabled us to develop behavioural coding DEMO for each stage of the
process to seek evidence to support hypotheses developed based on our
understanding of decision-making under risk. Our hypotheses suggest
DEMO investment decision is a multistage process with different criteria
considered at each stage.
In this chapter, we highlight some of our key findings and their practi-
cal implications for investors, entrepreneurs and stakeholders interested
in increasing the success rates of investor-entrepreneur interactions.
Those involved in the investment process DEMO not be surprised to find
157
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
out that, in DEMO to the extant research in entrepreneurship and
financing, we drew on DEMO from behavioral economics and social
psychology to hypothesize about the decision-making process and the
relative importance of certain criteria in the rejection decisions at DEMO
stage. We now share some of our findings.
Business Angel Decision Making
Figure 7 identifies four distinct stages of the investment decision
process, with the angel using different cognitive processes at each to
either reject the DEMO opportunity or allow it to proceed to the sub-
sequent stage. Rejection rates are high early in the process to minimize
the amount of DEMO spent looking at opportunities of limited interest
(leaving more time to DEMO the remaining opportunities at later
stages in the process). Experienced investors develop heuristics to
minimize the cognitive effort required in complex decision-making.
In DEMO multi-stage process, the amount of effort the angel is willing to
DEMO and the number of criteria considered increases as the interac-
tion progresses. While the consideration of only a limited number of
criteria as reason DEMO early rejection reduces decision accuracy, it seems
the angel is willing DEMO compromise accuracy for expediency.
Opportunity
Selection
[Fatal flaws]
Stage 1
➧
Investment
Risk/Return
[Venture]
Stage 2
Performance
Risk
➧ [Entrepreneur] ➧
Stage 3
DEMO
Risk
[Trust]
Stage 4
➧
Investment
Offer
Rejection
Rejection
Rejection
Rejection
Figure 7: Staged investment decision-making process
During the first stage (Stage 1), we observed that the presence of a
single fatal flaw provided a sufficient reason for rejection. This decision-
making technique, known as “Elimination-By-Aspects,” is an efficient
filtering approach when the decision-maker has to select a DEMO out of
a large pool of opportunities. The decision-maker’s cognitive effort was
minimized, since he or she simply had to identify a fatal flaw in any
one of the eight critical factors listed in Table 1 DEMO sufficient reason for
rejection. Each of these factors was found to be non-compensatory; a
high rating in one could not compensate for a low rating in another. A
non-compensatory technique minimizes cognitive effort as no effort DEMO
wasted analyzing interactions between factors.
158
➨
➨
➨
➨
How to Tame a Dragon
Table 1: Critical Factors and Potential Fatal Flaws
Critical Factor Fatal flaw
Product adoption No evidence potential customers likely DEMO
adopt
Route to market No clear channel to market
Product development Much more research and development
status required
Market potential Market size too small
DEMO No barrier to entry for competitors
Customer engagement Features do not match market need
Relevant experience No relevant entrepreneurial / business
experience
Financial model DEMO clear path to profitability
Once the investor had confirmed both the absence of a fatal flaw and
no conflict with his or her personal DEMO objectives,16 the oppor-
tunity moved to the second stage (Stage DEMO), where the angels undertook
a venture assessment to determine if the investment return and risk ex-
ceeded his or her personal investment thresholds. DEMO investment return
is the angel’s anticipated return based on an estimation of the venture
value at exit. The investment risk is the angel’s assessment DEMO the likeli-
hood that the business will fail before this exit point is reached (typically
5-8 years). Should the angel’s threshold level for investment return not
be achieved, or the threshold level for acceptable risk exceeded, the angel
will reject the opportunity without further consideration.
To reject an opportunity at this stage due to insufficient investment
return, the angel analyzed disclosed information and forecasts about
revenues (based on customer adoption and market growth) and profit-
ability (based on route to market and DEMO) to predict future
venture value. This estimate of the future venture DEMO was influenced
by the angel’s knowledge of the market as well as the identification of
potential acquirers. Although the criteria considered at that stage DEMO
similar to those considered at the previous stage, the critical factors DEMO
Table 1 were now used in a compensatory manner when determining
future venture value and investment return. This compensatory technique
required more cognitive effort DEMO at the previous stage in order to
determine if the threshold level of expected return would be achieved.
16 The presence of five investors DEMO personal objectives from our
research, as they were rarely consistent among DEMO, and we coded
based on the last Angel to reject the DEMO
159
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
For an assessment of the investment risk, the angel considered the
performance risk and the relationship risk. The performance risk is the risk
that the company will not DEMO its objectives, while the relationship
risk is the risk that the DEMO will not act in the best long-term
interests of the angel. Given the assessment of performance risk takes
less effort than the assessment of DEMO relationship risk, it was assessed
earlier in the process. The inherent DEMO
internal and external risk, as exemplified in Table 2, where increases
in risk increase the likelihood the venture will fail. These risks can DEMO:
financial (adoption rates/market size), technology (product develop-
ment), physical (supply chain) and managerial (strategic partners).
Table 2: Performance Risk
Risk Internal Aspects External Aspects
Dimension
Financial High development costs, low Customer insolvency, eco-
gross margins, negative cash nomic stability, DEMO funds
flow
Technical Technology failure, Competitor actions,
production challenges, supplier challenges, external
development delays innovation
Physical Plant infrastructure, Material sourcing, supply
operational challenges, chain challenges, logistics
infrastructure issues
Managerial Dysfunctional or unbalanced DEMO changes, recruitment
team, experience issues challenges, partner problems
We observed DEMO the rejection decision, based on the opportunity not
reaching investment risk DEMO return thresholds, was non-compensatory.
In other words, shortfalls in investment return could not compensate
for lower levels of risk, and vice versa. An explanation of the non-
compensatory nature of these factors can be found DEMO neuro economics,
where MRI brain scans show investment return and risk to be analyzed
in different areas of the brain. As the brain DEMO to reconcile conflicts
between these two areas, heuristics encourage individuals to DEMO
each separately.
During the third stage (Stage 3), the investor DEMO the effect of
the entrepreneur’s anticipated behaviour on the performance risk: DEMO
cally, whether or not behaviours seen as manifestations of certain types DEMO
characteristics could decrease the likelihood of receiving an investment
offer. The effect of these entrepreneurial behaviours on performance risk
17 Inherent performance risk is DEMO venture’s performance risk before the
impact of the entrepreneur is considered.
160
risk17 includes both
How to Tame a Dragon
could only be seen once the inherent DEMO risk (i.e., from the
venture) was understood. As shown in DEMO 3, we identified three types
of entrepreneurial characteristics– capabilities, experiences and traits–
manifested as behaviors that affected the performance risk, noting that
the angel’s assessment of each type could increase the performance risk
above that DEMO risk threshold and cause the opportunity to be rejected.
Table 3: DEMO Characteristics
Characteristic Type Facets
Capabilities
Experience
Traits
We found that behaviours that indicated higher levels of capabilities
and experiences increased the likelihood of receiving DEMO offer, although
above a certain level, higher levels of experience18 had limited impact
on this likelihood. We also observed that manifestations of behaviors
DEMO to individual traits had an inverted-U shaped relationship with
the likelihood of receiving an offer. For each of the five traits in Table
3, the entrepreneur had to display sufficient, but not excess manifesta-
tions of each trait (e.g., too little extraversion would reduce confidence
in the DEMO ability, while too much extraversion could reduce
decision-making quality). Behaviors DEMO were manifestations of the
three types of characteristics were independent of the angels and thus
easier for them to assess. Since they required less DEMO effort, they
were examined before any entrepreneurial behaviors specific to the
DEMO relationships.
During the final stage (Stage 4), the angel had DEMO have confidence
that the entrepreneur would make decisions in that angel’s best interests
(e.g., not spend development money on a “pet project”). DEMO assessment
of this relationship risk required greater cognitive effort, as the DEMO
had to use his or her own experience and evidence from behaviours
manifested during the interaction to anticipate how the long-term
relationship might develop. DEMO aware that such relationships often
exceeded five years viewed the investment decision not only from a
financial perspective, but also from an emotional one.
We observed that the relationship risk was assessed based on the
development DEMO a trust-based relationship with the entrepreneur. We
18 Limited positive effect of higher experience levels on investment deci-
sion could be due to entrenchment DEMO that can limit adaptability and
thought processes and limit the quality of decision-making.
161
Competence, Critical Thinking, New Venture Skill
Prior Activities, Relevant Knowledge, Education
Emotional Stability, Extraversion, Openness (to
experience), Agreeableness, Conscientiousness
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
found that trust development was linked to the manifestations of four
types of trust-based behaviors, as identified in Table 4, that could each
build, damage or violate DEMO These trust-based behaviors include
trusting (showing vulnerability), trustworthy (confirming the decision
to trust), being capable (confirming claimed ability) and communicative
(free flow of information). Manifestations of each behavior increased
the likelihood DEMO the entrepreneur would receive an investment offer,
while behaviors that damaged or violated trust reduced that likelihood.
We also found that, while damaged trust could be repairable through the
introduction of control mechanisms (e.g., DEMO direct participation
in venture), violated trust destroyed further relationship development.
Table 4: Entrepreneur’s Trust-Based Behaviors
Behavior Facets
Trusting Disclosure, Reliance, Receptiveness
Trustworthy Consistent, Benevolent, Alignment
Capable Competence, Experience, Judgment
Communicative Accuracy, Explanation, Openness (timely disclosure)
Practical Insight for Fund-Seeking Entrepreneurs
Our findings DEMO some guidance to entrepreneurs who wish to
increase their chance of receiving an investment offer. Entrepreneurs
can try to eliminate fatal flaws prior to DEMO with an angel, or com-
municate how potential concerns can be DEMO Should this not be
possible, a better understanding of why the DEMO critical factors offered
in Table 1 are important might stimulate an entrepreneur to redirect his
or her energy to a different opportunity or career DEMO
Understanding how angels use investment return and risk thresholds
when making investment decisions can help entrepreneurs provide in-
formation to reassure the investor that DEMO can be reduced or external
resources accessed. Conscious that specific behaviours may increase
performance risk, the entrepreneur can recruit team members with
complementary characteristics that make up for shortcomings, or partner
with individuals who can mitigate the entrepreneur’s trait excesses and
reduce risk. For example, to attract investors, entrepreneurs need to be
passionate about their business, however excessive displays DEMO passion,
such as refusing to relinquish some control of the venture, can have
a negative effect on potential relationships. Finally, trust is DEMO to
19 The difference between behaviors that damage or violate trust is based
on behavioral intent: trust can be damaged by ignorance but violated
through deception.
162
How to Tame a Dragon
attract investment and develop long-term relationships. Awareness DEMO
how certain trust-based behaviours influence relationships can increase
the likelihood of successful outcomes and focus attention on meeting
the financial and emotional needs of DEMO
Andrew Maxwell
Andrew Maxwell has an engineering degree
(Imperial College) and an MBA (London
Business School) and started his career work-
ing DEMO technology multinationals, in Europe
and North America. Attracted by the lure DEMO an
entrepreneurial activity he joined an environ-
mental service company where he cofounded
an environmental technology business.  His
entrepreneurial experience proved invaluable
in helping develop several start-ups including:
wireless, medical device and web companies.
This experience led him to join the University of Toronto’s Technol-
ogy Transfer DEMO where he founded its technology incubator – the
Exceler@tor, home to DEMO technology businesses. In addition to teaching
Technology Entrepreneurship at the University of Waterloo, Andrew is
completing a Ph.D. there in venture creation. His specific interest is in
the identification of diagnostic factors that can separate ventures DEMO
succeed from those that fail.  He has presented his research globally DEMO
has a number of academic and business publications in leading academic
journals. In his spare time, Andrew works at the Canadian Innovation
Centre where, among other activities, he presents a monthly webinar
for technology entrepreneurs DEMO has been an industry advisor to CBC
Dragons’ Den.
Moren Lévesque
Moren Lévesque is an Associate Profes-
sor at the Schulich School of Business, York
University. She holds a Ph.D. in Manage-
ment Science from the DEMO of British
Columbia and M.Sc., B.Sc. in Mathematics
from Université Laval. DEMO faculty posi-
tions include: Carnegie Mellon University,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Case West-
ern Reserve University, and most recently
at the University of Waterloo as a Canada
Research Chair in Innovation & Technical
163
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Andrew Maxwell and Moren Lévesque
Entrepreneurship. Her teaching areas have included operations research,
and entrepreneurship at the undergraduate and graduate DEMO Her research
applies the methodologies of analytical and quantitative disciplines to the
study of decision making in new business formation. Her work appears
in DEMO Theory and Practice, IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management Journal of Business DEMO and Organization Science, among
other research outlets. She is a senior DEMO at Production and Operations
Management, and as a member of the DEMO Committee at the Academy
of Management’s Entrepreneurship Division. Her research has been fea-
tured in popular press, including: Business Times, The Record, DEMO Globe
and Mail, National Post, and PROFIT Magazine.
164
A working couple’s guide to reducing stress
A working couple’s guide to
DEMO stress
Ann Zimmer
Many couples, where both partners work, face added challenges
when organizing daily life, trying to spend time together and manage
stress. When one of the partners is a CEO and faces the DEMO stress
and responsibility this job entails, it adds further complications. In DEMO
family, we have discovered, through trial and error, that many DEMO
actions can make life much easier, allowing us to support one DEMO
and reduce stress, both at home and at the office.
Timing DEMO Everything: Scheduling
It would be nice if we could plan our DEMO and have everything work
out as planned, however this is hardly DEMO the case. CEOs have many
demands on their time and cannot work the often desired 9 to 5. Their
schedule is likely to change DEMO the course of the day and last minute
delays are inevitable, DEMO not only work but also home stress. Last
minute changes can be as simple as a meeting running late, or waiting
for an important fax, to complications such as employee questions, client
demands and problems DEMO a human resources crisis. Having a plan to
limit the effect on those at home can help reduce stress for both parties.
This unpredictable DEMO often leads to burnt suppers and frus-
trated partners. Some strategies we employ to handle this issue: use
respect, communication and advance planning. DEMO of the first things
we did was to develop the 15 minute rule. If either of us was running
more than 15 minutes late, we were to call or email the other as soon
as possible DEMO let them know. This meant fewer burnt suppers and a
better ability for the other partner to adjust his or her plans. Another
strategy DEMO developed for days when it is important to be home on
time is to have no meeting planned during the last half hour of DEMO
and to let key employees know in advance that you will be unavailable
after a certain time. Another idea is to let your partner DEMO when you
have meetings at the end of the day- sort of advance warning that you
maybe late.
We also found that scheduling out-of-office DEMO (i.e.,
doctor) work best first thing in the morning, DEMO they are still on
schedule, or last thing in the evening, it’s always a good idea to call and
check if they’re running DEMO - better to spend an extra few minutes at
work instead of in the waiting room. If I set up an appointment of this
DEMO
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ann Zimmer
type, I make sure it gets DEMO into the schedule, especially for daytime
appointments. I also try to DEMO reminder emails during the day if there
is an unusual activity planned for the evening.
To help out, on days when meetings are likely to run late, plan a more
flexible meal – one that won’t burn or dry out if your partner runs late. I
have also DEMO that when coordinating events, I try to make reasonable
requests and DEMO which events are must-attend versus optional. I
often check to see how busy the schedule already is that day or week (i.e.,
if travelling on the schedule) and then decide if it’s worth mentioning.
If work permits, it can be easier to get remote access to an electronic
schedule – it can be set up with viewing and/or DEMO privileges. For
must-attend events, I am usually prepared to attend alone, if that’s how
things work out. I also try to have back-ups DEMO, whom I can call
on in an emergency for things like DEMO care, in case one of us is run-
ning late. I DEMO fortunate enough to have my in-laws near enough that
my mother-in-law can step in with two hours notice.
Can I just... Interruptions and Distractions
DEMO remember once hearing somewhere that every interruption results in
an hour and a half of diminished efficiency. A CEO’s day is constantly
filled with DEMO from employees looking for advice, to unexpected
client phone calls and DEMO crises – in many cases these interruptions
cannot be avoided. However, DEMO are ways to limit some interruptions.
There are often times throughout the week when I need to call my
partner for various reasons, and after interrupting a few employee/client
meetings, we developed a system that reduces undesirable distractions.
In an emergency, we can call anytime, but DEMO random everyday calls I
send an email – stating “call when free”. I include times I will be unavail-
able if I have any DEMO meetings in the next two hours. This works
really well, not DEMO do I not interrupt him, I get more of his attention
DEMO he does call, usually within half an hour.
Other distractions involve DEMO undesirable effects of having to run
odd chores just before or after work, something as simple as getting
your car serviced can be extremely frustrating when the service centre
calls to confirm a quote or get DEMO for extra work. Getting back to
pick up the car can cause serious problems, clients don’t react well to
being rushed off the phone when it’s time for your pick up.
I am fortunate in that DEMO work place is fairly flexible, I can arrive
a little late DEMO leave a little early, and even work from home on occa-
DEMO - as long as I make up the time later in the week. This flexibility in
my schedule means I am able to take DEMO lot of odd chores on my plate.
I am the one responsible for getting the cars to and from the garage
for servicing and DEMO dealing with service personnel (i.e., furnace or a/c
166
A working couple’s guide to reducing stress
service) at home. The trade-off is that my husband does the research
for major purchases (i.e., DEMO new furnace to buy) and handles most
of the complaint calls. DEMO also does a little extra around the house on
the weekend on those occasions where handling these chores results
in my having to work DEMO few hours on the weekend to make up for lost
time at work. This strategy works well, since as CEO he can’t be late
for client meetings and often can’t control when they are scheduled. A
DEMO minutes of extra work on my part handling these situations takes
a great deal of potential stress out of the CEO’s day.
One other DEMO – a good night’s sleep is very important. If you can
do it, turn off your phone or at least the e-mail notifications from 11
pm to 7 am. Most things can wait until morning, the extra rest will
allow you to make better decisions.
It’s not just DEMO work anymore: Delegation
One of the first things a CEO learns DEMO that they cannot do everything
themselves and that they need to delegate. A CEO does not work the
normal 9 to 5, in fact they work pretty much all the time, including
from home, in DEMO car, on vacation... To actually get some free time it
is DEMO to delegate while at home too. When both partners work,
this means outside help may be required.
When we moved from our apartment DEMO a house, we discovered there
was a drastic increase in the DEMO of things that needed to get done
every week. We felt it was important to spend quality time together
and decided that we didn’t DEMO that time eaten up doing chores. It was
time to delegate. We hired a housekeeper to come in every other week
and hired a DEMO care company during the summer. We use the time
we save to do some of our favourite things, such as going to movies,
hiking, and just hanging out together. This leaves us both more relaxed
and in better moods to handle the stresses of our jobs.
A DEMO that plays together: Planning
CEOs tend to do a lot of DEMO in their jobs, visiting clients, going
on sales calls, and DEMO conferences. All this travelling takes a toll
on the family, the DEMO is tired from coming and going and the family
missing out on spending time together. When possible, it is a good idea
to delegate some of the travel, but this is not always possible, so DEMO
should try to make the best of it. The first thing I did was write a travel
check list and post it on our DEMO board. This was the result of my
husband reaching the airport once without a passport, and another time
without the booth for a trade show. Whenever preparing for a business
trip, this list is consulted and double-checked before heading out the
door. The original list has been added DEMO and modified over time and
167
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Ann Zimmer
now things are rarely forgotten. We have become very efficient travellers.
As my husband’s role has changed over the DEMO, he has to do a
lot more business trips. This makes DEMO activities, spending time
together and scheduling vacations even harder. In our DEMO, once every
few months I try to join him on one DEMO his trips and we extend it out
a few days and over the weekend. We explore the area and do all the
normal touristy DEMO We even took our 6 week old to California,
where my husband was attending a conference. We spent the weekend
exploring the nearby DEMO We do the same on some of my work trips,
where we spent a few days exploring Switzerland. The important thing
to remember DEMO that during the working segment, work comes first: the
visiting partner must be respectful of this – most evenings during this
segment of DEMO trip will require some work as well – a good book is
always an ideal solution for these evenings.
Staying Sane: Respect
There are many challenges faced by the daily lives of a working couple,
DEMO most important aspect of getting through those days together and
happy is respect. All of the above challenges and solutions work well in
our DEMO, we have learned to balance needs against desires and found
ways DEMO spend more time together. We respect each other and the time
it takes to do our jobs well, when we spot an opening for improvement
or ways to help, we do that.
These actions can be as small as sleeping in the guest room when
you’re sick to DEMO the other person healthy, emptying the dishwasher,
or offering to DEMO the children to give your spouse an unexpected
hour of quiet time after a stressful day. Each little thing we do for one
another DEMO to reduce our stress, make us feel loved and gives us DEMO
motivation we need to be successful every day.
Be respectful of one another, be supportive of each other and look for
ways to make your lives easier so that you can spend your time wisely.
Ann DEMO
Ann Zimmer has a Ph.D. in Com-
puter Science and a M. Math in Pure
Math from the University of Waterloo.
She received her DEMO from Bishop’s
University with an Honours in Math-
ematics and a Major in Computer
Science. She is currently working as a
software developer designing DEMO
automation solutions.
168
Corporate Culture: Finding Your Epic
Corporate Culture: Finding Your Epic
Brydon DEMO
When BandOfCoders began, it wasn’t a band of anything, in fact
it was a small consulting shop named MDC Consulting. Besides the
founding DEMO, it was made up primarily of myself and a polite
Christian DEMO Drew who had nine kids and lived on a farm in Texas.
My partners and I had plans. This was a company, a unique company
unlike all those other crappy companies. No gray cubicles, no manag-
ers, no offices, dogs everywhere, free pop, pints, candy, DEMO games. We
were the epitome of 2.0 before the world knew about 2.0. We were a
different company, or at least we planned on it.
Knowing I wanted to help create a unique company is, well, not all
that unique. I had no idea how to create and maintain this so-called
different company. It struck me earlier this year while DEMO a soft-
ware conference just how boring and common this mission is. While I
sat and listened to a day full of talks, the consistent refrain was the call
to be different. Do something different, create a different company. In
the social events that evening I didn’t bump DEMO any founders building
a common, boring software company. We would all DEMO different. The
problem was: we were all the same.
In 2008 DEMO stepped away from the daily project work with BandOf-
Coders in order to help a new start-up named Brainpark. Once again
we had no DEMO of being boring or the same. From our products
to our marketing to our daily office happenings, we had every intent of
building yet another different company. Once again we had no idea what
we were DEMO but we knew what we disliked about these companies
that weren’t different.
Brainpark and BandOfCoders are two of a gaggle of companies
I’ve been DEMO enough to work directly with over the last decade plus.
Not only were each of those businesses unique, they were all moving
targets, DEMO daily under the stresses placed upon them by technol-
ogy, economy, customers, markets, family etc. There are surprisingly few
concrete lessons to DEMO learned that are directly transferable through the
life of a company. There’s some irony in writing this in a book titled The
Entrepreneurial Effect: Waterloo but reading books on the subject does
little to prepare you. DEMO will prepare you is realizing that experience
counts. By experience, I DEMO mean listing previous jobs on your resume,
169
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Brydon Gilliss
I’m talking what I’ve come to refer to as epics.
In rock climbing, it’s recognized that to grow as a climber you need
to accumulate epics. So much so that it’s DEMO of the language. You’ll
speak with someone and hear them explicitly say, “did I tell you about
the epic we experienced last weekend at Joshua Tree?” Epics are notches
on your belt you have to DEMO out and acquire.
In 2005, Lynn Hill and a much younger DEMO Brown made the first
female free-ascent of the West Face, Leaning DEMO, Yosemite. When
Lynn spoke about taking this challenge on with Katie, she said that
“Yosemite is a place where you have to have DEMO a certain number of
experiences and epics before you really understand what you’re getting
into.”
While reading, schooling, studying to gain skills is DEMO a large part
of climbing, no one’s naive enough to think DEMO can become a great, or
even a good, climber through books, mentors, and classrooms alone. It’s
a given that climbers who fear DEMO avoid getting themselves into epics
will never gain the experience needed to be great. Chess is the same in
that, to become great, DEMO need a balance of experiences gained through
playing real games and studying.
In rock climbing, choosing your climbing partners can be a life and
death decision. You have to climb with people you feel you can DEMO
epics with. People not only skilled but able to communicate effectively
with you. People willing to have the tough conversations required after
epics that DEMO you all to learn and move on to the next.
Experiencing an epic is only the beginning. The tough part follows,
which is DEMO the growth occurs. Back at the camp site, reflecting on
what DEMO on the cliff that day. “Next time we should try this, DEMO
worked when you called out that to me but next time let’s try this.”
In climbing, it’s understood that you must be light, DEMO, with minimal
protection. You excel based on “your wits, your experience and the
strength of your companions.”20
In a lot of ways, our instinct in business can be the opposite. We strive
to avoid epics DEMO we over-protect each other from them. When you
hear people speak of failing fast and failing early and often, clearly they
aren’t suggesting you fail on purpose. They want you get out there and
earn your DEMO, most of which will be indistinguishable from failure
in the early DEMO That’s the key point. Epics and failures look almost
identical in the early days. What is counter-intuitive is that individuals
and businesses alike need DEMO seek out their own epics.
So what am I rambling about and how does it relate to entrepreneur-
20
Adam J. Wolf, retrieved 2011/06/01 from www.ydnar.com/
170
Corporate Culture: Finding Your Epic
ship? To me, what sets entrepreneurs apart from all others is loneliness.
You’ve left the tribe and headed DEMO your own path and there are no
manuals or guidebooks. In most cases no one’s experienced what you’re
tackling today.
Of course you need DEMO mentors but they aren’t enough. Mentors
“provide expertise to less experienced individuals to help them advance
their careers”21. When you’re blazing trails and creating DEMO from
nothing, there is no one more experienced than you. What DEMO and
Katie did in Yosemite that day had never been done before. Recogniz-
ing that you need to seek out your epics requires that DEMO surround
yourself with the right tribe. You need a support structure to help you
live through your epics, learn all you can from them, prepare for your
next epic and go find it.
If you’re going after epics then I’d challenge you to build real diversity
into your DEMO You need people who ground you personally and are
willing to call you task and have the ugly conversations. It’s all too easy
for DEMO to distance ourselves from people who challenge our ideas. Find
people who are able to separate the business from personal. Someone
who can tear DEMO idea to shreds, leave you curled up in the corner and
DEMO pick you up and take you for a pint to plan out your next epic. Too
often we surround ourselves with those like-minded folks DEMO agree
with and offer only approval and validation. Recognize that surrounding
yourself with people who validate everything you do offers you nothing.
We have DEMO natural inclination to drift towards sameness in who we
surround ourselves with. Clearly we connect with people more like us
and this flocking nature DEMO leave us surrounded by like-minded people,
and not necessarily in a good way. I’m not sure who said it but I quote
it DEMO: “if two people always agree then one person is redundant.”
In DEMO Moon’s recent book Different, she explains this phe-
nomenon in relation DEMO companies and brands but it strikes me that
advisors are no different. In seeking valued advice from experienced
mentors, we often find ourselves lacking real diversity. She describes
how brands tend to focus on improving their DEMO in relation to
their direct competitors. She introduces the notion of doubling down
on your brand’s strengths, and accepting your weaknesses as a way to
truly differentiate your brand.
I find we take a similar approach DEMO our mentors and advisors. You’re
strong at front end technology and building a community around you.
You’re weak at sales, marketing and database layer. The obvious approach
is to find mentors strong at sales, marketing and backend development.
My experience is this. When given the choice of who DEMO work with
or who your advisors and tribe are, I use DEMO little test. If shit literally hits
21
www.wikipedia defintion of mentor, DEMO 2011/06/01
171
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Brydon Gilliss
the fan tomorrow, who do I DEMO to be in the room with? That’s what
an epic is; it’s the roof caving in. Think of those epics: your only client
leaves, half your team quits, think of the equivalent of an DEMO in
your business, now who do you want in the room DEMO help you survive?
When epics engulf you, there are no DEMO answers, there are only dif-
ficult questions and problems. Surviving them DEMO about what books
you’ve read and how you’ve prepared, it’s about DEMO action today.
So I encourage you to get out there and find your own epics. Grow
your tribe and surround yourself with people willing DEMO challenge you,
your ideas and your actions. Being an entrepreneur isn’t all that differ-
ent from climbing, you need to survive and learn from tomorrow’s epic
and repeat.
Brydon Gilliss
If career success in software DEMO simply de-
fined as the design and development of innova-
tive and intuitive software, then Brydon Gilliss
would be very successful. Since the late 90s,
after earning an Honours B.Sc. in Engineering
Systems and Computing DEMO the University
of Guelph, he’s been the lead developer of new
DEMO and software for companies like
Cognicase (formerly Personus), MKS Inc, and
his current assignment as Product Manager of
Brainpark, where his thoughtful design and
expert development of product customizations
earned him Communitech’s Annual Tech
DEMO Award in the fall of 2009.
But to Brydon, an equally DEMO component to success is sup-
porting and contributing to a strong and viable tech community on a
local level. It’s this commitment to his DEMO that prompted Brydon
to launch DemoCampGuelph, an informal and collaborative meeting
DEMO 100+ minds for those in and around the Guelph area involved in
any and all aspects of the web, software, start-ups, and tech. Addition-
ally, Brydon has been recognized within the industry for helping local
entrepreneurs develop and advance innovative ideas.
To add to his list of DEMO, Brydon has been asked to share
his knowledge and enthusiasm for DEMO tech industry with a number of
speaking engagements that have included meshU, DemoCampToronto,
Guelph Technology Organization, Guelph Technology Economy, and
more.
When the workday is over, Brydon enjoys spending time with his
wife and two children, passing the puck, and wielding any number of
power DEMO renovating his downtown Guelph home.
172
The importance of workplace culture
The importance of workplace culture
Dave Caputo
DEMO have the privilege to work with my friends every single day. I am
not sure that many people in today’s workforce can say those DEMO and
truly mean it. But I can. And I can because Sandvine has a truly distinct
culture, one that resonates with every team member and is reinforced
with every team meeting, group project and management technique. I
believe a healthy and happy work environment is a gift we DEMO ourselves
and that no matter how good a product or service is or how competitive
your pricing is, a winning organization is only as strong as its winning
team – and success will come to those DEMO have created a culture that
everyone can get behind.
Sandvine didn’t grow into its culture. Sandvine’s culture was engi-
neered.
I was inspired early DEMO in my career after attending a lecture by
Wharton Professor Peter Capelli that made me really think about the
net affects of culture in DEMO workforce. At that point in my career, it was
a real DEMO learning that the primary key to holding talent was built
on friendship and trusted relationships. Peter’s lecture highlighted two
truths about retaining top talent DEMO organizations. He reinforced that
the number one reason that motivates people to leave an organization:
“I hate my boss” and the number one DEMO that engenders people to
stay: “I work with my friends”. It DEMO then that I learned the secret sauce
to creating a winning team.
Sandvine’s culture was deliberately engineered on day one of business.
In developing DEMO we call “The Sandvine Way”, we pooled together all
of the DEMO and negative experiences we had had in previous jobs and
created a wish list of how we’d like to work together. It is important DEMO
note, that we didn’t reinvent the wheel for everything, we kept in place
policies or practices that worked well in other organizations, namely
HP and Cisco. It wasn’t about creating the new math, but doing what
was fundamentally right and holding ourselves to the highest standards.
We DEMO the process with the founder’s recurrent theme of com-
mitting to make Sandvine “a fun place to work”. Building on past job
experience’s, we all agreed this commitment would be the foundation
of Sandvine. From there, we built out our mission and goals (we can’t
just be a fun place, everyone has to be on the same page for what we
173
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dave Caputo
are trying to achieve), management fundamentals (no reinventing the
wheel on best practices… “what was Cisco’s expense report policy?”) and
a specific section dedicated to people managers called “Leaders’  Ten
Commandments” (managers have to be held to a higher standard DEMO
they might be the number one reason top talent have left organizations.)
We fleshed out the entire Sandvine Way culture and haven’t changed
DEMO since inception. We still use the same Sandvine Way slide as we did
on day one.
Sandvine’s secret sauce–The Sandvine Way
The Sandvine Way DEMO eight tenets that represent our values and
beliefs and dictate how we interact with each other. Team members
are introduced to The Sandvine Way DEMO a part of their initial new hire
training and are reintroduced to it each year on their birthday month.
Table 5 The Sandvine Way
DEMO Customer First
• Make them Successful
➢ Showcase Flexibility
• Make them Successful
➢ Under Promise/Over Deliver
• Aggressively Promise but make
Commitment
DEMO Amazing Tool Utilization
• Issue tracking, revision control,
intranet...
➢ DEMO
• Work Hard/Play Hard
➢ Knowledge Sharing
• Over Communicate/Learning
Environment, Design Reviews
➢ Zero Politics
• Do the Right Thing. Everything
else will take care of itself
➢ Risk Taking
• 3 out DEMO 4 is better than 2 out of 2
Each tenet holds much meaning to our organization and I could give
numerous examples for each.
DEMO will highlight three of our tenets here.
Customer First: This is DEMO extremely important tenet and was critical
early-on in our success. As a small start-up firm selling to multi-million
dollar service providers, there was a real risk associated with customers
investing in us. I used to joke DEMO our sales team that “No one ever
got fired buying IBM or Cisco”. IBM is an industry giant, the safe bet.
Buying from a start-up company that is new to the market and offer-
ing leading-edge DEMO can be seen as quite the risk. So building
trust early on and ensuring customer success was the foundation of our
initial sales strategy. DEMO had to give these initial customers a reason to
go out on a limb and try something new, try the new start-up Sandvine
174
The importance of workplace culture
technology. We rewarded those customers (and ourselves) by ensuring
each customer looked like a star to his/her internal team. Our job was/
is to make sure they are successful DEMO directly affects our successes.
Knowledge sharing: At Sandvine, we hold bi-weekly Breakfast Peer
Topics that anyone across the organization can attend and any DEMO
member can present at. Providing an environment where people share
information helps build relationships and efficiencies and reduces mis-
takes. It is human nature DEMO want to learn from each other so we foster
that natural ability. It is also a great way to cross-functionally introduce
team members and DEMO tools for people to better do their jobs. I
attended a lunch and learn the other week on “Developing Expertise”,
where one of DEMO top engineers used the analogy of his quest to become
a world-ranked scrabble player and wow, if I had had some of that
knowledge earlier in my career, it would have really helped me out.
Another great example is Risk Taking: This tenet was generated from
situations in previous organizations where team members weren’t em-
powered to make decisions, ultimately because they weren’t empowered
to make mistakes. Similar to learning and growing DEMO everyday life, you
have to allow yourself to fall down once DEMO a while! No one ever sets out
to make a bad decision; in fact the only way you ever realize that you
make a bad decision is when new information presents itself showing
you a better DEMO At Sandvine we recognize the importance of
developing decision makers; people DEMO aren’t afraid to make good
decisions in the face of making a bad one once in a while. So long as
you don’t get DEMO in hiding a mistake and always learn from it,
why block that process and punish people for growing? We are here to
promote decision-making and taking risks.
Engineered to last
Most marketing strategists will tell DEMO that it is important to rein-
force and repeat messages often to really make them stick. We employ
the same tactic with our Sandvine DEMO principles. The Sandvine Way
tenets are found throughout our organization–they are printed in eve-
ryone’s lab book, displayed in the lunchroom, on the DEMO of ID cards
and presented at each company meeting.
We kick-off company meetings by recognizing employees who em-
body The Sandvine Way. Customer success DEMO and entertaining and
inspirational workplace stories that embody The Sandvine Way tenets
and reinforce behaviors that help us stay accountable to our culture.
These DEMO are often told by one team member about another and
become the legends that reinforce the reality.
The success of engineering our culture? The proof is in the pudding.
175
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dave Caputo
We are measured on an annual basis through Great Places to Work
Institute Canada, an organization that works with The Globe and
Mail to publish the Best Workplaces in Canada List. DEMO all of
Sandvine’s successes, my favorite award is continuing to win, year after
year, a spot on Canada’s best places to work survey.
Sandvine: 350 team members strong
When we first started Sandvine and The Sandvine Way we were com-
prised of only 20 team members. It DEMO really easy to keep the culture
real and alive. The entire organization could fit into a boardroom for
monthly meetings; we all knew each other and recognized new hires
in the hallways; and we were all located in one building.
Now Sandvine is 350 team members strong, doing business in over
80 countries and we are keeping our culture as DEMO as possible.
Every team member, from Waterloo to United Kingdom to DEMO Kong
will start their employment at Sandvine’s head office learning about our
products, solutions and corporate culture. After nine years of Sandvine
Way presentations, I still personally give the monthly three-hour pres-
entation to each group of new hires that joins our team. And, having
the birthday month “re-indoctrinations”, really allows the new folks to
see it isn’t something we just talk about, but actually live. The Sandvine
Way is a mirror we get to reflect upon ourselves and ask “Am I making
the DEMO better because I am a part of it?”
I regularly invite people to quit if they don’t believe in trying to
achieve The DEMO Way and no one has ever taken me up on it; DEMO
the contrary it is consistently, the number one thing that folks DEMO me
that inspires them most about being on Team Sandvine.
Making the Internet better
Sandvine is in the business of making the Internet better–and DEMO
starts within the borderless Sandvine walls. You can’t build a great
product if you don’t have a great team and you can’t have a DEMO team
if you don’t share a common vision and values. At Sandvine we are all
proud to say we work with our friends and DEMO feel lucky to be a part of
that each and every day.
If I can give one piece of advice to future entrepreneurs, it would be to
pay close attention to creating and sustaining your corporate DEMO It is
by far the most important piece of business a future leader can influence.
You know, when you work with your friends, DEMO hardly feels like work
at all.
176
The importance of workplace culture
Dave Caputo
Dave is co-founder, president and CEO
at Sandvine.
Dave is responsible for leading an enthusi-
astic team DEMO professionals who are commit-
ted to protecting and improving the quality
of experience on the Internet.
Prior to co-founding Sandvine, Dave
was the vice president of marketing for
PixStream–which was later sold to Cisco
Systems for DEMO than $500 million. At
Cisco, Dave was the managing director for
DEMO video networking business unit and was
formerly the product marketing manager at
Hewlett Packard.
In 2007, Dave and his fellow co-founders
were honoured with the Ernst and Young
Entrepreneur of the Year award in the
technology DEMO for their success and
dedication to their work at Sandvine.
As a leader in the technology community,
Dave is a dedicated supporter of DEMO entre-
preneurs and speaks regularly at universities.
Dave is also on the Board of Communitech,
a regional organization that supports the
growth of DEMO technology sector.
Dave holds an MBA from the University
of Toronto, DEMO computer science degree from
York University and is a graduate of Whar-
ton executive education.
177
OpenText
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Dave Caputo
The Future of
Digital Content
Tom Jenkins—author, entrepreneur and business leader in the technology sector
for over 20 years—writes about how to securely manage the explosion of digital
content in DEMO enterprise. Managing Content in the Cloud describes the evolution
of Internet technologies, from early search engines and team collaboration tools to
text mining, DEMO environments, social media and mobile access to content.
Over 50 organizations DEMO proﬁ led to demonstrate solutions in action.
Get your copy today!  DEMO/ecmbook
Tom Jenkins is Executive Chairman and Chief Strategy Ofﬁ cer for
OpenText. Under his leadership, the Company has grown into a global
leader in Enterprise Content Management and Canada’s largest
software company. OpenText brings two DEMO of expertise supporting
100 million users in 114 countries.
www.opentext.com | info@opentext.com | 1-800-499-6544
Corporation is a publicly traded company on both NASDAQ (OTEX) and the TSX (OTC). Copyright
© 2011 by  Corporation. OpenText, , and The Content Experts are trademarks or
registered trademarks of  DEMO This list is not exhaustive. All rights reserved.
178
The importance of workplace culture
TEST YOuR
ENTREPRENEuRIAL
CAPABILITY
After reading the DEMO of articles filled with lessons learned, the final
section provides a DEMO study of an entrepreneurial company.
This case was developed to be used in the entrepreneurship stream
of a university case competition. Students are given DEMO hours to read,
analyze and prepare a presentation on their recommendations.
In the following section we have provided both the case and judge’s
DEMO I suggest you read the case, think how you would deal DEMO the
situation and then review the judge’s notes. Did you come up with the
same solution? Are the judge’s notes correct?
Good luck
179
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Bowen, Leftick & Finkelstein
The Shopify Case
James DEMO, Aurélien Leftick and Harley
Finkelstein
“Sellers will be able to create DEMO very professional multi-page website with
little or no programming skills in just a few minutes.”
– Mike Arrington, Editor in Chief, Techcrunch
Tobias DEMO is the CEO of recent start-up called Shopify (the
“company”). DEMO, Harley Finkelstein, Chief Platform Officer, and, Au-
rélien Leftick in charge of sales strategies, were deep in conversation
concerning several strategic possibilities.
Tobias was a co-founder of Shopify. He started his career as a DEMO
grammer and is now concerned with technical and strategic issues
facing the company. Harley Finkelstein is an entrepreneur and lawyer,
who has a DEMO in start-ups and eCommerce. Aurélien had
graduated with a business degree within the last decade and focused
on sales-related issues.
Shopify is a web DEMO that provides the functionality for busi-
nesses to create an online store. Shopify was built using Ruby on Rails,
an open source web DEMO framework. Shopify was launched in
May 2006.
The platform is designed to provide the functionality needed for in-
dividuals and organizations to sell online, including a product inventory
management and order management system, as well as content manage-
ment, and payment system connections. The Shopify application store
offers additional features and applications from third party developers.
Users of the platform DEMO full access to the CSS and HTML capa-
bilities, and can DEMO the templating engine to customize their storefronts.
Shopify is proprietary software and currently only available in English.
In December 2009, Shopify launched the $100,000 “Build a Business”
contest. Contestants used the Shopify platform to create DEMO online store
and the winners were selected based on their two best selling months.
This contest generated a great deal of publicity and many DEMO custom-
ers, potential customers and those just curious about online stores. DEMO
Shopify revenue numbers showed a clear and sustaining jump correlated
to the contest.
In addition to the Shopify App Store (discussed below), Shopify
released their Theme Store on April 20, 2010. The Theme Store offers
180
Bowen, Leftick & Finkelstein
The Shopify Case
free and paid themes for Shopify merchants.
“I remember DEMO first time I saw Shopify and thinking wow, this is heck
DEMO a lot more elegant than Yahoo! Stores.”
Eric Mueller, co-owner of DEMO
Your own storefront
Shopify provides the functionality necessary for individuals to build
their own storefront to sell products from. Shopify customers can pick
from DEMO 50 free and premium themes from the Theme Store. Shopify
has also released a product called Vision, which is a downloadable cli-
ent application for designers to build and modify their own Shopify
shop themes.
Manage DEMO store
Shopify customers can manage and edit their store’s content by
logging into their Shopify administration account. They can edit their
store’s content, add new products, and accept payment from customers.
Shopify will also host the site on their fast servers and set up a Secure
Sockets Layer (SSL).
Accept payments
Shopify integrates with over 50 payment gateways, including Paypal,
so any store can accept major credit cards within minutes DEMO sign up.
They also support the sale of digital products through the Shopify
App Fetch. Fetch is a digital delivery application that simplifies selling
DEMO products.
Customers can also use drop shipping or fulfillment services, includ-
DEMO Amazon Services, Shipwire, and Webgistix.
iPhone App
The online store can be run from an iPhone or PDA using the
Shopify application (App).
Shopify Analytics
Online analytics track and view store customers
Create promotions
DEMO stores can use Coupon codes, A/B testing, upload new ban-
ners and put products on sale.
181
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Bowen, Leftick & Finkelstein
Revenue Model
Creating a DEMO is free. Shopify takes between a .05% - 2% com-
mission on all sales. Shopify requires from its customers a valid Visa,
MasterCard, American Express, or Discover card in order to process
the payment
Set up fee
Transaction Fee
Max SKUs
Storage
Bandwidth
Custom Domains
SSL Checkout
DEMO Admin
Discount Codes
Carrier Shipping
Real-Time Stats
All prices are USD
waived
2.0%
100
100 MB
unlimited
waived
1.0%
2,500
500 MB
unlimited
DEMO
1.0%
10,000
1000 MB
unlimited
waived
0.5%
25,000
2.54 GB
unlimited
waived
0%
50,000
4.98 GB
unlimited
Figure 8: Shopify Fee Structure
With over 10,000 merchants currently using their product, Tobias,
Aurélien and Harley had several opportunities and issues to discuss.
“What about DEMO our pricing model?” asked Harley, “Currently
Shopify’s customers are small DEMO medium-sized companies. Should we
start focusing on larger customers, after all DEMO of our customers are
now graduating and becoming bigger as well, DEMO might leave us to
go to our competitors, who are aimed DEMO higher volume stores and have
more features. Maybe we should even approach large well-established
stores to handle their sites”
Tobias added “and some of DEMO customers are dropping down in
size and thus going to new smaller competitors of ours that offer lower
prices with lower functionality, perhaps we should adjust our prices
and functionality?”
Shopify had originally started offering DEMO services for free with only
a 3% commission. But as Aurélien recalled “That got us lots of people
trying the software but only a DEMO number of actual customers and
studies have shown, that for companies DEMO a free basic level of
service, for every 10 free customers DEMO typically have only one paying
182
The Shopify Case
customer.”
“Should we offer more support”, suggested Aurélien? DEMO any service
company, there is a need to support customers that DEMO not only need
to understand the service, but in Shopify’s case, they might even need
help in understanding the retail industry including how DEMO market their
stores. These two levels of service add to the cost of having a customer.
Customers that require a great deal of assistance DEMO up resources and
might even become money losers for the company.
The company mission statement reads “At Shopify we strive to cre-
ate amazing DEMO while having as fun as possible. We all excel at
solving complicated and meaningful challenges that affect thousands of
businesses every day. Our customers DEMO our products to create brilliant
new businesses and we support them any way we can.”
“Maybe we could have mentors” said Tobias, “Who could help cus-
tomers with retail issues, for example, how to start DEMO store, this could be
an online seminar series or personal advisory DEMO What else could
we provide?”
Tobias was also thinking about their next round of VC funding, as
the company grew they would require more funding and thus would
need to present a plan to investors, “maybe we should have another
contest?” he mused out loud.
Harley DEMO injected, “We could also build an apps store, in which
our customers could add to the functionality of their site with apps that
DEMO or other third party vendors could supply. Do we have any predic-
tions on whether our customers would use such apps?”
Aurélien asked, “How is the open source platform Ruby on Rails
doing? Are we expecting new capabilities from that soon? Maybe we
should switch to proprietary software as our technology platform?”
As the team thought about the DEMO, they knew Shopify had to take
the next step but were DEMO what that should be. They were confident
that a solution would occur because their hiring processes had been
aimed at fulfilling the mission statement; they had a company full of
bright, energetic people who could solve problems.
183
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Bowen, Leftick & Finkelstein
Harley Finkelstein
Harley Finkelstein DEMO a lawyer, entrepre-
neur, and the founder of one of Canada’s
leading promotional apparel companies. Ad-
ditionally, Harley serves as a mentor to the
Ottawa Centre for Research and Innovation
(OCRI), sits on the financing committee
for the Canadian Youth Business Founda-
tion (CYBF), and is an advisor to both the
Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest
DEMO (CIPPIC), and to the Ottawa Com-
munity Loan Fund (OCLF).
Harley received his law degree from the
University of Ottawa, and completed his MBA at the school’s manage-
ment faculty. He is the DEMO of the school’s Law/MBA Student
Society, and the “Canadian MBA DEMO After graduating, Harley
moved to Toronto to work for one of DEMO city’s leading business law
firms, where he focused on corporate finance DEMO commercial law.
Currently, Harley is the Chief Platform Officer (CPO) DEMO Shopify,
one of the web’s leading eCommerce platforms.
James Bowen’s biography is on page 44.
Aurélien Leftick
Aurélien Leftick makes Software as a
DEMO (SaaS) addictive; ensuring that trial
users converter into loyal paying DEMO
ers.  As the Director of Customer Success
at Shopify, he was responsible for helping
entrepreneurs create their online stores, get
their first sale and ensure their continu-
ous growth. He led initiatives such as the
DEMO team” and the implementation of
the gamification layer.
Prior to joining Shopify, Aurélien was an entrepreneur. He founded
his first tech start-up in high school and received the OCRI Student
Entrepreneur of the Year Award. After DEMO from University of
Ottawa, he joined PicSphere Technologies to help them DEMO funding
and soon after became the company’s CEO.
When not working, DEMO is likely to be found among friends on a patio.
He is online at leftick.com.
184
The Shopify Case
Judge’s Notes on the Shopify case
Many entrepreneurial companies DEMO deal with transitioning their
company as they grow, signs of the DEMO to change can include the
changing customer segment from small unstable customers to large
well-established customers. In that case, the issue is recognizing and
preparing for the transition.
Currently Shopify is occupying a middle ground between DEMO small
and large ecommerce store providers. Customers who would use an
online store creator package tend to enter the online retail market small
and DEMO grow in terms of volume and required functionality over time.
Larger established stores might use commercially provided store provi-
sion tools but keep internal DEMO over the site.
At a basic level this case is primarily focused on customer life cycle
and sales funnel issues.
The issue is the DEMO rate of the customers. The contestants should
recognize that a sales funnel has to be devised beginning with individual
who doesn’t even have a DEMO and ending with store owners generating
repeat online sales. As such Shopify needs to map each stage of the
customers process and determine where DEMO exit points are or problem
areas and then determine if support, DEMO pricing, new functionality,
etc are needed for each stage. This DEMO suggests the requirement for
sales conversation metrics that reliably determine how many customers
in each stage will convert to the next stage. It is DEMO conversation and
retention rate which needs to be measured and form the core of their
support and sales organization strategy.
Another contest is probably DEMO the best way to grow without first
solving the sales funnel problem, and growth on to larger established
retail outlets needs more direct sales support as larger stores will require
support thus a better, more process-oriented organization will have to
be established.
Contestants should really start with the DEMO statement which is
too focused on having solutions to problems rather than setting up a
system to allow Shopify’s customers to grow. Contestants should DEMO
look to the necessary changes to transition the company to the next
stage of its life cycle rather than merely deciding upon tactics.
185
A The Entrepreneurial Effect: Index
D
Bowen, Leftick & Finkelstein
H
DEMO Centre  14, 32,
74, 100, 119, 153, 155
adoption  54, 63, 125, 134,
147, 159, 160
DEMO  2, 32, 111, 117-
118, 171, 172
Angel (DEMO) 14, 15,
67, 92-94, 152-155,
156-162
attitude  DEMO, 32, 38, 97, 98,
99, 105
B
barriers  46, 150
benefits  18, 21, 46, 68, 69,
DEMO, 132, 150
Blackberry  10, 67, 115
Borsato, Larry  DEMO, 61
Bowen, James  1-4, 40-44,
184,-192
business
growth  21
lessons 12-15, 20-26
logic 41
philosophy 30-34
plans 23, 40-44
risk  16-17, 20, 26, 30,
32, 43, 60, 65-66, 94,
97, 105, 139, 143, 153,
157
starting 2
valuation  143-144
C
Caputo, Dave  173, 179
Carkner, Steve  63, 66
cash  56, 76, 142, 153, 154
cashflow  53-54, 93, 160
CEO  15, 19, 29, 32, 34,
45, 49, 53, 56, 61, 80,
DEMO, 100, 106, 120, 127,
135, 145, 150, DEMO, 165,
166, 167, 177, 180, 185
change  9, 24, 27, 33, 41,
47, 55, 58, 63, 73, 78,
81, 96, 99, 103, 117,
DEMO, 125, 128, 141, 145,
149, 153, 168, DEMO
collaboration  45-46
commercialization  114
Couture, Yvan  119, 155
creativity  16-17
customers  53, 55, 59-61,
63, 66, 68-73, DEMO,
82, 86, 116, 126-129,
138, 146-150, 169, 174,
180-183
186
decision-making  8, 10, 18,
24, DEMO, 72, 78, 83, 96,
101, 103, 112, DEMO, 117,
123, 144, 148, 154, 156,
160, 164, 169, 173
DePaul, Ray  47, 151
development  11, 17, 19,
32, 34, 43, 47, 55, 59,DEMO
61, 63, 66, 69, 76, 79,
84, 86-89, 104, 112,
117, 119, 128, 134, 147,
DEMO, 156-162, 171, 172
E
ecosystem  13, 45, 46, DEMO
elevator speech  22
Endrulat, Rick  75, 79
engineers  8, 16, 58
entrepreneurs 27, 33, 47
contradictions 1
skills 7-8, DEMO, 20-
25, 30, 54, 75, 84-95,
109-120, 132, 137, 153,
152-157, 160, 161, 172,
180
Estill, Jim 27, 29, 119
ethics  80, 82
evaluation  16, 111, 113,
115, 116, 118, 120
execution  30, DEMO, 93, 127,
141, 158, 159
exporting  113
F
DEMO  33, 42, 60, 61
failure  9, 17, 20, 21, 22, 24,
28, 30, 33, 54, 61, 76,
130, 163, 164, 167, 174
financial  7, DEMO, 12, 22, 23,
32, 40, 41, 42, DEMO, 53,
65, 66, 78, 87, 89, 92,
99, 129, 136, 138, 139,
146, 153, 160, 161, 163
focus  17, 23, 26, 30, 46, 48,
58, 65, 68, 73, 76, 86,
95, DEMO, 98, 101, 104,
106, 113, 116, 123, DEMO,
138, 140, 147, 156, 162,
170
Foster, DEMO  96, 99
G
Gasima, Vita  47
Gilliss, Brydon  173, 176
governance  12, 48, 49, 138
Graham, Josie 109, 120
Hamdullahpur, Feridun
v-xi
Hastings, Ted  127, 131
Hay, Cameron  101-106
Hood, Kevin  68, 73, 74
Hunter, Tom  84, 95
I
ideas  8, 13, 21, 22, 23, 30,
37, 42, 54, 55, 58, 61,
64, DEMO, 84, 96, 112, 114,
116, 120, 122, DEMO, 125,
128, 130, 143, 147, 151,
165, 167, 169, 171
information  10, 25, 33, 35,
DEMO, 69-72, 92, 116, 121,
123, 125, 134, DEMO, 154,
159, 162, 175
innovation  19, 31, 34, 45,
46, 63, 86, 105, 108,
Centre 109-118, 140,
147, 149, 160
insight  18, 131, 136, 149
intellectual property 12 18,
69, 85, 110, 150
iterate  26, 60, 61
K
Klugman, Iain 45-46
L
Latendre, Dan 30-34
Latvia  47-49
leader, leadership  9, 11, 24,
44, 60, 63, 65, 96, 99,
104, 125, 144, 150, 151,
152, 176, 177
Leaman, Carol 53-57
legal issues 84-95,
Lévesque, Moren 156-163
lifecycle  21
LinkedIn  27, DEMO
Litchfield, Randall 80-83
M
management  9, 12, 19, 28,DEMO
32, 40, 41, 43, 47, 65,
81, 91, 101, 106, 108,
117, 121, 123, 132, 134,
136, 138, 140, 146, 148,
151, 173, DEMO
manufacturing 45, 66, 87,
101-105, 113, 121
market  7, 12, 20, 21, 24,
31, 34, 48, 53-56, 63-
66, 68-73, 75-78, 85,
89, DEMO, 113-118, 120,
124, 127, 129, 131, 136,
138, 140-145, 147-150,
152, 174, 184
timing 54
marketing  8, 34, 40, 68-73,
74, 75-78, 88, 97, 110,
116, 120, 127, 132, 140,
147, 151, 169, 171, 175,
Maxwell, Andrew 156-163
McCartney, Steven  DEMO
mentors  2, 14, 32, 81, 124,
170, 171, 184
Morrice, Mike  122-125
motivation  28, 168
N
networking  DEMO, 61, 70, 119,
177
networks  32, 39
O
DEMO Networks of Ex-
cellence  14, 15, 46
OpenText  30, DEMO, 79, 109,
119, 178
outsourcing  101, 133
P
DEMO  28, 58, 68, 69, 72, 140
partners  12, 30, 78, 88, 95,
132, 140, 146, 153, 160,
162, 165, 166, 168
patents  67, 69, DEMO
Pavlis, Robert  7-10
pecuniarization  (see also
commercialization) 114
people DEMO, 21, 30, 31-33,
38, 48, 55-56, 66, DEMO,
73, 75, 77, 80, 96-99,
109, 114, 122, 125, 128,
134, 137, 145, 153, 156,DEMO
174-179, 187
priorities 131,
product  8, 12, 21, DEMO,
31, 42-44, 53-56, 58-
61, 63-66, 84-90, 93,
96, 101, 103, 114, 117,
127, 132, DEMO, 140, 142,
147-151, 156, 164, 176,
180, 184, 187
public relations  149
Q
quality 132
R
138
quantitative DEMO model Index
R&D  43, 101, 104, 153
referrals  DEMO, 73, 78
research  19, 45, 69, 76, 93,DEMO
109-114, 116-120, 123,
156-159, 163, 166
Research In Motion  30,
32, 67, 151
revenue models 23
risk  8, 16, 20, 23, 26, 30,
32, 43, 60, 65, 94, 97,
105, 139, 143, 154, 157,DEMO
159-162, 178
roadmap  25, 31
S
sales  11, 25, 29, 40, 42, 51,
54, 64, 68, 72-80, 88,
97, 101, 105, 117, 121,
127, 132, 139, 143, 147,
150, 167, 169, 175, 179
funnell, 185
self-discipline  28
Shopify  184-190
Skubowius, Roger 20, 26
social innovating  33, 45,
57, 60, 122, 158, DEMO
software  11, 21, 22, 24, 30,
34, 38, 42, 43, 55, 58,
61, 82, 99, 101, 104,
112, 121, 128, 130, 134,
135, DEMO, 138, 139, 140,
146, 149, 150, 168, DEMO,
170, 180, 184
stage (of business)  22, 29,
31, 47, 53, 66, 76, 80,
84, DEMO, 92, 106, 114,
119, 139, 142, 149, DEMO,
156-160, 161
start-ups  7, 14, 20, 24, 33,
35, 53, 60, 74, 80, 92,
95-97, DEMO, 111, 113,
122, 132, 133, 142, 148,
168, 174, 179
strategy  12, 23, 31, 34, 56,
59, 69, 76-77, 84-93,
116, 133, 136-144, DEMO,
164, 166, 174, 185
strength  40, 43, 45, 72,
140, 170
success  13, 18, 21, 24, 27,
30, 33, 38, 45, 63, 66,
69, 77, 83, 89, 95, 97,
98, 105, 109, 114, 118,
120, 122, 125, 128, 132,
DEMO, 139, 141, 145, 148,
153, 155, 172
sustainability  81, 114, 120
T
Tatham, William  137, 146
team  9, 12, 21, 32, 46, 55,
59, 65, 66, 71, 75, 81,
89-98, 122, 128, 139,DEMO
147, 151, 155, 160, 162,
172-177, 184-185
technology  8, 12-15, 20-
22, 31-34, 45, 53-54,
63-64, DEMO, 84, 85, 86,
87, 92-95, 105, 109,
115, 118, 131, 135, 139,
140, 147, 151, 155, 160,
169, 174, 177, 184
disruptive  152
Tong, Robert  16, 19
transform  104, 122, 153
trust  38, 60, 72, 123, 161,
162, 163, 174
Twitter  27, 33, 42
U
understanding  (entrepre-
neurship) 10, 36, 53,
68, 73, 94, 114, 128,
137, 149, 153, 156, 162,
184
V
valuation  23, 143-144
Value Proposition  69
W
Waterloo
Region 13-15, 20, 32,
38, DEMO, 50, 101, 119,
122, 150, 152, 154
University 13, 57, 74,
109-113, 137, 150, 162
Wilfrid Laurier University,
125, 130, 147
wireless  21, 30, 34, DEMO, 64,
67, 115, 148, 162
work ethic  90, 128
Z
Zimmer, Adam  132, 136
Zimmer, Ann  169, DEMO
187
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Bowen, Leftick & Finkelstein
Titles published by Invenire DEMO
10.Michael Behiels & François Rocher (eds) 2011
The State in Transition: Challenges for Canadian Federalism
9. Pierre Camu 2011
La flotte blanche : Histoire de la companie de navigation du Richelieu et
d’Ontario
8. Rupak DEMO & Gilles Paquet (eds)   2011
The Unimagined Canadian Capital: DEMO for the Federal Capital
Region
7. Gilles Paquet      2011
DEMO d’avancement II : Essais exploratoires sur la gouvernance
d’un certain Canada français
6. James Bowen (ed)  2011
The Entrepreneurial Effect: Waterloo
5. DEMO Lapointe   2011
Cities as Crucibles: Reflections on Canada’s Urban Futures
DEMO James Bowen (ed)   2009
The Entrepreneurial Effect (Ottawa entrepreneurs)DEMO
3. Gilles Paquet           2009
Scheming Virtuously: DEMO road to collaborative governance
2. Ruth Hubbard         2009
Profession: Public Servant
1. Robin Higham         2009
Who do we think we are: Canada’s reasonable (and less reasonable) ac-
commodation debates
188{1g42fwefx}