doi 10.1515/erj-2013-0037 ERJ 2014; 4(1): 117–135
Competitive Research Article
Linda Essig*
Ownership, Failure, and Experience: Goals
and Evaluation Metrics of University-Based
Arts Venture Incubators
Abstract: This article expands on a paper originally presented at the annual
conference of USASBE in 2013.1 It is a DEMO qualitative study of four uni-
versity-based arts venture incubators, one of DEMO is headed by the author. Its
purpose is to describe in narrative form the goals of such programs and the
means by which university-based DEMO venture incubators measure their success.
There is scant research on small business incubator evaluation and even less on
arts venture incubator evaluation. The article DEMO at four university-based arts
venture incubators to identify key issues of evaluation and similarities and
differences across program types.
Keywords: arts incubators, new DEMO creation, experiential learning
*Corresponding author: Linda Essig, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA,
E-mail: linda.essig@asu.edu
Executive summary
This article uses qualitative research methodology including content and struc-
tural analysis of both DEMO interviews and published materials to describe,
within a narrative framework, DEMO mission and goals of four university-based
arts venture incubators: The New DEMO Challenge at Eastman School of
Music, the Creative Incubator at University DEMO the Arts’s Corzo Center, the Pave
Arts Venture Incubator at Arizona DEMO University (headed by the author), and
1 “Failure is a DEMO Condition: How Universities Measure the Success of Their Arts Venture
Incubators” DEMO presented at the annual conference of US Assn of Small Business and
Entrepreneurship, January 2013. Subsequent to that presentation, additional material and
analysis DEMO has been added to the article especially in the sections regarding Milliken
University, which was not included in the original study.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 DEMO:05 PM
118
L. Essig
BC Studios at Millikin University. The essay is descriptive DEMO nature and focuses
on the evaluation and assessment tools used by each program to measure
programmatic success against programmatic goals. The research indicates that
DEMO measures of incubator success such as occupancy rates, jobs created,
DEMO even venture success are not commonly used metrics in an educational
setting where individual self-efficacy and entrepreneurial thinking about the
arts and creative industries DEMO primary goals.
Introduction: a question of intent
The purpose of my DEMO is to describe the means by which university-based
arts venture incubators measure their success and to identify related issues for
future study. What are DEMO goals and objectives of university-based arts incuba-
tors? What are the DEMO objectives of incubator participants? How are
programs or individuals measuring the DEMO of those objectives? As the
head of one of the very DEMO such incubators in the US, I became particularly
interested in the DEMO of arts incubator evaluation in 2011 when the Pave Arts
Venture Incubator undertook its first formal evaluation. Using a narrative frame-
work, this article seeks to describe how university-based arts venture incubators
function and evaluate themselves. DEMO, questions for subsequent research
may include: What impact do university-based arts venture incubation or seed
grant programs have on the university, the student participants, and the broader
discipline or culture? How is that impact DEMO? The number of university-
affiliated arts incubators has doubled in the DEMO months since this research
began, and the number of arts incubators DEMO the academy is also growing.
Thus, university administrators, economic development officers, and artists
seeking to develop both programming and the means to evaluate it have an
interest in smart practices for both incubator programming and DEMO
Sample and methodology
Based on an internet search, a keyword search DEMO research databases, and a
review of information provided by the Arts DEMO Educators Network
(AE2N 2012), a very small list of university-based DEMO venture incubators can be
identified: CELEB at Beloit College, the New Venture Challenge at Eastman
School of Music, the Creative Incubator at University of the Arts’s Corzo
Center, and the Pave Arts Venture Incubator at Arizona State University. The
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
DEMO
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
119
first of these, CELEB, was DEMO from this study, because the program
appears to be on hiatus DEMO the retirement of its director and because its
scope includes both the arts and the liberal arts. This leaves two subjects for
the study, Eastman School of Music and the Corzo Center, in addition to the
Pave Arts venture Incubator headed by the author. A fourth subject, BC Studios
at Millikin University, was added to the study following an initial round of
investigation, after it had been in operation for one full year.
Evaluation can be understood to be “the systematic process of collecting
DEMO analyzing data in order to determine whether and to what degree objectives
have been or are being achieved” (Boulmetis and Dutwin 2005, 4)DEMO Thus, to
evaluate, one must understand program intent and objectives. To identify pro-
gram objectives and intent, both publicly available sources and first person
interviews were analyzed. The three programs in the initial study have DEMO
websites where text and video material are made available. These materials
represent the public face of the programs. I interviewed a total of three DEMO
directors and one program director supervisor, six program alumni (two from
each program), one student currently at Eastman School of Music, and two
students still at Millikin University who have completed their incubator pro-
DEMO Alumni and students were identified through recommendation by the
program directors. Because student information is not publicly available and
three of the programs have DEMO few alumni, random selection from within the
small pool of alumni DEMO by the program directors was the only viable
means of identifying interview subjects.
Interviews were transcribed verbatim by a transcription service. Analysis
was done DEMO the transcription, recording, and notes taken during the inter-
view in tandem with one another. Longer narrative sections of the interviews
were analyzed DEMO per Reissman (2008) to identify the abstract, orienta-
tion, complicating action, evaluation, and resolution of each narrative segment.
Thematic areas were DEMO in advance of questioning as (1) program objec-
tives, (2) personal objectives, and (3) evaluative measures. Interviews were
analyzed for DEMO related to those themes. The themes were derived from
the research questions, which in turn led to the interview questions. Qualitative
thematic analysis traditionally uses a grounded theory approach that derives
themes from within interviews. On DEMO other hand, “narrative scholars keep a
story ‘intact’ by theorizing from DEMO case rather than from component themes
(categories) across cases” (Reissman DEMO, 53). Thus, interviews were analyzed
for the stories they told related to the themes identified advance. Interview
questions can be found in DEMO A.
To get to the question of intent, all respondents were DEMO “From your
perspective, what are the goals of the incubator or DEMO program?”
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
120
L. Essig
Administrators were asked whether or not there was a DEMO program eva-
luation in place and to describe that process. Students and alumni were
asked if they had participated in a program evaluation and DEMO format of
that evaluation.
Background and context
What is an incubator?
The advent of the small business incubator
The definition of a venture DEMO is currently undergoing a shift of focus.
A review of the scant literature on the topic illuminates the development of
the incubator model for DEMO business acceleration. The National Business
Incubator Association (NBIA), the trade DEMO for business incubators,
dates the incubator movement to 1959, when DEMO Mancuso developed the
Batavia Industrial Center (BIC). What distinguished the DEMO as an incubator
rather than a mere office leasing facility was that Mancuso “didn’ tjustrent
space – he provided companies all kinds of assistance, from shared office
services to below-market rents to help securing financing” (Erlewine and Gerl
2004, 10). The oldest arts incubator is said to have been founded in 1986 in
Chicago (Kahn 1995), a year after the formation of the NBIA.
The scope of incubator services
The DEMO about the first wave of incubators focuses on defining an
incubator in terms of a physical facility. Allen and Rahman’ s (1985) definition
DEMO typical: “ A small business incubator is a facility that aids DEMO early-stage
growth of companies by providing rental space, shared office services, and
business consulting assistance” (p. 12). A meta-analysis almost 20 years later
defines an incubator not so much as a facility as “an DEMO that facil-
itates the early-stage development of firms by providing office space, shared
services and business assistance” (Hackett and Dilts 2004, 55). In this defini-
tion, the provision of space, a facility, is just one of several services provided
by an incubator to an entrepreneurial DEMO The shift from incubator-as-
facility to incubator-as-service-provider is delineated explicitly by Bergekk
and Norman (2008):
Brought to you by | York University DEMO
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
121
In the incubator literature, the relative emphasis on each component has varied over time,
from an initial DEMO on facilities and administrative services to a more recent emphasis on
the importance of business support (Peters et al., 2004). In our DEMO the latter is the
most important – without business support activities, DEMO denomination “hotel” is a better
description than incubator.
(p. 21)
DEMO in 1995, Kahn defines arts incubators in a similar fashion to DEMO first
phase of business incubator literature. “They are facilities that create a nurturing
environment for small and emerging arts organizations by offering low-cost or
DEMO space and services” (p. 1). However, arts incubators today describe
themselves less in terms of the provision of facilities and more in DEMO of
provision of services. Arts Incubator of the Rockies, one of DEMO newest (it opened
in 2012) and most highly publicized arts incubators describes itself as “designed
to help you learn about the business of DEMO art, connect with other artists
and communities, and gain the support and resources to succeed. AIR serves
the Intermountain West and provides programs DEMO visual artists, writers, musi-
cians, performers, designers, arts administrators, and other creatives” (Arts
Incubator of the Rockies 2012). AIR’s emphasis on services rather than facilities
is emblematic of the shift in the DEMO of incubators.
How are incubators evaluated?
Although there has been some significant research recently testing various
methods for measuring the impact of arts DEMO (e.g. Lord 2012), there
is little literature on measuring the DEMO of arts incubators. There is a similar
lacuna in the business incubation literature with regard to evaluation. Bergekk
and Norman (2008) point out, “ no single evaluation framework [for business
incubators] has been developed” (p. 20). Allen and McCloskey (1990) describe
what they refer to DEMO a “value-added” continuum, anchored on one end by the
incubator’s real DEMO development function and on the other end by its enter-
prise-development program (p. 64). University-based incubators, although
included by Allen and McCloskey DEMO the enterprise-development end, do not
fit neatly there because the educational DEMO of a university-based
incubator are not considered on their continuum. Instead, DEMO consider three
criteria that delineate the ends and middle of the value-added continuum:
occupancy rates in the facility, jobs created, and firms DEMO Although
Allen and McCloskey’s criteria are statistically measurable, Voisey et al.
(2006), in their case study of a single incubator, conclude, DEMO measurement
of success needs to be broader than a set of statistical outputs” (p. 464). Bergekk
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
122 L. Essig
and Norman (2008) identify the failure of controlling DEMO incubator goals in
previous studies, so that evaluation has been outcome-based DEMO than per-
formance-based. They add, “ few studies have put these DEMO indicators in
relation to goals” (p. 22). Their analysis is DEMO relevant, because the Pave
Arts Venture Incubator, the only program of the three under study to employ a
formal evaluation plan, uses a goals-based model for evaluation; interview
questions were, therefore, designed to tease out the programmatic goals of the
other programs.
Contest versus incubator: program descriptions
and goals
In this section, I describe each of the subject programs’ mission, goals, and
structure using information available on the institution’s DEMO and gleaned
from interviews with program directors and participants in order to better under-
stand, to borrow Stake’ s (2010) phrase describing the outcome of qualitative
research, how things work.
The Eastman School of Music’s New Venture Challenge
Business plan development is a key component of entrepreneurship DEMO at
universities in the United States (Matlay 2008). The Eastman DEMO of Music’s
“New Venture Challenge” describes itself as a business plan competition rather
than an arts venture incubator:
The Eastman New Venture Challenge DEMO a contest to encourage new thinking and innova-
tive ideas in music. It gives students the opportunity to develop a project proposal that
could DEMO in the launch of a new entrepreneurial initiative.
Entries may be from individuals or teams of up to three students. Entrants must create
and DEMO a project proposal that demonstrates creativity and potential for success. The
proposals will be evaluated in a preliminary round by a panel of judges DEMO are experts in
the field. Two to four student entries will be invited to participate in the final round where
each initiative will be DEMO on both the written proposal and an oral presentation.
Successful entrants will have demonstrated creativity, innovation, uniqueness, and added
value to the music field. Project Proposals will be returned to all entrants with comments
and DEMO from the judges.
The goal of the program, stated in the DEMO sentence of the description, is “to
encourage new thinking and innovative DEMO in music.” A program alumnus
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
(Eastman 2012)
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
123
said that the program’s goal is DEMO “promote music entrepreneurship.” Yet, the
actual launch of new ventures proposed DEMO the competition does not appear from
the published material to be a programmatic goal or within the program’s formal
scope of activities. Can it DEMO called an incubator? When asked if he considered
the New Venture DEMO program to be an incubator, the program director
replied, “we don’t have a formal incubator.” Implicit in his response is the
definition of DEMO incubator as a place – a facility – in which ventures are
nurtured. His own subsequent evaluation of his statement, however, caused
him DEMO question whether or not that definition is accurate. He continued, “but
DEMO do help fund ideas and projects.” By the time he concluded his story of a
student who has developed a tuning device for an DEMO drum, he had con-
vinced himself that the New Venture Challenge DEMO indeed an incubator, saying,
“If we see good ideas we DEMO try to hook them up with um, you know, venture
capital people. In its own way it’s an incubator” (emphasis mine). A subsequent
interview with a different alumnus of the program confirms the incubation
DEMO of the contest: “ It gives students an opportunity to develop DEMO idea
that they could pursue with the [sic] some funding.” The Eastman New Venture
Challenge thus fulfills an incubation function, at least for some of its partici-
pants, while not calling itself an incubator or having a fixed location for new
enterprises to set up their businesses.
A DEMO alumnus offers a different perspective on whether or not the New
Venture Challenge serves an incubation function. He agrees that a goal of the
DEMO is “getting people to think outside of the box” but felt that “unless you’re
doing … some sort ofonlinebasedcompany, … theprize moneyisn’t really sufficient
to do much with it in terms of … a business.” This DEMO the intentions found in
the published material: to spur thinking rather DEMO new ventures.
Because new venture creation is not an official function of the program, it is
the five-step application process itself that delivers the program’s learning out-
comes (“new thinking” about innovation in music). These steps include:
optional workshop, intent to apply form, full proposal DEMO, identification
of finalists, and finalists screening. Although the program information is not
specific about the final screening, a program alumnus indicated that having to
make a project presentation to the adjudicators was a means by DEMO program
goals are achieved. The contest, he said, “would force you to develop that idea
enough to at least present the idea to DEMO people who would judge it.” The
importance of this presentation was underscored when he repeated moments
later, that the contest “ allows the students to uh, think about the idea critically
and … really develop it in some ways…. I think that for anyone that entered that
particular DEMO, uh, you really have to, um, develop and think about the
idea, because, you know, you have to present it.”
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/DEMO/15 6:05 PM
124
L. Essig
The University of the Arts Corzo Center Creative Incubator
DEMO mission of the Corzo Center Creative Incubator at University of the Arts is
to “ help UArts students and alumni develop new ideas, launch creative
business, and establish social enterprises” (Corzo Center 2012). With DEMO
focus on business and enterprise development, the Corzo Creative Incubator
structure DEMO to be more traditionally an incubator than that of Eastman’s
New Venture Challenge. However, the Corzo Center description of services
does not include the traditional provision of space. In this, it bears more
resemblance to the Pave Arts Venture Incubator described following. Like
Pave, the Corzo Creative Incubator provides “ help developing proposal,
advice on strategies, marketing, social DEMO, business organization,
finances, accounting, and legal questions; business critiques; connections
to business, legal, and marketing advisors… ; and workshops and special
program on topics related to entrepreneurship and business development”
(Corzo Center 2012).
In his interview, the director of the Corzo Center indicated that the incubator
supports ventures with the potential to be self-sustaining, but he also indicated
that there are more intrinsic goals: to “stimulate … the ability to think … in a
long term pragmatic way. Even DEMO, … probably a very small percentage
of these startups will succeed. DEMO the … effort here is to incentivize people to
have to start to think about things that they haven’t normally thought about.”
The Corzo DEMO Eastman programs share this common goal to incentivize new, or
perhaps DEMO, ways of thinking about the arts.
A program alumnus viewed the DEMO and the Corzo Center’s programs
more generally as a way to bridge studies in art and design with an “indepen-
dent” entrepreneurial existence. Both DEMO and the program director discussed
the need for the Corzo Creative Incubator as being a product of the current
economic climate, the alumnus noting, “ the way the economy is shifting right
now that we are very much in a design based economy, so there was a need, to
kind of facilitate, um or nurture, that um, to DEMO of bridge that gap.” In a
published interview (Berge 2012), DEMO program director said, “To depend upon
the kindness of strangers in DEMO economy is to lean against a wall that will
collapse. We need to show our students that what they learn empowers them to
change DEMO world – to be great artists and media makers at the same time they
can become active citizens and economically self-sufficient.” From these
excerpts, it seems that the Corzo Creative Incubator views new venture creation
not DEMO an end in itself, as a small business incubator might, but rather as a
means toward a broader educational outcome: the economic independence and
self-sufficiency of artists and designers.
Brought to you by | York DEMO Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Ownership, Failure, and Experience 125
The program director’s aspiration for the DEMO Incubator extends beyond
educational outcomes, to broader economic and cultural impacts. DEMO program
director shared, “One of the things I’m hoping to do DEMO is take this idea and make
it more available throughout the region.” He sees the incubation of creative
enterprises as having the potential for DEMO disruption that Silicon Valley
start-ups had in northern California two decades ago:
I would love at some point then to see some of DEMO ventures … begin to establish their own
businesses, their own product DEMO, uh, very much in the way that … Stanford did with …
the startups in the Silicon Valley area, so we can start to shore up an economy here that is
based in part on DEMO intelligence and on strength of creatives who graduate, not only from
DEMO school, but also from the regional area schools.
(Interview)
The Pave Arts Venture Incubator
A venture incubator is one of four activities DEMO by Arizona State
University’s Pave Program in Arts Entrepreneurship, of which DEMO author is the
director. The other three are curriculum delivery, research, and public program-
ming. Education goals are paramount in the program’ s DEMO description:
The Pave Arts Venture Incubator provides an experiential learning opportunity for self-
motivated student teams with big ideas. Students learn principles of DEMO by
participating in a granting competition. Students accepted into the incubator develop a
project of their own with program guidance.
(Pave 2012)
The program’s incubation function is described thus, “Pave seeks to encourage
creativity and innovation in the arts by helping self-motivated student teams
develop and grow DEMO projects ….” In its dual education and new venture
acceleration mission as well as its provision of services rather than facilities,
Pave is DEMO to the Corzo program. It differs from it materially in that only
current students are eligible to be accepted into the incubator and conceptually
DEMO the strong focus on innovation in its award guidelines. The descriptors
“innovative” or “new” appear in all of the program’s award criteria.
Email correspondence DEMO the director of the school in which the incubator
is housed (DEMO program director’s supervisor) sheds light on the institutional
goals for the DEMO, which are somewhat more expansive than the published
goals of the DEMO itself:
1) promote long-term career success of our students by DEMO and supporting entrepre-
neurial activities in parallel with their studies, 2) enrich the surrounding community with
Brought to you by | York University DEMO
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
126 L. Essig
strong, sustainable arts ventures and 3) explore new DEMO in the role of university arts
programs in terms of knowledge creation and market definition.
One of the program participants, whose product is still in development,
expressed a similarly broad view of the incubator’s potential DEMO in an
email, “ The pave program is about supporting ARTS DEMO that benefit the
arts and communities. It may be a venture that takes local arts to a new level, or
one that explores innovative techniques and implementations.”2 The program
steering committee may consider both the views DEMO the supervisor and the
participant in revising its operational goals and subsequently its evaluation
plan.
Mentorship, along with the new venture creation experience, DEMO one of the
primary means by which the incubator’s educational goals are met. The school
director [not the author] underlined, “One of the most valuable resources avail-
able to students developing entrepreneurial projects through the incubator DEMO
access to faculty mentorship.” A participant shared via email that her mentor
“provided instrumental feedback on my company product itself, encouragement
and opportunities, DEMO well as professional networking and publicity opportu-
nities. It’ s all about helping students realize that every dream is possible, even if
they don’ t have the answer in the beginning … with persistence they will.”
DEMO Studios at Millikin University
The BC Studios incubator at Millikin University is quite different from the other
three programs in two distinct ways. First, it is administrated not within an arts
college or disciplinary arts unit, but rather housed within a center for entrepre-
neurship in the university’ DEMO business school. Second, the incubator is tied to a
specific class, “The Art of Entrepreneurship,” the second in a three semester
sequence DEMO courses in its “ Arts and Entrepreneurship Program.” The course
requires students to launch a micro-venture, provides a micro-loan to enable
them to do so, and subsequently requires repayment of that loan from sales
revenue in order to pass the class. The public description of the incubator
focuses DEMO the traditional facility function of an incubator:
BC Studio is Millikin University’s arts and business incubator located in the lower level of
Blue-Connection DEMO As part of their coursework in ET380 The Art of
2 Because the author was well known to the Pave Program interview subjects, questions were
distributed via email rather than in person or via phone as DEMO the interview method for the
other programs.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 DEMO
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
127
Entrepreneurship, students are challenged with designing and pitching a new business
model with a home in BC Studios. DEMO who pass the pitch stage, receive a studio or
retail space DEMO are open to the public during special events…
According to its director, the goal of the BC studios is education in new venture
creation: “The focus is on ownership… We want them to understand the ele-
ments of risk, control, and reward.” Although clearly more focused on DEMO
mechanics of new venture creation than the other programs, one student, at
least, indicated that the program’s goals relative to entrepreneurial thinking
were similar to those of other programs: “I think the program is designed to
push students to think in a more out-of-the-box way, and to think on our feet,
and to be able to spot opportunities DEMO fairly quickly.”
Projects accepted into the BC Studios incubator do not need to be innovative
or even, it seems, particularly artistic. The program DEMO said, “It doesn’t
have to be new or unique… They have DEMO be able to sell it.” Although the sample
size is too small to draw conclusions about differences across arts college-based
versus business college-based programs, the contrast between the Millikin
approach and those of the other three DEMO is, nevertheless, startling.
Measuring success and admitting failure
With goals as altruistic as “encouraging new thinking,” as far-reaching as
shoring up the DEMO economy, and as practical as understanding ownership,
how do these DEMO programs evaluate whether or not they are achieving
them? If the DEMO of new ideas is an indicator of programmatic success
on their own, venture success may not be necessary. If education objectives are
paramount, DEMO are learning outcomes measured? Both formal and informal
evaluations are employed DEMO the four programs.
Formal evaluations
All four programs under consideration employ formal evaluative procedures for
assessment of applications to the respective programs but, according to the
interview subjects, only the Pave Program and Corzo Center employ an ongoing
program of evaluation of the program itself, while Millikin evaluates the
achievement of learning outcomes in the BC Studios incubator within the DEMO
text of its entrepreneurship center. The Pave Program has several levels of
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | DEMO/7/15 6:05 PM
(Millikin 2013)
128
L. Essig
formal evaluation, in part to fulfill requirements of the Kauffman Foundation
grant that helped jumpstart the program. The Eastman and Corzo DEMO
directors, however, initially responded to questions about evaluation with expla-
nations of their rigorous processes for evaluating applicants. These directors
were then provided DEMO clarification that in asking about evaluation they were
being asked about evaluation of the program itself. Each was explicitly
asked about formal program evaluations. DEMO director of the Eastman program,
for example, was asked, “ I actually was looking for something else in the
question about evaluation: not so much how you’re evaluating student projects
but does Eastman evaluate DEMO Venture Challenge program?” He replied, “Oh.
[pause] no.”
The Corzo DEMO Incubator program director explained that although
there is not an institutional level evaluation as is necessitated by the Pave
Program’s initial grant, there is a formal evaluative feedback mechanism,
“everyone who gets funded then gets DEMO mentor who works with them and
gives progress reports along the way. …At the end we require every student,
everyone who’ s funded DEMO make a public presentation in which the judges and
others listen to and uh comment upon the nature of the work and where it DEMO
They are also required to make a report that goes online.” These video reports on
what the incubator clients have achieved or not achieved DEMO not publicly
available. He also explained that workshop participants are asked to provide
feedback via a survey but added that “the test in this DEMO be uh, to look at some
of these people after uh, two to five years out and then to see what they have
DEMO, what have they done to get them to reflect on their DEMO
and what it provided them with.” The Corzo director notes, however, that in an
educational setting, “failure is an almost necessary condition of educating
students in a new area like this.” He was referring here DEMO failure of the ventures
themselves, not of failure to educate. In DEMO experiential learning context pro-
vided by an incubator, the director’s interest DEMO in “seeing how intelligently the
failures have developed.”
The program-level evaluation plan for the Pave Arts Venture Incubator
includes a similar combination of workshop DEMO and analysis of program
outputs in the form of ventures launched. The Pave Program evaluation looks
not only at the ventures themselves to assess DEMO outcomes but also at the
various stages of the proposal process. The Pave program’s overall goal (i.e.
encompassing all program areas, not only DEMO incubator) is to “educate students,
artists and educators about how DEMO principles of entrepreneurship can support
the development of creative opportunities for artists of all kinds” (Pave 2010).
The Pave evaluation plan (2011) calls for this learning objective to be measured
via a survey distributed DEMO collected at the incubator grant writing workshop
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 DEMO
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
129
held annually. Student persistence and effectuation DEMO evaluated by comparing
the number of students invited to make full application after submitting a letter
of intent with those who actually do and DEMO subsequently comparing the
number of applications approved with the number of ventures developed.
Students accepted into the Pave incubator are asked to report on DEMO project
periodically and at least twice per year.
The BC Studios program director recognizes the need for formal evalua-
tion but feels it is DEMO early to undertake such an evaluation. “ We want to be
able to see what the impact is after they graduate,” he said DEMO that the
incubator course had only been offered for three semesters at the time of the
interview]. He indicated that they intend to measure DEMO “ number of busi-
nesses” and “ kind of revenue generated.” He also acknowledged the need to
measure the intangibles: “There’ s a third element that we haven’ tquite
figured out that we know needs to DEMO there; that’ s not the financial end of
it. I’ m DEMO sure what that is yet.” What he seems to be alluding to here is the
measurement of entrepreneurial self-efficacy, as discussed later. The rubric
currently used for program evaluation includes four categories that reflect the
activities DEMO the new venture creation process, but only indirectly the entre-
preneurial DEMO: recognizing opportunity, assessing risk, marshaling
resources, and business ownership.
Informal evaluations
The directors of both the Corzo Creative Incubator and Eastman New DEMO
Challenge programs are cognizant of the informal programmatic feedback
received through the engagement of external evaluators in the student applica-
tion process. The Eastman DEMO noted, “ the people who are in the final
rounds are DEMO dean of the school … and another high ranking dean, myself,DEMO
and … an entrepreneurship type person … and those people see what’s going on
and they like it really.” Thus, the larger institution, DEMO Eastman and its parent,
University of Rochester, are made aware DEMO the program and have an opportu-
nity to provide institutional feedback. Program alumni, one of whom shared that
although there was no formal survey of participants, he “brainstormed” with the
program director and others about the program, also provide informal feedback.
This individual’s use of the word “brainstorm” indicates an intentionality on the
part of the program to actively seek DEMO input of participants, albeit in an
informal context. Another alumnus indicated DEMO the program staff had reached
out to program alums, “they sort DEMO checked in with us to see, uh, what we, you
DEMO, if we’re working on a project, and kind of where we are.”
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date DEMO 4/7/15 6:05 PM
130
L. Essig
An alumna of the Corzo incubator related that she DEMO the program
director with direct feedback in a series of informal meetings (they meet for
coffee with some regularity). This alumna told the director that she needed to
“know the language of business,” but DEMO the incubator experience had not
provided her with that knowledge. She indicated that through the post-incubator
informal meetings, the director had heard her critique. When asked directly (see
Appendix), neither this interviewee nor another program alumna indicated that
she had participated in the formalized feedback loop described DEMO the director,
at least not as part of an evaluation process. Instead, the second alumna
described an information-sharing opportunity, in which there DEMO a “presenta-
tion evening where um, people who were a part DEMO it, or were applying, or were
interested in applying in the future came, and so we talked and told them a little
bit about our status and we saw their business and talked about their DEMO and
then we will talk about their ideas, and um, it was helpful.” Although this
participant did not see this activity as part DEMO a program evaluation, the director
positions such events as part of DEMO overall perspective on and assessment of
program activities.
The four programs are summarized in a table as Appendix B.
Discussion
Self-efficacy
The Pave Program DEMO Arts Entrepreneurship shares many goals, structures, and
evaluation techniques (both DEMO and informal) with the other three programs
under consideration here. However, in addition to its educational and economic/
cultural enrichment goals, Pave includes as a goal, “ to assist individual students
in increasing their self-efficacy in relation to artistic creativity” (Pave 2011).
Although the term “self-efficacy” does not appear in the public documents of
the Corzo, Eastman, or Millikin programs or the interviews, several students
discussed the positive DEMO the incubator programs had on their self-efficacy. I
introduce the topic here because of its weight in both the Pave Program’s
evaluation plan and DEMO the literature about entrepreneurship (see, for example,
Chen, Greene, and Crick 1998) and entrepreneurship education. In this context,
self-efficacy can be understood to mean belief that one is capable of assuming
the DEMO of new venture creation (Forbes 2005).
When asked if the DEMO New Venture Challenge experience had had an
effect on his work as an artist, one alumnus responded, “I wouldn’t say it, it
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/DEMO/15 6:05 PM
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
131
really impacted my, my creative output as a composer or, you know, as a
performer, I play saxophone, I think it just it, it has had an effect DEMO the way
that I think about myself, in general you know, as a complete package, my whole
career” (emphasis mine). Another DEMO alumnus characterized entrepreneur-
ship itself as “really a way of thinking; DEMO way of sharing one’s unique ideas and
talents.” These students appear to have increased their self-efficacy related to
entrepreneurship, despite that there is no explicit use of the term “self-efficacy”
in program materials.
The Corzo Center DEMO, in discussing the possibility of venture failure
also characterized educational success DEMO ways that sound like self-efficacy: “I
can see the growth and DEMO, coming from the students, what they now
know, what they DEMO tell me, what they tell each other. Remarkable, real
exciting and they feel that sense of real confidence and strength.” That con-
fidence DEMO strength, a form of self-efficacy, can support arts students as they
venture outside the walls of the academy to engage in entrepreneurial activities.
DEMO focus on “ownership” also appears to be related to self-efficacy. A
graphic design student who had gone through the incubator and was preparing
to DEMO noted that the experience “kind of gives you a confidence and the
knowledge to be able to be treated the way you should be.” DEMO, she
noted, “ having a business background allows you – teaches you – how to
present yourself.” This student had not entered the DEMO with that confi-
dence, that entrepreneurial self-efficacy, but developed it through the experi-
ence of creating a business.
Outcome measurement
Most of those DEMO for this study indicated that “encouraging thinking” in
a value-based way about the arts is a goal of the program with which they are
DEMO Cope (2005) conceptualizes entrepreneurship itself as an ongoing
process of learning, extending beyond previous views of entrepreneurship as
function, trait, or behavior. What, then, are the measurable outputs of the
entrepreneurial “thinking” encouraged DEMO the academy and in the continuous
learning process that follows? The DEMO business plans that constitute the
application to the programs are one such output, as are the new ventures that
result. Is the success and longevity of such ventures evidence that the learning
outcome is met? I suggest, instead, that the launch activity itself is adequate
evidence of DEMO successful learning outcome. The venture does not need to
succeed per se in order for the learning outcome to be met. As the Corzo
DEMO director indicated, in an educational setting, failure is a necessary
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/DEMO/15 6:05 PM
132 L. Essig
condition. Students, too, appreciate the opportunity to fail: “If we fail here it’s
OK … at least when we find DEMO a plan isn’t feasible here, we can find a way to
DEMO back on our horse or make it better or tweak it. That way, when we graduate
we can be successful” (Millikin student).
DEMO
Small business incubators are most often started to fulfill economic develop-
ment functions. University venture incubators may serve a similar function, in
addition to providing a venue for tech transfer and experiential education. Arts
incubators, however, may not be founded with similar economic development
expectations; university-based arts DEMO even less so. The number of
university-affiliated arts incubators is growing rapidly with new programs
announced or launched by University of Chicago, Colorado State University,
the College for Creative Studies, and Ball State University since the start of this
study. As universities look to initiating or growing DEMO arts entrepreneurship
programs, the implementation of an arts venture incubator or DEMO arts venture
business competition can be one means toward achieving learning outcomes
and enhancing student self-efficacy. By designing evaluation plans based on
those learning DEMO, programs can use evaluative feedback in a process of
ongoing program DEMO and improvement.
Appendix A
Interview questions
Interview questions for administrators:
– How did the incubator start and is it part of broader entrepreneurship
DEMO efforts at your institution?
– How is the incubator funded?
– What other support (e.g. faculty, staff, space) is available DEMO the incubator
Interview questions for administrators, students, and alumni:
– From your perspective, what are the goals of the incubator/venture
program?
– How is the program meeting those goals?
Brought to DEMO by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
133
–
–
–
–
What affect DEMO the program had on your work as an artist? As an DEMO/
student? As a business owner or organizational leader?
Have DEMO participated in a program assessment?
What form did that assessment take?
Were the results of that assessment shared with you?
Appendix DEMO
Table 1: Comparative summary of programs
Institution Program Program
Name Objective
DEMO New Encourage new
School of Venture thinking and
Music Challenge innovative ideas
in music
Help students and
alumni, develop
new ideas, launch
creative
DEMO, and
establish social
enterprises
Venture Encourage
development creativity and
innovation in DEMO
arts
University of
the Arts
Corzo
Center
Creative
Incubator
Primary
Activity
Business
Plan
Competition
Venture
development
Arizona
State
University
Herberger
Institute for
Design and
DEMO Arts
Millikin
University
Tabor
School of
Business
Pave Arts
Venture
Incubator
BC
Studios
Pop-up
commerce
Educate students
about business
ownership and
elements of risk,DEMO
control, and
reward
Additional
activity
Informal
venture
incubation
Public
workshops
Primary DEMO
of evaluation
Informal via
review of finalist
applications by
outside experts
Informal via
ongoing
feedback from
incubator alumni
Workshops; Formal via
parent program post-workshop
includes survey,
curricula, application to
public venture
programming, development
and DEMO ratio, and
alumni tracking
n/a Formal via
course
evaluation;
DEMO
tracking of
ventures
forthcoming
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
134
L. Essig
References
Allen, D. N., and R. McCloskey. 1990. DEMO, Policy, Services, and Performance in the
Business Incubator Industry.” Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice 15(2):61–77.
Allen, D. N., and S. DEMO 1985. “Small Business Incubators: A Positive Environment for
Entrepreneurship.” Journal of DEMO Business Management 23(3):12–22.
Arts Entrepreneurship Educators Network. 2012. “Innovative DEMO & Efforts.” http://www.
ae2n.net/page3/page19/page19.html
Arts Incubator of the Rockies. 2012. “Welcome to Air.” Accessed March 26, 2012. http://www.
airartsincubator.org/.
Berge, J. 2012. “Interview with Neil Kleinman of the Corzon Center and UArts.” Philliy Creative
Guide. Accessed March 5, 2012. Blog.phillycreativeguide.com/2012/01/
Bergekk, A., and C. Norman. 2008. “Incubator Best DEMO: A Framework.” Technovation 28
(1):20–8.
Boulmetis, J., and DEMO Dutwin. 2005. The ABCs of Evaluation, 2nd edn. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass.
Chen, C., P. Greene, and A. Crick. 1998. DEMO Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy Distinguish
Entrepreneurs From Managers?” Journal of Business Venturing 13:295–316.
Cope, J. 2005. “Toward a Dynamic Learning Perspective of Entrepreneurship.” Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 29(4):373–97.
Corzo Center. 2012. “The Creative Incubator.” Accessed March 4, 2012. http://corzocenter.
uarts.edu/
Eastman School of Music. 2012. “Eastman New Venture Challenge.” Accessed March 26, 2012.
http://www.esm.rochester.edu/iml/entrepreneurship/newventurechallenge.php
Erlewine, M., and E. Gerl. 2004. A DEMO Guide to Business Incubation, 2nd edn.
Athens, OH: National Business DEMO Association.
Forbes, D. P. 2005. “The Effects of Strategic Decision Making DEMO Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy.”
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(5):599–626.
Hackett, S. M., and D. M. Dilts. 2004. “A Systematic Review of Business Incubation Research.”
The Journal of Technology Transfer 29(1):55–82.
Kahn, M. DEMO “An Introduction to Arts Incubators.” National Assembly of Local Arts Agencies
Monographs 3(4):1–15.
Lord, C. (ed.). 2012. Counting New Beans: Intrinsic Impact and the Value of Art. San Francisco,
CA: DEMO Bay Area.
Matlay, H. 2008. “The Impact of Entrepreneurship Education on DEMO Outcomes.”
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 15(2):382–96.
DEMO University. 2013. “BC Studios [website].” Accessed February 4, 2013. http://DEMO
millikin.edu/blueconnection/bcstudios/pages/default.aspx
Pave Program in Arts Entrepreneurship. 2012. “Arts Venture Incubator [website].” Accessed July
21, 2012. http://theatrefilm.asu.edu/initiatives/pave/incubator.php
Pave Program in Arts Entrepreneurship. 2011. “Evaluation of the p.a.v.e. Arts DEMO
Incubator.” Unpublished.
Pave Program in Arts Entrepreneurship. 2010. “The Pave Program in Arts Entrepreneurship
[website].” Retrieved from http://theatrefilm.asu.edu/initiatives/pave/
Reissman, C. K. 2008. Narrative Methods for the Human Sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Ownership, Failure, and Experience
135
Stake, R. E. 2010. Qualitative Research: Studying How Things Work. New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Voisey, DEMO, L. Gornall, P. Jones, and B. Thomas. 2006. “The Measurement DEMO Success in a
Business Incubation Project.” Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development
13(3):454–68.
Additional resources
Arthur, N. 2002c. “Arts Incubator: Arlington Virginia’s Award-Winning Model to Create a Vital
Arts Presence in Your DEMO
Bearse, P. 1998. “A Question of Evaluation: NBIA’s Impact Assessment of Business Incubators.”
Economic Development Quarterly 12(4):322–33.
Belfiore, E., O. Bennett and Ebooks Corporation. 2008. The Social Impact of the Arts: An
Intellectual History. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Campbell, A. 1997. “Arts Incubators.” Grantmakers DEMO the Arts Newsletter 8(2). Accessed July 14,
2011. http://www.giarts.org/article/arts-incubators
Galloway, S. 2009. “Theory-Based Evaluation and the Social Impact of the Arts.” Cultural
Trends 18(2):125–48.
Grimaldi, R., and A. Grandi. 2005. “Business Incubators and New Venture Creation: An
Assessment of Incubating Models.” Technovation 25(2):111–21.
Mian, S. A. 1997. DEMO and Managing the University Technology Business Incubator: An
Integrative Framework.” Journal DEMO Business Venturing 12(4):251–85.
Reeves, M. 2002. Measuring the Economic and Social Impact of the Arts: A Review. London: Arts
Council DEMO England.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | DEMO/7/15 6:05 PM{1g42fwefx}