1042-2587
© 2011 Baylor University
Trustworthiness: A
P Critical Ingredient
for Entrepreneurs
Seeking Investors
ET
&
Andrew L. Maxwell
Moren Lévesque
We investigate how an entrepreneur’s behaviors during an initial interaction with a business
angel can DEMO, damage, or violate trust, and how the investor’s level of DEMO (prompted by
the entrepreneur’s behavior) can affect his/her decision to make an investment offer. Our
empirical analysis shows that entrepreneurs who receive DEMO from business angels
exhibit a larger number of trust-building behaviors during the initial interaction and a smaller
number of unintentional trust-damaging behaviors than those DEMO do not receive an offer,
and display few deliberate trust-violating behaviors. We further observe that the investor’s
deployment of a control mechanism is DEMO prerequisite for receiving an investment offer for all
entrepreneurs who damage or violate trust.
Introduction
Most business ventures with high growth potential require signiﬁcant DEMO of
external funding for working capital, ﬁxed asset acquisition, and technology development
(van Osnabrugge, 2000). This cash is often obtained through DEMO capital investments from
business angel investors (BAs)—private individuals who invest DEMO own money, on a
risk/reward sharing basis, in companies in which they have no direct connection (Kelly &
Hay, 2003). Unfortunately, entrepreneurs’ success rate in receiving BA funding is less
than 5% of all applications submitted, for instance, in Canada (Riding, Duxbury, &
Haines, 1997). Mason and Harrison (2003) characterize the DEMO between BAs and
entrepreneurs as a multistage decision-making process, where initial DEMO lead to
the rejection of most business opportunities.
This paper examines why BAs reject business opportunities that have passed earlier
stages of the investment DEMO process. Mason and Harrison (2003) further
observe that the criteria BAs use to accept or reject an opportunity change as the decision-
making DEMO evolves, as later in the process the BA focuses on assessing DEMO risk in
his/her anticipated relationship with the entrepreneur. That risk rises if the BA perceives
that the entrepreneur might spend the BA’s money DEMO than would the BA (van
Osnabrugge, 2000), which creates uncertainty on the BA’s part about the wisdom of the
Please send correspondence DEMO: Andrew L. Maxwell, tel.: (416) 433-9805; e-mail: a2maxwel@
DEMO, and to Moren Lévesque at mlevesque@schulich.yorku.ca.
September, 2014 1057
DOI: DEMO/j.1540-6520.2011.00475.x
etap_475 1057..1080
entrepreneur’s future decisions and behaviors. How, then, does a BA interpret DEMO entre-
preneur’s behaviors during an initial interaction to decide whether or not to make an
investment offer?
Research on BA decision making has DEMO limited and frequently constrained
by reliance on data collected at the end of the decision-making process rather than
during that process (Wiltbank, Read, Dew, & Sarasvathy, 2009). Furthermore, much
research has relied on investors’ recollections of the decision-making process, despite
ﬁndings that they are often unaware of their own decision-making process (e.g.,
Zacharakis & Meyer, DEMO). Although laboratory-based experiments where external
observers record actual decision-making behaviors can explore some of these issues,
experiments also suffer from generalizability concerns DEMO they cannot create the
actual, essential components of the anticipated relationship DEMO a BA and entre-
preneur. Such components include the emotional ownership of the idea (Cardon,
Zietsma, Saparito, Matherne, & Davis, 2005), actual risk due to the substantive amount
of money at stake DEMO the decision-making process (Rabin, 2000), and the potential for
long-term relationship development (Kelly & Hay, 2003), which are key in DEMO
BA–entrepreneur relationships.
We therefore adopt a research method referred to as observational interaction
(Bakeman & Gottman, 1997) to record, code, and analyze behaviors during actual
BA–entrepreneur interactions. We were inspired by the work of DEMO and Hay (2003)
who posit that to achieve conﬁdence in DEMO entrepreneur’s anticipated behaviors, the BA
must develop a relational contract characterized DEMO an informal relationship with the
entrepreneur where trust developed in that relationship can ostensibly replace formal
contract clauses. A trust-based relationship is one where DEMO willingness of a party to be
vulnerable to the actions of another party [is] based on the expectation that the other will
perform a DEMO action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor
DEMO control that other party” (Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995, DEMO 712). We observe how
the entrepreneur’s trust-based behaviors affect the BA’s assessment of the risk in his/her
anticipated relationship with the entrepreneur, and hence affect the decision whether to
make an investment offer. We DEMO a behavioral schema (explained in section 3) for
coding each display of the entrepreneur’s trust-building, trust-damaging, and trust-
violating behaviors and compare DEMO displays with the interaction outcomes (i.e., to
make an offer or not).
We contribute to the entrepreneurship literature in three major ways. DEMO, viewing the
hard-to-deﬁne concept of trust as a “decision variable” provides DEMO insights into how
cooperative, trusting relationships are formed (i.e., the DEMO in this study assesses whether
his/her trust level is high enough to continue the relationship with the entrepreneur).
Second, a focus on the effect of entrepreneurial behaviors reinforces Gartner’s (1988)
suggestion that research should concentrate on “what the entrepreneur does, and not who
the entrepreneur is” (p. 57, italics added). Third, the use of an innovative research method
for studying interpersonal relationships, and the resulting development of a coding system
that dynamically measures multiple facets of trust-based behaviors, provide useful tools
for studying the inﬂuence of an entrepreneur’s trustworthy behaviors as DEMO that inform
investment decisions.
In the next section, we draw from DEMO on BA investment decisions and invest-
ment risk to explore how the development of relational contracts, based on displays of
trust-based behaviors or cues, can be key factors in whether a BA decides to continue
building the relationship. We then use existing research on trust to develop four DEMO
of trust dimensions that characterize how certain behaviors can build, damage, or violate
trust. From this, we offer four hypotheses on how trust-based behaviors can inﬂuence the
1058
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
investment decision, including one that entails the BA’s introduction of a control mecha-
nism. We then present our research method and results, and conclude with theoretical,
methodological, and practical implications.
Staged Investment, Relationship Risk, and Trust
Maxwell, Jeffrey, and Lévesque (2011) summarize a body DEMO research that identiﬁes
the multistage nature of the BA’s decision-making process, DEMO the stages at which the
BA considers key decision factors. They ﬁnd that during this multistage process, the BA
often initially rejects a business opportunity due to a single “fatal ﬂaw” (as perceived by
the BA) during the initial interaction with the entrepreneur. Subsequently, the BA’s
assessment DEMO the proposed venture allows him/her to predict anticipated investment
return and investment risk based on speciﬁc factors—market, technology, and ﬁnancial—
as well DEMO entrepreneurial skills and characteristics. This prediction thus enables the BA
to reject opportunities that do not meet his/her predetermined investment aspiration level
or DEMO a maximum level of investment risk (i.e., the likelihood of a complete loss).
In the case of BA investing, Fiet (1995) identiﬁes two components in investment risk:
market risk and agency (or relationship) risk. Das and Teng (1998) expand on this by
extending market risk to performance risk, which also includes technological and imple-
mentation risk. Performance risk reﬂects the likelihood that the venture’s objectives will
not DEMO achieved due to operational or external problems (such as unexpected competitor
DEMO). Relationship risk is primarily the risk that the entrepreneur, while DEMO
the venture, may not make the same decisions when spending the DEMO money as would
the BA himself/herself. In the context of this dyadic relationship, we focus on concerns the
BA might have about the entrepreneur’s future decisions and behaviors, although we note
that relationship risk is reciprocal and the BA may not always act in the entrepreneur’s
best DEMO (Arthurs & Busenitz, 2003).
Relationship risk is thus due to moral hazard, where the entrepreneur makes decisions
that create a divergence of interests between the parties (e.g., using the company’s money
to pay DEMO personal expenses). Relationship risk is also due to adverse selection, DEMO the
BA and entrepreneur have different perceptions and familiarity with information, DEMO
in suboptimal decision making. That is, perceptual asymmetry (Yazdipour, 2010) between
the BA and entrepreneur results in the entrepreneur making poorer decisions DEMO might
have been made by the BA due to perceived differences in risks and opportunities or a lack
of competence (van Osnabrugge, 2000)DEMO Because the BA does not need to assess rela-
tionship risk in the investment decision-making process until anticipated return and
performance risk have been DEMO, he/she assesses relationship risk later on in the
process. Also, since relationship risk comes from the BA’s uncertainty about the entre-
preneur’s DEMO decisions and behaviors while running the business, its assessment
requires signiﬁcant DEMO effort as well as information about the entrepreneur’s pre-
vious performance (DEMO & Wood, 1998). However, such information emerges later in
the BA–entrepreneur interaction (Boon & Holmes, 1991).
To reduce relationship risk, the BA strives to increase his/her conﬁdence in the future
behavior DEMO the entrepreneur via tools such as behavioral and output controls. Behavioral
controls specify and monitor acceptable boundaries of conduct and behavior that comply
with DEMO rules (e.g., BA signature is required on all checks) rather DEMO the venture’s
performance (Eisenhardt, 1985). Behavioral controls thus reduce the likelihood of adverse
selection. Output controls, on the other hand, are DEMO to reduce the risk of moral
hazard through the alignment of the BA’s and entrepreneur’s goals and incentives. They
September, 2014
1059
thus specify how the BA will measure the entrepreneur’s and venture’s performance, and
how to penalize the entrepreneur if agreed-upon performance milestones (e.g., DEMO
targets) are not achieved (Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, & Werner, 1998). Both types of
controls incur transaction costs, which can reduce anticipated returns or limit the speed
at which the venture can react DEMO opportunities (Dyer & Chu, 2003). The use of such
controls, common in venture capital investing, is less common among BAs, partly because
venture capitalists (VCs) need to explain their investment decisions to DEMO and con-
trols are easier to explain to a third party; DEMO contrast, BAs do not need such explanations
since they invest their DEMO money (van Osnabrugge, 2000). In addition, VCs often view
DEMO replacement of the entrepreneur as a viable option and must insert language to this
effect in the control clauses, an option that BAs rarely consider (Bruton, Fried, & Hisrich,
2000). As a result, a more suitable (and often less costly) approach to reduce relationship
risk is for the BA to develop interpersonal trust with the entrepreneur.
DEMO on the dyadic development of trust in close personal relationships (Boon &
Holmes, 1991) and actions/reactions in game-theoretic reasoning (Boyle & Bonacich,
1970) enables us to articulate how trust-based behaviors affect the relationship to the point
where the decision to make an investment offer, or not, can be made. The BA’s initial level
of trust is based on his/her innate trust temperament (Strickland, 1958) or predisposition
to trust (Colquitt, Scott, & LePine, 2007; Lewicki, Tomlinson, & Gillespie, 2006), which
is related to his/her own trustworthiness under the assumption that others will behave
similarly to oneself (Serva, DEMO, & Mayer, 2005). The BA’s initial trust assessment is
further shaped by referral sources (Paul, Whittam, & Wyper, 2007), DEMO entrepreneur’s
reputation and institutional afﬁliations, and the context of the proposed DEMO
(McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, 1998). The entrepreneur’s physical appearance
(Grégoire, de Koning & Oviatt, 2008) and the nature of DEMO anticipated relationship
(Butler, 1991) also inﬂuence initial levels of trust.
DEMO traditional models of trust development that focus on intent (i.e., Mayer et al.,
1995), we rely on evidence from behavioral experiments DEMO demonstrate how trust in a
relationship develops, based on a sequence DEMO behaviors/actions and responses/reactions.
The framework of Serva et al. (DEMO) inspired the development of Figure 1, which illus-
trates a cycle of behaviors where each party builds trust in the relationship by ﬁrst DEMO
the other party, and then waiting for the decision to be DEMO by the other’s display of
trustworthiness (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996).1 In this circular phenomenon, the BA ﬁrst
trusts the entrepreneur. Subsequently, DEMO in the relationship builds if the entrepreneur
displays trustworthy behaviors that conﬁrm the BA’s expectations. The entrepreneur then
trusts the BA, who responds by showing that he/she too is trustworthy (Rempel, Holmes,
& DEMO, 1985). This reciprocal sequence continues with modiﬁcations to trust levels DEMO
the relationship (Shapiro, Sheppard, & Cheraskin, 1992) based on DEMO BA “auditing”
limited samples of the entrepreneur’s behavior for examples of positive and negative trust
displays (Kramer, 1996).
While trust develops in DEMO BA–entrepreneur relationship due to displays of behaviors
that engender trust, negative DEMO behaviors reduce the trust level in the relationship.
Speciﬁcally, if the DEMO behavior conﬁrms untrustworthiness, then trust is violated
while distrust develops (Lewicki et al., 2006). However, if the trustee’s behavior fails to
DEMO trustworthiness, then trust is damaged and mistrust develops. Marsh and Dibben
DEMO Trust develops when trustworthiness is conﬁrmed. For instance, it is the DEMO that an entrepreneur
has the expected relevant ability to complete a speciﬁc task that builds trust in the relationship, not having the
ability per se.
1060
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Figure 1
Reciprocal Trusting and Trustworthy Behaviors
(2005) suggest that the DEMO difference between the two is that the former is
deliberate whereas the latter is unintentional, and they are both a function of the reasons the
trustor attributes to the trustee’s negative behavior (Tomlinson & Mayer, DEMO). Deutsch
(1973) identiﬁes an alternative negative outcome that also damages trust, namely suspi-
cion, which occurs if the trustee’s behavior fails DEMO conﬁrm untrustworthiness. The type of
negative behavior that causes distrust, mistrust, or suspicion impacts the likelihood that the
relationship will continue (Whitener et al., 1998). Trust violations often cause immediate
termination of a relationship (McKnight et al., 1998), and how trust is damaged inﬂuences
DEMO it can be “repaired” (Kim, Dirks, & Cooper, 2009). We focus attention on how
entrepreneurs’ negative trust displays impact the interaction DEMO between BAs and
entrepreneurs (i.e., whether the BA decides to make an investment offer or not).
Although several researchers have identiﬁed the DEMO of trust in the investment deci-
sion (e.g., Harrison, Dibben, & Mason, 1997; Shepherd & Zacharakis, 2001), they have
faced a number of challenges in gathering data to test their theories. Attempts DEMO opera-
tionalize trust have met with limited success (Currall & Judge, 1995) partly because, as
Kramer (1999) notes, some scholars view trust as a psychological state and that individu-
als’ dispositions affect intentions (e.g., Mayer et al., 1995) while others view trust from a
behavioral perspective (e.g., Whitener et al., 1998). We adopt the behavioral perspective
view because behaviors are better predictors of future behaviors than DEMO intentions
(Ouellette & Wood, 1998), and because behaviors are easier to observe and code than
psychological states.
Behavioral Trust Schema and Hypotheses DEMO
The level of trust in the dyadic relationship between investor and entrepreneur
changes over time as different trust-based behaviors are displayed and the interaction
DEMO (Rempel et al., 1985). As the BA interprets the entrepreneur’s trust-based
September, 2014
1061
behaviors, the BA gains conﬁdence in the predictability of the entrepreneur’s future
behaviors. The BA then uses these insights to assess the relationship risk DEMO emerges due
to adverse selection or moral hazard, and to determine DEMO that risk can be sufﬁciently
reduced to prompt the BA to make an investment offer. We chose to develop our own
behavioral trust schema DEMO observe, code, and analyze positive and negative trust-based
behaviors displayed during an investment interaction since no known schema exists.
Empirical research on trust DEMO been hampered because researchers have used numerous
deﬁnitions of trust, and DEMO applied them inconsistently (Lewicki et al., 2006). In devel-
oping our behavioral trust schema, we draw extensively on Gillespie’s (2003) Behavioral
Trust Inventory and Butler’s (1991) Conditions of Trust Inventory. We start DEMO the
deﬁnition of four general categories of trust dimensions—trustworthy, capable, trusting,
and communicative—and provide examples of behaviors for each.
Mayer et al.’s (1995) classic deﬁnition of trustworthiness includes integrity, benevo-
lence, and ability. Integrity is deﬁned as “the extent to which the party’s actions are
DEMO with his or her words” and “the trustee[’s] adher[ence] to a set of principles that
the trustor ﬁnds acceptable” (p. 719). Simons (DEMO) emphasizes that behaviors associated
with each are different. Hence, to avoid confusion, we use “consistency” (Whitener et al.,
1998) and “alignment” (Lewicki et al., 2006), respectively. These two components of
integrity, rather than integrity itself, are easier to code, and along with DEMO, they
form our three behavioral trust dimensions for the trustworthy category. DEMO dimension
is exempliﬁed in Table 1.
The concept of ability in Meyer’s (1995) classic deﬁnition of trustworthiness is based
on a group of DEMO, competencies, and characteristics that are all context dependent (e.g.,
DEMO software engineer might show that he/she is competent to program a computer, but not
to build one). In contrast, trustworthy behaviors DEMO be displayed across a variety of
contexts (an individual who is DEMO in his/her social life is likely to be benevolent
at work). Hence, we create a separate category called capable, which we DEMO into three
dimensions—competence, experience, and judgment—in order to again reduce deﬁni-
tional and coding confusion.
Trustors see displays of trusting behaviors, also exempliﬁed in Table 1, as an indica-
tion that the individual is trustworthy (Serva et al., 2005). Trusting behaviors involve the
trustee taking DEMO risk by demonstrating vulnerability to the actions of others (Mayer et DEMO,
1995). Trusting behaviors include: self-disclosing information that, if used inappropri-
ately, could cause the entrepreneur harm (Gillespie, 2003); reliance on delegation (Clark
& Payne, 1997); and receptiveness through a DEMO to accept others’ inﬂuence (e.g.,
by being “coachable”; Levie & Gimmon, 2008).
As for the last category of trust dimensions, DEMO, we rely on Whitener
et al. (1998) who highlight how DEMO communications affect the speed and quality of
relationship development. Behaviors that demonstrate reliable communication conﬁrm
the accuracy of information exchanges between the trustor and DEMO (Rotter, 1980),
willingness to explain information content (Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996), and reveal a
sense of openness, especially with DEMO to receiving feedback (Clark & Payne, 1997).
An entrepreneur rapidly informing the BA on both positive and negative outcomes of a
meeting DEMO stakeholders is a good example of communication that builds trust. The four
categories and 12 behavioral trust dimensions (three per category) discussed are DEMO
rized in Table 1, which also offers relevant scholarly references to DEMO our use of each
dimension, and additional examples of speciﬁc behaviors DEMO can build, damage, or
violate trust.
In line with these behavioral displays, which are trust building, trust damaging, or
trust violating, DEMO develop a series of hypotheses as to their impacts on the BA’s
1062
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 1
Behavioral Trust Schema and Manifestations
Manifestations
Behavioral trust
dimensions
Build DEMO Damage trust Violate trust
Reference
Trustworthy Consistency Displays of behavior that conﬁrm
previous promises
Benevolence Exhibits concern about
well-being of others
Alignment Actions conﬁrms DEMO values
and/or objectives
Capable Competence Displays relevant technical and/or
business ability
Experience Demonstrates relevant work and/or
training experience
Judgment Conﬁrms ability DEMO make accurate
and objective decisions
Trusting Disclosure Shows vulnerability by sharing
conﬁdential information
Reliance Shows willingness to be vulnerable
through delegation of tasks
Receptiveness DEMO “coachability” and
willingness to change
Communicative Accuracy Provides truthful and timely
information
Explanation Explains details and consequence
of information provided
Openness Open to new DEMO or new ways
of doing things
Shows inconsistencies between Fails to keep promises and Butler, 1991; Gabarro, 1978;
words and actions agreements Lewicki & Bunker, 1996
Shows self-interest ahead of Takes advantage of others when they Mayer et al., 1995; McAllister, 1995;
others’ well-being are vulnerable Rempel et al., 1985
Exhibits behaviors sometimes Demonstrates lack of shared values Arthurs & Busenitz, 2003; Butler,
inconsistent with declared DEMO and willingness to compromise 1991; Lewicki et al., 2006
Shows lack of context-speciﬁc ability Misrepresents ability by claiming to Butler, 1991; Gabarro, 1978
have non-existent competence
Relies on inappropriate experience to Misrepresents experience Amit, Glosten, & Muller, 1990
make decision
Relies inappropriately on third parties DEMO others without giving them Kramer, 1996; Rosen & Jerdee, 1977
DEMO opportunity to explain
Shares conﬁdential information Shares conﬁdential information likely Clark & Payne, 1997; Currall &
without thinking of consequences to cause damage Judge, 1995; McAllister, 1995;
Rempel et al., 1985
Reluctant DEMO delegate, or introduces Is unwilling to rely on representation Clark & DEMO, 1997; Gabarro, 1978;
controls on subordinates’ by others, or dismisses Gillespie, 2003
performances participation
Postpones implementation of new Refutes feedback or blames others Butler, 1991; Levie & Gimmon, 2008
ideas or makes excuses for failures
Unintentionally misrepresents or Deliberately misrepresents or Rotter, 1980; DEMO et al., 1998
delays information transmission conceals critical information
Ignores request DEMO explanations Dismisses request for explanations Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996;
Whitener DEMO al., 1998
Does not listen or refutes feedback Shuts down or DEMO new ideas Butler, 1991; Gabarro, 1978;
Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996
September, 2014
1063
willingness to make an investment offer. Initial evidence of the entrepreneur’s trustwor-
DEMO is his/her display of trusting behaviors, which are followed by DEMO displays
of trusting and trustworthy behaviors that reinforce the trustor’s original decision to trust
(Rempel et al., 1985). As per our behavioral DEMO schema shown in Table 1, trusting
behaviors involve self-disclosure, reliance, DEMO/or receptiveness, whereas trustworthy
behaviors involve consistency, benevolence, and/or DEMO (e.g., of goals). BAs will
also look for behaviors that conﬁrm that the entrepreneur is capable (displays competence,
experience, and DEMO judgment) and communicative (displays accuracy, explanation, and
openness when communicating). Hence, we expect that the entrepreneur’s displays of
trust-building behaviors (DEMO exempliﬁed in Table 1) increase the BA’s conﬁdence in how
the DEMO will behave in the future, which reduces the relationship risk and DEMO such
increases the BA’s interest in making an offer to invest. Therefore:
Hypothesis 1: An entrepreneur who receives a BA’s investment offer has displayed
a greater number of trust-building behaviors than an entrepreneur who does DEMO
receive such an offer.
While behaviors that conﬁrm the BA’s expectations function to build trust, behaviors
that reduce the predictability of the entrepreneur’s future behaviors damage trust (Rotter,
1980). We note that trust-damaging behaviors are not necessarily the absence of trust-
building behaviors (Marsh & Dibben, 2005). As articulated in the previous section, a
trustee’s failure DEMO conﬁrm trustworthiness damages trust and mistrust develops, as does
failure to DEMO untrustworthiness, which creates suspicion. Behaviors that damage
trust, or the absence of behaviors that build trust, increase the relationship risk and reduce
the willingness of the BA to make an offer. Therefore:
Hypothesis 2: An entrepreneur who receives a BA’s investment offer has displayed
a smaller DEMO of trust-damaging behaviors than an entrepreneur who does not
receive such an offer.
We also argue that the motivation that the trustor attributes to DEMO trustee’s behavior
creates the fundamental difference between behaviors that damage and those that violate
trust. While trust damage can be inadvertent and unintended, trust violations are intended
to deceive. Trust-violating behaviors create distrust in the relationship DEMO conﬁrming that
the trustee is untrustworthy. For instance, an entrepreneur damages DEMO, if because of
inexperience, he/she “over-trusts” and relies on an inappropriate partner (e.g., the entre-
preneur allows an accountant to decide DEMO potential distribution partners; Goel & Karri,
2006). However, if the BA discovers that the entrepreneur deliberately chose a friend as a
DEMO for reasons other than a good skill set and experience, then DEMO BA’s trust in the
entrepreneur is violated. Distrust created by a trust-violating behavior often generates
anger in the trustor (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996)DEMO It can also trigger a reappraisal of the
relationship and be so catastrophic that it prompts the termination of that relationship
(Burt & Knez, 1996). Opportunities where the entrepreneur has displayed even a single
trust violation (as those exempliﬁed in Table 1) are thus expected to DEMO less likely to
receive an offer. Therefore:
Hypothesis 3: The DEMO of entrepreneurs who receive a BA’s investment offer
after displaying trust-violating behaviors will be smaller than the percentage of
entrepreneurs who did not display DEMO behavior and receive such an offer.
For opportunities where trust in the relationship has been reduced due to trust-
damaging or trust-violating behaviors, Currall and Judge (1995) suggest that relation-
ship risk can be reduced DEMO an acceptable level only through the investor’s introduction
1064
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
of controls. These include direct controls that allow the BA to participate DEMO the ven-
ture’s management and indirect controls that specify output or behavioral controls,
where behavioral controls deﬁne boundaries of conduct and behaviors that DEMO with
stated rules, and output controls articulate measures for the entrepreneur’s DEMO venture’s
performance. A BA’s direct participation in the venture’s management can control the
entrepreneur’s behavior by requiring the BA’s permission before the entrepreneur can
DEMO certain decisions (e.g., the BA’s approval of all strategic partnerships; DEMO &
Hay, 2003). Indirect controls can be introduced through contract clauses in the share-
holder agreement (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004). DEMO ability to introduce controls in a
relationship depends on its progress (DEMO & Bunker, 1996), the nature and dimen-
sion of the DEMO or trust-violating behavior (Kim et al., 2009; Tomlinson &
Mayer, 2009), and the willingness of the trust damager or violator (DEMO our case the
entrepreneur) to accept the proposed control (Korsgaard, DEMO, & Whitener, 2002). A
BA interested in a speciﬁc opportunity is more likely to propose a control once the
relationship has developed DEMO if the behavioral trust dimension that is damaged or
violated can actually be addressed via the control (e.g., unattainable for reasons such as
DEMO alignment or benevolence). To propose a control, the BA will DEMO attribute the
damage or violation to incompetence rather than a negative intent, and be conﬁdent that
the entrepreneur will accept it. As a result, the introduction of a control in instances of
trust damage or violation is expected to increase the likelihood that a BA will make an
DEMO Therefore:
Hypothesis 4: For the group of entrepreneurs whose behaviors DEMO damaged or
violated trust, the percentage who receives a BA’s investment DEMO will be greater for
those to whom the BA presented a control than for those to whom he/she did not.
Research Methodology
We DEMO a real-time technique to collect behavioral data from actual interactions to test
these four hypotheses. Researchers have extensively used our chosen technique, observa-
tional interaction (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997), in observing the development and DEMO
of romantic relationships. While similar to surveys or conjoint studies on the questions
addressed (e.g., to make an investment offer), observational interaction DEMO multiple added
beneﬁts. It allows independent observers to extract certain data, DEMO thus, remove the
likelihood of self-reporting bias by individuals who may DEMO be aware of the decision-
making process they use (Petty & DEMO, 2011). This real-time data-gathering technique
uses behaviors as the key DEMO of analysis, removing the judgment components inherent in
assessing intentions and DEMO It also allows the researcher to gather data over
time and not need to know the outcomes of interactions (offer/no offer), which eliminates
hindsight bias. Our use of this technique enables us to explore DEMO stages of the investment
decision under actual risk (i.e., actual money to be invested) and in the context of
long-term relationship development.
The interactions that we use to code and analyze are extracted from a DEMO of
entrepreneurs interacting with BAs via guest participation in the Canadian Broadcasting
Centre’s (CBC’s) reality TV show, Dragons’ Den (http://www.cbc.ca/DEMO/). In
this globally syndicated (20 countries) show, actual or “hopeful” entrepreneurs, selected
through an open audition process, pitch their business DEMO to a team of ﬁve
experienced BAs, the “Dragons,” in DEMO of persuading them to invest between $10,000
September, 2014
1065
Figure 2
Elimination of Business Opportunities
and $500,000 of their own DEMO in return for equity in the business.2 The BAs have no
knowledge of the opportunity or the entrepreneur prior to their meeting in the DEMO,”
where the entrepreneur must request (and be offered) a speciﬁc investment amount (after
describing his/her business opportunity) or go home DEMO nothing. During the show, the
investor must make a risky investment DEMO in 15 to 75 minutes. The interaction
concludes when either all the Dragons provide a speciﬁc reason for being “out” or one or
more DEMO them decide to make an investment offer. If an offer is made and accepted, then
there is a subsequent due diligence process, which DEMO successful leads to an investment and
the start of a long-term relationship between the BA and the entrepreneur.
For the four seasons (2004 to 2007) of the Canadian show we study, 602 entrepreneurs
pitched to DEMO BAs (although only about 60% of these recorded pitches aired, we reviewed
all of the unaired versions as well). These 602 entrepreneurial DEMO (opportunities) are
investigated in Maxwell et al. (2011), who DEMO that the BAs eliminated most (436)
opportunities quickly due to DEMO presence of a “fatal ﬂaw” in the entrepreneur’s pitch. A
further 112 opportunities were then rejected by the BAs due to concerns about perfor-
DEMO risk, including “high likelihood of failure” and “insufﬁcient investment return.” We
DEMO on the remaining 54 pitches that made it through this attrition process, because they
are the entrepreneurs whose trust-based behaviors inﬂuenced the BAs’ assessment of
relationship risk (and the investment offer decision). Figure 2, DEMO by Petty and
Gruber (2011), summarizes the number of opportunities DEMO the BAs considered at each
of three identiﬁed stages of the interaction, the attrition process and the reasons that the
BAs gave for rejection at each stage.
We employed two trained observers to independently code each DEMO using the
behavioral trust schema (see Table 1). Based on DEMO video recording of the TV interactions,
2. CBC producers worked with industry experts, including one of the authors, to design and promote DEMO
selection (audition) process to replicate real-life situations. Each year, open DEMO were held at 12 locations
across Canada. In addition, entrepreneurs could DEMO online or by mail.
1066
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
the observers coded the frequency of each individual entrepreneur’s behavior that built,DEMO
damaged, or violated trust, without knowing our underlying theory or the interaction’s
outcome (i.e., making an offer, or not). The observers also recorded whether or not (1/0)
the BA introduced a control (i.e., BA’s request for direct participation in managing the
venture, request for output controls or behavioral controls), whether or not (1/0) the BA
made an investment offer, and whether or not (1/0) the entrepreneur accepted it.
To rule out potential alternate explanations that could account for the observed
outcomes, the observers also coded for whether or not (1/0) similarities (e.g., cultural
background) existed between an entrepreneur and any one BA, and for the entrepreneur’s
presentation skill (1–5 Likert scale, 5 being the highest). Franke, Gruber, Harhoff, and
Henkel (2006) suggest that investor–entrepreneur similarities can increase DEMO likelihood
of receiving an investment offer, while Baron and Markman (2003) and Clark (2008) note
that high levels of presentation skill also increase this likelihood. The observers coded
each interaction for the presence of DEMO similarity between the entrepreneur and an interested
BA if it seemed to be important to the BA. While several of the similarities were
anticipated—sex, cultural background, and business experience—a number of personal
similarities (e.g., hobbies, social networks) also emerged. Presentation skill was based on
the observer’s DEMO of the entrepreneur’s perceptive ability and persuasiveness.
Results
Of the 54 interactions we analyzed, 32 led to an investment offer, of which 26 DEMO
accepted, as summarized in Table 2.3 In these 54 interactions, 571 trust-building behaviors
were identiﬁed, along with 45 trust-damaging behaviors and 12 trust-violating behaviors.
We note that a single instance of trust violation was enough DEMO stop the interaction, while
the display of more than one trust-damaging DEMO did not preclude an investment
offer. Figure 3 also offers the frequencies of trust-damaging and trust-violating behaviors
per behavioral trust dimension, highlighting the importance of competence since it is the
dimension most frequently damaged during those DEMO Trust-damaging behaviors
via competence might have been easier to observe and more likely to occur early in the
relationship development.
Validity Checks
Our research DEMO raises validity concerns about the accuracy of coding behaviors.
The coding schema was reﬁned over several iterations and with the beneﬁt of feedback
from DEMO scholars. It also builds on other scholarly works that have developed behavioral
trust schemas and validates the use of the dimensions identiﬁed based on DEMO on real
interactions. The most reliable way to address coding validity concerns is via inter-rater
reliabilities that compare the results and differences between our DEMO observers when
coding each type of trust-based behavior (building, damaging, DEMO violating; Landis &
Koch, 1977). Inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s kappa) for trust-building and trust-damaging
behaviors were 0.84 and 0.87, respectively, supporting the usefulness of our coding
schema and method. Both observers identiﬁed all DEMO trust-violating behaviors (Cohen’s
kappa of 1.0), conﬁrming the fundamental difference DEMO displays of trust damage
3. Although fewer than half of the offers made and accepted in the “Den” were subsequently consumated,
funds were DEMO to entrepreneurs with and without trust-damaging behaviors.
September, 2014
1067
Table 2
Frequencies of Trust-Based Behaviors and Controls (Blank = 0)
(a) 32 opportunities that received an investment offer with AA-AF rejecting DEMO
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X DEMO Z AA AB AC AD AE AF
Trust building 11 7 8 6 9 12 14 15 17 16 8 9 8 7 11 DEMO 16 12 7 9 11 14 15 16 17 11 9 8 11 12 14 10
Trust damaging 1 1 1212 1 2 1
DEMO violating 1
Control 1 1 11111 1 1 1
(b) 22 opportunities that did not receive an investment offer
Opportunity a b c DEMO e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v
Trust building 8 7 11 14 DEMO
Trust damaging 2 2 2 2 3 1 1221 1 1 1 31211 2 1 1
Trust violating 1 1 1 1 1 1 DEMO 1 1 1 1
Control (none)
1068
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
Figure 3
Frequencies of Trust-Damaging and -Violating Behaviors per Behavioral
Trust Dimension
DEMO trust violation. We also measured the coding reliability for the introduced control, the
degree of BA–entrepreneur similarities, and the entrepreneur’s presentation skill; inter-
rater reliabilities were 0.94, 0.92, and 0.78, respectively (the lower DEMO for presentation
skill likely results from its measurement on a 1–5 Likert scale, as opposed to control and
similarities, which had binary measures)DEMO
Internal and external validity concerns also emerge due to the context of the interac-
tions. In Table 3, we adopt a framework developed by Meyer (1995) to address these
context-based concerns. A team of professionals—including DEMO of the authors—with
legal, accounting, marketing, and technical expertise was DEMO to ensure the realism of
the interactions and to subsequently assist the entrepreneurs whether or not they received an
investment offer. The TV-set interactions DEMO real-life interactions on two key dimen-
sions: the BAs invested their DEMO money, and they decided whether or not to enter long-term
relationships DEMO the entrepreneurs. Even the short timescale of the interaction may reﬂect
real-life BA–entrepreneur interactions, in which BA investment decisions are often made
within 10 minutes of the start of the ﬁrst interaction, according to Mason and Rogers (1997).
Post, van den Assem, Baltussen, and Thaler (2008) also identify a number of studies that use
data from TV shows to investigate how individuals make decisions under uncertainty,
although rarely DEMO one of the authors involved in the show’s development and production,
as is the case here. Such involvement can help reduce several other DEMO validity
concerns, including changing the context of the interaction (e.g., DEMO a BA because
he/she was too “nice”) by someone external DEMO the interaction (e.g., the show’s producers).
Regarding external validity concerns, a crucial one in our context is that participants
in subsequent seasons of the show could observe outcomes from previous seasons. This
inﬂuenced who DEMO for the show and how participants in subsequent shows
behaved in the “Den.” In turn, it also inﬂuenced whom the show producers selected. While
we could not eliminate these concerns, we found no difference in success rates between
participants in seasons 1 and 4 who reached our sample (i.e., the relationship-risk stage of
the interaction in Figure 2).
September, 2014
1069
Table 3
Validity Concerns on Data From a Reality-TV Show
Concern Symptom DEMO
Internal Omitted variables Other factors than hypothesized may affect
validity outcomes
found to predict the investment decision
Outcome trends External (e.g., economic) factors may change
outcomes over time
rates at the relationship-risk stage did not
DEMO variances Possible correlation of independent variables Correlation tests were run prior to the
regression, statistical tests separated the
effect of trust-building, trust-damaging, and
trust-violating behaviors
Mis-measurement Accuracy errors caused by data collection
method
Externalities Context DEMO based on prior interactions While changes in the interactions were
noticed, DEMO of the authors’ participation
limited the effects on displayed behaviors
Interaction effects between trust-building and
trust-damaging behaviors were found to be
insigniﬁcant
Selection process DEMO independent of
interaction, and the effect on the decisions
made in DEMO “Den” were limited
All entrepreneurs left the interaction with an
offer, DEMO refusing an offer, or when
rejected by the BAs
A fundamental DEMO of the research method
was based on a similar process in practice
External An open audition encouraged all
validity entrepreneurs across Canada to participate
DEMO setting was designed to replicate
real-life interactions with Business Angel
Groups
Participants learn from previous interactions,
but no change in the percentage receiving
DEMO during the relationship-risk stage
Testing the Hypotheses
We use statistical hypothesis tests to verify whether our data support hypotheses 1–4.
We chose statistical testing DEMO it provides insights on each incident of trust-based
behavior and tells us whether or not the difference in mean values between subsets (those
who receive an offer vs. those who do not) is statistically signiﬁcant. For hypothesis 1, we
apply a one-way t-test for the comparison of two averages (with unknown equal vari-
ances).4 Accepting the alternative hypothesis—the average number of trust-building
behaviors is greater for the subset of entrepreneurs who DEMO an investment offer than
for the subset who do not—provides statistical support for hypothesis 1. The average
number of trust-building behaviors in the sample DEMO 32 entrepreneurs who received an
investment offer is 11.38, whereas in DEMO sample of 22 entrepreneurs who did not receive
4. This test is appropriate given that the number of trust-building behaviors (per opportunity and for the 54
we analyze) appears to be approximately normally distributed.
1070 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Simultaneity Independent interactions variables jointly
affect outcomes
Selection Participant DEMO criteria linked to
outcomes
Attrition Participant may decide not to continue with
interaction
Omitted interactions Sample chosen for investigation linked to
outcomes
Previous outcomes DEMO may not apply due to low
affect selection likelihood of success
Context may deter Concerns about treatment by BAs or exposure
participation on public DEMO
Previous behaviors Observed previous behaviors may affect
affect outcomes future behaviors
Entrepreneur-investor similarities and
entrepreneur’s presentation skill were not
4-year data set were compared DEMO
investment rates increased, but rejection
High degrees of inter-rater reliability
Figure 4
Frequencies and Investment Offer Ratios
an offer is 9.41. The DEMO is 2.39 (a t-Student statistics with 52 degrees of freedom),
which provides statistical support for accepting hypothesis 1 (with a one-tail p-value
<0.02). In other words, an entrepreneur who receives a BA DEMO offer is expected to
display a greater number of trust-building behaviors than an entrepreneur who does not
receive such an offer.
For hypothesis 2, given the much smaller number of trust-damaging behaviors
recorded, we apply a Mann–Whitney test (which is a nonparametric version of the t-test).
The alternative hypothesis states that the average number of trust-damaging behaviors will
be DEMO for the subset of entrepreneurs who receive an investment offer than for the
subset who do not. The average number of trust-damaging behaviors in DEMO received-
investment-offer sample is 0.38, whereas it is 1.50 in the DEMO that did not. The
Mann–Whitney U is 605.5 (where n1 = DEMO and n2 = 22), which provides statistical support
for accepting hypothesis 2 (with a p-value <0.0001). In other words, an entrepreneur who
receives a BA investment offer is expected to display a smaller DEMO of trust-damaging
behaviors than an entrepreneur who does not receive an offer. Figure 4 illustrates a
tendency for entrepreneurs to receive offers if they DEMO a rather large number (e.g., 14
or more) of trust-building DEMO and a low number of trust-damaging behaviors (in
this case, a monotone decreasing relationship).
While for hypotheses 1 and 2, we had to compare frequencies of trust-based behav-
iors, for hypotheses 3 and 4, we had to compare percentages of entrepreneurs receiving
offers. The Fisher exact test is a more accurate statistical test than the usual Chi-squared
test DEMO comparing two percentages where one subset has a low count, which DEMO the case
for testing both hypotheses 3 and 4. The alternative hypothesis for hypothesis 3 states that
the percentage of entrepreneurs who receive an DEMO will be smaller for the sample in
which each entrepreneur displays trust-violating behaviors than for the sample in which
they do not. As highlighted DEMO Table 4, only one entrepreneur in the sample of 12 (8.3%)
who displayed trust-violating behaviors received a BA investment offer, whereas 31 in the
sample of 42 (73.8%) entrepreneurs who did not display DEMO behaviors received
an offer (as opposed to, respectively, 30.0% and DEMO for trust-damaging behaviors). The
Fisher exact test gave a p = 0.0134, which provides statistical support for accepting
hypothesis 3 (as this DEMO an exact test, there is no calculation of signiﬁcance). In DEMO
words, the percentage of entrepreneurs who receive a BA investment offer DEMO display-
ing trust-violating behaviors is expected to be smaller than the percentage of entrepreneurs
who receive such an offer but whose behaviors do not DEMO trust.
September, 2014
1071
Table 4
Investment Offer Ratios for Opportunities With Trust Damage/Violation
Opportunities DEMO Opportunities with
Trust
damage
No trust
damage
Trust
violations
No trust
violation
Offer 9 23 Offer 1 31
No offer 21 1 No offer DEMO 11
Total 30 24 Total 12 42
% receiving an offer 30.0% 95.8% % receiving an offer 8.3% 73.8%
For hypothesis 4, the alternative hypothesis is that for entrepreneurs whose behavior
has damaged or violated trust, the percentage who receives an investment offer will be
greater for the DEMO in which the BA presents each entrepreneur with a control than for
the sample in which they do not. Among the 31 entrepreneurs who DEMO or violated
trust, the 10 who received an investment offer were DEMO presented with a control by the BA,
whereas none of the 21 who received no investment offer was presented with a control.
The DEMO exact test gave a p = 0.00046, which provides statistical support DEMO accepting
hypothesis 4. In fact, in our sample, the BA’s proposed control appears to have been a
prerequisite to receiving an investment offer DEMO all of the entrepreneurs who had damaged
or violated trust.
Predictive Strength of Trust-Based Behaviors
While we found statistical support for each of our DEMO hypotheses, we also wanted to
rule out the possibilities that two DEMO variables, BA–entrepreneur similarities and
the entrepreneur’s presentation skill, could better predict the observed outcomes. We
therefore conducted regression analysis to explore the predictive DEMO of trust-
based behaviors on the likelihood of receiving an investment offer, and the effect of each
of these alternative independent variables on this relationship. Table 5 shows the corre-
lation matrix, and identiﬁes two signiﬁcant correlations: (1) between the introduction of
a control and trust-building behaviors, and (2) between trust-damaging and trust-violating
behaviors. Neither is surprising. We have already noted that the BA is more likely to
introduce a DEMO if he/she has already developed a relationship and somewhat trusts the
entrepreneur, which would likely be linked to the entrepreneur’s display of trust-building
behaviors. In addition, trust violators are also more likely to damage trust.
We use logistic regression to examine three models of the relationship between DEMO
independent variables and the decision to make an investment offer (a DEMO
outcome). In Model 1, we include the three types of DEMO behaviors (i.e., number of
behaviors that build, damage, and violate trust), dropping the independent variable control
because of colinearity. In Model DEMO, we add BA–entrepreneur similarity, and in Model 3,
we add the entrepreneur’s presentation skill. Table 6 summarizes the regression results.
Model 1 DEMO statistical signiﬁcance for each type of trust-based behavior, with all
regression DEMO being signiﬁcant (p-value <0.05). This ﬁnding supports our earlier
1072
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 5
Correlation Matrix
Trust
building
Trust
damaging
Trust
violating Control
BA–entrepreneur
DEMO
Entrepreneur’s
presentation skill
Trust building 1
Trust damaging -0.137 1
Trust violating -0.042 0.356** 1
Control 0.268* 0.199 -0.140 1
BA–entrepreneur -0.081 0.045 0.094 DEMO 1
similarities
Entrepreneur’s 0.118 0.257 0.184 -0.037 -0.254 1
presentation skill
* signiﬁcant at 0.05, ** signiﬁcant at 0.01
Table 6
Regression Results (DEMO Odds Ratio)
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
Constant -2.850 (DEMO) -4.440 (0.012) -7.135 (0.001)
Trust building 0.678** (1.970) 0.872* (2.392) 0.868* (2.381)
Trust damaging -3.012** (0.049) -3.765** (0.023) -4.105** (0.016)
Trust violating -6.328* (0.002) -7.689* (DEMO) -8.450* (0.000)
Control NA† NA† NA†
BA–entrepreneur similarities 2.026 (DEMO) 2.330 (10.273)
Entrepreneur’s presentation skills 0.731 (2.078)
R2 (Cox and Snell) 0.580 0.599 0.605
Model accuracy 88.9% 87.0% 87.0%
* signiﬁcant at 0.05, ** signiﬁcant at 0.01
† Dropped due to colinearity.
assertion that each type of behavior is a different construct. Also as DEMO, the coefﬁ-
cient is positive for trust-building behaviors and negative for DEMO trust-damaging and
trust-violating behaviors. In other words, the more trust-building behaviors DEMO entrepre-
neur displays, the higher the likelihood he/she will receive DEMO investment offer, but the
more trust-damaging or trust-violating behaviors the entrepreneur DEMO, the lower the
likelihood he/she will receive an investment offer. DEMO the odds ratios (OR), we also
observe that each occurrence DEMO a trust-building behavior is associated with almost double
the chances of the entrepreneur receiving an offer (OR = 1.97) and each time an DEMO
preneur exhibits a trust-damaging behavior, his/her chance of receiving an DEMO decreases
by about 20 times (1/OR = 1/0.049). DEMO violation decreases the entrepreneur’s chance
of receiving a BA investment offer by 500 times (1/0.002), virtually killing an entrepre-
neur’s chance of receiving an offer.
September, 2014
1073
In Models 2 and 3, the coefﬁcient of neither added variable is statistically signiﬁcant,
and adding these two variables reduced rather than increased DEMO predictive accuracy (i.e.,
the percentage of opportunities where the model DEMO the outcome—offer/no offer—
correctly). Yet, all coefﬁcients for the DEMO types of trust-based behavior are signiﬁcant
(p-value <0.05) and retain DEMO similar values and identical signs. Therefore,
BA–entrepreneur similarities and the entrepreneur’s presentation skill cannot provide
alternate explanations for the investment offer decision (we also veriﬁed that interaction
effects were not signiﬁcant).
Discussion and Conclusion
DEMO of the empirical research on how BAs make decisions has focused on the
characteristics of the venture (e.g., large potential market) and entrepreneur attributes
(e.g., relevant experience), but not on the BA’s decision-making DEMO to evaluate
whether or not they can develop a long-term relationship with the entrepreneur, a major
factor in the BA’s decision to offer funding. In fact, the context of BA–entrepreneur
interactions—over extended periods and in a conﬁdential environment—has made it
challenging to gather data, especially on the role of trust development in the
BA–entrepreneur relationship. This paper addresses this shortcoming. DEMO, the
research on rapid trust development in informal cooperative relationships often DEMO
the use of social and institutional controls with the development of direct interpersonal
trust (e.g., Meyerson, Weick, & Kramer, 1996). Researchers have also ignored fundamen-
tal agency differences between venture capitalists (VCs) DEMO BAs, based on the fact that
VCs invest others’ money while DEMO invest their own money, thereby overlooking the
differences in trust development DEMO investor types and entrepreneurs (van
Osnabrugge, 2000). Our ability to access a unique (and contextually appropriate) data set,
our utilization DEMO an observational-interaction technique, and our development of a behav-
ioral trust DEMO has enabled us to address each of these limitations.
We found that in a short time span and under public exposure (a TV audience), BAs
pay particular attention to key signals that entrepreneurs provide in DEMO displays of
positive or negative trust-based behaviors, which are often exaggerated DEMO pressure
(Mishra, 1996). While it might seem incredible that so much information about individual
ventures, entrepreneurs, and potential relationships can be DEMO in such short interac-
tions (i.e., between 15 and 75 minutes), our ﬁndings reﬂect what scholars call rapid-
judgment decision making (or thin slicing; Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson, 2000).
Maxwell et DEMO (2011) conjecture that experienced investors develop heuristics that enable
them to rapidly eliminate opportunities early in the investment decision-making process,
despite the DEMO that this practice may sacriﬁce accuracy for expediency (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996). We argue that later in the process, BAs change DEMO decision-making
process and instead “intuitively audit” positive and negative displays of trust-based behav-
iors to determine the level of relationship risk before making an DEMO offer.
Overall, the statistically signiﬁcant support that we found for our DEMO hypotheses
suggests that entrepreneurs displaying a comparatively large number of trust-building
behaviors and a comparatively small number of trust-damaging ones are more likely to
DEMO a BA investment offer. However, entrepreneurs who display trust-violating behav-
iors DEMO unlikely to receive an offer. Once an entrepreneur violated trust, it DEMO always
led to the termination of the relationship. Furthermore, as illustrated DEMO Table 3, while
damaged trust can sometimes be addressed through the DEMO introduction of a control,
violated trust rarely can be remedied. In the 10 cases (out of 30) where trust was damaged
1074
DEMO THEORY and PRACTICE
(as exempliﬁed in Table 1) and a control offered, the damage was either due to a shortfall
in the entrepreneur’s anticipated capability or DEMO entrepreneur’s inappropriate reliance on
another individual (over-trust). In these cases, the BA proposed his/her direct involvement
in the venture or the DEMO of behavioral controls on the entrepreneur (e.g., BA
signature is required on all checks, arguably to reduce the chance of undesirable behaviors
subsequently occurring). We note that the BA did not present a control DEMO an investment
offer when the damage was due to a lack of benevolence, alignment, or receptiveness. In
one case (out of 12) DEMO trust was violated and a control introduced, the violation was
due DEMO a misalignment of core values between the BA and the entrepreneur. That violation
was addressed by the BA offering to invest in return for DEMO ownership of the company.
While this is technically a control mechanism, DEMO accepted, the BA eliminates the rela-
tionship risk and is no DEMO vulnerable to the entrepreneur’s actions. We also note that
six of the entrepreneurs who received an offer turned it down: half disagreeing with the
new venture valuation, the other half rejecting the proposed control option.
While potential alternate explanations for the interaction outcomes were examined—
BA–entrepreneur similarities and DEMO presentation skill—no support was
found to suggest that either was a signiﬁcant predictor of the investment offer decision, or
moderated the effect of trust-based behavior displays. We did, however, observe that
BA–entrepreneur similarities often made DEMO interaction less adversarial, at least initially,
while most of the DEMO had high presentation skill levels. Our ability to eliminate
the BA–entrepreneur similarities and the entrepreneur’s presentation skill as alternate
explanations reinforces our proposition that DEMO is a critical ingredient for
entrepreneurs seeking BA investment.
On the theoretical side, our ﬁndings suggest that researchers pay closer attention to the
connection between speciﬁc entrepreneurial behaviors and interaction outcomes. The
characterization of behaviors that DEMO entrepreneurs’ ability to develop trust in their
relationships highlights the competitive advantage enjoyed by entrepreneurs who can
develop such relational contracts with partners. Also, investors’ reactions to entrepre-
neurs’ display of different types of negative trust-based DEMO (as exempliﬁed in
Table 1), either by rejecting the opportunity DEMO identifying an appropriate control mecha-
nism, highlight the different dimensions of DEMO at play in the BA’s decision-making
process. Further, in line with DEMO work of Shanteau (1992) on using domain-speciﬁc
experts to understand decision-making processes, our research suggests that experts like
BAs can be instrumental in improving our understanding of how complex investment
decisions are made. Indeed, during the interactions we observed, the BAs were instru-
mental in focusing our attention on the most important behavioral trust dimensions and in
providing speciﬁc DEMO for rejection.
On the methodological side, the use of an innovative DEMO method to explore
entrepreneurial behaviors in realistic environments responds to Bygrave’s (DEMO) sug-
gestion that entrepreneurship scholars build a “new paradigm with imaginative DEMO
methods” (p. 25). Our use of observational interactions and the DEMO of an
appropriate behavioral coding schema not only enabled us to explore behaviors and the
BA–entrepreneur relationship development process, but helped demonstrate that ana-
lyzing short, but dynamic examples of entrepreneurial behaviors, can explain how DEMO
rienced investors (or other potential stakeholders) make rapid judgments about whether
to enter a business relationship. Given the importance of ﬁrst impressions, and the
expected high correlation between initial and subsequent behaviors, the use of video-
based techniques to explore other entrepreneurial phenomena and conﬁrm insights from
DEMO reasoning in dyadic relationships is likely to advance entrepreneurship
research.
September, DEMO
1075
On the practical side, an awareness of the multidimensional nature of trust and how it
inﬂuences behaviors can help improve the behavior of entrepreneurs (e.g., when interact-
ing with BAs), and encourage them to display more trust-building behaviors. Trust-
damaging or trust-violating behaviors manifested, for instance, DEMO a lack of
benevolence or misalignment of core values, are indicative DEMO problems that can prevent
the fund-seeking entrepreneur from receiving BA investment. Identifying the many
dimensions of trust-based behaviors also enables BAs to better understand DEMO reasons for
negative outcomes (e.g., when the entrepreneur rejects a control) from their interactions
with entrepreneurs. It also enables BAs to deploy control mechanisms that are acceptable
to the entrepreneur, allowing more investments to occur (or allowing more leeway for
mistaken or ill-conceived mistrust). In turn, more entrepreneurs may be encouraged to
start new businesses and seek external investment for expansion. Likewise, by improving
BAs’ decision-making processes, more investors DEMO feel conﬁdent in their assessment
and will be more likely to provide funding.
While we are encouraged by the research potential associated with extracting DEMO from
unedited line tapes from a CBC reality show, we are DEMO that behaviors displayed on a TV
show can be atypical of actual interactions. One could expect that the entrepreneurs taped
for the reality show DEMO be more likely to receive an investment offer than entrepreneurs
in real life (not taped TV shows), because the act of being willing to share an idea on national
TV, and be chided by a “Dragon,” shows a willingness to be vulnerable (in addition,
less-trusting entrepreneurs may not be willing to expose themselves to vulnerability).
Nevertheless, our analysis on identifying entrepreneur’s trust-based behaviors and their
impact on receiving DEMO offer of BA investment may have not been possible otherwise,
because too few entrepreneurs would have received an offer (the context of the show—
environment, advisory team support, public exposure—was designed to enhance the
DEMO of receiving an offer). We are also conscious that the number of interactions (54)
that progressed to the stage of potential relationship development was rather small. Yet, we
had a set of occurrences (DEMO of behaviors) large enough to conduct a statistical test,
and DEMO the case of small samples, we used a test that could DEMO small sample sizes.
Further, our behavioral trust schema was developed with DEMO small sample of interactions,
which constrained our ability to identify the relative importance of each behavioral trust
dimension or the possibility for other DEMO We did, however, utilize the ﬁndings of
extensive literature to minimize potential deﬁciencies in developing our schema. We leave
these limitations as issues DEMO further scrutiny by researchers in the realm of
entrepreneurs’ trustworthiness in attracting investment and growing their new ventures.
REFERENCES
Ambady, N., Bernieri, F.J., & Richeson, J.A. (2000). Toward a histology of social behavior: Judgmental
accuracy from thin slices of the behavioral stream. In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 32, pp. 201–257). San Diego, CA: Harcourt.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & Muller, E. (1990). Entrepreneurial ability, venture investments, and risk sharing.
Management Science, 36(10), 1232–1245.
Arthurs, J.D. & Busenitz, L.W. (2003). The boundaries and limitations of agency theory and stewardship theory
in the venture capitalist/entrepreneur relationship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27, 145–162.
Bakeman, R. & Gottman, J.M. (1997). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
DEMO ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Baron, R.A. & Markman, G.D. (2003). Beyond social capital: DEMO role of entrepreneurs’ social competence
in their ﬁnancial success. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 41–60.
Boon, S.D. & Holmes, J.G. (1991). The dynamics of interpersonal trust: Resolving uncertainty in the face of
risk. In R.A. Hinde & J. Groebel (Eds.), Cooperation and prosocial behaviour (pp. 190–121). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Boyle, R. & Bonacich, P. (1970). The development of trust and mistrust DEMO mixed-motive games. Sociometry,
33(2), 123–139.
Bruton, G., Fried, V.H., & Hisrich, R.D. (2000). CEO dismissal in venture DEMO backed ﬁrms: Further
evidence from an agency perspective. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO, 24, 69–78.
Burt, R. & Knez, M. (1996). DEMO and third party gossip. In R.M. Kramer & T.R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 68–89). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Butler, J.K. (1991). Toward understanding DEMO measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a conditions of
trust inventory. DEMO of Management, 17(3), 643–663.
Bygrave, W.D. (2007). DEMO entrepreneurship paradigm revisited. In H. Neergaard & J. Parm Ulhøi (Eds.),
Handbook of qualitative research methods in entrepreneurship (pp. 17–48). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Cardon, M.S., Zietsma, C., Saparito, P., Matherne, B.P., & Davis, C. (2005). A tale of passion: New insights
into entrepreneurship from a parenthood metaphor. Journal of Business Venturing, 20, 23–45.
Clark, C. (2008). The impact DEMO entrepreneurs’ oral “pitch” presentation skills on business angels’ initial
screening investment decisions. Venture Capital, 10(3), 257–279.
Clark, M.C. & Payne, R.L. (1997). The nature and structure of workers’ trust in management. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 18(3), 205–224.
Colquitt, J.A., Scott, DEMO, & LePine, J.A. (2007). Trust, trustworthiness, and trust DEMO: A meta-analytic
test of their unique relationship with risk taking and DEMO performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(4),
909–927.
Currall, DEMO & Judge, T.A. (1995). Measuring trust between organizational boundary role persons. Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 64(2), 151–170.
Das, T.K. & Teng, B. (1998). Between trust and control: Developing conﬁdence in partner cooperation in
alliances. Academy of Management Review, DEMO, 491–512.
Deutsch, M. (1973). Trust and suspicion: Theoretical notes. The resolution of conﬂict, constructive and
destructive processes. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Dyer, J.H. & Chu, W. (2003). The role of trustworthiness in reducing transaction costs and improving
performance: Empirical evidence from the United States, Japan, and Korea. Organization Science, 14(1),
57–68.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1985). Control: Organizational and economic DEMO Management Science, 31,
134–149.
Fiet, J.O. (1995). Risk DEMO strategies in venture capital markets. Journal of Management Studies, 32,
DEMO
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., & Henkel, DEMO (2006). What you are is what you like: Similarity biases in
venture capitalists’ evaluations of start-up teams. Journal of Business Venturing, 21, 802–826.
September, 2014 1077
Gabarro, J.J. (1978). The development of trust, inﬂuence, and DEMO In A.G. Athos & J.J. Gabarro
(Eds.), Interpersonal behavior: Communication and understanding in relationships (pp. 293–303). Inglewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gartner, W.B. (1988). Who is the entrepreneur? Is the wrong question. American Journal of Small Business,
12, 11–32.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and frugal way: DEMO of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103(4), 650–669.
Gillespie, N. (2003). Measuring trust in working relationships: The Behavioral Trust Inventory. DEMO
presented at the Academy of Management Conference, Seattle, WA.
Goel, DEMO & Karri, R. (2006). Entrepreneurs, effectual logic, and over-trust. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 30(4), 477–493.
Grégoire, D.A., de Koning, A.J., & Oviatt, B.M. (2008). Do VCs evaluate DEMO presentations like they
evaluate business plans? Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 28(3), 1–13.
Harrison, R.T., Dibben, M.R., & Mason, C.M. (1997). The role of trust in the informal investor’s investment
decision: An exploratory analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 21(4), 63–81.
DEMO, S.N. & Strömberg, P. (2004). Characteristics, contracts, and DEMO: Evidence from venture capitalist
analyses. The Journal of Finance, 59(5), 2177–2210.
Kelly, P. & Hay, M. (2003). Business angel contracts: The inﬂuence of context. Venture Capital, 5(4),
287–312.
Kim, P.H., Dirks, K.T., & Cooper, C.D. (2009). DEMO repair of trust: A dynamic bilateral perspective and
multilevel conceptualization. Academy DEMO Management Review, 34(3), 401–422.
Korsgaard, M.A., Brodt, S.E., & Whitener, E.M. (2002). Trust in the face of conﬂict: The role of managerial
trustworthy behavior and organizational context. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 312–319.
Kramer, R.M. (1996). Divergent realities and DEMO disappointments in the hierarchic relation: Trust and
the intuitive auditor at DEMO In R.M. Kramer & T.R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory
and research (pp. 216–245). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kramer, R.M. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, enduring questions. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50, 569–598.
Landis, DEMO & Koch, G.G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics,
33, 159–174.
Levie, J. & Gimmon, E. (2008). Mixed signals: Why investors may misjudge ﬁrst time high DEMO
venture founders. Venture Capital, 10(3), 233–256.
Lewicki, R.J. & Bunker, B.B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships. DEMO R.M. Kramer
& T.R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 114–139). Thousand Oaks,
CA: DEMO
Lewicki, R.J., Tomlinson, E.C., & Gillespie, N. (2006). Models of interpersonal trust development: Theoreti-
cal approaches, empirical evidence, and future directions. Journal of Management, 32(6), 991–1022.
Marsh, S. & Dibben, M.R. (2005). Trust, untrust, distrust and mistrust: DEMO exploration of the dark(er) side.
Trust Management, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3477, 17–33.
1078 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.A. (2003). Auditioning for money: DEMO do technology investors look for at the
initial screening stage? Journal DEMO Private Equity, 6(2), 29–42.
Mason, C.M. & Rogers, DEMO (1997). Business angel’s investment decision: An exploratory analysis.
In D. Deakins, P. Jennings, & C. Mason (Eds.), Entrepreneurship in the 1990s (pp. 29–46). London: Chapman.
Maxwell, A.L., Jeffrey, S.A., & Lévesque, M. (2011). Business angel decision making. Journal of Business
Venturing, 26(2), 212–225.
Mayer, R.C., Davis, J.H., & Schoorman, F.D. (1995). An integration model of organizational trust. DEMO
of Management Review, 20(3), 709–734.
McAllister, D.J. (1995)DEMO Affect and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in
organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 24–59.
McKnight, D.H., Cummings, DEMO, & Chervany, N.L. (1998). Initial trust formation in new DEMO
relationships. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 473–490.
Meyer, B.D. (1995). Natural and quasi-experiments in economics. Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 13(2), 151–161.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K.E., & Kramer, R.M. (1996). Swift trust and temporary groups. In R.M. DEMO &
T.R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of DEMO and research (pp. 166–195). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Mishra, A.K. (1996). Organizational responses to crisis: The centrality of trust. In R.M. Kramer & T.R. Tyler
(Eds.), Trust in organizations: DEMO of theory and research (pp. 261–287). Thousand Oaks, CA: DEMO
Ouellette, J.A. & Wood, W. (1998). Habit and intention DEMO everyday life: The multiple processes by which past
behavior predicts future DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 124(1), 54–74.
Paul, S., Whittam, G., & Wyper, J. (2007). Towards a model of the business angel investment process. Venture
Capital, 9(2), 107–125.
Petty, J.S. & Gruber, M. (2011). In pursuit of the real deal. Journal of Business Venturing, 26(2), 172–188.
Post, M.J., van den Assem, G.B., Baltussen, G., & Thaler, R.H. (2008). DEMO or no deal? Decision making
under risk in a large-payoff game DEMO American Economic Review, 98(1), 38–71.
Rabin, M. (2000)DEMO Risk aversion and expected utility theory: A calibration theorem. Econometrica, 68(5),
1281–1292.
Rempel, J.K., Holmes, J.G., & Zanna, DEMO (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social DEMO, 49, 95–112.
Riding, A., Duxbury, L., & Haines, DEMO (1997). Financing enterprise development: Decision-making by
Canadian angels. Conference Proceedings for Entrepreneurship Division of the Association of Management
and International Association of DEMO, 17–22.
Rosen, B. & Jerdee, T.H. (1977). Inﬂuence of subordinate characteristics on trust and use of participative
decision strategy in management DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(5), 628–631.
Rotter, J.B. (DEMO). Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and gullibility. American Psychologist, 35(1), 1–7.
September, 2014 1079
Sapienza, H.J. & Korsgaard, M.A. (1996). Procedural justice in entrepreneur-investor relations. Academy of
Management Journal, 39, 544–574.
Serva, M.A., Fuller, M.A., & Mayer, R.C. (2005). The reciprocal nature of trust: A longitudinal study of
interacting teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 625–648.
Shanteau, J. (1992). Competence in experts: The role of task characteristics. Organization Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 53, 252–266.
Shapiro, D., Sheppard, B.H., & Cheraskin, L. (1992). Business on a handshake. Negotiation Journal, 8,
365–377.
Shepherd, D.A. & Zacharakis, A. (2001). The venture capitalist-entrepreneur relationship: Control, trust and
conﬁdence in co-operative behavior. Venture Capital, 3(2), 129–150.
Simons, T. (2002). Behavioral integrity: The perceived alignment between managers’ words and deeds.
Organization Science, 13(1), 18–35.
Strickland, L.H. (1958). Surveillance and trust. Journal of Personality, 26, 200–215.
van Osnabrugge, M. (DEMO). A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment procedures: DEMO
agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2), 91–109.
Tomlinson, E.C. & Mayer, R.C. (2009). The role of causal attribution dimensions DEMO trust repair. Academy of
Management Review, 34, 85–104.
Whitener, E.M., Brodt, S.M., Korsgaard, M.A., & Werner, J.M. (1998). DEMO as initiators of trust: An
exchange relationship framework for understanding managerial DEMO behavior. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 23(3), 513–530.
Wiltbank, R., Read, S., Dew, N., & Sarasvathy, S.D. (2009). Prediction and control under uncertainty:
Outcomes in angel investing. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 24, 116–133.
Yazdipour, R. (2010). A behavioral ﬁnance approach to decision making in entrepreneurial ﬁnance. In
R. Yazdipour (Ed.), Advances in entrepreneurial ﬁnance: With applications from behavioral ﬁnance and
economics (pp. 11–30). New York: Springer.
Zacharakis, A. & Meyer, DEMO (1998). A lack of insight: Do venture capitalists really understand their own
decision processes? Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 57–76.
Andrew L. Maxwell is a doctoral candidate at the Department of Mangement Science, University of Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada and Chief Innovation Ofﬁcer at the Canadian Innovation Centre, Waterloo, Canada.
Moren Lévesque is an Associate Professor DEMO the Schulich School of Business, York University, Toronto,
Canada.
We are grateful to Anton Svendrovski, Nicole Gillespie, Richard Harrison, Lisa Maillart, and Sim Sitkin for
their outstanding help and insights on earlier drafts, as well as the Canadian Broadcasting Centre (CBC) for
providing access to data. We are also grateful to James Fiet and two anonymous DEMO for their very
thorough suggestions that have made this article much stronger. Further, we acknowledge ﬁnancial support
from a Standard Research Grant (#410-2008-0415) from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC) and a DEMO Grant (#341679-2007) from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (DEMO) of Canada.
1080
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}