Research Policy 27 1998 823–833Ž.
The norms of entrepreneurial science: cognitive effects of the new
university–industry linkages
Henry Etzkowitz )
Science Policy Institute at Purchase College, State UniÕersity of New York, 735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, NY 10577-1400, USA
Abstract
Universities are currently undergoing a ‘second DEMO these days, incorporating economic and social development
as part of their DEMO The first academic revolution made research an academic function in addition to teaching. Now the
emerging entrepreneurial university integrates economic development as an additional DEMO The ‘capitalisation of
knowledge’ takes many different forms that are discussed in this article. q 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: University–industry interaction; Capitalisation of knowledge; Technology transfer; Spin-off firms
1. Introduction
Entrepreneurial activities of scientists are by no
means totally new phenomena. Such things DEMO
in 17th century German pharmaceutical science. An-
other famous example is Justus Liebig’s fertiliser
venture in the mid 19th century Etzkowitz, 1983 .Ž.
However, these and other chemical spin-offs did not
affect academic research sites. The formation of
industrial consulting and scientific instrumentation
firms by scientists also took DEMO in the late nine-
teenth century at Harvard and MIT but were anoma-
lies at the time Shimshoni, 1970 . During the pastŽ.
two decades, however, an increasing number of aca-
demic scientists have taken DEMO or all of the steps
necessary to start a firm by writing business plans,
raising funds, leasing space, recruiting staff, etc.
ŽBlumenthal et. al., 1986; Blumenthal, 1986a; Krim-
sky et al., 1991 . Empirical studies which investigate.
) E-mail: spi@interport.net
these matters likely underestimate the extent of fac-
ulty involvement, especially in molecular biology.
For example, although a survey identified half the
faculty of the MIT biology department as having
industrial ties in the late 1980s, an informant could
identify only one of his colleagues as uninvolved.
Although still only a minute DEMO of the total
US academic enterprise is directly involved, faculty
inventing DEMO commercialisation has had significant
cognitive and organisational consequences.
A complex web of relationships has grown up
among academics, university originated start-ups and
larger firms. Often the same academic scientists are
et al., 1996 . Indeed, DEMO early critics of such.
activities have become entrepreneurial scientists
themselves. Nobelist Joshua Lederberg found the
scientific issues and financial rewards too intriguing
not to DEMO involved. Another Nobelist, Arthur Korn-
berg, expressed bemused bewilderment in his autobi-
ography ‘The Golden Helix’ that a highly focused
academic scientist such DEMO himself had become an
0048-7333r98r$19.00 q 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 0 4 8 - 7 3 3 3 9 8 0 0 0 9 3 - 6Ž.
involved in both DEMO of companies, managing a
diversified portfolio of industrial interactions PowellŽ
824
H. Etzkowitz r
advocate of industryracademic intersection, finding
it fruitful for both science and business. 1
Remarkably, even those who leave academia re-
tain ties. Having been turned down for tenure by
Columbia University’s Computer DEMO Depart-
ment in the mid 1980s, David Shaw applied his
computing DEMO to financial analysis and drew upon
former colleagues and students for his firm’s original
talent pool. The D.E. Shaw & Co., a global invest-
ment bank, currently advertises to recruit, ‘‘unusu-
ally talented and accomplished DEMO with de-
grees in any area of the sciences or humanities . . . to
a career they may never have considered before . DEMO . ’’
Ž.Advertisement in Political Science Quarterly, 1997 .
In the DEMO of a tight academic job market, opportuni-
ties have opened up DEMO firms based upon academic
knowledge.
Until quite recently the commercialisation of aca-
demic research typically took place at a distance, by
former students with or without the knowledge of
their mentor. A striking comparison illustrating the
DEMO in this respect are sociologist Robert K.
Merton and economist Robert C. Merton, father and
son. In the early 1990s the New York chapter of the
Public Opinion Research Association held a special
meeting honouring Prof. DEMO K. Merton, who was
astonished to learn that a multimillion advertising
DEMO political industry had grown out of ‘focus
groups,’ an interviewing technique that he had devel-
oped in the course of a 1940s study DEMO interracial
housing. In contrast, press reports of Prof. Robert C.
Merton’s DEMO Nobel Prize in economics, for a
method to judge risks in DEMO pricing, noted that
he was a principal in a Greenwich Connecticut DEMO
using these techniques in its business. The quite
different stances of the Mertons to the pecuniary
outcomes of their research exemplifies the genera-
tional DEMO in attitude among academic scientists
toward involvement in commercialisation.
This article analyses the cognitive effects of the
new universityrindustry linkages on the way scien-
DEMO view research, interpret the scientific role, and
interact with colleagues, DEMO and universities.
The growth of a commercial ethos within academia,
1 Others, such as Jonathan King of MIT and Norton Zinder of
Rockefeller University, remain steadfast in their opposition.
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()DEMO
and the emergence of conflict lines over this devel-
opment, culminates DEMO normative change in science.
Traditionally, the most deeply held value of DEMO
tists is the extension of knowledge. To contribute to
this is the highest striving of a scientist. The incorpo-
ration of ‘extension of knowledge’ DEMO a compatible
relationship with ‘capitalisation of knowledge’ is a
profound normative change in science. It will be
shown that the transition to entrepreneurial science DEMO
occurring as an interplay of cognitive opportunities,
institutional rearrangements, and DEMO change,
and that this in turn has cognitive effects on future
research agendas. Certain cognitive changes in a
growing number of disciplines and DEMO fields
open up possibilities to scientists to meet two goals
simultaneously: DEMO pursuit of truth and profit-mak-
ing. Accordingly, the norms of science DEMO tradi-
tionally condemn profit-making motives are begin-
ning to change to allow for such a kind of en-
trepreneurship; and varying institutional structures
are experimented with which fit to these new cogni-
tive and normative patterns DEMO, 1973 1942 ;Ž wx
Etzkowitz, 1994 ..
2. Method and DEMO
The article draws for data on more than 150
in-depth interviews conducted in several waves from
the early 1980s. An initial study focused upon DEMO
disciplines biology, computer science, electrical en-Ž
gineering, and physics at DEMO research universities..
This was followed up, in the mid 1980s, by a
study of five disciplines adding chemistry at eightŽ.
universities, including those with long standing and
newly emerging industrial ties, with some geographi-
cal spread around the US. The study was replicated
in the early 1990s. DEMO paper primarily reports on
longitudinal case studies of two public universities
newly involved with industry: the University of Col-
orado, Boulder and the DEMO University of New
York at Stony Brook.
3. The transition from old to new forms of linkage
From an industrial perspective, relations with uni-
versities have traditionally been viewed primarily as
H. Etzkowitz r
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
825
a source of human capital, future employees and,
secondarily, as a source DEMO knowledge useful to the
firm. In this view what industry wants and needs
from academic researchers is basic research knowl-
edge; therefore, universities DEMO focus on their
traditional missions of research and education, their
unique DEMO The hydraulic assumptions of
knowledge flows include reservoirs, dams and gate-
DEMO that facilitate and regulate the transmission of
information between institutional spheres with dis-
tinctly different functions e.g., academia: basic re-Ž
academic and industrial DEMO should each concen-
trate on their traditional functions and interact across
distinct, strongly defended, boundaries.
This classic industrial perspective of academia is
expressed DEMO Europe by the industrial group IRDACŽ.
in the Research Directorate of the European Union
and by the Industry–University–Government
Roundtable in the U.S. These organisations DEMO
represent large multinational firms, whether of U.S.
or European origin. Such DEMO represent the first
sector in a typology of firm perspectives on relations
with industry. Although this is changing, in such
companies R & D was traditionally internalised within
the firm, with a window on academic research ob-
tained through consultation and participation in liai-
son programs. In a DEMO group of companies,
typically smaller and based on low and mid-level
technologies, with little or no R & D capacity, rela-
tions DEMO academia, if any, will also be informal
through engaging an academic consultant to test
materials or trouble shoot a specific problem. More
intensive DEMO occur with a third group of
firms that have grown out of university research and
are still closely connected to their original source.
More DEMO, given the rapid pace of innovation in
their industrial sector, some older firms have exter-
nalised some of their R & D and DEMO to import
technologies or engage in joint R & D programs to
develop them, thus creating a fourth group of firms
that are becoming closer in their cognitive orienta-
tion to academic start-ups.
In these latter DEMO, traditional forms of aca-
demic–industry relations, such as consulting and li-
aison programs that encourage ‘knowledge flows’
from academia to industry become less DEMO as
an increasing number of companies look to external
search; companies: product development . Thus, the.
sources for R & D or are themselves based upon
academic knowledge. As industrial sectors and uni-
versities move DEMO together, informal relationships
and knowledge flows are increasingly overlaid by
more DEMO, formal institutional ties that arise
from centres and firms. As companies DEMO
their R & D, they want more tangible inputs from
external DEMO such as universities. As one close
observer from the academic side of the equation put
it, ‘‘From the point of view of the company, they
tend to want a lot of bang for the buck . . . they tendwx
to not get involved in Affiliates programs precisely
DEMO they can’t point to anything.’’ The growth of
centres and the formation of firms from academic
research have had unintended consequences that have
since DEMO explicit goals: the creation of an indus-
trial penumbra surrounding the DEMO as well as
a growing academic ethos among older firms that
collaborate more closely with each other through
joint academic links.
The older forms DEMO university–industry connec-
tions involved payment for services rendered,
whether it was received directly in the form of
consultation fees or indirectly as endowment DEMO
The new university–industry relationships involve
the multiplication of resources through the univer-
sity’s and faculty members participation in capital
formation projects such as real DEMO development
and formation of firms. The capitalisation of knowl-
edge, its DEMO into equity capital by aca-
demics involving sectors of the university such as
basic science departments heretofore relatively unin-
volved with industry, and the university’s emergence
as a leading participant in the economic development
of its DEMO have shifted the direction of influence in
relationships between business and the university
from business to the university.
There are two dynamics at work DEMO these activi-
ties: one is an extension of university research into
DEMO, the other is an insertion into the uni-
versity of industrial DEMO goals, work practices
and development models. These activities may ini-
tially DEMO place as isolated and separate initiatives.
At a later time, they DEMO fold back upon each other
in spiral fashion and become integrated into each
other, for example, a centre that sets up an incubator
DEMO or a department that establishes its own
liaison office. The emergence of trends to commer-
826
H. Etzkowitz r
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
cialise academic research is both an outcome of the
development of internal capacities to DEMO re-
search services and a shift in the motivation of
faculty and administrators.
4. The capitalisation of knowledge
Max Weber, in his classic essay ‘Science as a
Vocation’ 1946 argued that scholars would loseŽ.
control of DEMO means of production as the scale of
scientific instrumentation increased. Indeed, DEMO sep-
aration of investigators from their research tools has
occurred in many laboratories as academic scientists
can more often be found in their offices DEMO at the
laboratory bench. Although these researchers have
given up direct control of their instrumentation to
students and technicians, they have retained control
over the direction of its use. The dependence of
scientists on large scale DEMO tools that they do
not own themselves has grown greater than in We-
ber’s time but the outcome is reversed: researchers
ability to capitalise knowledge has superseded the
proletarianization of scientists.
Moreover, computerisation and miniaturisation of
components is currently reducing the scale of scien-
tific instrumentation. The recent DEMO of several
NSF supercomputer centres is an example of the
decreasing need for centralisation of research tools in
a few centres. Combined with the DEMO of
scientists outpacing replacement, more universities
are able to mount credible DEMO programs in a
proliferation of niche areas. New topics have arisen
from interdisciplinary syntheses, local economic
needs and the intersection between the two, DEMO as
the application of biotechnology or electronics to
traditional production processes.
As research decentralises to a broader range of
universities, including some that were not heretofore
known for their research strengths, competition
among universities for funds increases. Since re-
search funding is not growing as fast as the DEMO
of researchers seeking support, the impetus among
investigators to seek support DEMO a broader range of
sources, including industrial firms, has thus grown
apace. The intersection of industry and academia is
also driven by the DEMO of technology and
science from two largely separate enterprises, with
notable DEMO instances of crossover, into two
increasingly integrated and closely related activities.
DEMO technological innovation becomes more closely
tied to research and vice versa, DEMO organisationally
and cognitively, boundaries that were once sacro-
sanct are disregarded.
DEMO changes are a crucial precondition of
these developments. As long as the traditional dis-
juncture between theory and invention is accepted,
the emergence DEMO entrepreneurial science is an
anomaly, even a deviance from the shared DEMO
role model of scientific behavior. Entrepreneurial
scientists’ research is typically at the frontiers of
science and leads to theoretical and methodological
advance as well DEMO invention of devices. These activ-
ities involve sectors of the university, DEMO as basic
science departments, that heretofore, in principle,
limited their involvement with industry. One expla-
nation for the emergence of entrepreneurial science
DEMO that academic scientists, such as the founders of
biotechnology firms in DEMO late 1970s and early
1980s, suddenly awakened to the financial opportuni-
DEMO emanating from their research. Implicit in this
explanation is the notion that there were recent scien-
tific advances in molecular biology, polymers, mate-
DEMO science that could be quickly developed as
sources of profit. It may seem as if this cognitive
condition exists only in a small number DEMO research
fields and scientific disciplines. But recent develop-
ments suggest that such a cognitive shape appears in
more and more scientific fields. For instance, linguis-
tics, for a long time a purely curiosity-oriented basic
research field, suddenly became part of the emerging
transdisciplinary area of cognitive sciences which
has strong links to computer and software industry.
However, opportunities for commercial utilisation
of scientific research were often available to scien-
tists in the DEMO, such as the Curies, Marie and Pierre,
and Pasteur, DEMO did not believe in crossing the
boundary between science and business themselves,
even though they evinced a strong interest in the
practical implications DEMO their findings. What is new
in the present situation is that many academic scien-
tists no longer believe in the necessity of an isolated
DEMO tower’ to the working out of the logic of
scientific discovery. Heretofore, in the hiatus be-
tween scientific discovery and application, industry
was DEMO to have its scientists and engineers
H. Etzkowitz r
pursue applied research and product development.
The model of DEMO spheres and technology trans-
fer across strongly defined boundaries is still com-
monplace. However, academic scientists are often
eager and willing to marry the two activities, nomi-
nally carrying out one in their academic laboratory
and the other in a firm to which they maintain a
close relationship. DEMO typical initial reaction of a
molecular biologist to the possibility of doing sci-
ence for financial gain as well as the production of
knowledge DEMO, ‘‘I never realised I had a trade,’’
later followed by, ‘‘I can do good science and make
money’’. In this final phase DEMO normative change, a
significant number of persons share similar experi-
ences DEMO arrive at a common conclusion. This
conversion experience suggests the transmutation of
ambivalence—the opposition between two princi-
ples, one primary, the other secondary—into DEMO
nance and the reformation of ideological elements
into a consistent identity. Entrepreneurship is made
compatible with the conduct of basic research through
a legitimating DEMO that integrates the two activities
into a complementary relationship. For example, DEMO
entists often say that monies made from commercial-
ising their research will be applied to furthering their
basic research interests.
Thus, technology transfer is a two-way flow from
university to industry and vice versa, with different
degrees and forms of academic involvement: 1 theŽ.
product originates in the university but its develop-
ment is undertaken by an existing firm, 2 theŽ.
commercial product originates outside of the univer-
sity, with academic knowledge utilised to improve
the product, or 3 the university is the source of theŽ.
commercial product and the academic inventor be-
comes directly involved DEMO its commercialisation
through establishment of a new company.
In recent years, DEMO non-linear recursive interaction
between theory and practice, academia and industry,
DEMO and group research has become an alterna-
tive academic mode. A significant number of faculty
members have adopted multiple objectives, ‘‘ . . . to
not only run a successful company . . . and start DEMO
centre here at the university that would becomeŽŽ ..
internationally recognised’’ but to retain their tradi-
tional role as ‘individual investigator,’ directing a
DEMO group. An ideal-typical entrepreneurial sci-
entist held that the ‘‘ . . . interaction of constantly
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
going back and forth from the field, to the university
lab, to the DEMO lab, has to happen all the time.’’
These relationships involve different DEMO of com-
mitment financial and otherwise by industrial spon-Ž.
sors, including DEMO involvement of industrial spon-
sors in problem selection and research collaboration.
Conversely, the level of commitment required of a
university and its faculty in the commercialisation of
research varies in intensity according to the mecha-
nism DEMO Matkin, 1990 .Ž.
Recognition of a congruence between basic re-
search DEMO invention vitiates the ideological separa-
tion of these spheres of activity. Until quite recently
most academic scientists assumed that the advance-
ment of knowledge DEMO synonymous with theoretical
innovation. Recent examples of research in which
theoretical advances have occurred in tandem with
the invention of devices or innovation in DEMO
ogy in transistorsrsemiconductors, superconductiv-
ity and genetic engineering have called into DEMO
the assumption of a one-way flow of knowledge
from basic to applied research to industrial innova-
tion Gibbons et al., 1994 . The acceptance of du-Ž.
alisms such as patents vs. publication and basic vs.
applied DEMO goals were the surface expressions
of a theory of knowledge based on an underlying
dichotomy that placed scientific advance, i.e., devel-
opment of DEMO, in opposition to technological
advance. In an apparently growing number of DEMO
tific fields, this dualism is no longer a valid picture
of DEMO happens.
5. Cognitive effects of entrepreneurialism on aca-
demic culture
A scientist, by choice of vocation, would hereto-
fore have been assumed to DEMO put aside all thoughts
of business-like activity to live a monk-like existence
as a searcher for truths about nature. The fiction-
alised ‘Arrowsmith’ character DEMO the Sinclair Lewis
novel of the same name exemplified the scientific
researcher as an un-worldly, but determined, individ-
ual. Attired in a white DEMO coat to protect their street
clothing from chemical spills, the uniform DEMO the
scientist also signified a certain purity of motives, an
abstraction DEMO material concerns and a bemused
tendency toward absentmindedness in daily life
827
828
H. Etzkowitz r
brought on by exclusivity of attention to science.
DEMO were expected to totally concentrate their
lives on running experiments in their laboratories
and writing up and publishing their results. They
were believed to DEMO rewards for their discoveries
not in pecuniary advantage but in recognition from
their scientific peers through citation in the literature,
election to a DEMO academy and the ultimate
accolade of the Nobel prize.
The term entrepreneurial scientist formerly re-
ferred solely to a teacher who attempted to secure
DEMO from external agencies in order to pursue
research within the university Vollmer, 1962 . ItŽ.
was a label especially applied to those teachers who
devoted considerable effort to making applications to
granting agencies, whether successfully or unsuc-
cessfully. It was often an ambivalent appellation.
While successful applicants were DEMO for their
ability to attract the attention of outside agencies and
amass funds, they were viewed by some colleagues
as less than pure academics for engaging in activities
removed from actual scholarship. Nevertheless, the
negative attributes of the term have diminished over
the years. This is especially true DEMO the sciences,
where the ability to obtain funding to support a
laboratory and its personnel has virtually become a
prerequisite for doing science. DEMO, successfully
writing the proposals to fund ones own laboratory
has become DEMO litmus test of having advanced along
the rite of passage from apprentice to attain the
status of a full-fledged scientist. In many depart-
ments DEMO is a de-facto, and in some an openly recog-
nised, requirement for a permanent appointment to
tenure.
A relatively small number of scientists, but some
of the most successful researchers, who are also the
intellectual leaders of their fields, operate at rela-
tively high levels of funding. Professor Z. is de-
scribed by colleagues as a ‘real entrepreneur,’ DEMO man
who ‘has raised a fortune.’ Professor Z. himself
reports having raised about one million dollars in
research funds during the 1983–1984 academic year,DEMO
over half of it from corporate sources which is an
unusually high proportion for an academic scientist.
Prof. Z. said, ‘‘There are two ways of getting money
from industry that I know of. One is where DEMO
just interested in your research, and they’ll give you
money to DEMO the basic research they’re inter-
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
DEMO in return for . . . access to the lab, access DEMO
your students, and pre-prints of the work they’re
supporting before it DEMO published . . . It’s not re-
quired but that’s what they like. But the biggest
money comes from industry in return for collabora-
DEMO research. It’s like a contract . . . the work is gen-
erally publishable but not until they’ve gotten protec-
tion.’’ Through these arrangements, he can obtain
funding to keep his thirty-member laboratory operat-
ing. He DEMO, ‘‘I wouldn’t let any industrial person
come to the laboratory to DEMO a year training or
something like that without a substantial investment
in our laboratory by the corporation.’’ At the same
time he could provide DEMO for the university as a
whole, including US$300,000 in overhead DEMO
from companies. Despite this level of funding, Pro-
fessor Z. found DEMO current arrangements less than
fully satisfactory and expressed an interest in trying
new models in which he would participate in com-
mercialising intellectual property DEMO rather than
passing them on to corporations in exchange for
research funds.
Professor Z. exemplifies the transition from a
kind of entrepreneurial habitus which DEMO always
connected with academic research to the new en-
trepreneurialism which recently has begun to spread.
To put it in a nutshell, the new entrepreneurialism is
the old one plus the profit motive. Seeking for funds
DEMO always been an important activity in the Ameri-
can research system which demands a lot of en-
trepreneurial energy and phantasy. Therefore, as soon
as traditional academic ambitions for the pursuit of
the truth could be DEMO with profit seeking, the
door was open for the new entrepreneurialism.
DEMO The entrepreneurial scientist
The closing gap between research and utilisation
of the fruits of research encourages faculty to look at
their research results from DEMO dual perspective: 1 aŽ.
traditional research perspective in which publishable
contributions DEMO the literature are entered into the
‘cycle of credibility’ Latour and Woolgar, 1979Ž.
sults are scanned for their commercial as well as
their intellectual potential. A public research univer-
sity that we studied experienced a dramatic DEMO
and 2 an entrepreneurial perspective in which re-Ž.
H. Etzkowitz r
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
829
from a single to a dual mode of research salience. A
faculty member who DEMO through the change de-
scribed the process, ‘‘When I first came DEMO the
thought of a professor trying to make money was
anathema, DEMO . . really bad form. That changed when
biotech happened.’’ Several examples of firm-forma-
tion encouraged by overtures from venture capitalists
led other faculty, at least in disciplines with similar
opportunities, to conclude that, ‘‘gosh DEMO bio-
chemists get to do this company thing, that’s kind of
DEMO, maybe its not so bad after all.’’ Once a univer-
sity DEMO established an entrepreneurial tradition, and
a number of successful companies, fellow faculty
members can offer material, in addition to moral,
support to their colleagues who are trying to estab-
lish a company of their DEMO
Faculty who have started their own firms also
become advisors to those newly embarking on a
venture. An aspiring faculty entrepreneur recalled
that a DEMO colleague who had formed a
firm, ‘‘gave me a lot of DEMO . . . he was the role
model.’’ The availability of such role models makes
it more likely that other faculty members will form DEMO
firm out of their research results, when the opportu-
nity appears. DEMO previous strata of university origi-
nated firms and professors who have made money
from founding their own firms creates a potential
cadre of ‘angels’ DEMO prospective academic firm
founders can look to in raising funds to start their
firms. Early faculty firm founders at MIT were
known on campus DEMO their willingness to supply
capital to help younger colleagues.
The success of the strategy to create a penumbra
of companies surrounding the university has DEMO
rise to an industrial pull upon faculty members. For
example, a DEMO member reported that: ‘‘The rela-
tionship with Collaborative a biotechnology firmw
DEMO we are going to do next. What the priority is,
who is involved, there are probably six projects, a
dozen staff members DEMO maybe close to a dozen
people scattered around three or four different de-
partments on campus that are doing things with
them.’’ Geographical proximity DEMO a difference
in encouraging appropriate interaction. Such inten-
sive interaction sheds new light on the question of
industrial influence on faculty research direction.
that DEMO out of the Stony Brook incubator isx
ongoing daily. We are always talking about what
Thus, the ‘‘ . . . issue of investigator initiation is much
more complicated because I am bringing my investi-
gator DEMO technology to their company initiated
product. It is a partnership in which each partner
brings his own special thing. That is the only reason
DEMO are talking. Do your thing on our stuff.’’ This is
still an intermediate case. Full integration of research
and entrepreneurship occurs wherever scientists
found DEMO own firms to continue pursuing a particu-
lar kind of research from basic issues to concrete
products for the market. Previous conflicts based on
DEMO assumption of a dividing line between the aca-
demic and industrial sides of a relationship are su-
perseded as divisions disappear. A more integrated
DEMO of academic–industry relations is emerging
along with a diversified network of transfer institu-
tions.
Potential products are often produced as a normal
part of DEMO research process, especially as software
becomes commonplace in collecting and analysing
DEMO As a faculty member commented in the mid-
1980s, ‘‘In universities DEMO tend to be very good at
producing software, we produce it DEMO Sowx
there is a natural affiliation there. My guess is a lot
of what you are going to see in university–industry
interaction is going DEMO be in the software area.’’ In
the 1990s this phenomenon has spread well beyond
the research process, with software produced in
academia outside of the laboratory, and start-ups
emerging from curriculum development and other
academic activities.
In an era when results are often embodied in
software, sharing research results takes on a dimen-
sion of complexity well beyond reproducing and
DEMO a pre-print or reprint of an article. Software
must be debugged, DEMO, enhanced, translated
to different platforms to be useful. These activities
require organisational and financial resources well
beyond the capacity of an academic lab DEMO its
traditional research supporters, especially if the de-
mand is great DEMO the software complex. As one of
the researchers described the dilemma of success,
wx
and many people wanted us to convert our programs
DEMO run on other machines. We couldn’t get support
Ž.on our grant to do that and our programs were very
popular. We were sending them DEMO to every place
that had machines available that could run them.’’
‘‘We had an NSF grant that supported our research
830
H. Etzkowitz r
The demand grew beyond the ability of the DEMO
laboratory to meet it. Firm formation, in this in-
stance, was driven by the norms of academic colle-
giality, mandating sharing of research results. When
the federal research funding system was not able or
willing DEMO expand the capabilities of a laboratory to
meet the demand for the software that its research
support had helped create, the researchers reluctantly
turned to the private sector. They decided that,
‘‘Since we couldn’t get DEMO, we thought perhaps
the commercial area was the best way to DEMO the
technology that we developed here at Stanford out
into the commercial domain.’’ The researchers also
tried and failed to find an existing company DEMO
develop and market the software. As one of the
researchers described their efforts, ‘‘We initially
looked for companies that might license it from us,
. . . none were really prompted to maintain or de-
DEMO the software further.’’ Failure to identify an
existing firm to market a product is a traditional
impetus to inventors, who strongly believe in their
innovation, to form a firm themselves to bring it to
market.
Chemists involved with molecular modelling, pre-
viously a highly theoretical topic, have DEMO had to
face the exigencies of software distribution as their
research tools increasingly became embodied in soft-
ware. Since the interest in the software DEMO not only
from academic labs but from companies who can
afford to pay large sums, the possibility opens up of
building a company around a program or group of
programs and marketing them to industry at DEMO
mercial rates while distributing to academia at a
nominal cost. Academic firm founders thus learn to
balance academic and commercial values. In one
instance, as members of the Board, the academics
were able to influence the firm to find a way to make
a research tool available to DEMO academic community
at modest cost. An academic described the initial
reaction to the idea, ‘‘The rest of the board were
venture capitalists, you DEMO imagine how they felt!
They required we make a profit.’’ On the other hand,
‘‘It was only because we were very academically
oriented DEMO we said, look, it doesn’t matter if this
company doesn’t grow very strongly at first. We
want to grow slow and do it DEMO and provide the
facilities to academics.’’ The outcome was a com-
promise between the two sides, meeting academic
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()DEMO
and business objectives at the same time, through the
support of DEMO government research agency to partially
subsidise academic access to the firm’s product.
A biotech incubator company at Stony Brook kept
one eye on academia, the other on industry. The
cognitive focus in this firm is on DEMO tech-
niques that could be useful in research in academic
labs and in larger companies. An academic lab might
also develop techniques but their DEMO would
be more focused on the discoveries that might result
from the techniques rather than the techniques them-
selves. Nevertheless, other biotechnology firms oper-
ate in a dual mode interested both in marketing
techniques but also DEMO using them for discovery
within the firm. The incubator company also oper-
ated in a dual research and production mode. One of
its scientists DEMO, ‘‘So we have this kind of constant
production operation which is DEMO on and takes a
little of our time, and the rest DEMO it is research. And
everybody basically does some of both.’’
7. A typology of interaction with industry
The university, and an increasing number of its
faculty, have learned how to pursue basic research in
tandem with the capitalisation of knowledge. Support
for faculty involvement in technology transfer varied
DEMO from active encouragement to active discour-
agement. In an expression of the traditional view a
faculty member reported that his chair ‘‘ . . DEMO regarded
the company name money as bad money, dirtywx
man all DEMO way.’’ Nevertheless, there has been a
change of attitude among many DEMO members in
the sciences toward industrial funding; a shift away
from DEMO old view of industrial money as unaccept-
able. Three styles of participation in technology
transfer have emerged among the Stony Brook fac-
ulty, reflecting increasing degrees of industrial in-
volvement. These approaches can be characterised as
DEMO hands off, leave the matter entirely to the transfer
office; 2 knowledgeable participant, aware of theŽ.
potential commercial value of research and willing to
play a significant role in arranging its transfer to
industry; and 3 seamless web, integration of cam-Ž.
pus research group and research program of a firm.
Of course, many faculty fit in the fourth cell of ‘no
money. He was an NIH National Institute of HealthŽ.
H. Etzkowitz r
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
831
interest’ or non-involvement. These researchers are
often referred to under the rubric of the DEMO
agency that is their primary source of support as in,
‘She is an NIH person.’
The approach of leaving it up to the DEMO
transfer office to find a developer and marketer for a
discovery precisely met the needs of many faculty
members, then and now, who DEMO delimit their
role in putting their technology into use. A faculty
member delineated this perspective on division of
labour in technology transfer: ‘‘It would depend on
the transfer office expertise and their advice. I am
not DEMO to become a business person. I really am
interested in seeing if this could be brought into the
market. I think it could have DEMO impact on people’s
lives. It is an attractive idea.’’ This attitude does not
necessarily preclude a start-up firm, but it does
exclude the possibility that the faculty member will
be the entrepreneur.
A stance of moderate DEMO is becoming
more commonplace, with scientists becoming knowl-
edgeable and comfortable DEMO in a business
milieu while retaining their primary interest and
identity as an academic scientist. A faculty member
exemplifying this approach expressed the view DEMO:
‘‘In science you kind of sit down and you share
ideas . . . There tends to be a very open and very
DEMO exchange. The business thing when you sit
down with somebody, the DEMO are usually done
later and you have to be very careful about what you
say with regard to details because that is what busi-
DEMO is about: keeping your arms around your details
so that you DEMO sell them to somebody else, other-
wise there is no point.’’ DEMO are learning to
calibrate their interaction to both scientific and busi-
ness needs, giving out enough information to interest
business persons in their research but not so much so
that a business transaction to acquire the DEMO
becomes superfluous. Another researcher said, ‘‘I
am thinking about what turns DEMO on, in terms of
scientific interest and the money is something DEMO I
can figure out how to get it then it is important but it
is certainly not the most important thing to me.’’ The
DEMO objective is still scientific; business objec-
tives are strictly secondary.
Many DEMO, both large established and start-
ups, want a closer, more DEMO relationship with
the academic scientists that they work with. Such a
collaborative approach makes the old model of li-
censing intellectual property into an DEMO first step
in setting the ground rules as to how the relationship
should be structured and any profits divided. But
once the contract is DEMO a much higher degree of
involvement is expected of both parties. As one
faculty member described the changed situation:
‘‘More and more the DEMO attitude is we want
you with your unique expertise to contribute, DEMO to
the development of an as yet uninvented product, but
to DEMO definition of this product which we as a
company may need . . . ’’ In this model the professor
becomes involved in helping DEMO the strategic re-
search direction of the company rather than merely
handing over a technology, developed as a by-prod-
uct of academic research, DEMO happens to coincide
with a corporate need.
Relations with industry have become further com-
plicated as companies see the university as a poten-
tial DEMO through its role in the creation of new
firms. Although some academics and industrialists
wish the university to return to its traditional role of
DEMO students and publishing research findings,
many states and local governments fund centres and
programs to encourage academic institutions to gen-
erate new economic DEMO from the campus. In-
deed, venture capitalists advise prospective academic
founders DEMO companies that the best way to launch
their firm is to remain on campus and work with
students to develop the early stages of DEMO technol-
ogy. Although many academics would prefer to re-
turn to an era when federal support was sufficient to
meet the needs of their DEMO enterprise, few see
this as a realistic possibility. The conflicts are DEMO
longer about whether the university should pursue
knowledge for profit, but DEMO the shape that organi-
sational innovations to accommodate industry con-
nections will take Etzkowitz et al., 1998 .Ž.
An interesting further development of academy–
industry relations is the concept of ‘discovery ex-
change’ at the University DEMO Colorado, Boulder, in-
vented by a departmental chairperson and a venture
capitalist. The Discovery Exchange plan drew out
the logical implications of university DEMO
transfer efforts and carried them to a new height. The
idea was to generate significant income by raising
venture capital funds to commercialise a DEMO larger
proportion of academic research than even the most
832
H. Etzkowitz r
entrepreneurial university to date. The Discovery
Exchange was DEMO on the premise that only a small
portion of university research is patented despite
universities having the right and the obligation by
law to DEMO commercialisation possibilities as a con-
dition of accepting federal research funds. Given
their financial constraints university technology
transfer offices ‘‘ . . . seek DEMO on only the ‘ost
promising’ ideas, as judged by industry contacts,DEMO
expert consultants, and, in some cases, by a com-
pany’s DEMO willingness to license a new inven-
tion once the office patents it’’ Gold, 1990 . OnlyŽ.
the immediately available obvious candidates for
commercialisation were patented.
In contrast, the Discovery Exchange plan envi-
sioned an aggressive and expensive strategy. Patents
would be taken out on a wide range of DEMO
useful research results, irrespective of current esti-
mates of their commercial DEMO, on the premise that
a significant number of these patents would DEMO
value that could not be entirely foreseen in advance
in the interim before their lapse. To draw upon the
research capacity of academic staff DEMO effectively
than traditional means of encouraging faculty to
bring potential commercialisable research to the at-
tention of a university office, the Discovery Ex-
change proposed to have one of its staff sit in on the
meetings DEMO research groups to help identify poten-
tially commercialisable knowledge. The Discovery
Exchange proposal stated that, ‘‘Providing that the
directors of a laboratory give their consent, the
churner will participate in laboratory research meet-
Butcher, 1989: 14 . Based upon the assumption that.
not all academic staff were DEMO of potential uses
for their research the ‘churners’ would join the re-
search group to monitor for useful results. They
would, ‘‘ . . . attend the lab meetings of the faculty
member . . . DEMO to recognise the commercial
potential of discoveries’’ Gold and Butcher, 1989:DEMO
to allow the filing of ten times a many applications
as a typical university patent office and six times as
much as the most DEMO
The implantation of the Discovery Exchange
would make technology transfer an integral part of
the everyday operation of the university. The cogni-
ings, follow on-going experiments, and join in the
intellectual life of the laboratories.’’ Gold andŽ
20 . It was also planned to hire sufficient legal staff.
DEMO Policy 27 1998 823–833()
tive effects are manifest among both DEMO and
detractors. In interviews, both proponents and oppo-
nents of the DEMO Exchange professed their
faith in the ‘meandering stream’ of basic research.
Although the Discovery Exchange representative was
intended as a non-obtrusive participant in the DEMO
search group, the introduction of such a presence
was argued as DEMO the potential to influence
research direction. An opponent said, ‘‘They used DEMO
wonderful and I think a totally self-defeating agricul-
tural metaphor. They were going to put these cultiva-
tors in peoples laboratories, churners they were
called, interestingly enough. In a perfect business
approach to it faculty were going to be invited to be
churners so some of us could DEMO some money out
of this thing because we would be intermediaries
between the Discovery Exchange and a particular
laboratory. So somebody has a lab DEMO one of us,
either another scientist in that field or someone else
who has a larger perspective would go to those
meetings, sit around and help to steer the choices in
a direction that would DEMO more payoff, potential
payoff, for patentable ideas for industrially relevant
kinds of works. These churners would be participat-
ing in the scholarly process DEMO then they would
harvest this stuff’’ Jessor, 1990 . As a DEMO
of such criticism, the churners, attorneys and venture
capital arm of the Exchange were replaced by a more
modest effort that would nevertheless DEMO the
formation of companies from faculty research and
allow the university to maintain an equity interest in
these firms. Although the leading proponent of DEMO
Exchange was sceptical of this more modest effort
Ž‘‘The university plan is worse than nothing’’; Gold,
1993 , but in principle it represented a considerable.
expansion of the university’s technology transfer ef-
forts Harpel, 1993 .Ž.
8. Conclusion: the industrial penumbra of the
university
Controversies such as the one about the Discovery
Exchange show that it is still a DEMO way to a
full-blown establishment of entrepreneurial science.
Universities are undergoing a ‘second revolution’
these days, incorporating economic and social devel-
opment as part of their mission Etzkowitz, in press .Ž.
H. Etzkowitz r
Research Policy 27 1998 823–833()
833
The first academic revolution, taking off in the
late nineteenth century in the U.S., made research an
academic function in addition to the traditional task
of teaching Jencks and Riesman, 1968 . This revolu-Ž.
tion is by no means finished. But in the most ad-
vanced segments of the worldwide DEMO system,
a ‘second revolution’ takes off. The entrepreneurial
university integrates economic development into the
university as an academic function along with teach-
ing DEMO research. It is this ‘capitalisation of knowl-
edge’ that is the heart of a new mission for the
university, linking universities to users of knowledge
more tightly and establishing the university as an
economic actor in DEMO own right.
9. Unlinked References
Butcher, 1990, Etzkowitz, 1995, Marberger, 1995,
Schuler, 1995, Waggoner, 1989, Weber, 1946
References
DEMO, D. et al., 1986. Industrial support of university
research in biotechnology. Science 231, 242–246.
Blumenthal, D., 1986a. University–industry research relations in
biotechnology. Science 232, 1361–1366.
Butcher, W., 1990. Venture Capitalist Boulder Colorado, DEMO of
Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder. DEMO with Henry Etzkowitz, May.
Etzkowitz, H., 1983. Entrepreneurial Scientists and DEMO
trepreneurial Universities in American Academic Science,
Minerva.
Etzkowitz, H., 1994. Knowledge as property: The Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and the Debate Over Academic Patent
Policy. Minerva. Winter.
Etzkowitz, H., 1995. Beyond technology transfer: Creating a
regional innovation environment at the State University of
New York DEMO Stony Brook. Purchase: A Science Policy Insti-
tute Report.
Etzkowitz, H., in press. The Triple Helix: MIT and the Rise of
Entrepreneurial DEMO Gordon and Breach, London.
Etzkowitz, H., Webster, A., Healey, P. Eds. , 1998. CapitalizingŽ.
Knowledge: University Intersections of Industry and
Academia. State Univ. of New York Press, Albany.
Gibbons, M., et al., 1994. The New Production of Knowledge.
Sage, Bevery Hills.
Gold, L., 1990. Department of Molecular, Cellular and Develop-
mental Biology, HCDB, DEMO of Colorado, Boulder.
Interview with Henry Etzkowitz, May.
Gold, L., 1993. Chair HCDB Dept. Interview with Henry
Etzkowitz, April 22.
Gold, DEMO, Butcher, W., 1989. The Discovery Exchange. Boulder
wxunpublished manuscript .
DEMO, R., 1993. University of Colorado Administrator, interview
with Henry Etzkowitz. DEMO April.
Jencks, C., Riesman, D., 1968. The Academic Revolution. Dou-
bleday, New York.
Jessor, R., 1990. Director, Institute of Behavioural DEMO,
University of Colorado, Boulder. Interview with Henry
Etzkowitz, May.
Krimsky, S., Ennis, J., Weissman, R., 1991. Academic-corporate
ties in DEMO: a quantitative study’ science. Technol-
ogy and Human Values 16 3 , 275–287, Summer.Ž.
Latour, B., Woolgar, S., 1979. Laboratory Life. DEMO, Beverly
Hills.
Marberger, 1995. Former President SUNY Stony Brook, interview
DEMO Henry Etzkowitz.
Matkin, G., 1990. Technology Transfer and the University.
Macmillan, New York.
Merton, R.K., 1973 1942 . The Normative Structure of Science.wx
In the Sociology of Science. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
DEMO, W., Kopul, K., Smith-Doerr, L., 1996. Interorganizational
Collaboration and the locus of Innovation: Networks of learn-
ing in Biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly 41,
116–145.
Schuler, E., 1995. SUNY Stony Brook administrator, interview
with Henry Etzkowitz, March.
Shimshoni, D., 1970. The mobile scientist in the American instru-
ment industry. Minerva 8 1 .Ž.
Vollmer, H., 1962. A Preliminary Investigation and Analysis of
the Role of Scientists in Research Organizations. Stanford
Research Institute, Menlo Park.
Waggoner, S., 1989. CU, patent group close to signing agreement:
Discovery Exchange plan could bring in millions from inven-
tions, Daily Camera. 25 July.
Weber, M., 1946 1918 . Science as a Vocation. In: Gerth andwx
Mills Eds. , From Max Weber. Oxford Univ. Press, NewŽ.
York.{1g42fwefx}