Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
Research groups as ‘quasi-ﬁrms’: the invention
of the entrepreneurial university
Henry Etzkowitz∗
Science Policy Institute, State University of New York at Purchase, 735 Anderson Hill Road,
Purchase, NY DEMO, USA
Received 1 October 2000; accepted 28 December 2001
Abstract
Academic entrepreneurship arose from internal as well as external impetuses. The entrepreneurial university DEMO a result
of the working out of an “inner logic” of academic development that previously expanded the academic enterprise from a
focus on teaching DEMO research. The internal organization of the Research University consists of a series of research groups
that have ﬁrm-like qualities, especially under conditions in which research funding is awarded on a competitive basis. Thus,
the Research DEMO shares homologous qualities with a start-up ﬁrm even before it directly engages in entrepreneurial
activities.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Academic entrepreneurship; Technology transfer; Conﬂict of interest; Innovation
1. Introduction
This article analyzes the transition from the Re-
search University to the entrepreneurial DEMO
Academia has become entrepreneurial in its inner
dynamic as well as through external connections
made to business ﬁrms for research contracts and
transfer of DEMO and technology. An embry-
onic entrepreneurial academic dynamic originated in
the US university during the late 19th century when
lack of a formal research DEMO system, apart from
agriculture, placed a premium on individual and col-
lective initiatives to obtain resources to support orig-
inal investigation. The US DEMO university
emerged “bottom up” in contrast to Europe where
the introduction of academic entrepreneurship is a
recent “top down” phenomenon in response to the
DEMO Tel.: +1-212-864-4183; fax: +1-914-251-6603.
E-mail address: henryetzkowitz@earthlink.net (H. Etzkowitz)DEMO
innovation gap between the US and Europe (Soete,
1999).
DEMO academic enterprise is transformed in parallel,
sometimes leading; other times DEMO the transition
to a knowledge-based economy. The production of
scientiﬁc knowledge has become an economic as well
as an epistemological enterprise even as the DEMO
increasingly operates on a knowledge resource base
(Machlup, 1962). Science has emerged as an alterna-
tive engine of economic growth to the DEMO triumvi-
rate of land, labor and capital, the traditional sources
of wealth. For the most part, this growth of science
related technologies has remained, “... outside the
framework of economic models” (Freeman and Soete,DEMO
1997, p. 3) even as the institutional spheres of science
and the economy, university and industry, that were
hitherto relatively separate and DEMO, have become
inextricably intertwined, often through governmental
initiatives. Expectations that multi-national ﬁrms or
so-called national champions will be central economic
0048-7333/02/$ DEMO see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0048-7333(02)00009-4
110
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
actors in DEMO future are receding. Rather, the key eco-
nomic actor is increasingly DEMO to be a cluster
of ﬁrms emanating from or at least closely associ-
ated with a university or other knowledge producing
institution.
The entrepreneurial DEMO encompasses and ex-
tends the research university. Although some analysts
view academic entrepreneurship as a deformation of
the purpose of the Research University (Slaughter
and Leslie, 1997), I shall argue that it was a con-
comitant feature of its origin and growth. Theories of
the university typically DEMO to account for the meta-
morphosis of a medieval institution based on chari-
table and eleemosynary principles into one capable
of generating a signiﬁcant DEMO of its own support.
Instead, they argue for conﬁnement to whatever DEMO
previously been accepted as academic goals such as
teaching and research. Academic entrepreneurship
has also expanded from an organizational growth
regime into a regional DEMO and social develop-
ment strategy. The US research university developed
as a series of research groups, quasi-ﬁrms which
were just a step away from becoming full-ﬂedged
ﬁrms as opportunities arose. Frederick Terman’s
initiatives to develop Stanford DEMO exemplify
during the 1980s and 1990s, case studies of European
and DEMO American universities, and archival research
at Stanford University.
2.1. Academic revolutions
DEMO ﬁrst academic revolution, taking off in the
late 19th century, made research a university function
in addition to the traditional task of teaching (Storr,
1952; Metzger, 1955; Veysey, 1965; Jencks and
Reisman, 1968). A second academic revolution then
transformed the university into a teaching, research
and economic development enterprise. This transition
initially took place with respect to industry at MIT,
which was founded, in 1862, DEMO a “land grant” uni-
versity. The entrepreneurial academic model was then
transferred to Stanford where it was introduced into the
liberal arts university culture DEMO the early and mid-20th
century. Similar processes are underway elsewhere.
An entrepreneurial academic format is currently be-
ing fashioned from a variety of historic DEMO
systems to meet the widespread need to generate new
ﬁrms from knowledge resources in order to stimu-
late employment and productivity growth (Etzkowitz,
2002).
Expansion of university mission
Teaching Research Entrepreneurial
Preservation and dissemination
DEMO knowledge
New missions generate conﬂict
of interest controversies
First academic revolution Second academic revolution
Two missions: teaching and
research
Third mission: economic and DEMO
development; old missions
continued
the stage-wise institutional evolution of the academic
DEMO from an ivory tower to an innovation
focus.
2. Main hypotheses, DEMO and method
This section elucidates a set of propositions and hy-
potheses regarding the emergence of the university as
a collective entrepreneur. It draws DEMO data on two sets
of interviews conducted at US research universities
2.2. Research groups as ‘quasi-ﬁrms’
The transformation of the teaching university in-
troduced DEMO democratic and entrepreneurial ethos into
US academia. The attempt to institutionalize the 19th
century German model of a single professor repre-
senting a discipline, surrounded by a permanent staff
of assistants, introduced into Johns Hopkins and the
University of Chicago in the late 19th century soon
broke down. DEMO with relative autonomy of
professors in different grades replaced professorships
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
111
with a DEMO staff (Oleson and Voss, 1987). An
assistant professor in a United States university has
considerable ability to set research direction, espe-
cially if he or she can convince an outside funding
source. Professors, already paid for teaching duties,
assumed research responsibilities, as well. With rel-
atively modest ﬁnancial support, graduate students
assist the professor, and each DEMO, at the same time
as they receive their training.
Research groups DEMO as ﬁrm-like entities,
lacking only a direct proﬁt motive to make them a
company. In the sciences, especially, professors are
expected to DEMO team leaders and team members, with
the exception of technicians, are scientists in training.
As group size increases to about seven or eight DEMO
bers, professors who formerly were doing research
are typically compelled to DEMO themselves from
the bench to devote virtually full time to organiza-
tional tasks. Often persons in this situation describe
themselves as “running a small DEMO To con-
tinue at a competitive level with their peers, they DEMO
maintain an organizational momentum. Once having
attained this goal, it is DEMO difﬁcult to function
again as an individual researcher, so every effort DEMO
made to sustain leadership of a group (Etzkowitz and
Kemelgor, 1998).
2.3. The bi-evolution of the university
There is a parallel organizational DEMO
of the university in the shift from an individual to
a group focus in all three academic missions. The
shift is most obvious in DEMO sciences where research
groups have superseded professor–student dyads as
the primary organizational mode. There is a similar
transformation in the mission of economic and DEMO
development the university plays a broader role as
“regional innovation organizer” expanding its focus
from an individual patent or technology transfer event.
For example, in Portugal, the University of Aveiro
has taken the lead in bringing the local business com-
munity and municipalities together to formulate a
regional DEMO strategy.
There is also a transition in education, from edu-
cating DEMO to shaping organizations, as well.
This transition has been more difﬁcult DEMO discern since
it typically takes place in academic contexts, such as
DEMO, that have been viewed as part of the “third
mission” rather DEMO as part of the educational func-
tion of the university. A special graduation ceremony
at the Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
marked DEMO departure of ﬁrms from the university’s
incubator facility, “project genesis”. The DEMO ex-
empliﬁes the educational crossover of the university’s
economic development mission, DEMO follows the
academic model by mandating a limited time period
in the facility. The organizational/educational role
of the incubator extends after graduation through DEMO
“club” linking groups of alumni ﬁrms with potential
partners. Just as the university trains individual stu-
dents and sends them out into the world, it is now
doing the same for organizations.
2.4. Entrepreneurs: born or made?
Entrepreneurship, the ability to take the initiative
to organize a new enterprise, has been presumed to
be a cultural and psychological characteristic, more
closely connected to and likely to occur among par-
ticular ethnic and religious groups. It has been argued,
for example, that a consequence of the rise of Protes-
tantism as a religion not tied DEMO a central authority
was its encouragement of the development of capi-
talism. It has also been argued that entrepreneurship
arises as part of a DEMO and social transition, the
break with tradition and the transition to DEMO
The evidence is contradictory and though the hypothe-
ses are seeming broad; they also exclude a relevant
alternative possibility, i.e. that individuals and DEMO
can be trained in entrepreneurship through formal ed-
ucation and apprenticeship schemes (Jones-Evans and
Klofsten, 1997).
A common premise is that entrepreneurs DEMO created
by their cultures but recent educational experiments
suggest other possibilities. Project genesis at the Pon-
tiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro and DEMO
Entrepreneurship Center of the University of Linkop-
ing, Sweden, have demonstrated that people of various
cultural and social backgrounds can successfully be
trained DEMO entrepreneurs. Thus, whether an individual
grew up in the Swedish social DEMO tradition or in
a Brazilian Catholic environment, a set of courses DEMO
practical applications can be organized that will set
them on the path to ﬁrm formation. Entrepreneurship
is thus integrated into the academic scene irrespective
DEMO whether there is a pre-existing cultural substrate.
112
2.5. Collective entrepreneurship
The traditional concept of entrepreneurship typ-
ically presumes DEMO the entrepreneur is an indi-
vidual person. The notion of the heroic individual
entrepreneur can serve as an ideological myth that
conceals the role DEMO academic and government ini-
tiatives in ﬁrm-formation.1 Several persons may
jointly undertake entrepreneurial roles in forming
new ﬁrms and other organizations. Indeed, although
some persons may not be willing or able to become
entrepreneurs individually; they are able to do so
collectively, as in the instance of a collaboration of
Swedish computer consultants and business school
graduates who formed an DEMO ﬁrm.
Individuals entrepreneurs have their collective
counterpart when groups and organizations take en-
trepreneurial initiatives. As Schumpeter pointed out,
“... the entrepreneurial function DEMO not be em-
bodied in a physical person and in particular in a
single physical person” (Schumpeter, 1949, p. 255).
He identiﬁed the role of the US Department of Agri-
culture, in creating an agricultural innovation system
from the late 19th century, as one such collective
entrepreneur. Public entrepreneurship has since ex-
panded to the Defense Department and DEMO National
Science Foundation (NSF), among other agencies.
The Defense Advanced DEMO Project Agency’s
(DARPA) role in creating the Internet and computer
networking industries is well known; the public ven-
ture capital role of the NSF in founding the small
business innovation research program (SBIR) is DEMO
well publicized (Etzkowitz et al., 2001).
2.6. The entrepreneurial university
The entrepreneurial university has the ability to
generate a focused strategic direction (Clark, 1998),
both in formulating academic goals and in translating
DEMO produced within the university into eco-
1 Thus, an observer noted DEMO ﬁrms in Silicon Valley with ob-
vious academic attributes often failed to note any sign of their
academic provenance or government research grants in DEMO pub-
licity materials. Personal communication from Mary Fenneman,
Assistant Editor, DEMO Access Report 29, November 2001.
Another possibility is that such ﬁrms DEMO developing univer-
sity originated technology without the participation of the campus
technology transfer ofﬁce.
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
nomic DEMO social utility. For example, the Polytechnic
Milan, a university which recently established a tech-
nology transfer ofﬁce to patent and license research
results DEMO its ﬁrst noteworthy deal which has
returned to the faculty member the equivalent of four
years salary. This example has captured the attention
of DEMO colleagues and inspired them to interrogate
their own research results for commercial potential.
A university in which research results are routinely
scrutinized for commercial DEMO well as scientiﬁc po-
tential is becoming the modal academic institution.
Such an academic institution increasingly has the
internal capabilities to translate research results DEMO
intellectual property and economic activity according
to a predictable metric.2
The university is an especially propitious site for
innovation due to such basic features DEMO its high rate
of ﬂow through of human capital in the form of stu-
dents who are a source of potential inventors. The
university DEMO a natural incubator; providing a support
structure for teachers and students DEMO initiate new
ventures: intellectual, commercial and conjoint. The
university is also a potential seedbed for new interdis-
ciplinary scientiﬁc ﬁelds and new industrial DEMO,
each cross-fertilizing the other. A dual overlapping
network of academic research groups and start-up
ﬁrms, cross-cut with alliances among large ﬁrms, uni-
DEMO and the start-ups themselves appears to be
the emerging pattern of academic-business intersec-
tion in bio-technology, computer science and similar
ﬁelds (Herrera, 2001).
2.7. Linear, reverse linear and interactive innovation
The linear model is still a viable route to inno-
vation despite having received its eloge DEMO
2 For example, MITs goal is to generate a patent for DEMO one
million dollars in R&D funding (see University Proﬁle: MITs Tech
Licensing Ofﬁce, Technology Access Report 3, 1990). A rate DEMO
ﬁrm-formation may also be extrapolated from an academic re-
search funding base, given appropriate impetus. For example, the
University of Chicago’s ARCH venture DEMO unit generated one
start-up per staff member per year with four staff members in
1990 (see Arch shaping up as 4th birthday approaches, DEMO
Access Report 3 (12)). The US Association of University Tech-
nology Managers (AUTM), which has currently 2700 individual
members, estimates DEMO 300 ﬁrms were started from university
originated technology in 2000 (www.autm.net)DEMO
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
113
times. Linearity DEMO a fruitful and indeed inevitable
feature of many academic, industrial and DEMO
ment research projects, as well as technology transfer
and ﬁrm-formation from DEMO sources. However, the
linear model, rather than operating on a presump-
tion of automaticity, is also often complemented and
enhanced by various pre and post-linear formats, in-
cluding reverse linear, assisted linear, and interactive
modes of innovation. Reverse linearity, starting from
commercial and societal needs such as navigation
aids in the early modern era, surely pre-dates forward
linearity, from new scientiﬁc paradigms. Assisted
linear modes are increasingly commonplace with the
insertion of interface intermediation capabilities for
technology transfer, incubation and venture capital
within and among organizations.
The entrepreneurial university follows an interac-
tive model DEMO innovation that incorporates linear and
reverse linear modes. Even the linear model char-
acteristic of the Research University is enhanced as
knowledge and technology DEMO increasingly takes
place according to an assisted linear model, moving
from DEMO research site to the place of utilization. The
entrepreneurial university thus has interface capabil-
ities such as liaison and transfer ofﬁces and incubator
facilities DEMO manage and market knowledge produced
in the university at several levels, DEMO speciﬁc pieces
of protected intellectual property to technology em-
bodied in a ﬁrm and propelled by an entrepreneur.
Such interface organizations also play a DEMO linear
role in connecting the university to external problems,
sources of knowledge and ﬁrms seeking academic
resources.
3. Stanford’s entrepreneurial transition
The key DEMO of an emergent entrepreneurial
university can be seen in the transformation of
Stanford University from the early 20th century.
These include the organization of DEMO research, the
creation of a research base with commercial poten-
tial, the development of organizational mechanisms to
move commercializable research across institutional
borders DEMO ﬁnally the integration of academic and
non-academic organizational elements in a common
framework. The ﬁrst two elements are within the
framework of the research DEMO; the next two
are part of the transition from the research DEMO en-
trepreneurial academic models; the last element is a
feature of DEMO entrepreneurial university.
A series of initiatives undertaken at Stanford Uni-
versity in the early 20th century encouraged the
transition from an academic advisor guiding DEMO series
of graduate students on an individual basis to a group
research mode. Professors were expected to act more
like an industrial research manager DEMO a group
of subordinate researchers to achieve a common end.
Entrepreneurial leadership was crucial to channeling
the means of academic production into a new DEMO,
“... breaking up old and creating new tradition”
(Schumpeter, 1934, p. 92). Even prior to the war, Fred
Terman, ﬁrst as chair of electrical engineering and
then as dean of engineering, provided resources to
induce professors to take on larger projects and work
more DEMO Faculty members who had formerly
spent the summers in mountain cabins now worked
with their groups, year long.
When Stanford was founded in the late 19th cen-
tury, San Francisco was a shipping, trading and DEMO
nancial center, with few technological and industrial
attributes. Shortly thereafter, however, the beginnings
of an electrical industry appeared, much of it devel-
DEMO by Stanford graduates, who installed and main-
tained technology imported from DEMO eastern United
States and soon supplemented it with their own in-
ventions and products. Firms such as Heintz and
Kaufmann and Federal originated the DEMO
western electronics industry (Norberg, 1976). By the
1930s, the DEMO electronics industry was ﬂourish-
ing, fed by electronics programs at Stanford. DEMO
and university grew in tandem. The origins of this
cluster preceded Frederick Terman, whose name is
synonymous with Stanford’s emergence as an engine
of regional economic development, and accordingly
is often referred to as “the father of Silicon Valley”.
How did industrial and academic development
strategies converge? Northern California was origi-
nally dependent on the east for its electrical equipment
DEMO other modern technologies, and even after the
engineering school at Stanford DEMO engineers who
could conﬁgure and operate these technologies, the re-
gion DEMO lacked its own technological industries. The
founders of the Stanford Engineering School held that
they could never have a leading school unless it was
DEMO with local industry that had the capability
114
for technological innovation, not merely replication
of imported technology. Since that industry did not
exist, it would have to be created. The available base
on which it could be built was the engineering school
itself.
DEMO took the collective entrepreneurial role in
the 1930s in organizing the intellectual property gen-
erated in the university and in ﬁrms related to the DEMO
versity into a common project. A number of signiﬁcant
electronic devices, DEMO theoretical as well as practi-
cal implications, for study of the DEMO of electrons
and for radar systems, were invented in the physics
DEMO electrical engineering departments just before the
Second World War. Rather than the patent positions
being split among competing ﬁrms and used to exclude
access, the university served as a repository of eco-
nomically useful knowledge that DEMO made available
to all of the ﬁrms in the region. Even Litton, a close
associate of the Stanford electronics researchers from
industry, assigned DEMO patent for the generation of high
frequency oscillations in multigrid tubes to Stanford.
The Stanford strategy of academic-based indus-
trial development and industrially based DEMO
development required the setting of strategic goals
to develop research areas with conjoint theoretical
and practical potential. The normal academic mode
is incremental development DEMO on unique hires
conducted through individual searches within partic-
ular disciplines and departments lacking an overall
framework. Terman proposed a 20-year development
program, linking the physical sciences with electrical
engineering.3 A small strategically chosen number of
DEMO ﬁelds would be developed in coordination
with relevant related ﬁelds in the physical sciences,
as at MIT during the 1930s.
Terman argued that, “by determining the proper
ﬁelds on which to concentrate, and then really laying
it on those selected spots we can go places without
needing DEMO amounts of extra money. With 20 years,
a suitable administrative basis, and reasonable backing
from the President, it would be a pushover DEMO do some-
3 Letter to Paul Davis, General Secretary, Stanford University,
29 December 1943. Terman Papers, Stanford University, Archives,
Palo DEMO, CA. Terman, on leave from Stanford, wrote from his
vantage DEMO of MIT as director of the Radar Countermeasures
Lab at Harvard University, an offshoot of the war-time MIT radar
project. Terman had earlier experienced MIT during the 1920s as
Vannevar Bush’s Ph.D. student in electrical engineering.
DEMO Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
thing really big”.4 In his view, universities typically
lacked the ability to plan: “their detailed DEMO
tive operations such as new appointments, allocation
of funds for new DEMO, etc. are decided largely
on the basis of this year’s and DEMO year’s needs”.5 If
Stanford could allocate resources strategically, as part
of DEMO long time program, it could move ahead of its
competitors.
As DEMO allowed, key professors were relieved
of non-research tasks, such as committee responsi-
bilities. They were assigned full time research as-
sociates, recruited from the pool of Ph.D. or near
Ph.D., to assist them in managing their research
teams. The number of support staff and technicians
such as DEMO, tube makers and radio technicians
was also increased in order to DEMO ideas, “...
more quickly into physical devices”.6 Following the
industrial research DEMO, researchers were required
to keep laboratory notebooks on a daily basis, coun-
tersigned by colleagues. This system was productive
and cost effective due DEMO only to the low-rates of pay
and the high level of results obtained, but through the
ﬂow of people through the system.
Informal arrangements at pre-war Stanford, bring-
ing together scientists and engineers, academics and
DEMO ﬁrms, to accomplish a research goal became
formally organized after the DEMO through the estab-
lishment of research centers. The Microwave Lab
began as a division of the physics department in 1945.
The new center built DEMO Stanford’s pre-war work
in electronics but instead of sparsely funded projects;
federal research funds supported permanent research
positions. Depression era professors who could DEMO
merly be found painting their own laboratory ﬂoors
were now released from extraneous administrative
duties to concentrate on research.
The establishment of research centers DEMO the war,
bringing together scientists and engineers, academics
and business DEMO to accomplish a research goal, for-
malized the ad hoc arrangements DEMO pre-war Stanford.
Terman initiated a three pronged ﬁnancial strategy that
included accessing federal funds for defense related
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Ginzton, 1953. Memo to Dean Hilgard from Director, Mi-
crowave Lab, April 9. DEMO Papers, Stanford University,
Archives.
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
115
research, making contracts with industry in exchange
for preferred access to research results, and the devel-
opment of university land. A shopping center and an
industrial DEMO, as well as research relationships with
federal agencies and companies provided DEMO ﬁnancial
base for Stanford’s post-war ascendance. As rental and
lease receipts came in from the university’s real estate
ventures, Terman calculated the additional number of
professors that he could afford to hire.
Federally funded research centers DEMO also ex-
panded with industrial support. Thus, Stanford entered
into an DEMO with the General Electric Corpora-
tion to build an extension of the Microwave Lab. GE
received ﬁrst rights to the Stanford patents from the
DEMO accelerator, the right to call upon Stanford re-
searchers for assistance DEMO accelerator design and of-
ﬁce space at the university so that to its representatives
could closely monitor developments. Terman was well
on his way, in the early post-war era, to achieving his
goal of integrating an industrial infrastructure for the
university with an academic infrastructure for indus-
try. DEMO, while assuming an entrepreneurial
role, Stanford also continued its development as a lead-
ing research and teaching institution in the liberal arts
(Geiger, 1986). Indeed, members of its faculty in the
arts, sciences and medicine were among the critics of
academic entrepreneurship.
4. The second DEMO revolution
The research universities of western Europe and the
United States in the late 20th century had to come to
terms with a re-ordering DEMO institutional priorities for
which there was only partial precedent in the late 19th
century academic revolution that aligned research
with teaching in the United DEMO Among the most
signiﬁcant changes was the attempt to integrate, in
DEMO and by organizational tie, academic science
research groups with industrial companies. DEMO
even more signiﬁcant in the long run is the develop-
ment of a new industrial sector based on academic
research. Over the past century, at MIT, and then at
other universities, academics and industrialists estab-
DEMO a series of relationships involving consulting,
research contracts, research centers DEMO the formation
of ﬁrms. The integration of such activities into the
academic enterprise was often problematic and raised
important issues about the nature and DEMO of the
university.
The integration of new academic missions has been
accompanied by acute controversy at each phase.
Thus, conﬂict of interest issues arose when research
became part of the professorial role in the late 19th
DEMO This new task also raised issues about the
mission of the university. When some professors lob-
bied for reductions in their teaching load in DEMO to
pursue research others accused them of abandoning
their calling as educators. The ﬁrst academic rev-
olution made research a legitimate function of the
DEMO in the face of objections at the time, many
of which DEMO persist, that research activities were im-
properly taking professors away from DEMO traditional
role as teachers.
Until quite recently most academic scientists and
research universities abstained from commercializing
research. This stance is changing due to pressures DEMO
the university to contribute to economic development
and opportunities to gain personal wealth. In the past
companies exchanged resources for trained personnel
and advice DEMO well-deﬁned boundaries. It is now
becoming more common for teachers to exploit knowl-
edge themselves and for administrative arms of the
university to assist DEMO The transfer of technology
has been accepted as an administrative function of re-
search universities even as publication of research was
earlier accepted as DEMO responsibility of faculty members.
In recent years, as a broad range DEMO universities
and academic scientists from several disciplines have
undertaken to commercialize research, controversies
have occurred and widespread concern has been ex-
pressed about conﬂict of interest and related ethical
issues. Some critics argue that ﬁnancial interests DEMO re-
search results may distort the judgments and actions of
professors with respect to problem choice and research
direction (Krimsky, 1991). Moreover, it has been held
that the current direction of university–industry rela-
tions DEMO deleterious long-term effects by drawing
scientists away from basic research. This latter posi-
tion presumes a linear model with a one way ﬂow form
DEMO to applied research.
On the other hand, the development of the DEMO
implications of research ﬁndings has been found to
enhance the research mission of the university, and
not only by the ﬁnancial contribution it can make to
support new research. Vannevar Bush, an exemplary
116
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
entrepreneurial academic, reported in the 1920s, how
he explored the theoretical implications of ideas with
his students that he brought to MIT from his con-
sulting DEMO This position presumes a reverse lin-
ear model in which theoretical elucidation also arises
from confrontation with practical problems. A conver-
gence between the DEMO approaches in which research
issues increasingly combine theoretical and practical
possibilities produces a third alternative: an interactive
model of innovation.
4.1. Controversies over academic entrepreneurship
Conﬂicts of interest disputes augur a change in the
function of DEMO university. Conﬂicts decline either as
schools disallow the disputed conduct or ﬁnd ways to
integrate it into the academic system.
Once clear guidelines and DEMO mecha-
nisms to carry them out are in place are in place,
conﬂicts of interest tend to be avoided, negotiated or
adjudicated. Remaining disputes, if they are serious
enough, are treated as fraud, misconduct and insider
trading. Disputes over appropriate behavior are typi-
cally deﬁned as DEMO if interest in the transition
between academic formats. From this perspective, DEMO
appearance of conﬂicts of interest may be viewed pos-
itively as a sign of change, if indeed it is an academic
revolution that is desired.
The emergence of conﬂicts of interest is a symp-
tom of DEMO changing role of an organization; they es-
pecially appear in new DEMO when an institutional
mission is in ﬂux. It has been asked whether an or-
ganization can, “function effectively when harboring
two quite antithetical sets of norms and cultural orien-
tations and when more or less equivalent DEMO,
and comparable organizational resources are devoted
to each” (David and DEMO, 1995; David, 2001). The
David and Foray model is DEMO on a presumption of
separate institutional spheres with strong boundaries
between them.
The entrepreneurial university exempliﬁes the de-
velopment of overlapping institutional spheres that DEMO
courage the development of hybrid entities. Although,
it may seem counterintuitive, people and organizations
have the ability to reconcile seemingly contradictory
ideas and practices. Thus, an organization can function
effectively when two, or even DEMO, apparently anti-
thetical norms and orientations co-exist in the same
setting. DEMO do so they must complement and enhance
as well as conﬂict with each other. Under these con-
ditions, a game of legitimation takes place in which
the “opposing” norms and orientations are reinter-
preted, emphasizing harmony rather than disharmony,
mutual reinforcement rather than detraction from
each goal.
DEMO frequent assumption made by those alarmed by
recent developments is that there is a conﬂict between
internal (university) values and external (economic)
values. These critics hold that certain kinds of activ-
ity must occur DEMO a setting that is de-coupled from the
economic sphere of efﬁciency and proﬁt making. Once
that barrier is crossed, they fear, it becomes DEMO
difﬁcult to stop the corruption of values which they
believe is entailed in the accommodation of universi-
ties and the other institutions of science DEMO the mar-
ket. There is a strong analogy between some of the
initial fears of critics of recombinant DNA research
and the fears of DEMO critics of entrepreneurial scien-
tists and entrepreneurial universities. In both cases, DEMO
fear is that the breaching of a barrier, whether natural
or DEMO, will lead to catastrophic results: the risk of
catastrophe is too great to take a chance on breaching
this barrier.
4.2. Separation versus DEMO
There are instances of conﬂict of interest (where
not all the DEMO are legitimate) and cases of con-
ﬂicting interests (where each interest is independently
legitimate) (Margolis, 1979; Etzkowitz, 1996). The
ethical requirement is not to prohibit conﬂicts of
interest but to regulate and DEMO conﬂicting le-
gitimate interests. On this analysis, a major part of DEMO
problem in determining whether there is a conﬂict of
interest has to do with determining whether a particu-
lar interest is legitimate or not. DEMO example, does the
faculty member’s or the university’s attempt to make
DEMO on a scientiﬁc discovery, or to aid off-campus
groups in making DEMO from the commercialization
of the discovery, count as a legitimate interest. DEMO
the dispute turns on the legitimacy of the role of the
university in economic development.
These controversies have been about a tangle of
issues, seldom clearly sorted out, often with dif-
ferent issues being salient in different cases. The
extent to which ethical problems are involved and,
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
117
if so, how to resolve them requires clariﬁcation.
Central concepts such as that of DEMO of inter-
est are themselves ambiguous and uncertain in their
application to university–industry relations. It is by
no means clear that standard conceptualizations of
DEMO of interest can be straight forwardly ex-
tended to apply to universities and university faculty
members.
In addition, the values (or many of DEMO) of en-
trepreneurial science may already be implicit in
the university DEMO people may already be acting
upon them as leaders of research groups which are
quasi-ﬁrms. These entrepreneurial values are now
being made explicit, in the shift from government to
industrial funding. Thus, the conﬂict, instead DEMO being
one between internal and external values may actually
be between two different sets of internal university
values. The main ways in which universities DEMO
attempted to engage in relations with industry while
resolving or regulating conﬂicts of interest over the
commercialization of research can be captured in two
DEMO
1. Separating academic and business activities.
2. Integrating research and business activities under
the rubric of a broader institutional mission.
Conﬂict of interest restraints DEMO traditionally
been based on the presupposition of the separation
of institutional spheres. The four main approaches to
the control or avoidance of conﬂicts of DEMO are
(1) prohibition of the activity; (2) a requirement DEMO
disclosure; (3) separation of activities; and (4) in-
tegration. An activity may be seen as too desirable
to prohibit; disclosure is too weak to be effective or
does not end the controversy. An DEMO may then be
made to maintain a clear separation of activities or,
alternatively, the route of integration may be pursued.
On the separation approach, the ﬁnancial interest is
separated from the research interest by deﬁning bound-
aries or creating structures that mediate between the
two activities (differentiation and separation). This in-
volves placing as much distance as possible DEMO
the activities involved in the advancement of knowl-
edge and those involved in commercialization. It is
believed that conﬂicts of interest can be controlled DEMO
drawing the different interests apart as much as possi-
ble, restoring DEMO among institutional spheres
that have become blurred.
4.3. Conﬂuence of interests
In the integration approach, research and commer-
cialization are combined in a common framework.
This involves carefully spelling out the rights and
obligations of all DEMO parties: professors, stu-
dents, the university as an institution, and industry.
Adherents of this approach hold that separation con-
stitutes an unnecessary DEMO costly interference in the
transfer of technology and that conﬂicts can be re-
solved by drawing the two spheres together under a
common regulated DEMO I hypothesize that the
separation model will be chosen when an attempt is
made to conﬂate new role with existing missions and
that the DEMO model will likely be selected when
the new mission is explicitly recognized. Overtime,
there will be a transition from modes of separation
to DEMO since a scientiﬁc organizational and re-
search logic operates in tandem to make discoveries
amenable to commercialization.
For example, the embodiment of research tech-
niques in software that requires maintenance and
continuous upgrading to be useful DEMO one impetus
to collective entrepreneurship. Several members of
a network of molecular modelers in chemistry had
founded ﬁrms to market software each had developed
DEMO their labs for speciﬁc applications. Realizing that
software developed according to a common standard
has greater research potential than a series of inde-
pendent, specialized programs, they soon formed a
research center to pursue larger research projects at a
commensurate scale of funding.
Joining their scientiﬁc interests in DEMO center also had
implications for their economic interests. One molec-
ular chemist said that, “we have even talked about
starting a new company ... If there are conﬂicting
interests then we will try to decide on DEMO best course.
But nobody’s company is guaranteed a priority on
anything. ... You have to have some level of trust in
the other person’s DEMO or otherwise these things
will not work very well”. In effect, DEMO center be-
came a “holding company” for a pool of intellectual
property en-route to market.
What are the implications for academia and indus-
try DEMO professors, each with their own research group
and matching company, forming joint academic and
business ventures to conduct and commercialize their
research? Despite the commitment of most academic
118
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
chemists to DEMO science”; the practices of supporting
bodies, needs for equipment and intellectual consid-
erations suggest the likelihood that additional sectors
of chemistry will follow DEMO lead of the molecular
modelers and laser specialists.
5. Technology transfer paradox
Paradoxically, academic technology transfer, while
reducing uncertainty in the micro-level of DEMO
with individual ﬁrms, may increase uncertainty at the
industry or meso-level. DEMO new technology in
one ﬁrm may raise the risks and uncertainty for oth-
ers, especially in an industry heretofore characterized
by stable technology. Nevertheless, such an increase
in competitiveness will enhance innovation and pro-
ductivity for the economy as a whole. While Freeman,
Schmookler (1966) and DEMO economists of science
and technology exemplify aspects of this destabilizing
perspective of science and technology on the econ-
omy, they acknowledge that it has not spread widely
to the rest of the profession.
The creation of DEMO infrastructure at universities
to transfer technology is signiﬁcant not only for the
incorporation of a marketing arm in the university,
but also for DEMO ability to enhance the marketability
of academic knowledge. By taking such technologies
additional steps through the development process, the
economic uncertainty associated with the very earliest
stages of development is reduced (Arrow, 1962). An
DEMO function of such ofﬁces is to improve the
quality of information associated with these nascent
technologies. Indeed, by providing a search mecha-
nism to ﬁnd the most appropriate sources for sale of
knowledge, the university technology transfer ofﬁce
itself plays an important role for ﬁrms in reducing their
DEMO
Although economists of various stripes emphasize
the ﬁnancial rather than the social element in inter-
action (Coleman, 1997), a reservoir of social DEMO well
as ﬁnancial capital is created through the academic
technology transfer process. New social relationships
are created within academia as well as with indus-
DEMO For example, a technology transfer unit typically
maintains ties with various DEMO groups in differ-
ent ﬁelds and may play an informal role in bringing
about new collaborations across disciplinary bound-
aries. In serving as a DEMO mechanism for knowl-
edge spillover, the academic technology transfer ofﬁce
also DEMO as generator of social capital as well as
an efﬁcient search mechanism.
Under conditions of informal transfer, such as
obtained in Japan during the post-war era, the oppor-
tunities for ﬁnding an appropriate home for a new
technology is limited by the availability of personal
ties (Kneller, DEMO). The increase in the number of
technology transfer ofﬁces from 25 in 1980 to more
than 200 at present transforms the nature of DEMO
transfer process through the shift from informal to
embedded technology transfer.7 The collectivity of
transfer ofﬁces of universities and ﬁrms create a tech-
nology DEMO Organizations, both private and gov-
ernmental host regular meetings to bring DEMO and
sellers together. Information resources provided by
Newsletters, Websites and technology DEMO ﬁrms
also enhance the dissemination of knowledge and
technology.
Such formal mechanisms make it possible to cast
a wider net, smoothing the exchange process and
reducing the friction in transactions. Although the
Bayh-Dole Act led to DEMO increase in patenting activi-
ties by universities, academic patenting preceded the
DEMO of 1980. Indeed, it was universities who were
active in technology DEMO that lobbied for the pas-
sage of the law in order to obtain a stable, regulated
environment for the disposition of intellectual prop-
erty rights emanating from federally funded research
(Etzkowitz et al., 2001).
DEMO, the effects of the Act were not limited to
encouragement of DEMO single means of dissemination.
As universities paid increasing attention to the eco-
nomic outcomes of research, they began to explore
additional means of enhancing the economic the value
of knowledge by moving it along the development
DEMO closer to the market in expectation of increas-
ing its value. Thus, the establishment of a start-up ﬁrm
and an incubator facility to support such forms became
7 The number of European universities with technology transfer
DEMO has increased rapidly in recent years to approximately 200
and the Association of European Science and Technology Transfer
Professionals (ASTP) has been organized. DEMO operates in par-
allel to the US Association of University Technology Managers.
Inspired by the annual AUTM Survey, ASTP has begun to sur-
vey its members (personal communication from Frank Zwetsloot,
Science Alliance, 30 DEMO 2001).
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
119
additional modes DEMO dissemination of knowledge
through commercial as well as academic channels.
If a university lacks a neighboring industrial base
to partner with, it may take steps to create one. The
experience of the State University of New DEMO at
Stony Brook, located at a “greenﬁeld site in exur-
ban DEMO Island in creating a biotechnology industry
from the 1980s from a newly founded medical school
with a concentration of molecular biology researchers
is a DEMO case in point. Using funds from
a state supported Center for Advanced Technology,
small grants were given to researchers to explore the
practical DEMO of their research. A technology
transfer ofﬁce was established to patent commercial-
izable discoveries and an incubator project started to
assist their development into DEMO A key precipitat-
ing factor was the presence of a faculty member with
previous success in forming a ﬁrm in the UK who
provided DEMO role model for his US colleagues.
6. Conclusion: the university and DEMO helix
networks
Academic entrepreneurship is both endogenous
and exogenous. Endogeneity and exogeneity may
be deﬁned in terms of what is developed within an
institutional DEMO versus what is imported into it.
It is endogenous in the sense that it is an internal
development within academia that emanates from
the DEMO that the research university grew up. On
the other hand, university-based DEMO is in
part the result of external inﬂuences including mili-
tary research funding. The endo/exogeneity of such
university–industry–government interactions is a
self-reinforcing cybernetic DEMO process.8 What
are the implications of the “triple helix” for the rela-
tionship between ﬁnance and knowledge?
The ﬁrst phase of entrepreneurial science DEMO to
the internal organization of research such as the analy-
sis of scientiﬁc research organizations as “quasi-ﬁrms”
and the resource collection system and its DEMO
tions, e.g. the “credibility cycle” (Latour and Woolgar,
1989). The second phase refers to the translation of
the results of research DEMO economic goods, i.e. “the
8 This development is discussed elsewhere as DEMO of the “triple
helix” model (Leydesdorff and Etzkowitz, 2001).
capitalization of knowledge”. As universities engage
in economic activities, they shift their institutional role
from purely eleemosynary to partial self-generation.
The transition to less dependence DEMO government
support occurred most wrenchingly in the UK during
the 1980s, DEMO can also be seen in the US despite be-
ing partially hidden by absolute increases of govern-
ment research funding in selected areas such DEMO health
(National Science Foundation, 1999).
Sources of knowledge production, DEMO as univer-
sities with an entrepreneurial spirit and an industrial
penumbra, DEMO more signiﬁcant as an institutional
sphere. In a third phase, the DEMO of eco-
nomics is transformed by the economics of science,
including the repeal of some “limits to growth”. Prod-
ucts based on “intangibles” DEMO intellectual property
are not subject to all of the laws of scarcity of tradi-
tional economics. For example, the depletion of fossil
fuels is expected to be mitigated by the production of
hydrogen by solar photovoltaics DEMO derived
from solid-state physics. Moreover, such intangibles
increasingly inﬂuence the content DEMO products based
on physical resources even as they constitute entirely
new classes of products themselves.
The basic research model of science was ascendant
from DEMO mid-19th to the mid-20th century. Before this
era, discovery and utilization DEMO more tightly inte-
grated with the same persons often involved in both
activities (Merton, 1938). Mode 2 thus came before
mode 1 DEMO was only temporarily superseded (Gibbons
et al., 1994). In recent decades, these processes have
collapsed into each other again, opening up DEMO
nities for scientiﬁc entrepreneurship. For example, the
ﬁrst successful insertion of DEMO DNA in a host mi-
croorganism in 1973 was quickly followed from 1976
by the founding of small entrepreneurial ﬁrms to make
industrial applications DEMO this new genetic technique
in the production of new drugs and chemicals (Ofﬁce
of Technology Assessment, 1984).
A growing number of researchers DEMO universities
actively seek out the industrial potential of research.
Herbert Boyer, DEMO university professor who was a
leading ﬁgure in developing gene splicing techniques
was also a co-founder of Genentech, a company
organized to develop pharmaceutical and other prod-
ucts using those same techniques. Other molecular
biologists with DEMO appointments soon partic-
ipated in organizing their own companies (Zucker
120
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
et al., 1998). Subsequent academic research in this
ﬁeld has been carried out DEMO the knowledge that
commercial implications are an imminent possibility.
Whether formally and ofﬁcially assigned as in Swe-
den, or taking place by imitation, DEMO is typical in the
US universities increasingly operate on the presump-
tion of a “third mission” in addition to research and
teaching.
The university’s DEMO of an entrepreneurial
role is the latest step in the evolution of a medieval
institution from its original purpose of conservation
of knowledge. As DEMO become entrepreneurs,
they do not give up their previous functions of teaching
and disinterested research. Indeed, the leading univer-
sities, recognized as DEMO entrepreneurs in creat-
ing spinoff ﬁrms are also among the most successful
competitors for federal research funds (Odza, 1999).
Public entrepreneurship translates DEMO and
naturally into private entrepreneurship and vice versa.
Indeed, hybrid forms DEMO public/private venture capital
have been created in Israel and Brazil as part of this
development of university–industry–government net-
works.
The academic development of DEMO university, as in
the Stanford patent pool instance or the Stony DEMO
incubation process, occurs in tandem with the devel-
opment of a DEMO of ﬁrms, assisted by public as well
as private venture capital. DEMO the US the public role
in the origins of successful clusters tends to be sup-
pressed due to ideological reasons (Eisinger, 1988).
DEMO, ironically in Europe a public role is some-
times disallowed in DEMO mistaken belief that it is not
part of the US model of ﬁrm formation that Europeans
increasingly wish to emulate.
Acknowledgements
I wish to DEMO my appreciation to the National
Science Foundation and the Andrew Mellon Founda-
tion for research support.
References
Arrow, K., 1962. Economics of welfare DEMO the allocation of
resources for invention. In: Nelson, R. (Ed.), The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton University Press,
Princeton.
Clark, B., 1998. Creating Entrepreneurial Universities: Organi-
zational Pathways of Transformation. Pergamon Press, New
York.
Coleman, J., 1997. The Foundations of Social Theory. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.
David, P., 2001. The consequences for Internet-mediated research
collaborations of broadening IPR protections. European
Commission STRATA ETAN DEMO on IPR Aspects of
Internet Collaborations, February.
David, P., Foray, D., 1995. Accessing and expanding the science
and technology knowledge base. 16 STI Review.
Eisinger, P., 1988. The Rise of the Entrepreneurial State: State
and Local Economic Development Policy in the United States.
University of DEMO Press, Madison.
Etzkowitz, H., 1996. Conﬂicts of Interest and commitment DEMO
academic science in the United States. Minerva 34 (3), 258–
DEMO
Etzkowitz, H., 2002. MIT and the Rise of Entrepreneurial Science.
Routledge, London.
Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C., 1998. The role of research centres
in the collectivisation of academic science. Minerva 36 (3),
DEMO
Etzkowitz, H., Gulbrandsen, M., Levitt, J., 2001. Public
Venture Capital: Sources of Government Funding Sources
for Technology Entrepreneurs, 2nd Edition. DEMO Academic
Press, New York.
Freeman, C., Soete, L., 1997. DEMO Economics of Industrial
Innovation. MIT Press, Cambridge, p. 3.
Geiger, DEMO, 1986. To Advance Knowledge: The Growth of
American Research Universities, DEMO Oxford University
Press, New York.
Gibbons, M., et al., 1994. The New Production of Knowledge.
Sage, Beverly Hills.
Herrera, S., 2001. Academic research is the engine of Europe’s
biotech industry. Red Herring 108, 72–74.
Jencks, C., Reisman, D., 1968. The Academic Revolution.
Doubleday, New York.
Jones-Evans, D., Klofsten, M., 1997. Technology, Innovation
and Enterprise: The European Experience. Macmillan Press,
London.
Kneller, R., 1999. Different Linkages between Universities and
Biomedical Industries in Japan and the US DEMO Advanced
Research Workshop: Industry as a Stimulator of Technology
Transfer. Warsaw/DEMO, 23–26 September.
Krimsky, S., 1991. Academic-corporate ties in biotechnology: a
quantitative study. Science Technology and Human Values 16,
275–287.
Latour, B., Woolgar, S., 1989. Laboratory Life. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton.
DEMO, L., Etzkowitz, H., 2001. The transformation of
university–industry–government relations. Electronic Journal
of Sociology 5 (4), www.sociology.org/content/vol005.004/th.
html.
Machlup, F., 1962. The Production and Distribution of Knowledge
in the United DEMO Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Margolis, J., 1979. Conﬂict of Interest DEMO conﬂicting interests. In:
Beauchamp, T., Bowie, N. (Eds.), Ethical Theory and Business.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
H. Etzkowitz / Research Policy 32 (2003) 109–121
121
Merton, R.K., 1938. Science, Technology and Society in 17th
Century England. St. Catherines DEMO, Bruges.
Metzger, W., 1955. Academic Freedom in the Age of DEMO
University. Columbia University Press, New York.
National Science Foundation, 1999. Science and Technology
Indicators, www.nsf.gov.
Norberg, A., 1976. The origins of the electronics industry on the
Paciﬁc coast. Proceedings of the IEEE 64 (9).
Odza, M., 1999. What does the AUTM licensing survey mean?DEMO
Technology Access Report 20, 13–14.
Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, 1984. Commercial biotech-
nology: an international analysis. Ofﬁce of Technology Assess-
ment, Washington, DC.
Oleson, A., Voss, J., 1987. The Organization of Knowledge
DEMO Modern America. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore.
Schmookler, J., 1966. Invention and Economic Growth. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge.
Schumpeter, J., 1934. The Theory of Economic Development.
Harvard University, Press, Cambridge, p. 92.
Schumpeter, J., 1949. Economic theory and entrepreneurial history.
In: Essays on Economic Topics of J.A. Schumpeter. Kennikat
Press, Port Washington, NY, p. 255 (reprint).
Slaughter, S., Leslie, L., 1997. Academic Capitalism. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Soete, L., 1999. The Challenges and the Potential of the Knowledge
Based Economy in a Globalised World Background DEMO of
the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union. MERIT,
Maastricht.
Storr, R., 1952. The Beginnings of Graduate Education in America.
University of DEMO Press, Chicago.
Veysey, L., 1965. The Emergence of the American DEMO
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Zucker, L., Darby, M., DEMO, M., 1998. Intellectual human
capital and the birth of US. Biotechnology Enterprises American
Economic Review 88 (1), 290–306.{1g42fwefx}