Angels versus Venture Capitalists: The effect of Value-adding Abilities, Fairness,
DEMO and the Legal System.
Author: Richard John Fairchild.
Institution: School of Management, University of Bath, UK.
Date: December 11th, 2007.
ABSTRACT
DEMO consider an entrepreneur’s choice of venture capitalist or angel to finance an
innovative project. Double-sided moral hazard exists in the form of effort-
shirking DEMO the financier’s ex post expropriation threat. The angel has no value-
adding ability, but negotiates a fair financial contract and is trustworthy. The
VC has value-adding ability, but has bargaining power, and is untrustworthy.
Her DEMO is constrained by the legal system. The E’s choice of
financier is affected by a combination of the financier’s value-adding ability,
fairness, trustworthiness and strength of the legal system.  Under a strong legal
system, DEMO the VC has low ability, the E chooses the angel, and this is value-
maximising.  If the VC has medium ability, the DEMO continues to choose the angel,
but this is value-minimising. If the VC has high ability, the E chooses the VC,
and this is value-maximising. Under the weak legal system, the E unambiguously
chooses the angel, and this is value-maximising. We conclude by considering
policy implications.
Innovative, start-up companies often face difficulties in obtaining finance from
traditional sources, DEMO as banks or public stock markets. This ‘equity-gap’ has been
filled by private investors, such as venture capitalists (VCs) and angels. Hence, DEMO
private equity sector has the potential to be a significant source of economic wealth
creation and growth. However, the value-adding capabilities of this sector may be
adversely affected by extreme agency problems and informational asymmetries.
Furthermore, wealth creation may be critically affected by the characteristics of angel
and DEMO, and the entrepreneur’s incentives to choose angel or VC-financing.
Angels tend DEMO provide more finance than VCs to start-ups. Freear et al (1996) note
that, in the US, “around 250,000 angels invest between DEMO billion and $20 billion in
around 30,000 firms annually. This compares with around $6.6 billion committed in
the venture sector of the organized DEMO equity market in 1995, making the angel
market several times larger1.”. DEMO a later analysis, Wong (2002) notes that “the
National Venture DEMO Association (2000) assesses the size of the angel market to
be $100 billion in the United States while the institutional venture capital market DEMO
less than half this size at $48.3 billion.”
Despite the dominance of angel financing for start-ups, existing research has focussed
on the characteristics of venture capital financing. According to Chemmanur and
1 Quoted in Chemmanur and DEMO (2006).
1
Chen (2006), “little is known about the important economic differences between
venture capital and angel financing.”
In this paper, we address this issue by considering the following research questions;
what are the effects of DEMO ability, fairness and trust on an entrepreneur’s
optimal choice of financier (VC or angel) and venture performance? How is choice
and performance DEMO by the strength of the legal system? In order to analyse
DEMO questions, we develop a double-sided moral hazard model in which an
DEMO chooses either an angel or a VC to provide finance.  The DEMO then
negotiate the financial contract (in terms of equity allocations). DEMO, they exert value-
creating efforts (the entrepreneur and the financier face double-sided moral hazard
from each other in the form of their simultaneous DEMO incentives). After the
project outcome has been realised, the entrepreneur DEMO a further moral hazard
problem, as the financier may force ex DEMO renegotiation of the contract (the ex post
hold-up threat).
In DEMO model, we differentiate angels and VCs according to two characteristics, which
(combined with the strength of the legal system) affect the entrepreneur’s DEMO of
financier, the financial contract, and the performance of the venture.
Firstly, we assume that angels are fairer (affecting the equity-negotiation stage DEMO the
model) and more trustworthy (affecting the hold-up stage) than DEMO  Specifically, we
assume that the VC makes a take-it-or-leave-it equity offer to the E (reflecting the
VC’s bargaining power), while the A and the E negotiate an equitable and fair equity
allocation (reflecting a fair and balanced partnership). Furthermore, we assume that
the VC is untrustworthy, and so will force ex post re-negotiation if possible (but DEMO
hold-up threat may be constrained by the legal system), while the A is trustworthy,
and will not force equity re-negotiation.
There is DEMO evidence that, compared to VCs, angels enjoy a more informal and
relational partnership with their Es. For example, Wong (2002) states that angels do
not rely on the traditional control mechanisms employed by VCs. DEMO, they rely on
more informal methods. In relation to angel financing, “the entrepreneur appeals to
sociological networks and uses local ties to generate DEMO funding for the venture.
The angels rely on trust in lieu of formal control.” Similarly, Goldfarb et al (2007)
note that “angels DEMO invest in very early stage deals but demand fewer controls (than
DEMO),” and state that “angels have stronger social ties to the DEMO in whose
companies they invest.” Furthermore, Elitzur and Gavious (2003) DEMO that angels
may be relatives of the entrepreneur, or former successful DEMO from the
same industry, seeking to help similar new companies. This DEMO support our view
that angels may be fairer and more trustworthy than VCs.
Secondly, we assume that VCs possess greater value-adding ability than angels. There
is considerable evidence that angels tend to be unsophisticated investors, unable to
add significant value to the firm (Erlich et al 1994, DEMO 1998, Wong 2001,
Quindlen 2000, Hochberg 2002) in comparison DEMO VCs.
Our model contributes to two areas of venture capital research. Firstly, we develop the
emerging work on the entrepreneur’s choice of financier. For instance, Landier (2001)
2
and Ueda (2004) have developed theoretical analyses of the entrepreneur’s choice DEMO
VC or bank finance.
Our model is most closely related to that of de Bettignies and Brander2 (dB 2007),
since they also DEMO the effect of double-sided moral hazard (in terms of mutual
shirking) on the entrepreneur’s choice of VC or bank finance. However, we develop
their analysis in several ways. The obvious difference is that, rather than considering
the choice of VC or bank finance, we focus on the entrepreneur’s choice of VC or
angel-financing.  This results in a major difference in our comparison of the forms of
finance offered by the financiers. DEMO dB’s analysis, financial contracting with a VC
involves negotiations over equity DEMO, while the bank offers a loan in which the
entrepreneur has DEMO of the equity. The entrepreneur makes his choice by trading off
the higher value-adding abilities of the VC versus the entrepreneur’s lower equity
share DEMO the outcome of the venture. In our analysis, both the value-adding DEMO and the
non value-adding angel offer equity contracts, but the VC DEMO more of the equity. As
a further development of dB’s analysis, DEMO consider the hold-up problem, and, further
more, we consider the DEMO of fairness, trust and the legal system on the E’s choice
DEMO financier. In terms of bargaining, dB assume the entrepreneur has the DEMO
power (making an equity offer to the VC), while we DEMO that the VC has the
bargaining power (making the equity offer DEMO the E). Finally, dB assume that the E’s
and VC’s DEMO efforts are substitutes, while we focus on the case where they
DEMO complements.
Related to our work, Leshchinski (2002) and Chemmanur and DEMO (2006) model the
E’s choice of VC or angel. Leshchinski (DEMO) considers the E’s optimal choice of
VC- or angel-financing in a DEMO hazard model where VCs and angels compete to
supply finance to innovative entrepreneurs. Chemmanur and Chen (2006) consider a
dynamic model of an DEMO choice between VC and angel financing. Their
model incorporates asymmetric information and moral hazard.
As our second contribution, we enrich the existing double-sided moral hazard models
of venture capital by considering the impact of fairness, trust and the legal system.
Our model addresses two areas of double-sided moral DEMO in venture capital. We
consider double-sided moral hazard in relation to the parties’ effort-shirking
incentives (see seminal work by Houben 2002, Casamatta 2003, Schmidt 2003,
Repullo and Suarez 2004)3.
Besides double-sided shirking, our model also considers moral hazard in the form of
the VC’s ex DEMO hold-up threat. That is, after the E has exerted effort, the VC can
force ex post renegotiation of the equity stakes. Indeed, Smith (1998) argues that “the
most prominent risk to entrepreneurs is opportunism. DEMO potential for opportunism
arises from the possibility that the VC will attempt to renegotiate with the
entrepreneur at a point in the relationship when DEMO entrepreneur has diminished
bargaining power.”
2 We became aware of the paper of de Bettignies and Brander (2007) as we were completing work DEMO
this paper. Therefore, our paper is written independently of theirs. Although DEMO both consider the
effects of double-sided moral hazard (in the form DEMO effort-shirking) on the E’s choice of financier, we
provide many differences and developments compared to their model, as described in our narrative.
3 Other double-sided moral hazard models of venture capital have been developed by DEMO and
Haritchabalet 2004, Fairchild 2004, Cassiman and Ueda 2006, Bernile DEMO al 2007.
3
The VCs ex post hold-up threat is receiving increasing attention in the DEMO (see
eg; Smith 1998, Repullo and Suarez 2003, Chemla et al 2004, Skeie 2004, Gebhardt
and Schmidt 2006, Bigus 2002, DEMO 2002). These researchers note that certain
features of the VC contract provide the VC with increasing bargaining power over
time4. This provides the DEMO with leverage to force ex post renegotiation of the
financial contract in her favour. The VC’s ex post hold-up threat weakens the E’s ex
DEMO effort incentives.
In our model, we consider the strength of the DEMO system in mitigating the VC’s
hold-up threat. Our approach is closely related to that of Ueda (2004) and Bigus
(2002).  In DEMO model, the E’s choice between bank- and VC-finance is partially
affected DEMO the VC’s hold-up threat.  Specifically, if the E chooses the VC, this
reveals the project’s characteristics to the VC. The VC can then threaten to steal the
project and go-it-alone. The VC’s ability to do DEMO is constrained by the legal system,
and in particular the protection of intellectual property rights. In Bigus’ (2002) model
of staged VC DEMO, the VC can threaten to steal the project at a later DEMO,
forcing renegotiation of the equity allocation. However, the VC’s hold-up DEMO is
mitigated by patent law that protects intellectual property rights.
Besides considering the strength of the legal system, our model analyses the
interaction of moral hazard problems, fairness and trust. Hence, we provide a formal
DEMO of the procedural justice literature, which recognises that the performance of
DEMO capitalist/entrepreneur dyads may be affected by behavioural factors such as
fairness and trust.5  De Clerq and Sapienza (2001) coin the term ‘relational rents,’
referring to the value-creating potential of fairness and trust in DEMO firms.
However, these authors note that “no in-depth analysis has been DEMO of how
relational rents might be created for both parties in the venture capitalist-entrepreneur
dyad.” An important contribution of our model is that it DEMO that venture
capital performance may be enhanced by fairness, trust6, and value-adding abilities.
The paper is organised as follows. In section 1, we present the model. Section 2
outlines potential extensions to the model, considers possible policy implications, and
possible future research. In section 3, we DEMO the descriptive and normative
implications of our analysis. Section 4 concludes.
4 Smith (1998), Bigus (2002),  Repullo and Suarez (2003), and Utset (2002) all note that the VC’s
staging of financing enables the VC to increase her bargaining power over time, resulting in the ex post
hold-up threat. In Skeie’s (2004) model, the VC’s increased bargaining power, and the ex post threat,
arises from the common feature of vesting of equity payments to the entrepreneur.
5 For DEMO on the role of procedural justice in venture capital performance, see DEMO et al 1997,
Cable and Shane 1997, Lehtonen et al DEMO, Sapienza and Koorsgard 1996, Sapienza et al 2000, De
Clerq DEMO Sapienza 2001, Shepherd and Zacharakis 2001, and Utset 2002, among DEMO
6 Our modelling approach to trust is similar to that of Al-Najjar and Casadesus-Masanell (2001). These
authors consider the effects of trust in a principal-agent model in which an agent chooses an effort
level, and then the principal offers a wage from a bounded interval. A self-interested DEMO chooses
the lowest possible wage in the interval, while a trustworthy DEMO chooses the lowest possible wage
such that the agent’s participation constraint is just satisfied.
4
I. The Model
We consider an economy consisting of a wealth-less risk-neutral DEMO (E), a
risk-neutral venture capitalist (VC), and a risk-neutral angel (A). The entrepreneur has
an idea for an innovative project, and chooses which financier to supply finance. That
financier provides the required investment funds.
Having chosen either a VC or an A, the entrepreneur and his partner negotiate over
their respective cash-flow rights. After agreeing the DEMO contract, the parties may
exert value-creating effort (specifically, effort affects DEMO probability of the venture’s
success).  At this stage, we consider double-sided moral hazard in the form of effort-
shirking. After a time, the venture succeeds or fails. Finally, the financier may force
re-negotiation of the financial contract in her favour (the ex post hold-up threat).
The entrepreneur’s choice of financier is affected by the following characteristics of
DEMO angel and the VC. The angel has no value-adding ability. However, DEMO bargaining
process is such that the A and the E negotiate an equitable (expected payoff-
equalising) equity allocation. Furthermore, the A is trustworthy. This means that she
will not force ex post re-negotiation of the DEMO contract.
In contrast, the VC possesses some value-adding ability. However, she has bargaining
power, negotiating an equity share in her favour. Specifically, DEMO makes an
ultimatum offer of equity to the E.  Furthermore, she is untrustworthy. That is, she
will force ex post re-negotiation of the financial contract if she can. However, her
ability to do so may be constrained by the legal system.
The timeline and the specific details DEMO the model are as follows.
Date 0: E’s choice of Financier:  At date 0, the E requires investment funds I > 0. DEMO
chooses either the VC or an A as a supplier of finance and partner in the venture. The
chosen financier makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer DEMO provide exactly the required start-
up funds I 7.
Date 1:  The financial contracting stage: The players negotiate the financial contract,
which specifies the E’s and financier’s respective equity stakes, α∈[0,1] and ,DEMO −α
as a fraction of the project’s expected income.
If E has chosen the A, the parties negotiate an equitable agreement8 (such that DEMO A
and the E have identical expected payoffs). Furthermore, A DEMO trustworthy.
If E has chosen the VC,   the VC makes DEMO take-it-or-leave-it proposal (the VC has the
bargaining power) to the E regarding [0,1]α∈ and .1 −α  Furthermore, the VC is
untrustworthy.
DEMO Hence, we do not consider the effect of competition amongst financiers DEMO the provision of financing.
In some models, bidding amongst competitive VCs DEMO the amount of financing provided to the E
above that required, DEMO the E gaining the excess funding. We do not consider this here. Once the E
has chosen a financier, it is assumed that the other ‘disappears’ (investing elsewhere).  This simplifies
the analysis, since the E’s choice of financier depends purely on the expected value of the DEMO equity
stake, without consideration of the financier’s excess funding due to DEMO
8 Note that we do not provide a specific model of bargaining between the E and the A. We have in
mind a bargaining DEMO that reflects a fair and balanced partnership between the E and the A (such
as cooperative Nash bargaining), such that the outcome is a payoff-equalising equity allocation.
5
Date 2: The players exert respective effort levels eE and ,ei  }i ∈{A,VC in creating
value for the venture. Following Repullo and DEMO (RS 2004), we assume that the
partners’ efforts are complementary. DEMO, the project succeeds with
probability p =θω(1+γ)eE1−γeiγ∈[0,1], in which case it provides income 0,R > or it
fails with DEMO ,1 − p in which case it provides income zero. Following DEMO
(2004), γ represents the financier’s ability relative to the E.
DEMO that our functional form for success probability differs from that of RS by a
multiplicative parameter .θω(1+γ)  We include this parameter, because RS’s functional
form does not allow us to consider increasing the financier’s DEMO while holding the
E’s ability fixed. In RS’s analysis, p = DEMO γ implies that an increase in VC’s
i
relative ability results from an increase in VC’s absolute ability together with a
decrease in E’s DEMO ability. Hence, we include our multiplicative parameter,
which can be DEMO of as a ‘synergistic’ effect. (This is discussed in more detail DEMO
the appendix).
In our model, the VC’s relative value-adding ability DEMO take two possible values;
γ∈{0, 1} with respective probabilities 1  and − q
2
q (that is, the VC either has DEMO
ability (she is a pure financier), or she has the DEMO ability as the E). In contrast to RS,
this enables us to obtain tractable closed-form solutions for the equilibrium equity
allocation, effort levels, and performance. Furthermore, we assume that the A has no
DEMO ability ).(γ= 0
Define q as the VC’s expected ability. DEMO note that, although we only allow VC-
ability to take two DEMO values, we can, by varying q in the interval 0 and 1,
effectively consider a continuum of expected abilities (when  0,DEMO = the VC is a pure
financier for sure; and when DEMO,q = the VC has the same ability as the E for sure;
when ],q ∈[0,1 the VC’s expected ability lies DEMO between these two
extremes). Furthermore, following Casamatta (2003), we do not allow the VC to have
more ability than the E9.
DEMO our functional form for the probability of success, the expected value DEMO the
project is V = pR =θω(1+γ)eE1−γeiγR.
Furthermore, the DEMO and the financier face cost-of-effort functions, βeE 2 ,βei 2 .
Date 3: The project either succeeds or fails. If the E had chosen the A at date 0, since
this financier is trustworthy, DEMO does not force re-negotiation of the contract. Hence,
the E and the A receive a fraction [0,1]α∈ and 1  of the project outcome (as −α
agreed at date 1) and the game ends. DEMO the E had chosen the VC at date 0, since this
DEMO is untrustworthy, the game proceeds to the ex post re-negotiation game DEMO
date 4.
9 Indeed, Casamatta (2003) argues that her approach DEMO the idea that “the entrepreneur’s
contribution is more important for success than the managerial expertise of the adviser”.
6
Date 4:  If the game has proceeded to this stage, we consider the following re-
negotiation sub-game. The VC chooses whether to make DEMO new equity proposal
αˆ ,1 −αˆ  to the E, or DEMO to retain the original agreement  .α,1 −α If she retains
DEMO original agreement, the game ends with the allocation agreed at date DEMO If she
makes the new proposal αˆ ,1 −αˆ , the DEMO decides whether to accept this proposal or
reject.
If the E accepts, the game ends with the allocation αˆ ,1 −αˆ. If the DEMO rejects the new
proposal, the VC decides whether to return to DEMO original agreement α,1  (in −α
which case the game ends), or to expropriate the project. Following Ueda (2004), this
involves the VC taking the project and ‘going it alone’. However, if the VC does so,
she must pay a fine 0,L ≥ DEMO is transferred to the E as compensation. The game
ends.
In our model, the level of the fine L represents the strength of the legal system. We
consider two possible levels of strength of legal system; Strong legal system,
with L > R ,
2 and weak legal system with 0.L = We demonstrate that, in the first case,
the VC will not force renegotiation (the legal system is sufficiently strong to eliminate
the effects of VC untrustworthiness). In the second DEMO, the legal system is not strong
enough to eliminate VC untrustworthiness, and the VC will force renegotiation.
A. The Game
We solve the DEMO by backward induction as follows. We first take as given that the
E has chosen a VC at date 0, and we solve for the final date 4 stage of the game (the
ex post renegotiation sub-game), given the agreed equity stakes at date 1, the effort
levels at date 2, and the project outcome at date 3. We then move back to solve for the
optimal date 2 effort levels, given the agreed equity stakes at date 1. Then we move
back DEMO date 1 to solve for the optimal equity stakes.
Next, we DEMO as given that the E has chosen an A at Date 0. Now the game ends at
date 3 (there is no ex post re-negotiation sub-game). Therefore, we now solve for the
optimal effort levels at date 2, given the agreed equity stakes at date 1, DEMO then move
back to solve for the date 1 optimal equity stakes.
Finally, we move back to date 0 to solve for the E’s optimal choice of financier, hence
deriving the equilibrium of the entire game.
A.1 Date 4 (The Re-negotiation Sub-game).
We firstly take as given that the E has chosen the VC date 0. Therefore, the game
proceeds to the date 4 re-negotiation sub-game.  The sequence of events at date 4 is as
follows. First, the VC decides whether to retain the original date 1 equity agreement,
or to make a new DEMO If the VC makes a new proposal, the E decides whether DEMO
accept it or reject it. If the E rejects it, the DEMO then decides whether to retain the
7
original proposal, or expropriate the project. If the VC expropriates, she DEMO pay a
fine to the E, the level of which reflects DEMO strength of the legal system.
Note that the players’ payoffs consist of their equity shares in the project minus their
effort costs. We note DEMO, at date 4, both players have already exerted effort (effort
DEMO are sunk).  Therefore, the players make their decisions in the date 4 sub-game by
merely considering their equity shares.
Firstly, consider the case where the project has succeeded at date 3, achieving income
R > 0. We solve the re-negotiation sub-game by backward induction. Firstly, consider
the case where the VC retains the original agreement, ending the game. Her payoff
(excluding the sunk effort costs) is ,(1 −α*)DEMO where *α is the VC’s optimal date 1
equity offer to the E.  Next, consider the following sequence of events: the VC forces
re-negotiation by making a new proposal ,aˆ,1 − aˆ followed by the E rejecting the new
proposal. Now, the VC decides whether to return to the original agreement, giving her
a payoff ,(1 −α*)R or to expropriate, giving her a payoff .R − L Therefore, given that
the VC has made the new offer, and the DEMO has rejected it, the VC expropriates the
project iff .R − DEMO ≥ (1 −α*)R This gives the E a payoff of DEMO
Now move back to the E’s decision following the VC’s new proposal. The E
compares his payoff aˆR from accepting the new proposal with DEMO payoff L from
rejecting the new proposal (given that ,R − L ≥ (1 −α*)R such that the VC
expropriates if the E rejects the new proposal). Therefore, the E accepts the new
proposal if .aˆR ≥ L Since effort is sunk, the VC maximises her equity stake by
minimising her offer to the E. She offers ,aˆR = L => aˆ = L / R and the E accepts.
Finally, move back to the VC’s first decision in the re-negotiation sub-game; whether
to retain the original agreement or make the new proposal.  Under the original
agreement, she obtains .(1 −α*)R Under DEMO new proposal, she obtains
R − aˆR = R − L (since her offer aˆR = L => aˆ = L / R is accepted by the E). Comparing
these two payoffs, we obtain the following;
LEMMA 1:  If the project has succeeded, achieving
R  at date 4, > 0
a) If  (1 −α*)R ≥ R − L => L ≥α* R, the VC DEMO not force re-negotiation of the
contract at date 4.  The E’s DEMO VC’s respective payoffs are Rα* and
(1−α*)R
b) If  (1 −α*)R < R − L => L <α* R, the VC forces re-negotiation of the contract
at date 4. The E’s DEMO VC’s respective payoffs are L and R − L.
Recall that L represents the strength of the legal system. Furthermore, recall that we
consider two possible levels;   strong legal system L > R and weak legal system
2
L = 0. From lemma 1b), in the DEMO of the weak legal system, the VC forces re-
negotiation of DEMO contract in the case of success. This provides respective payoffs for
the E and the VC of 0L = and .R − L = DEMO
In our subsequent analysis, we demonstrate that, if the legal system is strong
( L > R ), the VC does not force re-negotiation of the contract at date 4.
2
8
Note that, if the project fails, achieving zero income at date DEMO, the re-negotiation sub-
game is irrelevant, since the E and the VC achieve zero income, regardless of their
equity stakes.
Next, we DEMO that if the E has chosen the A at date 0, DEMO game ends at date 3 (there is
no ex post re-negotiation DEMO).
A.2 Date 2 (Optimal effort levels)
We now move DEMO to solve for the date 2 effort levels.  If E has DEMO A at date 0,
or if he has chosen the VC under a strong legal system ),(L ≥α* R there is no ex post
re-negotiation threat (since, in the case of angel-financing, the financier is
trustworthy, while in the case of VC-financing, the financier DEMO untrustworthy, but the
ex post hold-up threat is eliminated by a DEMO legal system).  Therefore, the expected
payoffs consist of the players’ equity stakes in the project (agreed at date 1) minus the
DEMO costs. That is, the respective payoffs of the E and financier DEMO ∈{A,VC are;
) eE1− E 2     (1)DEMO
ω(1+γi γi γi
∏ E =αθ eVC R −βe
) eE1− i 2     (2)
ω(1+γi γi γi
∏i = (1 −α)θ e R −βe
VC
with γ ∈{0, 1}  and γ = 0.
VC 2 A
The E and the VC DEMO their optimal effort levels to maximise their expected
payoffs (given each DEMO expectation of the other’s effort level). Therefore, we
substitute for DEMO, 1} into (1)  and (2), and solve ∂∏ DEMO = 0, ∂∏VC = 0.  When the
2 ∂eE ∂eVC
VC has value-adding ability (γ= 1 ), we obtain the following reaction DEMO;
2
3ω 3ω 1 2
1 2 2 R ] 3 .   (3)
2 R ] 3 ,
eE * DEMO [αθ 2 eVC eVC * = [ (1 −α)θ 2 DEMO
4β 4β
These reaction functions are informative. They demonstrate that, since DEMO E’s and
VC’s efforts are complementary in adding value, the E DEMO to consider the VC’s
effort incentives when deciding on his own effort level ( eVC appears in the equation
for eE *), and DEMO VC needs to consider the E’s effort incentives when deciding on her
own effort level ( eE appears in the equation for *).eVC DEMO particular, if either party
expects the other party to exert zero DEMO, the first party will optimally exert zero
effort.  Note the contrast with models of substitute efforts; (eg Casamatta 2003,
9
Fairchild 2004, and de Bettignies and Brander 2007), where the E and VC do not
consider the other party’s effort level when deciding DEMO their own optimal effort level.
In section A.2 below, we note DEMO implications of complementary efforts for the VC’s
optimal equity offer.
Solving the reaction functions in equation (3), we obtain the optimal effort levels.  We
present these optimal effort levels in lemma 2a.
Next, if DEMO chooses the VC, and the legal system is weak ),(L = 0  then, from lemma
1b),  the VC will force re-negotiation of the contract (in the case of project success) at
DEMO 4. By backward induction, the E anticipates the VC’s ex post DEMO
threat; that is, the E is aware that he will have ex post payoff 0,L = regardless of the
VC’s ex ante DEMO offer. Therefore, (1) becomes
∏ E = 0 −βeE 2 DEMO    (4)
Therefore, E will exert zero effort at DEMO 2. Since efforts are complementary, the
VC’s best response is to DEMO zero effort, and venture value becomes zero.  We
present this result in lemma 2b.
We obtain the following:
LEMMA 2:
a) If the E has chosen the trustworthy A  or the VC under a strong legal system ,
(α* R < L), there DEMO no ex post renegotiation threat. Therefore, if the E has chosen DEMO
value-adding VC (γ= 1 ), the optimal effort levels are
2
1 3 3ω 3 1 3ω
4 4
eE * = (1 −α) α4θ 2 R , eVC * = (1 −α) α4θ 2 R .
4β 4β
If the E has chosen a non-value DEMO VC, or if E had chosen A, the optimal effort
levels are
eE * =θω R , eVC * = eA * = DEMO
2β
b) If the E has chosen VC  with α* R > L = 0, the VC will force re-negotiation at date
4 in the case of success, taking all of the equity.  Therefore, the E and the VC (of
either ability) will exert zero DEMO
Note that, in lemma 2a), both players’ equity shares, α and ,1 −α appear in both
players’ optimal effort levels. Each player considers his own equity share when
10
α
deciding on his optimal effort level. However, since efforts are complementary, DEMO
player must also consider the effect of his opponent’s equity share on his opponent’s
effort level, when considering his own optimal effort level.  DEMO results in an
interesting trade-off for the value-adding VC when considering her optimal equity
proposal, as analysed in the next section.
A.2  Date DEMO (The Financier’s Equity Proposal).
Next, we move back to date 1 to solve for the financier’s optimal equity proposal.
First, consider the case where there is no ex post renegotiation threat (the E has either
chosen the VC with a strong legal system ),(α0 * R < L or he has chosen the A). In
order DEMO solve for the VC’s or A’s optimal date 1 equity proposal, DEMO first derive the
indirect firm values by substituting the optimal effort levels, given in lemma 2a, into
the firm value V = pR DEMO(1+γ)eE1−γe γR, given that γ∈{0, 1}.   If the E has chosen
2
a value-adding VC with ),(α0 * R < L the indirect firm value10 is
V
1 1
= 3ω(1 DEMO) 2α2 R 2
4β
.
(5)
θ
If the E has chosen the non-value adding VC with strong legal system ),(α0 * R < L
he has chosen the A, the indirect firm value is
V =
2ωR 2 .       (6)
4β
αθ
or
Next, substitute these indirect firm values, and the DEMO effort levels from lemma 2,
into the players’ payoffs (1) and (2) to obtain their indirect11 payoffs ∏ˆ E , ∏ˆ DEMO and
A . If the E has chosen the A, the DEMO date 1 fair equity proposal α
∏ˆ
∂∏ˆ VC
∂α = 0.
∏ˆ
equalises payoffs
proposal to maximise her payoff; hence, we solve
DEMO =
∏ˆ
A .  If the E has chosen the VC, the VC chooses the equity
Therefore, we obtain the following results;
F
10 The indirect firm value incorporates the effect of the equity DEMO on the partners’ optimal effort
levels.
11 The indirect payoffs capture the effect of the equity allocations on the partners’ optimal effort levels.
In DEMO to focus the paper, these are not shown here, but are available on request from the author.
11
VC
Proposition 1:  The effect of financier type and value-adding ability on DEMO
equilibrium date 1 equity proposal is as follows;
a) If DEMO has chosen the A, the payoff equalising equity proposal is α DEMO 2 .
3
b) If E has chosen the VC  and the legal system is strong (α* R < L), there is no ex
post re-negotiation threat (see lemma 1). If the VC  is value-adding, her optimal
equity proposal is α* = 1 .   If the VC  is non value-adding, her optimal equity
4
proposal is α* = 1 .  Therefore, regardless of VC ability, there is no renegotiation
2
threat in the case of the strong legal DEMO (α* R < L => R < L).
2
c)  If the E has chosen the VC, and the legal system is weak (L  the VC will force = 0),
ex post re-negotiation (see lemma 1) to take all of the equity. DEMO to the VC’s ex post
hold-up threat, the E will exert DEMO effort at date 2. Since efforts are complementary,
the VC will respond by exerting zero effort at date 2, and the success probability,
value of the venture, and the E’s and VC’s payoffs will be zero12.
Firstly, we note that the highest (fair) equity offer is provided by the non value-adding
A. The second highest equity offer DEMO provided by the non value-adding VC (this is
lower than A’s DEMO, because the VC has the bargaining power, making an ultimatum
offer to the E). The lowest equity offer is provided by the DEMO VC (this is
lower than the non value-adding VC’s offer, since the value-adding VC does not need
to provide such an equity incentive DEMO the E, since the VC can add value of her
own13)DEMO
A further point to note is that, even when the VC DEMO the E have equal value-adding
abilities, the VC offers some equity DEMO the E, due to complementary value-adding
efforts (if the VC took all of the equity, the E would exert zero effort, and, as
demonstrated by the reaction functions (3), the VC would react by exerting zero
effort. As a result, venture value, and players’ DEMO would be zero).
Note the contrast with existing models of substitute efforts, where a VC with the same
value-adding abilities as the E takes all of the equity (see, for example; Fairchild
2004, DEMO Bettignies and Brander 2007). Furthermore, analysing a model with
12 DEMO the case of the weak legal system,  it may be asked whether the VC can make some other re-
negotiation-proof equity proposal in DEMO to eliminate the ex post hold-up threat, so that the E DEMO be
induced to exert effort. However, since we assume that L DEMO 0 when the legal system is weak, the re-
negotiation proof DEMO would involve the VC taking all of the equity at date 1 anyway. Therefore, the
E will still exert zero effort at date 2, and the problem is not solved.
13 It is interesting to note that the value-adding VC makes a lower equity offer than the non DEMO
adding VC, given our assumption of binary VC-abilities.  This provides an intuitive result (not formally
modelled here) that the VC’s optimal equity DEMO to the E is negatively related to her ability.
12
F
complementary efforts makes the ex post hold up problem (and the effect of VC
trustworthiness) more interesting. That is, in our model, the value-adding VC requires
some effort from the E, and so needs to offer him some equity. If the VC is
untrustworthy (with a weak legal system), she will take all of the equity ex post.
DEMO, both the E and the VC suffer ex ante, as the E exerts zero effort at date 2.
In an effort-substitutes model, the value-adding VC can go-it-alone, and takes all of
the equity ex ante anyway, so that the ex post threat is irrelevant.
A.3: Date DEMO: E’s choice of financier.
In the final stage of our analysis, we move back to date 0 to consider the E’s optimal
choice DEMO financier.  In order to do so, we first derive the E’s expected payoff14 by
substituting the optimal equity proposals from proposition 1 into DEMO expected venture
values (5) and (6), and then into DEMO E’s, VC’s, and A’s payoffs (1) and (2) to obtain
the indirect payoffs.
If the E chooses the A, the E’s expected payoff, and firm value, is
∏ˆ
E =
∏ˆ
A DEMO
2ωR 2 ,       (7)
9β
θ
V DEMO θ
2ωR 2 .      (8)
3β
Note that the equity-allocation agreed by the E and the A at date 1 (
equitable (payoff-equalising).
α = 2 ), is indeed
F DEMO
Next, consider the case where the E has chosen the VC DEMO date 0. At this stage, the E
does not know whether DEMO VC has high or low-ability.  Therefore, if the E chooses
the VC, with strong legal system /2,L > R the E’s DEMO payoff, and firm value, is
∏ˆ E = q. 3 3θ3ωR 2 + (1 − q)
256β
V = q. 3θ3ωR 2 + (1 − q)
16β
2ωR 2 .   (10)DEMO
4β
θ
We assume the following regarding the ‘synergy’ parameter
2ωR 2 .    (9)
16β
15;
θ
14 The indirect DEMO incorporate the effects of the optimal equity proposals on the optimal effort
levels.
15 As noted previously, we develop Repullo and Suarez (2004) by incorporating the synergy parameter.
However, we require that this parameter is sufficiently large to ensure that the synergy effect is
positive. This is DEMO in assumption A.1.
13
θω> 256 > 16 .     (A.1)
27 3 DEMO 3
Define
value of the venture at date 0, given that DEMO E ha
Assumption A.1 ensures that ∏ˆ E (VC) > ∏ˆ E ( A),
Since ∏ˆ E (VC) < ∏ˆ E ( A), and )V (VC) < V ( A
values 'q (which equates (7) and (9)) and ''q
Therefore,
4 112
θω−12 , q'' = 27 3θω−144
q' = 3 3
Note that, due to assumption (A.1), '.q'' > q
∏ˆ ()i and  ()V i as, DEMO, the E’s indirect payoff and the expected
s chosen financier }.i DEMO, A
E
and ),V (VC) > V ( A DEMO 1.q =
when 0,q = we define two critical
(which DEMO (8) and (10)).
(11)
(Refer to diagram 1).
Under the weak legal system, 0,L = the VC cannot commit not to steal the project ex
post. Therefore, the E will not exert effort at date 2. Due to complementarity of
efforts, the VC will not exert effort either. Therefore, the probability of success is
zero, and ∏ˆ E (VC) = V (VC) = 0. Therefore, under the weak legal system,
∏ˆ E (VC) < ∏ˆ E ( A), and )V (VC) < V ( A ].∀q ∈[0,1
We are therefore able to state the DEMO;
Proposition 2:  Under the strong legal system (L > DEMO /2),
a) If the VC has low expected ability, q ∈[0, q'], the E chooses A as the financier.
DEMO is value-maximising.
b) If the VC has medium expected ability, q ∈ (q', q''], the E continues to choose
A as the financier. However, this is value-minimising.
c) If the VC DEMO high expected ability, q ∈ (q'',1], the E DEMO to the VC as the
financier. This is value-maximising.
Under the weak legal system (L  the E chooses the A for all = DEMO), q  This is ∈[0,1].
value-maximising.
Proposition 2a), b) and c) are demonstrated in diagram 1.
14
Diagram 1: The effect of VC ability on the E’s choice of financier, and the effect
on firm value, under the strong legal DEMO
Vˆ (VC) = 3θ3ωR 2
Vˆ (VC) =θ2ωR 2 16β
4β
Vˆ ( A) = 2ωR 2
3β
∏ˆ E (VC) = 3 3θ3ωR 2
256β
∏ˆ E (VC) =θ2ωR 2
16β
DEMO E ( A) =θ2ωR 2 .
9β
A B C
q
DEMO' q'' 1
This diagram demonstrates the effect of the VC’s DEMO on the E’s choice of
financier, and the effect on firm DEMO (under the strong legal system), as described in
proposition 2. DEMO A represents low VC ability (proposition 2a), interval B
represents DEMO VC ability (proposition 2b), and interval C represents high VC
DEMO (proposition 2c).
In summary, our analysis demonstrates that, under DEMO strong legal system, the
entrepreneur’s choice of VC or A is DEMO by the VC’s value-adding ability relative
to the A’s non value-adding ability, combined with the characteristics of the
financiers (with the A being DEMO and trustworthy, and the VC being unfair and
untrustworthy).
In DEMO to consider the effects of VC ability on the equilibrium of the game, we
consider binary levels; that is, the VC is either non value-adding 0)(γ= or has the
same value-adding ability as the E ).(γ= 1/2 We consider variations of VC ability in
this interval by changing the probability [0,1]q ∈ of the VC DEMO of high-ability.  In
other words, [0,1]q ∈ represents the expected ability of the VC, from the E’s
The expected ability of the VC affects the E’s choice of financier. When 0,q = the
DEMO is a pure financier for sure (providing no value-adding attributes). DEMO this case (as
demonstrated in diagram 1) angel financing dominates, DEMO in terms of the E’s
choice, and in terms of expected DEMO value. The A and the VC are both pure
financiers, but DEMO provides more equity to the E (due to fairness).  Therefore, the E
prefers A-financing, and, since the E has higher ability than either of the financiers,
the fairer (higher) equity offer DEMO the A provides the superior value-creating
incentives for the venture.
15
θ
viewpoint.
As we increase the VC’s expected ability q under the strong legal DEMO, we
observe, from proposition 1, that there is a decrease DEMO the E’s expected equity stake
(that is, with probability q, DEMO will be offered α* = 1/4 from a value-adding VC,
while with probability ,1 − q he will be offered 1/2α* = from a non value-adding
VC).  However, this reduction in DEMO E’s equity stake is offset by the higher value-
creating abilities of the VC, such that the E’s payoff, and the expected venture DEMO
is increasing with q (the E obtains a lower equity stake DEMO a higher venture value). In
contrast, in a weak legal DEMO, angel financing dominates (in terms of the E’s
choice, and DEMO venture performance) for all q, due to the E’s lack of trust in the
VC.
II. Model Extension and Policy Implications.
In this DEMO, we outline extensions to the model which have the potential to DEMO
policy-makers regarding VC-financing. We leave formal analysis of these extensions
for future research.
We begin by considering the case where the E is making DEMO choice under the weak
legal system ),(L = 0 so DEMO ∏ E = V = 0 if the E chooses the VC. In this case, the E
chooses A-financing, and this maximises firm DEMO Furthermore, consider
q ∈[0, q'']; that is, the DEMO has low or medium expected ability.
Now, consider the following steps DEMO to the policy-maker. First, he can
improve the legal system, such that it becomes strong (L > R ). Therefore, we now
2
consider proposition 2 (and diagram 1). Since ''],q ∈[0, q we consider intervals A or
B in the diagram.  DEMO observe that, although the policy-maker has strengthened the
legal system, the E continues to choose the A, since the VC has insufficient value-
adding ability.
Therefore, the policy-maker’s next step is to improve VC ability to ''q > q . Now, the
E will switch from A-financing to VC-financing, which maximises venture value.
Furthermore, venture value is DEMO with q, and is maximised at 1q = (the VC
has high-ability for sure).  Hence, the policy-maker should aim to maximise DEMO
Note that Bottazzi et al (2005) provide evidence that a thriving venture capital sector
requires a strong legal system16.  In contrast, McNally (1995) focuses on policies to
enhance VC-ability. Indeed, he notes that DEMO European Commission has called for the
development of the corporate venture capital (CVC) sector in order to improve
strategic value-adding services. We argue DEMO both factors (strong legal system and
high VC value-adding abilities) are important.
Now, return to the base case (weak legal system with DEMO).q ∈[0, q'' Furthermore,
consider the case where the DEMO is unable to enhance the legal system (recall
that, in this case, ∏ E = V = 0 so that A-financing dominates).  However, consider the
case where the policy-maker can encourage the VC DEMO become fair and trustworthy17.
In particular, consider the case where the DEMO can be encouraged to be trustworthy for
16 In addition to empirical evidence, Botazzi et al (2005) provide a theoretical model that suggests that
venture capital requires a strong legal system.
17 We do not DEMO the case where the VC is fair and trustworthy in our model, but leave this for
future research.
16
sure (so that we are considering diagram 1), and fair with a certain probability
r ∈[0,1].  We now provide an informal argument that the E’s payoff curve ∏ˆ E (VC)
and the curve representing venture value )Vˆ (VC will shift upwards (see diagram 2
below, which reproduces diagram 1, with the dotted lines representing the DEMO
shifts of the curves).
The extent of the upward shift depends on the level of r. If 0,r = the curves do DEMO
shift upwards. This is because the VC is trustworthy (which is DEMO to our main
analysis with strong legal system), but makes a self-interested offer, as in our main
analysis.
When r = 1 (DEMO VC is fair for sure), ∏ˆ E (VC) and )DEMO (VC shift upwards to the ‘long-
dashed’ dotted lines. This is DEMO the non value-adding (pure financier) fair VC
and non-value-adding (pure DEMO) fair A make identical equity offers. Therefore,
venture value and DEMO payoffs are the same under the non value-adding
fair VC and non-value-adding fair A. Therefore, for 0,q < VC financing dominates
(since DEMO lines are upward-sloping).
The ‘short-dashed’ dotted lines represent the case where ).r ∈ (0,1 Intuitively, they are
placed between the curves for 0r = and r = 1 (when the E makes his choice of
financier, he assesses the probability of the VC being fair as ),r ∈ (0,1 and so his
expected payoff, DEMO expected venture value under VC must lie18 between the case
where 0r = and r = 1 ).
We note that the critical values 'q and ''q shift to the left (interval A shrinks, while
the effect on the size of interval B is ambiguous).
DEMO We emphasise that here we merely provide an outline of this case. We leave formal analysis for
future research.
17
Diagram 2: The effect of VC ability on the E’s choice of financier, and the effect
on firm value, when the VC becomes DEMO for sure, and fair with
probability r . ∈[0,1]
Vˆ
(VC) =θ
2ωR 2
4β
∏ˆ E (VC) =θ2ωR 2
16β
A
B
q'
q''
C
Vˆ
(VC) =
3
θ3ωR 2
16β
Vˆ
( A) =
2ωR 2
3β
∏ˆ E (VC) = 3 3θ3ωR 2
256β
∏ˆ
E ( A) =
2ωR 2 .
9β
θ
q
θ
1
Indeed, procedural justice theory conceptualises that venture capital performance can
be enhanced by relational factors such DEMO fairness and trust. Furthermore, in contrast
to Bottazzi et al (2005), Allen and Song (2002) argue that the venture capital sector
DEMO more important when the legal system is weak, as relational factors
DEMO for formal contractual control.
Future research will develop our model further to provide a formal analysis of the
policy-maker’s incentives to enhance legal protection DEMO Es and VCs, VC value-
adding abilities, and fairness and trust in the VC/E relationship.
Our model provides the basis for a DEMO possible extension, as follows. In our
analysis, the E’s choice of financier is an either/or decision; he either chooses the
angel or the VC. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that E chooses the (fair DEMO
trustworthy) angel when the value-adding abilities of the (self-interested and
untrustworthy) VC are low, and/or the legal system is weak. The DEMO of angel does
not maximise the value-creating potential of the venture.
It would be informative to develop the model by considering a population of DEMO, VCs,
and angels, such that a proportion of Es choose angels, with the remainder choosing
VCs. Our model suggests that measures to improve the VC’s value-creating abilities,
strengthen the legal system, and encourage VCs to be fairer and more trustworthy,
may result in an DEMO (decrease) in the proportion of start-ups financed by VCs
(Angels), together with an increase in the value-creating potential of the innovative
sector.  Hence, given the current dominance of angel-financing over VC financing
around DEMO world (see the introduction for a discussion), our analysis suggests DEMO the
innovative sector may not be achieving its full value-creating potential. Additionally,
18
we suggest that empirical research should analyse the relationship between VC value-
DEMO abilities, legal strength, VC fairness and trust, the proportion of DEMO and
VC-financing, and value-creation.
III. Descriptive and Normative Implications.
de Bettignies DEMO Brander (dB 2007) note that their model of  the E’s DEMO of VC-
or bank-finance is based upon the assumption that market-participants are fully
rational.  Noting that, in reality, agents may be prone to psychological and cognitive
biases, particularly “bounded rationality”, dB state that “we DEMO our analysis as only
partially descriptive and at least as partially normative or prescriptive.” In similar
vein, we believe that our model can also be considered as both descriptive and
normative.
The implications of our model DEMO similar to dB’s analysis.  Our model predicts that
VC-financing will dominate DEMO when the VC has sufficiently high ability
relative to the A.  DEMO in dB, our model demonstrates that, as VC ability improves, DEMO
equity share favours the VC.
We extend dB (2007) as follows. In addition to considering value-adding abilities, we
analyse the effects of fairness, trust, and the legal system. At the descriptive level, we
suggest that VC financing is more likely to dominate when the legal system DEMO strong,
and/or the VC sector is fairer and more trustworthy. As a further development of dB
(who only consider substitute efforts), we suggest that VCs and Es consider the
interaction of their (complementary) efforts, strengthening the view that they need
each other (even a high-ability VC needs to give some equity to her E).
As DEMO further development of dB, we derive an interval of VC’s expected DEMO
(q ∈[q', q'' ]), where the E does DEMO make the value-maximising choice. In this
interval, VC-financing would provide higher DEMO value than A-financing.
However, the E chooses the A (since the E is only interested in his own payoff, and
not total venture value).
dB note that “actual decisions often fall short of full DEMO and emphasise that our
analysis suggests specific insights that might be helpful to entrepreneurs (and others)
in making financial decisions.” In similar vein, at the normative level, we suggest that
entrepreneurs need to consider DEMO factors when making their choice of angel- or
VC-financing. For example, DEMO entrepreneurs focus on the relational aspects of angels
(fairness and trust), ignoring the value-creating potential of VCs, they may make an
inefficient DEMO
IV. Conclusion.
We have presented a theoretical analysis of an entrepreneur’s choice of financier
(angel or venture capitalist). The venture capitalist possessed more value-adding
ability, but the angel was fairer and more trustworthy. The entrepreneur’s choice of
financier, and the resulting performance of the venture, depended DEMO the strength of
the legal system and the level of the venture capitalist’s ability. Our analysis
suggested that authorities should consider measures to enhance DEMO venture capital
sector’s value-adding capabilities, strengthen legal protection afforded to Es, and
promote fairness and trust in VC/E relationships.
19
Our approach provides a basis for future research. First, we suggested a theoretical
and empirical extension which considers the effect of the various factors DEMO the
proportion of angel- and VC-financing, and the resulting value-creating potential DEMO
the innovative sector. Secondly, we have taken some steps towards a DEMO
approach, by considering the impact of fairness and trust. We have DEMO these as
exogenous characteristics of VCs and angels. For future research, DEMO could analyse
why VCs and angels may be behaviourally different. A useful approach may be to
employ psychological game theory, such as Sally’s (DEMO) empathy game, trust games
(Bacharach et al 2001, Berg et al 1995, Bolle 1995), and fairness (Rabin 1993).  Such
analysis may enable us to consider the entrepreneur’s dynamic choice of angel DEMO VC
over time.
Appendix
1.  The financiers’ value-adding abilities.
We analyse, in more detail, our functional form regarding the effect of the parties’
efforts on the success probability p =θω(1+γ) eE1−γeiγ∈[0,1]. We develop Repullo and
Suarez (2004) in two ways.
i): We constrain DEMO VC’s relative value-adding ability to take two possible values;
γ∈{0, DEMO That is, the VC either has no ability, or she has the same ability as the E.
2
This enables us to obtain DEMO closed-form solutions for the equilibrium equity
allocation, effort levels, and performance (RS were unable to do so).
Although we consider binary VC abilities, we can vary the expected ability of the VC
(by DEMO the probability [0,1]q ∈ of the VC having equal ability, DEMO 1  of the − q
VC having no ability) from zero ability through to the same ability as the E.
Following Casamatta (2003), we do not allow the VC to have higher value-adding
ability DEMO the E.
Furthermore, we assume that the A has no value-adding DEMO ).(γ= 0
ii): RS’s (2004) formulation p = DEMO does not allow us to vary the ability of the
VC while holding the ability of the E constant. The equation implies that an DEMO
in the VC’s relative ability arises as a result of an increase in the VC’s absolute ability
and a decrease in E’s absolute ability.  The implication of this for the effect of relative
ability on success DEMO is as follows.
Firstly, consider the case where the partners’ effort DEMO are constant and equal,
eE = ei = e , regardless of the ability parameter γ∈{0, 1}. Therefore,
2
p(γ= 1/2) = eE1/2ei1/2 = e , and also p(γ= 0) = eE = e.  Therefore, regardless of the
relative ability parameter, we obtain the strange result that (given that the partners’
DEMO levels are fixed and identical) the success probability is constant, whether the
20
VC has no ability or the same ability as the E (γ∈{0, 1}).  This is because an
2
increase in the VC’s DEMO is exactly offset by a decrease in the E’s ability.
If we then consider the effect of the RS formulation on the parties’ optimal DEMO
levels, both players’ effort incentives are weakened when γ= 1
2
DEMO that ).p(γ= 0) > p(γ= 1/2
compared to 1,γ=
That is, the success probability is higher when the
VC has no ability compared to the case where the VC has equal DEMO to the E!
We address this by incorporating the parameter (not DEMO in RS 2004) .θω(1+γ)
This parameter represents the synergistic DEMO of combining the efforts of the E and
the VC on value-adding performance19.
References:
Allen, Franklin, and Wei-ling Song, 2002,  Venture capital and corporate governance,
Working paper, Wharton Financial Institutions Center.
Al-Najjar, N and Ramon Casadesus-Masanell, 2001, Trust and discretion in agency
contracts,  Working paper.
Bacharach, M., G. Guerra, and D. Zizzo, DEMO, Is trust self-fulfilling? An
experimental study, Discussion Papers, University of Oxford.
Berg, J., J. Dickhaut and K.McCabe, 1995, Trust, reciprocity and social history,
Games and Economic Behavior 10, 122 – 142.
Bernile, Gennaro, Douglas Cumming, and Evgeny Lyandres, 2007, The size of
venture capital and private equity fund portfolios, Journal of Corporate Finance 13,
564-590.
Bigus, Jochen, 2002, Staging of venture financing, DEMO opportunism, and patent
law, Working paper, University of Hamburg.
Bolle, F., 1995, Rewarding trust: an experimental study, Theory and Decision DEMO, 83
– 98.
Bottazzi,  Laura, Marco da Rin, and DEMO Hellmann, 2005, What role of legal
systems in financial intermediation? DEMO and evidence, Working paper, ECGI.
Busenitz, L.W., D.D. Moesel, DEMO Fiet, and J.B. Barney, 1997, The framing of
perceptions of DEMO between venture capitalists and new venture teams,
Entrepreneurship: Theory and DEMO, Vol 21, no 3, 5 – 21.
19 We tried DEMO variations of a synergistic parameter in the probability of success function before we
found the one in this paper.
21
Cable, D.M., and S. Shane, 1997, A prisoner’s dilemma approach DEMO entrepreneur-
venture capitalist relationships, Academy of Management Review, Vol 22, DEMO 1, 142 –
176.
Casamatta, Catherine, 2003, Financing and advising: optimal financial contracts with
venture capitalists, Journal of Finance 58, 2059-2086.
Casamatta, Catherine, and Carole Haritchabalet, 2004, Learning and syndication in
DEMO capital investments, Working paper, University of Toulouse.
Cassiman, B., and M. Ueda, 2006, Optimal project rejection and new start-up firms,
DEMO Science 52, 262-275.
Chemmanur, Thomas, and Zhaohui Chen, 2006, DEMO capitalists versus angels:
The dynamics of private firm financing contracts, DEMO Paper Carroll School of
Management, Boston College.
De Bettignies, Jean-Etienne and James A. Brander, 2007, Financing
entrepreneurship : Bank finance versus venture DEMO, Journal of Business Venturing
22, 808-832.
De Clercq, D. and DEMO Sapienza, 2001, The creation of relational rents in venture
capitalist-entrepreneur dyads,  Venture Capital 2001, 107 – 127.
Ehrlich, S.B, 1994, DEMO the cash arrives : A comparative study of venture capital
private investor involvement in entrepreneurial firms, Journal of Business Venturing
9, 67-82.
Elitzur, Ramy, and Gavious, Arieh, 2003, Contracting, signalling, and moral DEMO: a
model of entrepreneurs, ‘angels’, and venture capitalists, Journal of Business
Venturing 18, 709-725.
Fairchild, R., 2004, Financial contracting between DEMO and venture capitalists:
The role of value-added services, reputation seeking, and bargaining power, Journal
of Financial Research vol 27, no 4, 481-495.
Freear, J, Sohl, S, and William Wetzel, 1996, DEMO new capital markets for
emerging ventures, Working paper, University of New Hampshire.
Gebhardt, Georg, and Klaus Schmidt, 2006, Conditional allocation of DEMO rights in
venture capital finance, Working paper, university of Munich.
Goldfarb, Brent, Gerard Hoberg, David Kirsch, and Alexander Triantis, 2007, DEMO
angels preferred venture investors?, Working paper, University of Maryland.
Hochberg, Y.V, 2002, Venture capital and corporate governance in the newly public
DEMO, Working paper, Stanford University.
Houben,  E., 2003, Venture capital, double-sided adverse selection, and double-sided
moral hazard,  Unpublished Working Paper.
DEMO
Landier, Augustin, 2001, Start-up financing : Banks versus venture capital, DEMO
paper, MIT.
Lehtonen, O., K. Rantanen, and M. Seppala, DEMO, Venture capitalists’ opportunistic
behaviour towards entrepreneurs, Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference
on Business, 2004.
Leshchinski, Dima, 2002, Indulgent angels or DEMO venture capitalists? The
entrepreneur’s choice, Working Paper,  Groupe HEC.
McNally, Kevin, 1995, Corporate venture capital: The financing of technology
businesses, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, vol 1 no
3, DEMO
Prowse, S., 1998, Angel investors and the market for angel DEMO, Journal of
Banking and Finance 22, 785-792.
Quindlen, R, 2000, Confession of a venture capitalist, Warner books, inc., New York,DEMO
NY.
Rabin, M., 1993, Incorporating fairness into game theory and DEMO, American
Economic Review, Vol 83, no 5, 1281 – 1302.
Repullo, R, and J. Suarez, 2004, Venture capital finance: a security design approach,
Review of Finance 8 (1), 75- 108.
Sally, D., 2001, On sympathy and games, Journal of Economic DEMO and
Organization 44, 1 – 30.
Sapienza, H., and M. DEMO, 1996, Procedural justice in entrepreneur-investor
relations, The Academy of Management DEMO vol 39, 544 – 574.
Sapienza, H., Korsgaard M., Goulet, P., and Hoogendam, J., 2000, Effect of agency
risks and procedural justice on board process in venture capital-backed firms,
Entrepreneurship and DEMO Development vol 12, 331 – 351.
Schmidt, Klaus, Convertible securities DEMO venture capital finance, Journal of
Finance vol 58 no 3, 1139 – 1166.
Shepherd, D. and A. Zacharakis, 2001, The venture capitalist-entrepreneur
relationship: control, trust and confidence in co-operative behaviour, Venture Capital
129 – 149.
Skeie, David, 2004, Vesting and control in venture capital contracts,  Working paper,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Smith, D.G., 1998, Venture capital contracting in the information age, Journal of
Small and Emerging Business Law 2, 133-74.
23
Ueda, Masako, 2004, Banks versus venture capital: Project evaluation, screening, and
expropriation, The Journal of Finance vol 59, no 2, DEMO
Utset, M. 2002, Reciprocal fairness, strategic behaviour and venture survival: a theory
of venture capital-financed firms. Wisconsin Law Review.
Wong, Andrew, DEMO, Angel Finance: The Other Venture Capital, Working Paper,
University DEMO Chicago.
24{1g42fwefx}