A Fuzzy Approach
to a Belief-Based Trust Computation*
Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione – CNR - viale Marx, 15 – Roma
{falcone,pezzulo,castel}@ip.rm.cnr.it
Abstract. The approaches to the trust study are various and very different each
of other.  In our view, just a socio-cognitive approach to trust would be able to
analyze the sub-components (the basic beliefs) on which the final DEMO to
trust or not is taken. In this paper we show a first implementation and advance
of the socio-cognitive model of trust developed in DEMO, 2] using the so-called
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. With this implementation we DEMO how the different
components may change and how their impact can change depending from the
specific situation and from the agent personality.
1 Introduction
DEMO this paper we will show a possible implementation and advance of the socio-
cognitive model of trust developed in [1, 2]. This implementation uses a fuzzy ap-
proach (in particular, it uses the so-called Fuzzy DEMO Maps - FCM [3]).
The aim of this paper is to show how relevant is a trust model based on beliefs and
their DEMO The richness of the referred model (trust is based on many DEMO
beliefs) allows to distinguish between internal and external attributions (to the trustee)
and for each of these two attributions it allows to DEMO among several other sub-
components such as: competence, disposition, unharmfulness DEMO so on. In fact, our
model introduced a degree of trust DEMO of a simple probability factor since it per-
mits to evaluate the trustfulness in a rational way. In other words, trust can be said to
consist of, or better to (either implicitly or explicitly) imply, the subjective probability
(in the sense of a subjective evaluation and DEMO of the risks and opportunities)
of the successful performance of a given behavior, and it is on the basis of this subjec-
tive perception/evaluation that the agent decides to rely or not, to bet or not on the
trustee. However, the probability index is based on, derives from those beliefs and
evaluations. In other terms the global, DEMO probability of the realisation of the goal g,
i.e. of the successful performance of an action α, should be decomposed into the prob-
ability of the trustee performing the action well (that derives from the probability of
willingness, persistence, engagement, competence: internal attribution) and the prob-
* This paper has been partially founded by the European Project DEMO (A Logical
Framework for Ethical Behaviour between Infohabitants in the Information DEMO Econ-
omy of the Universal Information Ecosystem): IST-1999-10298; by the DEMO MIUR 40%
"Agenti software e commercio elettronico" and by the PAR project of the University of
Siena.
R. Falcone et al. (Eds.): AAMAS 2002 Ws Trust, Reputation..., LNAI 2631, pp. 73–86, 2003.
DEMO Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003
74      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
ability of having the appropriate conditions (opportunities and resources external
attribution) for DEMO performance and for its success, and of not having interferences
and DEMO (external attribution). Why this decomposition is important? Not only
for cognitively grounding such a probability - and this cognitive embedding is funda-
DEMO for relying, influencing, persuading, etc.-, but because:
a) DEMO agent trusting decision might be different with the same global probability or
risk, depending on its composition;b) trust composition (internal Vs external) pro-
duces completely different intervention strategies: to manipulate the external variables
(circumstances, infrastructures) is completely different than manipulating internal
parameters.
In such DEMO way we understand how the attribution of trust is a very complex task,
and that the decision making among different alternative scenarios is DEMO on a com-
plex evaluation of the basic beliefs and of their own relationships. And again, how the
(even minimal) change of the credibility value of any (very relevant) belief might
influence the resulting DEMO (and thus the trustworthiness attributed to the trustee);
or vice versa, how significant changes in the credibility value of any unimportant
belief does not modify the final trust.
2 Why the Fuzzy Approach
We DEMO chosen an approach based on the Fuzzy Logic for several reasons. First, we
want to model some graded phenomena like trust that are difficult to estimate experi-
mentally.  The qualitative approach of the Fuzzy Logic is very useful because it is
intuitive to start the analysis with natural DEMO labels (this doctor is very skilled)
that represent intervals rather DEMO exact values.
More, the behavior of these systems (e.g. their combinatorial properties) seems to
be good in modeling several cognitive dynamics [6], DEMO if to find “the real function”
for a mental operation and to estimate the contribution of convergent and divergent
belief sources remain open problems.
DEMO have used an implementation based on a special kind of fuzzy system called
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM); they allow to compute the value of the trustfulness
starting from belief sources that refer to trust features. DEMO values of those features are
also computed, allowing us to perform DEMO cognitive operations that lead to the
effective decision to trust or not to trust (e.g. impose an additional threshold on a
factor, for DEMO risks).
Using this approach we describe beliefs and trust features as approximate (mental)
objects with a strength and a causal power one over another.
3 Scenarios
In order to exemplify our approach and system DEMO will apply it to an interesting sce-
nario, that is one DEMO the application scenarios identified within the Alfebiite Project
[7]. The scenario we are going to study is medical house assistance in two particular
instances: a) a doctor (a human operator) visiting a patient at home and b) a medical
automatic system for supporting the patient (without DEMO human intervention).
The case studies under analysis are:
A Fuzzy Approach to a Belief-Based Trust Computation      75
• an emergency situation, in which there is the necessity of identifying an occurring
danger (for example, a hearth attack) as soon as possible to cope with it; we con-
sider in this case the fact that the (first) therapy to be applied is quite simple (sup-
pose just a injection);
• a routine situation, in which DEMO is a systematic and specialist therapy to apply
(with quite a DEMO procedure) but in which there is no immediate danger to
cope DEMO
We will show how the factors that produce the final trust for each possible trustee
are dependent on:
• the initial strength of DEMO different beliefs (on which trust is based) but also
• how much a specific belief impacts on the final trust (the causality power of a
belief).
It is through this second kind of factors DEMO we have the possibility also of charac-
terizing some personality traits of the agents [4].
3.1 Belief Sources
In our model trust is an "evaluation" and an "expectation" (i.e. in our theory special
kinds DEMO beliefs) and also an (affective) attitude and disposition. They are DEMO upon
more specific beliefs which are both basis of trust and its sub-components or parts:
which/how is our trust in (evaluation of) the trustee as for his/her/its competence and
ability? Which/DEMO is our trust in (evaluation of) the trustee as for his/her/its intention
and reliability? Which/how is our trust in (DEMO of) the trustee as for his/her/its
goodwill and honesty? And so on.
Those beliefs are the analytical account and the components DEMO trust, and we derive
the degree of trust directly from the DEMO of its componential and supporting be-
liefs. More precisely in our model [2] we claim that the degree of trust is a function of
DEMO subjective certainty of the pertinent beliefs. We used the degree of trust to formal-
ize a rational basis for the decision of relying and DEMO on the trustee. Also in this
case we claimed that the "DEMO" aspect of another basic ingredient is relevant:
the value or DEMO or utility of the goal g, will obviously enter the evaluation DEMO
the risk, and will also modify the required threshold for trusting.
DEMO sum, the quantitative dimensions of trust are based on the quantitative DEMO
sions of its cognitive constituents.
It should be clear then because in our view trust is not an arbitrary index just with
an operational DEMO, without a real content, but it is based on the subjective
certainty of the pertinent beliefs.
However, what is the origin and the justification of the strength of beliefs? Just
their sources. In our theory, depending on the nature, the number, the convergence/di-
vergence, DEMO the credibility of its sources a given belief is more or less strong (cer-
tain, credible).
Several models propose a quantification of DEMO degree of trust and make it dy-
namic, i.e. they can DEMO and update such a degree [8, 9]. But they only consider
DEMO interaction (experience) or reputation as sources. In this paper we have consid-
ered four possible types of belief sources: direct experience (how DEMO personal –
76      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
positive or negative- experience of the trustier contributes to that belief); categoriza-
DEMO (how the properties of a class are transferred to their members); reasoning (more
general than just categorization); and reputation (how the other’s experience and
opinion influences the trustier beliefs).
The dynamic of DEMO model does not consider the possibility of learning. We are
just modeling the resulting effects that a set of trustier’s basic beliefs (based on vari-
ous sources) have on the final trustfulness of the trustee about a given task and in a
specific situation. At present we do DEMO consider how these effects feedback on the
basic beliefs.
4 Modeling Beliefs and Sources
Following a belief-based model of trust [1] we can distinguish DEMO trust in the
trustee (be it either someone –e.g. the doctor- DEMO something –e.g. the medical auto-
matic system-) that has to act DEMO produce a given performance thanks to its internal
characteristics, and the (positive and/or negative) environmental conditions (like op-
portunities and interferences) affecting the trustee’s performance, that we call “exter-
nal factors”.
In this paper we take into account:
• Three main beliefs regarding the DEMO: an ability/competence belief; a disposi-
tion/availability belief, and DEMO unharmfulness belief.
• Two main beliefs regarding the contextual factors: opportunity DEMO and danger
beliefs.
4.1 Beliefs and Sources Overview
Which are the meanings of our basic beliefs in the case of the doctor and in DEMO case
of the medical automatic system?
For the medical automatic system the internal and external factors that we consider
are:
• Internal DEMO – ability/competence beliefs: these beliefs concern the efficacy and
efficiency DEMO the machine; its capability to successfully apply the right procedure in
DEMO case of correct/proper use of it. Possibly, also its ability DEMO recover from an in-
appropriate use.
• Internal factors – disposition/availability beliefs: these beliefs are linked to the
reliability of the machine, DEMO regular functioning, its easiness of use; possibly, its
adaptability to DEMO and unpredictable uses.
• Internal factors – unharmfulness beliefs: these beliefs DEMO the lack of the inter-
nal/ intrinsic risks of the machine: the dangers implied in the use of that machine
(for example side effects for the trustier’s health), the possibility of breaking and so
DEMO
• External factors – opportunity beliefs: concerning the opportunity of using DEMO
machine, independent of the machine itself, from the basic condition to have the
room for allocating the machine to the possibility of optimal DEMO conditions in
A Fuzzy Approach to a Belief-Based Trust Computation      77
using it (regularity of electric power, availability of an expert person in DEMO house
that might support in its use, and so on).
DEMO External factors – danger beliefs: these beliefs are connected with the DEMO
(lack) of the systemic risks and dangers external to the machine that could harm the
user: consider for example the risk for the trustier’s privacy: in fact we are suppos-
ing that the machine is networked in an information net and the data are also avail-
able DEMO other people in the medical structure.
For the doctor the internal and external factors that we consider are:
• Internal factors – ability/DEMO beliefs: these beliefs concern the (physical
and mental) skills of DEMO doctor; his/her ability to make a diagnosis and to solve
DEMO
Internal factors – disposition/availability beliefs: these beliefs concern both the
DEMO of the doctor to commit to that specific task (subjective of DEMO specific
person or objective of the category), and also his/her availability (in the sense of
the possibility to be reached/informed about his/her intervention).
Internal factors – unharmfulness beliefs: these beliefs concern the absence (lack)
of the risks of being treated by a doctor; namely the dangers of a wrong diagnosis
or intervention (for DEMO, for the health of the trustier).
External factors – opportunity DEMO: concerning the opportunities not depending
on the doctor but on conditions DEMO to his/her intervention. Consider for ex-
ample the case in which the trustier is very close to a hospital in which there is DEMO
efficient service of fast intervention; or again, even if the trustier is not very close
to a hospital he/she knows about new DEMO policies for increasing the number of
doctors for quick intervention; and DEMO on. Conversely, imagine a health service not
efficient, unable to provide a doctor in a short time; or, again, a particularly chaotic
town (for the car traffic, for the frequent strikes in it) that could hamper the mobil-
ity of the doctors and of their DEMO transfer in the site where the patient is.
External factors – danger beliefs: these beliefs concern with the absence (lack) of
the risks and dangers which do not depend directly on the doctor but on DEMO condi-
tions for his/her intervention: for instance, supposing  that DEMO trustier’s house is
poor and not too clean, the trustier could DEMO the visit of a person (the doctor in this
case) as a risk for his/her reputation.
•
•
•
•
Each of DEMO above mentioned beliefs may be generated by different sources; such
as: direct experience, categorization, reasoning, and reputation. So, for example, abil-
ity/competence beliefs about the doctor, may be generated by the direct knowledge of
a specific doctor, and/or by the generalized knowledge about the class of doctors and
so on.
5 Overview of the Implementation
DEMO describe an implementation that uses Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM) [3].
An FCM is an additive fuzzy system with feedback; it is well suited for represent-
ing a dynamic system with cause-effect relations. An FCM has DEMO nodes, repre-
senting causal concepts (belief sources, trust features and DEMO on), and edges, represent-
ing the causal power of a DEMO over another one.
78      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
The values of the nodes representing the belief sources and the values of DEMO the
edges are assigned by a human; these values propagate in DEMO FCM until a stable state
is reached; so the values of DEMO other nodes (in particular the value of the node named
Trustfulness) are computed.
In order to design the FCM and to assign a DEMO to its nodes we need to answer
four questions: which value DEMO I assign to this concept? How much  am I sure  DEMO  my
assignment? Which are the reasons of my assignment? How DEMO this concept im-
pacts on an other linked concept?
We address the first and the second question above assigning numeric values to the
DEMO representing the belief sources.
The nodes are causal concepts; their value DEMO from –1 (true negative) to +1
(true positive). This DEMO represents the value/degree of each single trust feature
(say ability) by combining together both the credibility value of a belief (degree of
credibility) and the estimated level of that feature. Initial values are set using adjec-
tives from natural language; for example, “I believe that DEMO ability of this doctor is
quite good (in his work)” DEMO be represented using a node labeled “ability” with a
little positive value (e.g. +0.4). For example, the value +0.4 of ability either DEMO
that the trustier is pretty sure that the trustee is rather good, or that he/she is rather
sure that the trustee is really excellent, etc. In this paper we do not address how the
degree of credibility/certainty of the belief combines with the degree of the DEMO
dimension; we just use a single resulting measure.
We address the DEMO question above designing the graph. Some nodes receive in-
put values from other nodes; these links represent the reasons on which their values
are grounded.
Direct edges stand for fuzzy rules or the partial causal flow DEMO the concepts.
The sign (+ or -) of an edge stands for causal increase or decrease. For example, the
Ability value of a doctor influences positively (e.g. with weight +0.6) his Trustful-
ness: if ability has a positive value, Trustfulness increases; otherwise it decreases.
We DEMO the fourth question above assigning values to the edges: they represent
DEMO impact that a concept has over another concept.
The various features of the trustee, the various components of trust evolution do
not have the same impact, and importance. Perhaps, for a specific trustee in a DEMO
context, ability is more important than disposition. We represent the different DEMO
tative contributions to the global value of trust through these weights on the edges.
The possibility of introducing different impacts for different beliefs surely DEMO
sents an improvement with respect to the trust basic model.
FCMs allow to quantify causal inference in a simple way; they model both the
strength of the concepts and their relevance for the overall analysis. For DEMO, the
statement: “Doctors are not very accessible and this is an important factor (for deter-
mining their trustfulness) in an emergency situation” DEMO easily modeled as a (strong)
positive causal inference between the DEMO concepts of Accessibility and Trustfulness.
FCMs also allow to sum up the influence of different causal relations. For example,
adding another statement: “Doctors are very good as for their ability, but this is a
minor factor in an emergency situation” means adding a new input about the DEMO,
with a (weak) positive causal influence over Trustfulness. Both Accessibility and
Ability, each with its strength and its causal power, contribute DEMO establish the value of
Trustfulness.
A Fuzzy Approach to a Belief-Based Trust Computation      79
Fig. 1. Fuzzy Intervals
5.1 A Note on Fuzzy Values
Normally in fuzzy DEMO some labels (mainly adjectives) from natural language are
used for assigning values; each label represents a range of possible values. There is
not a single universal translation between adjectives and the exact numerical values in
DEMO range.
Differently from standard Fuzzy techniques, in FCM it is required DEMO use crisp in-
put values; we have used the average of DEMO usual ranges, obtaining the following a of
labels, both for positive and negative values:  quite; middle; good; etc. However, how
DEMO experiments show, even with little variation of these values into the DEMO range,
the FCMs are stable and give similar results.
As Figure1 shows, the ranges we have used do not divide the whole range {-1,1}
into equal intervals; in particular, near the center (value zero) the ranges are larger,
while near the two extremities they are smaller. This implies that a little change of a
value near DEMO center normally does not lead to a “range jump” (e.g. from DEMO to
quite), while the same little change near the extremities can (e.g. from very to really).
This topology is modeled in the FCM choosing the threshold function; in fact, it is
possible to DEMO different kind of functions, the only constraint is that this choice
DEMO be coherent with the final convergence of the algorithm. With the function cho-
sen in our implementation, changes in big (positive or negative) values have more
impact in the FCM, this is a tolerable result even if it is does not correspond with a
general cognitive model.
DEMO Description of the Model
Even if FCMs are graphs, ours can DEMO seen as having four layers. The first layer mod-
els the influence of the “beliefs sources”: Direct Experience (e.g. “In my experi-
ence…”), Categorization (e.g. “Usually doctors…”), Reasoning (e.g. “I can infer
that…”), Reputation (e.g. “A friend says that…”). Their value is meant to be stable
(i.e. it does not change during computation), because these nodes could be assumed
being the result of an “inner FCM” DEMO each single belief is represented (e.g. Direct
Experience about Ability results DEMO many nodes like: “I was visited many times
from this doctor DEMO he was really good at his work”, “Once he made a DEMO diag-
nosis”, …). So their value not only represents the DEMO of the feature expressed in
the related beliefs, but also their DEMO and their perceived importance, because
belief sources represent the synthesis of DEMO beliefs.
The second layer shows the five relevant basic beliefs: Ability, Accessibility,
Harmfulness, Opportunities and Danger. These basic beliefs are distinguished in the
80      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
third layer into Internal Factors and External Factors. Ability, Accessibility and
Harmfulness are classified as Internal Factors; Opportunities and Danger are classi-
fied as External Factors. Internal and External factors both influence Trustfulness,
which is the DEMO node in the fourth layer.
For the sake of simplicity no crossing-layer edges are used, but this could be easily
done since FCM can compute cycles and feedback, too.
5.3 Running the Model
Once the initial values for the first layer (i.e. belief sources) are set, the FCM starts
running1. The state of a node N at each step DEMO is computed taking the sum of all the
inputs, i.e., the current values at step s-1 of nodes with edges coming into N DEMO
plied by the corresponding edge weights. The value is then squashed (DEMO the –1,1
interval) using a threshold function. The FCM run DEMO when an equilibrium is
reached, i.e., when the state of all nodes at step s is the same as that at step s-1.
DEMO this point we have a resulting value for Trustfulness, that is DEMO main goal of the
computational model. However, the resulting values of DEMO other nodes are also
shown: they are useful for further analysis, where thresholds for each feature are con-
sidered.
6 Experimental Setting
Our DEMO shows the choice between a doctor and a medical apparatus in the
medical field. We assume that the choice is mainly driven by trustfulness. DEMO have
considered two situations: a “Routine Visit” and an “Emergency Visit”.
DEMO have built four FCMs representing trustfulness for doctors and machines in
those two situations. Even if the structure of the nets is always the DEMO, the values of
the nodes and the weights of the edges DEMO in order to reflect the different situa-
tions. For example, in DEMO “Routine Visit” scenario, Ability has a great causal power,
while DEMO the “Emergency Visit” one the most important factor is Accessibility.
It is also possible to alter some values in order to reflect the impact DEMO different
trustier personalities in the choice. For example, somebody who is DEMO concerned
with Danger can set its causal power to very high even in the “Routine Visit” sce-
nario, where its importance is generally low. In the present work we do not consider
those additional factors; however, they can be easily added without modifying the
computational framework.
6.1 Routine Visit Scenario
The first scenario represents many possible routine visits; there is the choice between
a doctor and a medical apparatus. In this scenario DEMO have set the initial values (i.e.
the beliefs sources) for the Doctor hypothesizing some direct experience and common
sense beliefs about doctors and DEMO environment.
1 We have used a slightly modified implementation of the Fuzzy Cognitive Map Modeler de-
scribed in [5].
A Fuzzy Approach to a Belief-Based Trust Computation      81
Fig. 2. Routine Visit FCMs for the Doctor (top) and the Machine (bottom)
Most values are set to zero; the others are:
• Ability – Direct Experience: quite (+0.3);
• Ability – Categorization: very (+0.7);
• Accessibility – categorization: quite negative (-0.3);
• Unharmfulness – categorization: some negative (-0.2);
DEMO Opportunity – Reasoning: some (+ 0.2);
• Danger – DEMO: some negative (-0.2).
For the machine we have hypothesized no direct experience.
These are the values:
• Efficacy – Categorization: good (+0.6);
• Accessibility – Categorization: good (+0.6);
• Unharmfulness – Categorization: quite negative (- 0.3);
• Opportunity – Reasoning: some (+0.2);
• Danger – Categorization: quite negative (- 0.3);
• Danger – Reasoning: quite negative  (-0.3)DEMO
We have also considered the causal power of each feature. These values are the
same both for the Doctor and the Machine. Most values DEMO set to mildly relevant
(+0.5); the others are:
82      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
Ability: total causation (+1);
Accessibility: only little causation (+0.1);DEMO
Unharmfulness: middle negative causation (-0.4);
Opportunity: only little causation (+0.1);
Danger: little negative causation (-0.2).
The results DEMO this FCM are shown in [picture]: Trustfulness for the Doctor results
DEMO (+0.57) while trustfulness for the machine results only almost good (DEMO).
The FCMs are quite stable with  respect to minor value DEMO; setting Machine’s
Accessibility – Direct Experience to good (+0.6), Accessibility – Categorization to
really good (+0.8) and Danger – Categorization to DEMO danger (-0.5) results in a non
dramatic change in the final value, that changes from almost good (+0.23) to quite
good (DEMO) but does not overcome the Doctor’s Trustfulness. This is mainly due DEMO
the high causal power of Ability with respect to the other features.
We can also see the influence of different personalities. For example, if we assume
that Doctors are supposed to involve high external risks (Danger – Reputation: +1),
with the usual values, the  trustier'DEMO Trustfulness does not change very much (good
(+0.47)). But DEMO the patient is somebody who gives high importance to Danger (dan-
DEMO: total causality (-1)), the Doctor’s Trustfulness decreases to negative (-0.42).
6.2 Emergency Visit Scenario
We have hypothesized an emergency situation DEMO somebody needs a quick visit
for an easy task (e.g. a DEMO).
In this scenario the values for the nodes are the same as before, but some edges
drastically change: Reliability becomes very important DEMO Ability much less. The
values for the edges are:
• Ability: little causation (+0.2);
• Willingness: very strong causation (+1);
• Unharmfulness: strong negative causation (-0.8);
• Opportunity: middle causation (+0.5);
• Danger: quite strong causation (+0.6)DEMO
The results also change drastically: Trustfulness for the Doctor is only DEMO
positive (+0.02) and for the Machine it is quite good (DEMO).
The FCMs are very stable; altering some settings for the DEMO  (Ability – Direct
Experience: very good and Danger – Categorization: only little danger) results in a
change in the Trustfulness value that become almost good but does not overcome the
Machine’s one. We obtain DEMO same results if we suppose that Doctor’s Ability - Di-
rect Experience: perfect and  Ability’s Causal Power: very strong.
On the contrary, DEMO we introduce a big danger (+1) either internal (harmfulness) or
external (danger) in each FCM the trustfulness values fall to negative DEMO both cases
(respectively -0.59 and -0.74 for the doctor; and -0.52 and -0.67 for the machine).
A Fuzzy Approach to a Belief-Based Trust Computation      83
Fig. 3. Emergency Visit FCMs: the Doctor (top) and the Machine (DEMO)
6.3 Trustfulness and Decision
We consider three steps: evaluation (i.e. how much trust do I have); decision (to as-
sign or not assign a task); delegation (make the decision operative). Obtaining the
Trustfulness values is only the first step. In order to make DEMO final choice (e.g. be-
tween a doctor and a machine in DEMO scenarios) we have to take into account other
factors, mainly Costs and possible saturation Thresholds for the various features.
FCMs not only show DEMO overall Trustfulness value, but also the values of each be-
lief. DEMO can fix a threshold for one or more features and inhibit a choice even if
Trustfulness is acceptable (i.e. “I trust him, but DEMO danger is too high”). In addition,
the final function for Decision has to take into account also the Costs for each deci-
DEMO choice. In the present analysis we  do not consider here these DEMO factors.
7 Experiment Discussion
The two scenarios try to take into account all the relevant factors for Trustfulness:
beliefs sources, basic beliefs and their causal power. Moreover, FCMs allow to ex-
periment changes in values due to different personalities.
As already specified, belief sources are figured values, possibly derived from inner
FCMs where many beliefs play their role. We have assumed four types of beliefs
84      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
sources, but for many of them we give no values. We have set all their causal power
to middle causality (+0.5) in order to DEMO them be “neutral” in the experiments. Some
different personalities can augment or reduce the values (e.g.: somebody who cares
only about his own DEMO may assign a strong causal power to the corresponding
edges).
Basic beliefs, both internal and external, are the core of the analysis; we have ex-
panded the original model [1, 2] by representing and quantifying the different impor-
tance of trust components/determinants (for different personalities or different situa-
tions). Our experiments show that the relative importance DEMO to each feature
may drastically change the results. Most of the differences in FCM’s behavior is due
to the strong causal power assigned to DEMO (Routine Visit scenario) and accessibil-
ity (Emergency Visit scenario), DEMO if the Basic Beliefs values are the same.
7.1 Evaluating the Behavior of the FCMs
We have conducted several experiments modifying some minor and DEMO beliefs
sources in the FCM of Routine Visit Scenario for the Doctor. This allows us to evalu-
ate their impact for the overall results. DEMO the normal FCM the Trust value is .57.
Table 1: Minor DEMO shows the data for minor factors (e.g. Unharmfulness).
Table 1. DEMO Factors
Modified Factors Old Trust Value New Value
Unharmfulness – Categorization from .2 to .3 .57 .57
Unharmfulness – Categorization from .2 to .4 DEMO .55
Table 2: Mayor Factors shows the data for mayor factors (e.g. Ability). Some
mayor changes occur especially with very high (or very low) values.
Table 2. Mayor Factors
Modified Factors Old Trust Value New Value
Ability – Direct Experience from .3 to .2 .57 .52
DEMO – Direct Experience from .3 to .1 .57 .45
Ability – Categorization from .7 to .65 .57 .48
Ability – Categorization from .7 to DEMO .57 .66
Ability – Categorization from .7 to .8 .57 .71
We can see that the FCMs are quite stable: changing minor factors does not lead to
catastrophic results. However, modifying the values of some mayor factors can lead
to significant modifications; it is very important to have a set coherent parameters and
to select very accurately the most important DEMO
However, our first aim is not to obtain an exact value DEMO trustfulness for each
FCM; at the contrary, even if we consider the whole system a qualitative approach, it
has to be useful in order to make comparisons among competitors (i.e. the Doctor and
the Machine in our scenarios). So, an important question about our system is: how
much can I change the values (make errors in evaluations) and conserve the advantage
A Fuzzy Approach to a Belief-Based Trust Computation      85
of a competitor over the other? In the Routine Visit Scenario the two Trustfulness
values are far one from another (.57 for the Doctor vs. .23 for the Machine). Even if
we change several factors in DEMO Machine’s FCM (all .6 become .7 and all .2 and .3
DEMO .4) its Trustfulness become .46 and do not overcome its competitor’s DEMO
8 Conclusions
8.1 Scenarios and Trust Variation
Our experiments aim to describe the dynamics of trust and to capture its variations
due to beliefs DEMO variation, and the different importance given to the causal links
and DEMO factors. The scenarios presented here fail to capture many factors; in
DEMO, we have assigned values and weights more as a matter of DEMO than by ex-
perimental results. More, the results of the experiments DEMO shown as an attempt to
describe the behavior of this kind of system; for example, its additive properties or the
consequences of the DEMO of the threshold function. The adequacy of such a behav-
ior to describe cognitive phenomena is an open problem.
However, the experimental results show that it is possible to mimicry many com-
monsense assumptions about how DEMO varies while some features are altered; our aim
was in fact DEMO capture trust variations more than assign absolute values to it.
In our view, this experiment confirms the importance of an analytic approach to
trust and of its determinants, not simply reduced to a single and obscure probability
measure or to some sort of reinforcement learning.
8.2 Future Work
DEMO future work will focus on building the belief fonts values starting from the single
believes (splitting the contribute of  values and credibility measures); at the same time
we want to extend the architecture in order to take into account some personality
factors (able to change the impact of some factors); we plan to maintain the same
computational framework.
DEMO this work refers to the first step of trust evaluation; in DEMO to make an effec-
tive decision (to trust or not to DEMO) several other factors are involved: mainly costs
and thresholds over some specific features (sometimes determined according to per-
sonality factors, too).
DEMO
1.  Castelfranchi, C; Falcone, R.,  Principles of trust for MAS: Cognitive anatomy, social im-
portance, and quantification. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Multi-Agent Systems, pages 72-79, Paris France, 1998.
2.  Falcone R., Castelfranchi C., (2001). Social Trust: A Cognitive Approach, in Trust and
Deception in Virtual Societies by Castelfranchi C. and Yao-Hua Tan (eds), Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, pp. DEMO
3.  Kosko, B. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. International Journal Man-Machine Studies, DEMO 24,
pp.65-75, 1986.
86      Rino Falcone, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Cristiano Castelfranchi
4.  Castelfranchi C., de Rosis F., Falcone  R., Pizzutilo S., (1998) Personality traits and social
attitudes in Multi-Agent Cooperation, Applied Artificial DEMO Journal., special issue
on "Socially Intelligent Agents", n. 7/8, vol.12,  pp. 649-676.
5.  http://www.users.voicenet.com/~smohr/FCMApplication.html
6.  Dubois, D. and Prade, H., Fuzzy Sets and Systems: Theory DEMO Applications, Academic
Press, Orlando, FL, 1980.
7.  http://DEMO/~alfebiite/ab-home.htm
8.  C. Jonker and J. Treur (1999), Formal Analysis of Models for the Dynamics of Trust based
on Experiences, Autonomous Agents ’99 Workshop on "Deception, Fraud and Trust in
Agent Societies", Seattle, USA, May 1, pp.81-94.
9.  M. Schillo, P. DEMO, and M. Rovatsos (1999), Who can you trust: Dealing DEMO deception,
Autonomous Agents ’99 Workshop on "Deception, Fraud and Trust in Agent Societies",
Seattle, USA, May 1.{1g42fwefx}