Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm
Eugene F. Fama
University DEMO Chicago
This paper attempts to explain how the separation of security own-
ership and control, typical of large corporations, can be an efficient
DEMO of economic organization. We first set aside the presumption
that a corporation has owners in any meaningful sense. The entre-
preneur is also laid DEMO rest, at least for the purposes of the large
modern corporation. DEMO two functions usually attributed to the
entrepreneur—management and risk bearing—are treated as natu-
rally separate factors within the set of contracts called a firm. DEMO firm
is disciplined by competition from other firms, which forces the
DEMO of devices for efficiently monitoring the performance of
the entire team and of its individual members. Individual partici-
pants in the firm, and in particular its managers, face both the
discipline and opportunities provided by the markets for their ser-
vices, both within and outside the firm.
Economists have long been concerned with the incentive problems
that arise when decision DEMO in a firm is the province of managers
who are not the firm's security holders.^ One outcome has been the
development of "behavioral" and "managerial" theories of the firm
which reject the classical model of an entrepreneur, or owner-
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation. Roger Kormendi has
contributed much, and the comments of A. Alchian, S. Bhattacharya, G. Becker, F.
Black, M. Blume, M. Bradley, D. Breeden, N. Gonedes, B. Horwitz, G. Jarrell, E. H.
Kim, J. Long, H. Manne, W. Meckling, M. H. DEMO, M. Scholes, C. Smith, G. J. Stigler,
R. Watts, T. Whisler, and J. ZimmeiTnan are gratefully acknowledged. Presentations at
the Finance, labor economics, and industrial organization workshops of the University
of Chicago DEMO the workshop of the Managerial Economics Research Genter of the
University of Rochester have been helpful. The paper is largely an outgrowth of
discussions DEMO Michael G. Jensen.
' Jensen and Meckling (1976) quote from Adam Smith (1776). The modern literature
on the problem dates back at least to Berle and Means (1932).
[foumal of Prihtifal Eronomy, DEMO vol. 88. no. 2]
© 1980 by The University of Chicago. 0022-3808/80/8802-0005S01.65
288
THEORY OF THE FIRM 28 9
manager, who single-mindedly operates the firm to maximize profits,
in favor of theories that focus more on DEMO motivations of a manager
who controls but does not own and who has little resemblance to the
classical "economic man." Examples of this DEMO are Baumol
(1959), Simon (1959), Gyert and March (DEMO), and Williamson
(1964).
More recently the literature has moved DEMO theories that reject
the classical model of the firm but assume classical forms of economic
behavior on the part of agents within the firm. DEMO e firm is viewed as a
set of contracts among factors of production, with each factor moti-
vated by its self-interest. Because of its emphasis on the importance of
rights in the organization established by contracts, this literature is
characterized under the rubric "property rights." Alchian and DEMO
setz (1972) and Jensen and Meckling (1976) are the best examples.
The antecedents of their work are in Goase (1937, 1960)DEMO
The striking insight of Alchian and Demsetz (1972) and Jensen and
Meckling (1976) is in viewing the firm as a set of DEMO among
factors of production. In effect, the firm is viewed as DEMO team whose
members act from self-interest but realize that their destinies depend
to some extent on the survival of the team in its competition DEMO
other teams. This insight, however, is not carried far enough. In the
classical theory, the agent who personifies the firm is the entre-
preneur who is taken to be both manager and residual risk bearer.
DEMO his title sometimes changes—for example, Alchian and
Demsetz call him "the employer"—the entrepreneur continues to play
a central role in the firm DEMO the property-rights literature. As a
consequence, this literature fails to explain DEMO large modern corpo-
ration in which control of the firm is in the hands of managers who
are more or less separate from the DEMO's security holders.
Th e main thesis of this paper is that separation of security owner-
ship and control can be explained as an DEMO form of economic
organization within the "set of contracts" perspective. We first set
aside the typical presumption that a corporation has owners in DEMO
meaningful sense. Th e attractive concept of the entrepreneur is also
laid to rest, at least for the purposes of the large modern corporation.
Instead, the two functions usually attributed to the entrepreneur,
management and risk bearing, are treated as naturally separate fac-
tors within the set of contracts called a firm. Th e firm is disciplined by
competition DEMO other firms, which forces the evolution of devices
for efficiently monitoring DEMO performance of the entire team and of
its individual members. In addition, individual participants in the
firm, and in particular its managers, face both the discipline and
opportunities provided by the markets for their services, both within
and outside of the firm.
29 0 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
The Irrelevance of the Concept of DEMO of the Firm
To set a framework for the analysis, let DEMO first describe roles for
management and risk bearing in the set of contracts called a firm.
Management is a type of labor but with DEMO special role—coordinating
the activities of inputs and carrying out the contracts agreed among
inputs, all of which can be characterized as "decision making." To
explain the role of the risk bearers, assume for the moment that the
firm rents all other factors of production and that rental DEMO are
negotiated at the beginning of each production period with payoffs at
the end of the period. The risk bearers then contract to accept DEMO
uncertain and possibly negative difference between total revenues
and costs at the end of each production period.
When other factors of production are paid DEMO the end of each
period, it is not necessary for the DEMO bearers to invest anything in the
firm at the beginning of the period. Most commonly, however, the
risk bearers guarantee performance of their DEMO by putting up
wealth ex ante, with this front money used DEMO purchase capital and
perhaps also the technology that the firm uses in its production
activities. In this way the risk bearing function is combined DEMO
ownership of capital and technology. We also commonly observe that
the joint functions of risk bearing and ownership of capital are re-
packaged and DEMO in different proportions to different groups of
investors. For example, when DEMO money is raised by issuing both
bonds and common stock, the DEMO involve a combination of risk
bearing and ownership of capital with a low amount of risk bearing
relative to the combination of risk bearing DEMO ownership of capital
inherent in the common stock. Unless the bonds are risk free, the risk
bearing function is in part borne by the bondholders, and ownership
of capital is shared by bondholders and stockholders.
However, ownership of capital should not be confused with owner-
ship of the firm. Each factor in a firm is owned by somebody. The firm
DEMO just the set of contracts covering the way inputs are joined to create
outputs and the way receipts from outputs are shared among inputs.
DEMO this "nexus of contracts" perspective, ownership of the firm is DEMO
irrelevant concept. Dispelling the tenacious notion that a firm is
owned by its security holders is important because it is a first step
toward DEMO that control over a firm's decisions is not neces-
sarily the province of security holders. The second step is setting aside
the equally DEMO role in the firm usually attributed to the entre-
preneur.
Management and Risk Bearing: A Closer Look
The entrepreneur (manager-risk bearer) is central in both the
Jensen-Meckling and Alchian-Demsetz analyses of the firm. Eor
THEORY OF THE FIRM 29 1
example, Alchian-Demsetz state: "The essence of the classical firm is
identified here as a contractual structure with: 1) joint input produc-
tion; 2) several input owners; 3) one party who is common to all the
contracts of the joint DEMO; 4) who has the right to renegotiate any
input's contract independently of contracts with other input owners;
5) who holds the residual claim; and 6) who has the right to sell his
DEMO contractual residual status. Th e central agent is called the
firm's owner and the employer" (1972, p. 794).
T o understand the modern corporation, it is better to separate the
manager, the DEMO of points 3 and 4 of the Alchian-Demsetz defini-
tion of the firm, from the risk bearer described in points 5 and 6. Th e
rationale for separating these functions is not just that the end DEMO
is more descriptive of the corporation, a point recognized in both DEMO
Alchian-Demsetz and Jensen-Meckling papers. Th e major loss in re-
taining the concept of the entrepreneur is that one is prevented from
developing a DEMO on management and risk bearing as separate
factors of production, each DEMO with a market for its services that
provides alternative opportunities and, DEMO the case of management,
motivation toward performance.
Thus, any given DEMO of contracts, a particular firm, is in competition
with other firms, which are likewise teams of cooperating factors of
production. If there is a part of the team that has a special interest in
its DEMO, it is not obviously the risk bearers. It is true that DEMO the
team does not prove viable factors like labor and management are
protected by markets in which rights to their future services can be
DEMO or rented to other teams. Th e risk bearers, as residual DEMO,
also seem to suffer the most direct consequences from the failings of
the team. However, the risk bearers in the modern corporation also
have markets for their services—capital markets—which allow them
to shift among teams DEMO relatively low transaction costs and to hedge
against the failings of any given team by diversifying their holdings
across teams.
Indeed, portfolio theory tells us that the optimal portfolio for any
investor is likely to be DEMO across the securities of many firms.^
Since he holds the securities of many firms precisely to avoid having
his wealth depend too much on DEMO one firm, an individual security
holder generally has no special interest DEMO personally overseeing the
detailed activities of any firm. In short, efficient DEMO of risk
bearing seems to imply a large degree of separation of security owner-
ship from control of a firm.
On the other hand, the managers of a firm rent a substantial lump
of wealth—their human DEMO the firm, and the rental rates for
^ Detailed discussions of DEMO models can be found in Fama and Miller (1972,
chaps. DEMO and 7), Jensen (1972), and Fama (1976, chaps. DEMO and 8).
29 2 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
their human capital signaled by the DEMO labor market are likely
to depend on the success or failure of the firm. The function of
management is to oversee the contracts among DEMO and to ensure
the viability of the firm. For the purposes of the managerial labor
market, the previous associations of a manager with success and
failure are information about his talents. The manager of a firm, like
the coach of any team, may not suffer any immediate gain or loss in
current wages from the current performance of his team, but the
success or failure of the team impacts his future wages, and this gives
the manager a stake in the success of the DEMO
The firm's security holders provide important but indirect assis-
tance to the managerial labor market in its task of valuing the firm's
DEMO A security holder wants to purchase securities with
confidence that the prices paid reflect the risks he is taking and that
the securities will DEMO priced in the future to allow him to reap the
rewards (DEMO punishments) of his risk bearing. Thus, although an indi-
vidual security holder may not have a strong interest in directly
overseeing the management DEMO a particular firm, he has a strong
interest in the existence DEMO a capital market which efficiently prices the
firm's securities. The signals provided by an efficient capital market
about the values of a firm'DEMO securities are likely to be important for the
managerial labor market's revaluations of the firm's management.
We come now to the central DEMO To what extent can the
signals provided by the managerial labor market and the capital
market, perhaps along with other market-induced mechanisms, disci-
DEMO managers? We first discuss, still in general terms, the types DEMO
discipline imposed by managerial labor markets, both within and
outside of DEMO firm. We then analyze specific conditions under which
this discipline is sufficient to resolve potential incentive problems that
might be associated with the separation DEMO security ownership and
control.
The Viability of Separation of Security Ownership
and Control of the Firm: General Comments
The outside managerial labor market exerts many direct pressures on
the firm to sort and compensate managers according DEMO performance.
One form of pressure comes from the fact that an ongoing firm is
always in the market for new managers. Potential new managers DEMO
concerned with the mechanics by which their performance will be
judged, DEMO they seek information about the responsiveness of the
system in rewarding performance. Moreover, given a competitive
managerial labor market, when the firm's DEMO system is not re-
sponsive to performance the firm loses managers, DEMO the best are the
first to leave.
THEORY OF THE FIRM 29 3
Ther e is also much internal DEMO of managers by managers
themselves. Part of the talent of a manager is his ability to elicit and
measure the productivity of lower managers, so there is a natural
process of monitoring from higher to lower DEMO of management.
Less well appreciated, however, is the monitoring that takes place
from bottom to top. Lower managers perceive that they can gain DEMO
stepping over shirking or less competent managers above them.
Moreover, in DEMO team or nexus of contracts view of the firm, each
manager DEMO concerned with the performance of managers above and
below him since his marginal product is likely to be a positive function
of theirs. Finally, although higher managers are affected more than
lower managers, all managers realize that the managerial labor mar-
ket uses the performance of the firm DEMO determine each manager's
outside opportunity wage. In short, each manager DEMO a stake in the
performance of the managers above and below him and, as a conse-
quence, undertakes some amount of monitoring in DEMO directions.
All managers below the very top level have an interest in seeing that
the top managers choose policies for the firm which provide DEMO most
positive signals to the managerial labor market. But by what mecha-
nism can top management be disciplined? Since the body designated
for this function is the board of directors, we can ask how it might be
constructed to do its job. A board dominated by security holders DEMO
not seem optimal or endowed with good survival properties. Diffuse
ownership of securities is beneficial in terms of an optimal allocation
of risk bearing, but its consequence is that the firm's security holders
are generally DEMO diversified across the securities of many firms to take
much direct interest in a particular firm.
If there is competition among the top managers DEMO (all
want to be the boss of bosses), then perhaps DEMO are the best ones to
control the board of directors. They are most direcdy in the line of
fire from lower managers when the DEMO for securities and man-
agerial labor give poor signals about the performance of the firm.
Because of their power over the firm's decisions, their market-
determined opportunity wages are also likely to be most affected DEMO
market signals about the performance of the firm. If they are also in
competition for the top places in the firm, they may be the most
informed and responsive critics of the firm's performance.
Having DEMO control of the board, top management may decide
that collusion and DEMO of security holder wealth are better
than competition among themselves. Th e probability of such collusive
arrangements might be lowered, and the viability of the board as a
market-induced mechanism for low-cost internal transfer of control
DEMO be enhanced, by the inclusion of outside directors. Th e latter
DEMO best be regarded as professional referees whose task is to
stimulate and oversee the competition among the firm's top mana-
29 4 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
gers. In a state of advanced DEMO of the external markets that
buttress the corporate firm, the outside DEMO are in their turn
disciplined by the market for their services which prices them ac-
cording to their performance as referees. Since such a DEMO of
separation of security ownership from control is consistent with the
pressures applied by the managerial labor market, and since it
likewise operates in the interests of the firm's security holders, it
probably has good survival properties.^
This analysis does not imply that boards of directors are DEMO to be
composed entirely of managers and outside directors. The board is
viewed as a market-induced institution, the ultimate internal monitor
of the set of contracts called a firm, whose most important role is to
scrutinize the highest decision makers within the firm. In the team or
nexus DEMO contracts view of the firm, one cannot rule out the evolution
DEMO boards of directors that contain many different factors of produc-
tion (DEMO their hired representatives), whose common trait is that their
marginal products are affected by those of the top decision makers.
On the other DEMO, one also cannot conclude that all such factors will
naturally show DEMO on boards since there may be other market-induced
institutions, for example, unions, that more efficiently monitor mana-
gers on behalf of specific factors. All one can say is that in a competi-
tive environment lower-cost DEMO of monitoring mechanisms are likely
to survive. The role of the board in this framework is to provide a
relatively low-cost mechanism for replacing DEMO reordering top mana-
gers; lower cost, for example, than the DEMO provided by an
outside takeover, although, of course, the existence DEMO an outside
market for control is another force which helps to sensitize the inter-
nal managerial labor market.
The perspective suggested here owes much DEMO, but is nevertheless
different from, existing treatments of the firm in the property rights
literature. Thus, Alchian (1969) and Alchian and Demsetz (1972)
comment insightfully on the disciplining of management that takes
place through the inside and outside markets for managers. However,
they attribute DEMO task of disciplining management primarily to the
risk bearers, the firm'DEMO security holders, who are assisted to some
extent by managerial labor DEMO and by the possibility of outside
takeover. Jensen and Meckling (1976) likewise make control of man-
^ Watts and Zimmerman (1978) provide DEMO similar description of the market-induced
evolution of "independent" outside auditors whose function is to certify and, as a
consequence, stimulate the viability DEMO the set of contracts called the firm. Like the
outside directors, DEMO outside auditors are policed by the market for their services which
prices them in large part on the basis of how well they resist DEMO the interests of
one set of factors (e.g., security holders) DEMO the benefit of other factors (e.g., manage-
ment). Like the professional outside director, the welfare of the outside auditor de-
pends largely on "reputation."
THEORY OF THE FIRM 29 5
agement the province of the firm'DEMO risk bearers, but they do not allow
for any assistance from DEMO managerial labor market. Of all the au-
thors in the property-rights literature, Manne (1965, 1967) is most
concerned with the market for DEMO control. He recognizes that
with diffuse security ownership management and risk bearing are
naturally separate functions. But for him, disciplining management is
an "DEMO job " which in the first instance falls on a firm's
organizers and later on specialists in the process of outside takeover.
When DEMO and risk bearing are viewed as naturally sepa-
rate factors of production, looking at the market for risk bearing from
the viewpoint of portfolio theory tells us that risk bearers are likely to
spread their wealth DEMO many firms and so not be interested in
directly controlling the management of any individual firm. Thus,
models of the firm, like those of Alchian-Demsetz and Jensen-
Meckling, in which the control of management falls primarily on the
risk bearers, are not likely to allay the fears of those concerned with
the apparent incentive problems created by the separation DEMO security
ownership and control. Likewise, Manne's approach, in which the
control of management relies primarily on the expensive mechanism
of an outside DEMO, offers little comfort. Th e viability of the large
corporation with DEMO security ownership is better explained in
terms of a model where the primary disciplining of managers comes
through managerial labor markets, both within and outside of the
firm, with assistance from the panoply of internal and external
monitoring devices that evolve to stimulate the ongoing efficiency of
the DEMO form, and with the market for outside takeovers pro-
viding discipline DEMO last resort.
The Viahility of Separation of Security
Ownership and Control: DEMO
Th e preceding is a general discussion of how pressure from manage-
rial labor markets helps to discipline managers. We now examine
somewhat more DEMO conditions under which the discipline
imposed by managerial labor markets can resolve potential incentive
problems associated with the separation of security ownership and
control DEMO the firm.
T o focus on the problem we are trying to solve, let us first examine
the situation where the manager is also the firm's sole security holder,
so that there is clearly DEMO incentive problem. When he is sole security
holder, a manager consumes DEMO the job, through shirking, perqui-
sites, or incompetence, to the point where these yield marginal ex-
pected utility equal to that provided DEMO an additional dollar of wealth
usable for consumption or investment outside of the firm. The man-
29 6 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
ager is induced to make this DEMO decision because he pays directly
for consumption on the job; that DEMO, as manager he cannot avoid a full
ex post settling up DEMO himself as security holder.
In contrast, when the manager is no DEMO sole security holder,
and in the absence of some form of full ex post settling up for
deviations from contract, a manager has an incentive to consume
more on the job than is agreed in DEMO contract. The manager perceives
that, on an ex post basis, he can beat the game by shirking or con-
suming more perquisites than DEMO agreed. This does not neces-
sarily mean that the manager profits at the expense of other factors.
Rational managerial labor markets understand any shortcomings DEMO
available mechanisms for enforcing ex post settling up. Assessments
of ex post deviations from contract will be incorporated into contracts
on an ex ante DEMO; for example, through an adjustment of the
manager's wage.
Nevertheless, a game which is fair on an ex ante basis does not
induce the same behavior as a game in which there is also DEMO post
settling up. Herein lie the potential losses from separation of security
ownership and control of a firm. There are situations where, with less
than complete ex post settling up, the manager is induced to consume
more on the job than he would like, given that on average he pays for
his consumption ex ante.
Three general conditions suffice to DEMO the wage revaluation im-
posed by the managerial labor market a form of full ex post settling
up which resolves the managerial incentive problem DEMO above.
The first condition is that a manager's talents and his tastes for
consumption on the job are not known with certainty, are likely to
change through time, and must be imputed by managerial labor
markets at least in part from information about the manager's current
DEMO past performance. Since it seems to capture the essence of the
task of managerial labor markets in a world of uncertainty, this
assumption is no real restriction.
The second assumption is that managerial labor markets appro-
DEMO use current and past information to revise future wages and
understand any enforcement power inherent in the wage revision
process. In short, contrary to much of the literature on separation of
security ownership and control, we impute efficiency or rationality in
information processing to managerial labor markets. In DEMO of
this assumption, we note that the problem faced by managerial DEMO
markets in revaluing the managers of a firm is much entwined with
the problem faced by the capital market in revaluing the firm itself.
DEMO we do not understand all the details of the process, available
DEMO evidence (e.g., Fama 1976, chaps. 5 and 6) suggests that the
capital market generally makes rational assessments of the value of
THEORY OF THE FIRM 29 7
the firm in the face of DEMO and uncertain information. This does
not necessarily mean that information processing in managerial labor
markets is equally efficient or rational, but it is a warning against
strong presumptions to the contrary.
Th e final and key DEMO for full control of managerial behavior
through wage changes is that the weight of the wage revision process
is sufficient to resolve any potential DEMO with managerial incen-
tives. In this general form, the condition amounts DEMO assuming the
desired result. More substance is provided by specific examples.
Example 1: Marketable Human Capital
Suppose a manager's human capital, his DEMO of future wages, is a
marketable asset. Suppose the manager perceives DEMO, because of the
consequent revaluations of future wages, the current value of his
human capital changes by at least the amount of an DEMO assess-
ment of the wealth changes experienced by other factors, primarily
DEMO security holders, because of his current deviations from contract.
Then, as long as the manager is not a risk preferrer, these revalua-
tions of his human capital are a form of full ex post settling DEMO Th e
manager need not be charged ex ante for presumed ex post devia-
tions from contract since the weight of the wage revision DEMO is
sufficient to neutralize his incentives to deviate.
It is important to consider why the manager might perceive that the
value of his human DEMO changes by at least the amount of an
unbiased assessment of the wealth changes experienced by other
factors due to his deviations from contract. DEMO first that the market's
assessment of such wealth changes is also its assessment of the dif-
ference between the manager's ex post DEMO product and the
marginal product he contracted to deliver ex ante. However, any
assessment of the manager's marginal product is likely to include
extraneous noise which has little to do with his talents and efforts.
DEMO specific details on what the market takes to be the statistical
process governing the evolution of the manager's talents and his tastes
for DEMO on the job, one cannot say exactly how far it will DEMO
in adjusting his future wages to reflect its most recent measurement of
his marginal product. Assuming the market uses information ration-
ally, the adjustment is closer to complete the larger the signal in the
most recent DEMO relative to the noise, but as long as there is
some DEMO in the process, the adjustment is less than complete.^
Although his DEMO wage may not adjust by the full amount of an
unbiased assessment of the current cost of his deviations from con-
^ Specific illustrations DEMO this point are provided later.
29 8 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
tract, a manager with a multiperiod horizon may perceive that the
implied current wealth change, the present value of likely changes in
the stream of future wages, is at least as great as the cost of his
deviations from contract. In this DEMO, the contemporaneous change in
his wealth implied by an eventual adjustment DEMO future wages is a
form of full ex post settling up which results in full enforcement of his
contract. Moreover, the wage revision process resolves any potential
problems about a manager's incentives even though the DEMO ex
post settling up need not involve the firm currently employing the
manager; that is, lower or higher future wages due to current DEMO
tions from contract may come from other firms.
Of course, changes DEMO a manager's wealth as a consequence of
anticipated future wage revisions are not always equivalent to full ex
post settling up. When a DEMO does not expect to be in the labor
market for many future periods, the weight of future wage revisions
due to current assessments of performance may amount to substan-
tially less than full ex post settling DEMO However, it is just as important
to recognize that the weight DEMO anticipations about future wages may
amount to more than full ex post settling up. Ther e may be situations
where the personal wealth change DEMO by the manager as a
consequence of deviations from contract is greater than the wealth
change experienced by other factors. Since many readers have DEMO
trouble with this point, it is well to bring it closer DEMO home.
Economists (especially young economists) easily imagine situations
where the effects of higher or lower quality of a current article or
book on DEMO market value of human capital, through enhancement or
lowering of "reputation," are in excess of the effects of quality dif-
ferences on DEMO market value of the specific work to any publisher.
Managers can sometimes have similar perceptions with respect to the
implications of current performance for DEMO market value of their
human capital.
Example 2: Stochastic Processes for DEMO Products
Th e next example of ex post settling u p through the wage revision
process is somewhat more formal than that described above. DEMO make
specific assumptions about the stochastic evolution of a manager's
measured marginal product and about how the managerial labor
market uses information from DEMO process to adjust the manager's
future wages—in a manner which amounts to precise, full ex post
settling u p for the results of past performance.
Suppose the manager's measured marginal product for any period
DEMO is composed of two terms: (i) an expected value, given his talents,
effort exerted during /, consumption of perquisites, etc.; and (ii)
THEORY OF THE FIRM 29 9
random noise. Th e random noise DEMO in part result from measure-
ment error, that is, the sheer difficulty of accurately measuring mar-
ginal products when there is team production, but it may also arise in
part from the fact that effort DEMO and talent do not yield perfectly
certain consequences. Moreover, because of DEMO uncertain evolution
of the manager's talents and tastes, the expected DEMO of his marginal
product is itself a stochastic process. Specifically, we DEMO that the
expected value, I^ follows a random walk with steps DEMO are inde-
pendent of the random noise, €^, in the manager's measured marginal
product, z^ Thus, the measured marginal product,
DEMO = I , -h et, (1)
is a random walk plus white noise. For simplicity, we also assume that
this process describes the manager's marginal product both in his
current employment and in DEMO best alternative employment.
Th e characteristics (parameters) of the evolution of the manager's
marginal product depend to some extent on endogenous variables
DEMO effort and perquisites consumed, which are not completely observ-
able. Ou DEMO purpose is to set u p the managerial labor market so that
the wage revision process resolves any potential incentive problems
that may arise DEMO the endogeneity of z^ in a situation where there is
separation of security ownership and control of the firm.
Suppose next that risk bearers DEMO all risk neutral and that 1-period
market interest rates are always equal to zero. Suppose also that
managerial wage contracts are written so that DEMO manager's wage in
any period / is the expected value of his marginal product. If, condi-
tional on past measured values of his marginal product, with the risk
bearers accepting the noise e^ in the ex post measurement of the
marginal product. We shall see below that DEMO is an optimal arrange-
ment for our risk-neutral risk bearers. However, DEMO is not necessarily
optimal for the manager if he is risk averse. A risk-averse manager
may want to sell part of the risk inherent DEMO the uncertain evolution of
his expected marginal product to the risk bearers, for example,
through a long-term wage contract.
We avoid this issue by assuming that, perhaps because of the more
extreme moral hazard problems in long-term contracts (remember
that If is in part under the control of the manager) and the contracting
costs to which these moral hazard problems give rise, simple contracts
in which the manager's wage is reset at the beginning of each period
are dominant, at least for some nontrivial subset of firms and mana-
gers.^ If we could also DEMO away any remaining moral hazard
5 Institutions like corporations, that are DEMO to rapid technological change with a
large degree of uncertainty about future managerial needs, may find that long-term
3OO JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
(managerial incentive) problems, then with risk-averse managers,
risk-neutral risk bearers, and the presumed fixed recontracting pe-
riod, the contract which specifies ex ante that the manager will be paid
the current expected value of his marginal product dominates any
contract where DEMO manager also shares the ex post deviation of his
measured marginal product from its ex ante expected value (see, e.g.,
Spence and DEMO 1971).
However, contracts which specify ex ante that the manager DEMO be
paid the current expected value of his marginal product seem to leave
the typical moral hazard problem that arises when there is less DEMO
complete ex post enforcement of contracts. The noise e^ in the man-
ager's marginal product is borne by the risk bearers. Once the DEMO
ager's expected marginal product It {= his current wage) has DEMO
assessed, he seems to have an incentive to consume more perquisites
DEMO provide less effort than are implied in If
A mechanism for ex post enforcement is, however, built into the
model. With the expected DEMO of the manager's marginal product
wandering randomly through time, future DEMO of expected
marginal products (and thus of wages) will be determined in part by
e^, the deviation of the current measured marginal product from its ex
ante expected value. In the present scenario, where It is assumed to
follow a random walk, Muth (1960) has shown that the expected value
of the marginal product evolves according to
z, = z,-i + (1 -0)e,_i, (2)
where the parameter </) (0 < </) < 1) is DEMO to zero the smaller the
variance of the noise term in the marginal product equation (1)
relative to the variance of the steps in the random walk followed by
the expected marginal product.
In fact, the process by which future expected marginal products are
adjusted on the DEMO of past deviations of marginal products from
their expected values leads to a precise form of full ex post settling up.
This is best DEMO by writing the marginal product Zt in its inverted
form, that DEMO, in terms of past marginal products and the current
noise. The DEMO form for our model, a random walk embedded in
random noise, is
_3 + . . . + e,, (3)
managerial contracts can only be negotiated at high cost. On the other hand, institu-
tions like governments, schools, and universities may be able to DEMO more reliably
their future needs for managers (and other professionals) and so may be able to offer
long-term contracts at relatively low cost. DEMO institutions can then be expected to
attract the relatively risk-averse members of the professional labor force, while the
riskier employment offered by corporations attracts those who are willing to accept
shorter-term contracts.
THEORY OF THE FIRM 3OI
S
O tha t
i + 0( 1 - <i>)zt-2 + </>'(! - </>)z/-3 + . . . (4)
(see, e.g.. Nelson 1973, chap. 4, or Muth 1960).
For our purposes, the interesting fact is that, although he is paid his
ex ante expected marginal product, the manager does not get to avoid
his ex post marginal product. For example, we can infer from (4) that
Zt-i has weight 1 - </> in 'zt', then it has weight 0(1 - 0) in I^+i, 0^(1 - 0)DEMO
in 'Z(+2y and so on. In the end, the sum of the contributions of z,_i to
future expected marginal products, and thus to future wages, is
exactly Zt-i. With zero interest rates, DEMO means that the risk bearers
simply allow the manager to smooth his marginal product across
future periods at the going opportunity cost of all DEMO temporal
wealth transfers. As a consequence, the manager has no incentive DEMO
try to bury shirking or consumption of perquisites in his ex post
measured marginal product.
Since the managerial labor market is presumed to understand DEMO
weight of the wage revision process, which in this case amounts DEMO
precise full ex post settling up, any potential managerial incentive
problems DEMO the separation of risk bearing, or security ownership,
from control DEMO resolved. Th e manager can contract for and take an
optimal amount of consumption on the job. Th e wage set ex ante
need DEMO include any allowance for ex post incentives to deviate from
the contract since the wage revision process neutralizes any such
incentives. Note, moreover, DEMO the value of 0 in the wage revision
process described by (DEMO) determines how the observed marginal
product of any given period is DEMO and spread across future
periods, but whatever the value of 0, the given marginal product is
fully accounted for in the stream of DEMO wages. Thus, it is now clear
what was meant by the DEMO claim that although the parameter 0 in
the process generating the manager's marginal product is to some
extent unde r his control, this is not a matter of particular concern to
the managerial labor market.
DEMO somewhat evident qualification is in order. Th e smoothing pro-
cess described by (4) contains an infinite number of terms, whereas
any manager has a finite working life. For practical purposes, full ex
post settling u p is achieved as long as the manager's current marginal
DEMO is "very nearly" fully absorbed by the stream of wages over his
future working life. This requires a value of 0 in (4) which is
sufficiently far from 1.0, given the number of periods DEMO in
the manager's working life. Recall that 0 is closer to 1.0 the larger the
variance of the noise in the manager's DEMO marginal product
relative to the variance of the steps of the random walk taken by the
expected value of his marginal product. Intuitively, when the variance
3O2 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
of the noise term is large relative DEMO that of the changes in the
expected value, the current measured DEMO product has a weak
signal about any change in the expected value of the marginal prod-
uct, and the current marginal product is only allocated slowly to
expected future marginal products.
Some Extensions
Having qualified the DEMO, let us now indicate some ways in which
it is robust DEMO changes in details of the model.
1. More Complicated Models for the Manager's Marginal
Product
The critical ingredient in enforcing precise full ex DEMO settling up
through wage revisions on the basis of reassessments of expected
marginal products is that when the marginal product and its expected
value DEMO expressed in inverted form, as in (3) and (4), the sum of the
weights on past marginal products is exactly 1.0. DEMO will be the case
(see, e.g.. Nelson 1973, chap. 4) whenever the manager's marginal
product conforms to a nonstationary stochastic process, but the
changes from period to period in the marginal product conform DEMO
some stationary ARMA (mixed autoregressive moving average) pro-
cess. The example summarized in equations (l)-(4) is the interesting
but special DEMO where the expected marginal product follows a ran-
dom walk so that the differences of the marginal product are a
stationary, first-order moving average process. The general case al-
lows the expected value of the marginal DEMO to follow any more
complicated nonstationary process which has the property that the
differences of the marginal product are stationary, so that the margi-
nal product and its expected value can be expressed in inverted form
DEMO
with
Zf = niZt- i + TT^Zt-'Z + .. . + € , (5 )
!( = TTxZt-x + 'TT2Zt-2 + DEMO . . (6)
i=\
These can be viewed as the DEMO conditions for enforcing precise
full ex post settling through the wage revision process when the
THEORY OF THE FIRM 30 3
manager's wage is equal to DEMO current expected value of his marginal
product.^
2. Risk-Averse Risk Bearers
In the framework summarized in equations (5)-(7), if the manager
switches firms, the risk bearers of his former firm are left with the
remains of his measured marginal products not previously absorbed
into the DEMO value of his marginal product. Nevertheless, in the
way we have DEMO up the world, the risk bearers realize that the man-
ager'DEMO next firm continues to set his wage according to the same
stochastic process as the last firm. Since this results in full ex post
DEMO up on the part of the manager, the motive for switching DEMO
cannot be to avoid perverse adjustments of future wages on the basis
of past performance. On average, the switching of managers among
firms does not result in gains or losses to risk bearers, which means
that the switches are a matter of indifference to our presumed risk-
neutral DEMO bearers.
It is, however, interesting to examine how the analysis might
change when the risk bearers are risk averse and switching of mana-
DEMO among firms is not a matter of indifference. Suppose, for the
DEMO, that the risk bearers offer managers contracts where, as
before, DEMO manager's wage tracks the expected value of his marginal
product, DEMO each period there is also a fixed discount in the wage to
compensate the risk bearers for the risks of unfinished ex post settling
DEMO with the firm as a consequence of a possible future shift by the
manager to another firm. Such an arrangement may satisfy the risk
DEMO, but it will not be acceptable to the manager. As long DEMO his
marginal product evolves according to equations (5)-(7), DEMO in his
current firm and in the best alternative, the manager DEMO subject to full
ex post settling up. Thus, any risk adjustment DEMO his wage to reflect
the fact that the settling up may not be with his current firm is an
uncompensated loss which he will DEMO to avoid.
The manager can avoid any risk discount in his wage, and maintain
complete freedom to switch among firms, by himself bearing DEMO the
risk of his marginal product; that is, he contracts to accept, at the end
of each period, his ex post measured DEMO product rather than its
ex ante expected value so that there is, period by period, full ex post
settling up with his current DEMO There is such a presumption against
^ When It follows a stationary process, the long-run average value toward which the
process always tends will eventually be known with near perfect certainty. Thus,
the case of DEMO stationary expected marginal product is of litde interest, at least for
DEMO purposes of ex post settling up enforced by the wage revision process.
30 4 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
the optimality of immediate, full ex post settling up in the literature
on optimal contracting that it behooves DEMO to examine how and why it
works, and is optimal, in the circumstances under examination.
Gontractual Settling Up
The literature on optimal contracting, for example, Harris and Raviv
(1978, 1979), Holmstr5m (1979), and Shavell (1979), suggests uni-
formly that when there is DEMO in the manager's marginal product,
that is, when the DEMO of measured marginal product from its
expected value cannot be traced unambiguously and costlessly to the
manager's actions (talents, effort exerted, and consumption on the
job), then a risk-averse manager will always choose DEMO share part of the
uncertainty in the evaluation of his performance with the firm's risk
bearers. He will agree to some amount of DEMO post settling up, but
always less than 100 percent of the DEMO of his measured margi-
nal product from its ex ante expected value. In short, the contracting
models suggest that we must learn to live with the incentive problems
that arise when there is less than complete DEMO post enforcement of
contracts.
The contracting literature is almost uniformly concerned with 1-
period models. In a 1-period world, there can be no enforcement of
contracts through a wage revision process imposed by the managerial
labor DEMO The existence of this form of ex post settling up in a
multiperiod world affects the manager's willingness to engage in
explicit contractual DEMO post settling up.
For example, in the model summarized in equations (5)-(7), the
manager's wage in any period is DEMO expected value of his marginal
product assessed at the beginning of the period, and the manager
does not immediately share any of the deviation of his ex post margi-
nal product from its ex ante expected DEMO However, because it
contains information about future expected values of his DEMO
product, eventually the manager's current measured marginal prod-
uct is DEMO in full to future expected marginal products. Equiva-
lently, in the DEMO revision process described by equations (5)-(7), the
managerial DEMO market in effect acts as a financial intermediary. It
withdraws portions of past accumulated measured marginal products
to pay the manager a dividend on DEMO human capital equal to the
expected value of his marginal product, DEMO implicitly provides the
lending arrangements which allow the manager to spread his current
measured marginal product over future periods in precisely the way
the DEMO marginal product will contribute to expected future mar-
ginal products.
THEORY OF THE FIRM 3O5
Looked at from this perspective, however, DEMO manager might sim-
ply contract to take the ex post measured value of his marginal
product as his wage and then himself use the DEMO market to smooth
his measured marginal product over future periods. Since the same
asset (his human capital) is involved, the manager should be able to
carry out these smoothing transactions via the capital market on DEMO
same terms as can be had in the managerial labor market. Th e
advantage to the manager in smoothing through the capital market,
DEMO, is that he can then contract to accept full ex post DEMO up
period by period (he is paid his measured marginal product), which
means he can avoid any risk discount in his wage that might be
imposed when he is paid the expected value of his DEMO product
with the possibility of unanticipated switches to other firms.^
It is important to recognize that using the capital market in the
manner described DEMO allows the manager to "average out" the
random noise in his measured marginal product. Thus, when he is
instead paid the expected value of his marginal product each period,
and when the process generating DEMO marginal product is described by
equations (5)-(7), the DEMO's current measured marginal product
is eventually allocated in full to future expected marginal products.
This happily, but only coincidentally, resolves incentive problems DEMO
imposing full ex post settling up. Th e allocation of the current margi-
nal product to future expected marginal products in fact occurs
because DEMO current marginal product has information about future
expected marginal products. Th e weights TTJ in equations (5)-(7) are
precisely those that DEMO extract this information and so opti-
mally smooth or average out the purely random noise in the man-
ager's measured marginal product. Th DEMO manager can achieve the
same result by contracting to be paid the measured value of his
marginal product and then using the capital market DEMO smooth his
marginal product. This power of the capital market to reduce the
terror in full contractual ex post settling up is lost in DEMO 1-period
models that dominate the contracting literature.
' With positive interest rates, contracting to be paid his measured marginal product
and then using the capital market to smooth the marginal product over future periods
dominates the DEMO in which the manager is paid the expected value of his margmal
product. Equivalence can be restored by adjusting the expected marginal product J, in
eq. (6) for accumulated interest on the past marginal products, 2,_i, z,_2 or by
prepaying the present value of interest on the deferrals of the current marginal
product over future periods. Suffice DEMO to say, however, that either accumulation or
prepayment of interest complicates the problems posed by possible shifts of the man-
ager to other DEMO and so may lean the system toward contracts in which the manager is
paid his measured marginal product and then uses the capital market DEMO achieve
optimal smoothing.
JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
Conclusions
The model summarized by equations (5)-(7) is one specific scenario in
which the wage revision process imposed by the managerial labor
market amounts to full ex post settling up DEMO the manager for his past
performance. The important general point is that in any scenario
where the weight of the wage revision process is DEMO least equivalent to
full ex post settling up, managerial incentive problems—the DEMO
usually attributed to the separation of security ownership and control
of the firm—are resolved.
No claim is made that the wage revision process always DEMO in a
full ex post settling up on the part of the manager. There are certainly
situations where the weight of anticipated future wage DEMO is
insufficient to counterbalance the gains to be had from ex post shirk-
ing, or perhaps outright theft, in excess of what was DEMO ex ante in
a manager's contract. On the other hand, DEMO full ex post settling
up is not an upper bound on the force of the wage revision process.
There aie certainly situations where, as a consequence of anticipated
future wage changes, a manager perceives that the value of his human
capital changes by more than the wealth changes DEMO on other
factors, and especially the firm's security holders, by his current de-
viations from the terms of his contract.
The extent DEMO which the wage revision process imposes ex post
settling up in any particular situation is, of course, an empirical issue.
But it is DEMO safe to say that the general phenomenon is at least
one of the ingredients in the survival of the modern large corpora-
tion, characterized by diffuse security ownership and the separation
of security ownership and control, as a viable form of economic
organization.
References
Alchian, Armen A. ''Corporate Management and Property Rights." In Eco-
nomic Policy and the Regulation of Corporate Securities, edited by Henry G.
Manne. Washington: American Enterprise DEMO Public Policy Res., 1969.
Alchian, Armen A., and Demsetz, Harold. "Prodtiction, Information Costs,
and Economic Organization." A.£./?. 62 (December 1972): 777-95.
Baumol, WiWiam ]. Business Behai'ior. Value and Groioth. New York: Macmillan,
1959.
Berle, Adolph A., Jr., DEMO Means, Gardiner C. The Modern Corporation and
Private Property. New York: Macmillan, 1932.
Coase, Ronald H. "The Nature of the Firm." DEMO, n.s. 4 (November
1937): 386-405.
. "The Problem of DEMO Cost."/. Law and Econ. 3 (October 1960):
1-44.
DEMO, Richard M., and March, James G. A Behavioral Theoiy of DEMO Firm.
Englewood Cliffs, N.j.: Prentice-Hall, 1963.
THEORY OF THE FIRM 30 7
Fama, Eugene F. Foundations of Fi?iance. New York: Basic, 1976.
Fama, Eugene F., and Miller, Merton H. The Theory of Finance. New York:
Holt, Rinehart 8c Winston, 1972.
Harris, Milton, and Raviv, Artur. "Some Results on Incentive Contracts with
Applications to Education and Employment, Health Insurance, and DEMO
Enforcement.'' A.E.R. 68 (March 1978): 20-30.
. "Optimal Incentive Contracts with Imperfect Information." Working
Paper no. 70-75-76, Carnegie-Mellon Univ., Graduate School of Indus.
Admin., April 1976 (rev. January 1979), forthcoming DEMO Econ. Theoiy.
Holmstrom, Bengt. "Moral Hazard and Observability." Bell J. DEMO 10
(Spring 1979): 74-91 .
Jensen, Michael C. "Capital DEMO: Theory and Evidence.'' Bell J. Ecofi. and
Management Sci. 3 (Autumn 1972): 357-98.
Jensen, Michael C , and Meckhng, William DEMO "Theory of the Firm: Manage-
rial Behavior, Agency Costs and DEMO Structure."y. Financial Econ. 3
(October 1976): 305-60.
Manne, Henry G. "Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control." y.P.^.
73, no. 2 (April 1965): 110-20.
. "Otir Two Corporate Systems: Law and Economics." Virginia Law Rei'.
53 (March 1967): 259-85.
DEMO, John F. "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts."y.
American Statis. Assoc. 55 (June 1960): 299-306.
Nelson, Charles R. Applied Time DEMO Analysis for Managerial Forecasting. San
Francisco: Holden-Day, 1973.
Shavell, Steven. "Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and Agent
Relationship." 5^//DEMO Econ. 10 (Spring 1979): 55-73.
Simon, Herbert A. "Theories DEMO Decision Making in Economics and Behav-
ioral Science.'' A.E.R. 49 (DEMO 1959): 253-83.
Smith, Adam. The Wealth of Nations. 1776. Cannan DEMO New York: Modern
Library, 1937.
Spence, Michael, and Zeckhauser, DEMO "Insurance, Information and
Individtial Action." A.E.R. 61 (May 1971): 380-87.
Watts, Ross L., and Zimmerman, Jerold. "Auditors and the DEMO of
Accounting Standards, an Analysis of the Lack of Independence." Working
Paper GPB 7806, Univ. Rochester, Graduate School of Management, 1978.
Williamson, Oliver E. The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial Objec-
tives in DEMO Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964.
{1g42fwefx}