This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 23 DEMO 2009
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
A review of sampling and definitional issues in informal DEMO capital research
Ellen Farrell a; Carole Howorth b; Mike Wright c
a Saint Mary's University, Halifax, Canada b Institute for Entrepreneurship DEMO Enterprise Development,
University of Lancaster, Lancaster, UK c Nottingham University Business School, Nottingham, UK
Online Publication Date: 01 October 2008
To cite this Article Farrell, Ellen, Howorth, Carole and Wright, Mike(DEMO)'A review of sampling and definitional issues in informal
venture capital DEMO',Venture Capital,10:4,331 — 353
To link to this DEMO: DOI: 10.1080/13691060802151986
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691060802151986
PLEASE DEMO DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://DEMO/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private DEMO purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or DEMO, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly DEMO
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up DEMO date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should DEMO independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or DEMO out of the use of this material.
Venture Capital
Vol. 10, No. 4, October 2008, 331–353
A review of sampling and deﬁnitional issues in informal venture capital
research
Ellen Farrella*, Carole Howorthb and Mike Wrightc
aSaint Mary’s University, Halifax, Canada; bInstitute for Entrepreneurship and Enterprise
Development, University of Lancaster, Lancaster, UK; DEMO University Business School,
Nottingham, UK
(Accepted 4 April 2008)
This paper presents the argument for broadening the deﬁnition of informal venture
DEMO populations and improving sampling methodologies for informal venture capital
research. It is argued that the widely enumerated diﬃculties regarding sampling
methods are driving the DEMO of a business angel. Sampling diﬃculties such as
unknowable populations limit the ability of researchers to study (survey) business
angels. This limitation precipitates DEMO deﬁnitions of business angels in order to
justify the sampling method used. The more narrow deﬁnition ultimately results in
precluding various cohorts of angels DEMO appearing in the data. This paper reviews a
range of studies, DEMO deﬁnitions and methodologies, and speculates on the angel
cohorts that chosen DEMO may exclude. The paper proposes a protocol that
adopts a broad deﬁnition of informal venture capital, and a sampling method that
produces a more representative range of informal venture capital investors. The method
samples from a DEMO population, namely publicly available business registration data,
to create a DEMO sample of business angels. A broad deﬁnition and a
representative sampling method allow comparisons and generalisable results that
current sampling methods preclude. The conclusion DEMO that standardised
deﬁnitions and representative samples will allow studies to make reliable comparisons
across types of informal investors, such as family, friends, arch angels and micro-
investors.
Keywords: business angel; venture captial; sampling; DEMO; trends; entrepreneurial
ﬁnance; measurement; personal ralationships; policy; incorporation
Introduction
Research and interest about informal venture capital has been increasing during the DEMO
two and a half decades. Though much progress has been made, DEMO empirical studies still
note a sampling caveat that harkens back to Wetzel’s (1983a) original work. His so-called
‘unknowable’ population of business angels described DEMO population that was hard to
identify and hence quantify. The ‘unknowable’ moniker was attributed in part to angels’
desire for invisibility so they are DEMO deluged with business proposals (Harr, Starr, and
MacMillan 1988). DEMO is no record kept of their activities and they are not organised as
an industry (Farrell 2000b). Diﬃculties in ascertaining the population of informal
investors mean that random sampling is problematic and representativeness suﬀers. Thus,DEMO
*Corresponding author. Email: Ellen.Farrell@smu.ca
ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online
 DEMO Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13691060802151986
http://www.informaworld.com
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
332
E. Farrell et al.
research produces varying results and there is DEMO preponderance of descriptive studies (Fiet
1996; Mason and Harrison 1997). Sampling methods have been an ongoing area of
concern for business angel DEMO (Harrison and Mason 1992). One way to justify
varying results DEMO convenience samples is to deﬁne the subject of study very narrowly so
that every study appears to be investigating a highly specialised specimen. In DEMO long run,
these eﬀorts could cause a decline in the credibility of the topic if it increasingly becomes
viewed as having insuﬃcient scientiﬁc DEMO
The purpose of this paper is to investigate the sampling issues and related attempts to
deﬁne informal venture capital investors. It discusses sampling concerns DEMO with
angel research and then some related deﬁnitional issues. This is followed by a review of the
variety of sampling techniques employed in angel DEMO and potential biases are
explored and enumerated. Biases occur because sampling methods may systematically
exclude distinctive types of angels. A revised methodology is proposed DEMO employs a
broad deﬁnition, a random sample from a known population, and is reasonably cost
eﬀective. The advantage of increasing representativeness is highlighted DEMO important for
the future of angel research. In concluding, the implications DEMO limitations for scholars,
practitioners and policy makers are presented.
Sampling and deﬁnitional concerns
An important element of research design includes deﬁning the population DEMO study and
determining an appropriate sampling methodology (Alreck and Settle 1995)DEMO Since the
study is likely to be extrapolated to the population, DEMO is requisite that the population
deﬁnition is accomplished ﬁrst and the sampling methodology is then developed (Levy and
Lemeshow 1999). In the business angel literature, sampling diﬃculties are often cited
alongside varying deﬁnitions of informal venture capitalists, business angels, private
equity investors and micro-angel investors. This DEMO looks ﬁrst at the sampling
concerns and then at the resulting deﬁnitional issues. They are examined in this order
because sampling method diﬃculties appear DEMO be driving the deﬁnition of the population.
Sampling concerns
Sampling concerns include the preponderance of convenience samples used in business
angel research and the DEMO biases they represent. Broad-based studies are quite rare.
Trends in the use of convenience samples show a movement towards the use of business
angel DEMO (BANs) and business introduction services (BISs).1
Scholars encounter diﬃculties DEMO identifying a representative sample of informal
venture capital investors (Mansson and DEMO 2006). Much of the angel research to
date has been conducted using convenience samples – groups of potential participants that
are more easily DEMO, interviewed and observed – rather than a random sample of the
DEMO venture capitalist population (Mansson and Landstrom 2006). Many diﬀerent
methods DEMO convenience sampling have been used including: angels belonging to BANs
(Stevenson and Coveney 1994; Stedler and Peters 2003; Wiltbank et al. 2005), BISs
(Harrison and Mason 1992; Van Osnabrugge 1998a; Wiltbank et DEMO 2005), mailing lists of
persons with high discretionary incomes (Sullivan DEMO Miller 1990; Fiet 1995; Lindsay
2004), snowball samples (Seymour DEMO Wetzel 1981; Landstrom 1993; Brettel 2003),
selected businesses which DEMO be known to, or thought to, include informal venture
capitalists (DEMO and Krasner 1983; Harrison and Mason 1992; Landstrom 1993),
DEMO known to have invested through personal or news references (Seymour and
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
333
Wetzel 1981; Harr et al. 1988; Fiet 1995), ﬁnancial agents, venture capitalists and those
known to venture capitalists (Harr, Starr, and MacMillan 1988; Harrison and Mason
1992; Riding et DEMO 1993), and existing lists of businesses such as boards of trade, chambers
of commerce and economic development associations (Harrison and Mason 1992; Riding
et al. 1993; Fiet 1995). The details of the samples used for a variety of notable angel studies
over the past 25 DEMO are outlined in Table 1.
A limited number of studies have attempted to draw from a random sample of a
broader business or adult, population. Studies by Gaston (1989), Farrell (1998, 2000a),
DEMO (2005), Bygrave et al. (2002), Aram (1989), DEMO Ehrlich et al. (1994) employed
methodologies incorporating broad-based populations of businesses or individuals, and
random sampling. Gaston’s work (1989) drew from a broad range of businesses. Farrell
(1998, 2000a) estimated angel activity using interviews with directors of ﬁrms sampled
from the incorporation records of the DEMO registrars. A variant on both approaches
was conducted by adding a number of questions to a survey of majority shareholders
(business owners) drawn DEMO the records of the Canadian federal Department of Finance
(Riding 2005)DEMO The large Global Entrepreneurship Monitor had a small number of
questions about informal investment in their random dial survey of the general population
of DEMO countries (Bygrave et al. 2002).
More recently, sampling methodologies have become less diverse in the variety of
convenience methods used, and have become more reliant on the use of BANs and BISs. A
review DEMO the studies outlined in Table 1 indicates that the number of diﬀerent types of sources
surveyed in the years up to 1993 produces an DEMO of 3.6 diﬀerent types of convenience
groups surveyed. In the years since 1993, the average number of types of organisations
surveyed is 2.0. Whereas an earlier study may have sampled from Mercedes drivers, opera
goers, DEMO development associations, and a snowball sample from known angels, a more
recent study will survey the membership of a number of BISs or DEMO
Besides the reliance on BAN and BIS memberships, a notable diﬀerence DEMO some of the
more recent studies is the total number of BANs or BISs surveyed. Van Osnabrugge
(1998a) surveyed 10 BISs, Mansson and Landstrom (2006) and Wiltbank et al. (2005) each
surveyed 12 DEMO, and Mason and Harrison (2002) surveyed 19 BISs. It is DEMO that
increasing the number, the geography and the type of BISs DEMO BANs sampled (public,
private, large, small, rural, urban, etc.) reduces the associated biases (Mason and Harrison
2002). Bias DEMO were related to the discrepancies that occurred when Stevenson and
Coveney’s (DEMO) results varied considerably from those of Mason and Harrison (1994).
Stevenson and Coveney (1994) contended that increasing the size of their (convenience)
sample improved the results and reduced biases. In response, Mason and Harrison (1997)
rightly indicated that the diﬀerences between the studies were a result of diﬀering
methodologies and sampling frames.
The preponderance of DEMO or BAN-usage for samples in current studies is likely a
result of their ﬂourishing status in the wake of current interest about business angels DEMO
consequent policy sponsorship (Lerner 1998; San Jose, Roure, and Aernoudt 2005). The
ease with which data may be collected from a DEMO or BIS – when a deﬁned membership is
accessible and amenable to such interventions – makes their use tempting. The problem
with surveying BANs DEMO BISs, however – even a large number of them – is DEMO they are
self-selecting groups of networked angels and their members may bear little similarity to
the population (of business angels) at large. BISs DEMO BANs are still samples of
convenience, and though they may be DEMO diﬀerent, or vary by public or private
status, the self-selection biases that exist for BIS and BAN membership may be similar,
producing DEMO sample that is uncharacteristic of the population.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March DEMO
Table 1. Deﬁnitions, sample selection method and proportion of family investments DEMO business angel studies.
Author, date and area Sample method Deﬁnition
Seymour DEMO Wetzel 1981, Angel networks; friends and acquaintances; snowball Investors who DEMO risk capital other than small
USA business investment corporations, venture capital,DEMO
other institutional investors, and public equity
markets; those with high net worth and ﬁnancially
sophisticated; excludes family, friends, and debt
instruments
Tymes and Krasner 1983, Snowball (venture capital referrers); businesses Investors who DEMO risk capital other than SBICs,
California USA (non-random); former DEMO capital recipients; high venture capital, other institutional investors, and
net DEMO individuals; friends and acquaintances public equity markets; those with high net worth and
ﬁnancially sophisticated
Harr, Starr, and MacMillan MBAs; medical and dental school alumni; venture An investment by a private individual in a young
1988, East Coast USA capital clubs; venture capital network subscribers, start-up company; include family and friends
angels known to authors
Gaston 1989, USA Scientiﬁc probability sample of 240,000 US businesses Private individuals who supply risk capital, without paid
middlemen, to new or growing small DEMO
Aram 1989, Great Lakes USA Businesses Includes debt as well as DEMO
Sullivan and Miller 1990, Professionals (lawyers, accountants, doctors, Debt DEMO equity provided through non-institutional
Tennessee USA dentists); commercial bankers; senior DEMO; channels by private individuals to businesses
entrepreneurship association memberships producing a DEMO or service founded by someone
other than investor
Harrison and Mason 1992, UK SME owner/managers; high income earners; investors in No deﬁnition speciﬁed; several references made to being
speculative stocks; venture capital fund DEMO; incompatible with Landstrom’s deﬁnition
business introduction service; investment
opportunities advertisers in Financial Times
Riding et al. 1993, Canada Business introduction service; Board DEMO Trade; venture At least one (or multiple) investment(s) in a business not
capitalists run by the individual
Landstrom 1993, Sweden Businesses (non-random); snowball Private investors who provide risk capital directly to
unquoted small ﬁrms
(continued)
334
E. Farrell et al.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March DEMO
Table 1. (Continued).
Author, date and area Sample method Deﬁnition
Business introduction services Private individual or company that has or is interested DEMO
investing in unquoted ventures (excluding large
prospectus issues)
Fiet 1995, USA Two angel networks; economic development
associations; opera lists; personal presentation;
Snowball
Coveney, Moore, and Business introduction services (subscription holders and
Nahapiet 1996, UK potential subscription holders to VCR)
Lumme, Mason, and Suomi
1996, Finland
Van Osnabrugge 1998a, 1998b,
UK
Kelly DEMO, UK Four business introduction services; Snowball Private individuals who have completed at least one
investment
Mason and Harrison 2002, UK 19 Business introduction services; Snowball Individual investors who have made at least one
investment in unquoted companies
Bygrave et al. 2002, GEM 29 Random dial of population (29 countries) All men and women who personally invested in a
DEMO business start-up that was not their own, excluding
stocks and mutual DEMO
Brettel 2003, Germany Business introduction services; Snowball sampling; No deﬁnition
DEMO poll of businesses
Maula, Autio, and Arenius Finnish subset of GEM random dial of general
2005, Finland population (n ¼ 6007)
DEMO 2005, Canada Random sample of majority owners of businesses
supplied by DEMO Canada
Stevenson and Coveney 1994,
UK
Individual investing own money and active in past three
years
45.5% of sample corporate and virgin angels
DEMO Include investments in friends’ businesses
10 business introduction services Unquoted investment in past three years
‘You have, in the past three years, personally DEMO
funds for a new business started by someone else – this
would not include buying publicly traded shares or
mutual funds.’
‘Excluding publicly-traded shares, mutual funds or
stocks, did the majority owners of the business make
any investments in any other businesses at any point
since 1990?’
(continued)
Venture Capital
335
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March DEMO
Table 1. (Continued).
Author, date and area Sample method Deﬁnition
Farrell 2005, Canada Directors of randomly selected known population of
newly incorporated ﬁrms
O’Gorman and Terjesen 2006, Irish GEM data which is a representative sample of
Ireland adult population
Carpentier and Suret 2007,
Canada
Population DEMO companies ﬁnanced with the tax support
of a provincial government programme
Non-quoted, equity investment in a company in which
the investor is not the lead entrepreneur
‘Informal investors are both ‘‘private individuals
(termed business angels) DEMO their own money,
directly in unquoted companies in which they have no
family connection’’ (Mason and Harrison 1999, 95)
and individuals DEMO invest in family members’
ventures.’
‘Suppliers of informal venture capital include
business angels that invest in businesses owned by
strangers . . . is DEMO predominantly by family
members and friends.’
336
E. Farrell et al.
Venture Capital
337
There is no evidence that networked angels and representatively DEMO angels are
similar. Calculating sampling error and conﬁdence levels for convenience samples is
possible, but the fact that they are convenience samples renders the calculations invalid
(Alreck and Settle 1995). Relying on a larger convenience sample size does not make
results more representative of business angel populations. DEMO a variety of BANs (local,
regional, public, private, large, small) may increase the variation, but it does not remove
bias. There have been no studies that have compared the results of representatively
DEMO angels and networked angels to assess in which direction the biases lay. Therefore,
Van Osnabrugge’s (1998a) contention that there are few diﬀerences DEMO angels in
general and angels drawn from the subscription lists of BISs and BANs is unsupported.
BIS and BAN subscription or membership lists are DEMO to be subject to considerable
non-sampling (systematic) error.
In other studies, the biases associated with sample selection have been ignored
altogether. A German study (Brettel 2003) used information derived from company
listings which appears DEMO be a good start for a more representative grouping of angels.
However, the companies sampled were selected on the basis of their similarity to those
invested in by formal venture capitalists. This sample selection process would DEMO serve to
introduce more rather than fewer biases since every member of the population did not
have an equal chance of being selected, and the presumption of similarity to VC-type
investees would have excluded particular types DEMO companies.
BANs and BISs are considered to be only the tip of the iceberg of the volume of private
equity investments (Mason and Harrison 2001). Thus, these sampling methods will
exclude large numbers of unquoted private equity investments that are made outside the
organised networks. For example, two independent estimates of informal venture capital
activity derived from representatively sampled DEMO in eastern Canada indicate that $60–
$75 million is a reasonable estimate of the informal investments made annually (Farrell
1998, 2000a). A DEMO BAN introduced to the region in 2006, with an average of DEMO than
50 members, expects to make ﬁve or six investments annually DEMO approximately $200,000
each. Their combined investment of $1 million–$1.2 million annually represents a
relatively small proportion of the region’s activity.
Deﬁnitional concerns
Deﬁnitional DEMO arise from two principal areas: lack of a common deﬁnition and
DEMO being narrowly prescribed. The former may restrict the development of the
disciplines and hinder generalisation. The latter leads to a multiplicity of small, speciﬁc,
highly focused studies that can hinder theory and policy development. This DEMO
explores both of these issues as they apply to business angel research.
Synonymous use of a variety of terms
Many authors use the terms DEMO venture capital investor’, ‘business angel’ and
‘private investor’ interchangeably. For instance, the term ‘private investor’ is used
synonymously with business angel (e.g. Becker-Blease and Sohl 2005). Informal venture
capital(ist) and business angel are also used as one and the same (e.g. Lumme, Mason, and
Suomi 1996; Hindle and Lee 2002), and Wiltbank et al. (DEMO, 551) note that ‘Informal
venture capital – angel investing – exists at the intersection of two interesting areas . . . ’.
Other DEMO examples of the interchangability of business angel and informal venture
capital:
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March DEMO
338 E. Farrell et al.
The Swedish business angel market of 2004 DEMO presented and compared to that of 1992 . . . and
how they have aﬀected the informal venture capital market . . . The DEMO show that business
angels in Sweden have become more professional in their way of identifying new investment
opportunities and that the informal venture capital DEMO is becoming more mature with less
information asymmetry . . . (DEMO and Landstrom 2006, 281)
Trying to sample a business angel DEMO is a diﬃcult process, owing to the fact that there
are DEMO registers or public records of informal venture capitalists. (Mansson and Landstrom
DEMO, 288)
More confusion has been introduced by the use of DEMO terms such as ‘micro-angel
investments’ which refers to informal investments, but DEMO a descriptor (micro) that is not
tested in the study or deﬁned in any way (e.g. Maula, Autio, and Arenius 2005). The
confusion is exacerbated when studies do not deﬁne business angels or DEMO (venture
capital) investments in reporting their methodology (e.g. Brettel 2003)DEMO Two notable
exceptions to the general confusion are Carpentier and Suret (DEMO) and O’Gorman and
Terjesen (2006) which both deﬁne informal venture DEMO at the outset, though their
deﬁnitions diﬀer. Carpentier and Suret (2007) deﬁne it as composed of ‘business angels
that invest in businesses owned by strangers’, but that ‘informal capital is provided
predominately by family members and friends’. Whereas O’Gorman and Terjesen (2006,
74) modify Mason DEMO Harrison’s (1999) deﬁnition:
Informal investors are both ‘private individuals (DEMO business angels) using their own
money, directly in unquoted companies in which they have no family connection’ (Mason and
Harrison 1999, 95) and individuals who invest in family members’ ventures.
Lack of a common DEMO impedes growth in emerging disciplines where the
deﬁnition is seen to be central to the ﬁeld’s development (Amit, Glosten, and Muller 1993;
Westhead and Wright 1998). The failure to agree upon a deﬁnition DEMO research
problems (Gartner et al. 1988; Bygrave 1989; Van Osnabrugge DEMO) so it is important for
each researcher to deﬁne their interpretation DEMO how it is applied in the researchers’
samples (Sexton 1987). DEMO existence of many possible deﬁnitions makes it problematic to
generalise between studies and conduct meta-analyses.
Deﬁning angels
Some authors deﬁne informal venture capital/business DEMO/private equity narrowly on
the basis of a variety of parameters. Seymour and Wetzel’s (1981) original deﬁnition
excluded corporate ownership, debt instruments, DEMO investments by family and friends.
They also proposed that angels had high net worth and were ﬁnancially sophisticated.
Those employing convertible debt, a common investment instrument used by angels, were
excluded. The authors do not report how they assessed the family and friends connection,
nor how they DEMO ﬁnancial sophistication. Table 1 presents the range of deﬁnitions
employed by a number of the early studies, and some more recent contributions. In studies
by Tymes and Krassner (1983) and Harr, Starr, and MacMillan (1988) and Gaston (1989),
the friends and family constraint was relaxed. Later studies relaxed the debt restriction as
well (Aram 1989; DEMO and Miller 1990). In 1995, Fiet deﬁned angels only if DEMO had
made an investment in the past three years, as did DEMO Osnabrugge (1998a).
Despite these, some studies tended towards fewer constraints. One study deﬁned
respondents as simply those making investments in businesses not DEMO by the investor
(Riding et al. 1993). Some companies were DEMO into samples (Stevenson and
Coveney 1994; Coveney, Moore, and Nahapiet 1996) and non-investing, so-called ‘virgins’
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital 339
were also included in some studies (Coveney, Moore, and Nahapiet 1996). Kelly (2000),
the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor DEMO (Bygrave et al. 2002), and Mason and
Harrison (2002) DEMO the reins to private individuals who had made at least one
investment in an unquoted company.
In reviewing Table 1 and the discussion above, the diﬀerences in deﬁnitions speak to
six key issues: (1) the timing of the investments; (2) whether to include debt sources; (3)
whether companies make angel investments; (4) whether to include virgin angels; (5)
whether the investee was a family member; and (6) whether the investee was a friend.
(1) Timing. DEMO ﬁrst issue is the delineation of angels on the basis of an arbitrary time
limit since their last investment (Fiet 1995; Van Osnabrugge DEMO). Angels who have not
made an investment within a certain time period are deemed not to be angels and are
eliminated from further DEMO This also excludes angels who are holding
investments that were made previous to the arbitrarily determined time frame (Farrell
and Howorth 2002). It is also possible that serial or habitual angels who are between
investments DEMO be eliminated from studies because the future of their investment
activities cannot be known with certainty. It is acknowledged that angels who held
investments DEMO years previously may be inclined to forget details. However, if one DEMO to
support a broad deﬁnition, it seems more reasonable to include DEMO who are currently
holding investments and former angels. To the extent that accuracy of investment details is
paramount (rather than, say, cognition, DEMO, angel qualities or characteristics,
investee qualiﬁcations, product/market concerns, DEMO), older business angel investments
may be culled. This should not change the deﬁnition of an angel even for objectives
relating to accuracy.
(2) Debt. Secondly, the exclusion of angels on the basis of the DEMO of debt-type instruments
would seem to be in response to the private equity component of risk ﬁnance. Like formal
venture capitalists, however, informal DEMO capitalists often use convertible debt to
minimise their downside risk and maximise their upside risk. Convertible debt converts to
equity and is an important DEMO for an entrepreneur to acquire ﬁnance when the
entrepreneur is reluctant to relinquish straight equity. To exclude these angels on the basis
of the DEMO they use to structure their deals is not meaningful because it eliminates a
cohort that clearly operates within the realm of high risk, equity investing by individuals
who execute their investments with sophisticated methods.
(3) DEMO investors. Whether to include virgin angels (Stevenson and Coveney 1994;
DEMO, Moore, and Nahapiet 1996) appears to be an issue of DEMO numbers for
response rates. There seems little reason to include individuals who have not invested
simply because they may consider investing in the future. DEMO deﬁnition, they have not
made a personal investment in an unquoted DEMO, have never placed personal funds at risk,
and may never DEMO so.
(4) Corporate angels. The inclusion of corporate angels may also be motivated by a desire
to achieve greater study response rates. Some DEMO angels with incorporated companies
use their ﬁrms to make the investments rather than from their personal funds. This reduces
their personal risk. It is DEMO for the researcher to assess which of the corporations
represent the interests of a large body of shareholders (which would arguably not be an
angel investment) from the corporations controlled by a private individual who is in
essence reinvesting his/her own funds.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
340 E. Farrell et al.
(5) and (6) Family and DEMO The last two deﬁnitional issues explore the personal
relationship between angels and investees, particularly as they relate to family and
friends. Although these angels represent two diﬀerent groups, they are almost
always mentioned together. Riding (DEMO, 1) speciﬁcally addresses this issue
‘ . . . deﬁnitional problems persist. For example, investments in businesses owned by
friends and family (DEMO money’’) is in some research included as part of what is DEMO
by ‘‘informal investment’’ and, in other research, is excluded from the deﬁnition’.
Although some deﬁnitions speciﬁcally include family and friends (Harr, Starr, and
MacMillan 1988; Lumme, Mason, and Suomi 1996), other studies exclude them
(Seymour and Wetzel 1981). Reitan and Sørheim (2000) deﬁne investments by family
and friends as being outside the deﬁnition of DEMO investors, which contradicts the
clear deﬁnition proposed by Carpentier and Suret (2007). In the micro-investor work by
Maula, Autio, and Arenius (2005), only 11.6% of the qualiﬁed respondents were
strangers. The other DEMO categories were close family, other relatives, work
colleagues, and friends DEMO neighbours.
Surprisingly, of those studies that frown upon the inclusion of DEMO and friends,
almost none report the incidence of friends or family that have been excluded from the
sample of respondents. Thus, while some scholars shun the investments by family and
friends in practice, they rarely note the proportion of respondents that have been excluded
from the analysis DEMO these reasons. The notable exceptions are Gaston (1989), Bygrave
et DEMO (2002) and Farrell (1998, 2000a) who report the family DEMO, with the latter noting
the exclusion of family investments from the DEMO
Whether or not to include these angels’ investments raises three issues particularly: (1)
What are the merits or the problems of including DEMO and friends who make private
equity investments; (2) Has their DEMO been measured in studies (where it has not been
reported) or have previous studies assumed there was no family or friend connection; and
(3) Though family distinctions are relatively easy to ascertain, friendship is a more diﬃcult
concept to isolate.
(1) The reason for excluding DEMO and friend-type investors has received little
attention. It is possible that researchers interested in informal venture capital
expect family and friend-based investments to represent DEMO that are smaller than
those preferred for study. However no one has speciﬁed what size of investment is
worthy of study. There may be DEMO complementarity associated with small sums of
private equity to be followed by larger sums from more arm’s length investors.
Such a relationship between the DEMO cohorts would be valuable to know, were it so.
If there DEMO an argument to be made for excluding family- and friend-based angels
from study, the resulting analysis could be based on the investment as the unit of
study rather than the investor2 since some angels would have DEMO both arm’s
length- and family- (or friend-) based investments. Excluding family or friend
investors could exclude arm’s length investors for those who have DEMO variety of
investees.
(2) Scholars who exclude family or friends from their deﬁnition might be expected to
report the proportion of angels excluded DEMO their studies because they fell into
either of these categories. However, DEMO is not common practice and there is little
reporting of the incidence of these cohorts. It is argued that a quality that is
important DEMO to disqualify a respondent in theory should be measured in
practice. Furthermore, it would be easy for studies to include simple qualifying
questions to distinguish between such groups during analysis.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital 341
One reason that the incidence of family and friends DEMO not be measured is that
the sampling methods used are expected to preclude them. As mentioned earlier,
many studies rely on BISs or DEMO as samples of convenience because of the
diﬃculties of sampling from the population. BANs and BISs foster investments
between strangers because of the manner DEMO which deal ﬂow takes place. BANs and
BISs provide visible entities for entrepreneurs to approach (rather than
approaching individuals), and some BIS and BAN staﬀ vet opportunities before
introducing them to members. Both of these DEMO reduce the likelihood that the
entrepreneurs would be known by, or DEMO to, the member/subscriber angels.
(3) A further reason that DEMO may not report the incidence of family and friends is
the diﬃculty in teasing out the issue of ‘friends’. A simple qualifying question can
DEMO a family relationship, but distinguishing friends is considerably more
diﬃcult. Take DEMO temporal issue alone. Since investees may become friends during
or after the investment, identifying the nature of the relationship pre- and post-
investment may be subject to bias. Furthermore, there is no clear boundary
between, DEMO example, an acquaintance and a friend. How many social occasions
constitute DEMO friendship? Is a business acquaintance a friend? How do we deﬁne
‘friend’ in practice? The use of BANs and BISs as sampling methodologies reduces
the expectation that family and friends will be part of the DEMO frame.
Delineating these issues highlights the heterogeneity of business angels, as DEMO
pointed out by Gaston (1989) whose work contained many cohorts of angels and was a
probability sample drawn from a population of 240,DEMO US businesses. On the other hand,
deﬁning angels narrowly by including virgin angels, excluding family and friends, using
only equity instruments, and using respondents who have only made recent investments,
tolerates the conditions DEMO BANs, BISs and convenience samples. The more narrowly one
deﬁnes a DEMO angel, the easier it becomes to use membership lists, snowball samples
and known individuals to accommodate a sample. Convenience sampling is easier to
DEMO so researchers settle for narrowly deﬁned populations eschewing breadth and
representativeness.
Deﬁnitions that are very narrowly prescribed produce small, speciﬁc, highly focused
studies DEMO can result in fundamental diﬀerences in ﬁndings compared to large, broad-
DEMO studies (Cooper and Dunkelberg 1987). Cooper and Dunkelberg (1987) DEMO that
broad-based studies are particularly important where scholars attempt to extrapolate
ﬁndings to identify general principles for theory and policy development. A broad-based
study DEMO employ a small number of questions to test for diﬀerences between sub-groups
of business angels, based on, for example, intention to re-invest, DEMO of the investment,
investee relationships and debt. Such questions would provide cohort comparisons that
oﬀer insights not possible with narrowly deﬁned samples, furthering research that
highlights heterogeneity deepens analysis, creates insights and improves transparency for
the discipline.
Biases arising from sampling and deﬁnitional concerns
The variety of DEMO (professional, entrepreneurial, managerial), investment
preferences (high tech, manufacturing, business services), investment activities, compe-
tencies and motives (wealth maximisation, income generation, fun and excitement) point
to the heterogeneity of angels, and Freear, Sohl, and Wetzel (1994, 109) debunk the notion
that angels’ traits are ‘tightly clustered around the norm’. It is reasoned DEMO knowledge of
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
342
E. Farrell et al.
these diﬀerences can be used to target DEMO angels in order to locate them (Coveney,
Moore, and Nahapiet 1996).
A number of taxonomies have resulted. For example, Gaston’s (DEMO) taxonomy of 10
types of US angels and Stevenson and Coveney’s (1994) six types of angels were loosely
based on the angels’ wealth, investment amounts, investment frequency, motives and the
geographic area where they preferred to invest. Sullivan (1996) developed a four-category
typology based primarily DEMO the nature of business angels’ deal generation behaviours,
speciﬁcally their referring and due diligence preferences.
Sørheim and Landstrom (2001) developed a four-part DEMO using relative
amounts of investment activity and competence. Their inferences about practices that
constitute ‘real’ angel investing preclude some angel categories, which seems presump-
tuous. As a young ﬁeld of research, the identiﬁcation of meaningful dissimilarities among
angels should not exclude participants. Rather, the ﬁeld is better served by inductive
methods of deﬁnition, whereby angels are classiﬁed by the nature of their activities rather
than scholarly prescribed judgements. Van Osnabrugge (1998b), Kelly and Hay (1996) and
Farrell (2005) based typologies on DEMO investment frequencies. Farrell (2005) further
reﬁned novice and habitual angels with respect to the concurrence of their investment
practices, identifying signiﬁcant diﬀerences between their deal generation and cognitive
patterns, as well as success rates.
Observed variations highlight the importance of deﬁnition and sampling issues because
diﬀerent sampling DEMO systematically select and de-select diﬀerent cohorts of
the informal venture capital population. Much of what we currently know about informal
venture capitalists rests on DEMO which has been determined using convenience
samples. Only a small number of studies have used broad-based sampling methodologies
based on business or adult populations. DEMO concerning development is further
exacerbated by a trend to studying angels only involved in BISs and BANs. The fact
that – more than 25 DEMO on – investigation of the least understood element of capital
markets (DEMO and Sommer 2002) rests on the use of convenience samples is DEMO
Attempts to justify these methods do not advance the reputation of the ﬁeld. Researchers
cannot rely on the early and most oft-repeated justiﬁcation of DEMO convenience sample,
Wetzel’s (1983a) reference to the ‘unknowable population’.
We would question to what extent the criteria that deﬁne an angel are DEMO to
justify the sampling methods used. Mason and Harrison (2002) advocate reporting the
various biases inherent in sampling methods as a necessary recourse DEMO scholars of
convenience samples. However, to date, an assessment of these biases has yet to be
discussed in any meaningful detail and the DEMO biases of deﬁnitions created narrowly
to accommodate sampling methods are unknown. This section speculates about the
potential biases inherent in a variety of common DEMO methods. Summaries of the
sample method, missing sub-sectors and possible biases DEMO outlined in Table 2, along with
the relative ease and/or DEMO of each method. This section concludes with a recommended
sampling methodology that allows for a broad deﬁnition, fewer biases and increased
representativeness.
Business introduction services
BISs provide services for both capital-seeking entrepreneurs and subscription-holding
angels. These DEMO may include business plan assistance, presentation skills and support
for entrepreneurs, forums and professional development for angels, matchmaking services
and/or some form of introduction between the two. Angel subscription-holders often pay
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March DEMO
Table 2. Estimated biases of population deﬁnitions and sampling methodologies.
Population and sampling method Sub-sectors missing Ease/diﬃculty of data retrieval Relative cost*
Securities DEMO Seed capital and nascent angels Variety of regulators to deal with Moderate
Geographic areas which are Non-standard records
self-executing
Friends Requires regulators’ support
Family
DEMO associates
Angels in venture not registered by
governments
Angels not seeking professional
advice Women
Business angel networks Anyone who has not been selected by DEMO easy if using venture Inexpensive
group elite capital guides or known associates
Inexperienced ﬁnancial players
Unsophisticated angels
Non-syndicating angels Women
Business introduction services Less DEMO angels Relatively easy given presence of such Inexpensive
Angels who are not exposed to BIS services BIS may want to distribute
services Angels focusing DEMO smaller surveys for researcher
deals
Friends
Family
Random sample of general Should reasonably cover all angels Random dial generation equipment Extremely expensive
population given DEMO screening and and large samples make this
research design method diﬃcult
Lists, associations, and Angels investing in very young Relatively easy given cooperation DEMO Inexpensive (list procured free)
databases companies data owners or very DEMO (purchased)
Angels investing in companies that
have not survived
Principals DEMO registry records Those making very small invest- Information is often public though Inexpensive to moderate
ments, or Who do not prefer the retrieval methods may vary
responsibility
Note: *Relative costs are estimates based on the time and eﬀort required to: acquire approval to use data; actually receive DEMO data; pay for the data; accommodate for various
storage and retrieval methods of diﬀering districts, departments or agencies; develop common data system DEMO transposing it into useful code for the survey design.
Venture Capital
343
344
E. Farrell et al.
a fee and may be experienced or DEMO angels. New ventures are presented to angels in the
form of written summaries (or bulletins) sometimes prepared by the service organisers, or
personal introductions where entrepreneurs make a ‘pitch’ to subscribers. Similar services,
called DEMO, prepare a programme of entrepreneurial talent and invite angels. Some BISs
DEMO funded by governments, others are non-proﬁt and some are proﬁt-oriented (Harrison
and Mason 1996). Some have paid staﬀ who are non-investors. For DEMO, the
convenience of BISs is compelling. Business introduction services have been DEMO primary
source of angels for many studies (Stevenson and Coveney 1994; Coveney, Moore, and
Nahapiet 1996; Kelly 2000) and part of DEMO overall sample for others (Harrison and Mason
1992). The relative DEMO of using BIS memberships as a population would be substantial
as there is no expensive discovery process.
BISs will only appeal to particular types DEMO investors who are likely to be diﬀerent from
non-BIS angels in attitudes and geography. Studies conducted using BIS members are
likely to exclude cohorts DEMO want to conduct their own search, those who are
geographically situated DEMO as not to be able to take advantage of some of the services, and
those who believe such services to be crutches propping up poor entrepreneurial talent. If
introductions are a service of the BIS, investees who are known to angels, or who are
family and/or friends, may be under-represented. To the extent that social events are
involved, DEMO groups and women may be under-represented. The under-representa-
tion of women has been borne out in US results where ‘women are more likely to DEMO
(business angel) groups with a signiﬁcant number of women members’, DEMO the proportion
of such groups is very small (Sohl and Hill DEMO, 212). Research with angels who have
never been BIS members DEMO produce diﬀerent results from research with those who have
been members (DEMO, Whittam, and Johnston 2003).
Business angel networks
Business angel networks are self-formed groups of like-minded individuals who actively
seek proposals with one DEMO, but may not take on the formal vetting or provision of
DEMO services like that of BISs. BANs are jointly managed by the small number
of participating angels in either a cooperative or a limited partnership-type DEMO One or
two members may vet proposals and pass them along to others (Wetzel 1983b). Angel
networks select members based on close personal friendship (Wetzel 1983b), background
experience, ability to get along, and/or availability of time and location (Mason and
Harrison 1995). Most of these angels are ﬁnancially sophisticated and an initiation fee
pays for DEMO and incidentals regardless of investment (Wetzel 1983b; Mason and
Harrison 1995). Angel networks may advertise to solicit deals, may include angels who
have actively and publicly sought proposals on their own, and may represent the
wealthiest of angels since they are self-identiﬁed and self-formed. Case studies DEMO angel
networks and sampling studies where angel networks have been featured include
Massachusetts (Wetzel 1983b) and Texas (Fiet 1991). A research design using angel
networks is cost eﬀective and practical since ﬁnding one angel DEMO the other members
of the group once the network is identiﬁed. Thus, a number of individuals may be
contacted with little eﬀort.
There is no claim to representativeness when using angel networks or syndicated angels
as DEMO source of research data. Research using angels who are members of networks may
produce diﬀerent results from that of other samples (Paul, Whittam, and Johnston 2003).
The obvious self-selection and personal bonds produce a DEMO of individuals who
are likely to be very similar to one another. A sample using angel networks may be
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
345
over-representative of very wealthy angels, habitual angels, men, or those who adopt a
syndication mentality depending on the nature of DEMO network. A sample using angel
networks may under-represent cohorts or angels who prefer to invest alone, or who are not
inclined towards investment clubs, or who are not well known to others such as ﬁrst-time
angels. If angels are recruited or invited to join the network, or if the network is an
investment vehicle of a group of friends, minority groups and women may be under-
represented.
Survey of general population of DEMO
For an invisible population that comprises a range of qualities yet to be fully understood,
one method of producing a representative sample is DEMO randomly sample the adult
population over a large geographic area. The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (Bygrave
et al. 2002) is a multi-country, population-wide survey of entrepreneurship that included a
small number of survey questions about informal DEMO behaviour (and showed an
incidence of angel investing that is pervasive DEMO the population). A random dial of the
adult population should produce generalisable results since the adult population of the
participating countries is known. DEMO, the magnitude and expense of this undertaking
makes it a rare DEMO The cost of being part of the GEM study is estimated at
approximately CDN $75,000 per annum. The combined eﬀorts of more than DEMO scholars
and dozens of countries participating throughout the world contribute to amortising the
costs for any one country. To generate a sample for angel DEMO using a similar
method, even in one country, is almost prohibitive.3
Expense aside, however, this methodology is not without problems. There are DEMO
concerning surveying households and the techniques needed to ensure every person has an
equal chance of being selected. Parameters that are thought to be DEMO than 2% or 3% of
the sample frame (which appears to DEMO the case for angels sampled from the general
population of adults) DEMO additional diﬃculties (Deming 1966). Statistically, for studies
where populations exceed 500,000, a representative sample size of 2009 persons will give a
reliability +2% and a 95% conﬁdence level for parameters assumed to exist DEMO less than
30% of the population (Zikmund 1986). If the DEMO associated with general
population studies can be negotiated, this method has DEMO most merit to produce a broad
array of angels with the fewest missing cohorts.
Membership lists (governments, research ﬁrms or economic development agencies)DEMO
Some studies use lists of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) (DEMO 1987; Gaston
1989; Sullivan and Miller 1990) to identify angels. DEMO include membership or mailing
lists from boards of trade, chambers of DEMO, regional economic development
associations, or those for sale from professional research ﬁrms. Some studies use lists in a
non-random fashion (Wetzel 1981; DEMO and Krasner 1983; Landstrom 1993) and others
sample from speciﬁc industries or sectors such as new technology-based ﬁrms (Freear,
Sohl, and DEMO 1990; Madill, Haines, and Riding 2005), or gender or DEMO groups
(Amatucci and Sohl 2004). The costs of surveys that DEMO angels in these ways are likely
to be low to moderate depending on whether the lists were purchased and from whom.
When working with DEMO of SMEs, a number of problems emerge including (1)
the tendency for standardised databases to be biased towards successful ﬁrms, which is
related to the age of the databases; (2) the veracity of database information; and (3)
persistently poor non-response rates. Established database DEMO have a survivor bias as
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] DEMO: 19:11 23 March 2009
346
E. Farrell et al.
they include ﬁrms that have survived longer, and unintentionally cull less successful ﬁrms
(Aldrich et al. 1989). SMEs are often used as surrogates for entrepreneurial ﬁrms, yet small
ﬁrms are not necessarily entrepreneurial and may have little or no need for the DEMO
capital provided by angels.
Many sampling and representativeness issues arise as a result of incomplete, incorrect,
stale or biased databases and lists (DEMO et al. 1995). For example, in one study,
signiﬁcant DEMO of new companies were not listed within Dun & Bradstreet ﬁles. Later,
it was found that a substantial percentage of ﬁrms reported as DEMO gone out of business
by Dun & Bradstreet were not only still in business, but were at the same address and
phone number as reported in Dun & Bradstreet’s records from ﬁve years earlier (Williams
1993). Aldrich et al. (1989) found that Dun’s Market Indicator ﬁles DEMO not represent as
many as 90% of new businesses. US state employment insurance ﬁles only apply to
companies that have a payroll so therefore DEMO not include companies without employees.
Searching for angels using such lists exacerbates already existing problems.
Another criticism regarding the use of mailing lists of DEMO is low response rates
(Mason and Harrison 2001) that are sharply declining. In multi-stage sampling designs
such as Aram’s (1987) and Gaston DEMO Bell’s (1988) US investigations, large numbers of
postal requests returned DEMO small numbers of ﬁrms and angels identiﬁed (200 out of
20,DEMO and 551 out of 240,000 respectively). The second stages produce better results (68 of
200 and 551 of 2900 respectively). Presenting some non-response data would have
improved the reporting of systematic error. Aram (1987) does not report any non-response
biases for the central and Great Lakes region study which would have been possible with
two waves of DEMO and up to as many as four phone calls to respondents. Gaston and
Bell (1988), in non-response tests (n ¼ 20), DEMO one signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the
original sample and the non-response sample (DEMO to increased proportions of
investments in start-up-stage investees).
Sampling frames using these lists are likely to produce cohorts of angels who have
invested DEMO older and more successful ﬁrms. Mailing lists, government lists, development
agency lists and lists for sale are likely to exclude cohorts of angels DEMO by having
invested in very young ﬁrms, angels that have invested DEMO ﬁrms that have gone out of
business, and angels that have DEMO in ﬁrms that are entrepreneurial or growth
oriented, but not necessarily DEMO Generalisation from samples originating from mailing
lists devoted to speciﬁc industries such as high tech ﬁrms or technology oriented ﬁrms is
limited to those DEMO
Securities regulators’ records
Securities regulators have requirements for some equity-issuances whereby their records
may be a useful source for study (Carpentier and Suret 2007). In Canada, for example,
private equity exemptions exempt some ventures from the costly necessity of developing a
prospectus when attempting to raise DEMO equity. These exemptions are held by
provincially operated securities commissions which reﬂect economic and policy interests in
each region, and vary on geo-political bases. Another example is a tax incentive oﬀered to
those who invest in DEMO entrepreneurial ventures. Provincial/state tax records contain
information about the nature of the investment of informal investors in order to calculate
angels’ taxes.4 Acquiring DEMO to these records may be diﬃcult for the scholar, and the
DEMO of non-uniform storage and retrieval may make this method more expensive in
labour and time in gaining access, cleaning and coding the data. Even with bureaucratic
support, the information can be diﬃcult to access. By way of example, one of the authors
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
347
had favourable discussions with several people in a tax DEMO department,
acquired verbal support from the records’ administrator, and received DEMO feedback
from a senior politician who later became minister of the same department. Despite all this
agreeableness, access to the tax incentive data was never acquired.
Angels that may be over-represented in this group are angels DEMO tax incentives,
and those using lawyers, accountants and other professionals. DEMO sizes may be
skewed by the nature of the tax advantage oﬀered. Cohorts of angels missing from this
sample could include earnest or eager DEMO who have invested at a more informal level
(regardless of compliance DEMO securities laws), angels in young start-ups and nascent ﬁrms,
angels who are less well versed in tax and securities regulations, and angels who have
invested in entrepreneurial ventures that have yet to comply with DEMO legislation.
Some exemptions may exclude angels who are friends, family and DEMO business
associates. Other cohorts of angels missing from such a sample frame may include angels
who are unaware of federal/provincial tax incentives that DEMO from a bias against the use
of professionals in their investment dealings (lawyers and accountants who may be
familiar with the legislation and incentives). First time angels might also be missing since
virgin angels, in Britain at least, are less motivated by tax incentives (Stevenson and
DEMO 1994). More likely, however, would be the tendency for the methodology to not
reﬂect angels who have invested in ventures that were DEMO de-selected by the
registration requirements of the legislation.
Business registration records
A sample selection method that attempts to reach a broad array of angels DEMO way of the
ﬁrm is the cadre of registrations of incorporations, DEMO and sole proprietorships
overseen by provincial regulators in Canada, the Secretaries DEMO State in the US, and by
Companies House in the UK. DEMO registries provide speciﬁc details about all legally
operating companies. In the UK and Canada, the names and addresses of principals
(directors, angels’ oﬃcers, proprietors and partners) are publicly available.5 In Canada,
it is DEMO the home address of the principal that is supplied. Using this sampling
methodology, companies can be sampled from a known population of new registrations,
which are publicly and speedily available – sometimes within weeks. Individual
DEMO can be sampled from these records and a survey design can identify those
who are angels.
This methodology reduces many of the problems associated DEMO (1) unknowable
populations; (2) survival biases; (3) geographic areas where no formal networks exist; and
(4) biases introduced by gate-keeping entrepreneurs. First, incorporated companies are
required to register with the noted government registrars in order to become a legal entity,
and sole DEMO and partnerships register in order to conduct business. These
records provide a known, and accurate, population of legally operating businesses that is
defendable DEMO deﬁnition. There are no substantial incorporation barriers between large
and small ﬁrms in a variety of countries.6 The fees associated with incorporation range
from DEMO to US$200 (in the UK, Canada and the US). There are no minimum equity
requirements for new incorporations so there are no (equity) size requirements inhibiting
incorporation. All businesses registered during a speciﬁed period can become part of the
sampling frame for a random sample. Suﬃciently DEMO random samples taken from a
known and complete population of businesses reduces (or eliminates) sampling error
(Zikmund 1986). Much of this information (at least in the UK and Canada) is Internet-
based. Because DEMO distributions are part of the entrepreneurial–angel contract,
Downloaded By: [Canadian DEMO Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
348
E. Farrell et al.
surveying incorporated companies may be the most DEMO population strata if
scholars are attempting to reﬁne their samples to identify and study angels.
Second, new business registration databases are more current than Statistics Canada
reports, Dun & Bradstreet listings, business directories and phone DEMO, thus reducing
the previously noted survival biases. The registrars keep records DEMO young and old ﬁrms
regardless of their state of business activities. If young ﬁrms are essential to the
research, samples of companies as young as two or three months old are possible. The
opposite objective is DEMO possible if older ﬁrms are desired. Alternatively, the business
registrations database DEMO provide a cross-section of ﬁrms of any age because ﬁrms no
longer in business are not deleted from the record – even if they DEMO decertiﬁed. Old
company’s registrations are available whether the ﬁrms are still conducting business or
not.7 In entrepreneurship studies, unintentionally culling unsuccessful ﬁrms results in
bias towards studying ﬁrms with particular strengths at speciﬁc periods in their
DEMO life cycle. For example, though most start-ups will be by nimble DEMO,
most research will focus on later-stage ﬁrms that have become large and successful with
time. Research meant to focus on the former unintentionally DEMO the latter
(Kalleberg et al. 1990).
If desired, research designs can ascertain the trade-oﬀ between the presence of
survival bias and the DEMO of identifying early and mid-stage investing angels. For
example, very young DEMO may exclude angels who participate in follow-on
investments or who invest in later-stage ﬁrms whereas a sample of older ﬁrms may
include both early- DEMO later-stage investing angels. Both young and old samples,
however, can DEMO accessed by selecting records from diﬀering time periods. Furthermore,
because registration is compulsory for conducting business and for incorporation, there
is little problem with stale, incorrect or missing data and new ﬁrms are added to the
database as they are registered and are often publicly available within DEMO of being
registered.
Thirdly, locating angels using business registration databases also DEMO adequate
research possibilities for regions and locales that do not have any BANs or BISs. Lastly,
the ability to contact directors directly (in the case of the UK and Canada) eliminates the
extra step involved by attempting to locate angels via the entrepreneurs.
There is one cohort DEMO would be systematically de-selected using this method – those
angels who have not chosen to be listed as a principal. If their names are DEMO in the ﬁrms’
registration records, researchers may not be able to DEMO them directly. This group may
be small; 89.5% of Canadian angels DEMO their intention to serve on the board of
directors, or be DEMO to their investees (Riding et al. 1993), but these results DEMO
concluded from a study that was conducted using snowball convenience samples and
therefore may not be accurate. Bureaucrats in eastern Canada discern anecdotally that DEMO
proportion of angels who do not wish to be directors is large, citing litigious concerns as
grounds for this preference. Perhaps informal venture capital investors operating in small
sums may not have the ﬁnancial incentive or DEMO to insure their investment and
therefore may be less likely to be listed as a principal in the registry.8 Nonetheless, those
who do not choose to act as a principal represent a distinct (and interesting) DEMO since
the nature of their investment motivations – and certainly their governance methods –
would be expected to diﬀer.
Next to the survey of DEMO adult population which is prohibitively expensive, the business
registration method produces DEMO fewest systematically de-selected cohorts of business
angels. Thus, such a sample DEMO method should improve the samples’
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] DEMO: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
349
representativeness and our understanding of overall angel activity. Rather DEMO studying
pockets and small cohorts that cannot be compared with other studies, a broad array of
informal venture capital investors are sampled from a known population which can be
accessed (repeatedly if necessary) and generalisations DEMO
Discussion and implications
It has been noted that ‘the ratio of understanding of the angel capital market to its impact
on the economy is DEMO than just about any other economic contributor’ (Baty and
Sommer 2002, 289). It is argued here that a broader deﬁnition of angel DEMO and
improved methodological sampling processes will increase representativeness and improve
the robustness and generalisability of research ﬁndings. Fewer cohorts of angels will be
systematically DEMO and better comparisons of various types of informal investor
cohorts can be undertaken.
It is proposed that an all-embracing, inclusive deﬁnition be used in order to capture
the essence of informal venture capital investing. A business DEMO/informal venture
capital investor/individual private equity investor should be deﬁned as an individual,
non-professional, debt/equity investor (not lender) investing their own funds in unquoted
ﬁrm/s in which they are not the DEMO A small number of qualifying questions can
capture the nuances of the various cohorts of interest to the investigators, should
researchers wish to break this down into more narrowly deﬁned groups.
The requirement to study a DEMO of business angels is necessary in order to capture
the depth and breadth of this category of capital. The purpose should be to acknowledge
DEMO study all types of business angels in the same way that we diﬀerentiate between
entrepreneurs, e.g. founders, franchisees, inheritors, or serial, novice and portfolio
entrepreneurs, and between formal venture capital formations e.g. public, DEMO, labour-
sponsored, captive, independent, early-stage and expansionary-stage.
The business registration sampling method is proposed to have the greatest
representative qualities and methodological DEMO to advance the ﬁeld of informal
venture capital investment (general population DEMO aside). All research should
present the biases inherent in a sample and researchers should consistently disclose the
sample source(s), and any DEMO characteristics of the source(s) (Murphy 2002). This
will allow apparently contradictory ﬁndings to be understood. Because small
populations that are sampled DEMO do not support the development of theory
or policy, practitioners and DEMO makers are cautioned from making too much of the
empirical observations from studies using biased samples (Aldrich et al. 1989). In other
disciplines, entrepreneurship for example, strong biases that appear as a result of
DEMO source biases have hampered theoretical and empirical advances (Murphy
2002).
DEMO work may investigate to what degree studies are aﬀected by the inclusion of
family angels, angels who are friends, and non-networked angels. Failure DEMO report family
and friend relationships implies that all the investments are at arm’s length, which is not
the case. In cases where business angels have made arm’s length investments and family
investments, the investment may form the unit of study, rather than the investor.9 Trust,
family stories, friendly encounters and how angels search for deals, represent central
dimensions DEMO scholars to understand and assess the various types of private equity
capital placement. Investment criteria, attitudes, behaviours and cognition would all be
expected DEMO diﬀer for various cohorts and thus represents the basis for future important
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March DEMO
350
E. Farrell et al.
contributions. For example, the deﬁnition of ‘fools’, commonly associated with family and
friends (Bygrave et al. 2002), DEMO become clear.
Other broad works could usefully investigate cohorts of networked versus non-networked
angels. These studies have the potential to identify diﬀerences in attitudes, behaviours and
characteristics between angels who choose to pay for entrepreneurial introduction DEMO
services and those who do not. Theoretically, we would expect their DEMO generation, due
diligence and governance to diﬀer from the population of DEMO as a whole. In addition, the
proportions of networked angels to DEMO angels may assist in the creation of
informal venture capital estimates. Recent interest about the access to equity by women
entrepreneurs (Becker-Blease and Sohl 2005; Harrison and Mason 2007), and the supply of
women angels (O’Gorman and Terjesen 2006) will be more usefully addressed by such
DEMO since there may be signiﬁcant biases against women joining BANs and BISs.
Clearly, business angel research has considerable potential and interest, but its DEMO
will be restricted if researchers do not address the sampling and deﬁnitional concerns
outlined in this paper. Policy makers and practitioners should also be DEMO of these issues
when they are assessing, interpreting and using the DEMO of research.
Notes
1. BISs are member organisations that have staﬀ who perform functions related to the
introduction of entrepreneurs and angels to each DEMO These functions may include helping
entrepreneurs prepare their materials or presentations, DEMO abbreviated materials for
angels, and vetting entrepreneurial candidates prior to introduction. DEMO can be government
supported in part or privately operated. BANs are collections of like-minded individuals who
meet at their own behest to vet entrepreneurial DEMO for possible investment. They are
not professionally run or sponsored. BANs may elect some of their colleagues to conduct
preliminary due diligence investigations before DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities to the
larger group.
2. We thank an anonymous reviewer for making this observation.
3. A workshop conducted by Industry Canada and DEMO Canadian Department of Finance
consulted with angel scholars about conducting a general population survey. The cost of such a
survey was estimated by Statistics DEMO, the data gathering branch of the Government of
Canada, to be at least CDN $1 million (US$1,040,000).
4. In regions where these are available, not all businesses started are eligible for the tax incentives
as certain restrictions apply and approvals are necessary.
5. In DEMO UK, company registrations are very transparent and are overseen by Companies DEMO
(www.companies-house.gov.uk/) which provides company registration information, ‘company
directors’ details’, DEMO document images for a monthly subscription fee (Company Information
at your DEMO 2003; 2006: Companies House Direct – UK Government). In the US,
Secretaries of State provide detailed company information, but a review of a small number of
highly populated states such as New York DEMO California did not produce any information
about directors of the ﬁrms.
6. The US, UK and Canada oﬀer same-day incorporation services given a small amount of
speciﬁc information. The US Secretaries of State and Canadian registrars DEMO not note any
minimum equity requirements for new private incorporations. Companies House, the UK
registrar, speciﬁes speciﬁcally that ‘no minimum share capital for DEMO limited companies’ is
required (www.companieshouse.gov.uk/about/gbhtml/gba6.shtml retrieved June 2, 2006).
7. In Canada, the companies’ original listings and ﬁles remain on record long after companies
have dissolved or have ceased paying for DEMO registration. Therefore, research designs of any
period, or age of ﬁrm, can be accommodated. However, the older the sample desired the more
DEMO survival biases will be. Even through the addresses and persons associated with the
company are still listed, their addresses and details may have subsequently changed.
8. This observation was proﬀered by an anonymous reviewer.
9. This DEMO was proﬀered by an anonymous reviewer.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
351
References
Aldrich, H., A. Kalleberg, P. Marsden, DEMO J. Cassell. 1989. In pursuit of evidence: Sampling
procedures for locating DEMO businesses. Journal of Business Venturing 4: 367–86.
Alreck, P.L., and DEMO Settle. 1995. The survey research handbook. Ed. Nina McGuﬃn. The Irwin
series in marketing. Chicago: Irwin.
Amatucci, F.M., and J.A. Sohl. 2004. Women entrepreneurs securing business angel ﬁnancing: Tales
from the ﬁeld. Venture Capital 6, nos. 2/3: 181–96.
Amit, R., L. Glosten, and E. Muller. 1993. Challenges to theory development in entrepreneurship
research. Journal of Management DEMO 30, no. 5: 815–34.
Aram, J.D. 1987. Informal risk capital DEMO the Eastern Great Lakes region. Washington, DC: US Small
Business Administration, Oﬃce of Advocacy.
———. 1989. Attitudes and behaviors of informal investors towards early stage investments,
technology-based ventures, and co-investors. Journal of Business Venturing 4: 333–47.
Baty, G., and B. Sommer. 2002. True then, DEMO now: A 40-year perspective on the early stage
investment market. Venture DEMO 4, no. 4: 289–93.
Becker-Blease, J.R., and J.A. Sohl. 2005. Angel capital and women-entrepreneurs. Paper presented
at the Babson College Entrepreneurship Research DEMO, June 9–11, Babson College,
Wellesley, MA.
Birley, S., DEMO Muzyka, C. Dove, and G. Rossell. 1995. Finding the high-ﬂying entrepreneurs: A
cautionary tale. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 19, no. 4: 105–11.
Brettel, M. 2003. Business angels in Germany: A research note. Venture DEMO 5, no. 3: 251–68.
Bygrave, W., M. Hay, E. DEMO, and P. Reynolds. 2002. A study of informal investing in 29
DEMO composing the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). In Frontiers of entre-
DEMO research, ed. W.D. Bygrave, C.G. Brush, P. Davidsson, J. Fiet, P.G. Greene, R.T.
Harrison, M. Lerner, G.D. Meyer, J. Sohl, and A. Zacharakis, 366–80. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Bygrave, W.D. 1989. The entrepreneurship paradigm (I): A philosophical look at its research
methodologies. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 14, no. 1: 7–25.
Carpentier, C., and J.-M. Suret. 2007. On the usefulness of tax incentives for informal investors.
Venture Capital 9, no. 1: 1–22.
Cooper, A.C., and DEMO Dunkelberg. 1987. Entrepreneurial research: Old questions, new answers
and methodological issues. American Journal of Small Business 2, no. 3: 11–23.
Coveney, P., K. Moore, and J. Nahapiet. 1996. Business angels: Tapping the potential of individual
investors in Britain. The Oxford Executive Research Brieﬁngs. Oxford: Templeton College.
Deming, W.E. 1966. Some theory of sampling. Toronto: Dover Publications.
DEMO, S.B., A.F. DeNoble, T. Moore, and R.R. Weaver. 1994. After the cash arrives: A
comparative study of venture capital and private investor involvement in entrepreneurial ﬁrms.
Journal of Business Venturing 9: 67–82.
Farrell, DEMO 1998. Informal venture capital investment in Atlantic Canada: A representative view DEMO
angels. Moncton, New Brunswick: Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency.
———. 2000a. Informal venture capital investment in Atlantic Canada: A year-2000 review. Moncton,
Canada: Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency.
———. 2000b. Literature review and industry analysis of informal investment in Canada: A research
agenda on angels. Ottawa: Industry DEMO
———. 2005. Motivations, behaviour and cognition of novice and habitual business DEMO
Doctoral thesis, University of Nottingham.
Farrell, E., and C. Howorth. DEMO Representativeness and overconﬁdence in novice and habitual
business angels. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, ed. W.D. Bygrave, C.G. Brush, P.
Davidsson, J.O. DEMO, P. Greene, R.T. Harrison, M. Lerner, D. Meyer, J. DEMO, and A.
Zacharakis, 381–92. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Fiet, DEMO 1991. Managing investments in speciﬁc information: A comparison of business angels DEMO
venture capital ﬁrms. Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings, 51st Annual DEMO,
August 11–14, Miami Beach, Florida.
———. 1995. Reliance upon informants in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business
Venturing 10: 195–223.
———. 1996. Fragmentation in the market for venture capital. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
DEMO, no. 5: 5–21.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
352
E. Farrell et al.
Freear, J., J.A. Sohl, and W.E. Wetzel. 1990. Raising venture capital: Entrepreneurs’ views
of the process. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, ed. N.C. Churchill, W.D. Bygrave,
J.A. Hornaday, D.F. Muzyka, K.F. Vesper, and W.E. Wetzel, 223–37. Wellesley: Babson
DEMO
———. 1994. Angels and non-angels: Are there diﬀerences. Journal of Business DEMO 9: 109–23.
Gartner, W.B., J.W. Carland, F. Hoy, and DEMO Carland. 1988. ‘Who is an entrepreneur?’ is the
wrong question. American Journal of Small Business 12, no. 4: 11–32.
Gaston, R.J. 1989. Finding private venture capital for your ﬁrm: A complete guide. New York: John
Wiley & Sons. (Orig. ed. HG 4963.G37 1989.)
Gaston, R.J., and S. Bell. 1988. The informal supply of capital. Washington, DEMO: US Small Business
Administration Oﬃce of Advocacy.
Harr, N.E., J. DEMO, and I.C. MacMillan. 1988. Informal risk capital investors: Investment patterns
on the east coast of the USA. Journal of Business Venturing 3: 11–29.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M. Mason. 1992. International perspectives on the supply DEMO informal venture
capital. Journal of Business Venturing 7: 459–75.
———, eds. 1996. Informal venture capital: Evaluating the impact of business introduction services.
London: Prentice Hall Woodhead-Faulkner.
———. 2007. Does gender matter? Women business angels DEMO the supply of entrepreneurial
ﬁnance. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31: 447–74.
DEMO, K., and L. Lee. 2002. An exploratory investigation of informal venture capitalists in
Singapore. Venture Capital 4, no. 2: 169–81.
Kalleberg, A.L., P.V. Marsden, H.E. Aldrich, and J.W. Cassell. 1990. Comparing organizational
sampling frames. Administrative Science Quarterly 35, no. 4: 658–88.
Kelly, P., DEMO M. Hay. 1996. Serial investors: An exploratory study. In Frontiers of DEMO
research, ed. P. Reynolds, S. Birley, J.E. Butler, W.D. Bygrave, P. Davidsson, W.B. Gartner, and
P.P. McDougall, 329–43. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Kelly, P.S. 2000. Private investors and entrepreneurs: How context shapes their relationship.
Doctoral dissertation, London Business School.
Landstrom, H. 1993. DEMO risk capital in Sweden and some international comparisons. Journal
of Business Venturing 8: 525–40.
Lerner, J. 1998. ‘Angel’ ﬁnancing and public policy: An overview. Journal of Banking and Finance 22,
nos. 6/8: 773–83.
Levy, P.S., and S. Lemeshow. 1999. Sampling of populations: Methods and applications. ed. R.M.
Groves, G. Kalton, J.N.K. Rao, N. Schwartz, DEMO Christopher Skinner. Wiley Series on
Probability and Statistics: Survey Methodology Section. DEMO: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Lindsay, N.J. 2004. Do business angels have an entrepreneurial orientation? Venture Capital 6,
nos. 2/3: DEMO
Lumme, A., C.M. Mason, and M. Suomi. 1996. The returns DEMO informal venture capital
investments: Some evidence from Finland. In Frontiers of DEMO research, ed. P.
Reynolds, S. Birley, J.E. Butler, W.D. Bygrave, P. Davidsson, W.B. Gartner, and P.P.
McDougall, 344–58. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Madill, J.J., G.H. Haines, and A.L. Riding. 2005. DEMO role of angels in technology SMEs: A link to
venture capital. DEMO Capital 7, no. 2: 107–30.
Mansson, N., and H. Landstrom. 2006. Business angels in a changing economy: The case of Sweden.
Venture Capital 8, no. 4: 281–301.
Mason, C.M., and R.T. Harrison. DEMO The informal venture capital market in the UK. In
Financing small ﬁrms, ed. A. Hughes, and D.J. Storey, 64–111. London: Routledge.
———. DEMO Why ‘business angels’ say no: A case study of opportunities rejected DEMO an informal
investor syndicate. International Small Business Journal 14, no. 2: 35–51.
———. 1997. Business angels in the UK: A response to Stevenson and Coveney. International Small
Business Journal 15, no. 2: 83–90.
———. DEMO An overview of informal venture capital research. Venture Capital 1, no. DEMO: 95–100.
———. 2001. The size of the informal venture capital market DEMO the United Kingdom. Small Business
Economics 15, no. 2: 137–48.
———. 2002. Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal venture capital investments. Journal of
Business Venturing 17, no. 3: 211–36.
Maula, M., E. Autio, and P. Arenius. 2005. What drives micro-angel investments? Small Business
Economics 25, no. 5: 459–75.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
353
Murphy, G.B. 2002. The eﬀects of organizational sampling frame selection. Journal of Business
Venturing 17: 237–52.
O’Gorman, C., and S. Terjesen. 2006. Financing the Celtic tigress: Venture ﬁnancing and informal
investment in Ireland. Venture Capital 8, no. 1: 69–88.
Paul, S., G. DEMO, and J.B. Johnston. 2003. The operation of the informal venture capital DEMO
in Scotland. Venture Capital 5, no. 4: 313–35.
Reitan, B., and R. Sørheim. 2000. The informal venture capital market in Norway – DEMO
characteristics, behaviour and investment preferences. Venture Capital 2, no. 2: DEMO
Riding, A. 2005. Estimating informal investment in Canada. Ottawa: Industry Canada, Small
Business Policy Branch.
Riding, A., P.D. Cin, L. Duxbury, G. Haines, and R. Safrata. 1993. Informal investors in Canada:
The identiﬁcation of salient characteristics. Ottawa: Federal Department of Industry. Science and
Technology Canada and Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of the Province of
DEMO
San Jose, A., J. Roure, and R. Aernoudt. 2005. Business DEMO academies: Unleashing the potential
for business angel investment. Venture Capital 7, no. 2: 149–65.
Sexton, D.L. 1987. Advancing small business research: Utilizing research from other areas. American
Journal of Small Business 11: 25–30.
Seymour, C.R., and W.E. Wetzel. 1981. Informal risk capital in New England. DEMO, DC:
United States Small Business Association, Oﬃce of Advocacy.
Sohl, J.A., and L. Hill. 2007. Women business angels: Insights from angel groups. Venture Capital 9,
no. 3: 207–22.
Sørheim, R., and H. Landstrom. 2001. Informal investors: A categorization with policy implications.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 13, no. 4: 351–70.
Stedler, H.R., and H.H. DEMO 2003. Business angels in Germany: An empirical study. Venture
Capital 5, no. 3: 269–76.
Stevenson, H., and P. Coveney. 1994. Survey of business angels. Henley on Thames: Venture Capital
Report Ltd.
Sullivan, M.K. DEMO Local networks and informal venture capital in Tennessee. In Informal venture
capital: Evaluating the impact of business introduction services, ed. R.T. Harrison, and C.M.
Mason, 89–100. Hemel, Hempstead: Woodhead-Faulkner.
Sullivan, M.K., and A. Miller. 1990. Applying theory of ﬁnance to informal risk capital research:
DEMO and problems. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, ed. N.C. Churchill, W.D.
Bygrave, J.A. Hornaday, D.F. Muzyka, K.H. Vesper, and W.E. Wetzel, 296–310. Wellesley,
MA: Babson College.
Tymes, E.R., and O.J. Krasner. 1983. Informal risk capital in California. In Frontiers of
entrepreneurship research, ed. J.A. Hornaday, J.A. Timmons, and K.H. Vesper, 347–68.
Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Van Osnabrugge, M. 1998a. Do serial and non-serial investors behave diﬀerently: An empirical and
theoretical analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 22, DEMO 4: 23–42.
———. 1998b. Comparison of business angels and venture capitalists, ﬁnanciers of entrepreneurial
ﬁrms. Report, University of Oxford.
Westhead, P., and M. Wright. 1998. Novice, portfolio and serial founders: Are they diﬀerent?DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing 13: 173–204.
Wetzel, W.E. 1981. Informal risk capital in New England. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research,
ed. K.H. DEMO, 217–45. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
———. 1983a. Angels and informal DEMO capital. Sloan Management Review 24, no. 4: 23–34.
———. 1983b. Taplin & Montle Development Fund: A case study in ﬁnance. In Frontiers of
entrepreneurship research, ed. J.A. Hornaday, J.A. Timmons, and K.H. Vesper, DEMO
Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Williams, M.L. 1993. Measuring business starts, success and survival: Some database considerations.
Journal of Business Venturing 8: DEMO
Wiltbank, R., S. Read, S. Sarasvathy, and N. Dew. 2005. Prediction and control: Angel investing at
the individual level. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship research, ed. S.A. Zahara, C. Brush, P.
Davidsson, J.O. DEMO, P. Greene, R.T. Harrison, M. Lerner, C.M. Mason, D.A. DEMO, J.E.
Sohl, J. Wiklund, and M. Wright, 551–66. Wellesley, DEMO: Babson College.
Zikmund, W.G. 1986. Exploring marketing research. Toronto: Dryden DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:11 23 March 2009{1g42fwefx}