Equity and the Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
Author(s): Maryann Feldman, Irwin Feller, Janet Bercovitz, Richard Burton
Source: Management Science, Vol. 48, No. 1, Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and
Technology Transfer (Jan., 2002), pp. 105-121
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/822687
Accessed: 19/09/2010 11:DEMO
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not DEMO an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, DEMO you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/DEMO?publisherCode=informs.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page DEMO such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
DEMO in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about DEMO, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Management Science.
http://www.jstor.org
Equity
and
Strategies
Research
the
Technology
of American
Universities
Transfer
Department
The
DEMO
Maryann
Whiting School
of Economics,
Fuqua School
Fuqua School
Feldman * Irwin Feller * Janet
of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
DEMO State University, University Park,
of Business, Duke University, Durham,DEMO
of Business, Duke University, Durham,
maryann.feldman@jhu.edu *
iqf@psu.edu
Bercovitz * Richard
Burton
Maryland 21218
Pennsylvania 16802
North Carolina 27708
North Carolina 27708
DEMO janetb@duke.edu rmb2@mail.duke.edu
*
American universities are experimenting with new mechanisms for promoting the com-
mercialization of academic research and generating revenue from university intellectual
DEMO This paper discusses mechanisms available to universities in managing the com-
mercialization of intellectual property, considering equity as a technology transfer mechanism
that offers advantages for both generating revenue and aligning the interests of universities,
DEMO and faculty. Employing data from a national survey of Carnegie I and Carnegie
II institutions, we document the recent rise in university equity holdings. We present and
estimate a model that considers the university's use DEMO equity to be a function of behavioral
factors related to the university's prior experiences with licensing, success relative to other
institutions, and DEMO organization of the technology transfer office, as well as structural char-
DEMO related to university type.
(University-Industry Relationships; Equity Financing; Academic Patents; Licensing; Technology
Transfer)
Introduction
American universities are experimenting with new
mechanisms for promoting the commercialization of
academic research and generating revenues from uni-
DEMO intellectual property. The 20 years since the
passage of the Bayh-Dole Act have witnessed a search
to optimize, or, more pragmatically, to balance the
objectives of managing intellectual property rights,
developing new revenue sources, and accommodat-
ing faculty interests while simultaneously maintain-
ing norms related to DEMO conduct of academic research
and the dissemination of research findings. Based on
their own experiences with patent and licensing activ-
ities as well as DEMO lessons learned from the expe-
riences of other institutions, universities have DEMO
0025-1909/02/4801/0105$5.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN
mented with, and embraced, alternative mechanisms
of intellectual property transfer.
Equity positions in companies, as a payment for the
use of university intellectual property, are one emerg-
ing mechanism. Agreements in which a university
takes an equity interest in a DEMO in exchange
for providing the company the right to use university
intellectual property is becoming common.1 The Asso-
ciation of University Technology Managers (AUTM)
first reported on this trend in 1995. In 1999, 79 of
190 institutions responding to the AUTM survey had
This paper is not DEMO direct monetary investment in compa-
nies or investments in venture capital firms, some of which in turn
may invest in start-up firms based on university-based research
(Desruisseaux 2000).
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE ? 2002 INFORMS
Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 pp. 105-121
Equity
and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
DEMO American
Research
Universities
taken equity positions in 243 firms (AUTM 1999)DEMO Our
survey of research universities, conducted in Spring
2000 shows that DEMO was the earliest date reported
for an equity deal. By 1992, DEMO of our respondents
were taking equity in companies licensing their tech-
nology, and, in 2000, 70% had participated in at least
one equity deal (see Figure 1). While equity was ini-
tially conceived as a last resort means of accepted
payment reserved for cash-starved start-up firms, the
use of equity now extends to more established com-
panies as DEMO of a diversified compensation scheme.
The number of universities using equity licensing
transactions, coupled with the emergence of equity in
a more diversified set of bargaining situations, sug-
gests some strategic net advantages. By net advan-
tages, we mean comparisons of the costs and ben-
efits of equity positions relative to the costs and
benefits of alternative technology transfer revenue-
DEMO options. University technology transfer
operations have multiple objectives as determinants
of intellectual property strategy. Faculty retention,
closer university-industry linkages, enhanced uni-
versity prestige, and, more generally, enhanced and
accelerated technology transfer for the social and eco-
nomic benefit of the national or regional economy
are core DEMO named by university respondents
(Thursby et al. 2001). As no DEMO technology trans-
fer mechanism may ideally suit these multiple objec-
tives, DEMO are experimenting with different
mechanisms.
In this paper, we describe three DEMO to tak-
ing equity positions in lieu of licensing fees that inter-
viewees cited as important from the perspective of
the university. First, equity provides a university with
options or financial claims on a company's DEMO
income streams. The attractiveness of the option is
consistent with the uncertainty associated with the
technical and economic characteristics of academic
patents and with DEMO experience-based assessment
that the opportunity cost of foregone license and roy-
alty revenue is generally low. Second, equity deals,
in which the university becomes part owner of the
company, are reported by our interviewees to align
the interests of the university and the firm towards
the common DEMO of commercializing the technology.
Equity also may mitigate the potential for disputes
and litigation about intellectual property between the
university and the industry and DEMO potential for con-
flicts of interest that can arise if a faculty member
shifts loyalty away from the university and towards
the company developing DEMO intellectual property
(Jensen and Thursby 2001). Third, according to our
interviewees, equity may serve a certification func-
tion that provides a signal to relevant third parties.
From the perspective of the university, taking equity
may signal to the outside world that the university
is entrepreneurial. For DEMO firm, an equity deal may
signal to other investors that the DEMO has received a
valuable technology from the university and that the
university is confident in the value of technology that
Figure 1
More
Universities DEMO
Interests:
Year
of
Take
First
University
Equity
Deal
(n
= DEMO)
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
00 a
ct 0
0c a
a
,
0
l 0t
0
PreviousYears Year urrent
| Previous Years * Current
Year |
106
MANAGEMENT DEMO/Vol.
48, No. 1, January 2002
Equity
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
DEMO
American
Research
Universities
the firm holds. This may enhance the firm's ability to
receive additional funding.
Interviewees also noted the risks and negative
DEMO of taking equity besides those associated with
low or zero economic payoff. On many campuses,
the decision to take equity occurred only after DEMO
siderable debate about the propriety of extending the
university involvement in the commercialization of
academic knowledge into holding direct ownership
stakes in firms. Some DEMO saw equity holdings as
increasing the risk that the university might be held
liable or suffer from adverse publicity for product
defects. The claimed DEMO of improved alignment
with the interests of a firm was also seen as lend-
ing credence to charges that the university was losing
sight DEMO its traditional role as a generator of knowl-
edge as a public good and as an independent societal
source of expertise on complex scientific DEMO tech-
nical issues. The following discussion of the relative
attractiveness of equity and licensing as compensation
mechanisms abstracts from these considerations.
Cataloguing the pros DEMO cons of alternative mech-
anisms, however, is essentially a static task. Technol-
ogy transfer officials expressed many of these same
assessments about the DEMO attractiveness of equity
and licensing in the mid-1980s (Feller 1990). DEMO,
however, entered into equity arrangements at that
time. Drawing on DEMO from a survey of Carnegie I
and II research universities, we DEMO a set of find-
ings about the spread of equity holdings among
universities and the patterns that exist among uni-
versities in their willingness DEMO use the equity mech-
anism. The conceptual model we develop treats the
move to equity as an adaptation to the problems
and inadequacies of DEMO licensing agreements.
Our inquiry is cast in terms of a model of institu-
tional change and adaptation conditioned by learning
and the diffusion of DEMO practices, and organizational
incentives and behavior.
Why Equity Has Emerged As DEMO
Technology Transfer Mechanism
The provisions of the Bayh-Dole Act established uni-
versities' property rights over federally funded inven-
tions and encouraged universities to actively promote
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol.
48, No. 1, January 2002
the transfer DEMO those inventions to commercial use.
The initial university response was to create tech-
nology transfer offices to secure intellectual property
rights through patents, and endeavor to sell rights
to use those patents to firms. Three patterns DEMO
emerged. First, the number of patents received by uni-
versities increased DEMO the point where 3,151 patents-
5%, of the U.S. total DEMO in 1998-were granted
to universities. Second, the number of universities
receiving DEMO has increased (Henderson et al.
1998, Mowery and Ziedonis 1999). This corresponds
to an increase in the number and size of university
DEMO transfer offices (Association of American
Universities 1986, Seigel et al. 1999, Rogers et al. 2000,
Thursby et al. 2001). Third, DEMO most important to this
inquiry, the mechanisms used to transfer technology
DEMO to attain revenue from intellectual property rights
have changed and evolved. These changes reflect the
greater sophistication and learning that have come
with the DEMO derived from each university's
own involvement in patent and licensing as well as
lessons learned from the experience of other institu-
tions. The DEMO of the next section is to consider
university experience with traditional licensing agree-
ments and then evaluate the reasons for the growing
adoption of DEMO deals.
Licensing Reconsidered
Licensing agreements typically involve selling a com-
pany the rights to use a university's inventions in
return for revenue in DEMO form of upfront fees at the
time of closing the deal, DEMO annual, ongoing royalty
payments that are contingent upon the commercial
success DEMO the technology in a downstream market.
The terms of the licensing agreement depend upon
the assessment of the value of the technology in a
DEMO market that is often uncertain and thus dif-
ficult to evaluate. While there are some standards,
many provisions of the royalty agreement are DEMO
tiated. Bray and Lee (2000) report that license issue
fees typically range from $10,000 to $50,000 but may
be as high DEMO $250,000, while royalty rates are typ-
ically 2% to 5% DEMO may be as high as 15%.2 The
bargaining power of the two parties may be very
2
This
is the same range
reported
by DEMO
(1990).
107
Equity
uneven depending upon such factors as their relative
sophistication, experience and resources, established
industry-specific yardsticks, and the perceptions of
the attributes of DEMO technology, such as its commer-
cial promise and distance to market. DEMO a result, the
deals negotiated between one firm and several uni-
DEMO or between one university and its licensees
may be very different.
There are many positives to university technology
licensing. First, an active license program has both
substantive and symbolic importance: It attests to the
capabilities of universities to advance technology and
to serve as an engine of growth DEMO both national and
local economies. Second, an active technology trans-
fer DEMO (TTO) with a large number of active
licenses has become an instrument that the university
can use in recruiting and retaining faculty.3 Interviews
DEMO TTO officials at several universities indicate that
some prospective faculty seek meetings with these
officials to determine if the university is a congenial
home DEMO their prospective entrepreneurial activities.
Current trends in patents and licensing suggest
mixed patterns, however. The continuing upward
annual trend in patents, licenses, and license revenues
reported in the AUTM 1999 survey suggests that aca-
demic DEMO still is growing, with most institu-
tions reporting more licensing revenue DEMO they did
the previous year.4 Still, there is evidence that despite
DEMO rising totals, traditional licensing as a technol-
ogy transfer mechanism has DEMO yielded major finan-
cial returns for most institutions.
Efforts by universities to secure revenues from
licensing have been hindered by the fact that the DEMO
dards for securing patents for intellectual property
3 The right of faculty to share in the licensing revenue was a pro-
vision of the DEMO Act. Although substantial royalty wind-
falls have been reported for a small number of faculty, the after-tax
return to faculty from royalties in general has been reported as rela-
tively disappointing, comparing unfavorably with the revenue that
faculty earn from consulting (Blake 1993).
4 For the 82 recurrent respondents that reported data for the period
FY 1991-FY 1999, the total increased from $149 million to $655 mil-
lion. These revenues, while small in comparison with other univer-
sity revenue sources, are not insignificant.
108
and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
DEMO American
Research
are not equivalent to the requirements for commer-
cial success.5 In a recent survey of technology trans-
fer officers, Jensen and Thursby (2001) found that
only about 12% of the licensed technology is DEMO
for commercialization. The majority of licensed tech-
nology requires significant developmental work and
ongoing cooperation by faculty to realize commercial
success.
Only a small DEMO of invention disclosures gen-
erate any licensing interest; of those that DEMO, very
few generate sizeable net returns. The rule of thumb
in DEMO technology transfer is that for every
100 invention disclosures, 10 patents DEMO 1 com-
mercially successful product result (Blake 1993). The
distribution DEMO licensing revenues is highly skewed
with a few big commercial successes generating large
returns for a small number of universities. Well-
known licenses, such as the Cohen Boyer gene splic-
ing technique (University of California and Stanford),
Gatorade (University of Florida), Cisplatin (Michigan
State), Fax technology (Iowa State), or Taxol (Florida
State University) are the exceptions rather than the
rule.6
Finally, biomedical invention accounts for a sub-
stantial share of academic licenses (Mowery et al.
1999, Feller DEMO al. 2000), and commercialization of
these products requires navigating the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approval process, which takes
an average of 10 years. Considering that additional
development is needed to convert the licensed tech-
DEMO into a viable product before a firm even can
begin the long approval process, long lag times exist
before the receipt of any royalties by the university.7
Equity, in contrast, may provide a financial return DEMO
5The basic principle is well known. For example, as articulated
by DEMO Reimers, formerly of the Office of Technology Licens-
ing, Stanford University: "The bad news is that the technology
is underdeveloped and unproven, and a significant investment is
required by the company for development and DEMO may be
unsuccessful for market or technological reasons. The good news is
that often a basic patent position will be available" (Reimers 1989)DEMO
6 Taxol, for example, the patent owned by the Florida State Univer-
sity, has worldwide annual sales worth $1.2 billion and is expected
to yield $60 million in licensing revenue this year (Zacks 2000).
7 Indeed, several of our survey respondents expressed frustration
with licensing as a transfer mechanism due to this time lag.
48, No. 1, DEMO 2002
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol.
Universities
Equity
the case of an Initial Public Offering or an acquisition
by DEMO firm.
Further, there is evidence that licensing has not
been an DEMO satisfactory mechanism from the
industry perspective, either. In a survey of DEMO
try licensing executives, Thursby and Thursby (2000a)
found that 66% (199 business units out of a total of
300) had not DEMO intellectual property from uni-
versities. The reasons given included the feeling that
university research is generally at too early a stage of
development (49%); that universities rarely engage in
research in a related line of DEMO (37.4%); univer-
sity refusal to transfer ownership to company (31%);
university policies regarding delay of publication are
too strict (20%); and concerns about obtaining fac-
ulty cooperation for further development of the tech-
nology (16%).8 In sum, there is evidence of industry
DEMO to licensing.
Equity Considered
In the immediate post-Bayh-Dole period, univer-
sity DEMO transfer offices generally considered
equity-based licenses to be a compensation mecha-
nism of last resort reserved for cash-starved, start-
up firms. "Start-ups rarely DEMO a positive cash flow
during their first years of operation; therefore, taking
equity in such start-ups partially in lieu of cash fees
is DEMO important technique to conserve the company's
cash for investment in product development" (AUTM
1999, p. 17.) Although relative to the fixed DEMO
fees and standard royalty rates of traditional licenses,
equity held the promise of enabling the university to
share in potentially larger revenues if DEMO licensee flour-
ished as a result of use of the university's patents,
these revenues were perceived to be highly uncertain.
The high DEMO rate of new firms was well known.
Acting as would be predicted by the well-established
certainty effect (Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Tver-
sky DEMO Kahneman 1992), technology transfer officers
valued the relatively certain expected revenues accru-
ing from traditional licenses more than the uncertain,
8Twenty-eight percent DEMO the respondents indicated some other
difficulty such as "general attitude is DEMO," "complexity of deal
and... weird expectations," "too cumbersome" DEMO "high licensing
fees" Thursby and Thursby (2000a).
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/DEMO 48, No. 1, January 2002
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
DEMO
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
of
American
Research
Universities
though potentially higher, expected revenues associ-
ated with equity deals.
With the exception of a DEMO universities such as
MIT that made equity a core part of its technology
transfer and licensing portfolio, most universities at
first accepted equity deals in those cases where the
university believed that a patent had economic DEMO
but no established firm was able to pay the required
fees and royalties of a traditional license.9 Even if the
expected returns did not DEMO, the university
might still realize value by advancing its objectives of
DEMO knowledge, getting the technology out
for commercialization, and, in some DEMO, accommo-
dating the interests of the faculty inventors.10
Our interviews with DEMO transfer officers
suggest that this perception of equity as the mech-
anism of last resort has changed. Three main fac-
tors appear to underlie DEMO evolution. The first is the
increased experience of TTOs with traditional licens-
ing. This has resulted in a greater understanding of
the limitations of DEMO transfer mechanism in terms of
a downward revision in expectation about licensing's
revenue-generating potential.'l In contrast, equity is
perceived to offer an advantage as the potential return
9JHU took its first equity deal in DEMO for the use of intellectual
property that was licensed to a firm called CardioLogic. Larger
firms had been approached but were not interested in DEMO tech-
nology, which faculty and TTO staff believed was an important
DEMO The only mechanism that would allow the technology
to be licensed was an equity deal with a start-up firm.
0 Duke University's involvement DEMO one of early equity deals in
1987 follows such a scenario. Though the faculty inventor expressed
strong interest in taking the technology to a DEMO of his own,
the university insisted on first trying to license it to an established
firm. They were successful in this. However, the license was sub-
sequently reacquired from the initial licensee-a large, established
pharmaceutical company-due to the company's failure to move
the technology forward. At DEMO point, the university still chose
to spend an additional year seeking DEMO make a deal with another
established firm before accepting a license-for-equity deal with the
firm established by the inventor.
1 The earliest university licenses DEMO granted on an exclusive basis
that provided no limits on the company's use of the intellectual
property. Exclusive licenses gave the company total DEMO over the
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY in all potential applications, markets
and adaptations. DEMO, our interviews revealed that increas-
ingly licenses are nonexclusive with stipulated DEMO on technology
application, geographic scope or terms of use.
109
Equity
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
DEMO
American
Research
Universities
is based on the total assets of the firm, which is
expected to be greater than the return to any indi-
vidual product. Second, TTOs, as well as firms, have
begun to appreciate the mutual benefits of equity in
aligning university-firm interests. Third, interviewees
believe that equity more so than licensing provides
prestige and legitimacy for DEMO the university and
the firm. We discuss these arguments within the con-
text of pertinent theoretical frameworks in the sec-
tions below.
The Upside DEMO Potential of Equity
In discussing the advantages of equity-based licenses,
many of our respondents cited the upside potential
of this transfer mechanism. Through DEMO, the uni-
versity has the opportunity to benefit from future
products DEMO processes that increase the technical and
economic value of the firm. This view of equity is
not new; however, for several reasons the DEMO
value of equity has increased over the past 10 years
compared to the value ascribed to traditional licens-
ing. First, as discussed, many DEMO have been
disappointed by the revenue-generating performance
of their traditional licenses. Not only have relatively
fewer inventions resulted in licenses than had been
hoped, but also the majority of these licenses have
provided only moderate, if any, returns. The opportu-
nity cost of taking an equity option is the forgone rev-
enues that the university could receive had it negoti-
DEMO a traditional license with upfront fees, milestone
payments, and running royalties. Given that universi-
ties have learned from their own experiences and the
DEMO of other universities that this opportunity
cost is, on average, relatively low, the decision to trade
traditional licensing revenues for equity holdings has
become more attractive.
Second, many respondents noted that equity has
the advantage in providing the university with an
opportunity to share in the fortunes DEMO a firm rather
than just in the fortunes of a technology that may
have contributed to the development of the firm but
did not DEMO result in a commercial product. While
traditional licensing agreements are specific to the use
of a particular patent, equity deals provide a means
for the university to share in the company's success
even in the DEMO that no licensing royalties accrue
110
to the original technology. The technology covered
by university patents and licenses are typically far
away from the DEMO market and may not result
in a viable commercial product. However, DEMO firm's
experience with the licensed technology may pro-
vide knowledge that is incorporated into subsequent
products and materially contribute to the company's
DEMO commercial success. Equity deals permit the
university to capture at least some of the returns asso-
ciated with such knowledge transfer. In the worst-case
DEMO the original technology proves to be
completely worthless-the university still can bene-
fit from an equity deal if the selected partner proves
viable. Equity DEMO yield a portfolio that captures
a broad range of potential futures. In this respect,
equity has come to be perceived as being less DEMO
than traditional licenses.
Third, there is a broader recognition that holding
DEMO equity position permits the university to buy time,
waiting to exercise its option (i.e., sell its equity) until
uncertainty about the economic value of its patent
holdings is reduced (Vonortas and Hertzfeld, 1998)DEMO
Again, academic patents typically are early-stage
technological developments characterized by high
DEMO of technical and market uncertainty. To bring
the technology under an academic patent to mar-
ket often requires considerable follow-on research,
as well DEMO additional costs for approval (in the case
of drugs), production, and distribution. With a tra-
ditional license, the university has little option but
to negotiate the upfront fees, milestone payments,
and fixed royalty rates in the shadow of this uncer-
tainty. To deal with such DEMO, the universi-
ties tend to adopt standard industry-specific running
royalty rates, or to rely on technology licensing offi-
cials with expertise in selected DEMO fields.
The first technique drives the institution's negotiating
position to the average rate of return for licenses in a
field, while the latter entails additional administrative
costs. In fact, the latter is feasible only for those insti-
tutions with sizeable numbers of patents, clustered
into discernible utility or industry classes. Employ-
ment of either of these techniques effectively reduces
DEMO licensing returns. In comparison, equity deals
look relatively more attractive. If DEMO company has an
Initial Public Offering or is acquired before achieving
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, January
2002
Equity
a marketable product equity may provide a shorter
time horizon to DEMO realization.
Finally, it must be noted that for most of the
DEMO period when university equity holding
increased-the performance of the stock market, DEMO
of technology stocks in particular, had been quite pos-
itive.12 University DEMO, evaluating the potential
of equity against this backdrop, were likely to per-
ceive the returns of equity to be quite promising.
The Incentive DEMO Value of Equity
Another recurring theme that emerged from our dis-
cussions with technology-transfer officers was the
view that equity more so than licensing DEMO a means
to align the interests of the university and the licens-
ing firm. Three aspects of alignment were stressed: (1)
common DEMO related to the appreciation of the value
of the firm and the commercialization of the tech-
nology; (2) relative ease of initial contractual negoti-
ations; and (3) provision for ongoing, within agree-
ment, decision-making and adjustment. Each of these
is discussed in turn.
Several technology DEMO officers emphasized the
benefits provided by equity-based licenses by align-
ing the long-term interests of the firm and the uni-
versity. With equity, both parties gain as the total
value of the licensed technology, as well as the firm
as a whole, increases. As such, it is DEMO the best inter-
ests of both parties to take actions that enhance the
probability of the firm's commercial success. TTO offi-
cials view DEMO goal alignment as smoothing existing
and future university-firm technology transfer trans-
actions. As noted by one respondent, a firm that has
executed an equity-based license can expect to find
the going much easier in subsequent negotiations DEMO
sponsor research with, or acquire additional technol-
ogy rights from, the university. Rather than play hard-
ball in hopes of structuring the best DEMO one-time,
stand-alone deal, the university-evaluating the new
deal in light DEMO its existing ties-is more likely to strive
to expedite the transaction in a manner that enhances
firm viability.
2 Interviews were conducted in Summer DEMO before the sharp
decline in the stock market in the second half of the year market.
MANAGEMENT
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
of
American
Research
Universities
A number of respondents also highlighted the com-
parative DEMO of constructing an equity-based licens-
ing agreement as compared to the challenge of nego-
tiating a traditional license. Traditional licenses are,
in essence, contracts that specify price, detailed by
level of royalty rates and upfront fees, performance
requirements as reflected in milestone payment terms,
and enforcement rights executed through the courts.
An equity-based license changes the focus from DEMO
tracting on price and performance to agreeing on
ownership shares (i.e., how much stock does the uni-
versity receive for the right to DEMO the technology?).
Our interviewees suggest that it is easier to DEMO
on the latter than the former.13 Specifically, equity
agreements are easier DEMO write as they center on the
delineation of property rights and do not involve
the specification of the large number of contingency
terms that DEMO traditional license does. Equity also is
reported to have an advantage over traditional licens-
ing in that it reduces the potential for litigation relat-
DEMO to the firm's use of the licensed technology. Con-
sider a case in which a firm draws upon a university
license in its DEMO efforts to develop a commer-
cially viable product, all the while DEMO, scrap-
ping, and extending elements of the technology. Each
modification opens up new potential for legal con-
flicts about the extent to which DEMO final product
makes use of the licensed technology. As the origi-
nal contract rarely completely (or even significantly)
anticipates these developments, there DEMO seldom pay-
ment and/or performance terms on point. To resolve
disputes, the university and firm may attempt to rene-
gotiate in good faith. However, such renegotiations,
given the zero-sum nature of royalty payments, DEMO
be contentious, break down, and lead to litigation. In
an equity deal, contribution disputes are less likely
to produce this outcome as both players share in all
value created.
13Though prior to taking a first DEMO deal, there is often con-
tentious debates at the university about DEMO proper role of the uni-
versity and the general framework for all future equity deals, these
deliberations generally come before the university sits down to
negotiate with an individual firm. Interviewees tell us those subse-
quent DEMO negotiations, given the focused nature of the
negotiation on a particular DEMO, is generally straightforward.
111
Equity
The example of The Pennsylvania State University
and AbioMed illustrates this DEMO Penn State took
equity in AbioMed, a 19-year-old biomedical firm in
DEMO, in exchange for giving the company the rights
to use artificial DEMO technology developed at the
Hershey Medical School. AbioMed was working on a
product that would have inevitably been a competi-
tor to the Hershey DEMO Equity became the preferred
compensation mechanism for both parties because it
facilitated the integration of the company's on-going
research and development work with DEMO State intel-
lectual property while avoiding potential future legal
complications.
The Legitimacy Value of Equity
A final benefit of equity-based licenses cited by
respondents DEMO the belief that it provides legitimacy
and or prestige for both the firms and the univer-
sity. In discussing why firms seek equity deals, sev-
eral of the technology transfer officers interviewed
noted that beyond the DEMO benefit of conserv-
ing cash, firms believe university equity holding
enhanced DEMO credibility.14 Lerner (1999) concludes
that firms participating in the government Small Busi-
ness Innovation Research (SBIR) program grew signif-
icantly faster than DEMO firms and were more
likely to attract venture capital financing indicating
the government funding conferred a halo effect. A
similar halo may be generated DEMO a university owner-
ship position. Specifically, our interviews reveal that
a DEMO's willingness to accept equity in lieu of
up-front fees and/or royalties is believed to provide a
14 Evidence about the existence and DEMO of legitimacy effects
of equity holdings is indirect and mixed. Shane (DEMO) in a study of
MIT patents however points to a negative DEMO between uni-
versity equity holdings and the successful commercialization of the
technology covered by the relevant license. The reasoning behind
this finding involves a DEMO of the mainstream motivation
for why universities take equity: No existing DEMO believes that the
patented technology is commercially profitable. Start-up firms that
seek to commercialize such technologies are inherently highly risky
enterprises. Our focus in DEMO paper does not displace these dynam-
ics. The belief, on the DEMO of the firm, that having a university as
an equity partner DEMO legitimacy to the firm's ventures is not a
guarantee that the firms will succeed. Exuberant spirits may exist
on both sides of the DEMO table.
112
and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
of American
Research
Universities
signal to capital markets and potential strategic DEMO
ners that the university has made a positive evalua-
tion of the worthiness of the technology and the firm's
development competencies. If this DEMO is perceived
as valuable, it may give the university some advan-
DEMO in the equity share negotiations and thus enhance
its returns.
Perhaps more salient for our goal of understanding
universities' use of the equity mechanism is the pres-
tige value that technology transfer personnel believe
that having DEMO licenses conveys to the university.
The university's willingness to take equity lowers the
cost of licensing the technology and this may generate
more DEMO activity. We therefore might expect that
universities with low levels of licensing activity, both
in absolute and relative terms, to adopt taking equity
DEMO a means to increase their measured level of technol-
ogy transfer activity. Further, there is also a perceived
halo effect of university equity positions. Universities
with a high number of equity deals generally gain
an affirmative DEMO for being progressive and
entrepreneurial.
In conclusion, equity appears to provide DEMO im-
proved mechanism for university technology transfer.
Although equity options are not without problems,
our interviews reveal that university officials find that
equity DEMO some advantages over traditional licens-
ing agreements based on up-front fees and royalty
payments. The next section develops a set of hypothe-
ses that DEMO university characteristics to the adop-
tion of equity and presents data that we will use to
test these hypotheses.
Hypotheses and Data
Writing just DEMO Johns Hopkins University took its
first equity interest, David Blake, Senior Associate
Dean of the School of Medicine, wrote "Most uni-
versities DEMO their trustees are quite comfortable with
accepting royalty payments and sharing them with
faculty inventors under approved formulas. They are
much less comfortable with DEMO stock in a com-
pany that is commercializing a university discovery
(DEMO 1993, p. A52)." As noted previously, we have
seen DEMO recent increase in the use of equity in technol-
ogy transfer. Logically, one can attribute this increase
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
Equity
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
DEMO the number of equity transactions to the perceived
attractiveness of this mechanism, as described above.
However, substantial variation exists in both the tim-
DEMO of first equity deals and the intensity of equity
involvement across the universities in our sample.
The remaining question, and the one we tackle in this
section, is what factors explain these differing adop-
tion strategies?
We propose a model in which the intensity of a
university'DEMO equity involvement is related to a set of
behavioral and structural variables. The behavioral
variables relate to intra- and interinstitutional learn-
ing and adaptation DEMO come with time and expe-
rience. The control variables include the Carnegie
Classification of the university, the status as a pub-
lic or private entity, and the affiliation with a medical
school.
Direct Technology Transfer Office Attributes:
Experience and Structure
One strong association that emerged from our
DEMO was that of the relationship between
technology-transfer experience and the perceived
attractiveness of equity as a technology transfer
mechanism. In general, we observed that experience
with traditional licensing give rise to dissatisfaction
with this technique and DEMO experimentation
with new mechanisms. Hands-on experience seemed
to expose previously unconsidered limits of tradi-
tional licensing. As TTOs gained experience with tra-
ditional licensing DEMO, they appear to also
become more skeptical about the expected returns
DEMO to this transfer mechanism. This greater
understanding of potential limits led to a downward
revision of the transfer mechanism's relative attrac-
tiveness, which, in turn, appears to create a willing-
ness to experiment with DEMO transfer mecha-
nisms, such as equity-based licenses.
In addition, universities that have more experi-
ence with industry-sponsored research are expected
to have a DEMO commitment to technology trans-
fer and to be more willing to experiment with new
mechanisms that appear to offer perceived benefits.
As TTOs gain DEMO with industry through spon-
sored research they appear to be more willing to
attempt to facilitate increased interaction in technol-
ogy transfer. Thus, the following hypothesis.
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vo1.
48, No. 1, January
2002
of
DEMO 1. The greater a university's experience
with technology transfer, the DEMO likely the university will
be to adopt equity-based transfer mechanisms.
Along with licensing experience, we argue that the
budgetary policy of the technology transfer office may
also influence equity involvement. While we hypoth-
esize that greater DEMO leads to greater dissat-
isfaction with traditional licensing, and thus greater
DEMO in equity-based transfer deals, willingness to
make this trade-off may be DEMO, or secondary,
to immediate budgetary needs. Traditional licenses
generate both DEMO and uncertain revenue streams.
Up-front fees, the required payments at the DEMO of a
licensing deal, are immediate and certain. Upon com-
pletion DEMO negotiations, the university can expect to
receive these fees. Specifically, transfer offices that are
required to be self-supporting may rely on the imme-
DEMO and certain revenues coming form the up-front
fees of traditional licenses. As noted by March and
Shapira (1987), managers are much less likely to take
risks when organizational survival is at stake. Thus,
the DEMO hypothesis.
HYPOTHESIS 2. The expectation that the technology-
transfer office should be self-supporting reduces the propen-
sity for the university to adopt equity-based transfer
DEMO
Technology Transfer Experience Relative to
Other Institutions
While direct experience is expected to be an important
influence in the decision to adopt alternative trans-
DEMO mechanisms, we also argue that the experience of
others also comes DEMO to play. Many of the technology-
transfer officers we spoke with volunteered that they
commonly benchmark their university's performance
against the performance of DEMO similar institutions.
The average performance of a cohort comes to rep-
resent the minimal acceptable performance level-to
either the TTO or those that are DEMO the TTO.
March and Shapira (1987) and March (1988) argue
that aspirations or performance targets affect risk-
taking behavior. This may be DEMO to reflect the
expected influence of traditional license-related per-
formance benchmarks on a university's propensity to
enter equity-based licenses. Though expected value
113
DEMO
Research
Universities
Equity
may be high, equity deals are generally perceived
to be more risky than traditional licenses. Equity is
riskier because of its relative novelty-few DEMO
tions have had any significant experience with this
mechanism. In addition, DEMO is greater potential
return variance associated with equity. While tradi-
tional license returns are somewhat narrowly bound
between up-front fees and a percentage of DEMO
sales, equity returns vary more broadly from zero, if
the firm fails, to some percentage of the firm's total
worth.
March and Shapira (1987, p. 1413) argue that man-
agers that are near a performance target will be rel-
atively risk averse. These individuals are DEMO
to avoid a risky action that may cause performance
to fall below target. However, when performance
exceeds the target by a substantial amount, DEMO
are more likely to engage in risky behavior in hopes
of capturing the potential up-side benefit. Thus, the
following hypothesis:
HYPOTHESIS 3. Leading performers, those performing
substantially above the benchmarked target, will be more
DEMO than average pwformers to adopt equity-based trans-
fer mechanisms.
For decision-makers who have not been successful
to date-those performing substantially below target
levels-the desire DEMO reach the target will cause them
to focus on opportunities associated with the risky
action (March and Shapira 1987). Any action that may
get them closer to the target is attractive. Because,
these managers DEMO currently doing poorly, they do
not have much to lose if DEMO gamble fails to play out to
their advantage. Thus, these individuals DEMO expected
to have a predilection for risk-prone behavior:
HYPOTHESIS 4. Lagging universities, performing sub-
stantially below their cohorts, will be more likely DEMO aver-
age performers to adopt equity-based technology transfer
mechanisms.
Description of Survey Data
The most cited source on university technology trans-
fer, the AUTM annual survey, first reported data on
university equity agreements in 1995. Over the course
of the survey's history, however, AUTM has changed
DEMO collection items, adding and dropping variables
114
and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
of American
Research
Universities
in response to changes in university practices. The
changes limit the usefulness of these DEMO to dis-
cern trends. As a result, researchers interested in more
DEMO questions have used mail and telephone sur-
veys to collect original data on the equity aspects of
university technology transfer activities. Bray and Lee
(2000), for example, have compared the amount of
revenue received from equity positions versus licens-
ing fees, while Di Gregorio and Shane (DEMO) have
looked at equity as one dimension in considering why
some DEMO generate more start-up firms than
others. Our interest is in understanding equity as part
of a general examination of the evolving character of
university-industry DEMO Thus, as with these
other recent studies, our research involved a series
of telephone interviews with university technology
licensing and transfer officials.
In DEMO 2000, we conducted a survey of the 124
Carnegie I and DEMO research universities that have active
technology transfer operations.l5 The letter that intro-
duced the survey was addressed to the head of the
TTO as DEMO by AUTM or the university's web
page. We contacted each university official at least
three times to attempt to set up the survey DEMO
The interview protocol asked about university prac-
tices related to equity, DEMO other questions related
to the organization and function of the TTO. The
majority of the 124 institutions (76%) participated in
the AUTM survey DEMO a regular basis.
We received 67 responses, for a response rate DEMO
54%. Comparison of the respondents with the total
universe of universities indicates no biases in terms of
structural characteristics (e.g., Carnegie Classification,
DEMO/private, land grant/non-land grant, medical
school/no medical school). Our model estimation is
based on 62 observations. Lack of data on DEMO of
15 Under the Carnegie classification, Research Universities I award
50 DEMO more doctorates each year and annually receive $40 million
or more in federal research support. Research Universities II are the
same as Research I DEMO except that they receive between
$15.5 million and $40 million annually in federal research support.
This classification system will be undergoing major changes in DEMO
near future. Only one institution, Howard University, did not have
an office of technology transfer or some individual whom we were
able to DEMO as being assigned technology transfer as their pri-
mary responsibility.
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/VOl.
48, No. 1, January 2002
Equity
FELDMAN, FELLER,
and Technology
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
DEMO American
Research
Universities
the independent variables from sources other than
our survey necessitated omitting five institutions from
our econometric estimation. Again, we do not find
evidence that the estimation sample is biased with
respect to any DEMO characteristics.
In describing the characteristics of our respondents,
we draw upon the full sample of 67. Of the TTO
respondents, 76% indicated that their university had
taken equity in a company. Our findings are similar DEMO
those from Thursby et al. (2001), who found that 82%
DEMO their 62 responding universities had taken equity as
part of a licensing deal. The similar number of respon-
dents is a coincidence, as the sampling frame of our
respondents differ. The lower rate of universities tak-
DEMO of equity in our sample may be a result of the
greater institutional diversity in our sample frame.
Thirteen universities (19% of our respondents),
each a public university, were prohibited from tak-
ing equity DEMO companies because of state statutes that
limit their range of activity. These legislative restric-
tions do not limit the universities' initiatives to be in
a legal position to accept equity, however. Of these
universities, 10 DEMO independent 501(c)3 entities to
manage their intellectual property and to take equity
Figure 2
Diversity in
18
16
14
12
10
8 DEMO
6
4
2
I
i
III
I
1
4
v
i
with
fiI
= 67)
0
b
<:
I
Experience Equity
Deals
(n
ig
Number of Equity
holdings.16 To date, seven of these entities have taken
equity in lieu of licensing fees for a university inven-
DEMO Three of the independent entities had not taken
equity at the time of our interview.
University officials were asked the total number
of equity DEMO in which they had participated. Our
respondent set of 67 universities participated in 679
equity deals. The distribution of the number of deals
is DEMO skewed as shown in Figure 2. The mean
number of equity transactions was 10.3, the median
was 5 and the mode was 0. The maximum number of
equity deals was 90.
Dependent Variable. The dependent variable DEMO
our study is the intensity of equity involvement. We
measure this variable as the total number of a univer-
sity's equity interests divided DEMO the number of the
university's active licenses for 1998. Active licenses
are the cumulative number of licenses that had not
terminated by the DEMO of the 1998.
The total number of equity deals is from our sur-
vey, verified against the AUTM survey. The num-
ber of active licenses is from the 1998 AUTM survey.
For universities that did not DEMO participate in
Deals
per
University |
16An example is the Ohio State University Research Foundation.
Other institutions that have not been subject to statutory DEMO
tations have formed this type of entity to serve as a bridging
mechanism. For example, the University of Illinois system formed
Illinois Ventures as an intermediary institution to focus on com-
mercializing university intellectual property.
MANAGEMENT
DEMO/Vol.
48, No. 1, January 2002
115
Equity
and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
DEMO American
Research
Universities
Figure
3
Distribution of the Intensity of the Use of Equity: Equity Deals As a Percentage
14-
of All
Active
Licensing
Agreements
12-
10
4
,
J
0
5.1%-
10.0%
15.1%-
20.0%
25.1%-
30.0%
35.1%-
40.0%
45.1%-
50.0%
55.1%-
60.0%
65.1%-
70.0%
75.1%-
80.0%
I
DEMO
Equity-Based
Licenses/Total
Licenses
AUTM, we gathered data on the number DEMO active
licenses from web pages or from our interviews.
There is variation in the use of equity deals as a
percentage of all intellectual DEMO licenses (see
Figure 3). For our respondents, the percentage of
equity deals accounted for a mean value of 14.4%, and
a median of 8.5%. The maximum use of equity was
88.1% indicating that this DEMO used equity for
the vast majority of their intellectual property agree-
ments. This last statistic is an artifact of the relatively
small number of DEMO agreements at this univer-
sity, as well as to other universities DEMO the upper tail
of the distribution. To adjust for this skewnesss, DEMO
weight our regression model to mitigate the effect of
outliers who appear to have made high use of equity
simply because they did not DEMO many licensing
opportunities.
Independent Variables. The technology transfer
experience of the university provides the indepen-
dent variable for Hypothesis 1. We use three mea-
DEMO of experience: (1) age of the technology trans-
fer office; (2) cumulative number of executed licenses
(1991-1998); and (3) the log of the cumulative amount
of industrial research support received (1991-1998).
These data are from the annual AUTM surveys, ver-
ified and augmented by our survey and institutional
data from the National Science Foundation'DEMO Com-
puter Aided Science Policy Analysis and Research
(CASPAR) database.
For Hypothesis 2, the budgetary structure of the
technology transfer office is the independent variable
of interest. Using our survey data, we construct a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the expectation is that
the technology-transfer office DEMO be self-supporting,
0 otherwise. Roughly, half (47%) of the DEMO
offices in our survey had expectations of being self-
supporting.
The university's technology transfer experience rel-
ative to others is the independent variable DEMO the final
two hypotheses. Our interviews revealed that TTOs
are sensitive to the amount of intellectual property
activity they have relative to a cohort DEMO similar insti-
tutions. Our interviews revealed that status, as either
a DEMO or private institution, the presence of a med-
ical school, and some measure of the level of intel-
lectual property income relative to DEMO institution's
total R&D expenditures were considerations in defin-
ing one's cohort. Accordingly, we grouped institutions
into four cohorts based on status as either a public
or private institution and the presence or absence DEMO
a medical school: public/with medical school; pub-
lic/no medical school; private/with medical school;
private/no medical school. To construct the cohort
variable of licensing income relative to R&D expen-
ditures DEMO calculated the total annual licensing rev-
116
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol.
48, DEMO 1, January 2002
Equity
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
DEMO
American
Research
Universities
1
Table
Summary of
Hypotheses
Hypothesis
Dependent
Variable
Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 4
Equity envolvement
intensity:
Total DEMO of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
Equity involvement
intensity:
Total # of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
Equity involvement
intensity:
DEMO # of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
Equity Involvement
intensity:
Total # of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
Independent
Variable
Own
DEMO
Budgetary
structure
Relative
experience
Relative
experience
Operational
Independent
Variable
Age
of
technology
transfer
office
Cumulative
Average
Expectation of
=1 No
Yes
number
annual
TTO
DEMO 0
of
industrial
licensing
research
deals
support
self-sufficiency
Leading
cohort
Lagging
cohort
Predicted
Sign
+
+
+
+
enues from 1991-1998 relative to the DEMO's total
research budget. Considering the distribution of sim-
ilar institutions,17 we classify institutions greater than
one standard deviation above the category average DEMO
leading their cohort (Hypothesis 3). Similarly, insti-
tutions with average annual licensing revenue that
was more than one standard deviation below the
DEMO mean are classified as lagging their cohort
(Hypothesis 4).
Control DEMO In addition to the independent
variables, we add controls for university DEMO Specif-
ically, we create three dummy variables (each with
1 = Yes, 0 = No) to delineate whether a university (1)
has a medical school; (2) is private; and (3) DEMO classi-
fied as a Carnegie I Research Institution.
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the vari-
ables used in the regression.
Empirical Results
Table DEMO provides our empirical results. The depen-
dent variable is the total number of university equity
To
liers as either
the mean values and standard
DEMO
operationalize
this measure
leading or lagging their
deviations.
we first
categorized
cohort
obvious out-
and then calculated
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, DEMO 2002
Table
2
Descriptive
Statistics
Variable
Equity Share
Hypothesis 1:
Age of technology transfer
office
Cumulative number of licenses
Cumulative number of
licenses-squared
DEMO of average annual
industrial research support
Hypothesis 2:
Expectation that TTO will
self
Hypothesis 3:
Lagging
Leading
Own
Technology
Transfer
Experience
14.6452
DEMO,
148.6906
293.94
13.7728
Technology
Transfer
Budgetary
Incentives
supporting
be
0.4677
Relative
Technology
Transfer
Experience
cohort
cohort
0.2742
0.2258
Control
Variables
0.5484
0.3226
0.6613
DEMO
Private
Is
medical
university
Carnegie I institution
school
Mean
0.1443
Standard Deviation
0.1812
10.8493
218.9944
208,772.6573
3.7624
0.5030
0.4497
0.4215
0.5017
0.4713
0.4771
DEMO
Table 3
Own
Age
Empirical
Technology
of
Transfer
technology
transfer
Results
Experience
DEMO
Transfer
Model 1
Cumulative
number
of
licenses
0.0296
(0.0107)**
-0.6924
(0.1198)**
Cumulative
number
of
licenses-squared
Log
of
research
average annual industrial
DEMO
Budgetary
TTO will be self
Technology Transfer
Expectation that
supporting
Relative
cohort
Incentives
-0.400
(0.2416)*
Technology
Transfer
Experience
Lagging
Leading
cohort
Control
Variables
Has
medical
school
0.8725
(0.2824)**
-0.3154
(0.2473)
-0.2859
(0.3562)
3.2896
(0.4573)**
-75.3535
0.0000
62
Private
university
Is
Carnegie I
institution
Constant
Log likelihood
Prob > chi2
N
Model 2
0.0249
(0.0131)**
-0.0073
(0.020)**
4.80e-06
(1.6e-06)**
0.2524
(0.1478)*
-0.4888
(0.2862)*
0.7408
(0.3146)**
-0.0825
(0.3185)
-0.7382
(0.4247)DEMO
1.5147
(4.096)**
-84.5945
0.0028
62
Equity
Model 3
0.5843
(0.3151)*
0.1233
(0.3550)
0.1370
(0.3010)
-0.6868
(0.2625)**
-0.9145
(0.4005)**
1.5833
(4152)**
-87.5124
0.0146
62
interests divided by DEMO number of active university
licenses in 1998. The equity share of active univer-
sity licenses is thus a fraction that is truncated at zero
DEMO bounded by one at the upper level. There are ten
cases for which the number of equity deals was zero,
which is the DEMO bound for our data. We therefore
use the lower-bound TOBIT
model and the number of
1998 licensing agreement is used as an analytic weight
DEMO the model to pt-wide robust estimation (Maddala
1983, Greene 2000).
Models 1 and 2 estimates the use of equity as a
function DEMO the university's own technology-transfer
experience. The results indicate that the university's
prior experience in technology-transfer matters in the
use of equity. The DEMO of the technology-transfer
office is positively related to the university's use of
equity as expected. The older the university's office
of technology-transfer DEMO the greater the use of
equity as a percentage of intellectual property trans-
actions. This result is consistent with Bray and Lee
(2000) DEMO, based on interviews at 10 univer-
sity technology-transfer offices. that offices DEMO have
been in existence longer are much more likely to
consider taking equity than is a fledgling technology
transfer program.
The effect of the DEMO number of licens-
ing agreements on the intensity of equity use is
more complex. In Model 1, the cumulative number
118
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
and
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Technology
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
of
American
Research
Universities
Equity
FELDMAN, FELLER,
and Technology
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
DEMO American
Research
Universities
of licensing agreements is negatively related to the
intensity of use of equity-the greater the experience
with licensing the less likely DEMO university is to make
use of equity. In Model 2, we DEMO a quadratic licens-
ing term that is positive and statistically significant.
This indicates that the cumulative licensing experi-
ence has a nonlinear relationship on DEMO use of equity.
Specifically, universities appear more likely to use
equity DEMO they gain experience with licensing but the
relationship resembles an inverted U as the use of
equity decreases when the university has executed a
DEMO number of licenses.
Our final measure of the university's own technol-
ogy-transfer experience is industrial research support.
We find that the log of DEMO amount of average annual
industrial research support is positively related to the
use of equity in Model 2. In sum, we find support for
Hypothesis 1.
The effect of the TTO self-sufficiency is of the
expected DEMO for both Models 1 and 2. Univer-
sity technology-transfer offices that are expected to be
self-sufficient make less use of equity, ceteris paribus,
providing support for Hypothesis 2.
Model 3 estimates the university's intensity DEMO use
of equity relative to the technology-transfer perfor-
mance of peer institutions. The experience of the
technology-transfer office relative to other institutions
is measured DEMO a dummy variable that is equal to
one if the university respectively lags or leads other
universities in its cohort in terms of average DEMO
licensing. We find that those universities that lag their
cohort make greater use of equity after accounting for
structural characteristics. The coefficient for univer-
DEMO that lead their cohorts is of the expected sign
but is not statistically significant. This finding sug-
gests that universities that are average relative DEMO their
cohort make less use of equity, confirming Hypoth-
esis 3. DEMO coefficient for institutions that lead their
cohort. Hypothesis 4, was of DEMO expected sign but not
statistically significant.
Our specifications also include structural character-
istics and the results suggest universities make greater
use of equity deals DEMO technology transfer if they have
a medical school. In addition, Carnegie DEMO research
universities appear to make greater use of equity.
Model 3 reveals that public universities appear to
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, DEMO 2002
make greater use of equity when they compare them-
selves to their cohorts.
In sum, the results support the expectation that uni-
versities both learn from their own experience and
from the experiences of others. DEMO also find that struc-
tural characteristics of the university affect the degree
to which the university is able and willing to experi-
ment with DEMO Notably, universities with medical
schools made greater use of equity in DEMO agree-
ments. Carnegie II research universities also seemed
to be more aggressive in adopting the new mecha-
nism. This fact seems to bear on DEMO relative standing
of these institutions and their desire to advance their
position.
Conclusions
Recent trends towards increased university accep-
tance of equity as compensation DEMO intellectual prop-
erty rights represents a new strategic perspective
on intellectual property management and technology
transfer. The older, established view for universities
accepting equity in lieu of licensing fees was that
equity was the only compensation DEMO offered by
cash-starved start-up firms who were the only party
that would be interested in the university's patents.
We find that equity is DEMO seen by univer-
sity technology licensing offices as an attractive mech-
anism that offers advantages in both increasing the
upside revenue potential of university DEMO and
improving the alignment between the institution's
interests and those of the firm. The adoption of equity
may be seem as part of DEMO trend in which universities
are becoming more entrepreneurial in light of new
opportunities and changing expectations.
These theoretical considerations point to the impor-
tance DEMO institutional learning-the product of a uni-
versity's own experiences and that of other simi-
lar institutions, the characteristics of the technology
transfer office, and a set of structural variables-
which all affect the degree to which an institution
accepts equity as a mechanism in its intellectual prop-
DEMO licensing transactions. In this paper, we have
developed and tested four DEMO about the effect
of direct experience, organizational incentives, and
experience relative to a related cohort on the adoption
119
Equity
and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
Strategies
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
DEMO American
Research
Universities
of a new technology transfer mechanism. Our initial
results at testing these relationships, using data from
a national survey of Carnegie I and II research uni-
versities and other measures of academic licensing,DEMO
support this interpretation.
Our results, though, are limited by both sample size
and the absence of attention to changes over time and
in DEMO policy. In particular, the recent sharp
decline in high-tech stock prices DEMO in IPO share
prices may reduce the allure of the equity option.
In effect, our view of future trends in university hold-
ings of equity is agnostic. Experience cuts both ways.
In many respects, given the recent attention (and
hyperbole) associated with university equity initia-
tives, we would expect the trend to continue, indeed
to accelerate. All of our respondents indicated that
they expected their university's use of equity would
DEMO or stay the same in the next year. Univer-
sities are constantly adapting and learning and our
results, and those of other researchers, DEMO relate
primarily to the pre-inflexion stage of adoption and
diffusion. On the other hand, any prolonged decline
in stock prices may quickly lead many technology-
transfer offices back into the safe harbor of traditional
licensing arrangements. DEMO which route may be
followed is akin to asking whether it is more prof-
itable in today's market to buy long or sell DEMO Only
time will tell.
Acknowledgments
We wish to acknowledge funding support from the Andrew W.
Mellon Foundation for this paper as part of a DEMO project on
evolving university-industry relationships. This is a collaborative
research project and the names of the authors vary between publi-
cations although each author DEMO substantial contributions. We
would like to thank Scott Shane, David Mowery, Dan Rodriguez
and participants at the Georgia Tech Conference on University
Entrepreneurship DEMO Technology Transfer for their comments and
suggestions. We are indebted to the technology transfer person-
nel and research administrators at Johns Hopkins University, The
Pennsylvania State University and Duke University for generously
sharing their time and DEMO in identifying salient issues. We
also acknowledge and appreciate the cooperation of the technol-
ogy transfer officials who participated in our survey. We thank DEMO
Lehming and Don Siegel for providing data. The views expressed
in this paper are, of course, those of the authors, and do not rep-
resent the positions of any of the three universities, the individuals
interviewed, or the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
References
Association of American Universities. 1986. Trends in Technology
Transfer at Universities. Association of American Universities,
DEMO, D.C.
Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM) Licensing
Survey. 1991-1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999. AUTM, Northbrook,
IL.
Bercovitz, J., M. Feldman, I. Feller, R. Burton. 2001. Strategy and
structure as determinants of university technology transfer
practices: A comparative study. J. Tech. Transfer 26 21-35.
Blake, D. A. 1993. The university's role in marketing research dis-
coveries. Chronicle Higher Ed. (May 12).
Bray, M. DEMO, J. N. Lee. 2000. University revenues from technology
transfer: Licensing fees vs. equity positions. J. Bus. Venturing
15 385-392.
Di Gregorio, D., DEMO Shane. 2000. Why do some universities generate
more start-ups than others? DEMO, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD.
Desruisseaux, P. 2000. DEMO venture into venture capitalism.
Chronicle Higher Ed. (May 26).
Feller, I. 1990. University patent and technology-licensing strate-
gies. Ed. Policy 4 327-334.
DEMO . 1997. Technology transfer from universities. John Smart,
ed. Handbook Higher Education, Volume 12. Agathon Press,
New York, 1-42.
, M. DEMO, J. Bercovitz, R. Burton. 2000. A disaggregated
examination of patent and licensing behavior at three research
universities. Western Economic Association Meeting, Vancou-
ver, B.C., Canada.
Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable. 1986. New
Alliances and Partnerships in DEMO Science and Engineering.
National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C.
Greene, DEMO H. 2000. Econometric Analysis. 4th ed. Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Henderson, R., A. Jaffe, M. Trajtenberg. 1998. Universities as DEMO
source of commercial technology: A detailed analysis of uni-
versity patenting DEMO Rev. Econom. Statist. 81 119-127.
Jensen, R., M. Thursby. 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: The
tale of university licensing. Amer. Econom. Rev. 91(1) 240-259.
Kahneman, D., A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: DEMO analysis of
decision under risk. Econometrica
47 263-291.
Lerner, J. 1999. DEMO government as venture capitalist: The long run
impact of the SBIR DEMO J. Bus. 72 285-318.
Lerner, J., R. P. Merges. 1998. The control of technology alliances:
An empirical analysis of the biotechnology industry. DEMO Indust.
Econom. 46(2) 125-156.
Maddala, G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in
Econometric. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
March, James G. 1988. Variable risk preferences and adaptive aspi-
rations. J. Behavior Organ. DEMO(1) 5-24.
, Zur Shapira. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and DEMO
taking. Management Sci. 33(11) 1404-1418.
Mowery, D., A. Ziedonis. DEMO The effects of the Bayh-Dole Act
on U.S. university research and technology transfer: Analyzing
120
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
Equity and Technology
FELDMAN, FELLER,
Transfer
BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Strategies
DEMO American
Research
Universities
data from entrants and incumbents. Paper presented at the Sci-
ence and Technology Group, NBER Summer Institute, National
Bureau of DEMO Research, Cambridge, MA.
- , R. Nelson, B. Sampat, A. Ziedonis. 1999. The effects of the
Bayh-Dole Act on U.S. university research DEMO technology
transfer. L. Branscomb, F. Kodama, R. Florida, eds. Industrial-
DEMO Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 269-306.
National Research Council. 1995. DEMO Programs in the
United States: Continuity and Change. National Academy Press,DEMO
Washington, D.C.
National Science Board. 2000. National Science Board, 2000 (DEMO
00-1), Arlington, VA.
Rogers, Everett, J. Yin, J. Hoffman. 2000. Assessing the effective-
ness of technology transfer offices at U.S. research DEMO
J. Assoc. Univ. Tech. Managers 12 47-80.
Shane, Scott. 2000. Selling DEMO technology: Patterns from MIT.
Paper presented to the Georgia Tech Conference DEMO University
Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer (November).
Siegel, D., D. DEMO, A. Link. 1999. Assessing the impact of
organizational practices on the DEMO of university tech-
nology transfer offices: An exploratory study. Working paper
DEMO, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Thursby, M., DEMO Jensen, J. Thursby. 2001. Objectives, characteristics,
and outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major U.S.
universities. J. Tech. Transfer 12 59-72.
Thursby, J., S. Kemp. 1999. Growth and productive efficiency of uni-
DEMO intellectual property licensing. Working paper, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN.
DEMO, M. Thursby. 2000a. Industry perspectives on licensing univer-
sity technologies: Sources and problems. J. Assoc. Univ. Tech.
Managers 12 9-23.
--, --. 2000b. Who is selling the ivory tower? Sources of
growth in university licensing. NBER working paper no.
W7718, Cambridge, MA.
Trajtenberg, M., R. DEMO, A. Jaffe. 1997. University versus
corporate patents: A window on the basicness of invention.
Econom.
Innovation
New Tech.
5 19-50.
Tversky, A., DEMO Kahneman. 1992. Advances in prospect theory:
Cumulative representation of uncertainty. J. Risk Uncertainty 5
291-323.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 1992-1999. Technology Assess-
DEMO and Forecast Report, U.S. Universities and Colleges, 1992-
1999. Information Products Division, Technology Assessment
and Forecast Branch, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,DEMO
Washington, D.C.
Vonortas, N., H. Hertzfeld. 1998. Research and development DEMO
selection in the public sector. J. Policy Anal. Management 17
621-638.
Williamson, 0. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
Implications. The Free DEMO, New York.
-. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. The Free DEMO,
New York.
-. 1991. Comparative economic organization: The analysis of
DEMO structural alternatives. Admin. Sci. Quart. 36(2) 269-
296.
- . DEMO Economic organization: The case for candor. Acad. Man-
agement Rev. 21(DEMO) 48-57.
Zacks, R. 2000. The TR university research scorecard. Tech. Rev.
103 (July/August) <http://www.techreview.com/articles/
july00/ zacks.htm>DEMO
Zucker, L., M. Darby, M. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual human capital
DEMO the birth of U.S. biotechnology enterprises. Amer. Econom.
Rev. 88(1) DEMO
Accepted
by
David
C.
Mowery
and
Scott
Shane;
received
December
2000.
This
paper
was
with
the
authors 9
months
for 1 revision.
MANAGEMENT
DEMO/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
121{1g42fwefx}