Equity and the Technology Transfer
Strategies of American
Research Universities
Maryann Feldman DEMO Irwin Feller • Janet Bercovitz • Richard Burton
Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218
Department of Economics, Pennsylvania DEMO University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802
The Fuqua School of Business, DEMO University, Durham, North Carolina 27708
The Fuqua School of Business, DEMO University, Durham, North Carolina 27708
maryann.feldman@jhu.edu • iqf@psu.edu • janetb@duke.edu • rmb2@mail.duke.edu
merican universities are experimenting with new mechanisms for promoting the com-
DEMO mercialization of academic research and generating revenue from university intellectual
property. This paper discusses mechanisms available to universities in managing the com-
mercialization of DEMO property, considering equity as a technology transfer mechanism
that offers advantages DEMO both generating revenue and aligning the interests of universities,
industry and faculty. Employing data from a national survey of Carnegie I and Carnegie
DEMO institutions, we document the recent rise in university equity holdings. We DEMO and
estimate a model that considers the university’s use of equity to be a function of behavioral
factors related to the university’s prior experiences DEMO licensing, success relative to other
institutions, and the organization of the technology transfer ofﬁce, as well as structural char-
acteristics related to university type.
(University-Industry Relationships; Equity Financing; Academic Patents; Licensing; Technology
Transfer)
Introduction
American universities are experimenting with new
mechanisms for promoting the DEMO of
academic research and generating revenues from uni-
versity intellectual property. The 20 years since the
passage of the Bayh–Dole Act have witnessed a DEMO
to optimize, or, more pragmatically, to balance the
objectives of DEMO intellectual property rights,
developing new revenue sources, and accommodat-
ing DEMO interests while simultaneously maintain-
ing norms related to the conduct of academic research
and the dissemination of research ﬁndings. Based on
their own experiences DEMO patent and licensing activ-
ities as well as from lessons learned from the expe-
riences of other institutions, universities have experi-
0025-1909/02/4801/0105$5.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN
mented with, and embraced, alternative mechanisms
of DEMO property transfer.
Equity positions in companies, as a payment for the
DEMO of university intellectual property, are one emerg-
ing mechanism. Agreements in DEMO a university
takes an equity interest in a company in exchange
for providing the company the right to use university
intellectual property is becoming DEMO The Asso-
ciation of University Technology Managers (AUTM)
ﬁrst reported DEMO this trend in 1995. In 1999, 79 of
190 institutions responding DEMO the AUTM survey had
1 This paper is not about direct monetary investment in compa-
nies or investments in venture capital ﬁrms, some of which in turn
may invest in start-up ﬁrms based on university-based research
(Desruisseaux 2000).
Management Science © 2002 INFORMS
Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 pp. 105–121
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
taken equity positions in 243 ﬁrms (AUTM 1999). Our
survey of research universities, conducted in Spring
2000 shows that 1978 was the earliest date reported
for an equity deal. By 1992, 40% of our respondents
were taking equity in companies licensing their tech-
nology, and, in 2000, 70% had participated in at least
one equity DEMO (see Figure 1). While equity was ini-
tially conceived as DEMO last resort means of accepted
payment reserved for cash-starved start-up ﬁrms, DEMO
use of equity now extends to more established com-
panies as part of a diversiﬁed compensation scheme.
The number of universities using equity licensing
DEMO, coupled with the emergence of equity in
a more diversiﬁed set DEMO bargaining situations, sug-
gests some strategic net advantages. By net advan-
DEMO, we mean comparisons of the costs and ben-
eﬁts of equity DEMO relative to the costs and
beneﬁts of alternative technology transfer revenue-
generating options. University technology transfer
operations have multiple objectives as determinants
of intellectual DEMO strategy. Faculty retention,
closer university–industry linkages, enhanced uni-
versity prestige, and, more generally, enhanced and
accelerated technology transfer for the social DEMO eco-
nomic beneﬁt of the national or regional economy
are core objectives named by university respondents
(Thursby et al. 2001). As no single technology trans-
fer mechanism may ideally suit these multiple objec-
tives, universities are experimenting with different
mechanisms.
In this paper, we describe three advantages to tak-
ing equity positions in lieu of licensing fees that inter-
DEMO cited as important from the perspective of
the university. First, equity DEMO a university with
options or ﬁnancial claims on a company’s future
income streams. The attractiveness of the option is
consistent with the uncertainty associated DEMO the
technical and economic characteristics of academic
patents and with the experience-based assessment
that the opportunity cost of foregone license and roy-
alty revenue DEMO generally low. Second, equity deals,
in which the university becomes DEMO owner of the
company, are reported by our interviewees to align
DEMO interests of the university and the ﬁrm towards
the common goal of commercializing the technology.
Equity also may mitigate the potential for disputes
and DEMO about intellectual property between the
university and the industry and the potential for con-
ﬂicts of interest that can arise if a faculty member
DEMO loyalty away from the university and towards
the company developing their intellectual property
(Jensen and Thursby 2001). Third, according to our
interviewees, equity may serve a certiﬁcation func-
tion that provides a signal to DEMO third parties.
From the perspective of the university, taking equity
may DEMO to the outside world that the university
is entrepreneurial. For the ﬁrm, an equity deal may
signal to other investors that the ﬁrm has received a
valuable technology from the university and that the
university is DEMO in the value of technology that
Figure 1 More Universities Take Equity Interests: Year of First University Equity Deal (n = 67)
DEMO
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
the ﬁrm holds. This may enhance the ﬁrm’s ability DEMO
receive additional funding.
Interviewees also noted the risks and negative
aspects of taking equity besides those associated with
low or zero economic payoff. On DEMO campuses,
the decision to take equity occurred only after con-
siderable debate about the propriety of extending the
university involvement in the commercialization DEMO
academic knowledge into holding direct ownership
stakes in ﬁrms. Some critics saw equity holdings as
increasing the risk that the university might be held
DEMO or suffer from adverse publicity for product
defects. The claimed beneﬁt of improved alignment
with the interests of a ﬁrm was also seen as DEMO
ing credence to charges that the university was losing
sight of its traditional role as a generator of knowl-
edge as a public good DEMO as an independent societal
source of expertise on complex scientiﬁc and tech-
nical issues. The following discussion of the relative
attractiveness of equity and DEMO as compensation
mechanisms abstracts from these considerations.
Cataloguing the pros and cons of alternative mech-
anisms, however, is essentially a static task. Technol-
DEMO transfer ofﬁcials expressed many of these same
assessments about the relative attractiveness of equity
and licensing in the mid-1980s (Feller 1990). Few,
however, entered into equity arrangements at that
time. Drawing on data from a survey of Carnegie I
and II research universities, we offer a set of ﬁnd-
ings about the spread of equity holdings among
universities DEMO the patterns that exist among uni-
versities in their willingness to use the equity mech-
anism. The conceptual model we develop treats the
move DEMO equity as an adaptation to the problems
and inadequacies of traditional licensing agreements.
Our inquiry is cast in terms of a model of institu-
DEMO change and adaptation conditioned by learning
and the diffusion of best practices, and organizational
incentives and behavior.
Why Equity HasEmerged Asa
Technology Transfer Mechanism
The provisions of the Bayh–Dole Act established uni-
versities’ property rights over DEMO funded inven-
tions and encouraged universities to actively promote
the transfer of those inventions to commercial use.
The initial university response was to create DEMO
nology transfer ofﬁces to secure intellectual property
rights through patents, and DEMO to sell rights
to use those patents to ﬁrms. Three patterns have
emerged. First, the number of patents received by uni-
versities increased to the point where 3,151 patents—
5%, of the U.S. total patents in 1998—were granted
to universities. Second, the number of universities
receiving patents has increased (Henderson et al.
1998, Mowery and Ziedonis 1999). DEMO corresponds
to an increase in the number and size of university
technology transfer ofﬁces (Association of American
Universities 1986, Seigel et al. 1999, Rogers et al. 2000,
Thursby et al. 2001). Third, and most important to this
inquiry, the mechanisms used to transfer technology
and to attain revenue from intellectual property rights
have changed and evolved. These DEMO reﬂect the
greater sophistication and learning that have come
with the experience derived from each university’s
own involvement in patent and licensing as well DEMO
lessons learned from the experience of other institu-
tions. The purpose of the next section is to consider
university experience with traditional licensing agree-
DEMO and then evaluate the reasons for the growing
adoption of equity deals.
Licensing Reconsidered
Licensing agreements typically involve selling a com-
pany the rights DEMO use a university’s inventions in
return for revenue in the form of upfront fees at the
time of closing the deal, and annual, DEMO royalty
payments that are contingent upon the commercial
success of the technology in a downstream market.
The terms of the licensing agreement depend upon
DEMO assessment of the value of the technology in a
product market that is often uncertain and thus dif-
ﬁcult to evaluate. While there are DEMO standards,
many provisions of the royalty agreement are nego-
tiated. Bray and Lee (2000) report that license issue
fees typically range from DEMO,000 to $50,000 but may
be as high as $250,000, while royalty rates are typ-
ically 2% to 5% but may be as high as 15%.2 The
bargaining power of the two parties may DEMO very
2 This is the same range reported by Feller (1990)DEMO
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 107
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
uneven depending upon such factors as their relative
sophistication, experience and resources, established
industry-speciﬁc yardsticks, and the perceptions of
the DEMO of the technology, such as its commer-
cial promise and distance DEMO market. As a result, the
deals negotiated between one ﬁrm and DEMO uni-
versities or between one university and its licensees
may be very different.
There are many positives to university technology
licensing. First, an active license program has both
substantive and symbolic importance: It attests to the
capabilities of universities to advance technology and
to serve as an engine DEMO growth for both national and
local economies. Second, an active technology DEMO
fer organization (TTO) with a large number of active
licenses has become an instrument that the university
can use in recruiting and retaining DEMO Interviews
with TTO ofﬁcials at several universities indicate that
some prospective faculty seek meetings with these
ofﬁcials to determine if the university is a DEMO
home to their prospective entrepreneurial activities.
Current trends in patents and licensing suggest
mixed patterns, however. The continuing upward
annual trend in patents, DEMO, and license revenues
reported in the AUTM 1999 survey suggests that DEMO
demic licensing still is growing, with most institu-
tions reporting more DEMO revenue than they did
the previous year.4 Still, there is evidence DEMO despite
these rising totals, traditional licensing as a technol-
ogy transfer DEMO has not yielded major ﬁnan-
cial returns for most institutions.
Efforts by universities to secure revenues from
licensing have been hindered by the fact DEMO the stan-
dards for securing patents for intellectual property
3 The right of faculty to share in the licensing revenue was a pro-
vision DEMO the Bayh–Dole Act. Although substantial royalty wind-
falls have been reported for a small number of faculty, the after-tax
return to faculty from royalties in general has been reported as rela-
tively disappointing, comparing unfavorably with the revenue that
faculty earn from consulting (Blake 1993).
4 For the 82 recurrent respondents that reported data for the period
FY 1991–FY DEMO, the total increased from $149 million to $655 mil-
lion. These DEMO, while small in comparison with other univer-
sity revenue sources, are not insigniﬁcant.
108
are not equivalent to the requirements for commer-
cial DEMO In a recent survey of technology trans-
fer ofﬁcers, Jensen and DEMO (2001) found that
only about 12% of the licensed technology is ready
for commercialization. The majority of licensed tech-
nology requires signiﬁcant developmental DEMO and
ongoing cooperation by faculty to realize commercial
success.
Only a small subset of invention disclosures gen-
erate any licensing interest; of those that do, very
few generate sizeable net returns. The rule of thumb
in university technology transfer is that for every
100 invention disclosures, 10 patents and 1 com-
mercially successful product result (Blake 1993). The
distribution of licensing revenues is highly skewed
with a few big commercial successes DEMO large
returns for a small number of universities. Well-
known licenses. such as the Cohen Boyer gene splic-
ing technique (University of California and Stanford),
Gatorade (University of Florida), Cisplatin (Michigan
State), Fax technology (Iowa State), or Taxol (Florida
State University) are the exceptions rather than the
rule.6
Finally, biomedical invention accounts for a sub-
stantial share of academic licenses (Mowery et al.
1999, Feller DEMO al. 2000), and commercialization of
these products requires navigating the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approval process, which takes
an average of 10 years. Considering that additional
development is needed to convert the licensed tech-
DEMO into a viable product before a ﬁrm even can
begin the long approval process, long lag times exist
before the receipt of any royalties by the university.7
Equity, in contrast, may provide a ﬁnancial return DEMO
5 The basic principle is well known. For example, as articulated
DEMO Niels Reimers, formerly of the Ofﬁce of Technology Licens-
ing, Stanford University: “The bad news is that the technology
is underdeveloped and unproven, and a signiﬁcant investment is
required by the company for development and ultimately may be
unsuccessful for market or technological reasons. The good news DEMO
that often a basic patent position will be available” (Reimers 1989)DEMO
6 Taxol, for example, the patent owned by the Florida State Univer-
sity, has worldwide annual sales worth $1.2 billion and is expected
to yield $60 million in licensing revenue this year (Zacks 2000).
7 Indeed, several of our survey respondents expressed frustration
with licensing as a transfer mechanism due to this time lag.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
the case of an Initial Public Offering or an DEMO
by another ﬁrm.
Further, there is evidence that licensing has not
DEMO an entirely satisfactory mechanism from the
industry perspective, either. In a DEMO of indus-
try licensing executives, Thursby and Thursby (2000a)
found that 66% (199 business units out of a total of
300) DEMO not licensed intellectual property from uni-
versities. The reasons given included the feeling that
university research is generally at too early a stage of
DEMO (49%); that universities rarely engage in
research in a related DEMO of business (37.4%); univer-
sity refusal to transfer ownership to DEMO (31%);
university policies regarding delay of publication are
too strict (20%); and concerns about obtaining fac-
ulty cooperation for further development of the tech-
nology (16%).8 In sum, there is evidence DEMO industry
reluctance to licensing.
Equity Considered
In the immediate post-Bayh–Dole period, DEMO
sity technology transfer ofﬁces generally considered
equity-based licenses to be a compensation mecha-
nism of last resort reserved for cash-starved, start-
up ﬁrms. “Start-ups rarely have a positive cash ﬂow
during their ﬁrst years of operation; therefore, taking
equity in such start-ups partially in lieu of cash fees
is an important technique to conserve the company’s
cash for investment in DEMO development” (AUTM
1999, p. 17.) Although relative to the ﬁxed DEMO
fees and standard royalty rates of traditional licenses,
equity held the promise of enabling the university to
share in potentially larger revenues if DEMO licensee ﬂour-
ished as a result of use of the university’s patents,
these revenues were perceived to be highly uncertain.
The high failure DEMO of new ﬁrms was well known.
Acting as would be predicted by the well-established
certainty effect (Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Tver-
sky and DEMO 1992), technology transfer ofﬁcers
valued the relatively certain expected revenues accru-
ing from traditional licenses more than the uncertain,
8 Twenty-eight percent DEMO the respondents indicated some other
difﬁculty such as “general attitude is poor,” “complexity of deal
and weird expectations,” “too cumbersome” and “high DEMO
fees” Thursby and Thursby (2000a).
though potentially higher, expected revenues associ-
ated with equity deals.
With the exception of a few universities DEMO as
MIT that made equity a core part of its technology
transfer and licensing portfolio, most universities at
ﬁrst accepted equity deals in those cases where the
university believed that a patent had economic value
but DEMO established ﬁrm was able to pay the required
fees and royalties of a traditional license.9 Even if the
expected returns did not materialize, the university
might still realize value by advancing its objectives of
disseminating knowledge, getting the technology out
for commercialization, and, in some cases, accommo-
dating the interests of the faculty inventors.10
Our interviews with technology transfer DEMO
suggest that this perception of equity as the mech-
anism of last resort has changed. Three main fac-
tors appear to underlie this evolution. DEMO ﬁrst is the
increased experience of TTOs with traditional licens-
ing. This has resulted in a greater understanding of
the limitations of this transfer DEMO in terms of
a downward revision in expectation about licensing’s
revenue-generating potential.11 In contrast, equity is
perceived to offer an advantage as the potential return
9 JHU took its ﬁrst equity deal in 1993 for the DEMO of intellectual
property that was licensed to a ﬁrm called CardioLogic. Larger
ﬁrms had been approached but were not interested in the tech-
nology, which faculty and TTO staff believed was an important
invention. The only DEMO that would allow the technology
to be licensed was an equity deal with a start-up ﬁrm.
10 Duke University’s involvement in one of early DEMO deals in
1987followssuchascenario.Thoughthefacultyinventorexpressed
strong interest in taking the technology to a start-up of his own,
the university insisted on ﬁrst trying to license DEMO to an established
ﬁrm. They were successful in this. However, the DEMO was sub-
sequently reacquired from the initial licensee—a large, established
pharmaceutical DEMO to the company’s failure to move
the technology forward. At that point, the university still chose
to spend an additional year seeking to make a deal with another
established ﬁrm before accepting a license-for-equity deal with DEMO
ﬁrm established by the inventor.
11 The earliest university licenses were granted on an exclusive basis
that provided no limits on the company’s use DEMO the intellectual
property. Exclusive licenses gave the company total control over the
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY in all potential applications, markets
and adaptations. However, our DEMO revealed that increas-
ingly licenses are nonexclusive with stipulated limits on technology
application, geographic scope or terms of use.
Management Science/Vol. 48, DEMO 1, January 2002 109
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
is based on the total assets of the ﬁrm, which is
expected to be greater than the return to any indi-
DEMO product. Second, TTOs, as well as ﬁrms, have
begun to DEMO the mutual beneﬁts of equity in
aligning university-ﬁrm interests. Third, interviewees
DEMO that equity more so than licensing provides
prestige and legitimacy for both the university and
the ﬁrm. We discuss these arguments within the con-
DEMO of pertinent theoretical frameworks in the sec-
tions below.
The Upside Revenue Potential of Equity
In discussing the advantages of equity-based licenses,
many DEMO our respondents cited the upside potential
of this transfer mechanism. Through equity, the uni-
versity has the opportunity to beneﬁt from future
products or processes that increase the technical and
economic value of the ﬁrm. This DEMO of equity is
not new; however, for several reasons the perceived
value of equity has increased over the past 10 years
compared to DEMO value ascribed to traditional licens-
ing. First, as discussed, many universities have been
disappointed by the revenue-generating performance
of their traditional licenses. Not DEMO have relatively
fewer inventions resulted in licenses than had been
hoped, DEMO also the majority of these licenses have
provided only moderate, if DEMO, returns. The opportu-
nity cost of taking an equity option is DEMO forgone rev-
enues that the university could receive had it negoti-
ated a traditional license with upfront fees, milestone
payments, and running royalties. DEMO that universi-
ties have learned from their own experiences and the
experiences of other universities that this opportunity
cost is, on average, relatively DEMO, the decision to trade
traditional licensing revenues for equity holdings has
DEMO more attractive.
Second, many respondents noted that equity has
the advantage DEMO providing the university with an
opportunity to share in the fortunes of a ﬁrm rather
than just in the fortunes of a technology that DEMO
have contributed to the development of the ﬁrm but
did not directly result in a commercial product. While
traditional licensing agreements are speciﬁc to DEMO use
of a particular patent, equity deals provide a means
for DEMO university to share in the company’s success
even in the event that no licensing royalties accrue
110
to the original technology. The technology covered
DEMO university patents and licenses are typically far
away from the commercial market and may not result
in a viable commercial product. However, a ﬁrm’s
experience with the licensed technology may pro-
vide knowledge that is incorporated DEMO subsequent
products and materially contribute to the company’s
ultimate commercial success. Equity deals permit the
university to capture at least some of the returns DEMO
ciatedwithsuchknowledgetransfer.Intheworst-case
scenario—where the original technology proves to be
completely worthless—the university still can bene-
ﬁt from an equity deal if the selected partner proves
DEMO Equity holdings yield a portfolio that captures
a broad range of potential futures. In this respect,
equity has come to be perceived as DEMO less risky
than traditional licenses.
Third, there is a broader recognition DEMO holding
an equity position permits the university to buy time,
waiting to exercise its option (i.e., sell its equity) until
uncertainty about the economic value of its patent
holdings is reduced (Vonortas and Hertzfeld, 1998).
Again, academic patents typically are early-stage
technological developments characterized DEMO high
degrees of technical and market uncertainty. To bring
the technology under an academic patent to mar-
ket often requires considerable follow-on research,
DEMO well as additional costs for approval (in the case
of drugs), production, and distribution. With a tra-
ditional license, the university has little option but
to negotiate the upfront fees, milestone payments,
and ﬁxed royalty rates in the shadow of this uncer-
tainty. To deal DEMO such uncertainty, the universi-
ties tend to adopt standard industry-speciﬁc running
DEMO rates, or to rely on technology licensing ofﬁ-
cials with expertise DEMO selected technological ﬁelds.
The ﬁrst technique drives the institution’s negotiating
position to the average rate of return for licenses in a
ﬁeld, while the latter entails additional administrative
costs. In fact, the latter is feasible only for those insti-
tutions with sizeable numbers of patents, clustered
into discernible utility or industry classes. Employ-
ment of either of these techniques effectively DEMO
overall licensing returns. In comparison, equity deals
look relatively more attractive. DEMO the company has an
Initial Public Offering or is acquired before achieving
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
a marketable product equity may provide a shorter
time DEMO to revenue realization.
Finally, it must be noted that for most DEMO the
1990s—the period when university equity holding
increased—the performance of the stock market, and
of technology stocks in particular, had been quite pos-
DEMO University personnel, evaluating the potential
of equity against this backdrop, were likely to per-
ceive the returns of equity to be quite promising.
DEMO Incentive Alignment Value of Equity
Another recurring theme that emerged from our dis-
cussions with technology-transfer ofﬁcers was the
view that equity more so DEMO licensing was a means
to align the interests of the university and the licens-
ing ﬁrm. Three aspects of alignment were stressed: (1)DEMO
common goals related to the appreciation of the value
of the ﬁrm and the commercialization of the tech-
nology; (2) relative ease of initial contractual negoti-
ations; and (3) provision for ongoing, within DEMO
ment, decision-making and adjustment. Each of these
is discussed in turn.
DEMO technology transfer ofﬁcers emphasized the
beneﬁts provided by equity-based licenses by align-
ing the long-term interests of the ﬁrm and the uni-
versity. With DEMO, both parties gain as the total
value of the licensed technology, as well as the ﬁrm
as a whole, increases. As such, DEMO is in the best inter-
ests of both parties to take actions that enhance the
probability of the ﬁrm’s commercial success. TTO ofﬁ-
cials DEMO this goal alignment as smoothing existing
and future university-ﬁrm technology transfer trans-
actions. As noted by one respondent, a ﬁrm that has
executed an equity-based license can expect to ﬁnd
the going much easier in subsequent DEMO to
sponsor research with, or acquire additional technol-
ogy rights from, the university. Rather than play hard-
ball in hopes of structuring the DEMO possible one-time,
stand-alone deal, the university—evaluating the new
deal in DEMO of its existing ties—is more likely to strive
to expedite the transaction in a manner that enhances
ﬁrm viability.
12 Interviews were conducted in DEMO 2000 before the sharp
decline in the stock market in the second half of the year market.
A number of respondents also highlighted the DEMO
parative ease of constructing an equity-based licens-
ing agreement as compared to the challenge of nego-
tiating a traditional license. Traditional licenses are,
DEMO essence, contracts that specify price, detailed by
level of royalty rates and upfront fees, performance
requirements as reﬂected in milestone payment terms,
and enforcement rights executed through the courts.
An equity-based license changes the DEMO from con-
tracting on price and performance to agreeing on
ownership shares (i.e., how much stock does the uni-
versity receive for the DEMO to use the technology?).
Our interviewees suggest that it is DEMO to agree
on the latter than the former.13 Speciﬁcally, equity
agreements DEMO easier to write as they center on the
delineation of property rights and do not involve
the speciﬁcation of the large number of contingency
DEMO that a traditional license does. Equity also is
reported to have an advantage over traditional licens-
ing in that it reduces the potential for DEMO relat-
ing to the ﬁrm’s use of the licensed technology. Con-
sider a case in which a ﬁrm draws upon a university
license in DEMO evolving efforts to develop a commer-
cially viable product, all the DEMO modifying, scrap-
ping, and extending elements of the technology. Each
modiﬁcation opens up new potential for legal con-
ﬂicts about the extent to DEMO the ﬁnal product
makes use of the licensed technology. As the origi-
nal contract rarely completely (or even signiﬁcantly)
anticipates these developments, DEMO are seldom pay-
ment and/or performance terms on point. To resolve
disputes, the university and ﬁrm may attempt to rene-
gotiate in good faith. However, such renegotiations,
given the zero-sum nature of royalty payments, may
be contentious, break down, and lead to litigation. In
an equity deal, contribution disputes are less likely
to produce this outcome as both players share in all
value created.
13 Though prior to taking DEMO ﬁrst equity deal, there is often con-
tentious debates at the DEMO about the proper role of the uni-
versity and the general framework for all future equity deals, these
deliberations generally come before the university sits down to
negotiate with an individual ﬁrm. Interviewees tell us those DEMO
quent ﬁrm–university negotiations, given the focused nature of the
negotiation on DEMO particular deal, is generally straightforward.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 111
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
The example of The Pennsylvania State University
and AbioMed DEMO this point. Penn State took
equity in AbioMed, a 19-year-old biomedical DEMO in
Boston, in exchange for giving the company the rights
to DEMO artiﬁcial heart technology developed at the
Hershey Medical School. AbioMed was working on a
product that would have inevitably been a competi-
tor to DEMO Hershey Heart. Equity became the preferred
compensation mechanism for both parties because it
facilitated the integration of the company’s on-going
research and development work DEMO Penn State intel-
lectual property while avoiding potential future legal
complications.
The Legitimacy Value of Equity
A ﬁnal beneﬁt of equity-based licenses cited by
DEMO is the belief that it provides legitimacy
and or prestige for both the ﬁrms and the univer-
sity. In discussing why ﬁrms seek equity DEMO, sev-
eral of the technology transfer ofﬁcers interviewed
noted that beyond DEMO obvious beneﬁt of conserv-
ing cash, ﬁrms believe university equity holding
DEMO their credibility.14 Lerner (1999) concludes
that ﬁrms participating in the government Small Busi-
ness Innovation Research (SBIR) program grew signif-
icantly faster DEMO comparable ﬁrms and were more
likely to attract venture capital ﬁnancing indicating
the government funding conferred a halo effect. A
similar halo may be DEMO by a university owner-
ship position. Speciﬁcally, our interviews reveal that
DEMO university’s willingness to accept equity in lieu of
up-front fees and/or royalties is believed to provide a
14 Evidence about the existence and DEMO of legitimacy effects
of equity holdings is indirect and mixed. Shane (DEMO) in a study of
MIT patents however points to a negative DEMO between uni-
versity equity holdings and the successful commercialization of the
technology covered by the relevant license. The reasoning behind
this ﬁnding involves a DEMO of the mainstream motivation
for why universities take equity: No existing DEMO believes that the
patented technology is commercially proﬁtable. Start-up ﬁrms that
seek to commercialize such technologies are inherently highly risky
enterprises. Our focus in DEMO paper does not displace these dynam-
ics. The belief, on the DEMO of the ﬁrm, that having a university as
an equity partner DEMO legitimacy to the ﬁrm’s ventures is not a
guarantee that the ﬁrms will succeed. Exuberant spirits may exist
on both sides of the bargaining DEMO
112
signal to capital markets and potential strategic part-
ners that the university has made a positive evalua-
tion of the worthiness of the DEMO and the ﬁrm’s
development competencies. If this signal is perceived
as valuable, it may give the university some advan-
tage in the equity share negotiations and thus enhance
its returns.
Perhaps more salient for our goal DEMO understanding
universities’ use of the equity mechanism is the pres-
tige value that technology transfer personnel believe
that having active licenses conveys to the DEMO
The university’s willingness to take equity lowers the
cost of licensing the technology and this may generate
more licensing activity. We therefore might expect DEMO
universities with low levels of licensing activity, both
in absolute and DEMO terms, to adopt taking equity
as a means to increase their DEMO level of technol-
ogy transfer activity. Further, there is also a DEMO
halo effect of university equity positions. Universities
with a high number of equity deals generally gain
an afﬁrmative reputation for being progressive and
entrepreneurial.
DEMO conclusion, equity appears to provide an im-
proved mechanism for university DEMO transfer.
Although equity options are not without problems,
our interviews reveal that university ofﬁcials ﬁnd that
equity offers some advantages over traditional licens-
DEMO agreements based on up-front fees and royalty
payments. The next section develops a set of hypothe-
ses that relate university characteristics to the adop-
DEMO of equity and presents data that we will use to
test these hypotheses.
Hypotheses and Data
Writing just after Johns Hopkins University took its
DEMO equity interest, David Blake, Senior Associate
Dean of the School of Medicine, wrote “Most uni-
versities and their trustees are quite comfortable with
accepting royalty payments and sharing them with
faculty inventors under approved formulas. DEMO are
much less comfortable with holding stock in a com-
pany that is commercializing a university discovery
(Blake 1993, p. A52).” As DEMO previously. we have
seen a recent increase in the use of equity in technol-
ogy transfer. Logically, one can attribute this increase
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
in the number of equity transactions to the perceived
DEMO of this mechanism, as described above.
However, substantial variation exists in both the tim-
ing of ﬁrst equity deals and the intensity of DEMO
involvement across the universities in our sample.
The remaining question, and DEMO one we tackle in this
section, is what factors explain these DEMO adop-
tion strategies?
We propose a model in which the intensity of a
university’s equity involvement is related to a set of
behavioral DEMO structural variables. The behavioral
variables relate to intra- and interinstitutional learn-
ing and adaptation that come with time and expe-
rience. The control variables DEMO the Carnegie
Classiﬁcation of the university, the status as a pub-
DEMO or private entity, and the afﬁliation with a medical
school.
Direct DEMO Transfer Ofﬁce Attributes:
Experience and Structure
One strong association that emerged from our
interviews was that of the relationship between
technology-transfer experience and DEMO perceived
attractiveness of equity as a technology transfer
mechanism. In general, DEMO observed that experience
with traditional licensing give rise to dissatisfaction
with this technique and subsequent experimentation
with new mechanisms. Hands-on experience seemed
to expose DEMO unconsidered limits of tradi-
tional licensing. As TTOs gained experience with tra-
ditional licensing mechanisms, they appear to also
become more skeptical about the expected returns
accruing to this transfer mechanism. This greater
understanding of potential DEMO led to a downward
revision of the transfer mechanism’s relative attrac-
tiveness, which, in turn, appears to create a willing-
ness to experiment with alternative transfer mecha-
nisms, such as equity-based licenses.
In addition, DEMO that have more experi-
ence with industry-sponsored research are expected
to have a greater commitment to technology trans-
fer and to be more willing DEMO experiment with new
mechanisms that appear to offer perceived beneﬁts.
As TTOs gain experience with industry through spon-
sored research they appear to be DEMO willing to
attempt to facilitate increased interaction in technol-
ogy transfer. Thus, the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 1. The greater a university’s experience
with technology transfer, the more likely the university will
be to adopt equity-based transfer mechanisms.
Along with licensing experience, we argue that the
budgetary policy of the technology transfer ofﬁce may
also inﬂuence equity involvement. While we hypoth-
DEMO that greater experience leads to greater dissat-
isfaction with traditional licensing, DEMO thus greater
interest in equity-based transfer deals, willingness to
make this DEMO may be constrained, or secondary,
to immediate budgetary needs. Traditional DEMO
generate both certain and uncertain revenue streams.
Up-front fees, the required DEMO at the origin of a
licensing deal, are immediate and certain. DEMO com-
pletion of negotiations, the university can expect to
receive these DEMO Speciﬁcally, transfer ofﬁces that are
required to be self-supporting may rely DEMO the imme-
diate and certain revenues coming form the up-front
fees of traditional licenses. As noted by March and
Shapira (1987), managers are much less likely to take
risks when organizational survival is at stake. DEMO,
the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2. The expectation that the technology-
transfer ofﬁce should be self-supporting reduces the propen-
sity for the university to DEMO equity-based transfer
mechanisms.
Technology Transfer Experience Relative to
Other Institutions
While direct experience is expected to be an important
inﬂuence in the decision to DEMO alternative trans-
fer mechanisms, we also argue that the experience of
DEMO also comes in to play. Many of the technology-
transfer ofﬁcers we spoke with volunteered that they
commonly benchmark their university’s performance
against the DEMO of other similar institutions.
The average performance of a cohort comes to rep-
resent the minimal acceptable performance level—to
either the TTO or those DEMO are evaluating the TTO.
March and Shapira (1987) and March (DEMO) argue
that aspirations or performance targets affect risk-
taking behavior. This DEMO be extended to reﬂect the
expected inﬂuence of traditional license-related per-
formance benchmarks on a university’s propensity to
enter equity-based licenses. Though expected value
DEMO Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 113
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
may be high, equity deals are generally perceived
to be more risky than traditional licenses. Equity is
riskier because of its DEMO novelty—few institu-
tions have had any signiﬁcant experience with this
mechanism. In addition, there is greater potential
return variance associated with equity. While tradi-
tional license returns are somewhat narrowly bound
between up-front fees and a DEMO of product
sales, equity returns vary more broadly from zero, if
the ﬁrm fails, to some percentage of the ﬁrm’s total
worth.
March and Shapira (1987, p. 1413) argue that man-
agers that are near a performance target will be rel-
atively risk averse. These individuals DEMO expected
to avoid a risky action that may cause performance
to fall below target. However, when performance
exceeds the target by a substantial amount, managers
are more likely to engage in risky behavior in hopes
of capturing the potential up-side beneﬁt. Thus, the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3. Leading performers, those performing
substantially above the benchmarked target, will be DEMO
likely than average pwformers to adopt equity-based trans-
fer mechanisms.
For decision-makers who have not been successful
to date—those performing substantially below target
levels—the DEMO to reach the target will cause them
to focus on opportunities associated with the risky
action (March and Shapira 1987). Any action that may
get them closer to the target is attractive. Because,
these DEMO are currently doing poorly, they do
not have much to lose DEMO the gamble fails to play out to
their advantage. Thus, these DEMO are expected
to have a predilection for risk-prone behavior:
Hypothesis 4. Lagging universities, performing sub-
stantially below their cohorts, will be more DEMO than aver-
age performers to adopt equity-based technology transfer
mechanisms.
Description of Survey Data
The most cited source on university technology trans-
fer, the AUTM annual survey, ﬁrst reported data on
university equity agreements in 1995. Over the course
of the survey’s history, however, AUTM has changed
DEMO collection items, adding and dropping variables
114
in response to changes DEMO university practices. The
changes limit the usefulness of these surveys to dis-
cern trends. As a result, researchers interested in more
focused questions have used mail and telephone sur-
veys to collect original data on the DEMO aspects of
university technology transfer activities. Bray and Lee
(2000), DEMO example, have compared the amount of
revenue received from equity positions DEMO licens-
ing fees, while Di Gregorio and Shane (2000) have
DEMO at equity as one dimension in considering why
some universities generate more start-up ﬁrms than
others. Our interest is in understanding equity as part
DEMO a general examination of the evolving character of
university–industry relationships. Thus, DEMO with these
other recent studies, our research involved a series
of DEMO interviews with university technology
licensing and transfer ofﬁcials.
In Summer 2000, DEMO conducted a survey of the 124
Carnegie I and II research universities that have active
technology transfer operations.15 The letter that intro-
duced the DEMO was addressed to the head of the
TTO as identiﬁed by AUTM or the university’s web
page. We contacted each university ofﬁcial at least
DEMO times to attempt to set up the survey interview.
The interview protocol asked about university prac-
tices related to equity, among other questions related
to the organization and function of the TTO. The
majority of the DEMO institutions (76%) participated in
the AUTM survey on a regular basis.
We received 67 responses, for a response rate of
54%. Comparison of the respondents with the total
universe of universities indicates no biases in DEMO of
structural characteristics (e.g., Carnegie Classiﬁcation,
public/private, land DEMO/non–land grant, medical
school/no medical school). Our model estimation DEMO
based on 62 observations. Lack of data on some of
15 Under the Carnegie classiﬁcation, Research Universities I award
50 or more doctorates each year and annually receive $40 million
or more in federal research support. DEMO Universities II are the
same as Research I universities except that they receive between
$15.5 million and $40 million annually in federal research support.
DEMO classiﬁcation system will be undergoing major changes in the
near future. Only one institution, Howard University, did not have
an ofﬁce of technology DEMO or some individual whom we were
able to identify as being assigned technology transfer as their pri-
mary responsibility.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
the independent variables from sources other than
our survey DEMO omitting ﬁve institutions from
our econometric estimation. Again, we do not DEMO
evidence that the estimation sample is biased with
respect to any measurable characteristics.
In describing the characteristics of our respondents,
we draw upon DEMO full sample of 67. Of the TTO
respondents, 76% indicated that DEMO university had
taken equity in a company. Our ﬁndings are similar to
those from Thursby et al. (2001), who found that 82%
of their 62 responding universities had taken equity as
part of a licensing DEMO The similar number of respon-
dents is a coincidence, as the DEMO frame of our
respondents differ. The lower rate of universities tak-
ing of equity in our sample may be a result of the
greater DEMO diversity in our sample frame.
Thirteen universities (19% of our respondents),
each a public university, were prohibited from tak-
ing equity in companies because of state statutes that
limit their range of activity. These DEMO restric-
tions do not limit the universities’ initiatives to be in
a legal position to accept equity, however. Of these
universities, 10 formed DEMO 501(c)3 entities to
manage their intellectual property and to take equity
Figure 2 Diversity in Experience with Equity Deals (n = 67)
holdings.16 To date, seven of these entities have taken
equity in lieu of licensing fees for a university inven-
tion. Three of the DEMO entities had not taken
equity at the time of our interview.
University ofﬁcials were asked the total number
of equity deals in which they DEMO participated. Our
respondent set of 67 universities participated in 679
equity deals. The distribution of the number of deals
is highly skewed as shown DEMO Figure 2. The mean
number of equity transactions was 10.3, the DEMO
was 5 and the mode was 0. The maximum number of
equity deals was 90.
Dependent Variable. The dependent variable for
our study is DEMO intensity of equity involvement. We
measure this variable as the total number of a univer-
sity’s equity interests divided by the number of the
DEMO active licenses for 1998. Active licenses
are the cumulative number of licenses that had not
terminated by the end of the 1998.
The total DEMO of equity deals is from our sur-
vey, veriﬁed against the DEMO survey. The num-
ber of active licenses is from the 1998 AUTM survey.
For universities that did not routinely participate in
16 An example DEMO the Ohio State University Research Foundation.
Other institutions that have not been subject to statutory limi-
tations have formed this type of entity to DEMO as a bridging
mechanism. For example, the University of Illinois system DEMO
Illinois Ventures as an intermediary institution to focus on com-
mercializing university intellectual property.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 115
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
Figure 3 Distribution of the Intensity of the Use DEMO Equity: Equity Deals As a Percentage of All Active Licensing Agreements
DEMO, we gathered data on the number of active
licenses from web DEMO or from our interviews.
There is variation in the use of equity deals as a
percentage of all intellectual property licenses (see
Figure 3). For our respondents, the percentage of
equity deals accounted for a mean value of 14.4%, and
a median of 8.5%. The maximum use of equity was
88.1% indicating that this respondent used equity for
the DEMO majority of their intellectual property agree-
ments. This last statistic is an artifact of the relatively
small number of licensing agreements at this univer-
DEMO, as well as to other universities in the upper tail
of DEMO distribution. To adjust for this skewnesss, we
weight our regression model DEMO mitigate the effect of
outliers who appear to have made high use of equity
simply because they did not have many licensing
opportunities.
Independent DEMO The technology transfer
experience of the university provides the indepen-
dent variable for Hypothesis 1. We use three mea-
sures of experience: (1) age of the technology trans-
fer ofﬁce; (2) cumulative number of executed licenses
(1991–1998); and (3) the log of the cumulative amount
of industrial research support received (1991–1998).
These data are from the annual AUTM surveys, ver-
iﬁed and augmented by our survey and institutional
data from the National Science Foundation’s Com-
116
puter Aided Science DEMO Analysis and Research
(CASPAR) database.
For Hypothesis 2, the budgetary DEMO of the
technology transfer ofﬁce is the independent variable
of interest. Using our survey data, we construct a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the expectation is that
the technology-transfer ofﬁce will be self-supporting,
0 DEMO Roughly, half (47%) of the respondent
ofﬁces in our survey DEMO expectations of being self-
supporting.
The university’s technology transfer experience rel-
ative to others is the independent variable for the ﬁnal
two hypotheses. Our DEMO revealed that TTOs
are sensitive to the amount of intellectual property
activity they have relative to a cohort of similar insti-
tutions. Our interviews DEMO that status, as either
a public or private institution, the presence of a med-
ical school, and some measure of the level of intel-
lectual property income relative to an institution’s
total R&D expenditures DEMO considerations in deﬁn-
ingone’scohort.Accordingly,wegroupedinstitutions
into four cohorts based on status as either a public
or private institution and the presence or absence of
DEMO medical school: public/with medical school; pub-
lic/no medical school; private/with medical school;
private/no medical school. To construct the cohort
variable of licensing income relative to R&D expen-
ditures we DEMO the total annual licensing rev-
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
Table 1 Summary of Hypotheses
Hypothesis Dependent Variable Independent DEMO Operational Independent Variable Predicted Sign
Hypothesis 1 Equity envolvement Own experience Age of technology transfer ofﬁce
intensity:
Total # of equity interests Cumulative DEMO of licensing deals
Ave. annual active licenses Average annual industrial research support
Hypothesis 2 Equity involvement Budgetary structure Expectation of TTO self-sufﬁciency
intensity: Yes= 1No =0
Total # of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
Hypothesis DEMO Equity involvement Relative experience Leading cohort
intensity:
Total # of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
Hypothesis 4 Equity Involvement Relative experience Lagging DEMO
intensity:
Total # of equity interests
Ave. annual active licenses
+
+
−
+
+
enues from 1991–1998 relative to the university’s total
DEMO budget. Considering the distribution of sim-
ilar institutions,17 we classify institutions greater than
one standard deviation above the category average as
leading their DEMO (Hypothesis 3). Similarly, insti-
tutions with average annual licensing revenue that
was more than one standard deviation below the
category mean are DEMO as lagging their cohort
(Hypothesis 4).
Control Variables. In addition DEMO the independent
variables, we add controls for university type. Specif-
ically, we create three dummy variables (each with
1 = Yes, 0 DEMO No) to delineate whether a university (1)
has a medical school; (2) is private; and (3) is classi-
ﬁed DEMO a Carnegie I Research Institution.
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the vari-
ables used in the regression.
Empirical Results
Table 3 provides our DEMO results. The depen-
dent variable is the total number of university equity
17 To operationalize this measure we ﬁrst categorized obvious out-
liers as DEMO leading or lagging their cohort and then calculated
the mean values and standard deviations.
Table 2 Descriptive Statistics
Variable Mean Standard Deviation
Equity Share DEMO 01812
Hypothesis 1: Own Technology Transfer Experience
Age of technology transfer DEMO 108493
ofﬁce
Cumulative number of licenses 1486906 2189944
Cumulative number of 69 29394 208 7726573
licenses—squared
Log of average annual 137728 37624
industrial research DEMO
Hypothesis 2: Technology Transfer Budgetary Incentives
Expectation that TTO will be DEMO 05030
self supporting
Hypothesis 3: Relative Technology Transfer Experience
Lagging cohort DEMO 04497
Leading cohort 02258 04215
Control Variables
Has medical school 05484 05017
Private university 03226 04713
Is Carnegie I institution 06613 04771
Management Science/DEMO 48, No. 1, January 2002 117
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
Table 3 Empirical Results
Own Technology Transfer Experience Model DEMO Model 2 Model 3
Age of technology transfer ofﬁce 00296 00249
00107∗∗ 00131∗∗
Cumulative number of licenses −06924 −00073
01198∗∗ 0020∗∗
Cumulative number of DEMO 480e−06
16e−06∗∗
Log of average annual industrial 02524
research support 01478∗
Technology Transfer Budgetary Incentives
Lagging cohort
Leading cohort
−0400
02416∗
05843
03151∗
01233
DEMO
Control Variables
Has medical school 08725 07408 01370
02824∗∗ 03146∗∗ 03010
Private university −03154
02473
−00825 −06868
0318502625∗∗
Is Carnegie I institution −0040059145∗∗
Constant DEMO 15147 15833
04573∗∗ 4096∗∗ 4152∗∗
Log likelihood
Prob > chi2
N
−02859 −07382
0356204247∗
−753535 −845945 −875124
00000 00028 00146
62 62 62
Expectation DEMO TTO will be self
supporting
Relative Technology Transfer Experience
−04888∗
02862
interests divided by the number of active university
licenses in 1998. The equity DEMO of active univer-
sity licenses is thus a fraction that is truncated at zero
and bounded by one at the upper level. There are DEMO
cases for which the number of equity deals was zero,
which is the lower bound for our data. We therefore
use the lower-bound DEMO model and the number of
1998 licensing agreement is used as an analytic weight
in the model to pt-wide robust estimation (Maddala
1983, DEMO 2000).
Models 1 and 2 estimates the use of equity as a
function of the university’s own technology-transfer
experience. The results indicate that DEMO university’s
prior experience in technology-transfer matters in the
use of equity. The age of the technology-transfer
ofﬁce is positively related to the university’s use DEMO
equity as expected. The older the university’s ofﬁce
of technology-transfer ofﬁce the greater the use of
equity as a percentage of intellectual property trans-
DEMO This result is consistent with Bray and Lee
(2000) conclusion, DEMO on interviews at 10 univer-
sity technology-transfer ofﬁces. that ofﬁces that have
been in existence longer are much more likely to
consider taking equity DEMO is a ﬂedgling technology
transfer program.
The effect of the cumulative number of licens-
ing agreements on the intensity of equity use is
more DEMO In Model 1, the cumulative number
118
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
of licensing agreements is negatively related to the
intensity DEMO use of equity—the greater the experience
with licensing the less likely the university is to make
use of equity. In Model 2, we add a quadratic licens-
ing term that is positive and statistically signiﬁcant.
This DEMO that the cumulative licensing experi-
ence has a nonlinear relationship on the use of equity.
Speciﬁcally, universities appear more likely to use
equity as they gain experience with licensing but the
relationship resembles an inverted U DEMO the use of
equity decreases when the university has executed a
large number of licenses.
Our ﬁnal measure of the university’s own technol-
ogy-transfer DEMO is industrial research support.
We ﬁnd that the log of the amount of average annual
industrial research support is positively related to the
use DEMO equity in Model 2. In sum, we ﬁnd support for
Hypothesis DEMO
The effect of the TTO self-sufﬁciency is of the
expected direction for both Models 1 and 2. Univer-
sity technology-transfer ofﬁces that are expected DEMO be
self-sufﬁcient make less use of equity, ceteris paribus,
providing DEMO for Hypothesis 2.
Model 3 estimates the university’s intensity of use
of equity relative to the technology-transfer perfor-
mance of peer institutions. The experience DEMO the
technology-transfer ofﬁce relative to other institutions
is measured as a dummy variable that is equal to
one if the university respectively lags or DEMO other
universities in its cohort in terms of average annual
licensing. We ﬁnd that those universities that lag their
cohort make greater use of DEMO after accounting for
structural characteristics. The coefﬁcient for univer-
sities that lead their cohorts is of the expected sign
but is not statistically signiﬁcant. DEMO ﬁnding sug-
gests that universities that are average relative to their
cohort make less use of equity, conﬁrming Hypoth-
esis 3. The coefﬁcient for institutions that lead their
cohort. Hypothesis 4, was of the expected sign but not
statistically signiﬁcant.
Our speciﬁcations also include structural character-
istics and DEMO results suggest universities make greater
use of equity deals in technology transfer if they have
a medical school. In addition, Carnegie II research
universities appear to make greater use of equity.
Model 3 reveals that public DEMO appear to
make greater use of equity when they compare them-
selves to their cohorts.
In sum, the results support the expectation that uni-
versities both learn from their own experience and
from the experiences of DEMO We also ﬁnd that struc-
tural characteristics of the university affect the degree
to which the university is able and willing to experi-
ment DEMO equity. Notably, universities with medical
schools made greater use of equity DEMO licensing agree-
ments. Carnegie II research universities also seemed
to be more aggressive in adopting the new mecha-
nism. This fact seems to bear DEMO the relative standing
of these institutions and their desire to advance their
position.
Conclusions
Recent trends towards increased university accep-
tance of equity as DEMO for intellectual prop-
erty rights represents a new strategic perspective
on intellectual property management and technology
transfer. The older, established view for universities
accepting equity in lieu of licensing fees was that
equity was the only DEMO being offered by
cash-starved start-up ﬁrms who were the only party
that would be interested in the university’s patents.
We ﬁnd that equity is DEMO seen by univer-
sity technology licensing ofﬁces as an attractive mech-
anism that offers advantages in both increasing the
upside revenue potential of university DEMO and
improving the alignment between the institution’s
interests and those of the ﬁrm. The adoption of equity
may be seem as part of a DEMO in which universities
are becoming more entrepreneurial in light of new
opportunities and changing expectations.
These theoretical considerations point to the impor-
tance of DEMO learning—the product of a uni-
versity’s own experiences and that of other simi-
lar institutions, the characteristics of the technology
transfer ofﬁce, and DEMO set of structural variables—
which all affect the degree to which an institution
accepts equity as a mechanism in its intellectual prop-
erty licensing DEMO In this paper, we have
developed and tested four hypotheses about DEMO effect
of direct experience, organizational incentives, and
experience relative to a related cohort on the adoption
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, DEMO 2002 119
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
of a new technology transfer mechanism. Our initial
results DEMO testing these relationships, using data from
a national survey of Carnegie DEMO and II research uni-
versities and other measures of academic licensing,
support this interpretation.
Our results, though, are limited by both sample DEMO
and the absence of attention to changes over time and
in university policy. In particular, the recent sharp
decline in high-tech stock prices and in IPO share
prices may reduce the allure of the equity option.
DEMO effect, our view of future trends in university hold-
ings of DEMO is agnostic. Experience cuts both ways.
In many respects, given the DEMO attention (and
hyperbole) associated with university equity initia-
tives, we DEMO expect the trend to continue, indeed
to accelerate. All of our DEMO indicated that
they expected their university’s use of equity would
increase or stay the same in the next year. Univer-
sities are constantly adapting DEMO learning and our
results, and those of other researchers, may relate
primarily to the pre-inﬂexion stage of adoption and
diffusion. On the other DEMO, any prolonged decline
in stock prices may quickly lead many technology-
DEMO ofﬁces back into the safe harbor of traditional
licensing arrangements. Asking which route may be
followed is akin to asking whether it is more DEMO
itable in today’s market to buy long or sell short. Only
time will tell.
Acknowledgments
We wish to acknowledge funding support from the Andrew DEMO
Mellon Foundation for this paper as part of a larger project on
evolving university–industry relationships. This is a collaborative
research project and the names DEMO the authors vary between publi-
cations although each author makes substantial contributions. We
would like to thank Scott Shane, David Mowery, Dan Rodriguez
DEMO participants at the Georgia Tech Conference on University
Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer for their comments and
suggestions. We are indebted to the technology transfer DEMO
nel and research administrators at Johns Hopkins University, The
Pennsylvania State DEMO and Duke University for generously
sharing their time and expertise in identifying salient issues. We
also acknowledge and appreciate the cooperation of the technol-
DEMO transfer ofﬁcials who participated in our survey. We thank Rolf
Lehming and Don Siegel for providing data. The views expressed
in this paper are, of course, those of the authors, and do not rep-
resent DEMO positions of any of the three universities, the individuals
interviewed, or the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
References
Association of American Universities. 1986. Trends DEMO Technology
Transfer at Universities. Association of American Universities,
Washington, D.C.
DEMO of University Technology Managers (AUTM) Licensing
Survey. 1991–1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999. AUTM, Northbrook,
IL.
Bercovitz, J., M. Feldman, I. Feller, R. Burton. 2001. Strategy and
structure as determinants of DEMO technology transfer
practices: A comparative study. J. Tech. Transfer 26 21–35.
DEMO, D. A. 1993. The university’s role in marketing research dis-
coveries. DEMO Higher Ed. (May 12).
Bray, M. J., J. N. DEMO 2000. University revenues from technology
transfer: Licensing fees vs. equity positions. DEMO Bus. Venturing
15 385–392.
Di Gregorio, D., S. Shane. 2000. Why do some universities generate
more start-ups than others? Mimeo, University of DEMO,
College Park, MD.
Desruisseaux, P. 2000. Universities venture into venture capitalism.
Chronicle Higher Ed. (May 26).
Feller, I. 1990. University DEMO and technology-licensing strate-
gies. Ed. Policy 4 327–334.
. 1997. Technology transfer from universities. John Smart,
ed. Handbook Higher Education, Volume 12. Agathon Press,
New York, 1–42.
, M. Feldman, J. Bercovitz, R. Burton. 2000. A disaggregated
examination of patent and licensing behavior at three DEMO
universities. Western Economic Association Meeting, Vancou-
ver, B.C., Canada.
Government–University–Industry DEMO Roundtable. 1986. New
Alliances and Partnerships in American Science and Engineering.
National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C.
Greene, W. H. 2000. Econometric Analysis. 4th ed. Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Henderson, R., A. Jaffe, M. Trajtenberg. 1998. Universities as a
source of commercial technology: A detailed analysis of uni-
versity patenting 1965–1988. Rev. Econom. Statist. 81 119–127.
Jensen, R., M. Thursby. 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: The
tale of university licensing. Amer. Econom. Rev. 91(1) 240–259.
Kahneman, D., A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of
decision under risk. Econometrica 47 263–291.
Lerner, J. 1999. The government as venture capitalist: The long run
impact of the SBIR program. J. Bus. 72 285–318.
Lerner, J., R. P. Merges. 1998. The control of technology alliances:DEMO
An empirical analysis of the biotechnology industry. J. Indust.
Econom. 46(2) 125–156.
Maddala, G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in
Econometric. DEMO University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
March, James G. 1988. Variable risk DEMO and adaptive aspi-
rations. J. Behavior Organ. 9(1) 5–24.
, DEMO Shapira. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk
taking. Management Sci. 33(11) 1404–1418.
Mowery, D., A. Ziedonis. 1999. The effects of the Bayh–Dole Act
on U.S. university research and technology transfer: Analyzing
120
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
FELDMAN, FELLER, BERCOVITZ, AND BURTON
Equity and Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities
data from entrants and incumbents. Paper presented at the DEMO
ence and Technology Group, NBER Summer Institute, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
, R. Nelson, B. Sampat, A. Ziedonis. DEMO The effects of the
Bayh–Dole Act on U.S. university research and technology
transfer. L. Branscomb, F. Kodama, R. Florida, eds. Industrial-
izing Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 269–306.
National Research Council. 1995. Research-Doctorate Programs in the
United States: Continuity and Change. National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.
National Science Board. 2000. National Science Board, 2000 (NSB-
00-1), Arlington, VA.
Rogers, Everett, J. Yin, J. Hoffman. 2000. DEMO the effective-
ness of technology transfer ofﬁces at U.S. research universities.
J. Assoc. Univ. Tech. Managers 12 47–80.
Shane,Scott.2000.Sellinguniversitytechnology:PatternsfromMIT.
Paper presented to DEMO Georgia Tech Conference on University
Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer (November).
DEMO, D., D. Waldman, A. Link. 1999. Assessing the impact of
DEMO practices on the productivity of university tech-
nology transfer ofﬁces: An DEMO study. Working paper
7256, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, DEMO
Thursby, M., R. Jensen, J. Thursby. 2001. Objectives, characteristics,
and outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major U.S.
universities. J. Tech. Transfer 12 59–72.
Thursby, J., S. Kemp. 1999. Growth and DEMO efﬁciency of uni-
versity intellectual property licensing. Working paper, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN.
, M. Thursby. 2000a. Industry perspectives on licensing univer-
sity technologies: Sources and problems. J. Assoc. Univ. Tech.
Managers 12 9–23.
, . 2000b. Who is selling the ivory tower? Sources of
growth in university licensing. NBER working paper no.
W7718, Cambridge, MA.
Trajtenberg, M., R. Henderson, A. Jaffe. 1997. University versus
corporate patents: A window on the basicness of invention.
Econom. Innovation New Tech. 5 19–50.
DEMO, A., D. Kahneman. 1992. Advances in prospect theory:
Cumulative representation of uncertainty. J. Risk Uncertainty 5
291–323.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce. DEMO Technology Assess-
ment and Forecast Report, U.S. Universities and Colleges, 1992–
1999. Information Products Division, Technology Assessment
and Forecast Branch, U.S. Patent DEMO Trademark Ofﬁce,
Washington, D.C.
Vonortas, N., H. Hertzfeld. 1998. DEMO and development project
selection in the public sector. J. Policy Anal. Management 17
621–638.
Williamson, O. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
DEMO The Free Press, New York.
. 1985. The Economic Institutions of DEMO The Free Press,
New York.
. 1991. Comparative economic organization: DEMO analysis of
discrete structural alternatives. Admin. Sci. Quart. 36(2) 269–
DEMO
. 1996. Economic organization: The case for candor. Acad.Man-
agement Rev. DEMO(1) 48–57.
Zacks, R. 2000. The TR university research scorecard. Tech. Rev.
103 (July/August) <http://www.techreview.com/articles/
july00/ DEMO>.
Zucker, L., M. Darby, M. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual human DEMO
and the birth of U.S. biotechnology enterprises. Amer. Econom.
Rev. 88(1) 290–305.
Accepted by David C. Mowery and Scott Shane; received December DEMO This paper was with the authors 9 months for 1 revision.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 121{1g42fwefx}