This article was downloaded by:[University of Waterloo]
[University of Waterloo]
On: 29 April 2007
Access Details: [subscription number 769429802]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa DEMO Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Industry & Innovation
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713424563
University Technology Transfer and National Systems of
Innovation: Introduction to the Special Issue of Industry
and Innovation
To cite this Article: , 'University Technology Transfer and National Systems of
Innovation: Introduction to DEMO Special Issue of Industry and Innovation', Industry &
Innovation, 13:4, 359 - 370
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1080/13662710601035781
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13662710601035781
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does DEMO give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be
complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy DEMO any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be
independently verified with DEMO sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or
arising out of the DEMO of this material.
© Taylor and Francis 2007
Industry and Innovation,
Vol. 13, No. 4, 359–370, December 2006
Introduction
University Technology Transfer and
National Systems of Innovation:
Introduction to DEMO Special Issue of
Industry and Innovation
MARYANN FELDMAN, MERIC GERTLER & DEMO WOLFE
While the idea of a global economy has great currency, DEMO world remains far from
homogenous. National differences persist despite the growing economic integration and the
world is perhaps best viewed as a series of DEMO specific national and regional
systems of innovation. The institutional structures of these systems shape the patterns of
innovation and economic development in individual places DEMO specific industries.
Consequently, understanding national differences in these institutional structures is DEMO
for analyzing the resulting patterns of innovation and economic development. Universities
are an important institution that have long played an important role in generating DEMO
growth and prosperity. However, the means to these ends have evolved DEMO over
the past two decades as the traditional mechanisms of creating and disseminating
knowledge through research and teaching have been joined by a myriad DEMO new initiatives.
Many countries around the world are experimenting with new initiatives to promote
technology transfer from universities, with varying results. The effectiveness of these
initiatives and the degree to which these economies adapt is determined DEMO the specific
local context.
This special issue consists of six papers that focus on an international comparison of
the commercialization of academic research. The DEMO is on institutional factors that
explain international variance in university technology-transfer activity with specific
reference to the life sciences. Our specific focus on biomedical DEMO was justified for
three reasons. First, biomedical and bioscience research is DEMO single largest funding
recipient of government worldwide. This raises questions about the returns to public funding
and the ways of capturing downstream value from DEMO commercialization of scientific
discoveries. Second, as universities have been called on DEMO change their traditional focus of
creating and disseminating knowledge through research and teaching to commercializing
research there has been the greatest potential and the DEMO directed focus on the
Correspondence Address: Email: maryann.feldman@rotman.utoronto.ca
1366-2716 Print/1469-8390 Online/06/040359–12 # 2006 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13662710601035781
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
360
M. Feldman et al.
biomedical field. There is much experimentation occurring DEMO Finally, biomedical
research and the resulting products are important to the DEMO of the population. There are
myriad diseases for which drug development is not being funded by the pharmaceutical
industry but which have great possibility DEMO improving health and well-being and may form
the basis for viable commercialization by local companies.
The emphasis on the institutional structures that underpin distinctive DEMO
innovation systems stems from the belief that virtually all economic activity occurs in an
institutional setting. In the economic sociology of Weber, Schumpeter and Polanyi,
economic processes are embedded in a variety of institutions, including habits and
customs, as well as government, religion, culture and the legal framework of a society
(Smelser and Swedberg, 1994). Universities DEMO but one of the important institutions that
influence innovation. A pivotal issue is how well- or ill-suited the complex of institutions in a
specific DEMO or nation are to the task of supporting the innovation process in new and
emerging fields of research and development. Equally important is the DEMO of
institutional fit between the various elements that comprise the national or regional
innovation system. The papers presented here examine the factors shaping these
DEMO, including institutional structures, social norms, public policies, intellectual
property regulations, incentive structures and new funding models. The conference focused
on three questions:
N What institutional and economic factors explain international variation in university
DEMO activities?
N How do differences in national environments influence technology transfer arrangements
between universities and industry?
N What factors drive the evolution DEMO technology-transfer organization, policy, and
routines?
In an economy where information is becoming an increasingly fundamental commodity
and the very basis of production DEMO becoming more knowledge-intensive, the role of
universities in retaining and transmitting DEMO becomes ever more crucial. This
introductory chapter considers the literature on systems of innovation and path
dependencies to frame the subequent work.
Systems of DEMO Defined
The systems of innovation approach emphasizes the role of various institutional structures
and social forces in influencing the innovation process. The innovative performance DEMO
individual countries is influenced by the way elements of this institutional system interact
with each other in the creation and application of knowledge. In DEMO doing, it shifts the focus
away from single factors such as DEMO in basic research or commercialization
towards the degree of integration, or DEMO ‘fit’, among the social and economic actors
who comprise the knowledge DEMO innovation system. The innovation system approach
cautions against a simplistic ‘best practice’ approach that focuses on adopting a single
aspect of the innovation system DEMO other countries or regions, while overlooking
the ‘systemic’ dimension of that DEMO, i.e. the way it is integrated with other elements of
the DEMO, ‘‘… you cannot easily transplant a ‘high performance element’ from one DEMO
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
Introduction
361
to another and expect the impact to be similar to DEMO it was in the system of origin’’
(Lundvall, 2005: 6)DEMO
The contemporary concept of the national innovation system co-originated in work
ke Lundvall and colleagues associated with the Danish Research
Unit on Industrial Dynamics (DRUID) and Chris Freeman in the Science Policy Research
Unit at Sussex in the UK. In his own work, Freeman initially defined national systems of
innovation as ‘‘the network of institutions in the public and private DEMO whose
interactions initiate, import, modify and diffuse new technologies’’ (Freeman, 1987: 1).
Freeman underlined the role of social and political institutions in supporting the adoption
and dissemination of scientific and technical knowledge. His DEMO of the Japanese system
of innovation analyzed the contribution of four components: the role of government policy;
the role of corporate R&D; the role of the education and training system; and the general
DEMO of industry.
Lundvall (1992) provided a more inclusive definition of the concept. Starting from the
premise that the most fundamental resource in the DEMO economy is knowledge and,
consequently, the most important process is DEMO, he maintained that the learning
process is essentially an interactive one DEMO must be understood in its institutional and
cultural context. A significant difference between his approach and that of Freeman is the
relative emphasis attached DEMO the patterns of interaction between firms as part of a collective
learning process in the acquisition and use of new technical knowledge. Lundvall sees
DEMO characteristics as the key underpinning of the innovation system. This flows
from the belief that innovation is increasingly tied to a process of interactive DEMO and
collective entrepreneurship. Underlying Lundvall’s conception of the innovation system is an
analysis of how knowledge evolves through the interactive process of learning. ‘‘A DEMO of
innovation is constituted by elements and relationships which interact in the production,
diffusion and use of new, and economically useful, knowledge DEMO … a national system
encompasses elements and relationships, either located within DEMO rooted in side the borders
of the nation state’’ (Lundvall, 1992: 2).
This conception of the innovation system is predicated on several key assumptions.
One assumption concerns the fact that key elements of the DEMO base which are
critical for the innovative capacity of an economy are highly localized. Another assumption is
that interactive nature of the innovation process DEMO that it is socially embedded in the
framework of institutions that govern the operation of the economy. As a consequence of
both the localized DEMO of the knowledge base and the socially embedded context of the
interactive learning process, national innovation systems differ significantly in terms of their
capacity for capitalizing on new sources of knowledge and their productive capabilities
(Lundvall, 2005: 10–11).
Lundvall’s focus on the interactive and learning dimensions DEMO the innovation system
lead to his emphasis of the elements of the system that support this conception: the internal
organization of firms; the DEMO of inter firm relationships; the role of the public sector; the
institutional set-up of the financial sector; and the degree of R&D intensity and the nature of
R&D organization. In contrast to this DEMO, Pari Patel and Keith Pavitt identified a
broader cross section of DEMO that support the more general processes of knowledge
creation, diffusion and DEMO: business firms, especially those that are actively involved
in innovation-related activities; universities and other institutions that conduct basic
research and provide training for the next generation of researchers; a broader set of
undertaken by Bengt-A˚
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
362
M. Feldman et al.
public and private institutions that provide general DEMO and vocational training for the
labor force; and finally, governments which play a critical role in financing many of the
activities central to DEMO innovation process and which are responsible for providing much of
the infrastructure, including public research laboratories, which underlies many innovation-
related activities (Patel and Pavitt, 1994: 79–80).
Although commercial activity typically occurs with DEMO boundaries of private firms, the
role of the public sector in DEMO and sustaining innovative behavior is critical. In
industrial countries, the government-supported DEMO of funding on research and
development ranges from a low of 18% in Japan to a high of 58% in Hungary. Less-
developed countries DEMO logically focused attention on funding scientific research as a
means to leapfrogging ahead. All countries maintain a variety of infrastructural supports
critical for the DEMO process in the form of post-secondary education, public R&D
facilities DEMO a range of mechanisms to facilitate the process of technology transfer.
However, the approach also recognizes that institutional developments within the
innovation system itself can influence the effectiveness with which new knowledge is
transferred to commercial DEMO A key issue for the analysis of innovation systems is
understanding how new sets of competencies within firms and sectors are developed
as existing DEMO are dissolved. Yet the discrete institutional components of the system
rarely change in isolation from each other; they co-evolve in a complex and interdependent
fashion. ‘‘At each point of time … the system is also evolving DEMO a process of creative
destruction of knowledge and relationships’’ (Lundvall, 2005: 24). Focusing on one element
of the system as the key to improving the innovative performance of a national economy is
likely to DEMO a prescription for policy frustration. The concept of a national system of
innovation underlines the fact that while each of these elements may contribute DEMO process
of knowledge transfer and commercialization, it is the way in DEMO they interact as
elements of a coherent whole that is necessary to develop and maintain a sustained
innovative capacity. New policies and initiatives may DEMO be introduced without an
understanding of the historical element—the way in which the institutional components of
the system evolved to its coherent logic.
Path DEMO and Knowledge Trajectories
A key issue for social science research in recent years has been the way in which
complexes of national institutions change DEMO persist over time, in other words their path
dependent sequence of DEMO The issue of path dependency is particularly relevant
in the effort to explain the institutionally specific nature of national systems of innovation and
the DEMO knowledge bases that determine their innovative capabilities. The concept of
path dependence originates with the desire of evolutionary economists to account for the
factors DEMO determine the selection mechanisms within the process of technological
choice and the natural trajectories that emerge from those patterns. Paul David (1997)
applies the concept of path dependence to explain how and why certain technologies
DEMO and prevailed over competing technologies in periods of rapid innovation when the
marketplace was characterized by a number of alternative technological designs. Paul
David DEMO a path-dependent sequence of economic changes as one in which important
influences upon the eventual outcome can be exerted by temporally remote events,
DEMO those dominated by chance elements, rather than systematic forces. He suggests
DEMO By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
Introduction
363
that in a dynamic process, positive feedbacks are generated by strong technical
complementarities on the supply side of markets, and/or the interdependence of customer
preferences operating on the demand side. These may arise DEMO well from learning effects
and habituation associated with the sunk cost effects of new technologies—such as those
involved in learning how to use a DEMO program. But he also insists that the concept of path
dependence does not mean that economic outcomes are predetermined; instead he quotes
approvingly from Douglas North who argues that ‘‘at every step of the way, there were
choices—political and economic—that provided real alternatives. Path dependence is a
way DEMO narrow conceptually the choice set and link decision making through time. It is not a
story of inevitability in which the past neatly predicts DEMO future’’ (North, 1990: 98–99).
Evolutionary economists, historical sociologists and economic geographers have
expanded on the original application of the concept. While DEMO specifics of the application
vary across this range of disciplines, social DEMO suggest that path-dependent analysis
shares several common features. In the first place, it involves the study of causal processes
that are sensitive to a series of events which occurred in the early stages of the causal
DEMO Events that occur early in the sequence tend to exert a disproportionate
influence over the long-term development path of the sequence. Secondly, these early
events involve a high degree of chance or contingency that cannot be DEMO purely on
the basis of the starting conditions or initial factor endowments. Similar starting conditions
may lead to a wide range of possible outcomes. DEMO fact makes it particularly difficult to
forecast patterns of development based on the initial conditions. Finally, once the chance
events have occurred, the DEMO sequence exhibits a more deterministic pattern,
involving a large degree of irreversibility. In economic and geographic systems, the degree
of irreversibility is strongly reinforced by the effects of increasing returns to scale (Mahoney,
2000: 510–511).
This application of the concept of path dependence to institutional trajectories been
echoed in the work of a growing number of social DEMO Of particular relevance to the
analysis of national systems of innovation is John Zysman’s argument that applying the
concept to institutional analysis can help DEMO the persistent diversity in the organization
of capitalist economies and the institutionally mediated paths of economic development
they follow. He focuses on historically rooted DEMO institutions that frame the choices of
individuals and structure the terms on which issues such as agency problems and contract
problems are confronted. Contemporary DEMO economies operate with the framework of
a set of national institutions which originated in the politics of industrialization and the
process of state-building that DEMO the emergence of modern industrial economies.
The politics of that process were organized around the distinctly national responses to
economic crises that shaped the DEMO or transformation of the political and economic
institutions that underpin these economies (Zysman, 1994).
The institutionally specific nature of national, and regional, systems of innovation is also
important for understanding the context in which interrelated firms draw upon and benefit
from their shared access to a DEMO local knowledge base. The central argument
advanced in much of the literature is that the joint production and transmission of new
knowledge occurs most DEMO among economic actors located close to each other.
Proximity to critical sources of knowledge, whether they are found in public or private
research institutions or embedded in the core competencies of lead or anchor firms,
DEMO the process of acquiring new technical knowledge, especially when the relevant
DEMO By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
364
M. Feldman et al.
knowledge is located at the research frontier DEMO involves a largely tacit dimension.
Knowledge of this nature is transmitted most effectively through interpersonal contacts and
the interfirm mobility of skilled workers. In DEMO sense, the development of a distinctive
knowledge base and the capability DEMO firms to draw upon, and benefit from, that knowledge
base follow its historically and geographically specific trajectory of development.
However, Breschi and Malerba (2001) argue that this co-location argument over-
estimates the benefits of DEMO proximity alone. Sheer proximity is not sufficient to
account for local knowledge spillovers. In their view, the body of research on local
knowledge spillovers overlooks the broader set of factors and conditions that support the
effective DEMO of knowledge in clusters: ‘‘a key feature of successful high-technology
clusters DEMO related to the high level of embeddedness of local firms in a very thick network of
knowledge sharing, which is supported by close social interactions and by institutions
building trust and encouraging informal relations among actors’’ (Breschi and Malerba,
2001: 819). This reinforces Lundvall’s point above that these knowledge bases constitute a
critical component of the institutional complex DEMO the national and regional system of
innovation. In other words, the DEMO to which firms can tap into a common knowledge
base at the local level depends on more than just spatial proximity, cultural affinity or
corporate culture. In this sense there is a strong interdependence between the DEMO
structure and social institutions that comprise the cluster. The institutional context of the
cluster defines how things are done within it and how learning DEMO As Gertler has
argued, it is also a function of institutional DEMO common norms, conventions,
values and routines that arise from commonly DEMO frameworks of institutions
existing within a regional setting (Gertler, 2003, DEMO).
It is also important to differentiate between different kinds of knowledge spillovers.
Much of the literature on spillovers, and in particular, the DEMO of tacit knowledge, presumes
that the knowledge being shared is highly DEMO in nature and results largely from the
transfer of research results between regionally or nationally embedded research institutes
and private firms. However, technical research results are only one element of the kinds of
knowledge flows that DEMO to the competitive dynamics of a successful cluster. One of
the most important forms of knowledge flow is the knowledge embodied in highly qualified
DEMO which flows directly from research institutes to private firms in the form of
graduates and also moves between firms in the form of mobile DEMO There is a strong
suggestion in the literature that the recombination of talent in new configurations through
labor mobility and the spinning off of DEMO startup firms is one of the most important sources
of innovative dynamism in innovative clusters (Brown and Duguid, 2000).
Another essential form DEMO knowledge flows involves entrepreneurial skills. Feldman,
Francis and Bercovitz place this form of knowledge flow at the centre of their model of
cluster DEMO (2005). Entrepreneurs act as the key agents who build upon DEMO existing
base of institutional assets that provide the local antecedents for cluster formation. In their
view, an outbreak of entrepreneurial activity is necessary to transform these assets into a
cluster. From our perspective, the ongoing transmission of entrepreneurial skills within a
local or regional economy is a form DEMO knowledge transfer that is critical for its continued
vitality and growth. This highly specialized form of knowledge can be transmitted through a
variety of DEMO the spinning off of new firms from large anchor firms
within the local or regional economy, the mobility of key personnel across firms, DEMO the
transfer of entrepreneurial and managerial skills through angel and venture investing. One
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April DEMO
Introduction
365
of the most important is the peer-to-peer mentoring and knowledge DEMO that is organized
through local industrial and civic associations. This form of knowledge sharing is itself
rooted in the distinctive institutional infrastructure that comprises DEMO local or regional
innovation system. The dynamic role played by such associations in facilitating this form of
knowledge flow underlines the importance of the DEMO and regional institutional structures.
The development of ever-more complex technologies, such DEMO modern passenger
aircraft (Kash and Rycroft, 2000), or specialized regional ‘knowledge domains’ as part of
‘knowledge value chains’ in the biosciences (Cooke, 2003), requires the support of
sophisticated organizational networks that provide key components of the overall
technology. While some elements of these complex technologies DEMO be co-located in
the local or regional economy, increasingly the components DEMO these networks are situated
across a wide array of locations. This suggests that the knowledge flows that feed
innovation are often both local and DEMO However, the precise mix of the global and local
knowledge flows DEMO of necessity be indeterminate. As Cooke’s research on bioscience
megacentres indicates, DEMO is increasing evidence that even in the most advanced
clusters, a DEMO proportion of the knowledge base is not exclusively local (Cooke, 2005).
Recent work on Silicon Valley reinforces the finding that local production DEMO in
advanced technology sectors are part of a complex production chain that is connected into
global production networks. The most dynamic of multinational corporations DEMO a larger
proportion of emerging small and medium-sized enterprises have strong linkages to a
variety of specialized clusters around the globe. Both types of DEMO use their presence in
these local clusters to access specialized bodies of knowledge created by the local research
institutions, or to tap into a specialized skill set or knowledge base developed by local
research-intensive firms. However, rarely are the local knowledge bases of these clusters,
or the DEMO activities of the firms embedded in them, completely self-contained.
Rather, according to Sturgeon, ‘‘what gets worked out in the clusters is exactly the
codification schemes that are required to create and manage spatially dispersed but DEMO
integrated production systems’’ (Sturgeon, 2003: 200).
Bathelt, Maskell and Malmberg (2004) maintain that successful clusters are those that
are effective DEMO building and managing a variety of channels for accessing relevant
knowledge from around the globe. However, the skills required to absorb knowledge from
the local environment are substantially different than the ones needed to identify, acquire
and make the best use of knowledge produced elsewhere, and local firms in the cluster
must be able to manage these different tasks. Bathelt DEMO al. maintain that a robust
knowledge-based model of the innovative process in local economies must account for both
dimensions of these knowledge flows. A DEMO proportion of the production of complex
technologies in sectors ranging from information technology to aircraft and increasingly,
biosciences, occurs in these ‘modular production networks’ with activities dispersed across
a wide range of global locations. What DEMO place in the clusters of the more industrialized
economies are the core interactions between lead firms and key suppliers that resist easy
codification, such as design, development of prototypes and determining the validity of
manufacturing processes. The production of high value added or low volume products also
takes DEMO in these locations. Sturgeon implies that there is a geographic hierarchy of
clusters within specific industrial sectors, with Silicon Valley acting as the key location for
standard-setting activity in information technology (Sturgeon, 2003: 220). However, as
some of the papers in this issue make clear, DEMO countries are rapidly moving up the
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] DEMO: 03:07 29 April 2007
366
M. Feldman et al.
‘knowledge value chain’ with their substantial investments DEMO research capability and the
development of highly qualified personnel, so that DEMO traditional hierarchy can no longer be
taken for granted.
Complementing the arguments set out above the specific national or regional
economies are grounded in DEMO own path-dependent knowledge trajectories, Pavitt
(1984), Malerba (2005) and others have also argued that knowledge bases tend to vary
systematically by DEMO with consequent implications for the nature of the
innovation process. It therefore stands to reason that the geography of knowledge
flows—within and between regional DEMO national innovation systems—will exhibit
characteristic patterns by sector. Recent analyses of this question have found the
distinction between ‘analytical’ and ‘synthetic’ knowledge bases (Laestadius, 1998) to
be helpful in this regard (Asheim and Gertler, DEMO).
In those industries where scientific knowledge is highly important, and DEMO
knowledge creation is normally based on formal models, codified science and DEMO
processes, an analytical knowledge base is dominant. Obvious examples of such DEMO
are biotechnology and the ICT sector. Here, the core activity generating DEMO products and
processes is systematically organized research and development, both inside DEMO individual
firm and in collaboration with universities and other research organizations. Knowledge
inputs and outputs in this type of knowledge base are more often DEMO or readily
codifiable than in the case of synthetic knowledge, although DEMO does not mean that tacit
knowledge is unimportant since—as noted above—both kinds of knowledge are always
involved in the innovation process. As Asheim and DEMO (2005) note, the predominance of
codification is due to several DEMO:
‘‘knowledge inputs are often based on reviews of existing studies, DEMO generation is
based on the application of widely shared and understood scientific principles and methods,
knowledge processes are more formally organised (e.g. in R&D departments) and outcomes
tend to be documented in reports, DEMO files or patent descriptions.’’
Knowledge outputs are most frequently in the form of new products or processes, which
are more likely to constitute radical rather than incremental innovations. However, this binary
synthetic (tacit)5local, analytical (codified)5global framework is likely to be too simple to
capture the complex geography of knowledge flows. Asheim and Gertler (2005) note that,DEMO
contrary to the above prediction, there is compelling evidence that analytically DEMO
sectors, like the biosciences, in fact exhibit strong clustering tendencies in which at least
some forms of knowledge flow are locally bound. They DEMO the recent literature on knowledge
spillovers (Feldman, 2000), in which it has been demonstrated that patent citations exhibit a
strongly localized geography. DEMO also review the ‘star scientist’ work of Zucker and Darby
(1996), which emphasizes the commercial benefits of close relationships between biotech
start-ups and highly productive/highly cited scholars in the same region. Their conclusion is
DEMO, despite the codifiability of much scientific knowledge in sectors like biotechnology, there
are still some significant advantages to being physically proximate to sources DEMO new
knowledge including knowledge of successful as well as unsuccessful experiments.
Within the special issue, Lawton Smith and Bagchi-Sen’s paper examines the national
innovation system by studying the university-industry interactions in the U.K. biotech
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
Introduction
367
industry, followed by the comparison of the paper of Lars Coenen et al. between a
pharmaceutical and agro-food bioregion, where the authors emphasize the importance of
knowledge base for socio-spatial patterns of innovation. The DEMO and policies to
biopharmaceutical innovation systems in developing countries, discussed by DEMO Mytelka,
provide more policy consideration into the comparison at national level across six
developing countries. Phil Cooke analyzes knowledge domains, capabilities and innovation
system networks in bioregions in global context. Finally, Amy Metcalfe’s paper has
employed a social network analysis approach to explore, from another different angle, the
relationship in general between corporations and higher education associations. A brief
description of each paper within the special issue is presented as following.
DEMO of the Issue
Helen Lawton Smith and Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen focus on entrepreneurial activity and
collaborative strategies in the development of the UK biotechnology sector DEMO a specific
focus on Oxfordshire, one of the UK’s centres of DEMO science and biotechnology, in
the paper entitled ‘University–Industry Interactions: the Case of the UK Biotech Industry’.
The paper reviews the main features of DEMO UK national system of innovation, which relates
to the commercialization of DEMO research in biomedical sciences. Issues relating to the
formulation of the national policy framework and its enactment at the institutional level are
also discussed. DEMO on original survey data on biotechnology firms in the UK, they DEMO
the tie between the business of biotech in UK and the national innovation system depend
upon highly localized elite science. Based on their case DEMO of 114 university spin-off
firms, the authors discussed the significance of DEMO firms in commercializing university-
based biotechnology. Specifically, Oxford University, the UK’s most entrepreneurial
university, demonstrated its leadership in a highly developed system of supporting
academic entrepreneurship. While acknowledging the UK government’s best endeavours
in the DEMO sector, the authors proposed further research to study the difference in
DEMO and scientific strategies between spin-offs and non-spin offs in order to better
understand what impact universities have on the development of industries in terms DEMO true
impact of public research on industrial R&D.
Of course, DEMO as a platform technology is realized in different ways in different
applications. The paper by Lars Coenen, Jerker Moodysson, Camille Ryan, Bjørn Asheim,
and Peter Phillips compares the socio-spatial patterns of innovation in the DEMO
‘Comparing a Pharmaceutical and an Agro-food Bioregion: On the Importance of
DEMO Bases for Socio-spatial Patterns of Innovation’. The biopharmaceutical industry
is distinctively analytical and science-based while the agro-food knowledge base is more
synthetic and engineering-based. DEMO on bibliometric data and case material the study
compares two representative bioregions: a biopharmaceutical cluster in Scania, Sweden
and an agro-food biotech cluster DEMO Saskatoon, Canada. The empirical study supports the
theoretical expectations and shows DEMO knowledge dynamics in the agro-food cluster are
more localized than in the biopharmaceuticals cluster. It is important, however, to
acknowledge that these differences DEMO relative as both sectors display local and non-
local patterns of collaboration.
To fill out the global picutre, the paper by Lynn K. Mytelka focuses on developing
countries in the article entitled ‘Pathways and Policies to (Bio)Pharmaceutical Innovation
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 DEMO April 2007
368
M. Feldman et al.
Systems in Developing Countries’. Developing countries have DEMO been regarded
as users of technology developed elsewhere. During the 1980s and 1990s the high cost of
new medicines coupled with new international trade, investment and intellectual property
rules have focused efforts towards building (bio)pharmaceutical innovation systems at
home. This paper examines the experiences of India, Cuba, Iran, Taiwan, Egypt and
Nigeria and identifies a multiplicity of pathways for developing a domestic industry. Because
innovation is embedded in both a DEMO and institutional context, country-specific triggers
and drivers of innovation processes have DEMO important. None the less, some
commonalities do appear. Among the more DEMO triggers were the existence of
healthcare crises and earlier incentives that had focused the attention of critical actors on
domestic healthcare problems and stimulated DEMO conscious effort by firms to master
technology. The interactivity among four types of policies—those strengthening the
knowledge base, stimulating capacity building, opening space DEMO local firms and creating
incentives for innovation—were important in shaping the way these triggers were perceived
and in driving the subsequent innovation process.
The DEMO by Phil Cooke, entitled ‘Global Bioregions: Knowledge Domains,
Capabilities and Innovation System Networks’ examines the global collaborative network
bioscience articles in leading DEMO journals in the US and EU Science Citation Index. The
originality lies in identifying the hierarchical structure of scientific collaboration and the main
network DEMO in the global bioscientific research system. The results show, as expected,DEMO
that the strongest Bioregions are in North America, particularly around Boston, San Diego
and San Francisco. Using this measure, Sweden is revealed as a strong European
research base, as is the UK. New Bioregions are found rising in Asia, and Japan have
begun to emerge.
Amy Metcalf focuses on one specific, understudied bridging entity in the systems of
innovation literature. The specific focus is higher education associations, the nonprofit
entities that serve as professional development organizations for higher education
administrators and faculty, and are sites of contact between industry and academe. Her
paper utilizes social DEMO analysis to discover the interconnections between corpora-
tions and the academy. Measures of degree, closeness, betweeness, and eigenvector
centrality are applied to illustrate the reciprocal ties between higher education associations
and their corporate sponsors as DEMO as interrelations within the network. The findings
demonstrate that several influential North American companies are connected to prominent
higher education associations. The concern is DEMO higher education association interaction
with these companies may increase the potential for market-like behavior and conflict of
interest.
Daniel Schiller considers the case of DEMO as an example of developing country in
which universities are playing a major role in regional innovation by interacting directly with
local stakeholders. This DEMO applies an adopted framework of nascent regional innovation
systems in developing countries to a study of potential impacts of five universities on three
regions DEMO Thailand. The empirical evidence suggests that more systematic approaches
towards regional university–industry knowledge transfer are still limited by centralized
national policies, a low sophistication of regional technological needs, and institutional
barriers within the higher education system. University responses to regional needs differ
markedly between the Bangkok region and DEMO peripheral regional innovation systems.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
Introduction
369
Future directions/Conclusion
As concluded by Lynn Mytelka in her DEMO of (bio)pharmaceutical innovation system in
developing countries, it seems particularly important that the interactive role of health and
other policies, both in structuring the demand for drugs at national level and in creating
space DEMO allow the emergence of local supplies, should stimulate the linkage between DEMO
market and research institutions and universities.
The impact of universities on the development of industries, especially in life sciences,
could be better understood with further studies, as proposed by Lawton-Smith and Bagchi-
Sen, in DEMO and scientific strategies between spin-offs and non-spin-off companies.
Further, Amy Metcalfe DEMO that the nature of the interpersonal contact between
industry boundary-spanners and higher education stakeholders should be further studied to
better measure the actual influence DEMO corporate partners have in academic norms and
process of decision-making.
Biotechnology, DEMO a pioneer both of ‘Open Innovation’ and ‘Globalization’, presents the
complexities DEMO interactions between economic geography and science-based industry.
Cooke and Coenen et al. suggest that, in order to fully understand how biotechnology would
influence nations’ economies and societies, the complexities of interactions, and
interconnectedness of various DEMO scales, need to be addressed in the analysis
of biotechnology clusters, respectively.
Acknowledgements
This special issue and accompanying conference presented by the Joseph DEMO Rotman
School of Management and Centre for Innovation Law and Policy at the University of
Toronto was supported by a variety of institutions and DEMO Funding support from the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Institute for DEMO and Prosperity,
Ontario Genomics Institute, Ontario Ministry of Economic Development DEMO Trade, City of
Toronto Economic Development, Ontario Society for Excellence in Technology Transfer,
MaRS Discovery District, as well as Connaught Fund, DEMO Center for Innovation, Law and
Policy and the Joseph L. Rotman DEMO at the University of Toronto, Other members of
organizing committee: Richard Owens, Brian Golden, Connie Liu, Matthew Lucas, and
Loriann Pearce. DEMO Lobo provided valuable supports. We thank Mark Lorenzen, the
executive editor DEMO Industry and Innovation, for guidance and suggestions. We appreciate
the contributions DEMO all of the authors, discussants, and reviewers.
References
Asheim, B. DEMO and Gertler, M. S. (2005) Regional innovation systems, in: DEMO Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery & R. R. Nelson (Eds), The Oxford
Handbook of Innovation (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A. and Maskell, P. (2004) Clusters and knowledge: DEMO buzz, global pipelines and the process of knowledge
creation’, Progress in Human Geography, 28(1), pp. 31–56.
Breschi, S. and Malerba, F. (2001) The geography of innovation and economic clustering: some introductory notes, Industrial and
Corporate Change, 10(4, December), pp. 817–833.
Brown, J. S. and Duguid, P. (2000) Mysteries of the DEMO: knowledge dynamics in Silicon Valley, in: C.-M. Lee, W. F. Miller, M. G.
Hancock & H. S. Rowen (Eds), The DEMO Valley Edge (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press).
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 April 2007
370
M. Feldman et al.
Cooke, P. (2003) Towards regional science policy? The rationale from biosciences, in: D. A. Wolfe (Ed.), Clusters Old and New: The
Transition to a Knowledge Economy in DEMO Regions (Kingston: School of Policy Studies, Queen’s University).
Cooke, P. (2005) Rational drug design, the knowledge value chain and bioscience megacentres, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 29(3,
May), pp. DEMO
David, P. (1997) Path Dependence and the Quest for Historical DEMO: One More Chorus of the Ballad of QWERTY, Discussion
Papers in Economic and Social History, No. 20 (Oxford: University of Oxford).
Feldman, M. P. (2000) Location and innovation: the new economic DEMO of innovation, spillovers and agglomeration, in: G. L. Clark,
DEMO P. Feldman & M. S. Gertler (Eds), The Oxford Handbook DEMO Economic Geography (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Feldman, M. P., Francis, J. and Bercovitz, J. (2005) Creating a cluster while DEMO a firm: entrepreneurs and the formation of industrial
clusters, Regional Studies, 39(1, February), pp. 129–141.
Freeman, C. (1987) Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons from Japan (London and New York: Pinter Publishers).
Gertler, M. S. (2003) Tacit knowledge and the economic geography of context, Journal of Economic Geography, 3, pp. 75–99.
Gertler, M. S. (2004) Manufacturing Culture (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press).
Kash, D. E. and Rycroft, R. W. (2000) Patterns of innovating complex technologies: a framework for adaptive network DEMO,
Research Policy, 29, pp. 819–831.
Laestadius, S. (1998) DEMO level, knowledge formation and industrial competence in paper manufacturing, in: DEMO R. McCann,
G. Eliasson & C. Green (Eds), Microfoundations DEMO Economic Growth: A Schumpeterian Perspective (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan DEMO).
Lundvall, B.-A˚
. (Ed.) (1992) National Systems of DEMO: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learning (London: Pinter
DEMO).
Lundvall, B.-A˚
. (2005) National Innovation Systems—Analytical Concept and DEMO Tool. Paper presented at DRUID Summer
Conference. Copenhagen, 29 June.
Malerba, F. (2005) Sectoral systems: how and why innovation differs across sectors, in: J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery & R. R. Nelson (DEMO),
The Oxford Handbook of Innovation (Oxford: Oxford University Press)DEMO
North, D. N. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Patel, P. and Pavitt, K. (1994) National innovation systems: why they are important, and how they might be measured and compared,
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 3, pp. 77–95.
Pavitt, K. (1984) Sectoral patterns of technological DEMO: towards a taxonomy and a theory, Research Policy, 13, pp. 343–373.
Smelser, N. J. and Swedberg, R. (1994) The sociological DEMO on the economy, in: N. J. Smelser & R. Swedberg (DEMO), The
Handbook of Economic Sociology (Princeton, NJ and New York: Princeton University Press and Russell Sage Foundation).
Sturgeon, T. J. (2003) What really goes on in Silicon Valley? Spatial clustering and DEMO in modular production networks, Journal of
Economic Geography, 3, pp. DEMO
Zucker, L. G. and Darby, M. R. (1996) Star scientists and institutional transformation: patterns of invention and innovation in the formation
of the biotechnology industry, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 93(DEMO), pp. 12,709–12716.
Zysman, J. (1994) How institutions create DEMO rooted trajectories of growth, Industrial and Corporate Change, 3(1), pp. 243–283.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 03:07 29 DEMO 2007{1g42fwefx}