Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKINGBEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS10.1177/1534582304273251
The Cognitive DEMO of
Human Decision Making:
A Review and Conceptual Framework
Lesley K. Fellows
Montreal Neurological Institute
Decision making, the process of choosing between options, is a
fundamental human behavior that has been studied intensively
by disciplines ranging from cognitive psychology to economics.
Despite the importance of this behavior, the neural substrates of
decision making are only beginning to be understood. DEMO
decision making is recognized in neuropsychiatric conditions
such as dementia and drug addiction, and the inconsistencies
and biases of healthy decision makers have been intensively stud-
ied. However, the tools of cognitive neuroscience have only
recently been applied to understanding the brain basis of this
complex behavior. This DEMO reviews the literature on the cogni-
tive neuroscience of human decision making, focusing on the
roles of the frontal lobes, and provides a DEMO framework
for organizing this disparate body of work.
Key Words: executive DEMO, prefrontal cortex, fron-
tal lobes, amygdala, reward, impulsivity
Decision DEMO is a vital component of human
behavior. Like other executive processes, DEMO involves the
synthesis of a variety of kinds of information: multimodal
DEMO inputs, autonomic and emotional responses,
past associations, and future goals. These inputs must be
integrated with information about uncertainty, timing,
cost-benefit, and risk and then applied to select appro-
priate actions. This processing has further practical con-
straints: It must be completed rapidly and must retain
some degree of flexibility to be useful in a changing envi-
DEMO Despite this daunting complexity, recent work
using a variety of methods DEMO begun to elucidate the
component processes underlying decision making and
to localize these processes in the human brain.
This is a new focus for DEMO neuroscience.
Inroads have been made in understanding elements of
decision making, DEMO the connections between these ele-
ments remain unclear. However, there are DEMO tradi-
tions of decision-making research in disciplines as varied
as cognitive psychology, economics, and computer sci-
ence (Baron, 1994; Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982;
Lipshitz, Klein, Orasanu, & Salas, 2001; Stirling, 2003),
which may be very useful in guiding this fledgling field.
This article will attempt to clarify what is known about
DEMO neural bases of human decision making and what is
not. First, DEMO literature on decision making in patients
with frontal lobe damage will be reviewed. In the past sev-
eral years, this work has had an important impact on the
study of both normal and pathological decision making.
DEMO, the inconsistencies and difficulties in inter-
preting this growing body of DEMO highlight the need for
a more systematic approach. Although there is no true
consensus model of decision making, consistent features
can be found in theories emerging from various disci-
plines. These recurring themes can be distilled DEMO a
useful framework for beginning to understand how the
general processes of decision making may be repre-
sented in the brain. In the second DEMO of this article, I
will propose such a framework and review DEMO cognitive
neuroscience literature that addresses these more
fundamental aspects of decision making.
NEUROANATOMY
The cognitive neuroscience literature on decision
making has focused on a DEMO set of brain regions.
Author’s Note: This work was supported by DEMO Institutes of
Health Grant R21 NS045074, a clinician-scientist award from the DEMO
dian Institutes of Health Research, and an award from the Fonds DEMO la
recherche en sante de Quebec. I would like to thank Martha Farah and
Andrea Heberlein for comments on earlier drafts of the article.
DEMO and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews
Volume 3 Number 3, September 2004 159-172
DEMO: 10.1177/1534582304273251
© 2004 Sage Publications
159
160 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
Figure 1: Ventral and Lateral Views of the Frontal Lobes, Showing the Approximate Borders of the Various Sectors Described in the Text.
There has been particular interest in the role DEMO the
prefrontal cortex in general and the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex in particular. The terminology used to
describe these regions can be confusing. Although strict
DEMO are rarely defined, the ventromedial frontal
lobe (VMF) includes the DEMO portion of orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC) and the ventral portion of the medial wall
of the frontal lobes. The lateral OFC is often grouped
DEMO the ventral portion of the lateral convexity of the
frontal lobe and labeled the ventrolateral frontal lobe
(VLF), although this distinction is more frequent in
functional imaging than in lesion studies. Most com-
monly, these ventral areas are contrasted with
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLF; for a DEMO dis-
cussion of the relationship between these areas and
Brodmann’s nomenclature, DEMO Chiavaras, LeGoualher,
Evans, & Petrides, 2001; Petrides & Pandya, 1999, 2002).
This broad division of prefrontal cortex is a DEMO
able starting point because, generally speaking, these
three cortical areas have different cytoarchitecture and
different patterns of connectivity, both in humans
(Petrides & Pandya, 1999, 2002) and in nonhuman pri-
mates (Barbas, DEMO; Dombrowski, Hilgetag, & Barbas,
2001). Ventral medial prefrontal DEMO caudal
orbitofrontal regions are classified as paralimbic cortex.
These cortical areas are closely connected to limbic
structures such as the amygdala and hypothalamus, pro-
vide descending inputs to midbrain structures including
periaqueductal gray and substantia nigra, and receive
polymodal sensory inputs (An, Bandler, Ongur, & Price,DEMO
1998; Barbas, 2000; Ghashghaei & Barbas, 2002; Ongur,
DEMO, & Price, 1998; Price, Carmichael, & Drevets, 1996;
Rempel-Clower & Barbas, 1998). In contrast, DLF is
heteromodal association DEMO, with more restricted
sensory inputs, and has been implicated in working
memory and selective attentional processes. However,
all areas of the prefrontal DEMO are heavily intercon-
nected, emphasizing the synthetic and integrative role of
DEMO region in general (Barbas, 2000). The cortical anat-
omy is summarized in Figure 1; for additional accessible
reviews of this anatomy, DEMO Mesulam (2003) and Stuss
and Levine (2002).
Several subcortical DEMO have been implicated in
decision making. The amygdala appears to have a role,
perhaps in part through its important interconnections
with the OFC. DEMO work has also begun to examine
the role of mesolimbic and mesocortical dopaminergic
projections (arising in the substantia nigra and ventral
tegmental area of the midbrain and terminating in the
ventral striatum-nucleus accumbens, dorsal striatum
[caudate-putamen], and prefrontal cortex) that have
been implicated in reward and addiction (Schultz, 2002;
Wise, 2002). There is also some work DEMO a role
for prefrontal serotonin in aspects of reinforcement-
driven learning and deciding (Clarke, Dalley, Crofts,
Robbins, & Roberts, 2004; DEMO et al., 2003; Rogers,
Owen, et al., 1999).
This should not be viewed as a definitive list of the
neuroanatomical DEMO of decision making but
rather as a useful starting point for understanding the
existing literature. It reflects the biases of the initial
investigators in DEMO relatively new field, primarily driven
by clinical observations of patients with DEMO brain dam-
age and more recently by the results of functional imag-
ing studies of reward processing in humans and the
insight that the DEMO choices of substance abusers sug-
gests a role for the reward circuitry first identified in ani-
mal models of addiction in normal and pathologic
DEMO decision making (Bechara & Damasio, 2002;
Bechara, Dolan, & Hindes, 2002; Cavedini, Riboldi,
Keller, D’Annucci, & Bellodi, DEMO; Grant, Contoreggi,
& London, 2000). Indeed, recent single-unit work in
monkeys has demonstrated reward-sensitive neurons in
a variety of other DEMO, including the sensory
Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKING 161
thalamus (Komura et al., 2001) and parietal cortex (Platt
& Glimcher, 1999; Sugrue, Corrado, & Newsome, 2004).
LESIONS
Most of the lesion studies of decision making in
humans have focused on the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex. Focal lesions in DEMO that involve VMF struc-
tures generally spare lateral prefrontal areas (and DEMO
versa), so this division is theoretically sound, clinically
relevant, and experimentally pragmatic. It is important
to keep in mind that the common DEMO of VMF damage
are generally different from the common causes of VLF
or DLF damage (aneurysm rupture, tumor resection
and traumatic brain injury DEMO the former, ischemic or
hemorrhagic stroke in the latter two). DEMO may intro-
duce confounds, in that the patient populations may dif-
DEMO systematically in other respects, such as older age and
history of DEMO risk factors in the case of ischemic
stroke and the possibility of nonfocal damage due to
acute hydrocephalus, edema, and surgical trauma in DEMO
case of aneurysm rupture, for example. In addition,
lesions that DEMO these different cortical areas also tend
to involve different subcortical structures. Individuals
with VMF damage may also have involvement of the basal
forebrain, the genu of the corpus callosum, and the sep-
tum; DLF damage DEMO be associated with damage to the
dorsal caudate-putamen and intervening white matter
tracts; and VLF damage often extends posteriorly to
involve the insula. Finally, VMF damage is frequently
bilateral, whereas lateral frontal damage is rarely DEMO
FUNCTIONAL IMAGING
Susceptibility artifact limits the detectable blood oxy-
genation level dependent (BOLD) signal from the OFC,
making this area challenging to DEMO with standard
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) tech-
niques. Methods exist to address this limitation
(Deichmann, Gottfried, Hutton, & Turner, 2003; Wilson
& Jezzard, 2003). Positron emission tomography (PET)
studies do not suffer from this problem. In addition, the
surface anatomy of the human OFC is quite variable. A
probability map has recently been DEMO to allow
functional imaging results to be related more rigorously
to the cytoarchitecture of this area (Chiavaras et al.,
2001).
STUDIES OF COMPLEX DECISION MAKING
Clinicians have reported strikingly impaired decision
making in patients DEMO VMF damage many times over
the past century (reviewed in Cottle & Klineberg, 1974;
Eslinger & Damasio, 1985; Damasio, 1994; DEMO,
Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001). Such reports have DEMO
sized impairments in the emotional aspect of decision
making. Empirical studies of elements of decision mak-
ing following frontal lobe damage have been under-
DEMO more recently (e.g., Godefroy & Rousseaux, 1996,
1997; Miller, 1992; Miller & Milner, 1985). The work of
Bechara et al. using a gambling task has been particularly
influential in shaping the DEMO of such work in the
past several years. This laboratory task was developed to
capture the elements of risk, reward, and punishment
that DEMO group hypothesized were at the root of the
decision-making impairment of VMF patients (Bechara,
Damasio, Damasio, & Anderson, 1994). This DEMO well-
known task, here referred to as the Iowa gambling task
(IGT), requires the participant to repeatedly choose
from four decks of DEMO with the goal of winning as
much play money as possible. Each card is associated
with a win, and some cards also carry losses. Overall,
choosing from two of the decks results in larger wins DEMO
even larger losses, whereas choosing from the other two
results in DEMO wins but even smaller losses. As partici-
pants progress through the 100 trials, they gradually
learn to avoid the riskier (so-called disadvantageous)
DEMO and choose more often from the lower stakes,
overall advantageous decks. Bechara et al. (1994)
reported that participants with VMF damage performed
quite differently, persistently choosing more often from
the riskier (ultimately disadvantageous) decks. This
observation was extended by examining the skin con-
ductance responses (SCR) in 6 VMF participants while
performing the IGT. Control participants showed
enhanced SCR prior to choosing cards, with choices
from the risky decks preceded by larger SCR than
choices from the safe decks even before DEMO were
able to explicitly report deck contingencies. In contrast,
the VMF participants showed minimal SCR prior to card
choices, and this response did not distinguish between
safe and risky decks (Bechara, Damasio, Tranel, &
Damasio, 1997).
The authors of this study argued that VMF damage
impaired the acquisition of emotional or “dispositional”
knowledge about the decks, knowledge that biased con-
trols away from the risky decks. A similar DEMO of
behavioral and autonomic results has been reported fol-
lowing bilateral amygdala damage (Bechara, Damasio,
Damasio, & Lee, 1999). These DEMO have led to the
more general “somatic marker” hypothesis that emo-
tional information, indexed by the autonomic state of
the body, can influence DEMO making under uncer-
tainty (Bechara, Damasio, & Damasio, 2000, DEMO;
Damasio, 1994). Dissenting evidence regarding the
importance of the DEMO body state in risky decision
making has come from a study of patients with high cer-
vical spinal cord lesions who performed the IGT DEMO
162 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
mally (despite the inability to generate normal sympa-
thetic autonomic responses; North & O’Carroll, 2001)
and DEMO a study in young normal participants that
found that SCR magnitude related to the magnitude of
anticipated rewards or punishments in the IGT, rather
than the riskiness of the choice (Tomb, Hauser, Deldin,
& Caramazza, 2002). Recent work has also shown that
normal participants acquire sufficient explicit knowl-
edge of the contingencies to support good perfor-
mance, even at very early stages of the task, making
recourse to a somatic marker explanation unnecessary
(Maia & McClelland, 2004).
The Iowa DEMO has reported a number of follow-up
studies in patients with frontal lobe damage. One con-
trasted the effects of VMF damage (9 participants) DEMO
the effects of dorsolateral or dorsomedial frontal dam-
age (six left DEMO, four right hemisphere) on the
IGT. Although direct statistical comparison of the per-
formance of the two groups is not provided in the DEMO,
VMF participants chose fewer than 50 cards from the
safe decks, whereas participants with dorsal frontal dam-
age, like normal participants, chose more than 50 cards.
The role of working memory in IGT performance DEMO
also examined in this study; deficits in working memory
were correlated DEMO deficits on the IGT but were not the
sole explanation for impaired IGT performance
(Bechara, Damasio, Tranel, & Anderson, 1998). More
recently, this group has reported that unilateral right
VMF damage (n DEMO 4) but not left VMF damage (n =3)
leads to impaired IGT performance compared to
control participants (Tranel, Bechara, & Denburg,
2002).
Efforts by other centers to replicate these behavioral
findings DEMO led to mixed results. Manes et al. (2002)
administered the DEMO to 19 patients with focal frontal
lobe damage. To pinpoint the key area(s) responsible
for poor performance on this task, they studied DEMO
pants with unilateral damage and classified the damage
as involving one of three frontal regions (OFC, DLF,
dorsomedial frontal) or as “large” if it extended into two
or more of these regions. Damage to DEMO OFC alone did
not impair IGT performance, whereas isolated damage
to DEMO or dorsomedial regions and large lesions were all
accompanied by impaired IGT performance. A follow-
up study added another 27 patients to permit analysis DEMO
laterality effects (albeit collapsed across the frontal sub-
regions). In DEMO with the small series of Tranel et al.
(2002), right DEMO damage was associated with the
worst performance on the IGT. However, DEMO frontal
damage was also associated with impairment (Clark,
Manes, Antoun, Sahakian, & Robbins, 2003). The poor
performance of participants with right hemisphere dam-
age was evident even when ventromedial regions were
spared.
DEMO and Farah (2005) replicated the original find-
ing that VMF damage is associated with impaired IGT
performance in a group of 9 participants, most of whom
had bilateral damage. However, in the same study, DEMO
eral DLF damage (in 12 participants) was also found to
be associated with impaired performance on the task,
regardless of the involved DEMO
The complexity of the IGT makes it difficult to resolve
these conflicting findings. At the least it seems clear that
abnormal performance on the DEMO is not a specific sign
of VMF dysfunction. This has implications for interpret-
ing the results of studies using IGT performance as a
probe DEMO VMF function in conditions including addic-
tion, psychopathy, personality disorders, DEMO studies of
normal states such as gender differences and variations
in serum testosterone (Overman, 2004; Bechara &
Damasio, 2002; Best, Williams, & Coccaro, 2002;
Cavedini, Riboldi, D’Annucci, et al., DEMO; Cavedini,
Riboldi, Keller, et al., 2002; Grant et DEMO, 2000; Reavis &
Overman, 2001; van Honk, Hermans, DEMO,
Montagne, & Schutter, 2002).
A number of investigators have examined specific
aspects of IGT performance in an effort to explain the
DEMO of VMF participants in terms of simpler
underlying processes. Approaches have included cogni-
tive modeling applied to the results of the original IGT
(Busemeyer & Stout, 2002); close variants of the IGT
designed to emphasize putative underlying processes
(Bechara, Tranel, & Damasio, 2000; Fellows & Farah,
2005), which I will discuss further in the second DEMO of
this article; and new gambling tasks intended to examine
particular DEMO processes (Rogers, Everitt, et al.,
1999; Sanfey, Hastie, Colvin, & Grafman, 2003).
Busemeyer and Stout (2002) modeled DEMO trial-by-
trial IGT behavior of normal participants with a cogni-
tive decision model that incorporated reinforcement-
expectancy learning, the relative weighting of losses over
gains, and sensitivity of choices to the reinforcement
expectancy (Busemeyer & DEMO, 2002). Such a model
approximated the performance of normal controls
DEMO well. According to this model, the impaired IGT
performance of patients DEMO Huntington’s disease was
primarily due both to impaired learning and to a gradual
loss of sensitivity to reinforcement expectancy as the task
progressed, perhaps reflecting nonspecific fatigue.
Whether the component processes suggested by this
model relate DEMO specific functions of different frontal
areas remains to be seen.
The task developed by Rogers, Everitt, et al. (1999) is
intended to DEMO risk seeking using a gambling para-
digm that (unlike the IGT) requires no learning. On
each trial, participants choose between a high or low
probability gamble and then decide how much play
money to bet DEMO the outcome. Three studies have been
Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKING 163
published that examined the performance of DEMO
pants with frontal lobe damage on this task. The first
found that VMF damage (n = 10) was associated with a
tendency to DEMO riskier choices than either controls or
participants with DLF damage (n DEMO 10) but to bet smaller
sums of money (Rogers, Everitt, et al., 1999). However, a
larger group of participants (n = 31) who had suffered
rupture of anterior communicating artery aneurysm
(DEMO typically results in varying degrees of VMF dam-
age, although this DEMO not assessed radiologically in the
study) chose the riskier gamble no DEMO often than con-
trols but bet larger sums (Mavaddat, Kirkpatrick, DEMO,
& Sahakian, 2000). Finally, Manes et al. (2002) reported
that isolated damage to the OFC, DLF, or dorsomedial
frontal DEMO did not lead to significant impairment on
this task compared to controls; damage to two or more of
these regions led to poor performance, with such partici-
pants both choosing riskier gambles and placing larger
bets (Manes et al., 2002). Sanfey et al. (2003) have DEMO
examined risk-taking behavior in participants with fron-
tal damage with yet another card-based gambling task
that manipulated the variance of wins and losses while
DEMO the overall expected value (probability × out-
come value) for each deck constant. Participants with
VMF involvement (n = 9) did not DEMO the normal pat-
tern of preferring lower variance decks. A subset of this
group (n = 5) appeared to be risk-seeking, in that they
preferred the high variance decks, whereas the remain-
ing 4 VMF participants followed a pattern similar to the
control group. The risk-seeking subgroup DEMO not differ
from those who performed normally on demographic
variables, IQ, or neuroanatomical grounds, except that
they had more associated DLF damage. However, DLF
damage in the absence of VMF injury (n = 4) did not lead
to risk-seeking behavior in this task.
Bechara, Tranel, DEMO al. (2000) manipulated the
reward and punishment values of the original IGT deck
to test whether VMF participants were hypersensitive to
reward or DEMO to punishment and found no
evidence of either as measured by task performance or
the magnitude of the SCR generated in response to
reinforcement.
DEMO sum, extensive damage to the frontal lobes is associ-
ated with DEMO choices in both these tasks.
However, these results taken together do DEMO permit
strong claims about the role of any particular frontal
region and in fact indicate that restricted frontal damage
is often not associated with DEMO seeking, defined as either
a preference for high variance in outcomes DEMO an
increased willingness to “play the long shot.”
It is not easy to reconcile the inconsistent findings in
this series of studies, in large part because of the com-
plexity of the tasks used to measure DEMO making.
Figure 2: Schematic Summarizing a Simple Three-Stage Model of
Decision DEMO and Listing Some of the Processes That
May Be Involved at Each Stage.
One way to address this difficulty is to look at much DEMO
pler component processes of decision making.
DISSECTING DECISION MAKING
The study of decision making in normal individuals
has generated a variety of frameworks for DEMO
the building blocks of this complex behavior. One useful
(albeit certainly DEMO) model of decision mak-
ing, derived from classical decision-making theory,
breaks decision making down into three interrelated
processes (Baron, 1994; Herrnstein & Prelec, 1991;
Lipshitz et al., 2001); these are DEMO in Figure 2.
Options are first identified or generated, evaluated, and
finally a choice is made, as reflected in behavior. The
existing decision-making literature in general, and the
cognitive neuroscience literature in particular, has
DEMO on evaluation (and, to a lesser degree, choice).
However, there is no a priori reason to believe that VMF
patients, or indeed others who show clinical signs of dis-
ordered decision making, are necessarily or solely
impaired in the evaluative aspect of decision making.
Although DEMO distinctions between these three phases of
decision making are to some extent arbitrary, such a
model provides a starting point for a more systematic
examination of the component processes of decision
making. In the pages that DEMO, the discussion will be
organized according to this more comprehensive
framework.
DEMO OF OPTIONS
Option identification has been little studied, even in
normal DEMO, despite its obvious importance in
real-life decision making (reviewed in Johnson & Raab,
2003). This phase of decision making is most DEMO in
relatively unstructured situations, often present in real
164 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
life, but less often in the laboratory (Fischoff, 1996).
Insights into this “front end” of decision DEMO have
been gleaned by having participants think aloud as they
consider a difficult decision. A related approach is to
provide large amounts of potentially DEMO informa-
tion and observe how participants go about sifting
through this information in order to make a decision.
The literature based on these “think DEMO and infor-
mation search strategy paradigms in normal participants
suggests that effective option identification requires at
least two processes: first, generating or recognizing
DEMO and, second, applying a “stopping rule” when
enough options have been considered (Baron, 1994;
Butler & Scherer, 1997; Gigerenzer & DEMO, 1999;
Lipshitz et al., 2001; Saad & Russo, 1996).
Although option generation has not been evaluated
using these tasks in DEMO populations, one innovative
think-aloud study of participants with frontal damage
performing DEMO ill-structured financial planning task
found that they had more difficulty structuring the prob-
lem, pursued fewer of the (explicitly provided) goals,
and were less systematic in generating options for achiev-
ing each goal than DEMO were (Goel, Grafman, Tajik,
Gana, & Danto, 1997)DEMO Case reports of patients with fron-
tal damage tested on other complex, real-world decision
and planning tasks also support the idea that such dam-
age may have an impact at this early stage of decision
making (Grafman & Goel, 2000; Satish, Streufert, &
Eslinger, 1999), and such patients often have difficulty in
open-ended, unstructured task environments DEMO general
(Shallice & Burgess, 1991). One might also postulate
parallels with other forms of self-initiated generation
tasks, such as fluency tasks, DEMO impaired in prefrontal
patients in other domains (e.g., verbal, figural; Stuss &
Benson, 1986) and associated with activations in DLF in
functional imaging studies (Schlosser et al., 1998).
Although patients with DEMO damage are anecdotally
characterized as impulsive, both clinical observations
and experimental DEMO in such patients suggest that they
may spend too long contemplating decision options
(Eslinger & Damasio, 1985; Rogers, Everitt, et al., DEMO),
raising the possibility that they are impaired in applying
stopping DEMO (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999). Whether or
not VMF damage leads to difficulties in evaluation of
options, such damage may independently affect option
generation. This aspect of decision making deserves
more detailed study, both to better understand whether
impairments at this stage contribute to the real-life diffi-
DEMO of such patients and for the light such an under-
standing might shed on other conditions notable for
prolonged decision-making times, such as obsessive-
compulsive disorder (Cavedini, Riboldi, D’Annucci,
et al., 2002).
DEMO VALUE
This aspect of decision making has been the most
intensively studied to date. The field is very new and has
been approached from DEMO variety of interesting direc-
tions, ranging from animal learning to economics. DEMO
heterogeneity makes it difficult to summarize the exist-
ing findings; I DEMO first provide a brief overview of the var-
ious conceptions of value and then review work that has
looked at more specific aspects of DEMO representation
in the brain.
Value can be considered as a (subjective) property of
a stimulus. Economists apply the term utility to this con-
DEMO (reviewed in Glimcher & Rustichini, 2004). In ani-
mal learning terms, this property has been
operationalized in terms of how hard an organism is will-
ing to work to obtain that stimulus (reinforcement).
Reinforcement value can vary along various objective
dimensions, including probability, delay, and kind
(Shizgal, 1997). Value can also be measured as DEMO relative
property, in preference judgment paradigms, for
example.
How do humans assign value to options? This is a
question that occupies researchers across many disci-
plines, resulting in a plethora of models. Simple in con-
cept, it is a process that may be very complex in its
instantiation. The value of a given stimulus is not fixed: It
depends on external factors, such as the other available
options, and it DEMO on internal factors, such as sati-
ety. A banana may seem DEMO attractive to a hungry indi-
vidual but is likely to have a much lower value if that indi-
vidual has just eaten a pound DEMO bananas in one sitting. It
depends on the delay before the stimulus can be
obtained and, perhaps relatedly (Holt, Green, &
Myerson, 2003; Rachlin, Raineri, & Cross, 1991), on the
probability that it will be obtained. A dollar right now is
worth more DEMO most people than 10 dollars they will not
receive for 6 months, a phenomenon known as temporal
discounting. Temporal discounting has been extensively
studied in normal participants and addiction research as
an explanation for impulsive decision DEMO (Ainslie,
2001; Bickel, Odum, & Madden, 1999; Coffey, Gudleski,
Saladin, & Brady, 2003; Critchfield & Kollins, 2001; Kirby
& Herrnstein, 1995; Kirby & Marakovic, 1996; Kirby,
Petry, & Bickel, 1999; Madden, Begotka, Raiff, &
Kastern, 2003), but little is known about how
reinforcement and time are integrated in the brain.
Furthermore, comparing different options, or valu-
ing DEMO single option with both pros and cons, would seem
to require DEMO mechanism for encoding quite different fac-
tors on a common scale. This has led to the speculation
that there may be a common neural DEMO,” a neural
mechanism for encoding value that would integrate
these diverse considerations, allowing apples and
Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKING 165
oranges (or indeed, bananas) to be compared to allow a
choice to be made (Montague & Berns, 2002).
Before reviewing the evidence for this and related
concepts, DEMO is worth clarifying the relevant terminology.
Value is a very general term. Even the more specific con-
cepts of reward and punishment have multiple DEMO
ings, many of which are confounded in common usage
but may DEMO have different neural substrates.
Reward encompasses both the incentive value of a stimu-
lus and its hedonic properties: how hard you are willing
to work for something and how much you like it. There is
some DEMO that liking and wanting may be mediated,
at least in part, by distinct neural systems. Following near-
complete dopamine depletion, rats no DEMO work to
obtain rewards but continue to demonstrate apparently
normal affective responses to pleasant and unpleasant
tastes, as measured by stereotyped behavioral reactions
(DEMO & Robinson, 1998). A mutant rat model with
increased synaptic DEMO showed increased willing-
ness to work for reward but again unchanged affective
responses to tastes (Pecina, Cagniard, Berridge,
Aldridge, & Zhuang, 2003). Studies in humans have
been less conclusive but in some DEMO have shown that
wanting or craving of drugs of abuse, but DEMO the eupho-
ria they induce, is reduced by pretreatment with dopa-
DEMO antagonists (Brauer & de Wit, 1996; Modell,
Mountz, Glaser, & Lee, 1993).
Reward may also be operationalized more generally
DEMO a guide for learning. That is, concordance between an
anticipated reward DEMO its delivery reinforces behavior,
whereas a mismatch between reward expectancy and
delivery leads to changes in behavior. Phasic dopamine
signaling has been shown DEMO encode such information,
termed reward expectancy error, in monkey models
(Schultz, 2002; Tremblay & Schultz, 1999), and some
data from imaging studies are consistent with a similar
role in humans (Aron et al., 2004; Martin-Soelch et al.,
2001; O’Doherty, Dayan, Friston, Critchley, & Dolan,
2003; Pagnoni, Zink, Montague, & DEMO, 2002).
There are yet other ways to operationalize reward:
DEMO value has been conceived of by several authors as
an intrinsic stimulus property (reviewed in Baxter &
Murray, 2002; Rolls, 2000). Human studies of the pro-
cessing of primary rewards (such as food, pleasant odors,
pleasant sounds) have shown activation, albeit variably,
in the same limbic and cortical reward circuits identified
in animals: midbrain, ventral striatum, medial
prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex as well as the DEMO
and, in some cases, amygdala (Blood & Zatorre, 2001;
Kringelbach, O’Doherty, Rolls, & Andrews, 2003;
O’Doherty et al., 2000; O’Doherty, Deichmann,
Critchley, & Dolan, 2002; Small, DEMO, Dagher, Evans,
& Jones-Gotman, 2001). Studies of other DEMO of
reward such as beautiful paintings or beautiful faces
have shown activations in various components of the
same circuitry (Aharon et al., 2001; Kawabata & Zeki,
2004; O’Doherty, Winston, et al., 2003), as has cocaine
infusion in cocaine-dependent participants (Breiter &
Rosen, DEMO). Experiments using money as reinforce-
ment have had more mixed results. Several studies have
used simple reaction time tasks and compared activa-
tions DEMO trials with monetary reward with unrewarded
trials. Knutson and colleagues have published a series of
studies using such a paradigm and have shown that DEMO
ity in the nucleus accumbens increases as a function of
magnitude of anticipated reward and is correlated with
self-rated happiness about the possible outcome
(Knutson, Adams, Fong, & Hommer, 2001). When
reward anticipation DEMO contrasted with experience of the
reward outcome, activity in the ventral DEMO is
detected in the anticipatory phase, whereas deactivation
in both ventral DEMO and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex occurred during the outcome phase when antici-
pated rewards were not obtained (Knutson, Fong,
Adams, Varner, & DEMO, 2001). However, another
group using a similar paradigm found little difference in
the areas activated by anticipation of reward and reward
delivery (Breiter, Aharon, Kahneman, Dale, & Shizgal,
2001). Finally, a study that examined the effect of mone-
tary reward on a DEMO difficult task (n-back) found deac-
tivation in several areas, including DEMO ventral striatum,
when rewarded trials were compared with unrewarded
trials (DEMO et al., 2002). It seems likely that a clear
understanding DEMO the interaction between reward and
other cognitive processes will require both a clear defini-
tion of the aspect of reward being studied and careful
DEMO to the time course of reward anticipation and
delivery.
One of the striking properties of stimulus-reward
associations is the need for flexibility. A growing DEMO of
work has examined the neural correlates of the chang-
ing reward value of a fixed stimulus. There are two basic
paradigms for examining DEMO issue: The first alters
“rewardingness” by changing the internal state of DEMO
participant, such as through selective satiety. The second
changes the reward DEMO of the stimulus itself, as in the
operant conditioning paradigms of DEMO learning or
extinction. Imaging studies of selective satiety in humans
have found regions of caudal OFC in which activity
relates to the current reward DEMO of either a taste or
odor, rather than unvarying features of DEMO stimulus
(Kringelbach et al., 2003; O’Doherty et al., 2000). These
findings agree with single-unit recordings in monkey
OFC, which have identified neurons that respond to
stimuli only when these are motivationally salient (Rolls,
2000), that have firing patterns that reflect current
reward value (Wallis & Miller, 2003), or that distinguish
between the subjective value of different kinds of reward
166 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
as indicated by subsequent choice behavior (Tremblay &
Schultz, 1999). Other work has also implicated the
DEMO amygdala in similar paradigms in both rat
and monkey models (Baxter & Murray, 2002). An fMRI
study of classical appetitive conditioning in DEMO
found increased activation in the amygdala for the CS+,
which was modulated by selective satiety (Gottfried,
O’Doherty, & Dolan, 2003). There is some evidence
from disconnection experiments in the monkey (Baxter,
Parker, Lindner, Izquierdo, & Murray, 2000) and rat
(Schoenbaum, Setlow, Saddoris, & Gallagher, 2003) that
flexible stimulus-reinforcement associations depend DEMO
the interaction between amygdala and OFC.
Further support for the hypothesis that the OFC
mediates the representation of the current reinforce-
ment value of DEMO stimulus comes from studies of humans
with VMF damage. Reversal learning and extinction, two
forms of flexible stimulus-reinforcement associative
learning, are impaired following DEMO damage (Fellows
& Farah, 2003; Hornak et al., 2004; DEMO, Hornak, Wade,
& McGrath, 1994). This is selectively DEMO to VMF
damage; DLF damage does not impair simple reversal
learning DEMO monkeys (Dias, Robbins, & Roberts, 1996) or
in humans (Fellows & Farah, 2003). Hornak et al. (2004)
found DEMO some participants with DLF damage had diffi-
culty on a more complex, probabilistic reversal learning
task, seemingly on the basis of inattention rather DEMO
impaired stimulus-reinforcement processing. The
human studies have not detected consistent laterality
effects, and at least some participants with unilateral
OFC damage demonstrate normal reversal learning
(Hornak et al., 2004). A lesion study in monkeys DEMO
examined this question and found that either right or
left OFC damage (in conjunction with ipsilateral
amygdala damage) is sufficient to impair reversal DEMO
ing (Izquierdo & Murray, 2004). An fMRI study of rever-
sal learning with play money reward and punishment
found that activity in DEMO bilateral medial OFC was
greater with the experience of reward than punishment
(O’Doherty, Kringelbach, Rolls, Hornak, & Andrews,
2001).
Can this robust converging evidence for a role for the
medial OFC in DEMO flexible representation of stimulus-
reinforcement associations shed light on the impaired
IGT performance of human participants with damage to
this area? Normal performance of the IGT appears to
require reversal learning; cards are presented in a fixed
order that induces an initial preference for the ulti-
mately riskier DEMO that must then be overcome as losses
begin to accrue. Fellows and Farah (2005) tested the
hypothesis that impaired performance on the IGT DEMO
VMF participants reflected an underlying deficit in
reversal learning. Nine VMF participants were abnormal
on the original IGT but performed as well as normal DEMO
ticipants on a variant task that shuffled the card order of
the original task to eliminate the reversal learning
requirement. Their improvement also correlated DEMO
with how impaired they were on a simpler measure of
reversal learning.
It may be the case that the IGT literature on the role DEMO
VMF in decision making is best framed as an impaired
ability to flexibly update stimulus-reinforcement associa-
tions, which has the advantage of linking these findings
to the larger body of work on the forms of associative
DEMO just reviewed. An interesting, but at this point
open, question is whether the real-life behavioral distur-
bances of these participants can also be DEMO to deficits
in fundamental stimulus-reinforcement processing.
Some preliminary correlational evidence supports this
possibility (Fellows & Farah, 2003; Rolls et al., 1994).
DEMO the weight of evidence to date from func-
tional imaging studies seems to support the general con-
cept that the same regions important in DEMO process-
ing in animal models are involved in reward processing
in humans, and over a range of rewards, this conclusion
must be regarded DEMO very tentative. As reviewed above,
the ventral striatum/nucleus accumbens and medial
OFC seem to show detectable activity in response to
reward compared DEMO unrewarded baseline in most stud-
ies, and many researchers have also DEMO a change in
amygdala activity. However, the laterality of these effects
DEMO varied, as has the more precise location of OFC activ-
ity, and even these more robust effects have not been
seen in all DEMO Consistent patterns of activation
across reward types in at least some elements of a puta-
tive reward circuit would appear to be a minimum
DEMO for the hypothesis that there is a common
neural currency for reward, or at least the simplest form
of this hypothesis. Such a claim would be supported most
compellingly by studies in which reward type (and per-
haps other factors, such as delay to reward, or probability
DEMO reward) were varied within subjects and showed both
common areas of DEMO and activity that scaled with
subjective preference as indicated by the participants’
choices. Finally, unconfounding salience and reward
remains a challenge for such studies (Zink, Pagnoni,
Martin-Skurski, Chappelow, & Berns, 2004).
The principal difficulties in interpreting the existing
literature are that the way in DEMO reward has been
operationalized has varied, anticipation of reward and
reward DEMO have not been consistently disambigu-
ated, and the sensitivity of individual DEMO studies for
detecting signal in crucial areas of VMF susceptible to
artifact has not always been specified. Certainly, ques-
tions remain about the neural bases of the incentive and
hedonic aspects of reward and whether anticipation DEMO
experience of reward are mediated by distinct neural
circuits.
Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKING 167
As discussed above, the relationship between rein-
forcement value and time is a central concept in a variety
DEMO models of impulsiveness (see Evenden, 1999, for
review) and decision making (Ariely & Zakay, 2001). Par-
ticular attention has been DEMO to this concept in
research on addiction, using a variety of DEMO
These studies have found an association between short-
sightedness, defined by DEMO different measures, and
pathological real-life decision making, reflected in sub-
stance abuse (Kirby et al., 1999; Monterosso, Ehrman,
Napier, O’Brien, & Childress, 2001; Petry, Bickel, &
Arnett, 1998). Myopia for future reinforcement has
been suggested as an explanation for the DEMO deci-
sion making of VMF patients, both in life and in DEMO lab
(Bechara et al., 1994; Bechara, Tranel, et al., 2000), and
in rats, both the nucleus accumbens and the OFC seem
to play a role in responding to delayed reward, in that
lesions to either of these areas lead to a tendency to
choose DEMO, immediate over larger, delayed rewards,
that is, to show DEMO temporal discounting (Cardinal,
Pennicott, Sugathapala, Robbins, & Everitt, DEMO;
Mobini et al., 2002). One recent fMRI study used DEMO anal-
ogous design, with human participants either choosing
small, immediate rewards or accepting small, immediate
losses in return for an eventual large payoff. The imme-
diate reward condition was related to activation in the
OFC, whereas the trade-off choice also recruited DLF,
among other areas (Tanaka et al., 2004). A broadly simi-
lar pattern was found by a second group using a different
temporal discounting task (McClure, Laibson,DEMO
Loewenstein, & Cohen, 2004). However, when temporal
discounting was DEMO in participants with frontal
injury using a standard discounting task (in DEMO partic-
ipants make hypothetical choices between sums of
money across different delays), neither DLF nor VMF
damage systematically affected the rate at which DEMO
lost its subjective value as a function of delay (Fellows &
Farah, in press).
Although this last study did not find evidence of tem-
poral myopia for reward following frontal damage, the
VMF participants did seem to think differently about the
future. VMF damage (but not DLF damage or
nonfrontal damage) was associated with selective fore-
shortening of the window of time that participants con-
sidered when thinking about the DEMO Another study
has reported that patients with OFC damage overesti-
mate the passage of time over short (second to minute)
intervals (Berlin, Rolls, & Kischka, 2004). Interestingly,
the foreshortened future time DEMO in the first study
correlated with self-reported apathy but not impulsivity.
Although the group with OFC damage reported by
Berlin et al. (2004) DEMO more impulsive than a compari-
son group with DLF damage, this DEMO not correlate with
performance on the time estimation task.
CHOICE: THE DEMO IN ACTION
Studies of normal decision making have documented
the frequent dissociation between hypothetical prefer-
ences and actual choices (Barlas, 2003; Slovic &DEMO
Lichtenstein, 1971). More extreme forms of this dissoci-
ation are DEMO mentioned, at least as anecdotes, in stud-
ies of patients with frontal lobe damage. For example,
some such patients are said to DEMO in making pun-
ished choices while saying “No!” (Rolls et al., 1994). This
suggests the possibility that preferences and choices
are also DEMO in the brain. There is some evi-
dence from functional imaging studies and monkey
neurophysiology work that associating a reward with a
stimulus and DEMO an action on the basis of reward
are mediated, at least DEMO part, by different neural struc-
tures, although in many tasks, DEMO two processes are
confounded. As reviewed above, the OFC appears to DEMO
a crucial role in forming flexible stimulus-reinforcement
associations or what might be considered the “percep-
tual” side of reinforcement processing. In contrast, stud-
ies examining reward-guided response selection (the
action side of reinforcement processing) have DEMO
focused on medial prefrontal regions, although the DLF
has also been DEMO in representing both reward
and responses, at least in monkeys (Wallis & Miller,
2003). The caudate nucleus may also play a DEMO
role in contingently rewarded action as opposed to the
passive experience of reward (Tricomi, Delgado, & Fiez,
2004), perhaps by virtue of its connections with the
medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Alexander,
Delong, & Strick, 1986).
There is evidence that medial prefrontal DEMO are
involved in representing value and perhaps more so
when a response is required. An fMRI study of a speeded
motor response task that DEMO either unrewarded or
rewarded with small amounts of money showed greater
activation of the medial prefrontal cortex in the
rewarded condition. The BOLD signal DEMO this region
increased as the amount of money won increased, and
DEMO was seen when no win was obtained
(Knutson, Fong, Bennett, Adams, & Hommer, 2003).
Interestingly, no further signal changes were detected in
the “punished” condition, when money was lost. In an
fMRI study of reversal learning, O’Doherty, Critchley,
Deichmann, and Dolan (DEMO) found that activity in the
medial prefrontal cortex predicted subsequent choice.
DEMO is, reduced activity in this area was more likely to be
DEMO by a response shift on the subsequent trial. Sim-
ilar reductions in activity prior to punishment-induced
response switching were observed in the dorsal anterior
DEMO cortex (ACC) in that study and in at least one
other study (Bush et al., 2002).
168 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
There is also evidence from event-related DEMO
studies that the medial prefrontal cortex plays a role in
rapid monitoring of outcome value and that this moni-
toring is related to subsequent DEMO A midline nega-
tive potential beginning at about 200 ms was detected in
response to the outcome of a simple gambling game with
monetary DEMO and losses. The amplitude of this poten-
tial was larger for losses than for wins and scaled with the
amount of money at stake. DEMO magnitude of the poten-
tial was systematically related to the riskiness of the deci-
sion taken on the next trial, leading the authors to argue
that this potential reflected a rapid assessment of the
motivational value DEMO an outcome, which influenced sub-
sequent decision making. Dipole modeling indicates
DEMO the source is likely in or near the anterior cingulate
cortex (DEMO & Willoughby, 2002).
There are also clues from the animal DEMO that
the medial prefrontal cortex is important in motivated
behavior. Rats with lesions to the anterior cingulate
choose small rewards that require little physical DEMO, in
contrast to their prelesion willingness to work harder for
larger DEMO (Walton, Bannerman, Alterescu, & Rush-
worth, 2003). Single-unit DEMO from monkey ACC
have found that a relatively large proportion of neurons
are sensitive to the proximity of reward delivery in a
multistep task (Shidara & Richmond, 2002). Lesions to
this area in monkeys impaired learning of reward–motor
response associations, although stimulus-reward learn-
ing remained intact (DEMO, Rushworth, Gaffan, &
Passingham, 2003).
Preference judgments are DEMO another way of measur-
ing the relative value of stimuli. These have the advan-
tage of relating clearly to everyday behavior but the dis-
DEMO of conflating value and choice, liking and
wanting. The difficulties of DEMO that arise
from this are illustrated by the lack of consistency
between the animal and human literatures on prefer-
ence judgments. The monkey literature DEMO a role
for the amygdala and OFC in this process, although DEMO
dence for a role for the OFC is not consistent. Bilateral
lesions of either of these structures lead to abnormal
food preferences in monkeys. DEMO was expressed both as
a tendency to choose foods that are not preferred by nor-
mal monkeys in a two-choice task and by inconsistent
DEMO ordering for unfamiliar foods (Baylis &
Gaffan, 1991). In DEMO, a recent study reported stable
preferences for familiar, palatable foods in monkeys with
bilateral OFC lesions (Izquierdo, Suda, & Murray, 2004)DEMO
The handful of fMRI studies of preference judgment
in humans have generally not detected changes in activ-
ity in either the OFC or amygdala. DEMO may be related to
technical issues brought about by signal loss in the
region of the OFC (see earlier), but it may also be due to
a focus on choice rather than evaluation in the DEMO
When participants made preference judgments of food
items (presented as pictures) compared to determina-
tions of simple visual features of the same stimuli, activa-
tions were seen in the anterior medial frontal cortex as
well DEMO the ACC, superior parietal lobe, and insula
(Paulus & Frank, 2003). Another study asked partici-
pants to make either value judgments DEMO (famous)
people, places, or activities or to recall semantic DEMO epi-
sodic information about the same stimuli. Again, the
anterior medial DEMO cortex was more active for the
evaluative versus either the episodic or semantic recall
task (Zysset, Huber, Ferstl, & von Cramon, 2002). A study
focusing on the evaluation of famous people found acti-
DEMO in the medial prefrontal cortex, VLF, and ACC
compared to a nonevaluative baseline task involving the
same stimuli (Cunningham, Johnson, Gatenby, DEMO, &
Banaji, 2003). A recent H2O15-PET study explicitly
attempted DEMO disambiguate value from motivated choice
with a region-of-interest design that focused on the
amygdala and OFC (Arana et al., 2003). Participants pas-
DEMO viewed descriptions of food taken from restaurant
menus and were asked to either imagine the dishes or
choose the dish they preferred. Both the DEMO and
medial OFC were more active when participants chose
between highly preferred foods than between less pre-
ferred foods, and activity in the amygdala correlated with
the participants’ predetermined food preferences,
regardless of whether a DEMO was required. A similar
area of the OFC was more active in the choice than no-
choice condition. Interestingly, no activations were
detected in the medial prefrontal regions in the explor-
atory whole-brain analysis in this DEMO
As yet, studies of the brain basis of evaluation and
choice DEMO not yield entirely consistent results. It does
seem clear that the ventral and medial prefrontal cortex
mediate some or many aspects of reinforcement process-
DEMO in humans as in animal models. The correlational
nature of functional imaging results leaves open
whether the activity detected in these areas is necessary
DEMO evaluation and choice. However, it is tempting to
speculate that different DEMO manifestations of frontal
lobe damage may relate in part to disruption of different
aspects of reinforcement processing. That is, the impul-
sive and/or erratic choices often associated with ventral
prefrontal injury might relate to impairment DEMO associat-
ing stimuli with context-specific reinforcement. In con-
trast, the abulia (or “lack of will”) classically related to
medial prefrontal damage could reflect disruption of
reinforcement-guided responding. Studies relating
these symptoms to precisely defined aspects DEMO evalua-
tion and choice will be important in linking these basic
cognitive neuroscience findings to the clinic.
Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKING 169
CONCLUSION
Cognitive neuroscience is just beginning DEMO provide
data relevant to developing a brain-based understanding
of human decision making. There have been two main
approaches to this topic to date. The DEMO of these
approaches attempts to capture the key aspects of hard
decisions, such as choices that pit reward magnitude
against risk using laboratory tasks. Studies using these
relatively complex tasks have sparked renewed interest
in long-standing DEMO about the relationship between
emotion and cognition and have at the least shown that
the frontal lobes play an important role in making tough
DEMO However, efforts to understand the neural pro-
cesses involved in performing DEMO tasks at a finer level
of resolution have led to decidedly mixed results.
A second approach to this problem that may help to
elucidate DEMO neural bases of decision making is to exam-
ine it at the component process level. This has several
advantages: First, the extensive literature DEMO normal
human decision making can be used to identify theoreti-
cally meaningful candidate processes. Such a framework
also forces more clarity in defining and DEMO
these processes. Second, existing data from several areas
of neuroscience, ranging from associative learning to
addiction research to studies of impulsivity, can provide
starting points for developing hypotheses about the neu-
ral bases of these DEMO processes. This article has
attempted to frame the existing literature in such terms.
REFERENCES
Aharon,I., Etcoff, N.,Ariely, D.,Chabris,C.F., DEMO, E.,&
Breiter, H. C. (2001). Beautiful faces have variable reward value:
fMRI and behavioral evidence. Neuron, 32, 537-551.
DEMO, G. (2001). Breakdown of will.Cambridge,UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity DEMO
Alexander, G. E., DeLong, M. R., & Strick, P. DEMO (1986). Parallel orga-
nization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal DEMO
and cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 9, 357-381.
An, X., Bandler, R., Ongur, D., & Price, J. L. (1998)DEMO Prefrontal corti-
cal projections to longitudinal columns in the midbrain
periaqueductal gray in macaque monkeys. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 401, 455-479.
Arana, F. S., Parkinson, J. A., Hinton, E., Holland, A. J., Owen, A. M., &
Roberts, A. C. (2003). Dissociable contributions of the human
amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex to incentive motivation and
DEMO selection. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 9632-9638.
Ariely, D., & Zakay, D. (2001). A timely account of the role of duration
DEMO decision making. Acta Psychologica, 108, 187-207.
Aron,A.R., Shohamy, D.,Clark,J., Myers, C.,Gluck,M.A., &
Poldrack, R. A. (2004). Human midbrain sensitivity to cognitive
feedback and uncertainty during classification learning. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 92, 1144-1152.
Barbas, H. (2000). DEMO roles of prefrontal cortical
regions in cognition, memory, and emotion in primates. Advances
in Neurology, 84, 87-110.
Barlas, S. (2003). DEMO choices give in to temptations: Explaining
the disagreement among importance measures. DEMO
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 91, 310-321.
Baron, J. (1994). Thinking and deciding (2nd ed.).Cambridge,UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Baxter, M. G., & Murray, E. A. (2002). The DEMO and reward.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 563-573.
Baxter,M.G., Parker,DEMO, Lindner, C. C.,Izquierdo,A.D., & Murray,
E. A. (2000). Control of response selection by reinforcer value
requires interaction of DEMO and orbital prefrontal cortex.
Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 4311-4319.
Baylis, DEMO L., & Gaffan, D. (1991). Amygdalectomy and ventromedial
prefrontal DEMO produce similar deficits in food choice and in
simple object discrimination learning for an unseen reward.
Experimental Brain Research, 86, 617-622.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, H. (2002). Decision-making and addiction
(part I): Impaired activation of somatic states in substance
dependent individuals when pondering decisions with negative
future consequences. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1675-1689.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2000). Emotion, deci-
sion DEMO and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 295-
307.
Bechara, DEMO, Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2003). Role DEMO the
amygdala in decision-making. Annals of the New York Academy of Sci-
ences, 985, 356-369.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994).
Insensitivity to future consequences following damage to human
prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50(1-3), 7-15.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Damasio, A. R., & Lee, G. P. (1999). Differ-
ent contributions of the human amygdala and ventromedial
prefrontal cortex to decision-making. Journal of Neuroscience, 19,
5473-5481.
Bechara, DEMO, Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Anderson, S. W. (DEMO). Disso-
ciation of working memory from decision making within the
human prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 428-437.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R. (1997). Decid-
ing advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Sci-
ence, 275, 1293-1295.
DEMO, A., Dolan, S., & Hindes, A. (2002). Decision-making and
addiction (part II): Myopia for the future or hypersensitivity to
reward? Neuropsychologia, 40, 1690-1705.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H. (2000). Characterization of
the decision-making deficit of patients DEMO ventromedial
prefrontal cortex lesions. Brain, 123, 2189-2202.
Berlin, H. A., Rolls, E. T., & Kischka, U. (2004). Impulsivity, time per-
ception, emotion and reinforcement sensitivity in patients with
orbitofrontal cortex lesions. Brain, 127(pt. 5), 1108-1126.
Berridge, K. C., & Robinson, T. E. (1998). What is the role of dopa-
mine DEMO reward: Hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive
salience? Brain Research Brain Research Reviews, 28, 309-369.
Best, M., Williams, J. M., & Coccaro, E. F. (2002). Evidence for a dys-
functional prefrontal circuit in patients with an impulsive aggres-
sive disorder. Proceedings of DEMO National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 99, 8448-8453.
Bickel, W. K., Odum, A. L., & Madden, G. J. (1999). Impulsivity and
cigarette smoking: Delay discounting in current, never, and ex-
smokers. Psychopharmacology, 146, 447-454.
Blood, A. J., & Zatorre, R. J. (2001). Intensely pleasurable responses
to music DEMO with activity in brain regions implicated in
reward and emotion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 98, 11818-11823.
Brauer, L. H., & de Wit, H. (1996). Subjective responses to d-amphet-
amine alone and after pimozide pretreatment in normal, healthy
volunteers. Biological Psychiatry, 39, 26-32.
Breiter, H. C., Aharon, I., Kahneman, D., Dale, A., & Shizgal, P.
(2001). Functional imaging of neural responses to expectancy
and experience of monetary DEMO and losses. Neuron, 30, 619-639.
Breiter, H. C., & Rosen, B. R. (1999). Functional magnetic resonance
imaging of brain reward DEMO in the human. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, DEMO, 523-547.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Stout, J. C. (2002)DEMO A contribution of cognitive
decision models to clinical assessment: Decomposing perfor-
DEMO on the Bechara gambling task. Psychological Assessment, 14,
253-262.
Bush,DEMO, Vogt,B.A., Holmes,J., Dale,A.M., Greve, D.,Jenike, M. A.,
et al. (2002). Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex: DEMO role in reward-
170 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
based decision making. Proceedings of the DEMO Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America, 99, 523-528.
Butler, A., & Scherer, L. (1997). The effects DEMO elicitation aids, knowl-
edge, and problem content on option quantity and quality. Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 72, 184-202.
Cardinal, R. N., Pennicott, D. R., Sugathapala, C. L., Robbins, DEMO W., &
Everitt, B. J. (2001). Impulsive choice induced in rats by lesions of
the nucleus accumbens core. Science, 292, DEMO
Cavedini,P., Riboldi,G., D’Annucci,A., Belotti,P., Cisima,M., &
Bellodi, L. (2002). Decision-making heterogeneity in obsessive-
compulsive DEMO: Ventromedial prefrontal cortex function
predicts different treatment outcomes. Neuropsychologia, 40, DEMO
211.
Cavedini,P., Riboldi,G., Keller, R.,D’Annucci,A., & Bellodi,L.
(2002). Frontal lobe dysfunction in pathological gambling
patients. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 334-341.
Chiavaras, M. M., LeGoualher, G., Evans, A., & Petrides, M. (2001).
Three-dimensional probabilistic atlas of the human orbitofrontal
sulci in standardized stereotaxic space. Neuroimage, 13, 479-496.
Clark, L., Manes, F., Antoun, N., Sahakian, B. J., & Robbins, T. W.
(2003). The contributions of lesion laterality and DEMO volume to
decision-making impairment following frontal lobe damage.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 1474-1483.
Clarke, H. F., Dalley, J. W., Crofts, H. S., DEMO, T. W., & Roberts, A. C.
(2004). Cognitive inflexibility after prefrontal serotonin deple-
tion. Science, 304, 878-880.
Coffey, S. F., Gudleski, G. D., Saladin, M. E., & Brady, K. DEMO (2003).
Impulsivity and rapid discounting of delayed hypothetical
rewards in DEMO individuals. Experimental Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 11, 18-25.
Cottle, T. J., & Klineberg, S. L. (1974). The present of things future.New
York: Free Press.
Critchfield, T. S., & Kollins, S. H. (2001)DEMO Temporal discounting: Basic
research and the analysis of socially important behavior. DEMO of
Applied Behavior Analysis, 34, 101-122.
Cunningham, W. A., Johnson, M. K., Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C., &
Banaji, M. R. (2003). Neural components of social evaluation.
Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 639-649.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes error: Emotion, reason, and the human
brain.New York:AvonBooks.
Deichmann, R., Gottfried, J. A., Hutton, C., & Turner, R. (2003).
Optimized EPI for fMRI studies of the orbitofrontal cortex.
Neuroimage, 19(2 pt. 1), 430-441.
Dias, R., Robbins, DEMO W., & Roberts, A. C. (1996). Dissociation in
prefrontal DEMO of affective and attentional shifts. Nature, 380,
69-72.
Dombrowski, S. M., Hilgetag, C. C., & Barbas, H. (2001). Quantitative
architecture distinguishes prefrontal cortical systems in the rhe-
sus monkey. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 975-988.
Eslinger, P. J., & Damasio, A. R. (1985) Severe disturbances of higher
cognition after bilateral frontal lobe ablation: Patient DEMO Neurol-
ogy, 35, 1731-1741.
Evenden, J. L. (1999). Varieties of impulsivity. Psychopharmacology,
146, 348-361.
Fellows, L. K., & Farah, M. J. (2003). Ventromedial frontal cortex
mediates affective shifting in DEMO: Evidence from a reversal
learning paradigm. Brain, 126, 1830-1837.
Fellows, L. K., & Farah, M. J. (2005). Different underlying impair-
ments in decision-making following ventromedial and
dorsolateral frontal lobe damage in humans. DEMO Cortex, 15,
58-63.
Fellows,L.K., & Farah,M.J.(in press).Dissociable elements of
human foresight: A role for the ventromedial frontal lobes in
framing the future, but not in thinking about future rewards.
Neuropsychologia.
Fischoff, B. (1996). The real world: What good is it? Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65, 232-248.
Gehring, W. DEMO, & Willoughby, A. R. (2002). The medial frontal cortex
DEMO the rapid processing of monetary gains and losses. Science,
295, DEMO
Ghashghaei, H. T., & Barbas, H. (2002). Pathways for emotion: Inter-
actions of prefrontal and anterior temporal pathways in the
amygdala of the rhesus monkey. Neuroscience, 115, 1261-1279.
Gigerenzer, G., & DEMO, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us
smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Glimcher, P. W., & Rustichini, A. (2004). Neuroeconomics: The
consilience of brain and decision. Science, 306, 447-452.
Godefroy, O., & Rousseaux, M. (1996). Binary choice DEMO patients with
prefrontal or posterior brain damage: A relative judgement the-
DEMO analysis. Neuropsychologia, 34, 1029-1038.
Godefroy, O., & Rousseaux, M. (1997). Novel decision making in
patients with prefrontal or posterior brain DEMO Neurology, 49,
695-701.
Goel, V., Grafman, J., Tajik, J., Gana, S., & Danto, D. (1997). A study of
the performance of patients with frontal lobe lesions in a financial
DEMO task. Brain, 120(pt. 10), 1805-1822.
Gottfried, J. A., DEMO, J., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Encoding predic-
tive reward value in human amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex.
Science, 301, 1104-1107.
DEMO, J., & Goel, V. (2000). Role of the right prefrontal cortex in
ill-structured planning. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 17, 415-536.
Grant, S., Contoreggi, C., & London, E. D. (2000). Drug abusers show
impaired performance in a laboratory test of decision making.
Neuropsychologia, 38, 1180-1187.
Hadland, K. A., Rushworth, M. F., Gaffan, D., & Passingham, R. E.
(2003). The anterior cingulate and reward-guided DEMO of
actions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 89, 1161-1164.
Herrnstein, R. J., & Prelec, D. (1991). Melioration: A theory of distrib-
uted choice. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, 137-156.
Holt, D. D., DEMO, L., & Myerson, J. (2003). Is discounting impulsive?
Evidence from temporal and probability discounting in gambling
and non-gambling college students. DEMO Processes, 64, 355-
367.
Hornak,J., O’Doherty, J.,Bramham,J., Rolls,E.T., Morris, R. G.,Bull-
ock, P. R., & Polkey, C. E. (2004). Reward-related reversal learning
after surgical excisions DEMO orbito-frontal or dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex in humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, DEMO, 463-478.
Izquierdo, A., & Murray, E. A. (2004). DEMO unilateral lesions of
the amygdala and orbital prefrontal cortex impair affective pro-
cessing in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91, 2023-
2039.
Izquierdo, A., Suda, R. K., & Murray, E. A. (2004). Bilateral orbital
prefrontal cortex lesions in Rhesus monkeys disrupt choices
guided by DEMO reward value and reward contingency. Journal of
Neuroscience, 24, 7540-7548.
Johnson, J. G., & Raab, M. (2003). Take the first: Option-generation
and resulting choices. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 91, DEMO
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.Cambridge,UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Kawabata, H., & Zeki, S. (2004). Neural DEMO of beauty. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 91, 1699-1705.
Kirby, K. N., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1995). Preference reversals due to
myopic DEMO of delayed rewards. Psychological Sciences, 6, 83-
89.
Kirby, K. DEMO, & Marakovic, N. (1996). Modeling myopic decisions: Evi-
dence for hyperbolic delay-discounting within subjects and
amounts. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision DEMO, 64,
22-30.
Kirby, K. N., Petry, N. M., & Bickel, W. K. (1999). Heroin addicts have
higher discount rates for delayed rewards than non-drug-using
controls. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, DEMO, 78-87.
Knutson, B., Adams, C. M., Fong, G. W., & Hommer, D. (2001). Antici-
pation of increasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus
accumbens. Journal of Neuroscience, 21(16), RC159.
Knutson, B.,Fong, G. W.,Adams,C.M., Varner,J.L., & Hommer, D.
(2001). Dissociation of reward anticipation and outcome with
event-related fMRI. Neuroreport, 12, 3683-3687.
Knutson,B.,Fong,G.W.,Bennett,S.M.,Adams,C.M.,&Hommer,D.
(2003). A region of mesial prefrontal cortex tracks monetarily
Fellows / HUMAN DECISION MAKING 171
rewarding outcomes: Characterization with rapid event-related
fMRI. Neuroimage, 18, 263-272.
Komura,Y., Tamura,R., Uwano, T.,Nishijo,H., Kaga,K., Ono, T.
(2001). Retrospective and DEMO coding for predicted
reward in the sensory thalamus. Nature, 412, 546-549.
Kringelbach, M. L., O’Doherty, J., Rolls, E. T., & DEMO, C. (2003).
Activation of the human orbitofrontal cortex to a liquid food stim-
ulus is correlated with its subjective pleasantness. Cerebral Cortex,DEMO
13, 1064-1071.
Lipshitz, R., Klein, G., Orasanu, J., & Salas, E. (2001). Taking stock of
naturalistic decision making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
14, 331-352.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001)DEMO Risk
as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267-286.
Maia, T. V., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). A reexamination of the evi-
DEMO for the somatic marker hypothesis: What participants really
know in the DEMO gambling task. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 101, 16075-16080.
Madden, G. J., Begotka, A. M., Raiff, B. R., & Kastern, L. L. (2003).
Delay discounting of real and hypothetical rewards. Experimental
and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 11, 139-145.
Manes, F.,Sahakian, B.,Clark,L., Rogers,R., Antoun,N., Aitken,M.,
& Robbins, T. (2002). Decision-making processes following dam-
age to the prefrontal cortex. Brain, 125(pt. 3), 624-639.
Martin-Soelch, C.,Leenders,K.L., Chevalley, A. F.,Missimer, J.,DEMO
Kunig, G., Magyar, S., et al. (2001). Reward DEMO in the
brain and their role in dependence: Evidence from
neurophysiological DEMO neuroimaging studies. Brain Research
Reviews, 36(2-3), 139-149.
Mavaddat, N.,Kirkpatrick,P.J., Rogers,R.D., & Sahakian, B. J.
(2000). DEMO in decision-making in patients with aneurysms of
the anterior communicating artery. Brain, 123(pt, 10), 2109-2117.
McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G., & Cohen, J. D.
(2004). Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed
monetary rewards. Science, 306, 503-507.
DEMO, M. M. (2003). Some anatomic principles related to behav-
ioral neurology and neuropsychology. In T. E. Feinberg & M. J.
Farah (Eds.), Behavioral neurology and neuropsychology (2nd ed., pp.
45-56). New DEMO: McGraw-Hill.
Miller, L., & Milner, B. (1985). Cognitive DEMO after frontal or
temporal lobectomyII. The synthesis of phonemic and semantic
information. Neuropsychologia, 23, 371-379.
Miller, L. A. (1992). Impulsivity, risk-taking, and the ability to synthe-
size fragmented information after frontal lobectomy.
Neuropsychologia, 30, 69-79.
Mobini,S., Body,S., Ho,M.Y., Bradshaw,C.M., Szabadi, E.,Deakin,
J. F., et al. (2002). DEMO of lesions of the orbitofrontal cortex on
sensitivity to delayed and probabilistic reinforcement.
Psychopharmacology, 160, 290-298.
Modell, J. G., Mountz, J. M., Glaser, F. B., & Lee, J. Y. (1993). Effect of
haloperidol on measures of craving and impaired control in alco-
holic DEMO Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research, 17,
234-240.
Montague, P. DEMO, & Berns, G. S. (2002). Neural economics and the DEMO
logical substrates of valuation. Neuron, 36, 265-284.
Monterosso,J., Ehrman,DEMO, Napier,K.L., O’Brien, C. P.,& Childress,
A. R. (2001). Three decision-making tasks in cocaine-dependent
patients: Do they measure the same construct? Addiction, 96, 1825-
1837.
North, N. T., & O’Carroll, R. E. (2001). Decision making in patients
with spinal DEMO damage: Afferent feedback and the somatic
marker hypothesis. Neuropsychologia, 39, DEMO
O’Doherty, J., Critchley, H., Deichmann, R., & Dolan, DEMO J. (2003).
Dissociating valence of outcome from behavioral control in
DEMO orbital and ventral prefrontal cortices. Journal of Neurosci-
ence, 23, 7931-7939.
O’Doherty, J.,Kringelbach,M.L., Rolls,E.T., Hornak,J., & Andrews,DEMO
C. (2001). Abstract reward and punishment representations in
the human DEMO cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 95-102.
O’Doherty, J.,Rolls,E.T., Francis, S.,Bowtell, R.,McGlone,F., Kobal,
G., et al. (2000). Sensory-specific satiety-related olfactory activa-
tion of the human orbitofrontal cortex. DEMO, 11, 399-403.
O’Doherty, J.,Winston,J., Critchley, H.,Perrett, D.,Burt, D. M.,&
Dolan, R. J. (2003). DEMO in a smile: The role of medial
orbitofrontal cortex in facial DEMO Neuropsychologia, 41,
147-155.
O’Doherty, J. P.,Dayan,P., Friston, K.,Critchley,H., & Dolan,R.J.
(2003). Temporal difference models DEMO reward-related learning
in the human brain. Neuron, 38, 329-337.
O’Doherty, DEMO P.,Deichmann, R.,Critchley,H.D., & Dolan,R.J.
(2002). DEMO responses during anticipation of a primary taste
reward. Neuron, 33, 815-826.
Ongur, D., An, X., & Price, J. L. (1998)DEMO Prefrontal cortical projections
to the hypothalamus in macaque monkeys. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 401, 480-505.
Overman, W. H. (2004). Sex differences DEMO early childhood, adoles-
cence, and adulthood on cognitive tasks that rely on orbital
prefrontal cortex. Brain Cognition, 55, 134-147.
Pagnoni, G., DEMO, C. F., Montague, P. R., & Berns, G. S. (2002). Activ-
ity in human ventral striatum locked to errors of DEMO predic-
tion. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 97-98.
Paulus, M. P., & Frank, L. R. (2003). Ventromedial prefrontal cortex
activation is critical DEMO preference judgments. Neuroreport, 14,
1311-1315.
Pecina,S., Cagniard,B., DEMO, K. C.,Aldridge, J. W.,& Zhuang, X.
(2003). Hyperdopaminergic mutant mice have higher wanting
but not liking for sweet rewards. DEMO of Neuroscience, 23, 9395-
9402.
Petrides, M., & Pandya, DEMO N. (1999). Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex:
Comparative cytoarchitectonic analysis in DEMO human and the
macaque brain and corticocortical connection patterns. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 11, 1011-1036.
Petrides, M., & Pandya, D. N. (DEMO). Comparative cytoarchitectonic
analysis of the human and the macaque ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex and corticocortical connection patterns in the monkey.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 291-310.
Petry, N. M., Bickel, W. K., & Arnett, M. (1998). Shortened time hori-
zons and insensitivity to future DEMO in heroin addicts.
Addiction, 93, 729-738.
Platt, M. L., & Glimcher, P. W. (1999) Neural correlates of decision
variables in parietal cortex. Nature, 400, 233-238.
Pochon, J. B., Levy, R., DEMO, P., Lehericy, S., Poline, J. B., Pillon, B.,DEMO
et al. (2002). The neural system that bridges reward and DEMO
in humans: An fMRI study. Proceedings of the National Academy of DEMO
ences of the United States of America, 99, 5669-5674.
Price, DEMO L., Carmichael, S. T., & Drevets, W. C. (1996)DEMO Networks
related to the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex: A substrate DEMO
emotional behavior? Progress in Brain Research, 107, 523-536.
Rachlin, H., Raineri, A., & Cross, D. (1991). Subjective probability
and delay. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 55, 233-
244.
DEMO, R., & Overman, W. H. (2001). Adult sex differences on a deci-
sion-making task previously shown to depend on the orbital
DEMO cortex. Behavioral Neuroscience, 115, 196-206.
Rempel-Clower, N. L., & Barbas, H. (1998). Topographic organiza-
tion of connections between the hypothalamus DEMO prefrontal
cortex in the rhesus monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 398,DEMO
393-419.
Rogers,R.D., Everitt, B. J.,Baldacchino, A.,Blackshaw,A.J.,DEMO
Swainson, R., Wynne, K., et al. (1999). Dissociable DEMO in the
decision-making cognition of chronic amphetamine abusers,
opiate abusers, DEMO with focal damage to prefrontal cortex,
and tryptophan-depleted normal volunteers: DEMO for
monoaminergic mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology, 20, 322-
339.
Rogers, R. D., Owen, A. M., Middleton, H. C., Williams, E. J., DEMO,
J. D., Sahakian, B. J., et al. (1999). Choosing between small, likely
rewards and large, unlikely rewards activates inferior DEMO orbital
prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 9029-9038.
Rogers,R.D., DEMO, E. M.,Bhagwagar,Z., Drevets, W. C.,
Sahakian, B. J., & Carter, C. S. (2003). Tryptophan depletion alters
the decision-making of healthy volunteers through altered pro-
cessing of reward cues. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 153-162.
172 BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE REVIEWS
Rolls, E. T. (2000). DEMO orbitofrontal cortex and reward. Cerebral Cor-
tex, 10, 284-294.
Rolls, DEMO T., Hornak, J., Wade, D., & McGrath, J. (DEMO). Emotion-
related learning in patients with social and emotional changes
associated with frontal lobe damage. Journal of Neurology, Neurosur-
gery, and Psychiatry, 57, 1518-1524.
Saad, G., & Russo, J. (1996). Stopping criteria in sequential choice.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67, DEMO
Sanfey, A. G., Hastie, R., Colvin, M. K., & Grafman, J. (2003). Phineas
gauged: Decision-making and the human prefrontal cortex.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 1218-1229.
Satish, U., Streufert, S., & DEMO, P. J. (1999). Complex decision
making after orbitofrontal damage: DEMO and stra-
tegic management simulation assessment. Neurocase, 5, 355-364.
Schlosser, DEMO,Hutchinson, M.,Joseffer, S.,Rusinek,H., Saarimaki, A.,
Stevenson, J., et al. (1998). Functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing of human brain activity in a verbal fluency task. Journal of Neu-
rology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 64, 492-498.
Schoenbaum, G., Setlow, B., Saddoris, M. P., & Gallagher, M. (2003).
Encoding predicted DEMO and acquired value in orbitofrontal
cortex during cue sampling depends upon input from basolateral
amygdala. Neuron, 39, 855-867.
Schultz, W. (2002). DEMO formal with dopamine and reward. Neu-
ron, 36, 241-263.
Shallice, DEMO, & Burgess, P. W. (1991). Deficits in strategy application
DEMO frontal lobe damage in man. Brain, 114(pt. 2), 727-741.
DEMO, M., & Richmond, B. J. (2002). Anterior cingulate: DEMO
neuronal signals related to degree of reward expectancy. Science,
296, DEMO
Shizgal, P. (1997) Neural basis of utility estimation. Current Opinion DEMO
Neurobiology, 7, 198-208.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1971). Comparison of Bayesan and
regression approaches to the study of information DEMO in
judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 6,
649-744.
DEMO, D. M.,Zatorre,R.J., Dagher,A., Evans, A. C.,& Jones-Gotman,
M. (2001). Changes in brain activity related to eating chocolate:
From pleasure to aversion. Brain, 124(pt. 9), 1720-1733.
Stirling, W. C. (2003). Satisficing games and decision making: With appli-
cations to engineering and computer science.Cambridge,UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Stuss, D. T., & Benson, D. F. (1986). The DEMO lobes.New York:Raven
Press.
Stuss, D. T., & Levine, B. (2002). Adult clinical neuropsychology: Les-
sons from studies of the frontal lobes. Annual Review of Psychology,
53, 401-433.
Sugrue, L. P., Corrado, G. S., & Newsome, W. T. (2004). Matching
DEMO and the representation of value in the parietal cortex.
Science, 304, 1782-1787.
Tanaka,S.C., Doya,K., Okada, G.,Ueda, K.,Okamoto,DEMO, &
Yamawaki, S. (2004). Prediction of immediate and future rewards
differentially recruits cortico-basal ganglia loops. Nature Neurosci-
ence, 7, 887-893.
DEMO, I., Hauser, M., Deldin, P., & Caramazza, A. (2002). Do somatic
markers mediate decisions on the gambling task? Nature Neurosci-
ence, 5, 1103-1104.
Tranel, D., Bechara, A., & DEMO, N. L. (2002). Asymmetric func-
tional roles of right and left ventromedial prefrontal cortices in
social conduct, decision-making, and emotional processing. DEMO
tex, 38, 589-612.
Tremblay, L., & Schultz, W. (1999). Relative reward preference in pri-
mate orbitofrontal cortex. Nature, 398, DEMO
Tricomi, E. M., Delgado, M. R., & Fiez, J. DEMO (2004). Modulation of
caudate activity by action contingency. Neuron, 41, 281-292.
vanHonk, J.,Hermans,E.J., Putman, P.,Montagne, B.,& Schutter,
D. J. (2002). Defective somatic markers in sub-clinical psychopa-
thy. Neuroreport, 13, 1025-1027.
Wallis, J. D., & Miller, E. K. (2003). Neuronal activity in primate
dorsolateral and orbital prefrontal cortex during performance of
a reward preference task. European Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 2069-
2081.
Walton,M.E., Bannerman,D.M., Alterescu, K.,& Rushworth, M. F.
(2003). Functional specialization within medial frontal cortex of
the anterior cingulate for evaluating effort-related decisions. Jour-
nal of Neuroscience, 23, DEMO
Wilson, J. L., & Jezzard, P. (2003). Utilization of an intra-oral diamag-
netic passive shim in functional MRI of the inferior DEMO cortex.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 50, 1089-1094.
Wise, R. A. (2002). Brain reward circuitry: Insights from unsensed
incentives. Neuron, 36, 229-240.
Zink,C.F., Pagnoni, G.,Martin-Skurski,M.E., Chappelow, J. C.,&
Berns, G. S. (2004). Human striatal responses to monetary DEMO
depend on saliency. Neuron, 42, 509-517.
Zysset, S., Huber, DEMO, Ferstl, E., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2002). DEMO ante-
rior frontomedian cortex and evaluative judgment: An fMRI
study. Neuroimage, 15, 983-991.{1g42fwefx}