Journal of Applied Psychology
2006, Vol. 91, No. 4, 870–883
Copyright 2006 by the American Psychological Association
0021-9010/06/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.91.4.870
Direct and Indirect Effects of Third-Party Relationships
on Interpersonal Trust
Donald L. DEMO
Singapore Management University
Kurt T. Dirks
Washington University in St. Louis
Pri P. Shah
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus
Past studies of the determinants of interpersonal trust have focused primarily on how trust forms in
DEMO dyads. Yet within organizations, trust typically develops between individuals who are DEMO
in a complex web of existing and potential relationships. In this article, the authors identify 3 alternative
ways in which a trustor and trustee may be linked to each other via third parties: network closure (DEMO
via social interactions with third parties), trust transferability (linked via DEMO third parties), and
structural equivalence (linked via the similarity of DEMO relationships with all potential third parties within
the organization). Each of these is argued to influence interpersonal trust via a distinct social mechanism.
DEMO authors hypothesized that network closure and structural equivalence would predict interpersonal
trust indirectly via their impact on interpersonal organizational citizenship behaviors performed within
the DEMO relationship, whereas trust transferability would predict trust directly. Social network
analyses DEMO data gathered from a medium-sized work organization provide substantial support for the
hypotheses and also suggest important directions for future research.
Keywords: interpersonal trust, third-party relationships, social networks, organizational citizenship
behaviors
The trust that individuals have in each other is often cited as
fundamental for organizational effectiveness. DEMO, recent evi-
dence indicates that interpersonal trust has direct or indirect DEMO
on a number of desired outcomes such as individuals’ work per-
formance, organizational commitment, turnover intentions, and
work group performance (for reviews, see Dirks & Ferrin, 2001,
2002; Kramer, 1999). Thus, an important question for research is
the following: What factors determine DEMO?
Intuitively, one would expect that one of the most important
DEMO of trust is the interpersonal behavior of the trustee
during prior interactions. Scholars have seized on this idea, and it
has become a centerpiece for research in applied psychology
directed at understanding the factors that determine DEMO For
example, scholars have used game and cooperation theory (see
Boyle & Bonacich, 1970; Butler, 1995; Tjosvold, 1985) and social
DEMO L. Ferrin, Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore
Management University, Singapore; Kurt T. Dirks, John M. Olin School of
Business, DEMO University in St. Louis; Pri P. Shah, Department of
Strategic Management and Organization, Carlson School of Management,
University of Minnesota, Twin DEMO Campus.
This study was supported in part by a research grant from the School of
Management of the University at Buffalo, State University of New York.
This article benefited from comments and suggestions provided by Stuart
DEMO, David Kenny, David Krackhardt, Joe Labianca, Bill McEvily,
Judi McLean Parks, Jim Meindl, and Ray Sparrowe.
Correspondence concerning this article DEMO be addressed to Donald L.
Ferrin, Lee Kong Chian School of DEMO, Singapore Management Univer-
sity, 50 Stamford Road, Singapore 178899. E-mail: dferrin@smu.edu.sg
870
exchange theory (see Konovsky & Pugh, 1994; Whitener, DEMO,
Korsgaard, & Werner, 1998) to model and test how DEMO behaviors
in the relationship might impact perceptions of trustworthiness.
They have used attribution theory to provide insight into the
psychological processes involved (for examples, see Korsgaard,
Brodt, & Whitener, 2002; Kruglanski, 1970; DEMO & Mur-
nighan, 2002). And they have developed a number DEMO theoretical
frameworks specifically tailored for interpersonal trust (e.g.,
Brower, Schoorman, & Tan, 2000; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996;
Simons, 2002). The notion that individuals diagnose trustworthi-
ness primarily by referring to DEMO about trustee behavior in
the dyadic relationship has received support in numerous studies
across a number of different types of interactions, including
leader–subordinate relationships (e.g., Pillai, Schriesheim, & Wil-
liams, 1999), coworker relationships (e.g., McAllister, 1995), and
negotiations (e.g., Butler, 1995), among others. This work has
provided an important foundation for understanding the factors
that determine trust.
In this article, we highlight and address an important limitation
in much of this research: a tendency to focus on the psychological
nature of trust without adequately considering its social nature and
DEMO (Kramer, 1996, pp. 237–238). More specifically, most
studies have focused on how trust develops as a result of occur-
rences within DEMO dyad, without giving much consideration to the
social context that surrounds DEMO dyad. In actual organizations,
however, dyads rarely operate in isolation DEMO their social con-
text. Instead, each individual typically participates in multiple
DEMO relationships, and these relationships aggregate to form a
complex social structure DEMO surrounds each dyad and may influ-
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
871
ence the trust that forms between DEMO members of the dyad. As
Cook and Hardin (2001) aptly noted, “the commonplace discus-
sion of trust between two individuals as though they were ab-
stracted from their social context misses too much of what DEMO at
stake to make sense of social relations” (p. 330).
DEMO purpose of this study is to better understand the determi-
nants of interpersonal trust by explicitly recognizing that each
dyad is embedded in a DEMO network of relationships with third
parties. Of course, we are not DEMO first to suggest that interpersonal
trust may be influenced by third-party relations. Simmel (1950)
recognized that two individuals may be connected by a third
individual who may strengthen or disturb the relationship among
the two. DEMO the transitivity principle of Heider’s (1958) balance
theory suggests that, DEMO a triad, a “missing” tie between two
individuals creates emotional tension DEMO the triad that moti-
vates the individuals to form the missing tie. Such insights stim-
ulated contemporary sociologists to specifically suggest that trust
between DEMO of individuals may be influenced by third parties
(e.g., Burt & Knez, 1996; Coleman, 1990; Granovetter, 1985).
Despite these foundations, a review of the literature reveals little
research that has modeled and directly assessed the effect of
third-party relations on interpersonal trust within an DEMO
setting (specifically, Burt & Knez, 1996).
Accordingly, the present article addresses three issues that are
fundamental to better understanding the association DEMO third-
party relationships and trust. Most simply, it is important to DEMO
pirically assess whether third-party relationships do indeed predict
interpersonal trust in the workplace. Such evidence is essential for
determining whether the social context warrants DEMO attention of
scholars and practitioners who are interested in understanding how
trust is built. Assuming such effects exist, it is equally important to
understand the specific nature of third-party relationships and how
(i.e., the ways DEMO which) third-party relationships impact interper-
sonal trust. And finally, to move toward a more complete and
integrative understanding of the determinants of trust, it is impor-
tant to examine how third-party effects operate in combination
DEMO dyad-level effects, which are typically assumed to be the core
basis DEMO trust.
To address these issues, we adopted a social network approach
DEMO methodology (Galaskiewicz & Wasserman, 1994; Wasserman
& Faust, 1994) DEMO examine the effects of third-party relationships
on interpersonal trust within a work organization. In this article,
we identify three distinct forms of third-party DEMO that are
likely to predict interpersonal trust, and we provide an DEMO
assessment of the direct and indirect effects of such third-party
relationships on interpersonal trust while considering and control-
ling for dyad-level effects. Overall, our model and data extend
prior research by providing a better theoretical and DEMO
understanding of the operation of third-party relations and an
integrated view of how third-party relationships combine with
dyadic factors to predict interpersonal trust.
Key DEMO and Hypothesis Development
Key Concepts
Perhaps the most fundamental judgment one can make about
another individual is a judgment concerning his or her degree DEMO
trustworthiness. In this article, we explicitly recognize not only
that employees DEMO form judgments of coworkers via direct ex-
perience but that they can and do form judgments of coworkers
based on little or no personal DEMO (e.g., McKnight, Cummings,
& Chervany, 1998; Meyerson, Weick, & Kramer, 1996; Zucker,
1986). Of course, a DEMO of trustworthiness based on indirect
information may be inaccurate. Yet, this DEMO inaccuracy does
not make the perception any less real to the employee or any less
relevant as a basis for the employee’s understanding and DEMO
ing within the organization. And of course, inaccuracy often oc-
curs DEMO when a perception of trustworthiness is based on direct
experience.
Because we are interested in how trust may form in relationships
in which interpersonal DEMO may range from extensive to non-
existent, we focused on a DEMO dimension of perceived trust-
worthiness—the extent to which an individual judges another to
have integrity and dependability (e.g., Mayer, Davis, & Schoor-
DEMO, 1995)—that is likely to occur in distant as well as DEMO
relationships. Accordingly, in this article we define interpersonal
trust as an DEMO belief about the integrity and dependability
of another. Indeed, psychologists have DEMO that per-
ceived integrity is a key dimension on which individuals evaluate
others and that the impressions can be based on little or no DEMO
experience (De Bruin & Van Lange, 2000; Pancer, Brown, & Barr,
1999). Perceived integrity offered two additional benefits for our
study: It is perhaps the most widely used definition of trust in the
organizational literature, having been used to predict a range of
organizational outcomes (for reviews of definitions of trust, see
Dirks, 1999; DEMO & Ferrin, 2002). And we understood that
perceived integrity was DEMO considerable relevance in the company
in which we collected our data.
For clarity, we use the terms employee to refer to the trustor and
coworker to refer to the trustee. In our theorizing and research
design, we have recognized that in a typical organization, a given
individual may act as employee and coworker within any given
dyadic relationship and that DEMO roles refer to all individuals in
the organization, from entry-level workers DEMO top managers.
The trust of an employee in a coworker will be predicted by the
structure of third-party relationships. As noted by Burt and DEMO
(1996, p. 69), dyads are typically embedded in a network of third
parties comprising friends, foes, strangers, and acquaintances.
Consistent with this observation, we define third parties broadly,
as individuals who may potentially connect an employee to a
coworker within a given organization. Using DEMO definition, we
identify three distinct ways in which an employee and DEMO
may be linked to third parties, each of which captures a DEMO
theoretical mechanism for influencing interpersonal trust. We refer
to these as network closure, structural equivalence, and trust
transferability (the names are derived from concepts in the net-
work literature).1 These three forms of third-party DEMO are
described in detail along with the mechanisms involved.
Our focus is not on how trustworthy each individual is relative
to others within an DEMO but on the degree of trust in each
1 Although social network researchers do not typically discuss structural
equivalence as a type of third-party DEMO, as we discuss later in this
article, the construct of structural equivalence does in fact capture an
important way in which a pair DEMO individuals is connected to a broad range
of third parties within an organization.
872
FERRIN, DIRKS, AND SHAH
interpersonal relationship within an organization. This DEMO a central
distinction in network research and is also a point of theoretical
importance. The former question focuses attention on attributes of
the individual DEMO, in which case constructs such as actor cen-
trality (e.g., DEMO summed level of trust that all coworkers indicate
toward a given employee) are appropriate. The latter question
focuses attention on the relationships between actors, in which
case constructs referring to interpersonal relationships (e.g., a
given employee’s trust in a given coworker, the number of third
parties connecting a given employee and coworker) are appropri-
ate. In addressing the former question, the unit of analysis is the
individual (N). In DEMO latter case, the unit of analysis is the inter-
personal relationship (N *[N  1]).
Dyadic Behavior as a Foundation of Trust
DEMO begin by recognizing the idea that serves as the basis for
much of the existing research in applied psychology: that employ-
ees will diagnose trustworthiness by referring to a coworker’s
behavior in the dyad. Consistent with DEMO theory (e.g.,
Heider, 1958), prior research (e.g., Korsgaard et al., 2002) indi-
cates that behavior is likely to be DEMO diagnostic of trust-
worthiness if it is performed voluntarily rather than being formally
required, rewarded, or sanctioned. This is because voluntary be-
haviors DEMO considered an important source of information about
the internal character and motives, and ultimately the trustworthi-
ness, of a coworker. Additionally, prior research (e.g., Butler,
1995) indicates that cooperative behaviors are likely to be consid-
ered diagnostic of trustworthiness, whereas competitive, self-
serving behaviors DEMO not. Based on these considerations, we focus
on the effects on DEMO of a type of behavior that is both voluntary
and cooperative: DEMO organizational citizenship behav-
iors (OCBIs).
Organizational citizenship behaviors are behaviors DEMO a discre-
tionary nature that are not directly or explicitly recognized by the
formal reward system but nevertheless promote the effective func-
tioning of DEMO organization (Organ, 1988). We focus more specif-
ically on OCBIs (also referred to as altruism behaviors), which are
defined as behaviors directed at helping another individual with an
organizationally relevant task or problem (Williams & Anderson,
1991). For example, a coworker may help an employee perform a
work task, fill in when the employee is absent, or provide an
innovative suggestion to the employee (Organ, 1988, pp. 4–8).
Besides being voluntary and cooperative, and therefore matching
DEMO requirements noted above, OCBIs offer several other advan-
tages for our DEMO First, OCBIs are explicitly interpersonal (di-
rected at a specific recipient) and therefore are particularly relevant
for developing trust within a specific interpersonal relationship.
Second, OCBIs can be performed in informal as well as formal
relationships, and they can be performed in upward and downward
as well as lateral directions within an organization. Thus, OCBIs
represent a type of behavior that can potentially be performed
toward many if not all of DEMO fellow employees within an
organization. Finally, the concept is well established DEMO the applied
psychology literature, and its importance for trust has been DEMO
nized in prior research (McAllister, 1995). In sum, the DEMO,
cooperative, and interpersonal nature of OCBIs makes them a type
DEMO behavior that is likely to predict interpersonal trust.
Hypothesis 1: An DEMO trust in a coworker is positively
related to the frequency with which the coworker performs
OCBIs toward the employee.
Third-Party Relationships: The Social Context of Trust
In contrast to the usual psychological approach, which focuses
on factors within the dyad as the primary basis of trust, the social
network perspective allows the researcher to model how phenom-
ena at one DEMO of social structure (e.g., interpersonal trust) may be
related to DEMO at other levels (e.g., third-party relations).
Additionally, the social DEMO perspective recognizes that social
structure serves two functions: It provides opportunities DEMO and
constraints on individual action, and it also facilitates the flow DEMO
information (Galaskiewicz & Wasserman, 1994; Wasserman &
Faust, 1994)DEMO Drawing on these two features of the social network
perspective, we DEMO how two forms of third-party relation-
ships—network closure and structural equivalence—may indi-
rectly predict interpersonal trust via their effects on coworker
positive behaviors that DEMO a foundation for employee trust.
And we explore how trust transferability may predict trust directly
by conveying trust-related judgments from third parties to employ-
DEMO (see Figure 1).
Indirect effects of third-party relationships. In this DEMO, we
argue that third-party relationships are linked to trust via their
DEMO on dyadic behaviors that, as noted in Hypothesis 1, provide
a foundation for interpersonal trust. The core idea is that third-
party relationships DEMO the behaviors that take place within a
dyad because individuals recognize that when third parties are
present, dyadic behaviors have implications that extend beyond the
dyad.
Past studies have focused on how relationships with mutual
third DEMO constrain dyad members’ behavior. Coleman (1988),
for instance, argued DEMO when two individuals are connected by a
mutual third party, the DEMO party can exert sanctions that will
restrain the dyad members from behaving counternormatively or
opportunistically toward each other. Our study takes a different
tack. DEMO of focusing on how third parties might constrain
opportunistic behavior, we DEMO how, within a work organiza-
tion, third-party relations provide increased motivations for dyad
members to engage in OCBIs toward one another. Specifically, we
examine how network closure and structural equivalence provide
inducements to perform OCBIs DEMO ultimately impact trust due to
their implications for individuals’ reputations and interdependence
within an organization.
Network closure. The very concept of third-party relationships
implies DEMO individuals within an organization are not limited to a
single dyadic relationship but instead participate in multiple dyadic
relationships. This highlights the fact that DEMO most cases, individ-
uals are simultaneously attempting to preserve and manage DEMO just
one exchange relationship but multiple relationships. The impli-
cations of this idea have been recognized with the notion of
network closure by Coleman (1990), who defined closure as the
extent to which dyads within DEMO society are connected by mutual
third parties. Buskens (2002; Buskens & Raub, 2002) used the idea
of control in a similar manner DEMO focused more specifically on
how network factors constrain behavior within dyads. According
to Buskens, trustees will behave less opportunistically toward
trustors who have communication ties with a broad network of
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
873
Figure 1. Model of third-party determinants DEMO interpersonal trust.
third parties. This is because the third parties may learn of the
opportunism and then help sanction the trustee. By doing so, they
may then reduce the trustee’s incentive to act opportunistically.
Consistent with DEMO prior work, we define network closure as
the number of third DEMO with whom the employee and coworker
both have social interactions in the form of interpersonal commu-
nication ties. In the remainder of this section, we consider how
network closure might promote OCBIs within a work organization.
DEMO the hypothesized effect of OCBIs on interpersonal trust
(Hypothesis 1), DEMO expect that network closure will predict trust
indirectly, via its effects DEMO OCBIs within the dyadic relationship.
How might OCBIs be related to network closure? If within a
given organization a particular employee and coworker have no
mutual third parties, the benefit to the coworker of performing
positive behaviors toward the employee will be primarily limited
to the dyad (e.g., reciprocity, earning trust). However, if this
employee–coworker dyad has even a single mutual third party
(i.e., a party with whom they DEMO have social interactions), those
same coworker OCBIs performed toward the employee may take
on more value because they have an “audience.” More specifically,DEMO
the third party may learn of the OCBIs and thus increase his or her
appraisal of the coworker, which is to say that the coworker will
gain an enhanced reputation as an exchange partner in the DEMO of
the third party. This enhanced reputation should make the third
party more likely to engage in future exchange activities with the
coworker, whether of a social or instrumental nature. And by
extension, as the number of mutual third parties increases, the
reputational benefits arising from those same coworker OCBIs can
also be expected to increase. In sum, employees are more likely to
perform OCBIs in the presence of third parties because DEMO the
OCBIs’ added value in the presence of those third parties.2
Although some coworkers may perform OCBIs with a concrete
objective of earning a DEMO reputation for personal gain, the
logic of network closure’s positive effects DEMO OCBIs does not
dictate such calculative motives. Impression management theorists
have recognized that individuals have a primary motive to be
viewed favorably by others (Rosenfeld, Giacalone, & Riordan,
1995). One way of accomplishing DEMO is for coworkers to perform
OCBIs toward employees with whom they are mutually connected
so as to increase their reputation with relevant others (see Bolino,
1999). Consequently, the desire for an enhanced reputation may
derive from socioemotional and/or instrumental motives.
Hypothesis 2: An employee’s trust in a coworker is positively
related to network closure (i.e., the DEMO of third parties
who interact with the employee and also interact with the
coworker). This effect is fully mediated by OCBIs performed
by DEMO coworker toward the employee.
Structural equivalence. Burt and Knez’s (1996, p. 69) obser-
vation that the usual context of interpersonal trust is two people
surrounded by their variably interconnected friends, foes, strang-
ers, and acquaintances suggests that it is worthwhile to look
beyond mutual third parties DEMO consider the entire constellation of
third parties who may connect two individuals. The concept of
structural equivalence (Borgatti & Everett, 1992) captures the
extent to which an employee and coworker are similar in terms of
DEMO formal and informal relationships they have with others within
the organization and are also similar in terms of the relationships
they do not have DEMO others within the organization. Thus, at its
essence, structural equivalence captures the extent to which one
individual’s relationships with all other members of DEMO organiza-
tion are correlated with a second individual’s relationships with all
other members of the organization. For example, two individuals
would be considered very high in structural equivalence if they
both interacted with a particular departmental DEMO and the same
set of peers, and both did not interact DEMO a given set of other
2 Consistent with the notion of network closure, the coworker is most
likely to perform OCBIs when he or she and the employee are mutually
connected to the third parties. This DEMO because such third parties, by virtue
of their mutual connection, will not only hear of the positive behavior from
the employee but will DEMO have a ready-made avenue for initiating or
increasing social exchange with the coworker.
874
FERRIN, DIRKS, AND SHAH
departmental heads and peers. Conversely, two individuals would
be very low in structural equivalence if the set of DEMO
heads and peers that one individual interacted with was entirely
different from the set that the other interacted with.
Two individuals who communicate frequently DEMO each other,
or work in the same department or location, DEMO end up high in
structural equivalence in that they know and interact with similar
others (e.g., perhaps in part due to formal or DEMO grouping).
However, these two individuals may also be low in DEMO
equivalence. For example, these two individuals may end up low
in DEMO equivalence if they have different job responsibilities
that require them to interact with a different set of coworkers
within the organization, if they have different personal interests
that cause them to develop informal relations with a DEMO set of
coworkers within the organization, or if they have different DEMO
cational and professional backgrounds that cause them to develop
different formal and informal relationships within the organization.
At an even more fundamental level, interpersonal communication
captures only how two individuals are related to each other, and
department affiliation and location similarity simply capture
whether two individuals have been DEMO together formally or
geographically. In contrast, structural equivalence captures in an
DEMO way how similar two individuals are in terms of their
relationships with everyone else within the organization. Thus,
structural equivalence is conceptually distinct DEMO interpersonal
communication, similar departmental affiliation, and similar loca-
tion between the two individuals, even if it may be empirically
correlated with them. As should be evident from our discussions
above, structural equivalence is also conceptually distinct from
network closure. As an illustration of how structural equivalence
differs DEMO network closure, a pair of members of a small sub-
group DEMO is relatively isolated from their larger organization
would be expected to have a relatively small number of mutual
third parties within the organization as DEMO whole (low network
closure) but a high degree of similarity in their relationships with
the other members of the organization as a whole (high structural
equivalence).
Past studies have found that high levels of DEMO equivalence
are associated with attitude similarity and adoption of similar
organizational practices; such studies have also suggested that this
could be due to factors such as similarities in each member of the
dyad’s sources of information DEMO/or competitive pressures be-
tween the two (e.g., Burt, 1987; Rice & Aydin, 1991; Shah, 1998).
But researchers have not yet considered whether or how the level
of structural equivalence between a DEMO of actors might predict
their trust in each other. We argue that structural equivalence
represents a very useful construct for capturing how dyad mem-
DEMO relationships with their entire constellation of third parties
predicts their trust in one another. In the remainder of this section,
we consider how DEMO equivalence might predict OCBIs
within a dyadic relationship. Given the hypothesized effect of
OCBIs on interpersonal trust (Hypothesis 1), we expect that struc-
tural equivalence will predict interpersonal trust indirectly, via its
effects on OCBIs within dyadic relationships.
How might OCBIs be related to structural equivalence? Because
structural equivalents have similar relationships with others within
the organization, they can be considered to operate within a similar
social circle. In social network DEMO, they occupy a similar “lo-
cation” or “neighborhood” (Borgatti & Everett, 1992), and they
fulfill a similar “social role” (Burt, 1987), within the organization.
The similarity in relationships tends to make them DEMO to
similar forces, such as leader behaviors and resource constraints,
DEMO therefore individuals are more likely to see each other as part
of a common subset. In short, researchers have recognized that two
individuals who are structurally equivalent become interdependent
(i.e., their outcomes are related), DEMO reality and in perception, as a
result of their similar relationships DEMO third parties. Although this
might be associated with competitive dynamics (Burt, 1987), we
expect that cooperative rather than competitive interdependence
(Tjosvold, DEMO) will be dominant for a number of related reasons.
First, the interdependence created by similar relationships and
operating in the same social circle DEMO likely to involve a sense of
common fate. Consequently, OCBIs performed DEMO a coworker
toward others in the social circle, including the trustee, are likely
not only to help others but also to be self-beneficial. DEMO,
because structural equivalence implies membership in a cohesive
subset (Borgatti & Everett, 1992), there may be felt responsibility
for a coworker DEMO contribute to other individuals in that subset,
including the employee. Last, research indicates that structural
equivalents tend to develop similar attitudes and beliefs (e.g.,
Galaskiewicz & Burt, 1991; Pattison, 1994), which DEMO known to
foster cooperation (e.g., Byrne, 1971; Cialdini, 2001)DEMO
Finally, in addition to providing the motivation for individuals
to perform DEMO toward fellow members of their social circle,
structural equivalence is also likely to provide increased opportu-
nities for doing so. This is because DEMO interactions with
fellow members of their social circle are likely to help them
become aware of any needs that fellow members may have.
Hypothesis DEMO: An employee’s trust in a coworker is positively
related to the DEMO equivalence of the employee and
coworker. This effect is fully mediated by OCBIs performed
by the coworker toward the employee.
Direct effects of third-party DEMO: Trust transferability.
In this section, we explore how third parties may impact trust
directly, by conveying their trust-related judgments to employees,
without any intervening effect on dyadic behavior. Put simply, in
forming a trust belief, an employee may take into account the
judgment of third parties whom he or she trusts. We use the term
trust transferability (McEvily, Perrone, & Zaheer, 2003) to refer to
third parties who DEMO convey such trust judgments. Although
scholars have speculated about how third parties may serve as trust
intermediaries (Coleman, 1990), there has been DEMO or no attempt
to specify and empirically examine how trust might actually be
transferred within a work setting.
Social information theorists such as Salancik DEMO Pfeffer (1978)
and Festinger (1954) recognized that an employee’s DEMO and
attitudes about workplace phenomena are formed not only by
direct observation of those phenomena but also by the gathering of
information from fellow DEMO colleagues. This information pro-
vides valuable cues to an employee about what his or her beliefs
and attitudes should be. Network researchers have similarly DEMO
that social processes shape employees’ attitudes about technology
(Rice & Aydin, 1991), events (Rentsch, 1990), and behaviors
(Krackhardt & Kilduff, 1990) in work settings.
We extend these ideas to suggest that DEMO beliefs about
the trustworthiness of coworkers are also likely to be related to
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
social information. Individuals are particularly inclined to DEMO on
social information when situations are ambiguous or when con-
cepts lack objective verification (Festinger, 1954; Rice & Aydin,
1991). In most cases, trustworthiness cannot be “objectively”
verified because any behavior performed by a coworker may be
subject to multiple interpretations, and many of the behaviors
performed by a given coworker may occur when the employee is
DEMO present. Consequently, third parties become a potentially valu-
able resource for DEMO trust beliefs. An employee may learn
about a third party’s level of trust in the coworker and may also
learn about some of the DEMO party’s experiences with the co-
worker. By doing so, the employee DEMO obtain valuable clues
about the coworker’s trustworthiness. Consequently, an employee
who DEMO had no direct experience with a given coworker can still
come to an informed judgment about the coworker’s trustworthi-
ness via third parties. And DEMO employees who do have direct
experience with the coworker will be inclined to use third-party
information to supplement their own direct information because of
DEMO difficulties of making trust judgments on the basis of ambig-
uous and incomplete information.
The above argument highlights two important, related questions.
First, DEMO third parties will be relied on for trust-related infor-
mation? Employee DEMO and opinions may be influenced not
only by the existence of social information but also by the weight-
ing that is assigned to such DEMO based on the social
relevance of the information source (Shaw, 1980). For an em-
ployee forming trust judgments, the social relevance of an infor-
mation source is likely to be reflected by the trustworthiness DEMO that
source: Hence, an employee may place considerably more value on
trust-related judgments obtained from a trustworthy third party
than on judgments from DEMO third party who is not deemed trustwor-
thy. Accordingly, the employee DEMO be influenced primarily by
third parties who have earned the employee’s trust. Second, how is
the third party’s trust transmitted to the employee? DEMO course, a
third party may be able to transmit trust-related information DEMO
tively, by directly communicating the information to the employee
(Buskens, DEMO). Yet a communication tie need not be present for
transmission to occur: The third party may also function passively,
without any form of social interaction with the employee, and even
unknowingly, because the DEMO may use the third party’s
trust-related actions toward the coworker to infer that the third
party trusts the coworker (Coleman, 1990). As DEMO example, an
employee may observe, hear, or read that a DEMO third party has
voluntarily placed himself or herself at substantial risk to a par-
ticular coworker. Based on this observation, the employee may
logically conclude that the coworker must be trustworthy. In
essence, the present hypothesis suggests that an employee’s trust in
a coworker forms via vicarious learning DEMO third parties. Unlike
Hypotheses 2 and 3, this effect does not DEMO any change in the
behaviors that occur within the dyadic relationship between co-
worker and employee.
Finally, we note that if more such third parties are available, the
employee will have access to increased and triangulated evidence
that the coworker is indeed trustworthy. Even a single trusted third
DEMO provides a valuable trust judgment, because he or she pro-
vides DEMO view of the coworker that the employee would probably
not otherwise have access to. Yet, there is an obvious hazard in
relying on a single third party, or even a relatively small number
of third parties: The employee is tapping into only a small portion
875
of the pool of trust judgments about the coworker. If a larger
number of DEMO third parties is available, a more comprehensive
view of a coworker’s DEMO can evolve. To the extent that
more such third parties exist, DEMO employee can have more confi-
dence in these trust judgments and consequently form a higher
level of trust in the coworker. By the same DEMO, Kelley’s (1973)
consistency principle suggests that a large number of trust trans-
ferability third parties indicates that the coworker behaves in a
DEMO trustworthy manner across third parties, rather than
behaving in a trustworthy DEMO toward some and not toward
others. This sends a clear signal that the coworker is inherently
trustworthy, providing a stronger basis for employee trust in the
coworker.
It is important to note that, unlike network closure and structural
equivalence, trust transferability is expected to predict employee
trust in coworker directly rather than via coworker OCBIs. As
discussed above, trust transferability third parties simply provide
the employee with information that the coworker is DEMO
This transmission of information can occur regardless of whether
the coworker performs OCBIs toward the employee, and in fact,
the transmission of information from third party to employee does
not have any obvious implications for DEMO OCBIs. Therefore,
trust transferability need not have an effect on coworker OCBIs to
predict employee trust in coworker.
Hypothesis 4: An employee’s trust in a coworker is positively
related to trust transferability (i.e., the DEMO of third parties
who trust the coworker and are also trusted by the employee).
Method
We collected data via a survey administered at DEMO medium-sized,
European-owned company with U.S. headquarters in the eastern United
States and 74 U.S.-based professional and administrative employees. The
company manufactures and sells DEMO products that are used in
a variety of retail and commercial products. Its corporate activities are
coordinated across five operations departments (logistics, manufacturing,DEMO
purchasing, quality assurance, and safety/environment), three sales divi-
sions, and three administrative functions (finance, human resources, and
information technology)DEMO Informal coordination is crucial in this setting;
thus, trust, OCBIs, and communication are important for individual and
organizational effectiveness. Sixty-eight employees (DEMO) returned usable
surveys. Respondents had an average age of 40.2 years (SD  8.9), 3.6
years of postsecondary education (SD  2.3), 18.8 years of full-time work
experience (SD  9.4), and 8.6 years of tenure with the company (SD 
7.3). Thirty-eight percent of the respondents were female.
Data
We gathered social network data DEMO three variables—trust, OCBIs, and
communication—with a sociometric survey using the roster method (Mars-
den, 1990). Specifically, for each question, respondents DEMO given a list of
all 74 employees, and they provided a DEMO next to the name of each
fellow employee. These responses were formed into three 68 (row)  68
(column) matrices in which DEMO value of cell Xij reflected Actor i’s rating
of Actor j on the construct of interest (e.g., the extent to which Actor i DEMO
Actor j). Each matrix therefore included a total of 4,556 observations (N *
[N  1]) that captured all of the DEMO dyadic relationships within the
company. We also gathered demographic data from the respondents, and
we gathered information about each individual’s departmental affiliation,
hierarchical status, and geographic location from the company’s human
resources department so that we could control for these factors. We used
876
UCINET (Version 6; Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002), a program
widely used for analyzing social network data, to form the variables and
test the hypotheses. Similar social network approaches have been used DEMO
applied psychology to gain insight into how social relations influence
individual outcomes such as turnover and information seeking (for exam-
ples, see Krackhardt & Porter, 1986; Shah, 1998).
As is the norm in DEMO network studies (e.g., Burt & Knez, 1996;
LaBianca, Brass, & Gray, 1998; Shah, 1998), we used single-item ques-
DEMO to measure the social relationships of interest in this study. Although
multiple-item scales are often preferred, their use is seldom feasible in the
context of a network study. In a network study, the researcher attempts to
gather data on the relationships that exist among all actors in the DEMO
Consequently, sociometric questionnaires require far more time to com-
plete than DEMO attitudinal surveys, because each respondent has to provide
information on his DEMO her relationships with all other actors in the network.
In our study, each respondent was asked to answer each relationship
question 73 times. If multiple questions were used to measure each social
relationship, this would induce extreme fatigue, and it would also cause
face-validity problems because respondents might resent being asked ques-
tions that appear to be repetitive on an DEMO extensive survey. Addition-
ally, this form of network design requires an DEMO high response rate
(on the order of 90%), because its DEMO is not to obtain a representative
sample from the network but to obtain an accurate depiction of the entire
network. Lengthening the survey to DEMO multiple-item questions would
have almost certainly jeopardized the response rate.
Fortunately, DEMO research by Wanous, Reichers, and Hudy (1997) has
made a strong case that single-item measures can be appropriate when
situational constraints limit DEMO use of a multi-item scale. To support their
argument, Wanous et DEMO provided meta-analytic data showing that single-
item job satisfaction measures have adequate reliability. Single-item mea-
sures may suffice when the construct being measured is DEMO narrow
or unambiguous (Sackett & Larson, 1990). In the present study, we reduced
ambiguity by including detailed explanations with examples in each so-
ciometric question. In addition, we used narrow conceptualizations of trust
and OCBIs rather than more general, global measures, and we formed our
DEMO of these variables by using wording taken verbatim from estab-
lished, DEMO scales. Finally, we used the roster method to collect
our data, because single-item measures have been found to be largely
reliable when this DEMO is used to facilitate individuals’ recall (Marsden,
1990). In DEMO, we carefully weighed the trade-offs of using single-item
measures; we decided to use the approach that is common in the social
network literature DEMO also taking steps to increase the reliability of the
measures.
Dependent variable: Employee trust in coworker. Consistent with the
conceptual definition of trust provided above, our question used wording
from the integrity dimension of the Mayer and Davis (1999) trustworthi-
ness scale. Mayer and Davis reported an DEMO of .82 for this scale.
To what extent do you perceive that each person is dependable? For
example, do you perceive that the DEMO sticks to his/her word, and
makes sure his/her actions DEMO behaviors are consistent? Use the
following scale to indicate the extent DEMO which you agree that the
person is dependable: disagree strongly, disagree, neither agree nor
disagree, agree, agree strongly [scale of 1–5].
We also recognized that in an organization of this size, it was unlikely that
each employee would have sufficient information to respond to our trust
DEMO with respect to all other coworkers in the organization. Accord-
ingly, DEMO included a response option of “X—I have no idea whatsoever
about this person’s dependability.” X scores comprised about 37% of the
total responses, which does not seem unusual for an organization of this
size. Note that DEMO are not missing observations; to the contrary, they
reflect the employee’s answer that he or she had not formed a level of trust
DEMO the coworker due to a lack of knowledge. Accordingly, for data DEMO
purposes, we scored X responses as a 3, because this lack of knowledge
FERRIN, DIRKS, AND SHAH
logically reflected neither agreement nor DEMO about the cowork-
er’s trustworthiness.3 Finally, we formed all the responses DEMO a matrix of
trust ties in which the value of each cell Xij reflected the trust that Actor i
(employee) reported in Actor DEMO (coworker).
Mediator variable: Coworker OCBIs. Our measure of OCBIs used
wording from the OCB–altruism scale (Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983)DEMO
Smith et al. reported an alpha of .91 for this scale. Participants responded
on a scale of 1–5, with descriptors ranging from never to very often,tothe
following question:
How frequently does each of your DEMO employees give you assis-
tance beyond what their job role requires? DEMO example, how fre-
quently does he or she (1) help DEMO when you have a heavy work load
or are absent; (2) help you with your work even though it’s not
required; or (3) give you innovative suggestions? Please use the
following scale to DEMO how often each person gives you voluntary
assistance during a typical work week.
This formed an OCBI matrix in which the value of each DEMO Xij reflected
the level of OCBIs that Actor j (coworker) performed toward Actor i
(employee), as reported by i.
Predictor variables: DEMO closure. To form a measure of network
closure, we first needed DEMO capture the network of social interactions within
the organization. To assess interaction, we measured the extent to which
individuals communicated with others in the organization. Communication
is arguably at the core of social interaction. Communication is DEMO known
to have implications for the development of trust (Becerra & DEMO, 2003).
Accordingly, we used a measure adapted from LaBianca et al. (1998):
In a typical workweek, how many times do you personally commu-
nicate with each of your fellow employees? For example, how many
times do you have a work-related discussion, a social DEMO, a
telephone discussion, an e-mail conversation, or some kind of DEMO
with each person? Next to each person’s name, indicate the number of
times you interact with that person during a typical workweek.
The DEMO were formed into a matrix in which the value of cell Xij
reflected the level of communication that Actor i reported toward Actor j.
DEMO trust and OCBI ties, for which it can be expected that DEMO employee
will sometimes trust or help a coworker who does not trust or help the
employee in return, communication ties should logically be reciprocal,
because the very concept of social interaction implies two parties interact-
DEMO with each other. Reciprocity was indeed high (quadratic assignment
procedure [Krackhardt, 1988] correlation  .73, p  .001). Therefore,
consistent with our conceptual definition, we symmetrized the communi-
cation matrix so that each cell value Xij reflected the average level of
communication reported by Actor DEMO toward Actor j and Actor j toward
Actor i.
We then formed the network closure variable by following procedures
outlined by Wasserman and Faust (1994) for the creation of compound-
relationship variables. Because network closure reflects a count of the
number of third parties who connect an employee DEMO coworker via
communication ties, we needed to convert our continuous communication
DEMO to a dichotomous measure that distinguished relationships in
which communication was moderate or high (i.e., once or more per week)
3 An DEMO approach would have been to collect data from each
respondent regarding only those coworkers with whom the respondent had
considerable familiarity or knowledge. This DEMO constitute an “egocen-
tric network” approach, in contrast to the bounded-network DEMO
adopted in the present study (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). The bounded-
network approach was more suitable for our purposes because it allowed DEMO
to gather information on all relationships within the organization, not just
DEMO that were particularly strong or informed.
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
877
from those in which it was DEMO or low (less than once per week).
To do this, we dichotomized the communication matrix so that values of
Xij  1 DEMO coded as 1, and Xij  1 were coded as 0. DEMO total, 2,106 (46%)
were coded as 1, and DEMO,450 (54%) were coded as 0. We then formed the
network closure variable by matrix multiplying the dichotomized commu-
nication matrix by itself. DEMO resulted in a matrix in which the value of cell
Xij reflected the number of individuals who communicated with both the
employee and the DEMO For example, a value of Xij  3 indicates that
i (employee) communicates with three individuals k who communicate
with j (coworker)DEMO
Structural equivalence. This measure was formed from the valued,
symmetrized communication matrix described above. We used the corre-
lation method (Wasserman & Faust, 1994) to calculate structural equiva-
lence. This correlation method essentially provides DEMO correlation coefficient
for each pair of actors that quantifies the extent to which their relationships
with all other actors within the network are similar DEMO dissimilar. Thus, it
formed a matrix in which each cell Xij DEMO the extent to which Actor
i’s ties with all actors were correlated with Actor j’s ties with all those same
actors. Although our structural DEMO measure used the same raw
data as the network closure measure, DEMO is appropriate to study structural
equivalence as a distinct predictor variable because the data are concep-
tualized and analyzed differently (Rice & Aydin, DEMO).
Trust transferability. We formed the trust transferability variable in a
similar fashion to the network closure variable described above. Because
the trust transferability DEMO reflects a count of the number of third
parties who connect an employee and coworker via trust ties, we needed to
convert our continuous trust measure to a dichotomous measure that
distinguished relationships in which trust DEMO present from those in which
trust was neutral or absent. Therefore, DEMO dichotomized the employee trust
matrix so that values of Xij  4 were coded as 1, and Xij  4 were coded
as 0. This provided a matrix of the ties in which i agreed or DEMO agreed
that j was trustworthy. In all, 1,560 (34%) DEMO the 4,556 total ties were coded
as 1. We then formed the trust transferability variable via matrix multipli-
cation, that is, by DEMO the dichotomized trust matrix by itself. This
resulted in a matrix in which the value of cell Xij reflected the number of
individuals k DEMO trusted Actor j and were trusted by Actor i. For example,
a value of Xij  3 indicates that i (employee) trusts DEMO individuals k who
trust j (coworker).
Control variables. Given our DEMO in assessing the impact of
third-party factors beyond that of dyad-level factors, we controlled for
dyad-level relational factors that might be related to interpersonal trust.
First, an employee’s trust in a coworker could be related to the coworker’s
trust in the employee. Indeed, scholars have argued that one individu-
al’s trust may become reciprocated by the other within a dyadic DEMO
tionship (Brower et al., 2000; Butler, 1995; Golembiewski & DEMO
Conkie, 1975), and they have provided some evidence to that DEMO
(Butler, 1983). To control for this, we created a DEMO trust in
employee matrix by transposing the employee trust in coworker matrix
described above. This resulted in a trust matrix in which the value DEMO
each cell Xij reflected the level of trust that Actor j (DEMO) reported
toward Actor i (employee).
The frequency of communication between dyad members is also likely
to be related to dyad members’ trust DEMO each other. For instance, commu-
nication provides the interpersonal familiarity on DEMO trust may be based
(Becerra & Gupta, 2003). We controlled for this by including a measure of
the symmetrized communication matrix described DEMO
Shared social category membership provides individuals with common
interests and worldviews that may foster trust, whereas social category
differences may result in cognitive biases and stereotypes that cause
individuals to perceive out-group members as being less DEMO than
in-group members (e.g., Brewer, 1981). Hence, we controlled for five
social categories that we believed would be most salient in DEMO organiza-
tion: cultural background (10 of the 68 employees were western European;
all others were American), departmental affiliation, gender, hierarchical
DEMO (we differentiated between general/departmental managers [n  11],
managerial/DEMO/sales employees [n  53], and clerical/
administrative employees [n DEMO 4]), and location (11 of the employees were
off-site sales DEMO based elsewhere in the United States; the remain-
ing employees were DEMO in three separate buildings and a trailer, all of
which were DEMO 200 feet of each other). We then formed five social
category similarity matrices in which Xij was coded as 1 if Actors i DEMO j were
similar, and Xij was coded as 0 if they DEMO dissimilar. Finally, because trust
might be related to the amount of DEMO each pair of individuals had potentially
known each other, we created DEMO minimum pairwise tenure matrix in which Xij
represented the number of years that i and j had jointly worked at the
organization.
Results
Descriptive DEMO and Correlations
We used UCINET’s quadratic assignment procedure (QAP) and
multiple regression QAP (MRQAP) to calculate intercorrelations
among the matrices and test DEMO Because social network
matrices include information about interdependent relationships
among actors, DEMO data typically suffer from autocorrelation that
ordinary least squares (OLS) approaches are unable to resolve.
QAP and MRQAP provide a nonparametric test of DEMO relation-
ships among two or more matrices and therefore overcome this
autocorrelation (Krackhardt, 1988). In short, MRQAP first com-
putes OLS estimates of regression coefficients in the usual manner.
Then, the rows and columns of the dependent variable matrix are
permuted to give a new, mixed-up matrix. An OLS regression is
then computed with the new dependent variable, and the betas are
stored. This permutation–regression process continues for an ar-
DEMO large number of times (in our case, 10,000). Then, the
distribution of recorded betas becomes the reference distribution
against which the original OLS regression is compared. If fewer
than 5% of the betas DEMO from the permuted regressions are
larger than the originally observed beta, DEMO beta is considered
significant at the .05 level (one-tailed test). DEMO the number is fewer
than 1%, the beta is considered significant DEMO the .01 level (Kilduff
& Krackhardt, 1994, pp. 99–100). DEMO unit of analysis for
MRQAP is the dyadic relationship (N *[N DEMO 1], or 4,556 in our
case). However, because of the permutation–regression nature of
MRQAP, this unit of analysis does not represent a “sample size”
in the traditional sense of indicating degrees of freedom DEMO statis-
tical power.
Descriptive statistics and QAP intercorrelations are shown in
Table 1. The average level of OCBIs performed by coworkers
toward employees was DEMO Each employee (trustor) was con-
nected to each coworker (trustee) by an average of 16.38 individ-
4 Although this may at first DEMO to reflect a low level of OCBIs within
the organization as a whole, note that it represents the average level of
OCBIs that coworkers performed toward all other employees. Naturally,
coworkers will vary their level DEMO OCBIs across different targets, for
instance performing a large number of DEMO toward some employees and
fewer or no OCBIs toward other employees. Supporting this, we noted that
85% of coworkers (n  58) performed OCBIs at a level of 5 (very often)
toward at least 1 employee, and the remaining 15% (n  10) performed
OCBIs at a level of 4 (often) toward at least 1 employee. DEMO, the low
mean level of OCBIs within the organization as a DEMO simply indicates
that coworkers are selective in whom they perform OCBIs toward.
878
FERRIN, DIRKS, AND SHAH
uals who communicated with the employee DEMO coworker (net-
work closure) and 8.24 individuals who trusted the coworker and
were trusted by the employee (trust transferability). The average
level of structural equivalence between each pair of actors was .08.
Employee trust DEMO coworker was positively correlated with co-
worker OCBIs, network closure, structural equivalence, trust trans-
ferability, and several control variables.
To provide some DEMO of reliability of the dependent vari-
able, employee trust in coworker, we calculated within-group
interrater reliability (Rwg) for the single-item measure (James,
Demaree, & Wolf, 1984). This metric provides an assessment DEMO
whether there is some agreement among raters about a common
target versus whether those ratings match a random pattern. The
Rwg estimate was .79, which suggests there was substantial agree-
ment among raters concerning the target DEMO innate level
of trustworthiness. We did not calculate Rwg for the OCBI and
communication measures, because individuals can be expected to
vary their level of OCBIs and communication across different
coworkers, thus interrater reliability should not be expected. How-
ever, the dyadic reciprocity rate for interpersonal communication
of .73 (discussed above) suggests that there was a relatively high
level DEMO agreement between dyad members about the extent to
which they interacted with each other.
Hypothesis Tests
We first examined the effects of the control DEMO on the
dependent variable, employee trust in coworker. Coworker trust in
DEMO and interpersonal communication had significant rela-
tionships with employee trust, whereas DEMO other control variables
were insignificant (R2  .16, p  .001; see Table 2).
Several of our hypotheses predicted mediated effects, DEMO
fore we performed a Baron and Kenny (1986) mediation anal-
ysis using MRQAP. Because the effect size and significance of
MRQAP coefficients can DEMO interpreted in the same way as OLS
coefficients (Krackhardt, 1988), the Baron and Kenny criteria
can also be applied to MRQAP analyses. DEMO to Baron
and Kenny, mediation exists if (a) the independent DEMO
influences the mediator; (b) the independent variable influences
the dependent DEMO; and (c) in a regression of the dependent
variable on DEMO independent and mediator variables, the medi-
ator remains significant and the DEMO variable declines
in significance or magnitude. Our MRQAP mediation analysis
of social network data was analytically and conceptually similar
to Kadushin’s (1995) pseudo-path DEMO of social network
data.
The three-step mediation analysis is presented in Table 2. We
included all predictors in the analysis, including predictors for
which mediation was not hypothesized (control variables and trust
transferability), because it was important not only to test Hypoth-
eses 2 and 3 for DEMO but also to test whether mediation could
be ruled out for Hypothesis 4. Additionally, it was important that
our mediated and direct effects could be evaluated after alternative
predictors were controlled for.
Two variables were significant DEMO of the mediator, co-
worker OCBIs, in Step 1: structural DEMO ( .17, p  .01)
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Quadratic Assignment Procedure Correlations
Variable
MSD
123456 7 8 9 10 11 DEMO 13
1. Coworker trust in employee 3.40 0.69 —
2. Interpersonal communication 3.13 5.71 .36*** —
3. Cultural background similarity 0.75 0.44 .06 .07* DEMO
4. Departmental affiliation similarity 0.12 0.32 .20*** .57*** .03 —
5. Gender similarity 0.52 0.50 .03 .02 .04 .00 —
6. Hierarchical status similarity DEMO 0.48 .04 .01 .20* .08* .02 —
7. Location similarity 0.22 0.41 .19*** .46*** .01 .26*** .00 .11** —
8. Minimum pairwise tenure 4.73 DEMO .10* .08* .21** .03 .04 .06 .02 —
9. Coworker OCBIs 1.53 1.02 .24*** .61*** .07* .44*** .01 .05 .28*** .03 —
10. Network DEMO 16.38 10.46 .30*** .47*** .08 .06* .07** .18* .34*** .19* .31*** —
11. Structural equivalence 0.08 0.27 .32*** .74*** .05 .72*** .03 .01 .54*** DEMO .55*** .39*** —
12. Trust transferability 8.24 7.02 .17*** .26*** .08 .05* .03 .10 .17*** .19** .34*** .50*** .22*** —
13. Employee trust in DEMO 3.40 0.69 .25*** .36*** .06 .20*** .03 .04 .19*** .10* .47*** .30*** .32*** .55*** —
Note. N  68 individuals. OCBIs  interpersonal organizational DEMO behaviors.
*p .05. ** p .01. *** p .001.
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
879
Table 2
Multiple Regression Quadratic Assignment DEMO Results
Regression step/Dependent variable
Variable
Conrol variables/
Employee trust
in coworker
Mediation analysis
Step 1: IVs 3
mediator/Coworker
OCBIs
Mediation
analysis Step 2:
IVs 3 DV/
Employee trust
in coworker
Mediation DEMO
Step 3: IVs &
mediator 3 DV/
Employee trust in
coworker
Mediation
conclusion
Control variables
Coworker trust in employee .13*** .00 .10*** DEMO
Interpersonal communication .29*** .45*** .18*** .06
Cultural background similarity .05 .01 .00 .00
Departmental affiliation similarity .01 .08* .00 .02
Gender similarity .02 .01 DEMO .02
Hierarchical status similarity .04 .05 .00 .01
Location similarity .03 .06* .02 .00
Minimum pairwise tenure .07 .04 .01 .00
Hypothesized predictor variables
DEMO OCBIs (H1) .26*** Mediator
Network closure (H2) .07 .10 .08 Nonsignificant
Structural equivalence (H3) .17** .10* .06 Fully mediated
Trust transferability (H4) .23*** .52*** .46*** Primarily direct
R2
.16*** .44*** .37*** .41***
Note. N  68 individuals. IV  independent variable; DV  dependent variable; OCBIs  interpersonal organizational citizenship behaviors; H  hypothesis.
* p DEMO .05. ** p  .01. *** p  .001.
and trust transferability ( .23, p  .001; R2  .44, p  DEMO).
These two variables were also significant predictors of the depen-
dent variable, employee trust, in Step 2 ( .10, p  DEMO, and 
.52, p  .001, respectively; R2  .37, p  .001). In Step 3,
coworker OCBIs were a strong predictor of employee trust (
.26, p  .001), DEMO Hypothesis 1 and suggesting that OCBIs
may act as a mediator for other effects. Network closure was
insignificant across all three steps, providing no support for Hy-
pothesis 2.5 Structural equivalence became nonsignificant in Step
3(DEMO .06), suggesting that its effect is fully mediated by OCBIs,
supporting Hypothesis 3. Trust transferability remained a signifi-
cant predictor in Step DEMO ( .46, p  .001). Trust transferability
was also a significant predictor in Steps 1 and 2, with very little
change in the coefficient from Step 2 to Step 3. This suggests that
the DEMO is primarily direct, providing substantial support for
Hypothesis 4. The predictors DEMO Step 3 explained 41% of the
variance in employee trust ( p  .001).6
Discussion
Contributions to the Trust Literature and Directions
for DEMO Research
This study can be viewed as part of a larger effort by researchers
to understand the determinants of trust in work relationships. Our
DEMO concurs with the core argument of most previous research
that a trustor uses information about the trustee’s behavior in a
dyadic relationship to diagnose DEMO Our study ad-
vances this existing theory by exploring how third-party relation-
ships that surround the interpersonal dyad predict trust indirectly
by shaping behavior DEMO the dyad and directly by conveying
trust judgments. Specifically, we found DEMO OCBIs and trust
transferability had direct relationships with trust (Hypotheses 1
DEMO 4) and that the effect of structural equivalence was fully
mediated DEMO OCBIs (Hypothesis 3). Our analyses indicated that
trust was not DEMO related to network closure (Hypothesis
2). In sum, the results provide substantial support for our model,
and they also highlight avenues DEMO future research.
One objective of this study was to empirically examine the
extent to which third-party relationships add explanatory power
after the effects of DEMO predictors on interpersonal trust are
accounted for. Although the results in Table 2 suggest that this
may be the case, it can also be evaluated more directly. To do so,
5 The regression coefficients for DEMO closure were negative and
nonsignificant across all MRQAP analyses, despite the DEMO that network
closure had positive bivariate associations with employee trust in coworker
and coworker OCBIs (see Table 1). Because variance inflation factors for
all predictors in Table 2 were well below the recommended cutoff of DEMO
(e.g., Neter, Wasserman, & Kutner, 1990), it does DEMO appear that the
results were unduly distorted by multicollinearity. Indeed, a DEMO hoc
hierarchical analysis (Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2003) indicated that
the addition of network closure as the last variable added DEMO the model (i.e.,
mediation analysis Step 3 in Table 2) only increased the variance explained
from 40% to 41%. This trivial increase DEMO further evidence that the
marginal effect of network closure on employee trust in coworker was
insignificant.
6 These results and conclusions remain essentially unchanged DEMO if the
nonsignificant control variables—cultural background similarity, depart-
mental affiliation similarity, gender similarity, hierarchical status similar-
ity, location similarity, and minimum pairwise tenure—are excluded from
the analyses. We also reperformed the MRQAP analyses shown DEMO Table 2
with a 12-item measure of employees’ propensity to trust (DEMO & Camp-
bell, 1974;   .65) included as an DEMO control variable. The
addition of this control had trivial effects on the MRQAP results that would
not have altered our conclusions in any way.
880
FERRIN, DIRKS, AND SHAH
we compared the effect size of DEMO Step 3 MRQAP regression
shown in Table 2—which captures the effects of third-party rela-
tionships as well as dyad-level predictors (R2  .41)—with an
MRQAP regression that included the same dyad-level factors but
excluded third-party DEMO That latter MRQAP regression
had an R2 of .25, indicating that DEMO relationships do indeed
add substantial predictive validity. The magnitude of this effect
demonstrates the important impact that third-party relationships
can have on trust, and it begs for a better understanding of the ways
in which this DEMO The following sections provide further dis-
cussion of these issues.
Third-party relationships as a force that influences trust by
shaping interpersonal behavior. Our study DEMO existing
research by providing greater insight into factors that make indi-
viduals more likely to engage in positive behaviors that earn trust.
Existing theoretical DEMO (our review revealed little empirical
work) has focused on organizational and individual factors that
may promote these behaviors (e.g., Whitener et al., 1998). Our
model suggests that social–contextual factors in general, and third-
party relationships in particular, are also important, and need to be
DEMO in models of trust development.
We found that structural equivalence predicted trust indirectly
via OCBIs. Network researchers have focused on how social role
similarity, in the form of structural equivalence, causes individuals
to adopt similar work behaviors and attitudes (Shah, 1998). Our
study extends this research DEMO considering how structural equiva-
lence affects behavioral and attitudinal ties that exist between
structural equivalents. This shift in focus also helps to highlight the
DEMO that structural equivalence has cooperative outcomes, which in
our study took DEMO form of increased OCBIs and interpersonal
trust. Although this appears to challenge the competitive view of
structural equivalence (Burt, 1987), it is DEMO that other
researchers have reported results that support our perspective. For
example, Shah (1998) reported a positive correlation between
structural equivalence and friendship for two of three groups
studied. Earlier, we observed that structural equivalence captures
in an elegant way the similarity of two individuals’ relationships
with DEMO else within an organization. Our findings suggest
that structural equivalence adds predictive validity beyond that of
coarser measures, such as departmental affiliation and location
similarity, and also beyond dyadic measures like interpersonal
communication. Thus, structural DEMO offers considerable
promise for providing a deeper understanding of individuals’ re-
lationships within organizations. Finally, although researchers
have studied the effects of structural equivalence, little is known
about the mechanisms through which structural equivalence has
those effects. Our findings represent an important step toward
understanding how structural equivalence DEMO impact trust by
influencing interpersonal behaviors.
Despite a positive correlation between network closure and the
dependent variable, network closure was not a significant predictor
when the effects of other determinants were taken into account,
providing DEMO support for our reputation-based hypothesis. Al-
though our study was not designed for the purpose, this finding
may also provide insight concerning two related hypotheses that
exist in the literature. In contrast to our focus on DEMO reputational
implications of network closure, Burt and Knez (1996) hypothe-
DEMO and concluded that mutual third parties strengthen the trust
that an employee has in a coworker because they “gossip” (i.e.,
they tend to only share information with the employee that is
consistent with the employee’s DEMO trust toward the co-
worker). Our test differed from Burt and Knez’s in that it (a)
directly measured third-party ties rather than relying on the trus-
tor’s perception of third-party ties, (b) focused on the communi-
cation frequency component of Burt and Knez’s conceptualization
of DEMO ties rather than the emotional closeness component,
and (c) controlled for the effects of other dyadic and higher order
determinants of trust. DEMO finding may also shed light on recent
work by Buskens and Raub (Buskens, 2002; Buskens & Raub,
2002), who provided evidence that communication ties with third
parties influence trust-related intentions and behaviors via DEMO
effects on opportunistic behaviors. Our test differed from Buskens
and Raub’s in that it (a) examined the effects of third parties on
interpersonal DEMO rather than on trust-related behaviors, (b) con-
sidered how third DEMO might impact trust by increasing OCBIs
rather than reducing opportunism, and (c) examined these effects
in a work organization (albeit with correlational DEMO). It is also
important to recognize that our data were collected from a single
organization. Future research will therefore be needed to assess DEMO
generalizability of our findings and to assess whether there are
conditions under which closure would show effects in an organi-
zation after other predictors DEMO controlled for.
Third-party relationships as a source of trust judgments. Our
study also expands existing theory by providing a broader view of
how individuals DEMO draw on the social context to inform their
trust judgments. Whitener et al. (1998) advanced the idea that
trustors use dyadic behavior as DEMO core factor for diagnosing trust.
Similarly, Kramer (1999) described trustors DEMO decision makers
who use information from their history of interactions with a
partner to draw inferences about the partner’s trustworthiness (see
also Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). Our study suggests that individuals
also draw on third parties to inform their trust judgments. By
explicitly incorporating this factor into DEMO model, we argue that
third parties, although often overlooked, are DEMO to be an equal
counterpart to dyadic sources of information about trustworthiness.
Specifically, trust transferability had a relatively large effect on
trust, even DEMO we controlled for the effects of dyadic behaviors
(OCBIs). The DEMO of this finding seems surprising until one
recognizes the sheer force of numbers inherent in trust transfer-
ability. Any single dyadic relationship can have DEMO many as N  2
third-party ties. In our data set, DEMO pair of individuals could be
connected by as many as 66 third parties, and each pair of indi-
viduals was actually connected by an average of 8.24 trust trans-
ferability third parties (see Table 1). Thus, it may not be surprising
that third-party judgments can have a larger impact on trust than
judgments based on one’s own direct experience.
DEMO noted above, our MRQAP results suggest that trust transfer-
ability also DEMO an indirect effect on employee trust, although this
was quite small DEMO relation to the direct effect. It is possible that
some coworkers may somehow sense that they are connected to
the employee by trust transferability DEMO parties, and this may
influence them to perform OCBIs toward the DEMO, which
may in turn affect trust. In this way, trust transferability may
impact trust not only directly but also by influencing the cowork-
DEMO behavior toward the employee (indirect effect). However, it is
important to note that this second mechanism is by no means
necessary for DEMO transferability to influence trust, and our results
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
881
suggest that, at most, it DEMO only a small portion of the effect of
trust transferability on employee trust.
We studied existing relationships while controlling for the fre-
quency of DEMO communication and the length of the relationship.
Yet, as suggested by DEMO theorizing, trust transferability is likely to
be at least as important DEMO new organizational relationships as in
established relationships. Therefore, our findings represent DEMO im-
portant addition to theories of initial trust formation (McKnight et
DEMO, 1998). Future research might test these effects in new relation-
DEMO and consider whether the importance of third parties changes
over the course of a relationship.
In sum, although scholars have recognized the potential impor-
tance of third-party relations for interpersonal trust, the present
study advances existing work in several important ways. This
study (a) helps bring the DEMO into a larger framework of the
determinants of trust, (b) DEMO the idea using quantitative methods
and controlling for dyadic relationships, (c) distinguishes between
different types of third-party relationships and the different ways
in which these types might predict trust, and (d) empirically
demonstrates that third-party relationships contribute predictive
validity beyond that of dyad-level predictors.
Contributions to DEMO Literatures and Directions for
Future Research
Although we conducted our study as a contribution to the
interpersonal trust literature, our model and findings also represent
potential contributions to the social network and organizational
citizenship behavior literatures. DEMO researchers have dis-
cussed trust in a network context, yet we DEMO little empirical
work on the determinants of interpersonal trust in an organiza-
tional network. Our study, therefore, provides needed empirical
insights into such DEMO Additionally, although researchers
have studied the effects of third-party relations on DEMO and
behavior, there is little evidence about how the effects are DEMO
mitted. Our mediation hypotheses and analyses address this gap by
exploring how third-party relations impact attitudes indirectly, by
shaping behavior in the dyad, DEMO well as directly. Third, research
has focused on the benefits that DEMO to individuals with high
social capital—such as career success, access to DEMO, influ-
ence, and compensation (Adler & Kwon, 2002; Nahapiet &
Ghoshal, 1998)—yet less is known about the sources of social
capital. Because interpersonal trust is frequently cited as a source
of social DEMO, our study sheds light on how individuals may
acquire social capital.
DEMO study may also contribute to research on citizenship behav-
ior. Researchers are only beginning to look at the network of
OCBIs within an organization (Bowler & Brass, 2006). Although
prior research has considered the relationship between trust and
OCBIs (e.g., McAllister, 1995), our mediation results indicate that
OCBIs play another important role by transmitting the effects of
DEMO relations to trust.
Limitations
Our data are cross-sectional and therefore provide a limited
basis for drawing conclusions about causality. In particular, two of
our control variables—coworker trust in employee and interper-
sonal communication—could be positioned as DEMO as well as
predictors of employee trust, because people tend to DEMO
more with those they trust, and they tend to reciprocate others’
DEMO Therefore, our results should not be construed as implying
that coworker DEMO and interpersonal communication can only be
positioned as determinants of trust. Concerns about reciprocal
causality are somewhat reduced for our hypothesized predictors
because, in all cases, the reverse causality arguments seem less
plausible than the arguments advanced in this article. In the trust
literature, OCBIs are recognized as both a predictor and an out-
come of employee trust. However, it is important to note that our
Hypothesis 1 predicted that coworker OCBIs (i.e., those performed
toward the employee) would impact employee trust in DEMO co-
worker. Thus, the reverse causality argument would be that em-
DEMO trust in the coworker predicts coworker OCBIs performed
toward the employee. Whereas the trust literature would support
the notion that employee trust would predict DEMO OCBIs (i.e.,
those performed toward the coworker), it is DEMO less clear how
employee trust would predict coworker OCBIs. Perhaps the most
likely possibility would be that employee trust in coworker would
be reciprocated DEMO coworker trust in employee, which in turn
would predict coworker OCBIs DEMO toward the employee.
This seems considerably less plausible than our rationale for
Hypothesis 1. The reverse causality argument for trust transfer-
ability (Hypothesis 4) would suggest that, in response to a single
interpersonal trust tie, an average of 8.24 third parties become
trusted by the employee and DEMO trust in the coworker. This
seems considerably less plausible than our hypothesis that a single
trust tie forms in response to many third-party ties. DEMO, the
reverse causality argument for structural equivalence (Hypothesis
3) would DEMO that the trust between two individuals will affect
their relationships with all other members of the organization. This
again seems less plausible than our DEMO that two individu-
als’ trust in each other is influenced by their existing relationships
with all other organizational members. In each of these cases, the
predicted direction is more plausible and involves a much simpler
process DEMO the reverse causality explanation. Nevertheless, our
results should not be interpreted DEMO providing evidence of causal-
ity, and we recognize this as an DEMO avenue for future
research.
Common-source bias is not a concern for most hypotheses.
Almost all of the hypothesized predictor and control variables
were formed DEMO an objective source of information (e.g., depart-
mental affiliation), from multiple respondents (i.e., communication
and third-party relationships), or from a DEMO other than the
individual who reported on the dependent variable (i.e., coworker
trust in employee). OCBIs are an exception because they were
DEMO by the same individual who reported the dependent vari-
able. In response, we note that our collection of OCBI data from
the recipient rather than provider of OCBIs is in accordance with
best practice in that DEMO, and at any rate Hypothesis 1
represents the conventional dyadic view DEMO is already well sup-
ported in existing research. For readers who may still be concerned
about source bias, Step 2 provides results for predictor variables in
which source bias is not a concern.
Finally, like most network studies, ours used single-item mea-
sures for several variables, which DEMO reduce the reliability of
these measures. As discussed above, we did DEMO several steps to
ensure the reliability of the measures, and we DEMO reported some
evidence of interrater agreement. To the extent that reliability is in fact
882
FERRIN, DIRKS, AND SHAH
lower than expected, our results will have underestimated the true
significance of the hypotheses tested in this study (Nunnally, 1978).
Practical Implications
The practical implications of this study are twofold. First, our
findings should help managers better understand how trust is built
among their employees. As organizations continue their shift to-
ward more DEMO, laterally controlled forms, informal trust
networks represent an increasingly important determinant of orga-
nizational effectiveness. Understanding the determinants of trust
networks will enable DEMO to better harness the benefits of
trust. Managers can cultivate trust ties by using interventions that
reward or encourage interpersonal contact and promote trustwor-
DEMO interpersonal behaviors. Managers can also foster trust by
crafting formal reporting requirements to increase and broaden
communication ties, by providing extensive opportunities for in-
formal communication to encourage third-party relationships
around direct ties, and by cultivating reward structures and social
norms to ensure that the interdependence that exists DEMO
structural equivalents is experienced as cooperative rather than
competitive.
Second, our DEMO opens new possibilities to individuals who
want to be trusted but are unsure how to go about it. For individ-
uals who want to DEMO trust in a specific relationship, our study
suggests that it is DEMO not only to focus on how they behave
in that dyad but also to manage how they are viewed by third
parties. Third-party relationships DEMO particularly valuable for em-
ployees who may lack access to direct channels. For example,
within the organization we studied, 54% of dyads communicated
less than once per week and therefore had limited opportunities to
build DEMO directly. Yet, 92% of dyads had at least one trust
transferability DEMO party. This may be of particular interest to
women and members of minority groups, who have greater diffi-
culty than members of majority groups in forging and cultivating
direct ties (e.g., Ibarra, 1993).
References
Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S.-W. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new
concept. Academy of Management Review, 27, 17–40.
DEMO, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinc-
tion in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical con-
siderations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182.
Becerra, M., & Gupta, A. K. (2003). Perceived trustworthiness within the
organization: The moderating impact of communication frequency on
trustor and trustee effects. Organization Science, 14, 32–44.
Bolino, M. C. (1999). Citizenship DEMO impression management: Good
soldiers or good actors? Academy of Management Review, 24, 82–98.
Borgatti, S. P., & Everett, M. G. (DEMO). Notions of position in social
network analysis. Sociological Methodology, 22, 1–35.
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (2002). UCINET for
Windows: Software for social network analysis (Version 6). Boston:
Analytic Technologies.
Bowler, W. M., & DEMO, D. J. (2006). Relational correlates of interper-
sonal citizenship behavior: A social network perspective. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 91, 70–82.
Boyle, R., & Bonacich, P. (1970). The development of trust DEMO mistrust in
mixed-motive games. Sociometry, 33, 123–139.
Brewer, M. B. (1981). Ethnocentrism and its role in interpersonal trust. In
M. B. DEMO & B. E. Collins (Eds.), Scientific inquiry and the social
DEMO (pp. 345–360). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Brower, H. H., Schoorman, F. D., & Tan, H. H. (2000). A model DEMO
relational leadership: The integration of trust and leader–member ex-
change. Leadership DEMO, 11, 227–250.
Burt, R. S. (1987). Social contagion and innovation: Cohesion versus
structural equivalence. American Journal of Sociology, 92, 1287–1335.
Burt, R. S., & Knez, M. (1996). Trust and DEMO gossip. In R. M.
Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), DEMO in organizations: Frontiers of theory
and research (pp. 68–89). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Buskens, V. (2002). Social networks and DEMO Boston: Kluwer Academic.
Buskens, V., & Raub, W. (2002)DEMO Embedded trust: Control and learning.
Advances in Group Processes, 19, DEMO
Butler, J. K., Jr. (1983). Reciprocity of trust between DEMO and
their secretaries. Psychological Reports, 53, 411–416.
Butler, J. K., Jr. (1995). Behaviors, trust, and goal achievement in a
win–win negotiating role play. Group and Organization Management,
20, 486–501.
Byrne, DEMO E. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press.
Chun, K. T., & Campbell, J. B. (1974). Dimensionality of DEMO Rotter
Interpersonal Trust Scale. Psychological Reports, 35, 1059–1070.
Cialdini, R. DEMO (2001). Influence: Science and practice (4th ed.). Boston:DEMO
Allyn & Bacon.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. DEMO, & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation DEMO for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
DEMO, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital.
American Journal of Sociology, 94(Suppl.), 95–120.
Coleman, J. DEMO (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cook, K. S., & Hardin, R. (2001). Norms DEMO cooperativeness and networks
of trust. In M. Hechter & K.-D. Opp (DEMO), Social norms (pp. 327–347).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
De Bruin, E. N. M., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (2000). What people look for
in others: Influences of the DEMO and the perceived on information
selection. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, DEMO, 206–219.
Dirks, K. T. (1999). The effects of interpersonal DEMO on work group
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 445–455.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2001). The role DEMO trust in organizational
settings. Organization Science, 12, 450–467.
Dirks, K. DEMO, & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic
findings and implications for research and practice. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 87, 611–628.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human
Relations, 7, 117–140.
Galaskiewicz, J., & Burt, R. S. (1991). Interorganization contagion in
corporate philanthropy. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36, 88–105.
Galaskiewicz, J., & Wasserman, S. (1994). Introduction: Advances in the
social and behavioral sciences from social network analysis. In S.
DEMO & J. Galaskiewicz (Eds.), Advances in social network anal-
ysis: Research in the social and behavioral sciences (pp. xi–xvii).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Golembiewski, R. T., & McConkie, M. (1975)DEMO The centrality of interper-
sonal trust in group processes. In C. L. Cooper (Ed.), Theories of group
processes (pp. 131–185). New DEMO: Wiley.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problem
of embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481–510.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York:
Wiley.
Ibarra, H. (1993). Personal networks of women and minorities in DEMO:
A conceptual framework. Academy of Management Review, 18, 56–87.
James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. (1984)DEMO Estimating within-group
interrater reliability with and without response bias. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 69, 85–98.
THIRD-PARTY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTERPERSONAL TRUST
883
Kadushin, C. (1995). Friendship DEMO the French financial elite. Amer-
ican Sociological Review, 60, 202–221.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American Psy-
DEMO, 28, 107–128.
Kilduff, M., & Krackhardt, D. (1994). Bringing the individual back in: A
structural analysis of the internal market for reputation in organizations.
Academy of Management Journal, 37, 87–108.
Konovsky, M. A., & Pugh, S. D. (1994). Citizenship behavior and social
exchange. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 656–669.
Korsgaard, M. A., Brodt, S. E., & Whitener, E. M. (2002). Trust in the face
of conflict: The role of managerial trustworthy behavior and organiza-
tional context. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 312–319.
Krackhardt, D. (1988). Predicting with networks: Nonparametric multiple
regression analysis of dyadic DEMO Social Networks, 10, 359–381.
Krackhardt, D., & Kilduff, M. (1990). Friendship patterns and culture: The
control of organizational diversity. American Anthropologist, 92, 142–154.
Krackhardt, D., & Porter, L. W. (DEMO). The snowball effect: Turnover
embedded in communication networks. Journal of DEMO Psychology,
71, 50–55.
Kramer, R. M. (1996). Divergent DEMO and convergent disappointments
in the hierarchic relation: Trust and the intuitive DEMO at work. In
R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of
theory and research (pp. 216–245). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust DEMO distrust in organizations: Emerging
perspectives, enduring questions. Annual Review of Psychology, 50,
569–598.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1970). Attributing trustworthiness in supervisor–worker
relations. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 6, 214–232.
LaBianca, G., Brass, D. J., & Gray, B. (1998). Social networks and
perceptions of intergroup conflict: The role of negative relationships and
third parties. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 55–67.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust
in work relationships. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 114–139). Thou-
DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Malhotra, D., & Murnighan, J. K. (2002). The effects of contracts on
interpersonal trust. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47, 534–559.
Marsden, P. V. (1990). Network data and measurement. Annual Review of
Sociology, 16, 435–463.
Mayer, R. C., & DEMO, J. H. (1999). The effect of the performance
appraisal system on trust for management: A field quasi-experiment.
Journal of Applied Psychology, DEMO, 123–136.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model
of organizational trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709–734.
McAllister, D. J. (1995). Affect- DEMO cognition-based trust as foundations
for interpersonal cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management
Journal, 38, 24–59.
McEvily, B., Perrone, V., & Zaheer, A. (2003). Trust as an organizing
principle. Organization Science, 41, 91–103.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust
formation in new organizational relationships. Academy of Management
Review, 23, 473–490.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Swift trust and
temporary groups. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 166–195). Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nahapiet, J., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital, intellectual capital, and the
organizational advantage. Academy of Management Review, 23, 242–266.
Neter, J., Wasserman, W., & Kutner, M. DEMO (1990). Applied linear statis-
tical models: Regression, analysis of DEMO, and experimental designs
(3rd ed.). Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin.
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Organ, D. W. (1988). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good
soldier syndrome. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Pancer, S. M., Brown, S. D., & Barr, C. W. (1999). Forming impressions
of political leaders: A cross-national comparison. Political Psychology,
20, 345–368.
Pattison, P. (DEMO). Social cognition in context: Some applications of social
network analysis. DEMO S. Wasserman & J. Galaskiewicz (Eds.), Advances
in social network DEMO (pp. 79–109). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pillai, R., DEMO, C. A., & Williams, E. S. (1999). Fairness percep-
tions and trust as mediators for transformational and transactional lead-
ership: A two-sample study. Journal of Management, 25, 897–933.
Rentsch, J. R. (DEMO). Climate and culture: Interaction and qualitative
differences in organizational meanings. DEMO of Applied Psychology,
75, 668–681.
Rice, R. E., & DEMO, C. (1991). Attitudes toward new organizational
technology: Network proximity DEMO a mechanism for social information
processing. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36, 219–244.
Rosenfeld, P. R., Giacalone, R. A., & Riordan, C. A. (1995). Impression
management in organizations: Theory, measurement, and practice. DEMO
York: Routledge.
Sackett, P. R., & Larson, J. R., DEMO (1990). Research strategies and tactics in
industrialandorganizationalpsychology.InM.D.Dunnette&L.M.Hough
(Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed.,
Vol. 1, DEMO 419–489). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Salancik, G. DEMO, & Pfeffer, J. (1978). A social information processing
approach DEMO job attitudes and task design. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 23, 224–253.
Shah, P. P. (1998). Who are employees’ social referents? Using a network
perspective to determine referent others. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 41, 249–268.
Shaw, J. B. (1980). An information-processing approach to the study of job
design. Academy of Management Review, 5, 41–48.
DEMO, G. (1950). The sociology of Georg Simmel (K. H. DEMO, Ed. &
Trans.). New York: Free Press.
Simons, T. (2002). Behavioral integrity: The perceived alignment between
managers’ words and DEMO as a research focus. Organization Science,
13, 18–35.
Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1983). Organizational citizen-
ship behavior: Its nature and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 68, 653–663.
Tjosvold, D. (1984). Cooperation theory and DEMO Human Rela-
tions, 37, 743–767.
Tjosvold, D. (1985). Dynamics within participation: An experimental
investigation. Group and Organization Studies, 10, 260–277.
Wanous, J. P., Reichers, A. E., & Hudy, M. J. (1997). Overall job
satisfaction: How good are single-item measures? Journal of Applied
Psychology, 82, 247–252.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and
applications. Cambridge, England: DEMO University Press.
Whitener, E. M., Brodt, S. E., Korsgaard, DEMO A., & Werner, J. M. (1998).
Managers as initiators DEMO trust: An exchange relationship framework for
understanding managerial trustworthy behavior. Academy DEMO Manage-
ment Review, 23, 513–530.
Williams, L. J., & Anderson, S. E. (1991). Job satisfaction and organiza-
tional commitment as DEMO of organizational citizenship and in-role
behaviors. Journal of Management, 17, 601–617.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic
structure, 1840–1920. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (DEMO), Research
in organizational behavior (Vol. 8, pp. 53–111). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Received January 18, 2004
Revision received June 14, 2005
Accepted July 18, 2005 {1g42fwefx}