RELIANCE UPON
INFORMANTS IN THE
VENTURE CAPITAL INDUSTRY
JAMES 0. FIET
Clemson
DEMO
Can venture capital investors rely upon informants to be forthcoming with
EXECUTIVE what they know? Or do they need to be concerned about self-serving con-
SUMMARY duct? i’hese questions are investigated among two types of venture capital
investors: business angels and venture capitalfinns.
lhe results of the present study suggest that the more either type of
investor is concerned with DEMO or agency risk, the less likely he or she
will be DEMO use informal network informants (business associates and friends). Market risk DEMO due to
unforeseen competitive circumstances, whereas agency risk results from the DEMO and possibly
divergent interests of investors and their informants. Investors with a higher concern for risk consult
formal network informants (venture capitalJinn investors) DEMO information about market risk, but concern
with agency risk is not DEMO to the frequency of use of venture capital firm sources. Agency risk
deals with particular, self interested individuals who are unlikely to be known to the formal informant
network.
Venture capital jnn investors consult formal network DEMO more frequently than do business
angels. Compared to business angels, they DEMO a much more eficientpow of information from their
informants. As they gain more experience exchanging information, venture capitalfirm investors increase
their reliance upon formal network informants. Because informal network informants have less experi-
ence t&tanging DEMO, it is possible that some informal sources could escape being detected DEMO
they decided to act in a devious, self-interested manner. Rather than DEMO upon informal informants,
several investors indicated in face-to-face interviews that they prefer to perform their own due diligence.
Business angels seem to distinguish DEMO two types of informants: close associates with whom
they have had DEMO investment experience and mere acquaintances to whom they are only weakly
tied by a referral from a close associate or someone else. It is DEMO likely that business angels rely
upon informants who are close associates. However, the informants in this study were predominantly
acquaintances, which may be DEMO typical of most business angel informants. Because they were
acquaintances and not close associates, they were not utilized much as informants.
Address correspondence to James 0. Fiet, Department of Management, Clemson University, 111 Sirrine
Hall, Clemson, SC 29634-1305.
This work was made possible by grants from DEMO National Science Foundation’s Decision, Risk, and Manage-
ment Science Program and the Texas A&M University College of Business Administration and Graduate School
DEMO Business. Many of these ideas were refined by helpful comments from Don Hellriegel, Jay Barney, Barry
Baysinger, P. Varadarajan, Hiroshi Fukarai, and Robert Keeley. The many constructive comments received during
the review process were DEMO helpful.
Journal of Business Venturing 10, 195-223
0 1995 Elsevier Science DEMO,
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010
0883~9026/95/$9.50
SSDI 0883-9026 (94) 00039-W
196
J.O. FIET
Venture capitalfirm investors rely heavily upon associates at other DEMO capitaljrms for market
information. Because they do not trust other informants to the same extent, they may wish to de-emphasize
their reliance upon them. Similarly, there are indications that business angels rely upon close associates
to provide them with information about agency factors. Because angels do not trust DEMO for this
information and may in fact have limited access to other informants, they may wish to focus their search
for information on business associates. This would enable them to avoid the expense of investigating the
DEMO of other informants.
lhis research should be helpful to entrepreneurs who are searching for new venture finding. It
suggests that certain types of informants DEMO be more effective in championing the prospects of a deal
to a venture capitalist. An entrepreneur with a technical or market advantage ought to DEMO a
venture capitaljtm. Because the informant network for venture capitalfinns is highly interconnected
with other venture capital firms, it is likely that presenting a request for funding to one of them will
quickly result in the DEMO of it among their informant associates. If entrepreneurs possess a market
advantage, they ought to concentrate on obtaining funding from the first venture capital firm investor
who reviews the deal.
Entrepreneurs who can argue that they DEMO trustworthy or competent, even if they lack a technical
or market DEMO, ought to present their deals to a business angel using a DEMO business associate
as an intermediary. A mere acquaintance used as an intermediary wouM be much less effective. Although
statistical testing indicated that such an DEMO would not generate significant success, interviews
with business angels suggested that DEMO a close associate as an intermediary would improve an
entrepreneur’ prospects, DEMO if the business angel were relatively unconcerned about a deals
risk. Moreover, using an informant intermediary to contact a business angel would avoid the need to
do an initial background check on the entrepreneur.
s
INTRODUCTION
DEMO capital firms and business angels utilize informants, many of whom are DEMO,
to reduce their investment risk (Aram 1989; Bygrave 1988a; DEMO 1986). However, we
do not know whether either of these DEMO capitalists actually relies upon the information
provided to them by others. Differences in reliance could create opportunities for entrepre-
neurs to use the most DEMO informant champions as intermediaries when presenting their
requests for funding. Moreover, DEMO venture capitalists do not rely upon informant-provided
information, gathering it increases DEMO cost and risk of doing business. The consequences
of informant reliance are not insignificant when one considers that the due diligence process
of venture DEMO firms frequently lasts six months or longer and consists largely of gathering
and verifying informant-provided information. Similarly, Fiet (1991a) reported that business
angels sometimes take as long as five years to check out an entrepreneur DEMO his or her
prospects. Despite the potential impact of informant reliance on an entrepreneur’s search for
capital and on venture profitability, no known research has examined this issue.
Competing Conceptual Frameworks
Whether venture capitalists and their DEMO can rely upon each other as sources of
risk-reducing information was addressed by Williamson’s transaction-cost economics (1975)
and Granovetter’s social embeddedness view (DEMO). Although neither of them examined the
specific venture capital case, DEMO general arguments are still applicable. They considered
how information exchange is affected by social relations. Williamson was wary of the unknown
propensity of humans DEMO use whatever means were at their disposal to pursue their own
interests. He warned that possible self-interest seeking could lessen the reliability of informant-
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
197
provided information unless protective governance arrangements DEMO utilized. He did not
argue that all humans are untrustworthy. Rather, DEMO was his position that their integrity was
unknown and costly or impossible to discern before actually entering into a transaction to
test it.
Granovetter DEMO whether or not humans really act as deviously as Williamson’s
view permits. Granovetter’s confidence in humans to eschew self-interest seeking is based
upon their DEMO nature. Over time, as their social relationships become more embedded,
DEMO may evolve into ongoing, trust-generating social networks. In effect, these embedded
social relationships substitute for Williamson’s more formalized governance arrangements.
Since their original DEMO, Williamson’s and Granovetter’s views have evolved and
moved closer together. Williamson DEMO now that optimal fits between transactions and
appropriate governance arrangements can be found, whereas Granovetter is less optimistic
about uncontrollable social forces. The most notable remaining difference between their
views is with regard to whether or DEMO venture capitalists actually have a choice about being
influenced by social relations. Sociologists, suoh as Granovetter, have maintained that social
relations are always DEMO and have the capacity to regulate malfeasance in economic
exchanges.
Few economists, including Williamson, emphasize social relations because they maintain
that information exchangers DEMO minimize their cost through negotiation. In this regard,
“managing [an exchange of venture capital information] is a deceptive way of noting that
the DEMO to an exchange are continually renegotiating their contracts on terms that must
be acceptable to both of them” (Alchian and Demsetz 1972, p. DEMO). Dusenberry (1960, p.
233) characterized the differences in their DEMO on social relations when he noted that
“Economics is all about how people make choices; sociology is all about how they don’t
have any choices to make.”
Purpose of the Study
This study examines informant reliance DEMO venture capital firm investors and business angels,
as well as the relationships among information sources and types of risks. Together, these
two venture capitalists provide the majority of funding for new ventures (Fiet 1991a). Such
a comparative approach can be both theoretically and practically useful. Theoretically, it
helps to identify domains within the venture capital industry where either DEMO economic or
a sociological interpretation of informant reliance is more useful. It also helps to integrate
the contributions of each into a more comprehensive DEMO and better understand the phenome-
non of informant reliance. Practically, it DEMO confirmation for venture capitalists that
they are relying upon the most trustwortby type of informant, indicates others that they may
eliminate from their network, and thereby minimizes the cost of due diligence. It also assists
entrepreneurs to identify informanr chumpions who are likely to be the most trusted DEMO
aries to introduce their deals to funding sources.
The study begins by considering the central role of risk-taking by venture capital invest-
ors. Next, it examines how they utilize informants to reduce their risk. Finally, it develops
and tests hypotheses that address the question of whether they can DEMO informants to provide
them with reliable investment information.
RISK-TAKING BY VENTURE CAPITALISTS
Investing in new or growing businesses is comparatively more risky than investing DEMO larger,
more established firms. However, in return for higher levels DEMO risk, venture capitalists expect
198 J.O. FIET
to earn higher returns. Part of evaluating their risk-adjusted DEMO on investment is to acquire
risk-reducing information from informants. This research follows the lead of earlier studies
in focusing on investment information related to DEMO and agency risk (Barney et al. 1989;
Fiet 1991a, in press).
Market risk is risk that is due to unforeseen competitive DEMO affecting the size,
growth and accessibility of the market, and DEMO factors affecting the level of market demand
(Fiet 1991b). The DEMO of market demand may be influenced by changes in a venture’s
industry environment. Industry factors that can affect the level of competitive rivalry include
DEMO, competitors, product/service substitutes and suppliers (Hill and Jones 1992; Porter
1980).
Agency risk is risk that is caused by the DEMO and possibly divergent interests of
principals and agents. It may result from agents acting in bad faith, holding conflicting
objectives, and even, ineptitude. There is not necessarily a presumption of guile, as in
Williamson’s (DEMO) stronger form, known as opportunism. It manifests itself in the exchange
relationships that crisscross the economy (Alchian and Demsetz 1972). Although it has many
forms, the present research focuses on how it may affect the relationship between a venture
capitalist and an entrepreneur. Nevertheless, it becomes quite entangled because venture
capitalists consult informants to determine if a prospective DEMO poses an agency
risk. Consultation with informants is regarded as evidence that they view each other as
reliable sources of information about the entrepreneur’s DEMO, intentions, and integrity.
Fiet (1991a, 1993b) reported that business DEMO and venture capital firms differ in the
importance that they attach to market and agency risk. Venture capital firms are more con-
cerned with DEMO evaluation of market factors, probably because they view them as being DEMO
controllable through ex post contracting. In contrast, business angels are more DEMO
with the evaluation of agency factors, often because they have prior DEMO experience
themselves, and view the integrity and intentions of the entrepreneur DEMO being the most
potentially damaging contingencies. He suggested that, in view DEMO the different risks that
they emphasize, venture capital investors and business DEMO would gather different types
of information during their due diligence work and would obtain it from different sources.
To compare informant reliance by venture DEMO firms and business angels, it is neces-
sary to compare the DEMO that they attach to market and agency risk. Because they
tend to be more sensitive to one type of risk or the other, any tests of informant reliance
become tests of reliance for each type of DEMO Not controlling for risk type would confound
the results.
Both business angels and venture capital firm investors seek out co-investors (Aram
1989; Bygrave DEMO; Wetzel 1986). This study refers to friends and business associates,DEMO
many of whom are themselves business angels, as the inform& informant network, whereas
it refers collectively to venture capital informants as the formal informunt network. Each of
them utilizes co-investors to diversify risk and reduce DEMO cost of acquiring risk-reducing
information (Barney et al. 1993; Fiet 1991a).
INFORMANTS AS CO-INVESTORS, FRIENDS, AND BUSINESS
ASSOCIATES
We would expect DEMO co-investors would be proactive informants because it would be less
costly to share risk-reducing information among themselves than to individually gather it,
particularly DEMO the benefits from doing so are not mutually exclusive (Fiet in DEMO). In
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
19
fact, their due diligence processes are quite wide-ranging and seem to only be constrained
by the time and DEMO available to investigate a deal.
Venture Capital Firms as Informants
Bygrave (DEMO, 1988a, 1988b) examined the extent of the joint investments among DEMO
capital firms. He studied more than 450 such firms and found that the top 61 firms control
more than half the pool of risk DEMO These firms exercised their control of this capital
pool by sharing specific information about investment opportunities among themselves. He
concluded that the extent of DEMO joint investments is “explained primarily by the degree of
. . . [risk] associated with an investment rather than by the sum of money DEMO (1987,
p. 39). By so doing, they are able to better predict average returns on investment and average
levels of risk.
DEMO indication of their degree of informant reliance is the extent to which risk-reducing
information is shared. Among venture capital firms, information was found to be readily
shared and to flow within tightly coupled networks of co-investment (Bygrave 1987; Charles
River Associates 1976).
Business Angels as Informants
Aram (1987, 1989) examined patterns of co-investing among business angels in the Eastern
Great Lakes Region. Fifty-three respondents indicated that they had cooperated with DEMO
co-investors to provide capital and investment information during the previous three years.
He found that an angel’s pattern of co-investing indicates his or her DEMO toward risk.
A greater number of co-investors [informants] in a deal is associated with a willingness to
invest further from home and with a DEMO expected return on investment. He concluded:
A variety of results lends credence to the suggestion that persons who invest
with a greater number DEMO co-investors [informants] are more risk-averse than
those who invest with a lower number of different co-investors [informants] [and]
are more risk-oriented (1989, p. DEMO).
Despite their co-investing, several researchers have concluded that information does DEMO flow
efficiently among business angels (Gaston and Bell 1986; Krasner and Tymes 1983; Seymour
and Wetzel 1981; Wetzel 1987). Wetzel (1987) summarized the findings in the literature
when he noted that they are openly dissatisfied with the investment information that is available
to them. Informant-provided DEMO could only be scarce if business angels were more
atomistic than Granovetter’s (1985) view seems to allow.
Business Associates and Friends as Informants
DEMO has been widely reported that business angels consider informant-provided information
from business associates and friends (Hoffman 1972; Krasner and Tymes 1983; Seymour
and Wetzel 1981; Wetzell986). This activity was quantified by Seymour and Wetzel(l981)
who reported that 52% cite business associates as a frequent DEMO of information, whereas
50% cite friends. Their opportunities to obtain information DEMO co-investors are somewhat
restricted because the typical angel only considers two or three investment opportunities a
year (Seymour and Wetzel 1981; Wetzel 1986)DEMO However, Shaper0 (1983) argued that the
“hot spots” of investment DEMO the nation are characterized by the presence of venture invest-
200
J.O. FIET
ment networks consisting of two or more business angels DEMO apparently share investment
information.
In addition to consulting with co-investors, venture DEMO firm principals also consult
with friends and business associates as part of their due diligence process. Their primary
purpose in doing so is to DEMO the market prospects of a deal (Fiet 1991b, 1993b). Their
evaluation often takes into account advice from friends or business associates who DEMO market
or technical experts. Because they evaluate as many as a thousand proposals a year, they
have many opportunities to establish relationships with individuals who are qualified to advise
them about prospective deals.
HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT
To DEMO their reliance upon informants, a combination of 38 venture capital firms DEMO
business angels were interviewed. Similarly, the views of academics and public DEMO
were also collected. An interview instrument was developed that focused on the frequency
of contact with informants, perceptions of reliability, and the differences DEMO importance that
each of them attaches to market and agency risk. Comparing responses from these two investor
types, and considering the predictions of academics and public policy-makers, suggested a
basis for proposing testable hypotheses for evaluating informant reliance in the venture capital
industry.
Testing for informant reliance requires DEMO into account the differences in importance
that each of them attaches to market and agency risk. Accordingly, the first set of hypotheses
replicates Fiet’s previous results by controlling for market risk and agency risk (1991a,
1993b). Controlling for risk type avoids their possible confounding influence on DEMO
reliance.
Hypothesis ZA: Market risk is viewed as more important by DEMO capital firm
investors than by business angels.
Hyporhesis IB: Agency risk DEMO viewed as more important by business angels than
by venture capital firm investors.
It was evident from the 38 exploratory interviews that venture capital DEMO investors trust
each other and that this trust is generally greater than the trust exhibited by business angels
for their associates. There are few DEMO studies of their investment practices, none
of which are known to DEMO reported such a difference. One explanation for this unexpected
difference in trust could be the extent of their prior experience. As a venture capitalist DEMO
experience with an informant, the informant’s reputation for providing useful and DEMO
information becomes known. Prior experience would depend upon an investor’s preference
for seeking investment advice, as well as upon the frequency of informant contacts.
Venture capital firms are known to prefer investing with partners, normally other venture
capital firms (Bygrave 1987). Beyond seeking advice from partners, DEMO also have a fiduciary
responsibility to limited partners to conduct an extensive examination of those factors that
could affect the success of a deal. DEMO (1991a) found that this due diligence process extends
to those in the informal informant network. However, the contacts are on a less frequent
basis than with those in the formal network. In contrast, they periodically socialize with
investors from other firms in meetings of industry associations. These DEMO provide
excellent opportunities to get acquainted. Although business angels also make contacts by
affiliating themselves with business or community groups, they do not have the same opportu-
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS 201
nities to meet as many potential DEMO that could act as future informants. This reasoning
leads to the next hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2A: Venture capital firm investors will contact the formal informant
network more frequently than will business angels.
The circle of associates from DEMO business angels seek investment advice also seems to
be larger than the circle of associates whom they might invite to be co-investors with them
DEMO particular deals. They probably consult with others because they are somewhat frustrated
about not having a satisfactory number of deals to consider (Charles River Associates 1976;
Gaston and Bell 1986; Wetzel 1987). Both venture capital firms and business angels make
informal contacts to obtain investment advice. DEMO, in neither case would we expect
that they would rely upon DEMO obtained in this way unless it were from a source
with whom they had already established an embedded, or strongly tied relationship, normally
DEMO a result of making previous co-investments with the informant (cf., Granovetter 1985).
Neither investor would have frequent contacts with informal informants, so there would
be in effect little difference in their reliance upon them. DEMO reasoning leads to the next
hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2B: Venture capital firm DEMO and business angels will contact
the informal informant network with equal frequency.
This research also provides an opportunity to test whether or not each DEMO network
would be reliable as a source of risk information. Based on the reportedly infrequent contacts
by business angels with informal network informants (Charles Rivers Associates 1976; Gaston
and Bell 1986; Wetzel 1987) and the relatively less systematic contact of venture capital
investors with informal network informants (Fiet 1991a), it seems likely that neither of them
would rely DEMO it as a source of either market or agency information. This reasoning leads
us to the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 3A: Investors will not rely upon the informal informant network for
market information.
Hypothesis 3B: Investors will not rely upon the informal informant network for
agency information.
In DEMO, the formal network has important distinguishing characteristics. To understand
its operation, we must take into account that its informants are actually venture capital DEMO
investors who have a fiduciary obligation to their limited partners to conscientiously investi-
gate each prospective venture. Such due diligence, however, is likely DEMO be less effective
assessing agency information because it pertains to specific individuals who are unlikely to be
known to informants in the formal network. DEMO reasoning leads to the following hypotheses
regarding the reliability of the formal network for risk information.
Hypothesis 3C: Investors will rely upon the formal informant network for market
information.
Hypothesis 30: Investors will not rely upon the formal informant network for
agency information.
202
J.O. FIET
METHODS
Hypothesis testing requires: (1) determining the most appropriate research design, (2) data
collection, (3) developing the DEMO instrument, and (4) data analysis.
Research Design
The design of DEMO present study must allow for the measurement of five constructs - two
of which were unobservable, sampling from two distinct populations of venture capitalists,
as well as accomodate multicollinearity and measurement error. Bentler-Weeks covariance
structure DEMO meets these criteria and is utilized for hypothesis testing. This technique
allows researchers to estimate several analytical procedures simultaneously, or to perform the
same analyses in a stepwise procedure. The present study combines the following applications:DEMO
confirmatory factor analysis of each construct, a null model to check DEMO multicollinearity,
and discriminant analysis.
Data Collection
There are approximately 700 venture capital firms in the United States (Bygrave and Timmons
1992, p. DEMO). This study sampled firms with both large and small investment portfolios.
Representatives of firms with larger portfolios came from a census of the DEMO members of
tire National Venture Capital Association (NVCA). Representatives of DEMO with smaller
portfolios came from a census of the 29 members of the Houston Venture Capital Association
(HVCA). No attempt was made to completely separate these two sub-populations because
four HVCA firms were also NVCA DEMO, and a few had portfolios that were as large as
medium-sized DEMO firms.
After four rounds of mailed surveys, 141 usable responses were DEMO from a total
of 245 subjects, for a response rate of DEMO % . The four rounds of surveys were mailed according
to Dillman’s (1978) recommendations. The first round consisted of a letter and a DEMO
instrument. The second round consisted of a postcard reminder that was sent one week later.
The third round included a replacement survey, along with a letter, all of which was mailed
only to nonrespondents three weeks after the postcard. The fourth round was a certified letter
that was DEMO four weeks later to all remaining nonrespondents. This last mailing included
a final plea to respond along with another replacement survey. Refer to Table DEMO for a more
detailed analysis of how usable data were obtained from venture capital firm investors.
There are as many as 490,000 U.S. DEMO angels (Gaston 1989). They are an elusive
group to study DEMO they have a preference for anonymity. Furthermore, sometimes they
are in DEMO market for deals and at other times they are inactive. There are no comprehensive
lists of business angels. They have been surveyed in the DEMO using survey and referral
techniques. The average response rate from these studies has been less than 5 % . All previous
efforts to collect DEMO data on business angels have been inconclusive because it is
mathematically impossible to demonstrate that a sample is representative without being able
to identify DEMO population from which it comes. Because the population of business angels is
unknown, and probably unknowable, the conclusions of all previous studies, as well as those
of the present study, must be limited in their generalizabihty to the sample that they represent.
To be counted as a DEMO angel, a respondent had to have acted as an individual,
DEMO investing his or her own money, not a firm’s, and had to have been active during
the last three years. Earlier researchers used DEMO cutoff that varied between three years (Haar,
VENTURE
CAPITAL INVESTORS
AND INFORMANTS
203
TABLE 1 Analysis
of Data Collection
DEMO of Number of Percentage of
Number of Number of Usable Percentage of Follow-up Follow-up
Respondents surveys Responses Responses Usable Responses Interviews Interviews
Venture capital
DEMO:
NVCA 122
HVCA 19
Total 141
Business angels:
Longview 19
Opera 61
Networks 2
3rd Patty 1
Presentation 0
Total 83
Notes: NVCA refers to the National Venture Capital Association; HVCA refers to the Houston Venture Capital Association;
Longview refers to survey referrals from the DEMO of Economic Development for the City of Longview, Texas; Opera refers
to contributors to Greater Houston Gpera; Nehvorks refers to responses anonymously received fmm two Texas networks of business
angels; 3rd Party refers to anonymous referrals from other business angels; Presentation refers to responses received from participants
in venture capital clubs in Dallas and Waco, Texas.
Starr, and DEMO 1988) and five years (Sullivan 1990). Because respondents were being
asked to report how they evaluated risk and the frequency of their DEMO contacts with
informants, the more restrictive criterion was selected. An individual DEMO had invested his
or her own money, but had done it DEMO a firm, was viewed as a quasi-angel. Eighteen
percent of otherwise DEMO respondents were eliminated because they were quasi-angels.
Dillman’s (1978) procedure for mailing surveys was modified by omitting the final
certified letter to business DEMO The marginal benefit of sending it to an unknown population
appeared to be less than contacting new, potential investors. (It was more than DEMO as
expensive to send the final certified mailing as it was to send the first three rounds.) Also,
for venture capital firms, DEMO fourth round mailing only increased the overall response rate
by approximately 7 % .
Data from business angels were collected through a variety of DEMO Based on the
recommendation of the Director for Economic Development for the City of Longview, Texas,
207 potential business angels were mailed surveys. He suspected that the subjects were
investors because they had previously indicated DEMO him an interest in supporting any new
businesses that could be attracted to the community. After three rounds of surveys, 74
completed surveys were received, 55 of which were disqualified for not having made an
investment during the last three years. In total, these efforts resulted in a usable response
rate of 9%.
Three rounds of surveys were mailed to DEMO contributors to the Greater Houston Opera.
They were selected solely based on a hunch that they might occasionally act as angels. Of these,
DEMO surveys were completed and returned. After eliminating nonqualifying respondents, 61
remained, resulting in a usable response rate of 12 % .
In addition DEMO mailed surveys, three other methods were utilized to collect data. First,DEMO
there are two known Texas networks of business angels that anonymously review deals.
Approximately 80 surveys were mailed through their network offices. Second, the investigator
made presentations to, and distributed, surveys to potential business angels DEMO venture capital
forums in Houston, Waco, and Dallas, Texas. Third, some business angels volunteered to
personally deliver surveys, or to mail them at their own expense. The results of these last
216
29
245
DEMO
500
80
27
35
849
122
19
141
74
193
24
21
3
315
57
66
58
9
12
3
4
0
10
4
DEMO
23
0
21
0
0
0
21
3
100
16
0
34
0
0
0
25
204
J.O. FIET
three methods, together with the previous efforts to contact business angels, are summarized
in Table 1.
Development of the Survey Instrument
The survey instrument was developed to collect comparable data on construct indicators
DEMO both mailed inquiries and face-to-face interviews. To ensure its validity and ease of
use, it was pre-tested in the 38 face-to-face interviews that were previously described. As
mentioned earlier, these interviews were also utilized to refine preliminary hypotheses for
more formal testing. Some modifications, chiefly for ease of use, were made to the survey
instrument in response to pretesting.
There were five constructs to be measured: investor type, the importance of DEMO
risk for investment decisions, the importance of agency risk for investment DEMO, the
degree of use of venture capital firm informants (formal network), and the degree of use of
business acquaintances (informal network). Fiet (1991b) identified four indicators of market
risk and five indicators DEMO agency risk. He also suggested that investor type, because it
represented DEMO business angels or venture capital firm investors, could be measured dichot-
DEMO When investor type was coded as a zero, it indicated business DEMO When it was
coded as a one, it indicated venture capital DEMO This study adopted the same survey questions
that he used to collect data on the indicators for each type of risk, both of which were
measured on a five-point scale. Appendices 1 and 2 summarize the DEMO used by Fiet
(1991b) to measure the effects of market risk and agency risk.
Formal network was measured on a five-point scale by DEMO the frequency with
which venture capital firm investors and business angels contacted other venture capital firms,
business associates and friends. Although some evidence DEMO found that venture capital firm
investors contact friends and business associates, DEMO they were included in the measurement
of formal network, a confirmatory DEMO model would not converge on a solution that was
statistically significant. Thus, the more significant of the two indicators, the frequency of
contacts DEMO venture capital firms, was used as the sole indicator of formal DEMO
Informal network was measured on a five-point scale indicating the frequency with
which business angels and venture capital firm investors contact business acquaintances and
DEMO However, due to lack of convergence in the confirmatory factor model, the less
significant of the two indicators, friends, was dropped.
Data DEMO
Table 2 contains a correlation matrix of the variables that were used to model informant
reliance by venture capital investors. These correlations are multiplied DEMO their standard
deviations to produce the population covariance matrix, C (sigma). In covariance structure
modeling, C may be decomposed using maximum likelihood estimation to evaluate the rela-
tionships among the constructs of interest.
The DEMO assumption underlying this procedure is that the covariance matrix of
the observed variables is a function of a set of parameters. If a hypothesized DEMO were
correct and we knew its parameters, C would be exactly DEMO The procedure is
“structural” modeling because the parameters are assumed to be not just measures of associa-
tion, but evidence that the “causal assumptions embedded in a model match the sample of
data” (Bollen 1989, DEMO 4). Accordingly, this analysis depends upon the following relationship:
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
205
TABLE 2 Correlation Matrix of the DEMO Used to Model Informant Reliance by Venture Capital
Investors
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1. Business angel/DEMO
capital firm
2. Business associate
contacts
3. Venture capital firm
contacts
4. Many current competi-
tors
5. Many potential, new
competitors
6. Competitive products/
services that arc substi-
7. Weak customer demand
for the product DEMO
service
8. Differing profitability
objectives
9. Differing cash flow
objectives
10. Short-term, self-inter-
est seeking
11. Manipulation of venNre
profitability
12. Contractual ambiguities
1.00
.02
1.00
.22
.I7
.12 - .03
-.Ol
-.09
.07 -.02
.ll
DEMO
-.03
-.ll
-.I3
-.18
-.06
-.07
-.003
-0.7
-.04
-.09
1.00
.09
-.04
.ll
.20
-.ll
-.15
-.14
-.15
-.20
1.00
.67
1.00
.49
DEMO 1.00
.27
.27
.49 1.00
.06
.06
.17
.13 1.00
.17
.16
.12
.07
.71 1.00
-.04
- .07
.09 .19
46
.49 1.00
DEMO
.02
.14
.28
.34
.45
.55 1.00
.02
.06
.13
.07
.51
.48
.36
.49 1.00
c =
mv
(1)
In equation (DEMO), C is the population covariance matrix of the observed indicator variables,
0 (theta) is a vector that contains the model parameters DEMO X(O) is the covariance matrix
as it relates to 0.
DEMO 1 contains the covariance structure model of the relationships among the constructs
that are evaluated. The final variables indicating market risk and agency risk DEMO those used
by Fiet (1991b). As previously mentioned, investor type is dichotomously measured. The
formal and informal network constructs are measured by DEMO indicators.
The model in Figure 1 is a pictorial representation of a system of simultaneous equations
that depicts informant reliance among venture capital investors. DEMO relationships indicated
by the arrows are said to be structural because they suggest causality. Straight arrows represent
the assumption that a variable or construct DEMO the tail of an arrow inlluences the variable or
construct at the head of an arrow. The circles signify unobserved or latent constructs. The
DEMO/s (eta’s) represent endogenous, latent constructs that are acted upon DEMO other endogenous
or exogenous constructs. The only exogenous, latent construct, 5, (xi), acts upon the q/s,
but is not DEMO upon by them. Note that & is the only construct that is dichotomously
measured by an observed variable. The boxes (enclosing the xi and y;s ) signify an observed
or manifest variable that is measurable. DEMO xi is a variable that indicates an exogenous
construct, whereas the DEMO)s are variables that indicate endogenous constructs. The coefficients
on the paths between the observed variables and the latent constructs, 1LI)s (lambda’s), designate
206
J.O. FIET
r_
/
IllfOiiMl
Network
Y
FIGURE 1 Model of reliance upon informants by venture capital investors. xl-Business angel/
Venture capital DEMO; yI -Business associates; y2 - Venture capital firm; y3 -Many DEMO competitors;
yd-Many potential, new competitors; ys-Competitive products/services that are ready substitutes;
ya-Weak customer demand; y7-Differing profitability objectives; ys-Differing cash DEMO objectives;
yg-Short-term self-interest seeking; RIO-Manipulation of venture profitability; yll -Contractual ambi-
guities .
the magnitude of the change in the observed variable, yi, for a one-unit change in vi. The
hi’s also represent a variable’s reliability in measuring a corresponding construct. The yiis
(gamma’s) represent DEMO effect of the exogenous construct on the endogenous constructs. The
pi<s (beta’s) represent the effect of an endogenous construct on another endogenous DEMO
The first subscript, i, represents the construct that is affected, DEMO the second subscript, “,
represents the construct initiating the effect. DEMO rj’s (zeta’s) represent errors in measuring
endogenous constructs, while the DEMO ‘s (epsilon’s) represent errors in measuring y;s. Because
x1 is dichotomously coded, it is measured without error. The curved, two-headed arrow
DEMO ql and rb signifies their unanalyzed association, or partial correlation, while holding
51 constant. Likewise, the curved, two-headed arrow between r(3 DEMO q4 signifies their unana-
lyzed association, or partial correlation, while holding cl constant.
Table 3 contains the means and scaled responses for the DEMO of consulting with
informants, market risk, and agency risk. It was not possible to visually determine if the
data supported the hypotheses without DEMO evaluation to determine statistical significance.
Data are analyzed in a four-step process. First, it is necessary to replicate Fiet’s (1991b)
measures of DEMO and agency risk to determine if they fit the data in this new application.
They are estimated in a factor analytic application of covariance DEMO modeling. Second,
it is necessary to check for multicollinearity among the twelve indicators in the final model
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
207
TABLE 3
Scaled Resnonses
on Indicator DEMO
Respondents
Selecting
Each Category
12345
Informants
ye -Frequency of consulting informal
network
yz-Frequency of consulting venture
capital firms
Market risk
y3 - Many current DEMO
y4-Many potential new competitors
yr-Competitive products/services that
are ready substitutes
ye- Weak customer demand for prod-
uct/service
Averages
Agency risk
y7 - DEMO profitability objectives
yr - Differing cash flow objectives
ye- Short-term self-interest seeking
ylo- Manipulation of profitability
ye 1 ambiguities
Averages
Note: The scales
the presentation.
9113449
68
19 31 33 53
16
6 50 20 69
DEMO 48 22 80
50
37
8 16 4 57 107
5 36 18 81
52
8 47 15 83
8481884
10 40 12
9 DEMO 13
11572566
40
29
62
70
27
69
65
for measuring
yl and
ye
were
reverse-coded,
but
Combined
n
171
152
195
195
DEMO
192
193.5
193
187
193
189
186
189.6
these reversals
Means by Category
Venture Capital
Firms
Business
Angles
1.99
1.98
3.64
3.49
3.49
3.85
DEMO
3.48
3.30
3.58
3.75
3.11
3.44
2.26
3.70
3.39
3.42
4.00
3.52
3.58
3.59
3.61
3.86
3.97
3.41
3.67
de not appear
in this DEMO
in order
Both
3.91
3.10
3.51
3.44
4.24
3.71
3.72
3.52
3.39
3.70
3.82
3.24
3.53
to simplify
using a two-step null model, as suggested by Anderson and Gerbing (1988). Third, a statisti-
cally DEMO fit of the overall model is obtained through the use of maximum likelihood
estimation. Fourth, the hypotheses are tested by comparing the standardized path coefficients
in the best fitting structural model.
Covariance
Structure Modeling in a DEMO Analytic Application
Covariance structure modeling is utilized to evaluate the relationships among the five separate
constructs affecting the hypotheses that are to be tested: investor type, informal network,
formal network, market risk, and agency risk’. This model is an application of the EQS
system developed by DEMO (1989). For a lucid introduction to this system see Bollen (1989).
Before the relationships among these constructs can be tested it DEMO necessary to measure each
of them separately using covariance structure modeling, DEMO recommended by Anderson and
Gerbing (1988). This section details the DEMO of one of the five constructs, market
risk, which is illustrated in Figure 2.
Equations (3) through (6) measure the structural DEMO of market risk on its four indicators.
y3 = 3L3t13 + E3
y4 = ul3 + E4
(3)
(4)
‘Using maximum DEMO estimation, two of the constructs, format and informal network, would DEMO
converge on a solution and so they were replaced by single indicator variables.
-Contractual
208 J.O.
5;
Y3
E3
4
Es
%
b
FIGURE 2 DEMO factor model of market risk. qs -Market risk; y3 -Many current DEMO
tors; y4 -Many potential, new competitors; ys -Competitive products/services DEMO are ready substitutes;
ye-Weak customer demand for the product or service; %-Errors in measurement.
Ys
y6
=
=
hl3
haq3
+
+
Es
c6
(5)
(6)
The yi variables (i = 3, 4, 5, 6) stand for the four measures of market DEMO, ~3, and
they are y3 (many current competitors), y4 (many potential, new competitors), y5 (competitive
products/services that are DEMO substitutes, and y6 (weak customer demand for the product
or service). Refer to Appendix 1 for more information about these variables. The DEMO (lambda)
coefficients represent the magnitude of the change in the DEMO variable (yi) for a one
unit change in market risk, DEMO IJ~. The G variables are the errors of measurement for the yi
variables. Equations (3) through (6) can be written more compactly DEMO matrix notation as:
y = l&q + E
(7)DEMO
where y (p x 1) is a vector of indicator variables of u, AY (lambda,,) is a matrix (p x DEMO,
where m is the number of q’s) of regression parameters DEMO y on n. Equation 7 is used for
the measurement of endogenous consmtczs-ones that are acted upon by other endogenous
or exogenous constructs. Errors DEMO measuring y are represented by E’S. If the example con-
tained an exogenous construer-one that acts upon other endogenous constructs, but is not
acted upon by them-its parameters would be expressed by the following equation:
DEMO x (cl x 1) is a vector of observed independent variables; AX (lambda,) is a matrix
(q x n) of DEMO parameters of x on 5. Exogenous errors in measurement are represented
by 6, which is a (q x 1) vector. For a model that contained both endogenous and exogenous
constructs (as is the case in Figure l), the complete measurement model of the constructs
consists of DEMO equations (7) and (8).
The covariance matrix of the DEMO indicator variables of market risk (C) may be
expressed in terms of the parameters of equations (3) through (6) and the DEMO of the
covariance matrices r~ and E, provided that it meets DEMO conditions. First, AY, the p X
m coefficient matrix, must DEMO non-singular. Second, the variables must be expressed in
deviations from their DEMO And third, the vectors tl and E are assumed to be DEMO
FIET
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
209
However, the model does permit correlation among the variables within the respective vectors
and so it can accommodate DEMO multicollinearity difficulties that restrict many other ap-
proaches.
If the model is identified, this covariance matrix can be fitted to the sample covariance
matrix (S). The S matrix represents the data sample. Identification problems occur when the
constraints of theory and data are insufficient to establish unique DEMO of the structural
coefficients. For example, if this study had only DEMO data on risk in general, it would
be impossible to draw DEMO conclusions that pertained specifically to either market risk or
agency risk. Any choice from the set of acceptable estimates would be “purely arbitrary
because DEMO would be dictated neither by theory nor data. The solution to the identification
problem is to place further theoretical or data constraints on the DEMO (Hayduk 1987,
p. 140).
Using maximum likelihood estimation, fitting the sample covariance matrix (S) is done
by minimizing the function,DEMO
FML
= loglC(0)I + t&SC-Ye))
- logbl DEMO (p + s>
with respect to the vectors of the DEMO of the covariance matrices referred to above,
where (p + DEMO) is the number of observed variables, and all other variables are as previously
defined. This fitting function is contingent upon the assumption that DEMO variables are
multinormally distributed2.
The minimum value of FELL generates a statistic to evaluate the goodness of fit of the
proposed model of market DEMO If we denote Ho to be a hypothesis that the suggested indicators
of market risk fit the model and denote H, to be an hypothesis about a model that is less
restrictive than Ho; the minimum of the fitting function FML under & will be larger than the
DEMO of F~,K under H1 and their difference is asymptotically distributed as a x2 statistic
with degrees of freedom equal to the difference in DEMO overidentifying parameters separating
Ho and H1 (Fomby, Hill, and Johnson DEMO 56-59).
As an illustration of how model constraints help us to differentiate between H,, and HI,
consider the market risk construct DEMO Figure 2. Modeling this construct would not be possible
without placing some constraints (y/s) upon it. The data cannot simply speak for DEMO, so
the constraints that are placed upon it serve to identify DEMO attributes. It has four indicator
variables-its yi’s. If the market risk model had three indicator variables, it would be less
constrained and its goodness of fit test would be represented as HI. Because the market risk
DEMO fits the data better under Ho than HI, we may conclude DEMO we understand better how
the variables are related to market risk with four variables rather than with three.
The x2 statistic can be used DEMO evaluate competing models. If a model fits its data, the
p DEMO for the x2 statistic will exceed a standard cutoff value such as .05. There are also
three practical measures of fit: (1) A (delta) that controls for sample size, (2) p (rho) that
controls for degrees of freedom, and (3) CFI (comparative DEMO index) that controls for both
*The assumption of a multinormal distribution DEMO violated by the categorical variable, investor type, and to
a lesser degree by the variables coded on a Likert scale. The EQS system, in which this research was performed,
accommodates categorical independent variables. Categorical DEMO variables would be a source of concern
for LISREL users (Rentler DEMO, p. 5). Users of LISREL are cautioned to avoid even DEMO use of categorical
independent variables (Joreskog and Sorbom 1989, pp. 191-202).
210 J.O. FIET
TABLE 4 Measurement Model for Market Risk Covariance Structure DEMO
k (Standardized a Values for
Indicator/Error Terms Coefficient) p Value Error
y3 -Many current competitors 0.794 <.oool 0.608
ya-Many potential, new DEMO <.OOOl 0.642
competitors
ys - Competitive products/ 0.665 <.OOOl 0.747
DEMO that are ready
substitutes
y6 - Weak customer demand 0.665 <.OOOl DEMO
for the product or
service
a3-correlated with a4 0.123 0.55
a4-correlated with E3
Overall x2 statistic for model 0.058
Degrees of freedom 1.000
p DEMO of x2 statistic .810
A (Bentler-Fhnett normed fit index) 1.020
p (BentIer-Ehnett non-normed fit index) 1.000
CFI (comparative fit index) 1.000
DEMO size and degrees of freedom. Models that fit their data have values for these three
measures that are greater than .903.
Error in measurement DEMO multicollinearity may be the cause of some lack of fit; in DEMO
case, it may be ameliorated by correlating specific 6i or G DEMO Correlating errors effectively
isolates their effect and improves model fit. This procedure should only be performed when
there is a theoretical basis for the DEMO, such as the indicators would be viewed as
being similar by DEMO respondents.
Respondents were requested to assess how seriously a venture would be impacted if it
were not protected from four possible sources of market DEMO Each of these sources initially
found support in the literature, was DEMO in 38 face-to-face interviews, and was finally
measured on a 5point DEMO (refer to Appendix 1).
Table 4 contains the results of DEMO factor analysis of market risk using covariance structure
modeling. First, the DEMO value of the x2 statistic is greater than the standard cutoff value of
.05. Note also that the three practical measures of fit exceed DEMO recommended level of JO.
This degree of model fit was not obtained until ~3 and ~4 were correlated with each other, which
effectively treats y3 (many current competitors) and y4 (many potential, new competitors) as
if they were a single indicator. Because they both attempt to DEMO competition, this
assumption seems reasonable. The J..i’s compare the relative effect DEMO market risk on each
indicator variable. In summary, these factor analytic DEMO provide a way of measuring
and thus testing the effect of market risk on informant reliance even though it is a construct
that cannot DEMO directly observed.
A similar approach is taken in order to measure agency risk. For the sake of brevity,
it is not detailed here. DEMO, more information about it may be obtained from the author.
Formal DEMO is measured with a single indicator, the frequency with which investors
DEMO other venture capital firms. Informal network measures the frequency of contacting
3 The three practical measures of fit, together with the probability of the p value for the x2 statistic, can all
be used as goodness-of-fit criteria. A useful discussion of goodness-of-fit criteria is found in Loehlin (1987, pp.
54-71).
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
211
FIGURE 3
Venture
yd-Many potential, new competitors; ys
ye- Weak customer demand; y7
y9-Short-term
guities.
capital
Null DEMO of reliance upon informants by venture capital investors. x1
firm;
y1
-Differing profitability objectives; ys-Differing
-Business asseciates;
self-interest seeking; ylo-Manipulation
-Business DEMO/
yz
-Competitive products/services that are ready substitutes;
cash flow objectives;
of venture profitability; yll -Contractual
-Venture capital
firm; y3
DEMO current competitors;
ambi-
business associates. Previous researchers indicated that investors also rely upon friends for
investment information. However, the modeling procedure would not converge on a single
solution and so the less significant of the DEMO measures, friends, was dropped from the analysis.
Null Model.
We are now ready to combine tire statistically significant measures into an overall model
DEMO at the same time constrain the structural relationships among the constructs to be zero.
This constraint allows us to test whether this null model DEMO the data despite any unintended
correlation among the five constructs and 12 indicator variables. (Refer to Figure 3 for an
illustration of the null model.) Model fit is achieved through the use of the Lagranian multiplier
test (LM test), which is described in Appendix 3. When suggested by the LM test, correlation
was specified between specific error terms. The result of these procedures is that they generate
an overall model that DEMO the data. Table 5 contains the resulting k’s and their p values, as
well as the overall fit statistics. Note that the p value of the x2 statistic exceeds the standard
212
J.O. FIET
TABLE 5
Null Model of Informant Reliance Upon Venture DEMO Investors
Indicator Variable
li, Standardized
Coefficient
p Value
-
-
-
<.oool
<.OOOl
XI -Business angel/venture capital firm
yt -Informal network
ys-Venture capital firm
ys - Many current competitors
yb-Many potential, new competitors
ys - Competitive products/services that are
ready substitutes
ye- Weak customer demand DEMO the product
or service
y7-Differing profitability objectives
ys-Differing cash flow objectives
ys-Short-term, self-interest-seeking
yia- Manipulation of venture profitability
y 1 ambiguities
I
-Contractual
l.OtKl
1.000
1.000
0.541
0.946
0.520
<.OOOl
0.789
0.915
0.559
0.451
0.731
0.559
<.OOOl
<.OOOl
<.OoOl
<.OOOl
<.OOOl
<.OtN-ll
Overall x2 statistic DEMO null model
Degrees of freedom
p value of x2 statistic
A (DEMO normed fit index)
p (Bentler-Bennett non-normed fit index)
CFI (comparative fit index)
53.712
42.000
0.499
0.937
0.977
0.985
cut-off value DEMO .05. Also the practical measures of fit (A, p, CFI) exceed 90, so we may
conclude that the model is ready for relaxing its constraints and hypothesis testing.
Constraining the structural relationships to be DEMO in a null model is a very strong
constraint because it assumes the constructs are not related. If a high degree of multicollinearity
exists DEMO the constructs and their indicators, the model will not fit. Even DEMO such
a test, the model still fits the data. Thus, we may conclude that we have controlled for
multicollinearity.
The next procedure is DEMO determine whether or not a less constrained model will fit even
better. This analysis conforms to the guidelines suggested by Anderson and Gerbing (1988).
For a more detailed description of it, the reader should consult Hoskisson et al. (1993).
Table 6 summarizes the results of evaluating the overall model according to Anderson and
Gerbing’s (1988) guidelines. The DEMO are tested by comparing the standardized values
of the path coefficients in the final model.
RESULTS
Hypothesis 1A is tested by examining the direction DEMO significance of y31 . Because venture
capital firm investors are coded as one, this standardized path coefficient between investor
type and market risk has to be positive and significant. It is derived from the structural
equation DEMO compares the relationship between investor type, e1 , and market risk, q3 .
q3
=
Y3151
+
r,
where rj indicates the DEMO in measurement of ni . Refer to Figure 1. Substituting the results
from Table 6 into equation (lo), we find:
TABLE 6
Results
Path
Coefficient
Standardized
Value
-a02
.221
.024
-.219
.123
DEMO
- .073
-.154
l.ooO
1.000
1.000
1.073
1.000
1.553
.925
1.000
1.036
.742
,626
p Value
,498
.OOl
,382
,013
,055
,DEMO
,042
.023
<.OOl
<.OOl
<.OOl
<.OOl
_a
<.OOl
<DEMO
_b
<.OOl
<.OOl
<.OOl
Path
Coefficient
Standardized
Value
.678
1.000
DEMO
,913
,946
240
,864
,451
.319
1.055
1.136
,998
DEMO
2.157
.408
,921
0.000
,120
p Value
<.OOl
-
_
<.OOi
<.ool
.047
<.OOl
<.OOl
.037
<.OOl
<.OOl
<.OOl
<.OOl
<.OOl
.045
<.OOl
-
,514
213
Overall x2 statistic for overall model
Degrees of freedom
p value of x2 statistic
A (Bentler-J3onett normed fit index)
p (Render-Ekmnett non-normed fit index)
CFI (DEMO fit index)
35.804
29SiQO
.17935
0.950
,980
,990
a Lx (the reliability coefficient of %any potential, new competitors”) was allowed to co-vary with L (the reliability coefficient
of “many current competitors”). Recall that this was allowed in order to achieve a statistically significant fit DEMO the market risk
COnStruct.
’ & (tbe reliability coefficient of ‘differing DEMO flow objectives”) was allowed to co-vary with A,, (the reliability coefficient of
‘differing pmfitabiiity objectives”). This correlation was also introduced to DEMO model fit, in tbis case, the fit of the agency
risk construct.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
03
=
(.024)51
+
r,
(11)
The positive coefficient is in the expected direction; DEMO, the p value of .381 for
ye is not significant. These DEMO suggest rejection of the hypothesis. In this study, market
risk is DEMO viewed as more important by venture capital firm investors than by business angels.
Hypothesis 1B is also tested by examining the direction and significance DEMO another
standardized path coefficient, ~~1. Because business angels are coded as DEMO, it has to be
negative and significant. It is derived from DEMO structural equation that compares the relation-
ship between investor type, E,DEMO , and agency risk, n4.
Substituting in equation (12), we find:
1.114
=
(-.219)5,
+ r,
214 J.O. FIET
The p value of y41 is significant at .013 DEMO b having a mean of zero and a o of .921.
Thus, Hypothesis 1A is supported-agency risk is viewed as more important by business
angels than by venture capital firm investors.
To accept Hypothesis 2A, we would expect the following relationship to
hold:
A21
>o
(14)DEMO
The coefficient, yzl, is derived from the structural equation for formal network. However,
for the sake of brevity, further examples of structural equations will not be reproduced here.
As can be seen in Table DEMO, ‘yzl is 0.227 and its p value is .OOl. Thus, venture capital firm
investors contact the formal informant network more frequently than business DEMO contact
the formal informant network. To accept Hypothesis 2B, we would DEMO the following
relationship to hold:
Referring to Table 6, yll DEMO a standardized value of -0.002 with a p value of .498,
which means that it is not significantly different from zero. Thus, venture capital firm investors
and business angels contact the informal informant network with DEMO frequency.
Hypothesis 3A can be tested by evaluating whether p3iis equal to zero. Similarly, Hypoth-
esis 3B can be tested by evaluating whether p4i is equal to zero. From Table 6, we see that
p3, DEMO -0.073 and its p value is significant at .042, whereas p4, is -0.154 and its p value
is significant at .023. The negative DEMO mean that the more an investor is concerned
with a particular type of risk, the less that investor relies upon informal network informants
for assessing that risk.
The test of Hypothesis 3C is to evaluate whether DEMO is equal to zero. The results indicate
that pj2 is 0.123 and its p value is marginally significant at .055. The results suggest that
DEMO more an investor is concerned with market risk, the more he DEMO she will rely upon formal
network informants.
Finally, to test Hypothesis DEMO, we must evaluate whether I342 equal to zero. As can
be DEMO in Table 6, f142 .O42 and the p value is not DEMO at .542. Thus, we conclude
that investors do not rely on DEMO formal network for information about agency risk.
is
h,, = 0
is
(15)
Limitations
The interpretation of the covariance structure model used in this research is limited by several
factors that are endemic and DEMO: error in construct measurement, model misspecifica-
tion, lack of control DEMO the research design, and bias in sample selection, particularly for
the business angels. However, it should be noted that these problems are not restricted to
covariance structure modeling. In fact, it is one of the more powerful methods for dealing
with these issues. It is the only DEMO that allows us to measure latent constructs and
simultaneously identify and isolate errors in measurement. At the same time, it allows us
to test for the structural relationships among latent constructs, which are often the most
interesting to theoreticians and researchers.
The algebraic interpretation of the covariance structure DEMO does not help us to under-
stand all of the relationships in the model-particularly, the partial correlations represented
by the curved, double-headed arrows DEMO upon (1) r13 - n4 and (2) ql - n2. Relationship
(1) represents the partial correlation between market risk and agency DEMO, assuming investor
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
215
type is held constant. This first DEMO indicates the concern that both types of investors
have for market risk and agency risk. It indicates that investors are concerned about both
of DEMO, which complicates the interpretation of the results. Relationship (2) shows DEMO extent
to which one or both types of investors rely upon both types of informants. The correlation
between these network types is 0.17, which indicates that there is very little contact between
these two types of DEMO Through follow-up interviews, the investigator learned that
venture capital firms occasionally DEMO consult with business angel investors. There was no
evidence, however, that the reverse is true-business angels do not consult with venture
capital firms.
DEMO method variance is a problem in studies that only utilize one analytical tech-
nique. It may bias research findings by generating results that are DEMO artifact of the method,
rather than a valid representation of the relationships among the constructs in a study (Avolio,
Yammarino, and DEMO 1991; Campbell and Fiske 1959; Fiske 1982; Peter 1981; Williams,
Cote, and Buckley 1989). The low correlations in Table 2 indicate an absence of problems
with common method variance. That is, the mere fact that a respondent gives a high score
to one variable, clearly does not imply a tendency to give high scores to everything. DEMO,
the correlations would be positive and significant. However, to develop DEMO more in-depth
view of informant reliance, systematic, face-to-face, follow-up interviews DEMO conducted
with 23 venture capital firm investors and 21 business angels. Their comments provide a
richer view of the algebraic interpretation of informant reliance DEMO venture capital investors.
Those interviewed were asked to elaborate on the responses they had previously given to
mailed surveys. A few representative comments are DEMO in the next section.
Comments from Ventwe Capital Investors
Trust was manifested among the principals of some venture capital firms. One of them,
DEMO about market risk, noted, “As the largest . . . [venture capital firm] in the state,
we never go into a deal DEMO ourselves. We average three or four investors in every deal.”
Another affirmed, “If other venture capital firms are interested, then I am interested DEMO the
deal].” So, at least initially, the participation of one venture capital firm investor is sufficient
to interest others in performing their own DEMO diligence to see if a deal merits their involvement.
There was more skepticism by business angels that they could rely upon others to evaluate
DEMO risk. One boasted:
I rely upon myself by observing over a period of time, to let the true picture
develop and inconsistencies to explain themselves. Effort is to determine character
and distinguish honest and dishonest, then to determine those with judgment and
energy.
Another business angel stated, “I don’t ever ask a third person to do my investigation.”
Another DEMO on the importance of personally performing due diligence by saying, “I
DEMO more on . . . a sense of smell for agency risk.” In summary, these interview comments
were representative of others, the majority DEMO which supported the algebraic interpretation.
The results of these two different research methodologies tell the same story about informant
reliance, which provides us with some assurance that the study has avoided the difficulties
associated with common DEMO variance.
216 J.O.
FIET
DISCUSSION
This research examines the nature and extent of DEMO reliance by venture capital invest-
ors. It is the first known empirical test of Williamson’s (1975) and Granovetter’s (1985)
propositions regarding risk governance. It also provides some guidance to those whose liveli-
hood is DEMO upon the flow of venture capital.
Implications for Theory
The more an investor is concerned about a particular type of risk, the less likely he or she
will be to use informal network informants, even if the information is market-related. This
interpretation follows from the tests of Hypotheses DEMO and 3B where 831 and pdl are negative
and significant (refer DEMO Figure 1 and Table 6). Investors who are relatively unconcerned
with risk use informal sources to a greater degree than do investors with DEMO higher concern
with risk.
Investors with a higher concern for risk use venture capital firms as sources for informa-
tion about market risk, but concern with agency risk is not related to the frequency of use
DEMO venture capital firm sources.
Compared to business angels, venture capital firm DEMO enjoy a more efficient flow
of information from their informants. (This DEMO partially indicated by the results of testing
Hypothesis 2A, which indicates DEMO venture capital firm investors contact the formal infor-
mant network more than business angels contact the informal informant network.) Their
mutually beneficial relationships enable them to gain more experience with each other-in
large measure as a DEMO of their frequent investing and their propensity to seek out partners
who are often other venture capital firm investors. However, business angels and venture
capital firm investors contact informal informants with approximately the same frequency
(Hypothesis 2B), which appears to be minimal.
One would predict that the DEMO of trust and informant reliance would be a
function of a venture capital firm investor’s experience with an informant. The results of
this study DEMO that their formal network is a reliable source for assessing market risk,
but not for agency risk. Agency risk deals with particular, self-interested individuals who
are unlikely to be known to the formal informant network. DEMO, as indicated by the
following comment from one of the follow-up DEMO with a venture capital firm investor,
it may be that they find it less costly, and equally as effective, to take care DEMO agency factors
after they are in a deal.
We assess market risk ex ante and agency risk ex post. Agency risk becomes
more critical DEMO However, agency risk is much more manageable after you
get into DEMO deal than market risk. If the people are good and the idea is good, we
will do the deal and replace the entrepreneur.
This same venture capital firm investor also claimed that 30%-50% of entrepreneurs
are DEMO after two years because their ventures do not achieve the results that were
projected for them.
Granovetter (1985) predicts that embedded social relations DEMO pervasive and effectively
govern any malfeasance by an informant. However, this DEMO found that either social
embeddedness does not exist among informants in the informal network, or it is not as
effective as he expected. The greater the risk, the lower is the tendency to rely upon informal
informants.
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
217
Williamson’s (1975) transaction cost view DEMO an explanation of informal network
reliance that is more consistent with the results of this study. Because there is less interaction
among informal network DEMO, it is possible that some of them could escape being
detected DEMO they decided to act in a devious, self-interested manner. Rather than DEMO
upon informal informants, investors seem instead to perform their own due DEMO This
observation was supported by a venture capital firm investor, who DEMO, “I don’t ever ask
a third person to do my investigation.” DEMO comments clearly indicate that at least some
investors are far less trusting than would be permitted by Granovetter’s (1985) view.
The results of DEMO Hypothesis 1B corroborate Fiet’s (1991a, 1993b) findings that
agency risk DEMO viewed as more important by business angels than by venture capital firm
investors. Business angels are more concerned with the evaluation of agency factors, often
because they have prior industry experience themselves, and view the intentions of the entre-
preneur as being the most potentially damaging contingencies. There DEMO less evidence for
the views of venture capital firm investors regarding market risk (Hypothesis 1A). Interpreting
informant reliance by business angels is more complex than for venture capital firm investors.
It may be an oversimplification DEMO conclude from the algebraic analysis that business angels
specialize in agency risk, that they contact formal informants less than venture capital firm
investors, DEMO that the more a business angel is concerned about a particular type of risk,
the more he or she will avoid using informants.
DEMO suspect that the market for business angel information is less efficient (DEMO River
Associates 1976; Wetzel 1986). To the extent that their DEMO are less efficient, it is less
likely that any malfeasance by DEMO will be discovered, which would allow them to conduct
themselves more DEMO independent, atomistic actors. There is not necessarily a presumption
of “guile” DEMO the part of an informal informant-just a presumption that such sources are
not as expert. Nonexpert sources are used when an investor is not DEMO concerned about a
particular risk because they are a source of cheap information. The fact that business angels
operate in a comparatively inefficient market DEMO that they obtain risk-reducing informa-
tion by themselves, or at least DEMO other sources.
Market inefficiency also has a downside for business angels- it makes it more difficult
for them to learn about prospective deals. It DEMO also motivate them to expand their access
to deals by relying upon less trusted informants. As they use less trusted informants, they
expose themselves to losses due to opportunism.
Market inefficiency seems to have less of DEMO impact on the relationship between business
angels and their close associates because they still have powerful deterrents to self-serving
conduct when exchanging information. However, the deterrents to self-serving conduct for
informants who are only acquaintances may DEMO be nearly as strong as Granovetter envisioned
in his 1985 article. Nor does social embeddedness preclude a deal from being adversely
affected by informant DEMO
In an earlier article, Granovetter (1978) clearly anticipated relationships with DEMO
who were mere acquaintances when he made the distinction between strong ties and weak
ties. Applying his scheme to business angels, they have strong ties with informants who are
close friends and business associates, but weak ties with informants who are only acquain-
tances. Acquaintances can become close DEMO by increasing the frequency with which
angels consult with them. Because the business angels in this study consulted comparatively
infrequently with informants for investment DEMO they were more like acquaintances than
associates. Thus, for business angels DEMO their acquaintances, it is possible that malfeasance
can be rewarding-their weak DEMO to each other do not prevent it.
218
J.O. FlEiT
It is curious to realize that Granovetter (1985) DEMO that atomistic relations among
economic actors do not exist in the real world, yet seven years earlier he made provision
for at least a quasi-atomistic relationship that he described as weakly tied. The findings from
this DEMO suggest that where weakly tied relationships exist, economic actors ought to DEMO
Williamson’s (1975) exhortation to utilize governance mechanisms. Embedded social relations
do not substitute for Williamson’s governance when they are only weakly tied, as seems to
be the case in the business angel market for information. DEMO, the domain in which business
angels and their acquaintance informants operate DEMO to be better described by Williamson’s
(1975) transaction cost view than by Granovetter’s (1985) social embeddedness view.
When business angel informants are DEMO associates, evidence from the follow-up inter-
views supports Granovetter’s (1985) DEMO of social embeddedness serving as a governance
device to control opportunism in their relationships. Business angels probably do not feel
that they have to DEMO information from close associates. Nevertheless, any conclusions
from this study about DEMO in business angel informants need to be accepted with some
caution. It gathered comparatively less data from close associates. It is clear, though, DEMO
if a close associate were to decide to withhold information that was critical to evaluating the
entrepreneur or the prospects of the deal, the business angel could expect to have future
opportunities for retribution. Thus, the possibility of retribution could effectively govern
malfeasance between business angels and their DEMO associates.
Implications for Practitioners
This study suggests that venture capital firm investors often feel that their most trustworthy
informant is another venture capital firm DEMO who is investing in the deal. This study
did not differentiate between network insiders (those who are already investment partners
with others in the network) and network outsiders (those who are looking to make their DEMO
co-investment). However, collateral work by Bygrave (1988b) suggests that DEMO would
have a stronger incentive to be forthright. Insiders can be more forthright with each other
as a result of their mutual experience from DEMO deals and because their economic welfare
is jointly impacted by the outcome of their co-investments. There is little incentive for inside
venture capital firm DEMO to cheat their partners, if their risk-adjusted return depends
upon the DEMO viability of the deal.
In contrast, outsiders, or would-be entrants to their formal network, may have only
modest expectations for continued future dealings. Under such circumstances, outsiders would
be less fearful of retaliation, if DEMO decide to act deceptively in order to realize a large,
one-time gain.
Venture capital firm investors, presumably both insiders and outsiders, report DEMO
extensive due diligence among other types of informants such as suppliers, DEMO, bank-
ers, competitors, and distributors. However these other types of DEMO were not included
in this study.
Business angels already pinpoint business associates as reliable informants, particularly
when they expect to have ongoing relationships with them. They rely somewhat less on
friends who are not experts, or upon business associates who are outside their close circle
of acquaintances.
For DEMO, it can be very helpful to identify informant champions who can DEMO
as credible intermediaries to endorse a request for funding. This study suggests that an
entrepreneur with a technical or market advantage can be well DEMO by presenting his or
her request to a venture capital firm, DEMO it is not a high risk venture. Because the
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS AND INFORMANTS
219
informant network for venture capital firms DEMO highly interconnected with other venture capital
firms, it is likely that DEMO it to one of them will quickly result in the sharing of it
among their informant associates.
Entrepreneurs who can successfully argue that they DEMO trustworthy and competent,
even if they lack a technical or market advantage, would be well served to present their
deals to a business angel through a close business associate. It would serve no useful purpose
DEMO present the deal through an acquaintance because the business angel would perform his
or her own due diligence regarding the entrepreneur. It would be DEMO time consuming for
entrepreneurs to go directly to a business angel with their proposals, even if they are not
already well acquainted with him or her. If a business angel is not well acquainted with the
DEMO champion, it is likely that he or she will extensively investigate DEMO personal integrity
and competence of the entrepreneur, a process which Fiet (1991a) reported could take as
long as five years.
Future Research
Future research of informant reliance could compare the differing degrees of reliance between
DEMO angel informants who are close associates and those who are mere acquaintances.
Not only would such a comparative approach instruct us about the nature DEMO the informational
networks in which business angels operate, but it would DEMO provide us with a clearer
understanding of Granovetter’s (1978) strong tie and weak tie relationships. Additionally,
it would be useful to investigate DEMO types of governance that are utilized in place of strong
tie relationships when economic actors do not have close, trusting relationship.
We also need to understand the effects of differing degrees of risk on reliance. Is DEMO
reliance an u&fordable luxury at higher levels of risk? Are DEMO factors that an entrepreneur
can control that will moderate the negative relationship between informant reliance and risk?
Whereas agency risk is controllable through DEMO ex ante terms and conditions, is there
a way to control DEMO risk through contracting? These are just a few of the questions DEMO
answers will affect an entrepreneur’s access to venture capital.
REFERENCES
Alchian, DEMO, and Demsetz, H. 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization.
American Economic Review 62:777-795.
Anderson, J.C., and Gerbing, D.W. 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice: a review and
recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin 103(3):41 l-423.
Aram, J.D. 1987. Informal Risk Capital DEMO the Eastern Great L&es Region. Washington, DC: United
States Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy.
Aram, J.D. 1989. Attitudes and behaviors DEMO informal investors toward early-stage investments, technol-
ogy-based ventures, and co-investors. Journal of Business Venturing 41333-347.
Avolio, B.J., Yammarino, F.J., and Bass, B.M. 1991. Identifying common methods variance with
data collected from a single DEMO: an unresolved sticky issue. Journal of Munugement 17(3):
571-587.
Bain, J.S. 1956. Barriers to New Competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Barney, J.B., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J.O., and Moesel, D. 1989. The structure of venture capital gover-
nance: an organizational economic analysis of relations between venture capital firms and new
ventures. Best Papers DEMO of the Ammal Meeting of the Academy of Management,
Washington, DEMO
220
J.O. PIET
Barney, J.B., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J.O., DEMO Moesel, D. 1993. Do venture capital firms value their own
advice? Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Atlanta, DEMO
Barney, J.B., and Ouchi, W.G. 1986. Organizational Economics. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bentler, P.M. 1989. EQS-Structural Equations Program Manual. Los Angeles: BMDP DEMO
Software, Inc.
Bollen, K.A. 1989. Structural Equations With Latent Variables. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Bygrave, W.D. 1987. Syndicated investments by DEMO capital firms: a networking perspective.
Journal of Business Venturing 2:139-154.
DEMO, W.D. 1988a. Venture capital investing: resource exchange perspective. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Boston University.
Bygrave, W.D. 1988b. The structure of investment networks of DEMO capital firms. Journal of
Business Venturing 3:137-157.
Bygrave, W.D., andTimmons, J.A. 1992. Venture Capitalat the Crossroads. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
DEMO, D., and Fiske, D. 1959. Convergent and discriminant validation by DEMO multitrait-
multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin 56: 8 1 - 105.
Caves, R.E., and Porter, M.E. 1977. From entry barriers to mobility barriers: conjectural decisions
and contrived deterrence to new competition. Quarterly Journal of Economics DEMO:241-262.
Charles River Associates. 1976. An Analysis of Venture Capital Market Impetfection. Prepared for
Experimental Technology Incentives Program, National Bureau of Standards, United DEMO
Department of Commerce (February). Washington, DC: USGPO.
Cohen, J., and Cohen, P. 1983. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the DEMO
Sciences, 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Copeland, T., DEMO Weston, J.F. 1988. Financial Theory and Corporate Policy, 3rd ed. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Dillman, D.A. 1978. Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
Dusenberry, J. DEMO Comment on an economic analysis of fertility. In National Bureau Committee
for Economic Research, ed.. Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Countries.
Princeton, DEMO: University Press.
Fiet, J.O. 1991a. Managing Investments in Specific Information: DEMO Comparison of Business Angels
and Venture Capital Firms. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, DEMO A&M University.
Fiet, J.O. 1991b. Venture capital risk assessment: an empirical test comparing business angels and
venture capital firms. Best Papers Proceedings DEMO the Annual Meeting of the Academy of Manage-
ment, Miami.
Fiet, J.O. Do all venture capital investors evaluate risk in the same way? Journal of Management
Studies (in press).
Fiet, J.O. 1993b. Co-investor DEMO as a basis for separate pools of risk capital. Presented at the
Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Atlanta.
Fiske, D. 1982. DEMO validation in measurement and research strategies. In D.
Brinbert and L. Kitter, eds., New Directions for Methodology of Social and Behavioral Science:
DEMO of Validity in Research. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Fomby, T.B., Hill, R.C., and Johnson, S.R. 1984. Advanced Econometric Methodr. New York:
DEMO
Gaston, R.J. 1989. Finding Private Venture Gzpitalfor Your Firm. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Gaston, R.J., and Bell, S. 1986. Informal Risk Capital in the Sunbelt Region. Knoxville: Applied
Economic Group.
Granovetter, DEMO 1978. The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology 78(6): 1360-1380.
Granovetter, M.S. 1985. Economic action, social structure, and embeddedness. American Journal of
Sociology 91(3):481-510.
Haar, N.E., Starr, DEMO, and MacMillan, I.C. 1988. Informal risk capital investors: investment patterns
DEMO the East Coast of the U.S.A. Journal ofBusiness Venturing 3:11-29.
VENTURE
CAPITAL INVESTORS
AND INFORMANTS
221
Hayduk, L.E. 1987. Structural Equation Modeling with LZSREL: Essentials and Advances. Baltimore,
MD: The Johns Hopkins DEMO Press.
Hill, C.W.L., and Jones, G.R. 1992. Strategic Management: An IntegratedApproach, 2nd ed. Boston:
Houghton-Milllin.
Hoffman, C. 1972. l?re DEMO capital investment process: a particular aspect of regional economic
development. Unpublished DEMO dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
Hoskisson, R.E., Hitt, M.A., Johnson, R.A., and Moesel, D.D. 1993. Construct validity of an DEMO
(entropy) categorical measure of diversification strategy. Strategic Management Journal 14:
215-235.
Krasner, O., and Tymes, E. 1983. Informal risk capital in California. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Joreskog, K.G. and Sorbom, D. 1989. Z.ZSZU?L 7: A Guide to the DEMO and Applications, 2nd ed.
Chicago: SPSS Inc.
Loehlin, J.C. 1987. DEMO Variable Models: An Introduction to Factor, Path, and Structural Analysis.
DEMO, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
McGee, J.S. 1988. Industrial Organization. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Peter, J. 1981. Construct validity: a review of basic issues and marketing practices. Journal ofMarketing
Research 18:133-145.
Porter, M.E. 1980. Competitive Strategy. New York: Free Press.
Porter, M.E. 1985. Competitive Advantage: New York: Free Press.
Poindexter, J.B. 1976. Zhee~ciencyofjnancialmarkets: the venture capital case. Unpublisheddoctoral
dissertation, New York University.
Scherer, F.M. 1980. Industrial Market DEMO and Economic Performance, 2nd ed Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Company.
Seymour, DEMO, and Wetzel, W.E., Jr. 1981. Informal Risk Capital in New DEMO Washington,
DC: United States Small Business Association, Office of Advocacy.
Shapero, A. 1983. 7Jte Role of the Financial Znstitutions a Community in the Formation, Effecriveness,
and Expansion of Znnovating Companies. Columbus, OH: Shapero-HufFman Associates.
Stigler, G.J. 1961. Economics of information. Journal of Political Economy 69:213-225.
Sullivan, M.K. 1990. Segmenting the informal investment market: a DEMO typology of informal
investors. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Wetzel, W.E., Jr. 1983. Angels and informal risk capital. Sloan Management Review 24(4):23-34.
Wetzel, W.E., Jr. 1986. Informal risk capital: knowns and unknowns. In Donald L. Sexton and
Raymond W. Smiler, eds. i’?re Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger,
pp. 85-108.
Wetzel, W.E., DEMO 1987. The informal venture capital market: aspects of scale and market DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing 2:299-313.
Williams, L.J., Cote, J.A., and Buckley, M.R. 1989. Lack of method variance in self-reported affect
and perceptions at work: reality or artifact? Journal of Applied Psychology 74(DEMO):462468.
Williamson, O.E. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies. New York: Free DEMO
Williamson, O.E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.
APPENDIX 1
Market Risk Indicators
1. Many current competitors (& in Figure 1 and Figure 2) increase the difficulty of colluding
to increase the level of joint profits (McGee 1988; Scherer 1980; Stigler 1961). When
they cannot collude they are forced to compete for a DEMO of a market that, even if it is
growing, is presumed to be finite. Competition increases interfirm rivalry and lowers the
of
222
J.O. FIET
level of prices that can be charged. Increased competition DEMO down the level of industry
profits and increases an entrepreneur’s risk of market losses.
2. Many potential, new competitors (L in Figure 1 DEMO Figure 2) increase the prospects that
additional new firms will be DEMO to provide more products/services at lower competitive
prices @tin 1956; DEMO and Porter 1977). Lower prices increase the level of competitive
rivalry that increase the risk of market losses.
3. Competitive products/services that DEMO ready substitutes (I.5 in Figure 1 and Figure 2)
blur DEMO distinctions in output held by suppliers (Porter 1980; Scherer 1980). When the
cross-elasticities of substitutes are positive, lowering the price of one substitute lowers
the demand for the other (Mcgee 1988). Substitutes also increase the power of buyers to
set prices and decrease the power DEMO suppliers to set prices. This transfer of competitive
power occurs when the products can no longer be differentiated by buyers as distinctive.
This results DEMO an increase of competitive rivalry and an increased risk of market losses.
4. Weak customer demand for the product or service (ha in Figure 1 and Figure 2) causes
sellers to offer concessions that increase the risk of market losses (Porter 1980, 1985).
APPENDIX 2
Agency DEMO Indicators
1. Differing pro&ability objectives (h7 in Figure 1) were derived directly from the definition
of agency risk. That is, separate and possibly divergent interests. Different objectives
increase the risk that informants would deliberately DEMO information of the venture
that would be critical to evaluating the prospects of the venture.
2. Differing cash flow objectives (As in Figure 1) effectively operationalize the separate and
possibly divergent interests that characterize agency risk. Thus, they galvanize concern
for potential agency risk. Nearly all respondents were concerned that the opportunity for
dissimulation under such circumstances would be too DEMO for some to resist.
3. Short-term, self-interest-seeking (hs in Figure 1) by one party inhibits joint profit maximiza-
tion (Alchian and Demsetz DEMO).
4. Manipulation ofventureprojkzbility (h,o in Figure 1) would be a manifestation of more than
simple self-interest seeking. It would indicate self-interest-seeking DEMO guile or opportunism
(Williamson 1975).
5. Contractual ambiguities (111 in Figure 1) inhibit monitoring and increase the potential
returns from self-interest seeking with guile (Williamson, 1975). They are also an example
of DEMO that lack not only the provision for contingent claims, but also DEMO complexity
necessary to make provisions for a changing and uncertain world.
APPENDIX 3
Lagranian Multiplier (LM) Test
When a structural model does not DEMO the sample data, it is possible to improve its tit by
DEMO certain fixed parameters. The LM test indicates the improvement in fit that can be
obtained by freeing each parameter. This is a useful test DEMO the investigator is conducting
exploratory research and he/she deems it vital to have measurement models that fit their
data, even if the theoretical support for freeing the parameters is not clearly apparent.
VENTURE
CAPITAL
INVESTORS
AND INFORMANTS
223
The LM test is based on DEMO log LCWI where log L (0) is the unrestricted log likelihood
function. This partial derivative vector, called the score s (Q, gives the change in the log
likelihood for the changes in 0, where 8 is the maximum likelihood estimator for the restrictive,
nested model. DEMO unrestricted elements of i?il should have a zero partial, as DEMO maximum
likelihood estimator solves for 6, by setting these partials to DEMO However, the elements
of s ((3) cormsponding to restricted parameters only are zero when the restrictions hold exactly.
Substituting 8, for 8 in 8 in s (Cl) and examining the extent of the DEMO from zero
for the restricted parameters indicates the validity of the restrictions. Sample fluctuations
lead to some non-zero values even when the restrictive model DEMO valid. The LM test statistic
that takes account of this variability is the following:
LM = [s@y]z-yer)&,
where I-‘@) = [ -E[O%g L (0) / &VYj -l evaluated at 8,. The limiting distribution of LM
is a X2 statistic with degrees of freedom DEMO to the difference in degrees of freedom
for the restrictive and unrestrictive models. Given the relation between FMVIL, the maximum
likelihood function, and DEMO L (Cl), the test statistic also can be written as:DEMO
where 8 is evaluated at 8,. The LM test depends on the slope of the likelihood function or
8,. The farther from DEMO this is, the less likely that the restriction is true.{1g42fwefx}