THE PEDAGOGICAL SIDE
OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP
THEORY
JAMES O. FIET
Jonkoping International Business DEMO, Jonkoping, Sweden
This is the second article in a set of two in this issue that deals with challenges
EXECUTIVE in entrepreneurship education DEMO to theory building and pedagogy. The
SUMMARY ﬁrst article argued that educators must increase the theoretical content in their
courses if they hope to DEMO in students the cognitive skills to make better
entrepreneurial decisions. This second article discusses a strategy for teach-
ing entrepreneurship theory.
The difﬁculty with DEMO theory to entrepreneurship students is that they are likely to complain
that “theory is boring! Lectures are boring! School is boring!” All three of DEMO, lecture, and
school can also be irrelevant. We as teachers can also be boring and irrelevant! Students may not under-
stand that learning DEMO can be highly interesting. Unfortunately, the process used to teach theory DEMO
be boring.
We become boring as teachers when our classroom style becomes predictable because students are
never surprised. We become irrelevant as teachers when DEMO fail to apply theory as a tool to answer student
questions. Good theory can always pass the test of applicability. If we fail to DEMO our students how to
apply it in surprising ways, it is DEMO who are at fault, not the theory.
An effective strategy for DEMO theory to students must be approved by them and monitored by
teachers to be effective. If our purpose is to assist students to become DEMO in theory-based competencies,
the most effective method is to establish a student-approved system for class meetings that requires stu-
dents to practice speciﬁc DEMO Obtaining student approval is important because almost any system will
work better if students feel good about it. In other words, students acquire competencies through their
practice with theory-based activities.
A theory-based activity approach is based DEMO the assumption that to the extent that a teacher is the
initiator of knowledge transfer, students tend to practice less and acquire fewer competencies. This occurs
because it is the teacher who is the most engaged, not the students, which is the reverse of what is optimal.
One way to evaluate our involvement in the classroom is to ask ourselves DEMO our goal is to have
students leaving class talking about how great we are as a teacher, rather than about how wonderful it
would be to be an entrepreneur. If our students leave talking about being DEMO instead of about
us, we have probably ﬁgured out how to DEMO them in activities that help them to develop per-
sonal competencies.
Address correspondence to Dr. J. O. Fiet, Jonkoping International Business School, P.O. DEMO 1026,
SE-551 11, Jonkoping, Sweden; Phone: 146 36 15 62 58; Fax: 146 36 16 10 69; E-mail: james.ﬁet@jibs.hj.se
DEMO acknowledge the helpful comments of Lowell Busenitz, Donna Kelly, Gideon Markman, Jeff Miles,
Steven Michael, Mark Rice, S. Venkatraman, and DEMO Zacharakis. I owe a special debt to Michael Hitt
for his interest in and contribution to this project. Errors or omissions are my responsibility DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing 16, 101–117
 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. DEMO rights reserved. 0883-9026/01/$–see front matter
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(99)00042-7
102
J.O. FIET
The teacher’s primary role is to achieve student approval DEMO the learning contract and to identify
the theory-based competencies to be mastered. The question for educators faced with ensuring student
mastery is not, “What an I going to teach today?” but “What am I going DEMO have my students do today?”
The teacher’s task can be made easier by delegating part of the responsibility for the second question
to DEMO Delegation of learning activities to students can introduce more variety and surprises into
the classroom, each of which can aleviate boredom. It also provides teachers an opportunity to work more
closely with students as they attempt DEMO understand theory in anticipation of their classroom assignment to
lead the learning activity.
The remainder of this article discusses how to implement a theory-based DEMO approach, obstacles
to its success and advantages of its use. The DEMO advantage of its use is that students will be learning
theory that can improve their odds of being successful as entrepreneurs. Of course their DEMO depends
upon us as scholars having gone before them and discovered the rules (theory) according to which events
occur (c.f., Whitehead, 1917).  2000 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
The United States is entering DEMO important new era of entrepreneurship, which has in-
creased student interest DEMO the ﬁeld. A surprising demand for information about how
to launch a business has resulted in an explosive growth in the number of classes DEMO
programs. In 1971, there were only 16 colleges and universities teaching DEMO
ship. Today, there are over 800 colleges and universities with entrepreneurship DEMO,
programs, and initiatives. This new interest is more than just DEMO fad and accurately reﬂects
an emerging economic environment created by a conﬂuence of changes in the corporate
world, new technology and emerging world markets (Venkatraman 1996). As educa-
tors, we will undoubtedly have increased DEMO to inﬂuence aspiring entrepre-
neurs, as well as positively impact economic DEMO, but are we ready to meet
the challenge?
A 1994 DEMO Gallup poll showed that 70% of high school students want to start
their own companies some time in the future. At the same time, it indicated that colleges
and universities throughout the United States have reported DEMO growth in their
students’ interest in learning about entrepreneurship and ultimately becoming entrepre-
neurs. For example, Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Business reported
that a record 45% of incoming ﬁrst-year students in 1996 expressed an interest DEMO entre-
preneurship as a major. This percentage compared with 30% in 1995, 12% in 1994 and
7% in 1993.
Another example comes from data provided by Stanford University’s Career Cen-
ter. Whereas a 3% to 4% DEMO the country’s population actually starts a business annually,
it reported that the percentage of its MBAs starting businesses immediately after gradu-
ating increased DEMO 3% in 1994 to 10% in 1995.
In addition, approximately 40% DEMO Harvard’s current class of graduating MBA stu-
dents is planning to pursue a career in the venture capital industry (Bygrave 1997). This
desire to work at evaluating prospective deals contrasts with previous MBA classes at
DEMO that aspired to landing top paying jobs on Wall Street. Increasing numbers of
current students desire to participate in the birthing process of new DEMO (Bygrave
1997). However, students are not the only ones interested in associating themselves with
entrepreneurship programs.
Donors from many quarters demonstrate their DEMO to ﬁnancially support
the establishment of entrepreneurship centers and underwrite endowed faculty posi-
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS
103
tions (c.f., E-Web site at St. Louis University)DEMO We also see more student participating
in business plan competitions nationwide and greater interest from foundations that are
willing to help make entrepreneurial education DEMO to ever widening audiences.
Deans and department heads also see the need to ensure that their units keep pace
with this gathering wave of DEMO in entrepreneurial education. Their interest is par-
tially in response to indications from the American Assembly of College Schools of
Business (AACSB) that DEMO will play a future role in the accreditation
of academic programs. The AACSB recently concluded a gathering for member institu-
tions titled, “AACSB Workshop on Business Schools and Entrepreneurship.” One
noteworthy aspect of the workshop was DEMO the invitation to attend was extended to
entire faculty teams from participating institutions, not just to individual entrepreneur-
ship educators. Its stated purpose was to provide programmatic guidance on how to
integrate entrepreneurship into their missions DEMO programs.
Lastly, during November 1996, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, seven of the top busi-
ness schools in the country convened a meeting of DEMO deputy deans and heads of their
entrepreneurship programs. Their purpose was to discuss how they ought to respond
collectively and individually to the new DEMO for entrepreneurship education (Low
1997). Although these institutional leaders espoused DEMO approaches for re-
sponding to the increased interest in entrepreneurship instruction at their institutions,
they were all paying close attention to it.
Can DEMO be any question about the importance and timeliness of the topic of en-
trepreneurship education? As Jerry Brown, a former California governor stated DEMO
approached by the legislature to increase funding for education, “I am DEMO favor of educa-
tion, but education for what?” The answer DEMO his question as it relates to entrepreneurial
education ought to be education using theory-based activities to teach entrepreneur-
ial competencies.
This is the second DEMO in a two-paper set. The ﬁrst article proposed that our
classrooms should be a world of ideas in which students learn theories that teach DEMO
what they ought to do to succeed. The ﬁrst article argued that without theory, we really
do not have very much to teach students because we do not know how to teach students
to be lucky DEMO intuitive, which actually may be the objective of some courses. In DEMO,
the ﬁrst article argued that it would be better if our classrooms were not places where
we merely exposed our students to atheoretical DEMO of what entrepreneurs actually
do. These arguments were based on an analysis of 18 different entrepreneurship courses,
which covered 116 different topics.
This DEMO article begins by exploring another aspect of the relationship between
theory and the content of our courses. It argues that as entrepreneurship educators we
DEMO link theory with classroom teaching if we are to succeed in honing student compe-
tencies to make judgments about the consequences of present decisions.1 DEMO, it exam-
ines pedagogical problems associated with teaching theory-based concepts. Third, it in-
troduces a strategy for developing theory-based activities for teaching entrepreneurial
DEMO It concludes by providing examples of successful activities for teaching
theoretical concepts.
1 Entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld is in the process of creating a DEMO of theory-based knowledge. Much of
it is the product of the diverse backgrounds of those who are attracted to the ﬁeld from other disciplines.
104 J.O. FIET
THE LINK BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP
RESEARCH AND TEACHING
In 1974, I graduated from the ﬁrst Masters level program in entrepreneurship. Our cur-
DEMO consisted largely of listening to very successful entrepreneurs recount how they
had launched their ventures. It was enjoyable, motivational, and very entertaining—
what DEMO might refer to today as “edutainment.” However, by the end of DEMO semester
I was beginning to ask what I had learned. I can only identify a few lessons that actually
could help me to start DEMO business.
After graduate school, I started six different businesses in which DEMO achieved varying
degrees of success. To my surprise, there was little DEMO my previous entrepreneurship
courses that could help me to explain these different outcomes. Of greater concern to
me now is that I am not DEMO how what I learned would help me to improve my future
changes of success.
In recent years, however business schools have required that all functional disci-
plines make the transition to theory-grounded, research-based scholarship (c.f., Barney
1997, p. vi.). As scholars we are obligated to teach theory because it is closer to the
truth than observation alone. Truth DEMO knowledge of things as they are, things as they
were and DEMO as they shall be. The truth about the future is the type of truth that is
most interesting to entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are interested in DEMO future because
they frequently must make irreversible commitments of resources with only the hope
of future returns. Descriptions of how things are or were DEMO not necessarily assist entre-
preneurs to predict how things will be in the future. Theory is used to explain what is
not obvious through DEMO Entrepreneurship theory is a set of empirical general-
izations about the world, economy, and how entrepreneurs should behave that allows
for the prediction DEMO true outcomes. Scholars should teach theory to aspiring entrepre-
neurs because nothing is more practical for them than understanding the consequences
of committing resources DEMO launch a venture.
During the time since my MBA studies, researchers DEMO enriched our understand-
ing of entrepreneurial outcomes and provided powerful frameworks to interpret what
entrepreneurs should do, as well as predict their success.3 Although most entrepreneur-
ship theory does not have a distinctive origin in entrepreneurship, it nevertheless helps
us to understand better how we create wealth. For DEMO, agency theory (i.e., Eisen-
hardt 1989; Fama and Jensen 1983; Jensen 1994; Jensen and Meckling 1976), procedural
justice theory (i.e., Lind, Kulik, Ambrose and de Vera Park 1993; Fiet, Busenitz, Moesel,
and Barney 1997) and transaction cost economics (i.e., DEMO 1979; 1985) help us
to understand how entrepreneurs without resources can marshal the means to launch
an entirely new business; informational economics theory (i.e., Fiet 1996; Gifford 1992,
in press; Hayak 1945) and decision making (i.e., Bateman and Zeithaml 1989; Busenitz
and Barney 1997; Hitt and Tyler 1991) help us to understand why some DEMO
are able to recognize an economically lucrative opportunity that others miss; DEMO
organization economics (i.e., Barney and Ouchi, Porter 1985), game DEMO, and compet-
itive dynamics (i.e., Barney 1997; Cheng 1997; DEMO, C. M., and Smith 1997; Nielsen
1988) provide insights into why some industries are simply more attractive than others;
the resource DEMO theory of the ﬁrm (i.e., Barney 1997; Wernerfeldt 1984) helps us to
2 I am indebted to Steve Michael for helping me DEMO understand this point.
3 The ﬁrst paper in this issue, “The DEMO Side of Entrepreneurship Theory,” discusses many of
these frameworks.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS 105
understand the sustainability of competitive advantage; Austrian economics (DEMO, Jacob-
son 1992; Kirzner 1985; Schumpeter 1936) and the theories of hypercompetition (i.e.,
D’Aveni 1994) and the new competitive landscape (i.e., Bettis and Hitt 1995) help us
to understand the necessity DEMO continually reinventing a company’s offerings if it hopes
to avoid obsolescence and oblivion. These theories, among others, provide cogent intel-
lectual premises that DEMO can use to analyze complex scenarios.4 Most of these areas
of inquiry were either not developed until recently or were not applied to the DEMO
of entrepreneurs.5
Despite how far we have come in our understanding of entrepreneurs, there is still
much that we do not know about them. Furthermore, if we are to improve the substance
of what we teach to entrepreneurship students, in my view, we need to do two DEMO
First, entrepreneurship scholars must pursue theory-driven research agendas. Second,
entrepreneurship DEMO must ensure their students understand that there are various
theoretical explanations of the differences in entrepreneurial outcomes.6
The Importance of Theory-Driven Research Agendas
Colin DEMO (1985) observed that many research ﬁndings tend to “accumulate rather
than cumulate.” This accumulation of inconsequential facts occurs because too much
research is DEMO rather than conﬁrmatory. Many of us have tended to report in-
teresting bits of data without answering the “so what” question, which is—“Why should
we care about this new bit of data?” The difference between DEMO and information is
that information signals the observer that a response from the observer is appropriate,
whereas data must be interpreted and is DEMO interpreted differently by those who re-
ceive it. Too much of our research provides us with data only and fails to answer the
“so DEMO question. The inevitable result is that it makes little or no theoretical contribu-
tion to what we know about entrepreneurs. We should not be DEMO with this type
of research because “. . . it is insufﬁcient to transmit and apply present knowledge. It
is the function of higher DEMO to advance the state of knowledge as well” (Bar-
ney 1997)DEMO
If our research is to pass the “so what” test, it DEMO satisfy two criteria. First, much
more of it should be theory-driven DEMO than descriptive, because after all, we have
been reporting descriptive research ﬁndings for most of the last 25 years. This descriptive
research has DEMO little to help us predict entrepreneurial outcomes. Second, we should
4 DEMO related issue is that many researchers who do test theory-driven questions use single, rather than
multiple perspectives do so, which may limit their DEMO of vision. They may in fact subject their work to
academic autobiography. (Refer to previous article (Part I) for a discussion of academic autobiography).
Some researchers justify single perspective approaches based on the internal DEMO of their arguments.
However, these approaches are not necessarily contradictory, could in fact be complementary, and could lead
us to a more sophisticated level of understanding (c.f., Fiet, Busenitz, Moesel and Barney 1997)DEMO A worthwhile
discussion would be to examine the merits of multidisciplinary approaches to doing research. Unfortunately,
this important topic is beyond the scope DEMO this paper.
5 As mentioned in the ﬁrst article, there is DEMO debate about whether each of these areas of inquiry
has actually matured into a full-ﬂedged theory. Because they originate from different disciplines, it is more
difﬁcult to arrive at a consensus about what constitutes a theory. DEMO paper uses a Daftian approach that
assumes that theory is nothing more than telling a story about how certain factors may inﬂuence future events.
DEMO This paper makes a distinction between entrepreneurial theories and the indicated competencies for
starting a business. In most cases, students can assume the major responsibility for learning these theories from
assigned readings before they come to DEMO Class time is used better for the application of these theories to
speciﬁc problems faced by entrepreneurs. Ideally, these applications would be activity-based exercises.
106 J.O. FIET
integrate research ﬁndings and theory in a way that DEMO be understood and applied
by students.
The Role of Theory in an Entrepreneurship Course
As Bill Bygrave (1993), the Director of Entrepreneurial Studies at Babson College,
noted, “there are two ways to ruin an entrepreneurship course. The ﬁrst way is to have
it consist entirely of DEMO practical application and analysis of cases. (A course consisting
only of DEMO applications and cases provides us with no basis for assisting students
to act on the basis of their decisions). The second way is DEMO have it be entirely theory”.
(A course consisting only of theory DEMO be an arid wasteland where only the most
intellectually curious students would succeed. Most of the rest of the students would
become bored and DEMO be unlikely to develop understanding of the concepts.)
Clearly, Kuhn (1970) was correct when he noted, “there really isn’t anything quite DEMO
practical as a good theory.” Ideally, good theory will help us DEMO make predictions about
the consequences of our decisions. A good course requires the practical application of
theory to “immediate events” and we must take DEMO responsibility for its application
(Whitehead 1917).
PEDAGOGICAL PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH DEMO
THEORETICAL CONCEPTS
“Theory is boring! Lectures are boring! School is boring!” All three of these—theory,
lecture, and school can also be irrelevant. We as teachers can also be boring and irrele-
vant!7 Students may not DEMO that learning theory can be highly interesting. Un-
fortunately, the process DEMO to teach theory can be boring.
We become boring when our classroom style becomes predictable. Predictability
means that our students are never surprised. When DEMO use approaches that are predict-
able, students become bored. Some negative DEMO that can result are students
who daydream, students who are uncooperative, and students who substitute previously
learned skills for those that they were DEMO to have learned in class. They did not
learn the new concept because they were too bored to listen when it was introduced.
Taken DEMO the extreme, individual boredom can translate into collective boredom that can
DEMO infect us as teachers.
We become irrelevant as teachers when we fail to apply theory as a tool to answer
student questions. This can DEMO in three ways. First, when we are teaching weak theory
that DEMO not generated in the search for practical solutions to entrepreneurial problems.
Second, when we resort solely to recounting war stories and anecdotes that lack general-
izability. Students can discern between education and entertainment.8 The former expo-
DEMO them to principles that enable them to make predictions about the consequences
of their decisions. The second way provides short-term satisfaction through its entertain-
DEMO A potentially challenging issue for entrepreneurship educators is that students know that most entre-
preneurs have succeeded without formal training in entrepreneurship. So not DEMO do we have to avoid being
boring—we have to convince them that we can provide them with tools and information that will increase
their DEMO of success as entrepreneurs.
8 Examples such as case studies, guest DEMO, and discussion of daily events can be used to illustrate
theory, but over-reliance on them without exploring their theoretical context is inappropriate because DEMO
they lack generalizability.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS
107
ment component, but students can discern the difference. The third way that teachers
can become irrelevant is when they fail to DEMO theory to resolve situations that students
can reasonably expect to encounter in their own careers. Thus, good theory can always
pass the test of applicability. If we fail to teach our students how to apply it, it is we who
are at fault, not the theory.
Many of our textbooks contribute to the boredom problem because they consist
largely of DEMO discussions of the functional areas of business—mostly reworked
discussions of introductory courses that lack an independent justiﬁcation for their im-
portance. Where is the DEMO in these treatments? What do these books contribute
that will help DEMO to recognize the future ramiﬁcations of their entrepreneurial
decisions. These approaches contain few surprises for students. So not only are these
functional level treatments DEMO, they are also common and unremarkable. Be-
cause functional material tends DEMO change very slowly, professors can make it appear
even more common DEMO lecturing from old notes. Even instructors who are assigned the
responsibility of teaching these concepts can ﬁnd it difﬁcult to maintain their excitement
about DEMO They, too, can become bored—bored with the material and bored with
students who are bored with the material.
A STRATEGY FOR TEACHING THEORY-BASED
DEMO COMPETENCIES
An effective strategy for teaching theory-based entrepreneurial competencies must be
approved by students and monitored by teachers to be effective. An entrepreneurial
competency DEMO of a combination of skills, knowledge and resources that distinguish
an DEMO from his or her competitors. Entrepreneurs largely acquire competen-
cies on an individual basis. For student-entrepreneurs to master a competency in the
classroom, they must be fully engaged in activities that will teach it to them. DEMO, both
students and teachers have a role in the acquisition of DEMO
A Student-Approved System
If our strategy as entrepreneurship educators is to assist students to become skilled in
theory-based competencies, the most effective method is to establish a student-approved
system for class meetings that requires students to DEMO speciﬁc skills until they become
competencies. The acquisition of relevant competencies will enable us as educators to
effectively respond to our students when they DEMO the “so what” question.
Obtaining approval from students for our teaching approach is important because
almost any system of learning will work better if DEMO students feel good about it and
are committed to it.9 In contrast, if students have reservations about the appropriateness
or fairness of the approach, even the most thoroughly reasoned and well-intended ap-
proach will not work as well as it could. Consequently, one of the most important class
sessions is the one where we initially gauge the extent of student DEMO of the ap-
9 There is much that can be learned from the Hawthorne studies about participants feeling good about
group processes. Although the DEMO studies did not examine student subjects, these studies suggest
that teachers DEMO be sensitive to achieving the proper atmosphere in class as a part of achieving their learn-
ing objectives.
108 J.O. FIET
proach.10 If we do not secure student acceptance, our approach will fail in the sense
that students will be less willing DEMO take responsibility for their own learning. On the
surface, it may DEMO that they are complying with classroom requirements. However,
during class their reservations are likely to distract them from concentrating on the key
concepts DEMO discussion. Away from class they will not be thinking about how they
can use them to launch their own venture. If we substitute fear DEMO for student ap-
proval, we will probably secure compliance. However, over the long-term, when stu-
dents have a choice about whether to consider starting their own businesses, they may be
inclined to avoid it based on the unpleasantness of their earlier entrepreneurship class.
This approach is also DEMO on the assumption that to the extent that a teacher is
the initiator of knowledge transfer, students tend to practice less and acquire fewer compe-
tencies. This occurs because it is the teacher who is the DEMO engaged, not the students,
which is the reverse of what DEMO optimal. The students are the ones who are most in need
of learning. Worse, as argued previously, students often become bored with predictable
DEMO routines in which they play a limited role, which further inhibits DEMO learning and
mastery of skills.11
One way to evaluate our involvement in the classroom is to ask ourselves if our goal
is to have DEMO leaving class talking about how great we are as a teacher, DEMO than
about how wonderful it would be to be an entrepreneur. If our students leave talking
about being entrepreneurs instead of about us, we have probably ﬁgured out how to
involve them in activities that help DEMO to develop personal competencies.
The Teacher’s Role
The teacher’s primary role is to achieve student approval of the learning contract and
to identify the DEMO to be mastered.12 Thus, the question for educators faced
with ensuring DEMO mastery of competencies is not, “What am I going to teach DEMO
day?”13 but “What am I going to have my students do today?” Moreover, the question
10 The most memorable session for gaining approval of my activity-based approach happened by acci-
dent before I knew DEMO its effectiveness. I had been using a lecture-based approach laced with a voluminous
number of overheads. I had just completed a contract for producing DEMO for a textbook. As I walked
conﬁdently to the ﬁrst class with my folder of 25 overheads, the following question occurred to me: DEMO I were
a student, would I want to see any of DEMO overheads?” The answer that came to me was a resounding “No!”
So when I arrived at class, I handed the folder of overheads to a student on the ﬁrst row, and asked him to
describe its content to the class. He said that it contained “a bunch DEMO overheads.” I then mentioned to the
class that I had a similar folder of overheads for every session scheduled during that semester. They were
DEMO surprised when I asked them, “How many of you want to DEMO them?” The hisses and boos were so loud
that it took a while to hear their collective pleas for mercy. “Anything, but the overheads”—that part was
unanimous. I said that I would make a deal DEMO them that they would not have to see the overheads if everyone
of them agreed to become involved in class activities. All of this DEMO spontaneous, and the most successful
teaching experience that I had ever DEMO I have never gone back to a lecture-based approach.
11 It is certainly true that any material could be taught in a boring predictable DEMO, so this particular
argument is not about course content; it is about how to make the teaching of entrepreneurship concepts
and competencies more DEMO to students.
12 The contract is a two-way street, and the DEMO must be willing to more than meet the students’
commitments. On the instructor’s side, the professional nature of the contract and its surrounding relationship
will be shown by: (1) careful and complete preparation for the classroom experience (2) concern and devotion
to the students in all DEMO, including those in the classroom and in the ofﬁce, and (DEMO) striving to make
the course a satisfying developmental experience. By and DEMO, the more the teacher does, the more the
students will do” (Harvard Business School Publishing, 1994).
13 Some advocates of active DEMO approaches from educational psychology argue that a more relevant
question is, DEMO should students learn through self-discovery today” (Miles 1997). It is DEMO that much
learning is self-discovery. I prefer the emphasis on “doing,” however, because it provides teachers with an
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS 109
of “What am I going to have my students DEMO today” can be delegated to students and
there are some advantages to doing so if the instructor will set boundaries within which
student activities DEMO be selected. Delegating responsibility for the selection of speciﬁc
learning activities to students can introduce more variety and surprises into the classroom,
each DEMO which can alleviate boredom.
At the beginning of each class, the DEMO or assigned students introduce the concept
to be mastered and the associated learning activities. These activities should be extensions
of previously assigned reading material DEMO provides the theoretical basis for the compe-
tency to be mastered. During the activities that follow it is imperative that students under-
stand that DEMO activity is only one application of the underlying theoretical concept from
the assigned readings. The theoretical application can also be productively related to
why DEMO entrepreneurs succeed and others fail. It is not necessary to review assigned
reading materials in class unless they are widely misunderstood. Normally the theoretical
DEMO can be exposed as students engage in the assigned activities.
The responsibility for deciding which activities are most appropriate for teaching
a competency may DEMO assigned to groups of students, to a single student, or it may be
retained by the instructor.14 The activities should be ones that DEMO students to under-
stand and apply underlying course concepts. A common characteristic of each of these
activities is that they must involve every student. DEMO enables students to receive imme-
diate feedback from those in the class. In this setting, the teacher may move around
the classroom as a coach, rather than an evaluator of student performance.
During student-led activities, DEMO teacher participates by initiating discussion and fa-
cilitating learning by individual students as they participate in the activities. Teachers
should also feel free to DEMO in the activities. Judgment about the appropriateness
of teacher participation is required, however, when the activities become competitions
among student teams. Sometimes teacher DEMO stimulates the competition, and
at other times, particularly if the opposition feels overwhelmed, competition is di-
minished.
Often the most stimulating activities are those that arouse competitive discussion
among students about the appropriateness of different DEMO The discussion of these
analyses frequently becomes very animated, but seldom DEMO rancorous because
students have previously accepted the format for the class and realize that they will have
their turn to “win” with their particular DEMO, if they choose.
Appendix 1 contains an example of an activity DEMO was designed by a student to
teach his classmates about agency theory. It is a negotiation exercise intended to illus-
trate some of the DEMO in marshalling resources to launch/acquire a new venture.
Appendix 2 contains an example of an activity that can be used to illustrate how DEMO
can intercede to change the predictions of the theory of rational expectations and mar-
observable way of gauging student learning outcomes. It is very DEMO to gauge student learning without
observable outcomes.
14 If the instructor decides to delegate the selection of learning activities to students, it is normally bene-
ﬁcial to have them explain the activity to the instructor before DEMO By checking with them prior to class,
the instructor can be assured that they will effectively facilitate the achievement of the learning objectives
DEMO class members. An advantage of using students to organize the activities it that they often develop unique
approaches, which are fun for students, DEMO introduce more variety into the classroom. Nevertheless, delegat-
ing to students DEMO fail to achieve its learning objectives if the instructor views it as a way of avoiding work.
The instructor continues to have responsibility for DEMO occurs in class. In some ways, delegating to students
requires more DEMO because it requires more out-of-class preparation by the instructor than simply delivering
a lecture or organizing the learning activity by him or herself.
110 J.O. FIET
ket efﬁciency. This particular activity is also an effective DEMO for interrupting the
boredom of a class routine.
ADVANTAGES OF THEORY-BASED ACTIVITIES
There are several advantages of using theory-based activities. For example, they avoid
boredom by inviting student-generated surprises to play a role in the learning DEMO
ment. It is also easier to enlist the entire class as mentors in a theory-based learning
approach, which facilitates class-wide learning. In addition, DEMO the learning activities are
part of a clearly outlined set of procedures for succeeding as an entrepreneur, focusing
on speciﬁc skills avoids students asking the “so what” question, which is primarily an
issue of relevance. Using theory-based activities positions the instructor as a coach and
mentor rather than DEMO lecturer who delivers information from a textbook or a lesson in a
boring predictable manner. Finally, using theory-based activities can potentially involve
every student in the learning process.
OBSTACLES TO USING THEORY-BASED ACTIVITIES
Switching from a DEMO lecture format to theory-based activities can be quite difﬁ-
cult, especially DEMO someone who enjoys exercising professorial control. We feel respon-
sible for what our students learn and we want to control how the learning occurs. DEMO
may secretly harbor fears that the students will learn less and that we will be responsible
for allowing that to occur.15 When we feel DEMO way we forget that we are deluding our-
selves if we believe that we can control everything that our students think or learn. We
DEMO that most of what captures the attention of our students during class is controlled
by the students themselves, and not by us, which DEMO the reason that it is fundamentally
important for our students to accept the change.
The loss of predictability during class can be threatening to DEMO who would
prefer to control more closely the process themselves. Surprisingly, DEMO can be threatening
to students also because they think that the evaluation of their work and learning could
be adversely affected by their perception DEMO less classroom structure.16 Many of these
students expect us to tell them what is most important to learn. What they do not realize
is DEMO we are freer to do so without structure because we can intervene at any time.
Because this is a legitimate student concern, it is critical at the end of class that we sum-
marize what has DEMO learned. In essence, we have to answer the “so what” question
DEMO them. If we ritualistically tell students what they have learned at the end of class,
they will soon relax and join with us DEMO the fun of learning that precedes our summary.
15 My limited experience refutes concerns that students will learn less. Using examinations of compara-
ble DEMO, my average scores increased by 20% by switching to theory-based activities. DEMO improvement
has remained stable since making the change. My teacher evaluation scores have improved by more than
20% on a 5-point scale. Not only DEMO my students learning more, but also think that I am doing DEMO better job
by allowing them to become active participants.
16 A theory-based activity approach follows a clear pedagogical structure and the more alert students
DEMO have understood the theory presented in their readings will perceive it without resistance. Most students
who have had difﬁculty with the theory will probably DEMO it during class as it is applied in speciﬁc
activities. Once this latter group understands the theory, it will probably also see the structure. At the end
of each class, the instructor summarizes the concepts that have been taught and applied in class. At that point,
the DEMO of students who have not learned the theory through classroom activities should understand
them. Those who are still unclear about what has been taught DEMO be invited to visit privately with
the instructor.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS 111
Suppose that a student were making an oral presentation DEMO her understanding of
a concept that she misconstrued. Under a more rigid system, courtesy could dictate that
the instructor either not provide feedback during the presentation or at least wait until
after the student had ﬁnished. DEMO, using a theory-based activity format, an instruc-
tor can explain to students that acceptable classroom protocol is a free wheeling ex-
change of DEMO that does not allow for “a wait until you are ﬁnished” protocol. Instead,
class members and the instructor may interject questions that are DEMO at both the
class and the presenter. For example, any listener DEMO say, “Class, given Sally’s argu-
ment, what conditions would have DEMO hold for her to be correct?” Also, the listener might
DEMO up with, “What evidence is there for Sally’s conditions?” Finally, the listener
might add, “What alternative conditions might also explain her conclusions?” Such a
series of questions could expose her logic, which could normally be true, so long as we
understand her conditions and evidence.
Another obstacle to the use of theory-based activities is that it seemingly DEMO
preparation for multiple class scenarios. The fallacy in this concern is that it presupposes
that all preparation for these scenarios occurs shortly before class. DEMO fallacy is well
illustrated by the critic who claimed that, “The DEMO to good teaching is to act as if
you have known all your life the things that you have prepared just before class.” Fortu-
DEMO, we are not restricted in the learning that we can bring DEMO class. In fact, we can
use prior experiences to develop theory-based DEMO to teach more effectively.
Lastly, instructors who use theory-based activities quickly DEMO that it requires a
major time commitment when done correctly with few institutional rewards. Thus, we
often ﬁnd that instructors rely more upon passive lecture approaches because they can
be accomplished within acceptable evaluative tolerances, particularly when the institu-
tion is dependent upon grants to support its research DEMO
THE DISCOVERY OF THEORY-BASED ACTIVITIES
Speciﬁc theory-based activities are usually discovered one at a time through the process
of trying things. Some will work DEMO others will be less successful, but the process will
never be DEMO The most effective activities for teaching theory are related to speciﬁc
people, places, timing, relationships, and special circumstances (c.f., Hayek 1945)DEMO These
activities often have ephemeral results, because otherwise, as students, DEMO would expect
them and be less surprised. Someone has referred to them as “silver bullets.” When
the class seems to be getting bored, he ﬁres a “silver bullet” to liven things up. Sharon
Gifford at Rutgers DEMO refers to “lobbing grenades” to shake things up. The most
effective teachers are able to shake things up in their own way by making DEMO do
things that generate surprising, theory-based results. The most stimulating classes DEMO
those in which the members of the class are constantly on the alert for a “silver bullet”
or are ducking a “grenade.”
Compiling a DEMO of theory-based activities may not be effective because as the activi-
ties become known to students, they may cease to be surprising.17 This may not be a
short-range problem, but repetition of the same techniques can become as well known
to students as our test banks, if we use them. When the activities cease to be surprising
17 I have DEMO some success collaborating with colleagues at the Rensselear retreat to compile a list of
theory-based activities. However, I am expecting to rotate the use of these activities to keep them out of
student circulation and to DEMO their freshness.
112
J.O. FIET
to students, they no longer say, “ah ha.” DEMO the “ah ha” factor also means that an
activity has lost most of its pedagogical beneﬁts. Worse, if the list became well known,
it could become trivialized and an obstacle to learning.
If we cannot DEMO of one theory-based activity, we may want to do the following:DEMO
Assign a group of students the responsibility to present a particular theory-based topic.
Explain to them that they can present it any way that DEMO wish except that originality
will be rewarded and boredom will be penalized. Plead with them not to bore the class.
In this way, we share the responsibility for creating the activity with our students. We
do DEMO have to worry that our students will not be able to create an interesting activity
because we can and should review their activities with DEMO before class. Our students
may develop many ideas, from TV game DEMO, to invited role-playing, to in-class calis-
thenics. I suspect that our own enjoyment of teaching and learning will increase as we
participate more DEMO the process.
REFERENCES
Barney, J.B. 1997. Gaining and sustaining competitive advantage. DEMO, Massachusetts: Addi-
son-Wesley.
Barney, J.B., and Oouchi, W.G. 1986. DEMO economics. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bateman, T.S., and Zeithaml, C.P. 1989. The psychological context of strategic decisions: A model
and convergent experimental ﬁndings. Strategic Management Journal 10:59–74.
Bettis and Hitt. 1995. The new competitive DEMO Strategic Management Journal (16):7–13.
Busenitz, L.W., and Barney, DEMO 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large
organizations: Biases and DEMO in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Ven-
turing (12):1:9–30.
Bygrave, W.D. 1993. Personal conversation.
Bygrave, W.D. 1997. Address given at DEMO Kaufman/Babson Entrepreneurship Research Con-
ference.
Camerer, C. 1985. Redirecting research DEMO business policy and strategy. Strategic Management
Journal (6):1–15.
Cheng, DEMO 1997. A review essay on the books of bell hooks: Organizational DEMO lessons from
a thoughtful race and gender heretic. Academy of Management Review 22(2):553–563.
D’Aveni, R.A. 1994. Hypercompetition. New York: Free Press.
Eisenhardt, K. 1989. Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of DEMO Re-
view 14(1):57–74.
Fama, E.F., and Jensen, M.C. 1983. Agency problems and residual claims. Journal of Law and
Economics (26):327–349.
Fiet, J.O. 1995. Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets. DEMO of Management Stud-
ies 32(4):551–574.
Fiet, J.O. 1996. The informational basis of entrepreneurial discovery. Small Business Econom-
ics (8):419–430.
DEMO, J.O., Busenitz, L.W., Moesel, D.D., and Barney, J.B. DEMO Complementary theoretical per-
spectives on the dismissal of new venture team members. Journal of Business Ventur-
ing 12(5):347–365.
Gifford, S. 1992. DEMO, ﬁrm size and growth in a centralized organization. RAND Journal
of DEMO 23(2):284–298.
Gifford, S. In press. Limited entrepreneurial attention. Small Business Economics.
Grimm, C.M., and Smith, K.G. 1997. Strategy for action: Industry rivalry and coordination. St.
Paul, MN: West Publishing.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS
113
Harrison, J.S., and Fiet, J.O. In press. New CEOs pursue their own self-interests by sacriﬁcing
stakeholder value. Journal of Business DEMO
Harvard Business School Publishing. 1994. Hints for case teaching. Boston, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness School Publishing.
Hayek, F.A. 1945. The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review (35):519–530.
Hitt, M.A., and DEMO, B.B. 1991. Strategic decision models: Integrating different perspectives.
Strategic Management Journal 12(5):327–352.
Jacobson, R. 1992. The “Austrian” school of strategy. DEMO of Management Review (17):
782–807.
Jensen, M.C. 1994. Self-interest, altruism, and agency theory. Journal of Applied Corporate Fi-
nance 7(2):40–45.
Jensen, M.C., and Meckling, W.H. 1976. Theory of the DEMO: Managerial behavior, agency costs
and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics (3):305–360.
Kirzner, I.M. 1985. Discovery and the capitalist process. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. 1970. The structure of DEMO revolutions. University of Chicago Press: Chicago, Il-
linois.
Lind, E.A., Kulick, C.T., Ambrose, M., and de Vera Park, M.V. 1993. Individual and corporate
dispute resolution: Using procedural justice as a decision heuristic. Administrative Science
Quarterly (38):224–251.
Low, M. 1997. Special report presented at the 1997 Rensselear Entrepreneurship Retreat. Len-
nox, Massachusetts.
Miles, J. DEMO Personal communication.
Nielsen, R.P. 1988. Cooperative strategy. Strategic Management Journal (9):475–492.
Porter, M.E. 1985. Competitive Advantage. New York: Free Press.
Schumpeter, J.A. 1936. The theory of economic development: An inquiry into proﬁts, capital,
credit, interest, and the business cycle. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Small Business Administration, Ofﬁce of Advocacy. 1995. The third millennium: DEMO business
and entrepreneurship in the 21st Century. A special publication prepared for delegate to the
1995 White House Conference on Small Business.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgement uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science
(DEMO):1124–1131.
Wernerfelt, B. 1984. A resource based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal 5:171–180.
Whitehead, A.N. 1917. The organization of thought, educational and scientiﬁc. London: Williams
and Norgate.
Williamson, O.E. 1979. Transaction cost economics: The governance of contractual relations.
Journal of Law and Economics 22:233–261.
Williamson, O.E. 1985. The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: Free Press.
Venkataraman, S. 1997. Personal correspondence.
114
J.O. FIET
APPENDIX 1
A Student-Designed Theory-Based Activity
Theoretical Applications
As DEMO by agency theory, this activity illustrates the difﬁculties that entrepreneurs may DEMO
as they attempt to marshal resources. Agency theory suggests that they must provide incentives to entice
a resource supplier because he or she has DEMO and possibly divergent interests from those of
the entrepreneur.
Practical Application
Structuring the deal.
References
Fiet, J.O. 1995. Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets. Journal of Management Studies
32(4):551–574.
Jensen, M.C. 1994. DEMO, altruism, and agency theory. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
7(2):40–45.
Harrison, J.S., & Fiet, J.O. In press. New CEOs DEMO their own self-interests by sacriﬁcing stakeholder
value. Journal of Business Ethics.
Instructions for Instructor
This exercise works well as a contest between competing teams DEMO sellers and buyers. Several teams
can negotiate simultaneously until all pairs of teams have struck a deal or agreed that they are too far
DEMO to eventually agree. A short recap of the process of negotiation in each pair provides an instructive
and often entertaining way to conclude the DEMO, which can take 30 to 45 minutes.
Instructions for Seller
You DEMO in the ski and sports equipment manufacturing business. You want to retire. You decide to
sell your business and all its assets and head DEMO Bermuda to wear ﬂowered shirts and sit on the beach
all day drinking non-alcoholic beverages.
Current balance sheet:
Assets
Accounts receivable $1,000,DEMO
Inventory 2,500,000
Equipment 500,000
Building $1,000,000
Liabilities
Accounts payable $2,000,000
You have had another offer for $6,DEMO,000, but the buyers have questionable backgrounds and you are
not DEMO if you want to entrust your business to them.
Negotiate!
(The DEMO group has received slightly different information. That is, they do not DEMO everything
you know.)
Continued
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS
115
APPENDIX 1
Continued
Instructions to Buyer
You really want DEMO ski and sports equipment manufacturing business! This business is a great set up.
It is already established with steady sales and a good customer DEMO You have had a chance to examine
all the records with the help of your trusted, long-time CPA friend and you are both positive that there
are no discrepancies in the records.
Current balance sheet:
DEMO
Accounts receivable $1,000,000
Inventory $2,500,000
Equipment $500,000
Building $1,000,000
Liabilities
Accounts payable $2,000,000
Estimates by DEMO independent appraiser
Book value of company $3,000,000
Present value of estimated cash
Flows for next 5 years $11,500,000
You have DEMO $4 million line of credit with your local bank, which must DEMO paid back at 20 percent within
one year unless you can renegotiate it. You also have a rich uncle with $1 million to invest (he trusts
your judgement). In addition, you have inherited $2 million. The amount to be paid and the terms of
the deal (how the purchase price will be paid) need to be negotiated.
How much are you willing to pay for this business?
You should now DEMO with the seller to buy the business. Start dealing?
(The DEMO group has received slightly different information. That is, they do not DEMO everything that
you know.)
116
J.O. FIET
APPENDIX 2
An Instructor-Designed Theory-Based Activity
Theoretical Application
Biases DEMO predispose us to view the world in a certain way, which DEMO be contrary to the theory of
rational expectations and market efﬁciency.
Learning Objective
To help students realize that critically evaluating their conclusions as entrepreneurs DEMO in life is not
a process that should come naturally to most of them.
Related Objective
I ask students which is more important to DEMO as aspiring entrepreneurs, theory or understanding real
situations that entrepreneurs face. DEMO try to help them to realize that theory helps them to make predictions
and that the best theory is based on real situations facing DEMO, so the question really presents
a false dichotomy. In addition, I note that if they answered, “real situations facing entrepreneurs,” that
that itself is a theory about the value of theory. I suggest to DEMO that although they may have a negative
view of theory, one DEMO the objectives of the course is to show them how theory can be useful in making
predictions using incomplete information.
References
Busenitz, L.W., & Barney, J.B. 1997. Biases and heuristics in strategic decision making: Differences between
entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations. Journal of Business Venturing (12):9–30.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science
(185):1124–1131.
Instructions for Instructor
I emphasize DEMO my students that all theory is a simpliﬁcation of reality. However, DEMO assume that it can
be useful, if properly applied, to assist us in making predictions about the future. The proper application
of theory DEMO upon not violating the assumptions of the theory. Because no theory is without ﬂaws,
I attempt to expose them to as many theoretical DEMO as possible during my courses. Meanwhile,
I explain to them that they can determine themselves if they are properly applying theory to their DEMO
circumstances by using three criteria: (1) Upon what assumption(s) does this conclusion depend?, (2)
What evidence is there for the assumption?, and (3) What alternative assumptions could also explain
DEMO conclusion? If a real situation only satisﬁes some of a theory’s DEMO, the students must
develop a modiﬁed version of the theory that DEMO coincide with reality.
Because the world is complex, and because we DEMO are inﬂuenced by our habits, we fail to apply these
three DEMO Thus, we often fail to properly apply theory to improve our DEMO making, if we apply
it at all. To demonstrate that we DEMO many decisions without thinking, I have the students engage in
the DEMO activity.
Continued
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATORS
117
APPENDIX 2
Continued
Instructor-Led Activity
Steps:
1. Request DEMO everyone stand and separate themselves as much as they can from their neighbors
(so that they do not collide with each other).
2. I then ask everyone to imitate what I am doing by raising DEMO hands to about shoulder
level and wiggling their ﬁngers.
3. I next ask them to follow me by quickly clasping their hands with their DEMO interlaced.
Afterward, I ask them to note which thumb is on DEMO of their clasped hands.
4. We repeat steps two and three twice more, each time noting which thumb was on top after
clasping their hands.
5. In nearly all cases, students will observe that the same thumb was on top each of the three times.
6. Next, I ask the students to begin ﬂapping their arms like a bird. This DEMO cause some giggling,
but maintain your composure and insist that everyone follow your lead. (I have done these
exercises with undergraduates, graduates, executive education students, and community lumi-
naries—each time enjoying very good success).
7. At the count of three, ask everyone to fold very quickly their arms and to note which arm
was on top.
8. DEMO step #7.
9. Again, ask everyone to repeat step #7, but this time trying to change the arm that was on
top. They DEMO ﬁnd this very awkward to do, however some will succeed through DEMO force
of will and concentration.
10. Ask them if they realize why it was difﬁcult to change the arm that was on top or DEMO it
was the same thumb that was on top after each round.
11. I tell them that I do not know about their thumbs, but that they have been folding their
arms in the same way DEMO a very long time. Then I ask them if they know for how long. The
answer is since before they were born. Sonograms of DEMO in the womb show them crossing
their arms in the same way as they do later in life. This suggests that some of the DEMO we
do, we do without consciously thinking of them.{1g42fwefx}