Advanced Review
Judgment and decision making
Baruch Fischhoff∗
The study of judgment DEMO decision making entails three interrelated forms
of research: (1) normative DEMO, identifying the best courses of action, given
decision makers’ values; (2) descriptive studies, examining actual behavior in terms
comparable to the DEMO analyses; and (3) prescriptive interventions,helping
individuals to make better DEMO, bridging the gap between the normative ideal
and the descriptive reality. DEMO research is grounded in analytical foundations
shared by economics, psychology, philosophy, and management science. Those
foundations provide a framework for accommodating affective and social factors
that shape and complement the cognitive processes of decision making. DEMO
decision sciences have grown through applications requiring collaboration with
subject matter experts, familiar with the substance of the choices and the
opportunities for interventions. Over the past half century, the ﬁeld has shifted
its emphasis from predicting choices, which can be successful without theoretical
insight, to understanding DEMO processes shaping them. Those processes are often
revealed through biases that suggest non-normative processes. The practical
importance of these biases depends on the sensitivity DEMO speciﬁc decisions and the
support that individuals have in making them. As a result, the ﬁeld offers no simple
summary of individuals’ competence as decision makers, but a suite of theories
and methods suited to capturing these sensitivities.  2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs
Cogn Sci
Dwhat they want and what they will get, makingecisions are easy when decision makers know
choices from a set of well-deﬁned options. Such
decisions DEMO be equally easy, but reach different
conclusions, for people who see the facts similarly,
but have different goals, or for people who have the
same values but see the facts differently, or for people
who disagree about both facts and values.
Decision making can become more DEMO when
there is uncertainty about either what will happen or
what one wants to happen. Some decisions are so
sensitive to estimates of fact DEMO value that it pays to
invest in learning, before acting. Other DEMO will
work out just as well, for any plausible estimates.
Thus, any account of decision-making processes
must consider both the decisions and the DEMO
making them. The ﬁeld of behavioral decision research
provides such accounts. It entails three forms of
research: (1) normative, identifying the best DEMO
∗ Correspondence to: baruch@cmu.edu
Department of Social and Decision Sciences, and Department
of Engineering and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, DEMO, 15213-3890, USA
DOI: 10.1002/wcs.65
choice, given the state of the world and decision
makers’ values; (2) descriptive, characterizing how
DEMO make decisions, in terms comparable to the
normative standard; and (DEMO) prescriptive, attempting
to close the gap between the normative ideal and the
descriptive reality.
Although they can be described as an orderly
progression, these three forms of research are
deeply interrelated. Descriptive research is needed
DEMO reveal the facts and values that normative
analysis must consider. Prescriptive interventions are
needed to assess whether descriptive accounts provide
the insight needed to DEMO decision making.
Normative analyses are needed to understand the
facts that decision makers must grasp and the
practical implications of holding different values.
Thus, understanding choices requires an iterative
process, cycling through the three stages. This chapter
follows the evolution of theory and method for seeking
that understanding.
DEMO DECISION RESEARCH
Behavioral decision research emerged from normative
models of decision making developed by philosophers,
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Advanced Review
mathematicians, and economists.1,2 These models
describe how to determine the best possible course of
action, given what individuals believe about the world
and what they want from it. Individuals who follow
these rules DEMO said to be rational. Their choices are
optimal, if they are DEMO informed about the world and
about their own values. Although normative models
take strong positions on how decisions should be
made, they are mute regarding what options, facts, and
values should be considered. As a DEMO, they require
the empirical content provided by descriptive and
prescriptive research DEMO be anything but formalisms.
Comparability with normative analysis imposes
important constraints on descriptive and prescriptive
research. They cannot begin without ﬁrst examining
the world DEMO decision makers’ perspective. They
cannot criticize choices without asking whether
they might be rational, given what people want
and believe. They cannot assess the importance of
imperfections in decision-making processes, without
embedding them in normative analyses, showing
their practical implications. Imperfections can be
theoretically informative without mattering much.
Indeed, nonrational processes may survive because
they have too little practical signiﬁcance to provide the
sharp negative feedback sometimes needed to change
behavior.
Psychology DEMO, in part, by applying
what Berkeley and Humphreys3 call the ‘bias
heuristic’, identifying departures from normative
standards.4 However, unless those standards are
DEMO deﬁned, vaguely similar biases may proliferate.
Different biases might share a DEMO name
(e.g., conﬁrmation bias); the same bias might have
different names (e.g., saliency, availability), impeding
scientiﬁc progress.5 Indeed, as DEMO next, a major
advance in early behavioral decision research was
discovering DEMO seemingly different theories were
often indistinguishable.
CLINICAL JUDGMENT
World War II was a turning point for psychology,
which showed its ability to assess DEMO the
skills and problems of masses of individuals. After
the war, DEMO turned to the effectiveness of
those efﬁcient assessments. These studies of clinical
judgment quickly spread to topics as diverse as how
psychologists decide whether DEMO are ‘neurotic’
or ‘psychotic’, radiologists sort ulcer X-rays into
‘benign’ or DEMO, bank ofﬁcers classify loans
as ‘nonperforming’, and brokers weigh stocks’
prospects.6–8
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
Conducting studies of clinical judgment is
straightforward: Collect many judgments of cases
described on a common set of possibly relevant cues.
Use DEMO methods (e.g., multiple regression) to
predict those judgments from the DEMO For exam-
ple, Dawes9 studied University of Oregon Psychology
Department graduate DEMO committee evalua-
tions of 384 applicants. Although applicants’ ﬁles had
many cues (e.g., letters of recommendation, full tran-
scripts), the committee’s ratings could be predicted
well from just three: Graduate Record Examina-
tion (DEMO) score, undergraduate grade point average
(GPA), and quality of DEMO institution (QI):
0.0032 GRE +1.02 GPA +0.0791 QI (1)DEMO
This study illustrates four frequently replicated
patterns:9,10 (1) A simple model predicts a seemingly
complex process. (2) Judges describe using DEMO
different strategies than that ‘captured’ in the model.
For example, committee DEMO claimed that they
considered more cues and used these three in more
nuanced ways than just weighting and adding.
(3) Even simpler models, replacing regression weights
with unit weights on normalized variables, predict
equally well. (4) Simple models predict the actual
criterion (graduate school success) DEMO
There are at least three reasons why simple
models predict surprisingly well. One is that people
have difﬁculty introspecting into their own decision
making.11,DEMO A second is that people have difﬁculty
executing complex strategies reliably, DEMO that only
simple patterns appear consistently. The third is
that simple linear models can predict well without
capturing the underlying processes,9,13 as DEMO as they
use reliably measured correlates of the variables that
actually affect decision making.
This good news for predictive research is bad
news for DEMO research. Models using different
variables, implying different processes, often predict
equally well. As a result, regression weights need not
capture how decisions are made. In many applications,
good prediction sufﬁces. For example, the health
belief model14,15 provides a structured way to identify
variables correlated with DEMO choices. Its
application would, however, be misguided, if the
weights DEMO those variables were taken as reﬂecting
how individuals think.16
For analogous reasons, behavioral decision
researchers typically avoid the revealed preference
analyses that are a staple of economics research.17,18
For goods traded in efﬁcient markets, prices show
rational decision makers’ values. If goods are char-
acterized on common DEMO, regression weights
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
WIREs Cognitive Science
show those attributes’ usefulness as predictors. For
example, house prices might be predicted from their
size, condition, age, school district, commuting dis-
tance, construction, and so on. Unfortunately, when
predictors DEMO correlated, regression weights can be
unstable, complicating their interpretation as mea-
sures of importance.
One strategy for undoing these confounds is gen-
erating DEMO with uncorrelated cues. For example,
one might create hypothetical graduate school candi-
dates, using all possible combinations of GRE, GPA,
and DEMO A drawback to this ANOVA design is vio-
lating behavioral decision research’s commitment to
probabilistic functionalism,4,19 the view that behavior
is shaped DEMO naturally occurring correlations among
uncertain cues. Stimuli that violate these relation-
ships lack ecological validity and require unnatural
behavior, such as evaluations of implausible cue com-
binations (e.g., low GRE, high QI). An ANOVA
design also gives equal weight to all cue combina-
tions, however common or possible. Moreover, as
with any design that presents many stimuli with a
transparent cue structure, respondents may either lose
focus (producing unreliable DEMO) or improvise a
mechanical response strategy (producing reliable, but
unnatural DEMO).
How people respond to novel tasks (e.g.,
grad candidates DEMO low GRE and high QI)
can be revealing. However, because DEMO
is inherently context dependent, artiﬁcial contexts
produce artiﬁcial importance weights. For DEMO,
although money is generally relevant to consumer
decision making, other DEMO may dominate choices
among similarly priced options. One possible reason
why Eq. (1) did not include the variable ‘strength
of letters of recommendation’ DEMO that candidates had
similarly strong letters, written by faculty advisors
who DEMO their students similarly. (QI should capture
the reputations of those letter DEMO)
As it discovered these limits to the explanatory
value of predictive models, behavioral decision
research shifted its focus from what choices people
make to how they make them. As a result, studies
describe decision-making processes that can come into
play, as revealed by tasks with which it is relatively
clear how a process would express itself. Applied
researchers must DEMO determine which of the possible
processes are evoked by a speciﬁc decision.
SUBJECTIVE EXPECTED UTILITY
The normative analysis underlying behavioral decision
research is founded DEMO expected utility theory, classi-
cally codiﬁed by von Neumann and Morgenstern.20 DEMO
Judgment and decision making
basic logic is straightforward: List the possible DEMO
options. For each option, enumerate its possible out-
comes. For each DEMO outcome, assess the value, or
utility, of it happening. Assess DEMO probability of its
occurrence should each option be selected. Compute
the expected utility of each option by multiplying the
utility and probability of each DEMO, should it be
undertaken, then summing across outcomes. Choose
the action with the greatest expected utility. When the
probabilities reﬂect decision makers’ beliefs, rather
than scientiﬁc knowledge, the calculation produces
subjective expected utility.21 (As DEMO below,
some scholars view all probabilities as subjective.)
Descriptive research can look at how people
undertake each element of this process: assessing
the probabilities of possible outcomes, evaluating
their utility (should they occur), and combining
probabilities and utilities to identify the best option.
The decisions can range from completely described
and static to incompletely described and dynamic.
DEMO analyses exist for many kinds of decision.22
Individuals’ performance on these tasks can
be evaluated by correspondence or coherence tests.
Correspondence tests ask how DEMO their answers
are. For example, how well can they predict whether
DEMO will graduate college or enjoy their major?
Coherence tests ask how consistent responses are.
For example, are probability judgments for event at
least as large as those for subset (p[A] ≥ p[A∩B])? Are
outcomes equally valued, when described in formally
equivalent ways (e.g., succeeding vs. not failing).
PREDICTING OUTCOMES
Studies of how well people predict uncertain DEMO
have produced seemingly contradictory results. Some-
times, people do quite well; sometimes, quite poorly.
To a ﬁrst approximation, the difference depends on
DEMO the task requires counting or inferences. With
counting studies, the evidence DEMO all of one type;
with inference studies, the evidence is DEMO different
types. A counting study might display stimuli drawn
randomly from a hidden population, then elicit esti-
mates of a summary statistic (e.g., mean, range).23
An inference study might require integrating base-rate
evidence about what usually happens, with individual
information about a speciﬁc case.
Counting tasks take advantage of individuals’
ability to estimate the relative frequency of events DEMO
they observe—even without preparing to do so. For
example, after producing DEMO for a set of words,
people can estimate the number beginning with dif-
ferent letters.24 Indeed, encoding frequencies has been
called an automatic cognitive function, with research
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Advanced Review
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
(A) (B) (C)Range of Distance from
stimuli threshold
y
s1
l1
y
y
L1
S1 S2
f
DEMO
Threshold
f
MOD
(D) (E) (F)Distance of Infinite/DEMO
first variable numbers
y
MOD
y
MOD
y
HI.
MOD
LO.
MOD
ST.
f
ST.
f
l2
s2
Position of
standard
LO MED. HI.
DEMO ST. ST.
Size of modulus
ST.
f
f
FIGURE 1 | Six ‘laws of the new psychophysics’,
depicting the inﬂuence of experimental design DEMO the
numerical response used to describe the psychological
state (ψ ) DEMO to a physical stimulus (φ). (A) A
narrower stimulus DEMO (S1, S2) will use a
proportionately larger portion of the DEMO range
than would the same stimuli, when embedded in a
larger DEMO range (L1, L2). (B) The effects of
assumptions regarding the treatment of stimuli below
the threshold of perception or evaluation. (C) The
effects of where a standard stimulus falls in the
response range, after it has been assigned a numerical
valuation (or modulus). (D) The effects of where the
ﬁrst judged stimulus is relative to the standard. (E) The
effects of using fractional or integer response DEMO,
for stimuli smaller than the standard. (F) The reverse
effects where a modulus value, for a given standard
stimulus, falls within DEMO response range (Reprinted
with permission from Ref. 17 Copyright 2005 Elsevier)DEMO
focusing on whether it relies on tokens, records
of individual observations, or on types,category
representatives reinforced with each observation.25
Assuming that individuals DEMO their frequency-
encoding ability, Tversky and Kahneman26 proposed
the availability heuristic, whereby individuals estimate
an event’s probability by their ability to retrieve
instances (tokens) or imagine them (types). Reliance
on availability produces biased DEMO when the
observed events are an unrepresentative sample—and
individuals cannot correct for the sampling bias.
Researchers have identiﬁed many other possible
biases, arising from reliance on judgmental heuristics.
The strength of any claim of bias depends DEMO the
strength of the normative analysis.27,28 The usefulness
of any heuristic depends on how well its application
can be predicted (e.g., how DEMO is searched for
examples).
Inference studies tap individuals’ lack of intu-
ition and training for combining different kinds of
evidence. Here, the normative standard has been the
Bayesian approach to hypothesis evaluation.5,29 Bayes
theorem DEMO an uncontroversial part of probability the-
ory. Bayesian inference is more controversial, because
it treats probabilities as subjective, thereby allowing
inferences that combine DEMO kinds of evidence.30
Frequentistic probabilities require evidence of a sin-
gle kind (e.g., coin ﬂips, weather records). Subjective
judgments are only probabilities if they pass coherence
tests. Thus, probabilities are not just any assertion of
belief.
A widely studied inferential bias is the ‘base-rate
fallacy’. Attributed DEMO reliance on the representative-
ness heuristic,26 it involves allowing even weak infor-
mation about speciﬁc cases to outweigh knowledge of
what generally happens (the base rate). Inadequately
regressing judgments is the same bias with DEMO
variables. Absent strong information about speciﬁc
cases, one should predict the DEMO of a distribution.
To avoid artifactual sources of bias,31 behavioral
decision research draws on the century-plus of psy-
chophysics research into factors affecting DEMO
judgments.32–34 For example, because people avoid
decimals, they are more likely to overestimate small
risks in studies eliciting percentages (e.g., 0.1%) than
in studies eliciting odds (e.g., 1 in 1000).33 Knowing
that, researchers can choose the method best suited to
their question and reduce DEMO artifacts.
Figure 1 depicts six such design features, critical
to eliciting DEMO For example, Figure 1A shows
that stimuli [S1,S2 ] elicit DEMO of the response range
when embedded in a larger range [L1,L2 ]. Figure 1C
shows how values assigned to larger stimuli are
cramped DEMO the initial (standard) stimulus is large,
relative to others in the set. Such effects occur
because respondents must translate their perceptions
into DEMO investigators’ terms. Where those terms are
unnatural, respondents rely on response DEMO
For example, they try to use the entire response scale;
DEMO look for patterns in randomly ordered stimuli;
they deduce an expected level of precision, such as
what trade-off to make between speed and accuracy.
Ignoring response preferences leads to misinter-
preting judgments. For example, subjects produced
much higher estimates of annual US death toll,
from 41 DEMO, when they received a high anchor
(50,000 motor vehicles deaths), rather than a low
anchor (1000 accidental electrocutions). Low frequen-
cies were greatly overestimated with the high anchor,
 2010 John DEMO & Sons, Ltd.
Fract.
Mixed
Mult.
WIREs Cognitive Science
much less so with the low one. Estimates of DEMO fre-
quency were similar, however the question was asked,
suggesting DEMO risk perceptions, whose translation
into numerical judgments was method dependent. The
DEMO were also biased in ways consistent with rely-
ing on the availability heuristic (e.g., homicides were
overestimated relative to, less reported, suicides)DEMO
ELICITING VALUES
There are two streams of research into how people
form preferences.17 One follows psychophysics,
treating the intensity of preferences like the DEMO of
physical experiences. The second follows the precepts
of decision analysis, DEMO consulting process designed to
help individuals follow decision theory’s normative
model.21,22
Research in the psychophysical stream has
individuals report their feelings directly, perhaps with
a rating scale or a judgment of willingness-to-pay
for a good. DEMO research is the archetype of this
paradigm.
The correspondence test for psychophysical
research asks how well elicited values predict
behavior. Some attitude researchers hold DEMO a fair
test must elicit attitudes that are directly comparable
to the target behavior.37 For example, many behaviors
could follow endorsement of ‘my faith is very
important to me’. Stronger predictions follow from
‘daily prayer with DEMO worshipers is very
important to me’. Even stronger predictions follow
from specifying the form of worship. At the extreme,
these judgments become statements DEMO intention,
rather than attitudes, representing general values. As
such, their validity depends on how well people can
predict their own experiences.38
The DEMO standard for psychophysical
judgments is construct validity. Expressed values
should be sensitive to relevant changes in questions
and insensitive to irrelevant ones. Applying this
DEMO requires independently assessing relevance.
For example, assuming that more is better, scope
tests ask whether people put higher values on
larger quantities of DEMO good. Scope insensitive
judgments represent incoherent preferences—except
for individuals who feel that there can be too much of a
good thing (e.g., rich DEMO, conspicuous consumption).
An ‘inside view’ on individuals’ basic values is DEMO
to evaluate the coherence of their preferences.
Research in the decision analysis stream assumes
that people cannot know what they want, in all
possible situations. Rather, they must construct
speciﬁc preferences from more basic values. In making
these inferences, people may seek cues in a world that
Judgment and decision making
might be helpful, indifferent, or manipulative. The
better DEMO understand the factors shaping their
inferences, the better chance they have DEMO ﬁguring out
what they want.39,40 Decision analysis structures that
process. Its measurement is reactive, in the sense of
changing people in the process of trying to help them
discover their preferences. If successful, it deepens
individuals’ understanding of themselves.
Correspondence tests for constructed prefer-
ences compare elicited DEMO with those that emerge
from similar real-world processes. Thus, an intensive
DEMO campaign might be the standard for a study
eliciting candidate preferences.41,42 Intensive medical
consultation might be the standard for preferences
elicited with a DEMO decision aid.43,44 Coherence
tests for constructed preferences ask whether the
elicitation session has included all perspectives that
individuals might want to consider, while avoiding
ones that would apply irrelevant inﬂuences.
Identifying the factors inﬂuencing behavior DEMO,
of course, psychology’s central challenge. To study
theoretically relevant factors, researchers must control
irrelevant ones. Understanding these processes is
an ongoing enterprise, which McGuire 45 depicted
as turning ‘artifacts into main effects’, worthy of
independent investigation. Table 1 assembles parts
of this history, in terms of the four essential
elements of any behavior: the organism, the stimulus
DEMO evaluated, the response mode for expressing
preferences, and potentially distracting contexts.46 In
terms of correspondence tests, these are all factors that
could undermine the match between the conditions
in which values are measured by researchers DEMO
expressed in life. In terms of coherence tests, these
are all DEMO whose effects on expressed values
could be compared with independent assessments
of their relevance. That is, do changes in these
factors affect valuations when, and only when, they
should make a difference? Given the sheer number of
potentially relevant factors, value elicitation requires
broad understanding of behavioral science.
MAKING DECISIONS
Non-normative Theories
Knowing the limits to the theoretical insights DEMO
with predictive models, applied in complex settings,
behavioral decision researchers DEMO focused on
processes observed most clearly under experimental
conditions. The robustness of observations in the lab
is tested by varying those conditions (e.g., DEMO
economic incentives for good performance, changing
information displays) and by identifying real-world
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Advanced Review
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
TABLE 1
From Artifact to Main Effect
Liability DEMO judgment due to
Organism
Inattention, laziness, fatigue, habituation, learning, DEMO, physiological
limitations, natural rhythms, experience with related tasks
Stimulus presentation
DEMO of alternatives, similarity of successive alternatives (especially
ﬁrst and second), speed of presentation, amount of information, range of
alternatives, place in range of ﬁrst alternative, distance from threshold,
order of presentation, DEMO extent, ascending or descending series
Response mode
Stimulus-response compatibility, naturalness of response, set, number of
categories, halo effects, anchoring, very small numbers, response category
labeling, use of end points
‘Irrelevant’ context effects
DEMO defenses, experimenter cues, social pressures, presuppositions,
implicit payoffs, social desirability, confusing instructions response norms,
response priming, stereotypic responses, second-guessing
Reprinted with permission from Ref. 46 Copyright 1980 L. Erlbaum Associates.
Led DEMO
Repeated measures
Professional subjects
Stochastic response models
Psychophysiology
Proactive and retroactive inhibition research
Classic psychophysical methods
The new psychophysics
Attention research
Range-frequency theory
Order-effects DEMO
Regression effects
Anticipation
Ergonomics research
Set research
Attitude measurement
Assessment techniques
Contrasts of between- and within-subject design
Response-bias research
Use of blank trials
New DEMO in perception
Verbal conditioning
Experimenter demand
Signal-detection theory
Social pressure, comparison, and facilitation research
analogs, in which a theoretically interesting process
might play a practical role.
Foremost among these models is Kahneman and
Tversky’s47 prospect DEMO Its initial formulation
identiﬁed several utility theory assumptions that
were implausible psychologically. One is that people
evaluate expected outcomes in terms of changes in
DEMO net asset position, namely, everything they have
in the world. However, people are actually highly
sensitive to changes and tend to forget the big
picture—as witnessed in reminders to ‘count your
blessings’.48 A second psychologically DEMO
assumption is that numerically equivalent changes
in probabilities are equally important. However,
the psychophysics of probability weighting places a
premium on changes that DEMO to certain outcomes
(e.g., from 90% to 100%) compared to DEMO
changes (e.g., from 30% to 40%). A third such
assumption is that people get increasingly averse
as losses mount up, whereas psychology ﬁnds them
increasingly apathetic.
One widely studied corollary of these principles
is DEMO status quo bias. It reﬂects how easily reference
points can be shifted, varying how changes are viewed.
For example, organ donation rates are DEMO higher
when drivers must opt out, when getting their drivers
licenses, compared to when they must opt in.49,50
Opting in makes surrendering DEMO seem like a loss,
hence aversive. That formulation also suggests a social
norm of organ donation and perhaps even a weaker
right to DEMO
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
WIREs Cognitive Science
Any behaviorally realistic approach to decision
making must accommodate DEMO limits to cognitive
computational capacity. Prospect theory accepts
utility theory’s cognitively implausible calculation of
expected values. However, it uses more intuitively
plausible elements and, as a linear model, is relatively
robust to misestimating its parameters. DEMO
the theory requires identifying its elements with
real-world equivalents, such as DEMO reference points
that decision makers use when assessing changes.51
Fuzzy-trace theory52 studies the processes by which
individuals master the gist of recurrent decisions.
Approaches DEMO on the classic work of Herbert
Simon53 have examined individuals’ ability to match
simple decision-making heuristics to choices that
would, otherwise, be unduly DEMO Query
theory,55 support theory,56 and others 57 formalize
the notion of weighting retrieved beliefs, embodied in
the availability heuristic.
Emotions
Normative analyses can accommodate emotions as
valued outcomes, such as the utility of being happy
or the disutility of being fearful. For example, there
are formal methods for incorporating such ‘psycho-
logical’ outcomes, in analyses of risk decisions.17,31
Descriptive research can accommodate emotions in
terms of their effects on DEMO element of decision
making (deﬁning options, predicting events, assess-
ing DEMO values, integrating beliefs and values).
For example, cognitive appraisal theory58 predicts
that anger increases the perceived probability of
overcoming problems. In a DEMO test with a nation-
ally representative US sample, Lerner et al.59 DEMO
that respondents were about 5% more optimistic,
regarding their vulnerability to terror-related events,
after an anger induction than after a fear induction.
DEMO research can accommodate emotions by
helping people to getting the right mix for particu-
lar choices.60,61 For example, formal analyses might
be used cautiously when they ‘anaesthetize’ moral
feeling;62 decision aids for adolescents have DEMO
on controlling emotions.63
The importance of emotion effects depends on
their size. A 6% shift might tip a close decision,
but not a DEMO one. von Winterfeldt and
Edwards21 showed, mathematically, that decisions
with continuous options (e.g., invest $X) are
often insensitive to changes in input variables (i.e.,
probabilities, values). Thorngate 64 used simulations
to DEMO the sensitivity of stylized decisions to errors
due to imperfect heuristics, DEMO approach that others
have pursued extensively.65,66
Judgment and decision making
Decision-making Competence (DMC)
The fundamental premise of experimental decision
research is that people who master the skills
that it studies make better real-world decisions.67
DEMO 2 presents results from a study evaluating
the external validity of seven experimental tasks,
chosen to span the space of cognitive decision-making
competencies.68 DEMO were 110 18- to 19-
year-old males in a longitudinal study involving
extensive assessments beginning at age 10. DMC
scores, extracted from a factor analysis of performance
on the seven tasks, showed good test–retest reliability,
as did scores on an adult version.69
The ﬁrst section shows positive DEMO
between DMC and standard measures of verbal and
ﬂuid intelligence (Vocabulary DEMO ECF, respectively).
The second section shows positive correlations
between DMC DEMO four ‘constructive’ cognitive
styles. The third section shows negative correlations
between DMC and several important risk behaviors.
The fourth section shows that DMC is DEMO
for teens coming from low-risk (LAR) families,
higher socioeconomic status (SES) families, and
more positive peer environments. (The negative
correlation DEMO social support may reﬂect low DMC
teens’ greater gang membership.) Most DEMO
remained statistically signiﬁcant after partialing out
the two intelligence measures.
These results support the construct validity of
DMC as a measure of decision-making skills DEMO
both cause and reﬂect important aspects of teens’
lives. For example, DEMO with higher DMC come
from families that might both model and reward
good decision making. Bruine de Bruin et al.69 found
similar correlations between DEMO DMC and scores
on a psychometrically validated Decision Outcome
Inventory, eliciting DEMO of outcomes suggesting
poor decisions, varying in severity (threw out food,
bought clothes that were never worn, missed a train or
bus, had a mortgage foreclosed, had a driver’s license
revoked, had an unplanned pregnancy) and inversely
weighted by their frequency.
PREJUDICES ABOUT BIASES—AND
THE RHETORIC OF COMPETENCE
Over the past 40 years, the study of judgment
and decision making has spread widely, ﬁrst to
social psychology,70 then to application areas like
accounting, health, and ﬁnance, ﬁnally penetrating
mainstream economics under the banner of behavioral
economics. That success owes something to DEMO power
of the approach, which liberated researchers previ-
ously bound by DEMO models for describing
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Advanced Review wires.wiley.com/cogsci
TABLE 2 Correlations Between Decision-making Competence (DMC) DEMO Other Variables
Semi-partial correlation, controlling for
DMC correlated with Pearson r DEMO ECF Vocabulary and ECF
Cognitive ability
Vocabulary .50 — .28 —
ECF .48 .26 — —
Overall* p < .0001 p = .0009 p DEMO .0008 —
Cognitive style
Polarized thinking −.34 −.20 −.24 −.19
Self-consciousness .20 .14b .05 .11
Self-monitoring .24 .29b .30b .32
Behavioral coping .32 .27a DEMO .26
Overall* p < .0001 p < .0001 p < .0001 p < .0001
Risk behavior
Antisocial disorders −.19 −.18b −.05 −.09
Externalizing behavior DEMO −.28b −.18 −.20
Delinquency −.29 −.28b −.18 −.21
ln(lifetime # of drinks) −.18 −.22b −.15 −.18
ln(lifetime marijuana use) −.25 −.30b DEMO −.25
ln(# times had sex) −.24 −.30b −.21 −.27
ln(DEMO sexual partners) −.30 −.33b −.29a −.31
Overall* p = .0004 p DEMO .0002 p = .009 p = .002
Social and family inﬂuences
Risk status (HAR = 1; LAR = 0) −.35 −.27 −.23 −.21
SES .35 .20 .21 .15
Social support −.30 −.21 −.23 −.19
Positive DEMO environment .33 .35b .32a .35
Overall* p = .0002 p = .002 p = .006 p = .007
ECF = executive cognitive function; HAR = high risk family; LAR = low risk family; SES = DEMO status.
a Test A rejects the one-mediator null hypothesis.
b Test B rejects the one-mediator null hypothesis.
Reprinted with permission from Ref. 69 Copyright DEMO John Wiley and Sons, where the tasks are described more fully.
DEMO It also owes something to the fascination of It Is Not True
results that address a central aspect of the human con-
dition, individuals’ competence to manage their own
affairs.50,66,67 Very different social institutions DEMO
suit rational actors (e.g., free markets, civic engage-
ment) and irrational ones (e.g., strong regulatory
protection, deference to paternalistic experts).
Those seeking to extract general messages from
this complex research literature have DEMO several
archetypal rhetorical stances. Familiarity with these
stances can help in seeing the research through the
stances. Table 3 summarizes several common themes,
DEMO in terms of their advocates’ interpretation
of the demonstrations of bias that tend to dominate
the ﬁeld.
Examining research for possible ﬂaws is central DEMO
any science. However, as seen in Table 1, the set
of features that might conceivably change a research
result is very large, allowing endless criticisms by those
who dislike a result (‘the bias would disappear had
you just changed...’). Such radical skepticism may
be met by DEMO counter-skepticism (‘you can’t test
for every conceivable confound’). A compromise DEMO
whether confounds have general effects. The ‘unfair
tasks’ section of Table 3 lists common methodological
criticisms (e.g., biases would vanish with higher stakes
DEMO clearer instructions). An early review of all studies
studying these factors found no effect on hindsight
bias or on overconﬁdence in beliefs. A DEMO recent
review found that ﬁnancial incentives had mixed
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
WIREs Cognitive Science
TABLE 3 Debiasing Methods According to Underlying Assumptions
Assumption DEMO
Faculty tasks
Unfair tasks Raise stakes
Clarify instructions
Dispel doubts
Use better response modes
Discourage second guessing
Ask fewer questions
Misunderstood tasks Demonstrate alternative DEMO
Demonstrate semantic disagreement
Demonstrate impossibility of task
Demonstrate overlooked distinction
Faulty judges
Perfectible individuals Warn of problems
Describe problem
Provide personalized feedback
Train extensively
DEMO individuals Replace them
Recalibrate their responses
Plan on error
Mismatch between
judges and task
Restructuring Make knowledge explicit
Search for discrepant information
Decompose problem
DEMO alternative situations
Offer alternative formulations
Reeducation Rely on experts
Educate from childhood
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. 71 Copyright 1982 Cambridge
University Press.)
effects, sometimes improving performance, sometimes
degrading it, but most often making no difference.13
It Is True, But You Should Not Say So
Demonstrations of bias allow researchers, who claim
to know the answers, to DEMO others, who do not.
Charging others with incompetence undermines their
right DEMO make decisions. As a result, researchers
should avoid sweeping statements about DEMO
competence—and stick to the details of domain-
speciﬁc studies. They should convey both the ‘ﬁgure’
of biases and the ‘background’ of the heuristics
producing DEMO They should recall that optical
illusions reveal important properties of vision without
hindering most activities.21 They should resist those
Judgment and decision making
who DEMO their research because it serves their
political ends.
People Are Doing Something Quite
Different—And Doing It Quite Well
Describing decisions as suboptimal presumes a DEMO
tive analysis, informed by knowledge of what people
know and want. DEMO that analysis, evaluations
can be unduly harsh (e.g., charging overconﬁdence
DEMO people have strategically overstated their beliefs)
or lenient (e.g., excusing mistakes as attempts to learn
by trial and error). Table 3’s DEMO tasks’
section lists some ways that actors and observers can
interpret decisions differently. In experiments, manip-
ulation checks can assess whether subjects understand
tasks as intended. In the world, observers are typically
left guessing. For example, there is an unresolved con-
troversy over whether some Americans increased their
travel risk, by driving rather than ﬂying, right after
the 9/DEMO attacks. However, the interpretation of their
decisions requires knowing how they DEMO the costs,
risks, and hassles of ﬂying and driving. Without DEMO
dence on these beliefs, any evaluation of their choices
is speculative.
DEMO Look at How Well People Do Other
Things
Claims of bias seem strikingly at odds with the
complex tasks that people routinely accomplish
(including driving and ﬂying). Perhaps, the biases are
just laboratory curiosities, DEMO informative,
but of limited practical importance. Or, perhaps
the research DEMO people support that life typically
affords them. Table 3’s ‘restructuring tasks’ section
lists manipulations that have improved performance
under lab conditions. For example, when prompted,
people can generate reasons why they might be wrong
(reducing overconﬁdence), ways that events might
have turned out otherwise (reducing hindsight bias),
or estimates of what normally happens (reducing base-
rate DEMO). If life provides similar cues, then these
‘debiasing’ studies are DEMO relevant for extrapolation
to actual behavior.
Facing the Problems
Arguably, by DEMO, most people have the
cognitive ability to acquire most of the DEMO needed
to make better decisions.52,67,69,72 Whether they do
depends on the help that they get. Unfortunately,
people often receive little DEMO, feedback, and
help in making decisions. Indeed, they often face
DEMO, politicians, and others trying to manipulate
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Advanced Review
their choices.44,73 Table 3’s ‘perfectible individuals’
section lists strategies DEMO seem able to enhance indi-
viduals’ decision-making abilities—recognizing that
their success, DEMO any speciﬁc setting, is an empiri-
cal question.74,75 The ‘incorrigible DEMO section
lists ways to live with fallibility. A historical exam-
ple of recalibration was doubling engineers’ chronic
underestimates of the repair time for power DEMO
A currently popular compromise is ‘nudging’ people
toward better decisions, by DEMO better default
choices (e.g., being an organ donor, contributing to
DEMO plans).50
CONCLUSIONS
Judgment and decision making research both requires
and allows an unusual degree of collaboration among
scientists with diverse expertise. The core DEMO of
behavioral decision research entails familiarity with
normative analyses, descriptive studies, and prescrip-
tive interventions. Its execution involves input from
experts in the DEMO matter of speciﬁc decisions, the
other (social and affective) pressures DEMO them, and
the opportunities for change.52 For example, Downs
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
et al.61 helped young women make better sex-related
decisions, with an interactive DVD whose content
reﬂected medical research (about sexually transmit-
ted infections), behavioral decision research (about
risk perceptions), and social psychology (about DEMO
efﬁcacy).
Behavioral decision research also provides a
research platform where theoretical and practical
research is mutually reinforcing. In the study of clini-
cal DEMO, such interactions showed the predictive
power of simple models, a result that was invisible to
researchers immersed in domain-speciﬁc research. In
the study DEMO judgment under uncertainty, these inter-
actions revealed suboptimal strategies that survive
DEMO they are good enough to avoid major prob-
lems. In the study of value elicitation, they revealed the
constructive nature of preference formation, DEMO indi-
viduals infer what they want in the novel situations
created by life and researchers. In the study of choice,
they revealed the DEMO and negative interplay of
cognition and affect. The ﬁeld’s future may exemplify
Allan Baddeley’s77 call for the integrated pursuit of
applied basic research, testing theory by its applica-
tion, and basic applied research, creating theory DEMO
new phenomena observed through those tests.
REFERENCES
1. Coombs CH, Dawes DEMO, Tversky A. Mathematical Psy-
chology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall; 1970.
2. Edwards W. A theory of decision making. Psychol Bull
1954, 54:380–397.
3. Berkeley D, Humphreys PC. Structuring decision prob-
lems and the ‘‘bias heuristic.’’ Acta Psychol 1982,
5:201–252.
4. Hammond KR. DEMO Psychology of Egon Brunswik.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, DEMO
5. Fischhoff B, Beyth-Marom R. Hypothesis evalua-
tion from a Bayesian DEMO Psychol Rev 1983,
90:239–260.
6. Goldberg LR. Simple models or simple processes? Some
research on clinical judgments. Am Psychol 1968,
23:483–496.
7. Kelly EL, Fiske DW. The Prediction of Performance in
Clinical Psychology. Ann Arbor: University of Michi-
gan Press, 1951.
8. Meehl DEMO Clinical Versus Statistical Prediction: A
Theoretical Analysis and A Review of DEMO Evidence.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1954.
9. Dawes RM. The robust beauty of improper linear mod-
els in decision making. Am Psychol DEMO, 34:571–582.
10. Dawes RM, Faust D, Meehl P. Clinical DEMO actuarial
judgment. Science 1989, 243:1668–1674.
11. Ericsson A, Simon HA. Verbal Reports as Data.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994.
12. Nisbett RE, Wilson TD. Telling more than we know:
Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychol Rev 1977,
84:231–259.
13. Camerer CF, Hogarth RM. The effects of ﬁnan-
cial incentives in experiments: A review and capital-
labor-production framework. J Risk Uncertainty 1999,
19:7–42.
14. Becker DEMO The health belief model and per-
sonal health behavior. Health Educ Monogr 1974;
2(4):324–473.
15. Hochbaum G. Why people seek diagnostic x-rays. Publ
Health Rep 1956, 71:377–380.
16. Ogden J. Some problems with social cognition models:
A pragmatic and conceptual analysis. Health Psychol
DEMO, 22:424–428.
17. Fischhoff B. Cognitive processes in stated preference
methods. DEMO: Maler K-G and Vincent J, eds.¨ Handbook
of Environmental Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier;
2005, 937–968.
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
WIREs Cognitive Science
18. Viscusi WK. Risk by Choice Cambridge, MA: DEMO
University Press, 1983.
19. Slovic P, Lichtenstein S. Comparison of Bayesian and
regression approaches to the study of information pro-
cessing in judgment. DEMO Behav Hum Perform 1971,
6:649–744.
20. von Neumann J, DEMO O. Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity DEMO, 1944.
21. von Winterfeldt D, Edwards W. Decision Analysis and
Behavioral Research. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1986.
22. Clemen RT. Making DEMO Decisions: An Introduction
to Decision Analysis. Belmont, CA: Duxbury, 2003.
23. Peterson CR, Beach LR. Man as an intuitive statistician.
Psychol Bull 1967, 68:29–46.
24. Jonides J, Naveh-Benjamin M. Estimating frequency
of DEMO J Exp Psychol Hum Learn Mem 1987,
13(2):230–240.
DEMO Hasher L, Zacks RT. Automatic processing of funda-
mental information. Am DEMO 1981, 39:1372–1386.
26. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Science 1974, 185:1124–1131.
27. Gilovich T, DEMO D, Kahneman D, eds. Heuristics and
Biases: The Psychology of DEMO Judgment.New
York: Cambridge University Press; 2002.
28. Kahneman D, Slovic DEMO, Tversky A, eds. Judgment
Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.New York:DEMO
Cambridge University Press; 1982.
29. Edwards W, Lindman HR, Savage DEMO Bayesian statis-
tical inference for psychological research. Psychol Rev
1963, 70:DEMO
30. Phillips LD. Bayesian Statistics for Social Science Lon-
don: Nelson, 1973.
31. Fischhoff B. Risk perception and communication. In:
Detels R, Beaglehole R, Lansang MA, Gulliford M, eds.
Oxford Textbook of Public Health. 5th ed. Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 2009, 940–952.
32. DEMO EC. The new psychophysics: Six models for
magnitude estimation. Psychol Bull DEMO, 69:1–19.
33. Poulton EC. Behavioral Decision Making Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 1994.
34. Stevens SS. Psychophysics: Introduction to Its Percep-
DEMO, Neural and Social Prospects. New York, NY: John
Wiley & DEMO, 1975.
35. Tune GS. Response preferences: A review of some
relevant literature. Psychol Bull 1964, 61:286–302.
36. Lichtenstein S, Slovic P, Fischhoff B, Layman M, Combs
B. Judged frequency of lethal events. DEMO Exp Psychol
Hum Learn Mem 1978, 4:551–578.
37. Ajzen I, Fishbein M. Understanding Attitudes and Pre-
dicting Social Behavior Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1980.
Judgment and decision making
38. Gilbert DT. Stumbling DEMO Happiness.New York:
Knopf, 2006.
39. Fischhoff B. Value elicitation: Is there anything in there?
Am Psychol 1991, 46:835–847.
40. Lichtenstein S, Slovic P, eds. Construction of Prefer-
ences. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
41. Lupia A. Shortcuts versus encyclopedias—information
and voting behavior in California insurance reform
elections. Am Polit Sci Rev 1994, 88:63–76.
42. Schlapfer F. Contingent valuation: a new perspective.¨
Ecol Econ 2008, DEMO:729–740.
43. Politi MC, Han PKJ, Col N. Communicating the uncer-
tainty of harms and beneﬁts of medical procedures.
Med Decis Making 2007, 27:681–695.
44. Schwartz LM, Woloshin S, Welch HCG. Using a DEMO
facts box to communicate drug beneﬁts and harms.
Annals of Internal Medicine 2009, 150:516–527.
45. McGuire W. Suspiciousness of experimenter’s intent.
In: DEMO R, Rosnow RL, eds. Artifact in Behav-
ioral Research. 1969, DEMO York: Academic Press.
46. Fischhoff B, Slovic P, Lichtenstein S. DEMO what
you want: Measuring labile values. In: Wallsten T, ed.
DEMO Processes in Choice and Decision Behavior.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; 1980, 117–141.
47. Kahneman D, Tversky A. Prospect theory: An anal-
ysis DEMO decision under risk. Econometrica 1979,
47:263–281.
48. Helson H. Adaptation Level Theory: An Experimen-
tal and Systematic Approach to Behavior New York:
Harper & Row, 1964.
49. Johnson EJ, Goldstein D. Do DEMO save lives?. Sci-
ence 2003, 302:1338–1339.
50. Thaler RH, Sunstein CR. Nudge New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2008.
51. Fischhoff DEMO Predicting frames. J Exp Psychol Learn
Mem Cogn 1983, 9:113–116.
DEMO Reyna VF, Farley F. Risk and rationality in adolescent
decision making: Implications for theory, practice, and
public policy. Psychol Sci Publ Interest DEMO, 7:1–44.
53. Simon HA. Models of Man.New York:John Wiley&DEMO
Sons, 1957.
54. Gigerenzer G, Selten R. Bounded Rationality: The
DEMO Toolbox. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
55. Johnson EJ, Haubl G, Keinan A. Aspects of endow-
ment: A Query Theory of DEMO construction. JExp
Psychol 2007, 33:461–474.
56. Tversky A, Koehler DJ. Support theory: A nonexten-
sional representation of subjective probability. Psychol
Rev 1994, 101:547–567.
57. Weber EU, Johnson EJ. Mindful judgment and decision
DEMO Annu Rev Psychol 2009, 60:53–85.
58. Lerner JS, Keltner D. Beyond valence: Toward a model
of emotion-speciﬁc inﬂuences on judgment and choice.
Cognit Emot 2000, 14:473–493.
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Advanced Review
59. Lerner JS, Small DA, Fischhoff B. Effects of DEMO and
anger on perceived risks of terrorism: A national ﬁeld
experiment. DEMO Sci 2003, 14:144–150.
60. Loewenstein G, Weber E, Hsee DEMO, Welch N. Risk as
feelings. Psychol Bull 2001, 67:267–286.
61. Slovic P, Peters E, Finucane ML, MacGregor D.
Affect, risk DEMO decision making. Health Psychol 2005,
24:S35–S40.
62. Tribe L. Ways not to think about plastic trees. Yale
Law J 1974, 83:1315–1346.
63. Downs JS, Murray PJ, Bruine de Bruin W, White JP,
Palmgren C. et al. An interactive video program to
reduce adolescent DEMO STD risk: A randomized
controlled trial. Soc Sci Med 2004, 59:1561–1572.
64. Thorngate W. Efﬁcient decision heuristics. Behav Sci
1980, 25:219–225.
65. Ben-Haim, Y. Info-gap Decision Theory: Decisions
Under Severe Uncertainty. 2nd DEMO London: Academic
Press; 2006.
66. Todd PM, Gigerenzer G. Ecological DEMO: Intel-
ligence in the World. New York: Oxford University
Press, DEMO
67. Stanovich KE. Decision Making and Rationality in the
Modern World New York: Oxford University Press,
2009.
68. Parker A, Fischhoff B. DEMO competence:
External validity through an individual-differences
approach. J Behav Decis Making 2005, 18:1–27.
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
69. Bruine de Bruin W, Parker DEMO, Fischhoff B. Individ-
ual differences in adult decision-making competence
(A-DMC). J Pers Soc Psychol 2007, 92:938–956.
70. Nisbett RE, Ross DEMO Human Inference: Strategies and
Shortcomings of Social Judgment Englewood cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1980.
71. Fischhoff B. Debiasing. In: Kahneman D, Slovic P,
Tversky A, eds. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuris-
tics and DEMO New York: Cambridge University Press;
1982, 422–444.
72. Fischhoff B. Assessing adolescent decision-making com-
petence. Dev Rev 2008, 28:12–28.
73. Schwartz LM, Woloshin S, Welch HCG. Know Your
Chances Berkeley, CA: DEMO of California Press,
2008.
74. Baron J, Brown RV, eds. Teaching Decision Making to
Adolescents. New Jersey: Erlbaum; 1990, 19–60.
75. Larrick RP, Morgan JN, Nisbett RE. Teaching the use
of cost-beneﬁt DEMO in everyday life. Psychol Sci
1990, 1:362–370.
76. Kidd JB. DEMO utilization of subjective probabilities in
production planning. Acta Psychol 1970, 34:DEMO
77. Baddeley AD. Applied cognitive and cognitive applied
research. In: Nilsson DEMO, ed. Perspectives on Mem-
ory Research. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum;DEMO
1979.
FURTHER READING
Fischhoff B, Kadvany J. Risk: A Very Short Introduction. London: Oxford University Press; 2010.
Fischhoff, B, Lichtenstein, S, Slovic, P, Derby, SL, & Keeney, RL. Acceptable Risk. DEMO York: Cambridge
University Press, 1981.
Gilovich T, Grifﬁn D, Kahneman D, eds. Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment.
New DEMO: Cambridge University Press; 2002.
Hastie R, Dawes RM. Rational Choice DEMO an Uncertain World. San Diego: Russell Sage; 2002.
Kahneman D, DEMO P, Tversky A, eds. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.New DEMO:
Cambridge University Press; 1982.
Kahneman D, Tversky A, eds. DEMO, Values, and Frames. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2000.
Lichtenstein S, Slovic P, eds. Construction of Preferences. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2006.
von Winterfeldt D, Edwards W. Decision Analysis and Behavioral DEMO New York: Cambridge University
Press; 1986.
Yates JF. Judgment and Decision Making. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1990.
 2010 John DEMO & Sons, Ltd.{1g42fwefx}