Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
www.elsevier.com/locate/jrp
DEMO delineating and integrating the study of
variability and stability in personality psychology:
Interpersonal trust as illustration 
William Fleeson a,¤, Christine Leicht b,1
a Department of Psychology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27023, USA
b Caliber Associates, Inc., 10530 Rosehaven St., Suite DEMO, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
Available online 2 November 2005
Abstract
DEMO the person–situation debate is coming to an end, it is not DEMO clear how to integrate the
two perspectives on personality nor what an integration would look like. The density distributions
approach is proposed as a DEMO to integrate the two perspectives while maintaining and delineating
their respective contributions. Four requirements of an integration are proposed and the density dis-
tributions DEMO is shown to meet all four. This integration is illustrated with an experience-sam-
pling study of interpersonal trust. Each individual varied his or her DEMO level considerably from
interaction to interaction (sizeable intraindividual variability), yet DEMO a stable average level
of trust over many interactions (sizeable consistency)DEMO Manifestation of trust in daily life was pre-
dicted by the type of relationship and strongly positively predicted interaction quality.
 2005 Elsevier Inc. DEMO rights reserved.
Keywords: Trust; Intraindividual variability; Consistency; States
1. Introduction
The purpose of this paper is threefold. The Wrst purpose is to DEMO that the comfortable
coexistence of large within-person variability and large between-person stability is the rule
 We thank Lisa PytlikZillig for discussions on these DEMO This paper is based on a talk presented at the Annu-
al Meetings of the Association for Research in Personality, January 2005, New DEMO, LA.
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 336 758 4733.
E-mail addresses: FleesonW@wfu.edu (W. Fleeson), CLeicht@Caliber.com (C. Leicht).
1 C. Leicht is formerly C. Staudt.
0092-6566/$ - see front matter  2005 DEMO Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2005.08.004
6
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
rather than the exception in personality. The two phenomena DEMO variability and stability
have largely been seen as mutually exclusive whereas recent data suggest they are not in at
least some domains (Fleeson, DEMO). Furthermore, both variability and stability are much
larger than is DEMO realized, implying a need for a diVerent way of thinking about
DEMO (Fleeson, 2004).
The second purpose of this paper is to propose the density distributions approach as a
potential delineation and integration of DEMO research focused on each of these two phenom-
ena (Fleeson, 2001). A complete description of personality requires delineating and inte-
grating the DEMO research foci (Fleeson, 2004; Funder, 2001; Mischel, 2004), and there are at
least four requirements of a successful integration. A DEMO integration will determine
the validity of each focus, resolve the apparent DEMO between them, identify the
conceptual and assessment tools appropriate for each DEMO as well as their respec-
tive domains of maximum applicability, and DEMO usefully, show how the two foci link up
to each other.
DEMO third purpose is to illustrate and test the proposed integration for interpersonal
trust. Trust is a variable with a long history of debate over DEMO it is best represented as
varying within persons or as stable between persons (Jones, Couch, & Scott, 1997; La
Guardia, Ryan, Couchman, & Deci, 2000; Rotter, 1971) so an integration would be impor-
tant for a full understanding of trust. Additionally, extending the density distributions
approach beyond the Big Five would show that it is DEMO limited to nor constrained by the
Big Five. This paper is primarily theoretical as it describes the approach in some detail. A
brief empirical DEMO is presented at the end as an illustration.
2. Two competing perspectives in need of integration
Personality psychology encompasses a number of important distinctions. DEMO few of them
coalesced into a debate between two perspectives (the DEMO debate”) that has
dominated personality psychology for decades (Fleeson, 2004; Funder, 2001; Kenrick &
Funder, 1988; Mischel, 1968, 2004). Because this debate is characterized by several overlap-
ping but not DEMO distinctions, which are emphasized to diVerent degrees by diVerent
authors, there is no consensual nor simple description of the debate. We consider Wve DEMO the
distinctions particularly important.
The distinction that gives the debate its name is the distinction between person and situ-
ation (Fleeson, 2004). DEMO person perspective argues that personality is a powerful predic-
tor of behavior and so promotes the study of individual diVerences; the situation
perspective argues that the situation is a more powerful predictor of behavior, even some-
times concluding that personality adds no value in prediction.
A second distinction DEMO how similar to each other multiple behaviors of one indi-
vidual will be. The person perspective predicts that multiple behaviors of one individual
will DEMO similar to each other because behaviors are determined by the stable personality of
the actor (even if they are not similar in absolute terms, they will at least be similar in their
relative or rank position, e.g., Funder & Colvin, 1991). The situation perspective predicts
that multiple behaviors of even the same individual will vary considerably because the
DEMO situation determines the behavior.
A third distinction is between structures of individual diVerences and processes of psy-
chological functioning. The person perspective, because of its focus on individual diVer-
ences in multiple variables, has primarily investigated the structure of covariances among
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (DEMO) 5–20
7
individual diVerences. This research investigates how individual diVerences on DEMO are
correlated and the number and content of factors needed to account for those covariances.
It is referred to as “structure” because it describes DEMO organization of variables but not
how they operate. The situation perspective, DEMO of its focus on situations as determi-
nants of behavior, has DEMO investigated psychological processes. Processes are
sequences of events that lead to an outcome, often starting with a situation and ending
with a behavior (DEMO & Shoda, 1995). The primary interest is in identifying processes
DEMO are common to all individuals, but a secondary interest is in DEMO processes diVer
across individuals (e.g., in the strength or input to the processes).
A fourth overlapping distinction is the degree to which DEMO is emphasized as a
critical component of personality. The person perspective focuses on diVerences between
people in how they behave and in covariances among DEMO diVerences. Thus, each individ-
ual diVerence variable is taken as a DEMO style or way of acting, feeling, and thinking, and
less DEMO is paid to the internal cognitive determinants of those styles (Goldberg, 1993;
Winter, John, Stewart, Klohnen, & Duncan, 1998). The situation perspective in contrast
focuses on explaining processes of responding to DEMO Processes typically involve
perception, interpretation, and adaptation, each of which DEMO cognition (Mischel &
Shoda, 1995; Pervin, 2003).
Finally, a Wfth distinction is where the interesting variance is considered to be: between
persons or within one person. Individual-diVerence covariances refer to how people DEMO
on a given variable who diVer on other variables so the interesting variance is considered to
be between persons. Processes refer to the ways DEMO which variables within a person aVect
other variables within that same person in unfolding sequences, so the interesting variance
is considered to be within one person and (usually) across time.
These distinctions make up the DEMO of the person–situation debate. At times the debate
is limited to arguments over the relative importance of the two perspectives. However, the
apparent contradiction between the two perspectives suggests that they cannot both be
right: If the behavior of one person is variable with the situation, it cannot be stable across
situations. We wish to argue in contrast that each DEMO is not only viable and impor-
tant, but that each is DEMO for a complete understanding of personality. That is, personal-
ity needs DEMO describe and explain both within-person cognitive processes involving the
situation and between-person structures of individual diVerences in styles.
The Wrst part of the paper DEMO the density distributions approach to integrating
the two perspectives. The Wrst requirement in integrating the two perspectives is that the
validity of each perspective DEMO determined. However, claiming both perspectives are valid is
ultimately unsatisfying unless DEMO apparent contradiction between them is resolved. Thus,
the second requirement is to resolve the apparent contradiction. The third requirement is
to maintain the DEMO between the two perspectives by delineating their tasks and
ranges of applicability. The fourth and Wnal requirement for integration is to identify
where and DEMO the two perspectives link to each other.
The second part of the paper presents data to illustrate this approach with a new vari-
able—interpersonal DEMO (Rotter, 1971). Interpersonal trust is an ideal variable because it
historically has been a battleground between the two sides, with it being identiWed as an
emergent variable unique to each relationship and so varying DEMO person or alternately
as a personality characteristic and so stable within a person (Jones et al., 1997). Trust is
also an important DEMO because it is essential to nearly every interpersonal interaction,
from the most mundane purchase to the most intimate relationship.
8
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
3. The density distributions approach to integration
The density DEMO approach to personality (Fleeson, 2001) describes personality as
the accumulation DEMO the everyday behavior of an individual. Behavior is emphasized because a
core part of an individual’s personality is what he or she actually does—if DEMO is to
describe personality, it ought to be able to describe DEMO a person with a given personality
actually does. Everyday is emphasized because it is desirable to describe the individual’s per-
sonality in real situations. DEMO is emphasized because the assumption is that indi-
viduals do not act the same way at all times, so to discover the way a person acts, a large
sample of the person’s actions must be assessed. There are three primary characteristics to the
density distributions approach: the personality state, trait manifestation, and distributions.
3.1. The personality state
A state DEMO a dimension for characterizing an individual’s personality at the moment, that
DEMO, how an individual is acting, feeling, and thinking at the DEMO (Cattell, 1950). It is just
like a trait dimension, DEMO the same content, the same breadth, and the same scale. For
example, just as trait extraversion has the content of talkative, bold, adventurous, and
energetic, and can be assessed with a 1–7 scale, state extraversion has the content of talka-
tive, bold, adventurous, and energetic, and can be assessed with a 1–7 scale. Just as individ-
uals have standings on traits (their trait levels) representing the degree DEMO which the trait
content describes the individual in general, individuals have DEMO on states, represent-
ing the degree to which the trait content DEMO the individual at the moment. Thus, the
central diVerence between states DEMO traits is the duration for which a particular level is an
accurate description. In the case of traits, the level remains accurate for longer periods of
time, such as months, years, or decades. In the case of states, the level remains accurate for
shorter periods of time, such as a few minutes or hours.
States are descriptions of individuals, but they are nonetheless intended as assessments
of behavior. That is because a state describes what the person is doing at the moment.
Behavior DEMO meant here in the broad sense, including how the individual is DEMO, feeling,
and thinking at the moment (PytlikZillig, Hemenover, & Dienstbier, 2002). It is what the
individual is doing, as DEMO whole. This approach does not describe the speciWc, physical
actions or DEMO the person is making, unlike in the act frequencies approach (Buss &
Craik, 1983), but it is still an assessment of DEMO the person is behaving. For example,
“warm” is an accurate description of a person at the moment if he or she is doing DEMO
thing pleasant for others, thinking nice thoughts about them, and/or feeling pleasantly
toward them. However, “warm” does not specify what his or her speciWc actions were, such
as whether he or she smiled, DEMO someone on the back, or shared dessert.
Thus, this method sacriWces the ability to describe behavior in speciWc physical terms.
However, we believe this approach to assessing behavior gains at least four advantages in
return: (i) it includes feelings and thoughts for a more complete description DEMO what the
person is doing; (ii) it assesses the meaning DEMO the behavior, avoiding the problem that
superWcially similar physical actions can DEMO very diVerent meanings depending on other
factors (e.g., slapping someone on the back can be warm or it can be aggressive); (iii) it
makes behavior assessment commensurable with trait assessment, allowing direct assess-
DEMO of trait content in behavior; and (iv) it avoids an DEMO error-prone step of deter-
mining which physical actions manifest which traits.
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (DEMO) 5–20
9
Although the only intended diVerence between traits and states DEMO their duration, we are
not taking the extreme position that they DEMO isomorphic in all regards, that momentarily
being in a state recreates DEMO totality of the corresponding trait (Fleeson, Malanos, &
Achille, DEMO; Matthews, Deary, & Whiteman, 2003). For example, any DEMO neurological
structures underlying trait extraversion (e.g., Canli, 2004) obviously cannot be recreated
with each change in state extraversion. It is also unclear DEMO states will have the same
covariance structure as do traits (Borkenau & Ostendorf, 1998; Fleeson, 1998). On the
other hand, states and traits may be isomorphic (share properties) in many respects. For
DEMO, state extraversion causes state positive aVect just as trait extraversion is DEMO
ated with trait positive aVect (McNiel & Fleeson, in press). Determining the extent of iso-
morphism is important for understanding just what DEMO are.
3.2. Trait manifestation
A second primary characteristic of the density distributions approach is the hypothesis
that traits are manifest in states. Manifest here DEMO used in the sense of an idea or a potential
becoming present and realized; it is not meant in the sense of providing evidence for some-
thing else. That is, states are hypothesized to be the form in which traits become present
and realized. This occurs in two DEMO
First, individuals’ trait levels are manifest in state levels. A trait DEMO represents the indi-
vidual’s standing on the trait, how much the DEMO of the trait describes the person in
general. This standing is manifest in the individual behaving diVerently than he or she
would if he DEMO she had a diVerent standing on the trait (without such behavior, the standing
would be only an unrealized potential to act diVerently). DEMO propose that for many traits,
behaving diVerently means expressing the content of the trait to diVerent degrees. For
example, individuals with diVerent standings on trait extraversion will behave at diVerent
levels of state extraversion. That DEMO, standing on a trait will be manifest in behavior that has
DEMO same content as the trait (the state) and it will be manifest by being at diVerent levels of
the state than would occur DEMO the individual had a diVerent standing.
The second way in which traits are manifest in states has nothing to do with individual
diVerences and DEMO only to the content of the trait. SpeciWcally, the content of DEMO trait
dimension becomes manifest only to the extent that someone is in the corresponding state.
For example, the content of extraversion (talkativeness, boldness, energy) is present only to
the extent that a person is DEMO talkative, bold, or energetic for the moment. Without such
manifestation in a state, the content of a trait is only a potential description. If no one is
being talkative for a given moment, talkativeness would not be present except as a poten-
tial description of people in DEMO future. The two concepts of manifestation diVer in that the
Wrst refers to the ways in which a person is diVerentiated from others on DEMO trait and the sec-
ond refers to the way the content of the trait appears in the world at all.
The processes underlying trait DEMO are the processes that determine the degree
to which the content is present in the behavior. These processes likely involve psychologi-
cal variables such DEMO interpretations, expectancies, and goals (Fleeson & Jolley, in press;
Mischel & Shoda, 1995). For example, pursuing a goal that DEMO vigorous action may
increase the level of state extraversion. Thus, this DEMO, unlike pure act frequency
approaches, postulates the existence of such internal determinants of states. It also suggests
that the key to understanding traits DEMO to explain the processes that underlie trait manifesta-
tion in states.
10
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
3.3. Distributions
The third basic characteristic of the density DEMO approach is the focus on distri-
butions. Although a trait standing suggests that the individual has a usual or normal level
of the state, it is likely that most individuals deviate from their typical level at DEMO some of
the time. Thus, to get an accurate description of DEMO an individual acts, it is necessary to
assess states on multiple DEMO and record the frequency with which he or she acts at
each level of the state. These frequencies form a density distribution of states DEMO that indi-
vidual.
The density distributions approach proposes that the individual’s “standing” on the
trait may be best conceived of as the entire distribution DEMO state levels rather than just one
of the levels. Instead of describing a person’s trait as being one level on the state, it is better
to describe it by the frequency of being at each level. DEMO example, people are neither extra-
verted nor introverted, but rather highly extraverted some times, highly introverted other
times, and in between most DEMO the time; what diVerentiates people is their frequencies in
each of DEMO states. To simplify such descriptions, distributions can be characterized by
their DEMO The mean of the distribution describes the central location of the distri-
bution and the individual’s typical way of acting. The standard deviation describes DEMO
width of the distribution and how variable or inconsistent the individual is. Distributions
can even be characterized by their skew and kurtosis, indicating how extreme and one-
sided an individual’s deviations are.
The mechanisms that determine DEMO individual’s frequencies at each state level are yet to
be identiWed. These mechanisms are the mechanisms that underlie trait manifestation and
are expected to DEMO across individuals. These mechanisms also allow prediction of how
individuals will act in new and unprecedented situations. That is, we are suggesting that
individual diVerences in traits may have two aspects—individuals diVer in the manifesta-
tion DEMO the trait as revealed in the distribution of states and individuals diVer in the under-
lying mechanisms that determine those frequencies.
3.4. Findings for DEMO Big Five
This approach was Wrst applied to the traits of the Big Five (Fleeson, 2001). College stu-
dents carried Palm Pilots DEMO them for a couple of weeks and every few hours they
described their current behavior using 1–7 scales and about 25 adjectives (such as talkative,
friendly, lazy, secure, or uncreative). The resulting data were quantiWed distributions of
extensive samples of each individual’s behavior, already translated into trait terms. The
width of a person’s distribution describes how diVerent DEMO or her states are from each
other (how variable he or DEMO is) and is quantiWed by the standard deviation. The Wrst Wnd-
DEMO was that the average individual’s distribution was (a) almost as wide as the distribution
of all states generated by all individuals, meaning that knowing who is acting added little
information about how he or she DEMO acting at any given moment; and (b) about as wide DEMO
the distribution of means across individuals, meaning that individuals diVered from DEMO
selves as much as they diVered from others. This Wnding means that trait-relevant behavior
is much less predictable and more variable than may be DEMO believed.
The second, and apparently contradictory, Wnding was that behavior was nonetheless
highly predictable and highly stable. Although each individual varied considerably, they
also each had a central point or tendency around which they varied. DEMO analyses
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (DEMO) 5–20
11
revealed that individual diVerences in these central points remained DEMO from week
to week, with stability correlations around .80 to .90 (Epstein, 1979; Fleeson, 2001; Mosko-
witz, 1982). Thus, DEMO location of each individual’s (wide) behavior distribution was as sta-
ble and predictable as any variable in psychology, and it is legitimate and accurate to
describe what a person is like in general with trait-like DEMO It in fact describes how the
person behaves in everyday life.
The third Wnding was that individuals diVered not only in the central tendency DEMO
their distributions, but also in the size (amount of variability) DEMO them. Such individual
diVerences in amount of variability were also stable (DEMO correlations over .50),
supporting the view that degree of behavioral DEMO is a potentially important
part of personality (Berdie, 1969; Eid & Diener, 1999; Fiske, 1961; Larsen, 1989;
Nesselroade, 1991).
3.5. The density distributions approach as delineation and integration of two DEMO
The person–situation debate is a long history of arguing about which perspective ought
to dominate personality psychology: explaining processes of psychological functioning or
organizing covariance structures of individual diVerences. The density distributions
approach oVers a potential DEMO of these perspectives.
The Wrst requirement of integration is establishing whether the data support both per-
spectives. The situation perspective was supported by the DEMO Five data as evidenced by
sizeable behavioral variability within each person, DEMO due to the situation (Flee-
son, under review). The person perspective was also supported in that there was also size-
able stability DEMO behavior at the parameter level. Thus, both perspectives were supported.
The DEMO support both positions, but doing so creates a contradiction in that DEMO is
described as both variable and stable. The second requirement of integration is to resolve
this contradiction. The resolution oVered by the density distributions DEMO is that the
two perspectives are most applicable to diVerent aspects of behavior: behavior is highly
variable when examined singly at the moment, DEMO behavior is highly stable when exam-
ined as parameters over time (DEMO additional resolutions are described in Funder, 2001,
Mischel, 2004). Note that each perspective also loses some applicability in this resolution.
The DEMO perspective has to give up the ability to predict strongly how people act at the
moment without knowing the situation, and the situation perspective has to acknowledge
that it is possible to accurately predict how people DEMO on average, even without knowing
the situation.
Third, these results provide a clear delineation of the tasks of the two perspectives. One
task DEMO within the distribution: it is to use within-person processes to explain DEMO
son variability and its consequences. This is a large realm of behavior that cannot be
explained by stable individual diVerences so must be explained DEMO processes that vary
within-person. This variability will reveal the variables that are important within a person
as well as their structure (Cervone, 2004); there may also be individual diVerences in those
variables, that structure, or those processes. Finally, this variation may be the domain of
self-regulation, mental health, and well-being. For example, charting how situations aVect
behavior will require predicting within-person variance in behavior. The other task lies
between DEMO distributions: it is to use between-person individual diVerence covariance
structures to DEMO the parameters of distributions. By specifying the correlations among
variables, the DEMO net can be built up to identify the meaning of these variables.
12
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
Furthermore, important consequences of traits, such as well-being, health, and life span
can be identiWed. These individual diVerences provide a rough and ready description of the
individual.
The Wnal step in integration DEMO to show how the two tasks link up to each other. The
density distributions approach proposes that within-person processes of variability are
the processes DEMO mechanisms underlying the manifestation of between-person vari-
ables. Between-person variables (e.g., traits) become real and present in the behavior
manifesting them, so DEMO of interpreting and reacting to situations become the very
mechanisms underlying how traits become real. For example, Fleeson (under review)
demonstrated that DEMO in situation characteristics reliably predicts within-person
variation in states. Thus, one DEMO underlying manifestation of Big Five traits is
interpretation and reaction to situations. Understanding traits requires understanding
processes.
The two tasks also link up to DEMO other in that the consequences of states can clarify
the consequences of traits. For example, McNiel and Fleeson (in press; Fleeson et al., 2002)
instructed participants to act alternately extraverted and introverted. They found that pos-
itive aVect was signiWcantly higher when individuals were acting extraverted DEMO when
they were acting introverted, regardless of whether they were dispositionally DEMO or
introverted, thus showing that extraversion states cause positive aVect states. DEMO Wnding
Wnally clariWes that the well-known association between trait extraversion and positive
aVect is due at least in part to trait extraversion causing positive DEMO, assuming trait
extraversion becomes manifest in state extraversion which then causes DEMO aVect. It
also clariWes that one of the reasons extraverts are happier than introverts is simply that
they act extraverted more often.
These two DEMO show how the two approaches link together. Thus, the density
distributions DEMO shows not only the two respective tasks and their comfortable
coexistence, DEMO also provides an innovative way to link them together. As can be seen,
this approach incorporates several important insights from others, adds some new con-
ceptions (e.g., behavior as states, distributions, stability of DEMO) and puts them
together into a coherent and empirically-supported whole. This DEMO whole describes
a resolution to the person–situation debate such that both perspectives are important to
understanding personality.
4. Interpersonal trust as an illustrative variable
DEMO remainder of the paper provides a new example from a related but non-Big Five
trait: interpersonal trust. Interpersonal trust is chosen as an illustration Wrst because it is
important in its own right: trust is necessary in every interaction and it may have profound
consequences for the quality DEMO relationships (Couch & Jones, 1997; Gurtman, 1992). Sec-
ond, trust makes a good illustration because it is the locus of a long controversy over
whether trust is consistent within the person.
The person DEMO argues that individuals diVer in their levels of interpersonal
trust, that DEMO individual trusts others at a mainly consistent level, that such trust DEMO
ences aVect outcomes, and that psychologists should study the correlations of DEMO with
other individual diVerences variables and outcomes (Gurtman, 1992; Holmes, 1991; Mikul-
incer, 1998; Rotter, 1971). The situation perspective DEMO that trust emerges in each rela-
tionship uniquely due to the history of interactions in the relationship, that psychologists
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (DEMO) 5–20
13
should study the processes of the development of trust DEMO a relationship as it varies within a
person over time, and DEMO cognitions are likely paramount in these processes (Holmes,
1991; Jones et al., 1997). We propose that both perspectives are correct and that they do
not conXict with each other. When it comes to DEMO trust, there have been others
who have recognized its potentially dual DEMO SpeciWcally, Couch and Jones (1997) have
distinguished between general trust DEMO relationship-speciWc trust and attachment
researchers have pointed out that attachment variability divides into variability within per-
sons and variability between persons (La Guardia et al., 2000).
4.1. The density distributions approach to trust
Our study tests the density distributions approach with the concept of interpersonal
trust to DEMO whether it applies to trust and whether it can delineate and integrate the
two perspectives on trust. The Wrst characteristic of the density distributions DEMO is
taking the same trust content used to describe how an individual is in general (the trait)
and applying it to how the person is being at the moment (the state). Just as trait trust
assesses how trusting a person is in general on a scale, state trust assesses how trusting an
individual is at the moment on DEMO same scale. The concrete physical actions of the individ-
ual are not the only way trait trust is manifested, but rather manifestation includes the
aVective and cognitive components as well. For example, a person may agree to a plan of
action but also think about pursuing an alternative DEMO without letting the other indi-
vidual know, due to the cognitive DEMO of state trust.
Staudt (1999) reviewed several conceptions of trust from multiple social sciences, and
concluded that the content of interpersonal trust is the lack of a negative expectation when
in risky situations, which are deWned as situations in which one’s outcomes depend on
another (see also Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998). A person high DEMO trait trust
generally lacks such negative expectations; a person high in DEMO trust momentarily lacks
such a negative expectation.
The second characteristic of the density distributions approach is to hypothesize that
trait trust is manifest in DEMO trust. SpeciWcally, individual diVerences in levels of trait trust
are manifest DEMO individuals being in diVerent levels of state trust as they live their lives.
The third characteristic of the density distributions approach is the formation DEMO density
distributions of states for each individual. This requires assessing state trust levels for an
individual multiple times and recording the frequency he or DEMO trusts at each level. The
distribution of levels than provides an accurate description of the individual’s overall trust.
4.2. Testing an integrated approach to DEMO trust
Our Wrst hypothesis is that the density distributions approach will show that the two
perspectives are each valid and do not contradict each DEMO The typical individual’s distri-
bution of trust states will be wide due to within-person variability in trust, but individual
diVerences in distribution parameters will be stable.
Our second hypothesis is that within-person processes may underlie the DEMO
of and consequences of between-person individual diVerences in trust. Because the rela-
tionship is so critical in many theories of trust (e.g., Holmes, 1991; Jones et al., 1997), we
propose that state trust DEMO will be associated with the type of relationship the partici-
pant has with his or her interaction partner. Also, we propose that state trust levels will
14
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
predict the quality of interactions. Most theorists predict that DEMO is primarily beneWcial
(Holmes, 1991; Jones et al., 1997; DEMO, 1998; Rotter, 1971). However, trust puts the
trusting individual at risk because others have control over the outcomes, and trust may be
akin to gullibility if trust is given to those who do DEMO deserve it. In this study, we will cor-
relate amount of DEMO experienced in each interaction with the quality of that interaction.
5. Method
Because this study is an illustration, the methods and results will be described in less
detail than in a typical research report.
5.1. Participants
DEMO participants completed the experiment in partial fulWllment of the require-
ments for an introductory psychology course. One participant was not included for com-
pleting DEMO than 10 valid interaction reports. To maximize the potential individual
diVerences in trust levels, participants were invited on the basis of scores on the mean of
two trust items administered in a previous mass testing session (trustful, distrustful,
 D .84). Because interpersonal trust is highly negatively skewed, participants were eligible
if they scored less than Wve (DEMO low trusters) or exactly seven (23 high trusters) on the DEMO
scale.
5.2. Procedure
Participants attended an introductory session in which they learned how to operate
the hand-held computers and completed questionnaires (not used in this study). For
the next 12 days, participants completed a questionnaire four times per day describing
their most recent interaction lasting three minutes DEMO more (noon, four pm, eight pm,
and midnight). DEMO entered their answers into Palm Pilots and brought them
to be downloaded every 2 days. This was to encourage timely recording of data by DEMO
participants and to minimize eVects of downloading problems. Reports were discarded
if they were completed several hours later or before the scheduled time. The DEMO
number of validly reported interactions was 29.1 per included participant (of DEMO
possible).
5.3. Measures
Thirty items assessed the amount of trust in the interaction, the relationship of the par-
ticipant to the interaction partner, the quality of the interaction, and other items not used
in DEMO report. All items were answered on a scale of 1–7 with seven being high and one
being low. Some questions also allowed an answer DEMO zero for ‘I don’t know.’ Trust was
assessed with the item “How much did you trust the other person in the interaction?” Rela-
DEMO to the interaction partner was reported as family, best friend, romantic, friend,
acquaintance, previously unknown, or other. Quality of the interaction was assessed as the
mean of three items: How happy did the interaction make you feel? How enthusiastic did
the interaction make you feel? Overall, how satisWed are you with the interaction? (Cron-
bach’s DEMO D .87).
6. Results
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
15
6.1. Density distributions of trust
The Wrst DEMO concerned the nature of individuals’ density distributions of trust
levels across their daily interactions: how much variability and how much stability do indi-
viduals show in their level of trust across interactions? These results quantify the two per-
spectives in personality in order to test their respective validities.
DEMO observe how much the typical individual’s trust level varied across interactions, DEMO
standard deviation was calculated separately for each individual across all his or her inter-
actions. The average of these standard deviations was 1.21. This DEMO deviation is
large, meaning that the average or typical individual varied DEMO or her trust level routinely
between 3 and 7 (out of DEMO) and occasionally reached as low as 2, in the course of only 12
days. It can also be compared to the standard deviation DEMO how much individuals
diVered from each other in their trust levels, DEMO D .73. This comparison shows that individ-
uals diVered from themselves across interactions in their trusting levels more than they
diVered from others in DEMO trusting levels. Fig. 1 plots the typical individual’s density dis-
tribution of trust levels by drawing a normal distribution based on this standard deviation
DEMO the average individual’s distribution mean of 5.60.
In addition to the sizeable within-person variability in trust, we predicted sizeable stabil-
ity in trust levels. Stability was calculated by dividing each participant’s data into two ran-
dom DEMO, calculating the mean and standard deviation for each individual for each DEMO,
and correlating across the two halves (this was repeated 10 DEMO). The average stability
correlation for mean trust was .80, meaning DEMO individual diVerences in mean trust levels
were highly stable and reliable. Additionally, individual diVerences in variability also
existed, and also were stable across DEMO, although the magnitude was less, average
r D .44.
Fig. 1. The typical individual’s distribution of trust across interactions.
16
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
Together, these Wndings mean that variability and stability comfortably coexist in levels
of interpersonal trust. The amount of trust an individual DEMO at the moment is highly
variable (inconsistent), but the amount DEMO trust an individual exhibits on average across
several interactions is highly stable (consistent). These Wndings meet the Wrst three require-
ments of integration: (1) they demonstrate that each perspective has empirical support; (2)
they resolve the apparent contradiction by showing that one perspective refers DEMO to
momentary trust levels and the other primarily refers to parameters of trust distributions;
and (3) they describe the two domains of DEMO applicability for the two perspectives
(explaining variance within a person or DEMO parameter diVerences between individ-
uals).
6.2. Predicting manifestation of trust
The Wnal requirement of the integration is to identify where the two perspectives DEMO up.
The density distributions approach proposes that one place they link up is in the manifes-
tation of the between-person diVerences. Trust is manifest DEMO in state trust. Thus, to iden-
tify the processes that determine DEMO of trust, it is necessary to identify the
processes that determine DEMO trust. That is, the content of the trait appears only in DEMO state,
so the appearance of the content of the trait is determined by the processes that determine
states. Because these processes may involve DEMO, the manifestation of the trait con-
tent may involve situations. This DEMO the Wnal step in integration because it links up traits
with situations: the content of the trait is proposed to appear as a result of the situation.
We hypothesize that type of relationship to the interaction DEMO is important to level of
trust, so we will illustrate this DEMO by examining whether relationship type predicts
level of state trust.
A multilevel model revealed that state trust levels diVered signiWcantly across the seven
relationship DEMO, F (6, 1246.35) D 89.78, p < .001, meaning that level of state trust varied
with the type of relationship to DEMO interaction partner. Fig. 2 shows the level of trust in
each relationship type. More intimate relationships, such as family, best friend, and roman-
tic were associated with higher levels of state trust than were less DEMO relationships
such as friend, acquaintance, and stranger.
This signiWcant and fairly substantial variation in trust is important for demonstrating
the validity of the DEMO perspective. It shows that within-person variability is meaning-
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Relationship to Interaction Partner
Fig. 2. State trust as DEMO function of relationship type.
Other
Stranger
Acquaintance
Friend
Romantic
Best Friend
Family
State Trust Level
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (DEMO) 5–20
17
ful rather than random or capricious and that the DEMO is a powerful predictor of
behavior (Reis & Collins, 2004). It also reveals the link between the two perspectives
because the manifestation DEMO trait trust is predicted by a process involving the situation.
6.3. Manifestation predicting interaction quality
The Wnal question concerned the meaningfulness of trust states DEMO testing their ability to
predict interaction quality. A multilevel model predicting interaction quality from state
trust (centered within each person) revealed a signiWcant DEMO positive relationship of trust
to quality, b D .45, p < .001. This  can be interpreted as an unstandardized  from a DEMO
regression, and means that quality changed .45 points with every point DEMO trust changed.
Given that the quality scale goes only from 1 to 7, this means that satisfying and dissatisfy-
ing interactions diVer by only a few points on trust (also on a 1–7 scale). In addition, multi-
level models allowed testing whether the association diVered across individuals. In this case
it did, SD D .25, p < .01, meaning that quality was much more strongly predicted by trust
for some DEMO than for others. However, this suggests a positive relationship
between trust DEMO quality for about 98% of the population.
Including relationship type in the model revealed a signiWcant interaction between rela-
tionship type and state trust, F (6, 880.54) D 2.17, p < .05, such that the association between
trust and quality was weakest for acquaintances, b D .18, and strongest for romantic rela-
tionships, lar relationship in which DEMO trust was being manifest.b D .76. Thus, the meaning of the DEMO of trust depended on the particu-
These results further demonstrate the validity of the within-person approach by show-
ing reliable and important associations of DEMO trust to outcomes. The complexity of these
within-person processes was revealed in the interaction with relationship type. Finally, the
linkage was strengthened in that trust to outcome associations at the between-person level
can be proWtably studied DEMO the within-person level.
7. Discussion
On the one hand, the results DEMO large amounts of variability in how much the same
person trusts others across diVerent interactions, suggesting that important variables in
aVecting trust are interaction-speciWc. Indeed, relationship type signiWcantly predicted
interpersonal trust in the interaction. Thus, DEMO is a need to explain within-person pro-
cesses that describe how trust emerges in particular relationships. On the other hand, the
results showed that individual diVerences in average levels of trust were highly stable, sug-
gesting that important variables in aVecting trust are personality related. Thus, there is a
need to explain individual diVerences in interpersonal trust and to discover DEMO correlates.
The two Wndings together in the very same data argue that both conclusions are correct
and that they do not contradict each other. DEMO do not contradict each other because rela-
tionship-speciWc variables are relatively important at the level of speciWc interactions, and
personality-related variables are relatively important at the level of trends over time. Of
course, this also means that each approach loses some usefulness at the other level. Fur-
thermore, the two Wndings link up together in that manifestation of the between-persons
DEMO is associated with the within-person variable of relationship type, and in DEMO trust
state level was strongly positively associated with quality of the interaction. This suggests a
positive role of trust in relationships.
18
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
The purposes of this paper were to argue that DEMO comfortable coexistence of sizeable
within-person variability and sizeable between-person stability was the rule rather than the
exception in personality, to describe the density distributions approach to a possible inte-
gration of two perspectives, and to illustrate this with new data for the variable of interper-
sonal trust. The DEMO part of the paper elaborated the density distributions approach in
enough detail to explain its main assumptions and characteristics and to show how it DEMO
vides one possible means of integration. SpeciWcally, it shows that within-person DEMO
and between-person stability do not conXict, and that the two domains DEMO link up in the
manifestation of between-person variables in daily life. A new variable illustrated these
general principles, Wtting into the approach quite neatly.
7.1. Future directions
At least Wve directions for future research are salient. DEMO future direction is to extend
the range of concepts elucidated by a density distributions approach. We predict that many
or most variables will conWrm DEMO density distributions assumptions. With easy computing
power and aVordable PDAs, the DEMO distributions approach is increasingly manage-
able. A second direction is to identify and describe the processes leading to trait manifesta-
tion in states. For DEMO, Fleeson (under review) has shown that manifestation of each of
DEMO Big Five traits is highly related to properties of situations. Fleeson and Jolley (in press)
proposed other determinants of manifestations, including goals, temporal trends, and sta-
bilizing factors.
A third direction is to test the approach in other age groups. College students may be
unusually variable. DEMO will be important to establish that the coexistence of variability and
stability is a general phenomenon of personality rather than limited to a particular DEMO
period. Fourth, the validity of self-reports in experience sampling is unknown. DEMO
biases, scale-usage habits, or inaccurate interpretations of one’s behavior might mean that
self-reports of states do not describe how the participants actually were DEMO Thus, high
levels of variability or stability could possibly be artifacts DEMO these self-report problems.
One way to address this issue would be to conduct an experience-sampling study in the lab,
with observers also describing DEMO states. Finally, it is important to establish the health rel-
evance DEMO the density distributions approach. Self-regulation is critical to our nation’s
health problems (Baumeister, Heatherton, & Tice, 1994) and likely involves processes of
trait manifestation in response to momentary variables. In addition, several personality
and aVect disorders may involve inappropriate amounts of or timing of variability. For
DEMO, personality disorders such as borderline or histrionic may be characterized by
DEMO high levels of variability whereas others such as schizoid, avoidant, or
obsessive–compulsive may be characterized by rigidly low levels of variability.
8. Conclusion
DEMO two perspectives on the causes of behavior, the person and the DEMO perspec-
tives, are both important and viable and even can link DEMO to each other. There is much
more variability in one person’s behavior than may be commonly believed, and there is
much more stability in individual diVerences than may be commonly believed. This is
because behavior is DEMO variable at the moment-to-moment level and more stable at the
parameter level. The density distributions approach may potentially be a fruitful way to
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (DEMO) 5–20
19
study the two perspectives in a delineated and integrated DEMO In particular, it describes
a route to link the two perspectives, namely, investigating how traits are manifest as a
result of situation-sensitive processes. Interpersonal trust was a new variable that illus-
trated the applicability and DEMO of this approach.
References
Baumeister, R. F., Heatherton, T. F., & Tice, D. M. (1994). Losing control: How and why people fail at self-regula-
tion. New York: Academic Press.
Berdie, R. DEMO (1969). Consistency and generalizability of intraindividual variability. Journal of Applied DEMO,
53, 35–41.
Borkenau, P., & Ostendorf, F. (1998)DEMO The Big Five as states: How useful is the Five-Factor Model DEMO describe
intra-individual variations over time? Journal of Research in Personality, 32, 202–221.
Buss, D. M., & Craik, K. H. (1983). The act frequency approach to personality. Psychological Review, 90, 105–126.
Canli, T. (2004). Functional brain mapping of extraversion and neuroticism: Learning DEMO individual diVerences
in emotional processing. Journal of Research in Personality, 72, 1105–1132.
Cattell, R. B. (1950). Personality: A systematic theoretical and factual study. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cervone, D. (2004). The architecture of personality. Psychological Review, 111, 183–204.
Couch, L. L., & DEMO, W. H. (1997). Measuring levels of trust. Journal of Research in Personality, 31, 319–336.
Eid, M., & Diener, E. (DEMO). Intraindividual variability in aVect: Reliability, validity, and personality correlates.
DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 662–676.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior? I. On predicting most of the people much of the time. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 37, 1097–1126.
Fiske, D. W. (1961). The inherent variability of behavior. In D. W. Fiske & S. R. Maddi (Eds.), Functions of varied
experience (pp. 326–354). Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press.
Fleeson, DEMO (1998). Across-time within-person structures of personality: Common and individual traits. In G. V.
Caprara & D. Cervone (Chairs), Personality and social cognition. Symposium conducted at the 9th European
Conference on Personality, Guildford, DEMO, July.
Fleeson, W. (2001). Towards a structure- and process-integrated DEMO of personality: Traits as density distribu-
tions of states. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 80, 1011–1027.
Fleeson, W. (2004). Moving personality beyond the person–situation debate: The challenge and the opportunity
of within-person variability. Current Directions, 13, 83–87.
Fleeson, W. (under review). DEMO situation-based contingencies underlying trait manifestation.
Fleeson, W., & Jolley, S. (in press). The challenge and the opportunity of intraindividual variability: A theory of
human Xexibility. In D. Mroczek & T. D. Little (Eds.), Handbook of personality development.
Fleeson, W., Malanos, A., & DEMO, N. (2002). An intra-individual process approach to the relationship between
extraversion and positive aVect: Is acting extraverted as “good” as being extraverted? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1409–1422.
Funder, D. DEMO (2001). Personality. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 197–221.
Funder, D. C., & Colvin, C. R. (1991). Explorations in behavioral consistency: Properties of persons, situations,
and behaviors. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 60, 773–794.
Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American Psychologist, 48, 26–34.
Gurtman, M. (1992). Trust, distrust, and interpersonal problems: A circumplex analysis. DEMO of Personality
and Social Psychology, 62, 989–1002.
Holmes, J. G. (1991). Trust and the appraisal process in close relationships. In W. DEMO Jones & D. Perlman (Eds.),
Advances in personal relationships (DEMO 57–106). London: Jessica Kinsgley.
Jones, W. H., Couch, L., & Scott, S. (1997). Trust and betrayal: The psychology DEMO getting along and getting ahead.
In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 466–483). DEMO Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Kenrick, D. T., & Funder, D. C. (1988). ProWting from controversy: Lessons from the person–situation DEMO
American Psychologist, 43, 23–34.
La Guardia, J. G., Ryan, DEMO M., Couchman, C. E., & Deci, E. L. (2000)DEMO Within-person variation in security of
attachment: A self-determination theory perspective on DEMO, need fulWllment, and well-being. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 367–384.
20
W. Fleeson, C. Leicht / Journal of Research in Personality 40 (2006) 5–20
Larsen, R. J. (1989). A process approach DEMO personality psychology: Utilizing time as a facet of data. In D. DEMO
Buss & N. Cantor (Eds.), Personality psychology: Recent trends and emerging directions (pp. 177–193). New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Matthews, G., DEMO, I. J., & Whiteman, M. C. (2003). Personality traits (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
McNiel, J. DEMO, & Fleeson, W. (in press). The causal eVects of DEMO on positive aVect and neuroticism on
negative aVect: Manipulating state extraversion DEMO state neuroticism in an experimental approach. Journal of
Research in Personality.
Mikulincer, M. (1998). Attachment working models and the sense of trust: An exploration of interaction goals
and aVect regulation. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychology, 74, 1209–1224.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, W. (2004). Toward an integrative science of the person. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 1–22.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-aVective system theory of personality: Reconceptualizing situations,
dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246–268.
Moskowitz, D. S. (1982). Coherence and DEMO generality in personality: A new analysis of old prob-
lems. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 754–768.
Nesselroade, J. R. (1991). The warp and the woof of the developmental fabric. In R. DEMO Downs & L. S. Liben
(Eds.), Visions of Aesthetics, The Environment and Development: The Legacy of Joachim F. Wohlwill (pp. 213–
DEMO). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Pervin, L. A. (2003). The Science of Personality (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
PytlikZillig, L. M., Hemenover, S. H., & Dienstbier, R. A. (2002). What do we assess when we assess a Big5 trait. A
DEMO analysis of the aVective, behavioral, and cognitive processes represented in Big5 personality invento-
ries. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 847–858.
Reis, H. T., & Collins, W. A. (2004). Relationships, human DEMO, and psychological science. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 13, 233–237.
DEMO, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so diVerent after all: A cross-discipline view
of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393–404.
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. American Psychologist, 26, 443–452.
Staudt, C. (1999). Research on trust: An integrative review. Unpublished manuscript, Wake Forest University.
Winter, D. G., John, O. DEMO, Stewart, A. J., Klohnen, E. C., & Duncan, L. E. (1998). Traits and motives: Toward an
integration of two DEMO in personality research. Psychological Review, 105, 230–250.{1g42fwefx}