Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
Are some entrepreneurs more DEMO than others?
Daniel P. Forbes*
University of Minnesota, Carlson School DEMO Management, Department of Strategic Management and
Organization, 321-19th Ave. South, DEMO 3-365, Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States
Received 30 September 2003; received in revised form 30 May 2004; accepted 30 May 2004
Abstract
Entrepreneurs are more susceptible to certain cognitive biases than are managers who DEMO not
entrepreneurs, but it is not clear why. In an effort DEMO help explain why, I examine differences in the
degree to which DEMO exhibit the overconfidence bias. Results show that individual age, firm
decision DEMO and external equity funding affect the degree to which entrepreneurs are
overconfident. In addition, founder-managers are shown to be more overconfident than are new-
venture managers who did not found their firms. The results suggest that DEMO cognitive
biases are a function of both individual and contextual factors.
D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Entrepreneurs; Managers; Founder
1. Executive summary
Cognitive biases are thought processes that involve erroneous inferences or DEMO
An example of a cognitive bias is the bease of recallQ bias: events that are especially recent or
vivid are easier to recall from memory, so people tend to overestimate the actual frequency of
such events. Biases of this sort are a natural and common phenomenon. Most people DEMO
cognitive biases in their thinking. To some extent, these biases represent DEMO that enable
us to deal quickly with the large volumes of information that confront us in daily life.
* Tel.: +1 612 625 2989; fax: +1 928 447 4733.
E-mail address: dforbes@csom.umn.edu.
0883-9026/$ - see front matter D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/DEMO
624
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO, biases can also get in the way of effective decision making. DEMO we make major
decisions based on biased thinking, we may make DEMO mistakes that could have been
avoided if we had been able to recognize our biases and improve our decision making with
more information or DEMO careful analysis.
Past research has shown that entrepreneurs are more susceptible to certain cognitive biases
than are managers who are not entrepreneurs. One specific DEMO for which this has been shown
to be true is the overconfidence bias. The overconfidence bias refers to the tendency of people
to overestimate DEMO correctness of their initial estimates in answering moderate to difficult
questions. In other words, tests that reveal the existence of this bias provide a measure of the
degree to which people bdo not know what they DEMO not knowQ.
It is not clear why entrepreneurs exhibit more overconfidence than nonentrepreneurs are.
Two possible explanations have been advanced. The first holds that DEMO attracts
a bcertain kind of peopleQ, specifically, people who are less formal and rational in their
thinking and more inclined to favor instinct DEMO spontaneous insight—to follow their
hunches, so to speak. The second explanation DEMO that entrepreneurs resort to cognitive
biases as a response to certain conditions associated with the task of entrepreneurship, such as
information overload, high DEMO and high time pressure. Research has not yet provided
an answer as to which of these explanations is correct.
In an effort to shed DEMO light on this question, this study examines differences in the
degree DEMO which different entrepreneurs exhibit the overconfidence bias. Specifically, the
study tests DEMO differences in overconfidence are associated with certain individual
differences and with differences in the organizational contexts in which entrepreneurs
operate. The results of this DEMO show that individual age, firm decision comprehensiveness
and external equity funding DEMO the degree to which entrepreneurs are overconfident. In
addition, founder-managers are DEMO to be more overconfident than are new-venture
managers who did not found their firms. These results suggest that entrepreneurs’ cognitive
biases are a function DEMO both individual and contextual factors.
The finding that entrepreneurs’ cognitive biases vary with contextual factors indicates that
their tendency to exhibit cognitive biases is DEMO rooted in binnateQ preferences and, therefore,
is not unchangeable. This DEMO that educators and practitioners may be able to undertake
interventions designed to help entrepreneurs to think and make decisions better in their
capacity as DEMO managers. For example, consultants or investors could draw upon the
many DEMO, exercises and teaching materials that have been developed (by Max Bazerman,
Paul Schoemaker, Zur Shapira and others) to help educate managers DEMO cognitive biases
and improve their decision making. The first step towards interventions of this sort is
identifying which particular entrepreneurs are most likely to DEMO susceptible to these biases,
and the findings of this study take us some distance towards that goal.
2. Introduction
Recent research in entrepreneurship DEMO shown that entrepreneurs are more likely than
nonentrepreneurs to exhibit certain cognitive biases and heuristics. For example, Palich and
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
625
DEMO (1995) found that entrepreneurs were more likely to categorize equivocal business
situations positively than were nonentrepreneurs. Busenitz and Barney (1997) found that
DEMO exhibited a greater reliance on the overconfidence bias and the representative-
ness heuristic than did ordinary managers. Kaish and Gilad (1991) found that DEMO
scan for information more actively in their off-hours and use more nonverbal, nontraditional
sources of information than do ordinary managers. Drawing together findings of this sort,
Busenitz and Lau (1996) developed the umbrella term DEMO cognitionQ to refer to
the set of cognitive processes that such studies identify as being characteristic of
entrepreneurs. These studies have answered some important DEMO questions, but they
underscore another question that remains open: Why do entrepreneurs think differently from
nonentrepreneurs? At least two answers to this question have been proposed.
One answer holds that the cognitive processes associated with DEMO cognition
are quasi-traits that become characteristic of entrepreneurs through a self-selection process. In
other words, people who think in certain ways tend to be attracted to entrepreneurship.
Busenitz and Barney (1997) favor this explanation. They DEMO that bthose who are more
susceptible to the use of biases and heuristics in decision making are the very ones who are
most likely DEMO become entrepreneursQ, whereas bthe more cautious decision makers will tend
to DEMO attracted to larger organizations where more methodical information tends to be more
readily availableQ (p. 14). This explanation acknowledges the contextual differences that
distinguish entrepreneurship from the management of larger firms by identifying those
differences DEMO drivers of the self-selection process. However, this view also locates the
DEMO source of entrepreneurial cognition within the individual him/herself. That is, DEMO
view holds that some individuals are inherently more bsusceptibleQ to decision biases or,
alternatively, are bmore cautiousQ decision makers.
An alternative explanation for entrepreneurial cognition is that cognitive biases are induced
in decision makers by DEMO of the entrepreneurial experience. Baron (1998) has argued for
this explanation. He suggested that entrepreneurs take cognitive shortcuts as a response to
certain DEMO associated with the task of entrepreneurship, such as information overload,
DEMO uncertainty and high time pressure. This perspective implies that entrepreneurial
cognition is not rooted primarily in individual differences and is instead, at least partly, a
function of contextual factors faced by the entrepreneur. As Baron (DEMO) puts it, bdifferences
in cognition do not stem primarily from differences between entrepreneurs and other people
with respect to personal traits (although such differences may well exist), but rather from the
fact that entrepreneurs DEMO in situations and under conditions that would be expected to
maximize such errors or biasesQ (p. 288).
Each of these alternative explanations has some plausibility. However, empirical support
for either of the proposed explanations remains lacking. Some light can be shed on these
issues by studying whether DEMO how entrepreneurs think differently from one another.
Evidence that entrepreneurs’ cognitive processes do not differ significantly or that their
differences are related to other DEMO characteristics would support Busenitz and
Barney’s (1997) trait-like explanation for entrepreneurial cognition. On the other hand,
evidence that significant differences in entrepreneurs’ DEMO processes are associated with
differences in the organizational contexts within which entrepreneurs operate would support
626
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO situational view of Baron (1998). In the remainder of this DEMO, I evaluate the relative
strength of these explanations by proposing and DEMO a set of individual and organizational
determinants of a specific manifestation of entrepreneurial cognition: overconfidence.
3. Overconfidence: its meaning and significance
Overconfidence is DEMO decision-making bias that emanates from the banchoring and
adjustmentQ heuristic and refers to the tendency of people to overestimate the correctness of
their initial DEMO in answering moderate to difficult questions (Bazerman, 1994). To
paraphrase Lichtenstein and Fischoff (1977), the overconfidence score provides a measure of
the degree to which people bdo not know what they do not DEMO Many studies conceive of
overconfidence as a widespread cognitive bias and not as something that varies across
individuals. However, research has shown that some individuals exhibit higher levels of
overconfidence than others do (e.g., Keren, 1987; Simon and Houghton, 2003; Yates et al.,
1998). Building on this insight, Busenitz and Barney (1997) found that entrepreneurs were
more overconfident than ordinary managers.
Entrepreneurial overconfidence is usually thought to DEMO of interest in connection with
entrepreneurs’ initial decisions to start new ventures. For example, Dosi and Lovallo’s (1997)
characterization of entrepreneurs as DEMO martyrsQ is based on their observation of the
probabilistically poor but socially useful gamble made by individuals who create new
ventures. Understanding the sources DEMO overconfidence can help to explain this important
entrepreneurial behavior. But overconfidence has also been shown to influence a variety of
managerial behaviors, such as forecasting (Hogarth and Makridakis, 1981) and negotiation
(Bazerman and Neale, 1982), that many entrepreneurs perform as they continue to manage
their DEMO for years after the founding event (Willard et al., 1992). Thus, overconfidence
probably affects not only how entrepreneurs found their ventures but also how they behave in
their capacities as managers of those ventures. DEMO example, overconfidence may influence
how entrepreneurs respond to new information and DEMO and the way they represent their
ventures’ prospects to others, such DEMO potential customers and strategic partners. There is
some empirical evidence that overconfidence may have important strategic implications of
this kind. Simon and Houghton (2003), for example, showed that managers who exhibited
higher levels of overconfidence were more likely to make product introductions that were
more risky and DEMO likely to succeed. In addition, a case study by Guth et DEMO (1991) showed
that firm performance can suffer when managerial decisions reflect a lack of congruence
between entrepreneurs’ perceptions of the environment and actual DEMO conditions.
4. Clarifications
In the sections that follow, I propose some DEMO and organizational determinants of
overconfidence. Before doing so, however, I offer two points of clarification. First,
throughout this article, I use boverconfidenceQ to refer to people’s ability to estimate the
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
627
DEMO of their own knowledge, as that ability has been measured in DEMO aforementioned
literature. Strictly speaking, the measure can reveal people to be DEMO instead of
overconfident. However, the measure reveals most people to be DEMO, thus, for the
sake of simplicity, I discuss variations along DEMO construct by referring to higher and lower
levels of overconfidence. Second, DEMO use the term bnew-venture managerQ to refer to both
founder and nonfounder managers of new ventures. In keeping with much of the
entrepreneurship literature, I use the term bentrepreneurQ to refer only to new-venture
managers who DEMO founders. All but one of the following hypotheses are concerned with
variations in cognition among entrepreneurs; only the first hypothesis is also concerned with
nonfounder managers of new ventures.
5. Individual factors associated with overconfidence
In DEMO to identify the effects of individual factors on the presence of entrepreneurial
cognition, it is instructive to consider the distinction between founder and nonfounder managers
of new ventures. Following a logic similar to that advanced by DEMO and Barney (1997), one
might argue that management positions in DEMO ventures would tend to attract individuals who
already bthink like entrepreneursQ and that, consequently, there should be little difference
between the cognitive processes DEMO founder and nonfounder managers of new ventures.
However, in hiring nonfounder DEMO, new ventures commonly seek people who have
experience in managing larger, more established organizations, and the findings of Busenitz and
Barney (1997) would lead us to expect such individuals to have cognitive processes that DEMO
from those of founders. On the other hand, if Baron’s (1998) logic were followed to an extreme,
one could argue that there should be little difference between new-venture managers who have
founded their firms DEMO those who are simply managing new ventures that others have founded,
because both sets of new-venture managers face conditions akin to those to DEMO Baron
attributed entrepreneurial cognition. However, individual cognitive profiles are likely to DEMO at
least moderately stable and are not likely to change immediately in response to changes in
conditions. For these reasons, it is likely that nonfounder managers will think more like large-
firm managers than like entrepreneurs. DEMO, nonfounder managers are likely to be less
susceptible to cognitive biases DEMO overconfidence.
Hypothesis 1. New-venture managers who founded their ventures will be more overconfident
than will be those who did not.
Demographic differences among entrepreneurs DEMO also account for differences in the
degree to which they are overconfident. For example, individuals’ ages have been shown to
affect their cognitive processes (Hagestad and Neugarten, 1985). Many past studies in the
management DEMO have theorized about the effects of age on certain managerial
decision situations, such as responses to takeover attempts (Buchholtz and Ribbens, 1994)
or acquisitions (Grimm and Smith, 1991). Considerably fewer studies have DEMO the
influence of managers’ ages on their cognitive processes. However, Taylor (1975) found
that older managers sought more information and took longer to make a decision than did
628
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO managers. His study also showed that older managers were less confident and
more equivocal about their decisions than younger managers were once they had DEMO
them. Consistent with the general theme of Taylor’s findings, I expect DEMO younger
entrepreneurs are likely to be more overconfident than older ones are. Younger
entrepreneurs have had less time to recognize and correct these biases DEMO themselves. By
contrast, older entrepreneurs will, on average, have experienced DEMO failures, judgmental
errors and other instances in which the inaccuracy of DEMO own knowledge has been made
apparent to them, and these experiences DEMO likely to temper their tendency to overestimate
the accuracy of their own knowledge.
Hypothesis 2. Younger entrepreneurs will be more overconfident than will be DEMO
entrepreneurs.
Susceptibility to the cognitive biases associated with entrepreneurial cognition may also
vary based on what entrepreneurs believe about themselves—in particular, on the extent to
which they believe that they bhave what it takesQ to be DEMO entrepreneur. This belief is captured
by the construct of entrepreneurial self-efficacy (DEMO), which captures the degree to which
individuals believe that they are capable of performing the tasks associated with new-venture
management (Chen et al., 1998). Overconfidence and ESE are both based on estimations of
personal ability, but they also differ in several important ways. First, the DEMO bias
measures the accuracy of an ability, whereas ESE measures only DEMO people believe about
their abilities. Relatedly, overconfidence is almost always an DEMO phenomenon,
whereas ESE is often a consciously held belief. Finally, DEMO overconfidence bias is concerned
with people’s ability to make judgments about their knowledge and, therefore, has relevance
in a variety of domains, whereas ESE refers to people’s ability to perform a particular set of
identifiable DEMO within a specific domain. Thus, overconfidence and ESE are distinct
constructs. DEMO, there are reasons to expect that they are related.
Understanding the DEMO between ESE and overconfidence requires an appreciation
of the fact that people may possess high levels of ESE for different reasons. For some
entrepreneurs, high levels of ESE may reflect a generally inflated set of beliefs DEMO personal
ability—one which stems, perhaps, from an inflated sense of overall self-esteem. In such
cases, measures that assess actual ability, as overconfidence DEMO, are likely to reveal the
exaggerations inherent in inflated self-appraisals. Clearly, however, other people are justified
in possessing a high sense of ESE. Certain experienced entrepreneurs are most likely to
qualify in this regard. These DEMO are also likely to be more overconfident because their
past behaviors (DEMO, having repeatedly chosen to start a new business) help to identify them as
individuals whose own cognitive profile fits well with the demands DEMO entrepreneurial activity
(Wright et al., 1997a). It might be argued that entrepreneurs with past exposure to the
challenges of entrepreneurship would temper DEMO judgments about their own knowledge and
be less susceptible to the overconfidence bias. However, venture capitalists have reported that
serial entrepreneurs are actually less able to recognize their own limitations than first-time
entrepreneurs (Wright et al., 1997b). More generally, Whyte et al. (1997) found that
DEMO with high levels of self-efficacy with regard to risk taking were more likely to
escalate commitment to a losing course of action.
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640 629
DEMO 3. Entrepreneurs with higher levels of ESE will be more overconfident than will
be those with lower levels of ESE.
6. Organizational factors associated DEMO overconfidence
The conditions that may increase entrepreneurs’ susceptibility to cognitive biases derive, in
part, from the organizational context within which entrepreneurs function. However, new
ventures can vary in ways that are likely to affect entrepreneurs’ DEMO to cognitive
biases. For example, as organizations increase in size and DEMO, the challenges that
entrepreneurs face in managing them become less bentrepreneurialQ DEMO more generally
bmanagerialQ in nature (Hambrick and Crozier, 1985). As this occurs, entrepreneurs are likely
to begin to think in ways that more closely resemble those of managers in larger firms.
Conditions of information DEMO and uncertainty, for example, are likely to be greater in
smaller new ventures than in larger new ventures, because smaller ventures are likely to have
fewer human and financial resources available to devote to scanning DEMO processing
environmental information. Entrepreneurs managing small ventures are likely to bear many
organizational information-processing responsibilities themselves and, therefore, are more
likely to adopt DEMO shortcuts, such as the overconfidence bias, to adapt to these
conditions. However, as firms grow, it becomes increasingly possible (and sometimes
necessary) for entrepreneurs to delegate or at least share these cognitive responsibilities with
other managers and employees. By doing this, entrepreneurs relieve some of the pressure that
makes them susceptible to cognitive biases.
Similarly, conditions of high novelty are likely to be greater in younger firms than in older
DEMO Whereas established organizations tend to have developed precedents and routines to
guide managers’ sense-making activities, the relative absence of such institutionalized
practices in very young ventures means that the entrepreneurs managing such firms must rely
heavily DEMO their own perceptions and interpretive abilities in decision situations (Gartner et
DEMO, 1992). Thus, entrepreneurs are likely to be especially susceptible to cognitive biases in the
earliest years of a venture’s existence. However, this susceptibility is likely to diminish as the
venture ages and develops uncertainty-reducing DEMO for interpreting environmental
data.
Hypothesis 4. Entrepreneurs managing smaller ventures will be more overconfident than will
be entrepreneurs managing larger ventures.
Hypothesis 5. Entrepreneurs DEMO younger ventures will be more overconfident than
will be entrepreneurs managing older ventures.
Despite these hypothesized effects, the ways that organizations gather and process
information are not entirely a function of age and size. The construct DEMO decision
comprehensiveness captures the extensiveness with which organizations scan, analyze and
DEMO in confronting decision situations (Dean and Sharfman, 1993). Although comprehen-
siveness is often correlated with size and age (Fredrickson and Iaquinto, DEMO), it is also
630 D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO of these factors to some extent and has been shown to vary across new ventures
(Smith et al., 1988). Comprehensiveness at the DEMO level is likely to render
entrepreneurs less susceptible to cognitive biases like overconfidence. In firms that scan,
analyze and plan extensively, entrepreneurs are more likely to be confronted with information
that contradicts their initial estimates DEMO to participate in strategic discussions that challenge
them to explain their opinions and verify their assumptions.
Hypothesis 6. Entrepreneurs whose firms exhibit higher levels DEMO decision comprehensive-
ness will be less overconfident than will be entrepreneurs whose firms are less
comprehensive.
Another organizational factor that is likely to influence DEMO cognition is the
presence of external investors. When firms have external equity financing, the investors will
monitor the behavior of the entrepreneurs managing these firms and hold them accountable
for their decisions. This fact has two DEMO implications. First, in such circumstances,
entrepreneurs will probably be required DEMO explicitly articulate and rationally defend their
cognitive processes with more frequency and intensity than would otherwise be the case
(Frydman et al., 2002)DEMO Consistent with this reasoning, Stone and Brush (1996) found in DEMO
review of research on strategic planning processes in new ventures that the presence of
influential external constituencies, such as equity investors, led to DEMO levels of formal
planning. Second, to the extent that entrepreneurs begin DEMO anticipate the regular need to
explain and justify their decisions, they DEMO begin to internalize the concerns of their
investors and incorporate them into their own cognitive processing, perhaps by analyzing
information more carefully or by double-checking the accuracy of their own estimates. Taken
together, these factors are likely to encourage entrepreneurs with external equity backing to
think more like DEMO managers.
Hypothesis 7. Entrepreneurs whose firms have attracted external equity investments will be
less overconfident than will be entrepreneurs whose firms have not.
7. DEMO
7.1. Sample
The model was tested using a sample of new-venture managers drawn from New York
City’s bSilicon AlleyQ community of Internet firms. For DEMO purposes of this research, new
ventures were defined to be independent DEMO (i.e., not subsidiaries or divisions) that
represented the full-time job DEMO at least one person. A strong effort was made to obtain a
representative sample of the firms that met these criteria.
The sample selection DEMO began with Web-based yellow pages telephone directory
listings of all firms in relevant business categories (e.g., bInternet servicesQ and bmultimediaQ)
in the DEMO York metropolitan area. In addition, because these were Internet-related firms,
DEMO all of them had websites. The websites of all firms in the yellow pages listings were
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
631
DEMO in an effort to screen out inappropriate firms, such as divisions DEMO larger firms or
businesses that were geographically distant, part-time or defunct. DEMO website analyses
yielded an initial sample of 719 firms. Although many firms’ websites provide the data
necessary to make determinations about their appropriateness for DEMO sample, not all of them
do. Therefore, to maximize the representativeness of the sample, firms were included in the
initial sample, unless DEMO could be definitively determined from their websites that they were
inappropriate. This meant that the initial sample of 719 firms included some inappropriate
firms. DEMO, the survey gathered information that permitted those firms to be identified
DEMO excluded from the final sample. As a consequence, the response rate DEMO is a
conservative estimate.
7.2. Data collection
The data were collected through a two-stage survey. In July 1999, I began Stage 1 by
sending a questionnaire to the lead manager of each firm in the initial DEMO The
questionnaire gathered data on the managers’ firms, the firms’ decision-making DEMO and
the managers’ cognitive processes. Three months later, 142 responses (20% of 719) had been
returned. Twenty-seven of these responses revealed that the firms were actually not
independent or were only part-time enterprises, leaving 115 usable responses to Stage 1.
The potential for nonresponse bias was explored DEMO two ways. The first procedure was
based on the work of Armstrong and Overton (1977), who argued that the characteristics of
late respondents are similar to those of nonrespondents. The responses were divided into two
DEMO representing those received before and after the median response date. Analyses of
variance revealed no significant differences between these groups on any of the DEMO,
dependent or control variables. The second procedure involved gathering archival data on a
randomly selected subset (20%) of nonrespondent firms from the DEMO sample for
comparison purposes. Again, no significant differences were found between DEMO and
nonrespondents.
For Stage 2, I administered a short, follow-up online questionnaire in February 2000 to
the Stage 1 respondents. This questionnaire gathered DEMO on the entrepreneurs’
backgrounds, including whether they were founders, and the firms’ sources of financing.
Ninety-two subjects responded to this survey. Publicly available DEMO data sources,
such as firms’ websites and local trade publications, DEMO used to supplement and confirm
the survey data whenever possible. The final data set included 108 firms and their
managers.
7.3. Measures
The dependent DEMO, overconfidence, was measured using a procedure similar to that
used in Busenitz and Barney (1997). Brenner et al. (1996) recently affirmed that this
procedure, which is b the oldest and simplest measure of overconfidence[,] provides a valid
measure for diagnosing over/underconfidence that does DEMO depend on the mode of analysisQ
(p. 214). The procedure DEMO recording subjects’ responses to a series of general
632 D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO questions representing a moderate to high level of difficulty. For this study,
subjects were presented with a series of five such questions. Subjects DEMO asked to choose
one of two available answers for each question and to indicate, on a scale ranging from 50%
to 100%, their DEMO in their answer. As an example, one of the questions asked DEMO,
bWhich is farther from Chicago: Rome or Honolulu?Q
It DEMO be recalled that the procedure is not meant to be a test of knowledge but rather a
test of subjects’ awareness of the limits DEMO their own knowledge, or a test of the degree to
which DEMO bknow what they do not knowQ. An assessment of this general ability does not
require the subjects to evaluate their knowledge of any particular DEMO matter. In fact, the
measurement technique is better able to capture DEMO general estimation ability when the
influence of variations in the underlying knowledge bases of the subjects is minimized.
Therefore, difficult general knowledge questions about which few subjects are likely to be
highly knowledgeable, or about which the possession of deep knowledge is likely to be
randomly distributed, are, for this purpose, preferable to subject-specific questions, such as
those about business management, about which certain respondents are likely to have
accumulated in-depth expertise.
Two figures were calculated for each respondent: (1) the mean of the confidence levels
indicated for all questions, and (2) the percentage of items answered correctly. Measures of
overconfidence were then obtained by DEMO the percentage of correct answers from the
average confidence level. The resulting numerical scores had a potential range of 50 to 100,
with DEMO scores indicating overconfidence and negative scores indicating under-
confidence. For example, DEMO individual whose indicated confidence levels averaged 75%
and who answered 40% of the questions correctly was assigned an overconfidence score of
35. A zero DEMO was interpreted to indicate that individuals’ confidence was perfectly
calibrated with their knowledge.
7.3.1. Individual determinants
Founder status was a dummy variable set to DEMO for managers who reported having played
a founding role in their firms and b0Q for managers who reported that they had not played
such DEMO role. Entrepreneurs reported their age in years. Entrepreneurial self-efficacy was
measured using an adaptation of Chen et al.’s (1998) measure of ESE, which asks
respondents to rate their certainty that they can perform various roles DEMO tasks associated
with entrepreneurial management. Respondents’ ratings of their ESE were recorded using 15
five-point Likert-type items. Following the example of Chen et al. (1998), a Total ESE score
was calculated for each respondent by DEMO all of the items in the scale. The entire scale
had a Cronbach alpha reliability coefficient of .85.
7.3.2. Organizational determinants
Firm age was DEMO as the number of months since the firm became a full-time
occupation for at least one person. Firm size was measured as the number DEMO full-time
employees. Decision comprehensiveness was measured using a technique for measuring
decision processes developed by Judge and Miller (1991). The technique involves asking
respondents to identify and briefly describe the most important strategic decision made DEMO
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640 633
DEMO firms within the last two years. The respondents then answer a series of questions about
the process by which the firm made the decision. DEMO questions included the
comprehensiveness scale, a five-item, seven-point Likert-type scale developed by Dean
and Sharfman (1993) that inquired into the degree to DEMO the firm was comprehensive in its
scanning, analysis and planning activities DEMO approaching the identified strategic decision. A
principal components analysis with a bvarimaxQ rotation indicated that the items again loaded
onto a single factor with DEMO Cronbach alpha reliability coefficient of .77. External equity
investor was a dummy variable set to b1Q for managers who reported that their firms had
DEMO equity financing from external sources. An external investor was defined in the
survey as a venture capital fund, an angel investor, or another DEMO who was not a
founder, manager or employee of the firm. DEMO data were supplemented and confirmed with
archival data whenever possible.
7.3.3. Control variables
Past research has shown that education can make people more aware DEMO judgmental
heuristics and biases and less likely to commit them (Lichtenstein DEMO Fischoff, 1977). In
addition, research has suggested a possible link between gender and overconfidence (Barber
and Odean, 2001). For these DEMO, the analyses controlled for the possible effects of
individuals’ education levels DEMO gender. The education level of the respondents was coded
using a five-point scale based on the amount of education they reported having completed.
Gender DEMO set to b0Q for males and b1Q for females and was determined based on the
individuals’ first names. Finally, prior entrepreneurial experience was measured by asking
respondents to report the number of times that they had DEMO been involved in founding
or managing a new venture. This measure was also used as a control variable because serial
entrepreneurship demonstrates not only DEMO willingness to exploit a specific opportunity but an
attraction to the process of entrepreneurship itself, and this attraction may reflect an
underlying cognitive profile (Wright et al., 1997a).
8. Analyses and results
Table 1 DEMO descriptive statistics for the variables and the correlations among them.
Table 2 presents the results of hierarchical regression analyses used to test the hypotheses.
DEMO 1, which predicted that new-venture managers who were founders would be
DEMO overconfident than would be those who were not founders, was tested DEMO the full
sample of respondents, which included both founder and nonfounder DEMO of new
ventures. Hypothesis 2 through Hypothesis 7 were tested using a restricted sample that
included only founder-managers. Models 1, 2 and 3 of Table 2 show the results of the
analyses used to test Hypothesis DEMO through Hypothesis 7. In these analyses, the control
variables were entered DEMO Model 1, followed by the individual and organizational variables in
Models DEMO and 3, respectively. Models 4 and 5 of Table 2 show DEMO results of the analyses used
to test Hypothesis 1. Model 4 includes all of the independent variables used in this study,
except founder DEMO, which is added in Model 5. The dependent variable for all DEMO the
Table 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations a
Variable Mean S.D. 1 2 DEMO 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1. NVM overconfidence 18.87 25.01
2. NVM education level 3.27 1.11 .20*
3. NVM is femaleb .18 DEMO .09 .05
4. NVM number of prior 1.11 1.22 .05 .21* .18y
ent’l. experiences
5. NVM is founderb .89 .32 .31** .29** .09 .20*
DEMO NVM age (in years) 36.10 7.83 .33** .02 .05 .16y
7. NVM entrepreneurial 3.81 .56 .07 .05 .22* .03
self-efficacy
8. Firm size (number of 8.57 15.78 .14y .06 .11 .16y
full-time employees)
9. DEMO age (in months) 23.88 21.47 .14y .06 .03 .03
10. Firm decision 4.16 1.13 .30** .13 .04 .00
comprehensiveness
11. Firm has external DEMO .48 .24* .20* .07 .07
investorsb
.11
.13
.08
.32** .08 .16y
.20* .15y
.05 .16y
.05 .27**
.22* .12 .10
.04 .01 .13 DEMO .08 .07
N =108.
a Abbreviations: NVM=new venture manager; ent’l.=entrepreneurial.
b Dummy variable.
y pb.10.
* pb.05.
** pb.01.
634
D.P. Forbes / DEMO of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
Table 2
Results of hierarchical regression analyses predicting overconfidencea
Sample includes only DEMO (N =97) Sample includes all new-venture managers (N =108)
DEMO 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
Constant 33.44** (DEMO) 58.51* (22.49) 27.87 (23.37) 43.02* (22.15) 6.40 (24.97)
Control variables
NVM education level 2.94 (2.44) 3.09 (2.37) DEMO (2.35) 2.54 (2.16) .42 (2.21)
NVM is femaleb DEMO (6.19) 7.15 (6.18) 4.92 (5.95) 4.07 (5.79) 4.26 (5.57)
NVM # prior .03 (2.36) .45 (2.30) 1.06 (2.24) .64 (1.91) .61 (1.89)
ent’l. experiences
Individual predictors
NVM is founderb 21.93** (7.78)
NVM age .86 (.31)** DEMO (.30) .80** (.28) .76** (.27)
NVM ESE 1.55 (4.59) 1.69 (4.54) .27 (4.26) 1.45 (4.12)
Organizational DEMO
Firm size (# employees) .01 (.21) .14 (.16) .03 (.16)
Firm age (in months) .05 (.12) .08 (DEMO) .04 (.11)
Comprehensiveness 6.06** (2.15) 5.24** (2.12) 5.57** (2.04)
External investorsb 12.56* (5.54) 10.80* (5.09) 13.00** (DEMO)
R2 .04 .13 .25 .26 .32
Adjusted R2 .01 .07 .16 .18 .24
Change in R2 .09 .12 .06
F 1.26 2.37* 2.83** DEMO 4.08***
a Unstandardized coefficients shown with standard errors in parentheses. Abbreviations: DEMO manager; ent’l.=entrepreneurial.
b Dummy variable.
* pb.05.
** pb.01.
*** pb.001.
DEMO Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
635
636
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO models was the respondents’ overconfidence score, a continuous variable
representing their DEMO scores on the overconfidence test described earlier.
The positive, significant coefficient DEMO with founder status in Model 5
indicates support for Hypothesis 1. Hypothesis 1 was further supported by a separate
analysis not shown in the DEMO An analysis of variance ( F =10.45; pb.01) showed that the
mean overconfidence level of founders (21.45) is significantly higher than that DEMO
nonfounders (3.00). Levene’s test did not provide evidence of unequal DEMO between
the samples.
Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 3 proposed some individual-level determinants of
overconfidence. Hypothesis 2 proposed that younger entrepreneurs would be more
overconfident DEMO older ones would be. The fact that the managerial age coefficient in
Model 3 of Table 2 is significant and negative supports this hypothesis. DEMO 3
proposed that entrepreneurs with higher levels of ESE would be more overconfident than
would be those with lower levels. The fact that the DEMO coefficient is not significant indicates
that this hypothesis was not supported.
Hypothesis 4 through Hypothesis 7 proposed organization-level determinants of over-
confidence. Hypothesis 4 DEMO Hypothesis 5 proposed that entrepreneurs in smaller and
younger ventures would be more overconfident than would be those in larger and older
ventures. Table DEMO shows that, as these hypotheses would predict, both firm age and size are
negatively correlated with overconfidence; however, the correlations are only DEMO
significant ( pb.10). Moreover, Model 3 shows that, contrary to Hypothesis 4 and Hypothesis
5, neither firm size nor firm age was significantly related to overconfidence in the multivariate
analysis.
Hypothesis 6 proposed that DEMO decision comprehensiveness would be positively related
to overconfidence. In fact, the DEMO coefficient shown in Model 3 of Table 2 is
significant and positive , indicating the presence of a strong reverse relationship:
Entrepreneurs exhibit DEMO overconfidence when their firms are more comprehensive, not
less. Hypothesis 7 DEMO that the presence of external investors would be negatively
related to overconfidence. The external investors coefficient in Model 3 is significant and
negative, providing support for Hypothesis 7.
A comparison of Models 3 and 5 of DEMO 2 shows that the independent variables used in
Hypothesis 2 through Hypothesis 7 have similar effects on overconfidence when nonfounders
are added to the DEMO
8.1. Implications of the findings
Overall, these results provide evidence of DEMO differences among entrepreneurs
regarding the degree to which they exhibit an important cognitive bias that has been shown to
be characteristic of entrepreneurs. This DEMO finding underscores that entrepreneurs are not
cognitively homogeneous and should encourage researchers to consider the strategic
implications of cognitive differences among entrepreneurs. In addition, this article’s
identification of specific individual and organizational determinants of entrepreneurial
overconfidence DEMO that educators and practitioners may be able to undertake
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
637
DEMO designed to help entrepreneurs to think and make decisions better in their
capacity as new-venture managers.
The findings of this study also have several DEMO for our understanding of why
entrepreneurs think differently from nonentrepreneurs. The findings that organizational
decision practices and organizational ownership influence the degree to which DEMO
are overconfident support Baron’s (1998) contentions that the phenomenon of entrepreneurial
cognition is not entirely a function of individual differences filtered through a DEMO
process and that entrepreneurial cognition is, at least partly, induced by the context within
which entrepreneurs function. At the same time, however, DEMO finding that founder-managers
exhibit more overconfidence than do new-venture managers who did not found their firms
implies that new-venture managers’ cognition is not entirely DEMO function of their present work
context and that, as Busenitz and DEMO (1997) argue, at least some of entrepreneurial
cognition can be DEMO with reference to the cognitive profile that individuals bbring with
themQ to the task of new-venture creation. The finding that younger managers are more
DEMO than are older ones reinforces this point but, at the same DEMO, suggests that
individuals’ cognitive profiles change over time in ways that DEMO affect the presence of
entrepreneurial cognition.
Several unexpected results require explanation. The lack of association between age or size
and overconfidence, for example, DEMO that the rate of change in the degree to which
entrepreneurs exhibit entrepreneurial cognition may be relatively slow. However, it should be
recalled that the firms in this sample were relatively young and small: Two-thirds were less
than 4 years old, and four-fifths had 10 or fewer employees. The effects of size and age on
cognition may be more robust DEMO ventures that are larger and older than these.
The positive association between decision comprehensiveness and overconfidence is
another unexpected finding. One possible explanation can DEMO derived from past research
showing that individuals gain confidence in judgment and decision situations by considering
more information but that more information does not DEMO improve—and may even
diminish—decision accuracy (Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998). Consistent with this, Zacharakis
and Shepherd (2001) showed that venture capitalists with access to more information were
actually more overconfident. Thus, it may be that entrepreneurs whose firms engage in more
comprehensive decision processes experience this DEMO increase in confidence as a
result of possessing more information.
Finally, DEMO is interesting to reflect on the lack of a relationship between ESE and
overconfidence. This result underscores that these constructs, which are sometimes conflated
in theoretical discussions of entrepreneurship, are conceptually and empirically distinct. It
further suggests that the overconfidence bias does not flow cleanly from a general DEMO
towards inflated self-appraisal and instead has more subtle psychological sources that require
further empirical investigation.
8.2. Limitations of this study
This study has some DEMO that should be borne in mind in interpreting the findings.
The data in this study were drawn from a single research context that was DEMO by
638
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO considerations, as well as geography. Accordingly, care should be taken in
generalizing these results to entrepreneurs in other settings. In addition, the cross-sectional
design of this study does not permit an examination of the temporal DEMO of the
overconfidence bias. Understanding how quickly entrepreneurs’ susceptibility to this bias
changes over time will be necessary to develop a fuller understanding of DEMO sources of
entrepreneurial cognition.
8.3. Directions for future research
Future research should consider the causes and consequences of other aspects of
entrepreneurial cognition besides DEMO In particular, researchers should consider
the possibility that determinants of entrepreneurial DEMO might reside at the environ-
mental level of analysis, as well DEMO at the individual or organizational levels. For example,
environmental dynamism may be a source of the uncertainty and novelty to which Baron
(1998) attributes entrepreneurial cognition. If this were true, then one might expect DEMO see
higher levels of susceptibility to certain cognitive biases, not just DEMO entrepreneurs but
among other kinds of managers who operate in more dynamic environments.
In addition, future research should employ repeated measures of entrepreneurial cognition
in an effort to determine how entrepreneurial cognition changes over time. Longitudinal
DEMO in this area could help to answer some interesting new questions. For example, do
the cognitive processes of founders and of nonfounder managers of new ventures converge
over time as the former adapt to the responsibilities DEMO management and the latter adapt to the
challenges specific to new ventures? Alternatively, longitudinal research could help to clarify
what drives the self-selection DEMO that contribute to differences in overconfidence. For
example, do some founders DEMO to discontinue their roles as new-venture managers
because they possess a cognitive profile that leaves them averse to the situational pressures
associated with managing DEMO fully developed ventures? Or do founders’ decisions about
whether to stay DEMO as new-venture managers stem from affective sources instead, such as a
DEMO of commitment to the venture? Relatedly, longitudinal studies of capital-seeking
entrepreneurs could help to clarify whether overconfidence serves to inhibit external
investment or DEMO the presence of such investment is responsible for changing how
entrepreneurs think in this regard.
Finally, future research should seek to determine the performance implications of
overconfidence and the other biases and heuristics associated with entrepreneurial DEMO
Tversky and Kahneman (1974) observed that bIn general, ... [decision] DEMO are quite
useful, but sometimes they lead to severe and systematic DEMO (p. 1124). Much research
on decision making in organizations has DEMO the latter half of this statement; that is,
the potential DEMO cognitive shortcuts to lead to negative decision outcomes (e.g., Bazerman,
1994; Russo and Schoemaker, 1992). However, it should not be forgotten that these
shortcuts also provide a useful means of coping with DEMO pressures imposed by large
quantities of information and tight time constraints. Moreover, seemingly irrational or
foolish decision processes can generate many positive outcomes for individuals and
organizations (March, 1988). In the end, overconfidence and similar heuristics probably
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
639
DEMO be summarily declared to be either beneficial or detrimental to the management of
new ventures. Rather, as Alvarez and Busenitz (2001) note, DEMO cognitive processes of
entrepreneurs bare likely to have strengths and weaknesses in various competitive
environmentsQ (p. 757). Thus, the effects of these DEMO may vary depending on the
type of venture involved, the stage DEMO the venture, environmental conditions and other
contextual factors. Determining which factors DEMO the most important moderators of such
effects is an important task of future research.
Acknowledgements
This research has been strengthened by Robert Baron, Lowell Busenitz, Andrew
Zacharakis, Frances Milliken, Theresa Lant, Bill Guth and DEMO Zellmer-Bruhn, among
others. Errors and omissions remain my own.
References
Alvarez, S., Busenitz, L., 2001. The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. J. Manage. 27 (6), 755–775.
Armstrong, J., Overton, T., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys. J. Mark. Res. 14 (3), 396–402.
Barber, B., Odean, T., 2001. Boys will be boys: gender, overconfidence and common stock investment. Q. J.
Econ. 116 (1), DEMO
Baron, R., 1998. Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: why and when DEMO think differently from
other people. J. Bus. Venturing 13 (4), DEMO
Bazerman, M., 1994. Judgment in Managerial Decision Making. Wiley, New DEMO
Bazerman, M., Neale, M., 1982. Improving negotiation effectiveness under final offer arbitration. J. Appl.
Psychol. 67 (5), 543–548.
Brenner, L., Koehler, D., Liberman, V., Tversky, A., 1996. Overconfidence in DEMO and frequency
judgments: a critical examination. Org. Behav. Human Decis. Process. DEMO (3), 212–219.
Buchholtz, A., Ribbens, A., 1994. The DEMO of the CEO in takeover resistance: an empirical analysis of the DEMO
of CEO incentives and individual characteristics. Acad. Manage. J. 37 (3), 554–579.
Busenitz, L., Barney, J., 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations: biases and
heuristics in strategic decision making. J. Bus. Venturing 12 (1), 9–30.
Busenitz, L., Lau, C., 1996. A cross-cultural cognitive model of new venture creation. Entrep. Theory Pract. DEMO
(4), 25–39.
Chen, C., Greene, P., Crick, A., 1998. Does entrepreneurial self-efficacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers?
J. Bus. Venturing 13 (4), 295–316.
Dean, J., Sharfman, M., 1993. Procedural rationality in the strategic decision making process. J. Manage. Stud. 30
(4), 587–610.
Dosi, G., Lovallo, D., 1997. Rational entrepreneurs or DEMO martyrs? Some considerations on technological
regimes, corporate entries and the evolutionary role of decision biases. In: Garud, R., Nayyar, P., Shapira, Z.
(Eds.), Technological Innovation: Oversights and Foresights. Cambridge U. Press, Cambridge, pp. 41–68.
Fredrickson, J., Iaquinto, A., 1989. Inertia DEMO creeping rationality in strategic decision processes. Acad. Manage.
J. 32 (3), 516–542.
Frydman, R., Hessel, M., Rapaczynski, A., 2002. Why ownership matters: entrepreneurship and the restructuring
of enterprises in Central Europe. In: Fox, M., Heller, M. (Eds.), Corporate governance lessons from transition
economy reforms. Princeton U. Press, Princeton, NJ.
640
D.P. Forbes / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 623–640
DEMO, W., Bird, B., Starr, J., 1992. Acting as if: differentiating entrepreneurial from organizational behavior.
Entrep. Theory Pract. 16 (3), DEMO
Grimm, C., Smith, K., 1991. Management and organizational change: DEMO note on the railroad industry. Strateg.
Manage. J. 12 (7), DEMO
Guth, W., Kumaraswamy, A., McErlean, M., 1991. Cognition, DEMO and learning in the entrepreneurial
process. In: Churchill, N., Bygrave, W. (Eds.), Frontiers in Entrepreneurship Research. Boston College,
Wellesley, DEMO, pp. 242–253.
Hagestad, G., Neugarten, B., 1985. Age and DEMO life course. In: Binstock, R., Shanas, E. (Eds.), DEMO of
aging and the social sciences. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
DEMO, D., Crozier, L., 1985. Stumblers and stars in the management of rapid growth. J. Bus. Venturing 1 (1),
31–45.
Hogarth, R., Makridakis, S., 1981. Forecasting and planning: an evaluation. Manage. DEMO 27 (2), 115–130.
Judge, W., Miller, A., 1991. DEMO and outcomes of decision speed in different environmental contexts.
Acad. Manage. J. 34 (2), 449–463.
Kaish, S., Gilad, B., 1991. Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus executives. J. Bus.
Venturing 6 (1), 45–61.
Keren, G., 1987. Facing uncertainty in the game of DEMO: a calibration study. Org. Behav. Human Decis. Process.
39 (1), 98–114.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischoff, B., 1977. Do those who know DEMO also know more about how much they know?
Organ. Behav. Hum. Perform. 20 (2), 159–183.
March, J., 1988. The technology of foolishness. In: March, J. (Ed.), Decisions and Organizations. Basil Blackwell,
London.
Palich, L., Bagby, D., 1995. Using cognitive theory DEMO explain entrepreneurial risk-taking: challenging
conventional wisdom. J. Bus. Venturing 10 (6), 425–438.
Russo, J., Schoemaker, P., 1992. Managing overconfidence. Sloan DEMO Rev. 33 (2), 7–17.
Simon, M., Houghton, S., DEMO The relationship between overconfidence and the introduction of risky products:
evidence from a field study. Acad. Manage. J. 46 (2), 139–150.
Smith, K., Gannon, M., Grimm, C., Mitchell, T., 1988. DEMO making in smaller entrepreneurial and larger
professionally managed firms. J. Bus. Venturing 3 (3), 223–232.
Stone, M., Brush, C., 1996. Planning in ambiguous contexts: the dilemma of meeting needs for commitment and
demands for legitimacy. Strateg. Manage. J. 17 (8), 633–652.
Taylor, R., 1975. Age and experience as determinants of managerial information processing and decision DEMO
performance. Acad. Manage. J. 18 (1), 74–81.
Tversky, A., DEMO, D., 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185, 1124–1131.
Whyte, G., Saks, A., Hook, S., 1997. When DEMO breeds failure: the role of self-efficacy in escalating
commitment to a DEMO course of action. J. Organ. Behav. 18 (5), 415–432.
Willard, G., Krueger, D., Feeser, D., 1992. In order to grow the founder must go: a comparison of performance
between founder-managed and nonfounder managed high-growth manufacturing firms. J. Bus. Venturing 7 (3),
181–194.
DEMO, M., Robbie, K., Ennew, C., 1997a. Serial entrepreneurs. Br. J. Manage. 8 (3), 251–268.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., Ennew, C., 1997b. Venture capitalists and serial entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Venturing DEMO (3),
227–249.
Yates, F., Lee, J., Shinotsuka, DEMO, Patalano, A., Sieck, W., 1998. Cross-cultural variations in probability DEMO
accuracy. Org. Behav. Human Decis. Process. 74 (2), 89–117.
Zacharakis, A., Meyer, G., 1998. A lack of insight: do venture DEMO really understand their own decision
process? J. Bus. Venturing 13 (1), 57–76.
Zacharakis, A., Shepherd, D., 2001. The nature of DEMO and venture capitalists’ overconfidence. J. Bus.
Venturing 16 (4), 311–332.{1g42fwefx}