ORGANIZATIONAL
BEHAVIOR
AND
HUMAN
DECISION
PROCESSES
43, 75-117 (1989)
methodologies DEMO decision approaches making. have State University
processes process underlying distinct relation tion ual comes) muntz, A decision processes input large this of 439-449) of process L. (Abelson 1979; modeling between factors, cognitive choices information (Abelson processes stimuli are structural (input) and decision on the intervening responses (out-
48824- J. Kevin 1117. Ford,
of informational data of
Copyright
All rights
that cision processes Process occur outcomes. should models between DEMO be attempt fundamental the studied introduction to by focus more directly
(DEMO, & statistical Levi, and
collecting principle
1979). &
to
DEMO research
during the
draw models Structural inferences 1985; can active models DEMO,
be
1985). By
1979).
Levi,
manipulation developed regarding or statistical Kleinmuntz, on describing & Klein- the
inputs and cognitive process the steps de-
focus
to
underlying predict of
decision is that
modeling DEMO
the
informa- individ- cogni-
versity, Send correspondence East Lansing,
Process DEMO Methods: Contributions,
J. KEVIN BRIAN FORD, M. NEAL HULTS, DEMO SCHMITT,~USAN AND MARY L.
five literature coded. typically The the contingent small Process dominant review, research studies R. or The after used using on results were a also mode the number only process demands indicates DEMO firmly used when of tracing alternatives by demonstrate the of that decision for the number approaches information this task had review makers. faced that DEMO been alternatives noncompensatory to by processing and Compensatory study eliminated the study decision decision and in characteristics from decision dimensions maker. making. strategies strategies DEMO making Based Forty- were were were were on is
needed directions Beach is for future research.
yet body underlying potentially of
Department 75
0 DEMO by Academic
of reproduction
Press,
tracing then methodological and
used
research has
individual complementary
to
MI
research
T.
as
R.
an
Mitchell integrative
DEMO protocol to
study
are issues discussed. (1978, that could The contribute cost/benefit Management as to
framework 8 Academy 1989
examined decision
and DEMO
Problems, and
L. DOHERTY SCHECHTMAN,
analysis the the cognitive growing DEMO information processes body of
a guide
analysis improving for framework the rigor
identifying Review,
such
been
This
developed as review
verbal
3,
DEMO making. issues
developed
to study
Academic
PRSS.
regarding
methodologically the
cognitive
IK.
Two
of Psychology, Michigan State Uni-
0749-5978189 $3.00
Inc.
reserved.
in any form
Neglected Research Questions
Svenson,
underlying board
tive
or 76 as often strategies as possible that people (Svenson, use DEMO 1979). arriving at a decision are the main focus of
of inquiry. linear predicting models
The the models information (Slavic Research the simple linear & utilizing model structural for
evaluations ing contend
judgments the posited DEMO sion stein, From insensitivity making behavior 1977). to another be DEMO process. more they perspective, may a function capture a fundamental characteristic DEMO
occur may
not underlying quently, be modeled understood some cognitive researchers DEMO processes simply have studying (Anderson, concluded input-output 1969; that cognitive DEMO, relationships processes 1960). and Conse- can- that
predictive of denying (Pitz
being tive, the expense linear the model is rarely benefits the & Sachs, sufficient of linear 1984; when and Svenson, models substantive one is must interested 1979). not meaning From be in accepted DEMO this of processes nonlinear perspec- at
existence the
judgmental proach problem opment adapted Payne for of solving process (1976) providing new processes noted (Newell models tracing insights (Pitz that & and procedures the Simon, & different into Sachs, limitations cognitive 1984; methods of Slavic processes the of structural et experimentation. al., require 1977). modeling the devel- ap- He
1978). to This tracing used
tracing uation models spective by DEMO human decision the behavior. Unlike the structural modeling per-
accessed. Carroll, DEMO strategies
approaches which tracing focuses information Process a the judgment observe been steps on
the
form have
leading and
outcomes predecisional 1972) to used a of decision the behavior decision
used in arriving
directly the to DEMO make assesses at in inferences a which
choice.
(Payne, what the process, analyzing process a sit- &
in Braunstein,
has
process
DEMO
Lichtenstein, have
model linear added model implies little
that
despite
found
(Pitz linear which 8z regression Sachs, a
algebraically In a (Dawes DEMO addition, of the
FORD With process models, the algorithms
choices has demonstrated made by decision the robustness makers
or
decision 1984).
linear DEMO the
equivalent & flawed yet model be
is
in
ET AL.
1971). that
the
Attempts addition
to
document conflgural
of
the
terms
nonlinear DEMO structural use
of
(e.g., that no the Billings increment & Marcus, of maker predictable uses
models represents decision For may
the goodness characteristics of fit
Corrigan, the model predictive 1974; than power a
in
DEMO, do a tradeoff more Einhom than among Goldberg, variance complex et beyond averag- 1968).
as suggestive Slavic, two or
merely
of of
more of radically decision different models
the the linear tasks used model DEMO deci- and is
an to effort research to derive issues explanatory in
about
human
information information what
deci- was
characteristic of Fischhoff, the
1983;
a
linear
of
conflicting al. predict
human & model Lichten- deci- DEMO
(1979)
PROCESS TRACING
tion Two boards major (eye process movement tracing methods methods have are verbal also been protocols used but and have informa- been
DEMO applied analysis to a doing restricted requires as set the of decision tasks and maker problem to think situations). aloud while Verbal actually DEMO
model or theory of the decision process. Information boards require par-
tion
decision. be The examined to identify alternative models or strategies used in DEMO a
tory literature
for cated 1983).
parisons for model the implies that decision makers compare alternatives on each dimen-
ferences and one sion DEMO computing results summing in the differences a difference preference across between for one dimensions. decision alternatives alternative (Olshavsky,
duce tory mational Noncompensatory strategies. sated clude Conjunctive models the for conjunctive, by complexity a which high strategies score disjunctive, strategies have of the on been refer another decision involve identified to lexicographic, the dimension problem. the process by use Payne and of (Billings in The simplifying which elimination major (1976) 8z decision noncompensa- and rules by others aspects makers to re- in-
A DEMO
making thinking verbal statements decisions. or
ticipants and usually of the
models
information by Compensatory the absence
bined additive a
alternative
dimension 1979). DEMO With
Noncompensatory cues in
natives (Svenson, establish which a 1979). minimum do
to can
two are major types of strategies described in DEMO decision making
decision additively
integration
difference
with
alternatives the
greatest
are
value then
is
both the “compensates” linear same models a low are score DEMO on
disjunctive criterion meet
which
Decision they then
go
represent compensatory
cognitively
and
about
among
for
alternative to model. produce strategies the (Einhom interactive refer & to use Hogarth, either of cues the
of
explicitly require
decision
maker’s a choice search
is
and
decision
additive
this
for
be DEMO through coded are their and asked evaluation hypotheses to describe information alternatives. available of tested information. what alternatives regarding search Examina- they
noncompensatory complex DEMO sophisticated models. which model Compensa- & strategies are Marcus, or indi-
DEMO given an linear overall a value model based value The on summation each dimension of dif-
or by dimension the interactive cannot use be DEMO of infor-
model minimum each is dimension defined standard
The are a
depth for among
information and the pattern available
dimensions that alternative. each
DEMO counteracts difference one models, a low value a
77
can
dimension DEMO Com- the
selected. on these The additive overall values difference and
high
Marcus, 1983).
dimension
and
assumes for
of
the
as
each
1981) linear (Billings
and the for
then
requirement each reject
on
com-
DEMO another on
alter-
that
78 FORD ET AL.
alternative alternatives exceed the 1979). criterion equal DEMO to on or lexicographic at less least one dimension and criterion and
that different the selected the aspects remaining dimensions the strategies With aspects, important the (Olshavsky, the lexicographic involve are the important rank strategy, is ordering selected the of (Payne, dimensions attractive examined in first
DEMO the elimina- on
inated native of elimination and tion A importance. all by number alternatives form 1981; of of information researchers Newell that do (Svenson, not contend processing Simon, meet the that 1972; (Beach predetermined decision Tversky, Payne, & Mitchell, making 1976, 1972). DEMO 1982; is 1978; a highly Svenson, are Einhom elim- con-
DEMO on by consideration most 1979; most is
most dimension dimension 1976)DEMO
tingent ment, tory & 1979). decision and From person this DEMO perspective, characteristics. is a demands complex of effects the information critical DEMO use function of (1982) compensatory processing of processes task, in DEMO the decision or decision noncompensa- person complexity environ- making making factors
Hogarth, &
that
task). the which contingent The identification indicates on
DEMO the and and of is documented. The task, noncompensatory environment, and/or strategies. person It has factors now on been the 10 use DEMO of compensatory since process
examination of the their of environmental the decision task (e.g., of
highly on are less well
(Abelson Previous tracing objective was & reviews introduced Levi, of 1985; of many process DEMO process the decision modeling tracing making and studies process literature is to examine tracing by Payne techniques the (1976). effects
of
utility in teristics described behavior. ysis The press) of purpose the coded. have the Studies and research focused the of The using evidence variables present that DEMO process Jacoby, describing process has for of review interest tracing Jaccard, the conducted. impact is rather were in Kuss, the of reviewed process task, Troutman, environmental, tracing and study & Mazursky, studies charac-
DEMO factors on the strategy using use examined. been tracing to The provide approaches than major critically a comprehensive conclusions to study evaluating decision that DEMO and can are the
perspective the using results (1978) process organizing decision needed
framework be issues identified. making drawn which The from need DEMO Beach cost/benefit this to body and be addressed Mitchell of research in the are found model is process derived then tracing and tracing DEMO and identifying examines as methodological literature are
which used for an
Sample METHOD
terms alter- With
reviewed decision
research
future from a for research
DEMO for
An attempt was made
to locate and summarize
results of published and
unpublished cited sion tion Index, by Payne a computerized (1976,
DEMO research. words behaviors. solicitation such Two as criteria process Sources of studies 1982), were tracing, for PROCESS from used verbal researchers for TRACING including protocol, active a study and in information in decision this review: making board, (I)
and
met
Coding (2) Nine task, study Strategy (3) process coded by task
findings. applied pendent teristics tracing mation regarding studies. as is variables, These well characteristics (7) search process, were chosen (8) decision to
characteristics tracing approach, DEMO
were each Judgment of analysis proaches type consumer Sample of available coded subject (VPA), (VPA, tasks and product) provided to task. DEMO as used include require IB). the providing and The in information A each verbal both subjects the sample A a study type the DEMO protocol was to matrix object board of (e.g., make decision coded task (4) study 99 (IB), of a requires rating students). the by the made or asks identifying decision stimuli, provide both or subjects subjects strategy, (judgment overall Task process (e.g., the DEMO to evaluation to number choose think apartment, or tracing choice). DEMO and one ap- for
of
descriptive and
resulted to examined discuss
to reevaluation the ers sulted the met inconsistencies appropriate in to a discuss DEMO the
ers coding study
description below. summary to which
Process the available tracing alternatives. approach.
board while and dimensions study acquiring presents monitors (often information subjects scaled
A
researchers: (5)
(9)
infor- study
attributes, about a
process
Studies were coded as using verbal protocol
the
of the coding process of the for results tracing each of the DEMO charac-
acquiring e.g., of decision alternatives rent)
representing task.
information.
(e.g.,
An
apartments) information a
decision
found
79
from search The
at least 41 forty-five variables one articles process met or decision the DEMO two were approach was utilized; and (2) one or more
DEMO search a
strategies criteria divided
was
slight
in
of each
both the
refinement in study
independently coders coding reviewing of the by studies. two DEMO researchers. study Any
of the this coding. the the review. process coding categories was
viability category
After
in
of
coding
cues,
research in
DEMO process manual relevant tracing studies approaches
of
Psychological search of included
were among were examined. five included coders Forty-five in such the
Discussion scheme DEMO, disagreements of and reach coding Each the agreement pair subsequent issues DEMO
to
the
(1)
the
(6)
has
Social Abstracts
to Science study Cita- key
using
review. that studies each
of in cod- DEMO as
and the the nature five cod- of
sample, inde-
process DEMO
references deci-
studies that
studies
the domains
situation and
the
face For 80 Information the down mechanical a the in the
by DEMO, native. were distribution stimuli subjects Tusk the on as defined number DEMO stimuli a a was coded also of dimensions recorded. as the number that provided of alternatives information available about to the each subject alter-
DEMO
rized “dishwasher as “dichotomous,” included”). “continuous,” Continuous “yes” cues or “mixed.” were defined When as the involving values a
were that DEMO,” “quantitative,” or “mixed.” Descriptive cues content refers to
as
content to were cues coded medium, Studies Independent examine on in used the were
tion turn develops over
information vary
cards matrix FORD mechanically with DEMO
function of as and cue
ability dimension each number study: the DEMO possible or “no” values,
gies. makers Huber when Therefore, used (1980) cues simplifying showed were for this described that rather review, DEMO than content in the more content complex of
number studies
dichotomous all the task
screen. used IB. desired. ET AL. pieces to
Cues are DEMO values of in that define the task stimuli (each alternative/
DEMO the for the
words
labeled had were short labeled phrases as were quantitative used as
variables. effects process both Studies as descriptive in which DEMO no information quantitative about cue values cue
compensatory was
when cue values
which large). words Cues
alternatives which task
which “mixed.” to represent DEMO cue values
search the
pair). (1) of values the cue
stimuli (e.g., had a value only of two
computer program pieces
DEMO were
the amount
boards
Two
cells
subjects both
subjects.
and stimuli dimensions were experimentally which
number levels possible types provides of across of cue
DEMO levels, information alternatives. and about (2) as Cue the to DEMO content the
were
levels range were of
coded the and catego- cues. vari-
of
which
terminal of information coded can
board, are of
varied
“not The
various and/or
presented.” purpose person, selection of
can categorized
(e.g., 2,3, or 4 rooms in an apartment).
the task, many (NP).
instead affect strategy of numbers, use.
approach manually informa- types
manipu- across
for
of
strate- as
and/or process DEMO tracing strategies. studies level fac- For is
of decision
numerical (e.g., values small, were or
the
either
or
be
as
For
display The this computerized review, the
operated of information are asked or computerized. to
matrix
of
are
He
placed
of
decision found
cues. values the Klayman DEMO for
range task defined stimuli labeled of
by
three
two
in the study.
of
in
rent were which
for
defined some $150, by of $200, the
the cues
three or task
dimension $250) or were DEMO more for coded labeled values were as
tors
of
the
attributes. of (1983) alternatives noted available For
that
information
this and search to DEMO, dimensions the strategies task
and
stimuli may the
Task
as or
DEMO “mixed.” while values Studies others (e.g.,
all the
more
depth this nipulated Search review, of search, and process. the nonmanipulated DEMO (2) The sequence salient PROCESS variables variables of characteristics search, DEMO for were (3) each content coded of study search separately. of were search, process coded. and are Ma- (I) (4)
DEMO Depth
acquired pieces sequence
decision indicative cates ample, same searching makers (Klayman, a large proportion 1983; Payne, of the available 1976; DEMO, information 1979). is For seen ex- as
proportion use of
DEMO aspects pattern approach. suggests
on a (response particular price
the pattern DEMO suggests the use a noncompensatory of a
mensional ination while search) DEMO by
Content of search or represents an analysis of the specific content of the
compensatory linear an additive or conjunctive difference (low strategy or elim-
nutrient piece latency) of information information is defined as for and/or the a particular amount to
reliance of information amining search acquired. DEMO example, a researcher may be interested in the
studies the
statements.” DEMO
conducted made Finally,
by such
categories and resent ing noncompensatory of strategies. decision strategies (nonlinear). are Specific compensatory strategies (often identified DEMO for linear) cod-
egy
by
compensatory aspects strategies linear measure maker. DEMO evidence or Since
ination included by
Decision use.
attempted the a researcher decision
to
latency each was of search (see Jacoby, Chestnut, Weigle, dz Fisher, 1976). For
quence
number recorded. study, of of of and search search the of alternative/dimension refers to the
information DEMO assessed often
characteristic(s) refers
examined searched through to temporal
decision DEMO maker attempt analysis to to
(EBA) (LN)
a
of
DEMO the (Payne, a determine comparison pairs acquired
compensatory a of noncompensatory information strategy for strategy. each while alternative low Additionally, proportion
81
the amount search of which by
Depth of search the nth of strategies DEMO and
strategy. strategy Finally, while searching variability search an a variable DEMO indi- the of
examine make
In the decision making literature, the DEMO major
strategies and additive and conjunctive, difference (AD) lexicographic, models which and elim- rep-
could study
process information
categorize were
search
models DEMO that a coded particular this which a particular review strategy we strategy were or
for
search the
total of
use
suggests of a
in
DEMO).
actually
the the and nth
search + by
used
labeled verbal sequence. protocol as of “coded Studies statements verbal which
represent terms
of
DEMO
information searched subject). Se- is
product. a
time
final
spent decision. Latency
ex-
noncompensatory whether
in most was terms actually interested of whether DEMO in
the
measured (i.e.,
1
researcher strat-
pattern in
protocol
examining 82 the factors affecting the decision process, decision strategies
short
examine was were Findings. used coded decision by For as at present least DEMO strategies one study, only if results indicated that a particular strategy
DEMO
and noncompensatory decision strategies.
research scriptive The
tal vided. and
process search Coding sented of Study Characteristics
as
of irons, participants ies of The another 22. involved cars, tasks person and stereos. such
be able the decision patients, performed. alternatives. tasks. and studies a
FORD
depth, ables DEMO
results is summary of
The Sample subjects coding in process, tracing DEMO of the 45 studies using process tracing approaches is pre-
both studies “housewives” students used professionals and professionals in work in organizations the same DEMO while three Six studies studies used used
across
the about to examination examine which Twelve decisions deciding various of housing studies on were options. DEMO Another varied, such 16 studies as toasters, 10
approach. required of studies political Seven decision Twenty-six required
ET
AL.
(task,
the RESULTS
person determinants of Second, of evidence search process, and strategy use DEMO pro-
across information size
studies
1.
and and task. one Twenty-seven study used elementary of the
the
and
regarding (from 45 or studies “women” a sample the was study
choice as
Three
approach, A strategy descriptive task is summary stimuli,
below. of cues,
45
of as DEMO and one study did not present
candidates. makers some asked
studies both choice used and an information rating
sequence,
decision were a
concentrate DEMO, and content on describing person of factors) the
coded maker
summary
and
as
“not the of
effects on on
in
the
the
study. DEMO results Studies was
search of the use
independent of processes
(NA)DEMO recorded. failing to
compensatory
(e.g.,
vari-
47.3
loan
studies
1
DEMO independent for
studies school used aged college children. students Seven
participants. to (SD
required candidates,
a sample
= 45.5)
of
that
required
to
Six
the
Sample with 196).
treatment type of
make studies DEMO choice of used all the
ratings
a size
The median
sample, DEMO,
variables,
average varied sample sample widely stud- size
avail-
evaluation gambling of plans for
one tasks
of
search)
separated characteristics regarding DEMO
two
used the sections. in task,
process
environmen- First,
tracing
a de-
provided
consumer products
though
presented.
review the study are
Thirty-five DEMO alternatives.
Process tracing
83
PROCESS TRACING
by board Payne approach and his while colleagues) 13 used verbal studies protocol used both analysis. verbal Six protocol (4 of which analysis are
and task access Task the information board maker 26 DEMO studies, to varied examine widely of amount the the decision although DEMO studies making studies not process. available manipulate had
stimuli For and cues. the of
than stimuli. 15 by alternatives the decision these and less DEMO 15 dimensions. In 8 studies, the number
number sions alternatives was DEMO dimensions was manipulated 11 were both while the in number 1 study of the alternatives number of and dimen- the
information most did
of DEMO In studies, varied.
less for
levels about cues, pro- cue
cue
makers. continuous did not Of cue present 32 information 4 studies reporting DEMO used dichotomous the
levels, vided Fourteen studies the studies information
Fourteen DEMO cues,
decision 22 used levels,
studies did report mixed cue report dichotomous information 10 presented and about continuous subjects cue content. with DEMO quantitative Of values.
either failed that sented ers and 5 and studies presented Independent were descriptive did 6 to cue to present interested decision DEMO descriptive variables. cues. evidence or makers. in cue Twelve the cues, DEMO In regarding effects 40 studies and of the 17 Additionally, of DEMO did presented 45 the not intercorrelation studies characteristics a in process mixture this any information sample, of tracing of the the quantitative research- decision studies pre-
not content, the 32
report of cues about
while task, studies, the 23 process. decision studies decision examined Seventeen The examined DEMO, effects the of and/or effects least the one of decision DEMO task maker variables. 14 factors on studies least the Of decision focused one the exam- en- 40
in
processes other studies 5 studies rather DEMO descriptive examining effects studies correlates only one interested of
processes. measuring making examined than the of
33 at 5 studies examined factor, at
variable those
studies factor, (N and
person the
vironmental ined The at DEMO least factor. one of
on natives the effects [N = 8]), of task the complexity number 33 of dimensions (defined = as (DEMO varying = l), the or both number the of number alter-
DeNisi, and
ject. their of used studies 1985) alternatives Ten effects DEMO varied (Billings display studies on the and & information response varied DEMO, dimensions the use mode 1988; values while about (N required DEMO, = 4 of dimensions examined 11). the Four cues (choice the studies in the or rating) matrix varied of to the examine the format sub- on
Blencoe, alternatives & Cafferty, while 2
provided DEMO search behavior. Seven the political As an stand examined example of the use search Herstein function (1981) of infor-
changes of candidate the DEMO strategy prior of labeling, to the as a for the
20) examining task
strategy
studies
effects of labeling
Bettman Bettman Jacoby Kakkar Study & & (1976)
Bettman Bettman (DEMO (Study Kakkar & & 2) 1) (1977)
(1980) (1977) Park
Gaber, Linsmeier
Billings (1983) (1985) & Marcus
Billings & Scherer
Butcher Scofield & (1984)
Capon & Burke
60 150
students Sample
housewives
50 housewives
99 housewives
11 loan officers
48 DEMO
104 students
15 professionals mental health
48 women
Biggs,
Bedard, &
(1988)
(1980)
~OCESS TRACING
cereals
Choice Choice Task DEMO of cereals
Choice of cereals
Choice microwaves of
Choice candidates of loan
Choice of apartments and rating
Choice or rating
Choice for of
Choice
DEMO of applicants residence
microwave iron, of toaster,
patient plan
steam
DEMO TABLE
Process tracing IB IB
IB
VPA
VPA IB
IB
IB
VPA
IB
OF 1
DECISION MAKING
16 11 Stimuli x x 35 13
DEMO x 13
15 x 9
3, 10 x 3, 7
2, x4 5, 8, 12
8X6
1 x 28
6 x 14,27
a. a. b. b.
a. b. a. b.
b a. .
DEMO a.
b. a.
b. a.
a.
NP NP Mixed NP Cues
Mixed NP Mixed NP
Continuous Descriptive
Mixed Continuous
Dichotomous Mixed
Mixed Continuous
NP
DEMO a. a. b.
b. a.
a. b.
a.
a. b.
a. b.
b. b. a.
a.
Independent variables
format
None None
None Display None DEMO
Task None Task Similarity Prior trials complexity knowledge of
alternatives Response candidate Number None of profiles mode
Response Task Decision None trials importance mode
DEMO None Prior Sex
dimensions Memory Number
knowledge of
aid
$
g z r:
F-
treatment
Capon & Davis
&
Dahlstrand Crow, Einhom, & Montgomery (1980) (1984) Summers Olshavsky,
Kleinmuntz KIeinmuntz, &
Einhom, (1979) (Study & 1)
Herstein
Hoyer & Jacoby
Isen (1983) & Means
Jacoby, & Fisher
Chestnut, (1978)
60 members female church
14 buyers industrial
26 students
1 student
1 student
20 students
61 DEMO
22 students
60 students
Choice of steam
Choice vender
Choice apartments of
Rating maladjustment of
Rating of cereal
Choice candidates of
Choice control of
DEMO iron & of
methods birth
Choice of car
Choice of cereals
quality
IB
VPA
IB
VPA
VPA
IB VPA
IB
VPA
IB
(1984)
Kleinmuntz,
Kleinmuntz (1979) (Study (1981)
2)
(1982)
6 x 27
7, 15 x 5
5x8
96x 16
42 x 11
2 x 45
3 x 12
6x9
16 x 35
DEMO a.
b. a.
b. a.
b. a.
b a. .
a. b.
b. a.
b. a.
a. b.
NP NP
Mixed Continuous
NP Continuous DEMO
Continuous Quantitative
NP NP
NP NP
Continuous Descriptive
NP NP
b.
b. a.
a. b. a. b.
b. a.
b. a.
a.
b. b. DEMO
a. b.
a. b.
Social/economic (SES) product
None Performance Risk status
Number cognitive of of tasks on
trials
alternatives None None Task DEMO
None
Display format
Political None Attitudes Past candidate None birth experience control stand of
Mood importance Dimension state toward and sex
None Prior Perceived DEMO risk
m 8 2
!l 0 z
c
E
Jacoby, Troutman, Mazursky, Study C
Jacoby, & Kuss Busato- (1984) Szybillo,
Johnson Johnson (1984) & (1985) Meyer
Johnson, DEMO Ghore
Payne,
(1985)
Meyer, (1986)
Johnson, Klayman (1986) &
Bettman
Schach (1977)
17
84 students
9 DEMO 2 physicians students students
NP
91 students
48
security Sample
analysts
school elementary
children
TABLE l-Continued
Process tracing IB
IB
VPA VPA
IB
IB
DEMO
Choice to Task of
Choice toothpaste of
Rating Choice job
applicants apartments of of
Choice
Choice Bidding of gambles of or
lunch summer
apartments DEMO
stocks
rating
specials bicycle, camp,
8 x Stimuli 26
4, 16, 8, 12 18 x
6x400 2.8 1, x4 2,4, x 8
2x2
3, 6 x 3, 6
4
b. a.
b. a.
b. a. b. a.
a. b.
b. a.
b. a.
DEMO Cues
Continuous Mixed
Mixed Mixed Mixed
Mixed Continuous
Continuous Quantitative
Dichotomous Mixed
buy
a. b.
a.
a. b. a. b.
b. a.
a. b.
DEMO a.
b.
Independent variables
Availability Task analysts Number Performance trials level of
name Expertise None
alternatives None Number of
Cue alternatives None
Task Cue DEMO made values values complexity of gamble of
Mental score Sex
brands of
brand/manufacturer of
of rater
Number None
Type None
capacity format test
DEMO 2
Importance of choice
Lehman (1980) & Moore
Lehman, Major (Study BE Moore,
DEMO (1980) 2) (1982)
Olshavsky (1979)
Onken, Revelle Hastie, (1985) &
Payne Payne Payne (Study (1976) (DEMO) 2)
2)
Payne (1986) (Study 3)
Payne, Payne, & (1986) & Johnson Bettman, Bettman, (Study
(DEMO) Braunstein &
120 students
1% 120 staff students members &
DEMO students
90 students
6 10 students students
16 12 students students
10 students
10 students
students
Choice of breads
Choice Rating of breads
attributions DEMO of
Choice
Choice
Gambling Choice Choice Gambling decisions decisions apartments apartments of of
Gambling decisions
Gambling decisions
condominiums & stereo of
receivers apartments of
DEMO
IB IB
VPA
VPA
VPA IB VPA
VPA IB IB
IB
VPA IB
5 x 9, 10
5x9 3 x 12
15 12 x 6,
3,
2, 4, 8, 12
2x3
2, DEMO, 6, 12 x
4x4 4, x 4, 8, 8, 12 12
4, 8, 12
4x4
2, 6, 10 x DEMO
12 x
2, 4, 8,
b. a.
b. a. a. b.
b. a.
b. a.
b. a.
b. a. a.
b. a. DEMO b. a.
a. b.
Continuous Mixed
Dichotomous Descriptive NP NP
Mixed Mixed
Mixed Quantitative Continuous
Continuous Continuous Mixed
Continuous Continuous Quantitative Mixed Quantitative
Continuous DEMO
a.
b. a. b. a.
a. b. b.
b. a.
a.
a. b. a. b.
b. a.
b. a. b. a.
b.
Type. Introduction DEMO of bread label
alternative Task trials change of new
Cue of values
Type Sex Task None trials of target behavior person
Task Task None DEMO complexity
Task None complexity
Cue values
Task Task None Time Cue None None values pressure
complexity complexity
Cue None values
Number Time None pressure DEMO
alternatives None
(Study (1976) 1)
Johnson
Study
Payne &
Payne (1978) Braunstein & Ragsdale
Staelin Sundstrom (DEMO)
Shields (1978) (1980)
Shields (1983)
&
DEMO (1984)
Wiiams, Wilkins Svenson Blencoe, Cafferty (1964) (1974) DeNisi, &
Bettman (1976) & Study (1985) Jacoby
25
students Sample
19 12 housewives executives
12
executives
% 12 students students
DEMO 120 17 students officers home probation students buyers &
Depth Search DEMO
Search of sequence variables search latency
Task TABLE
Choice groceries of
Rating Rating performance of of
performance
Choice Choice
apartments apartments of of
Choice DEMO homes
Choice Probation
decisions of performance or rating
NA
l-Continued Process tracing
VPA IB VPA
IB IB
IB IB
VPA
IB IB
Strategies
Gambling DEMO
Stimuli 8
3, Unknown 2, 4, x 4
3, 9 9 x x 6, 6,
13 13
4, 2, x 4, 8 4, x 8, 4, 8, 12 8 12
7 4 1 x x x 49 10 16
Quantitative Continuous Cues
DEMO NP Quantitative NP
Continuous Quantitative
NP Continuous NP NP
Continuous NP NP
NP Descriptive Findings
Dimension processors processors dimension searched fewer dimensions while
brand DEMO, combined differences looked among at
more searched and information, brand fewer processing, alternatives. and saw greater used Those more quality who
b. a.
b. a. a. b.
b. a.
b. a. a.
b.
b. a. DEMO
b. a. b.
b. a.
a. b. b. a.
b. a.
a. b. a.
b. a. b.
a. b. a. b.
Independent variables
alternatives DEMO None of
Task None Decision None complexity phase
Task Dimension complexity
Task complexity rating
importance None
Cue Task Display None complexity format
None None DEMO values confidence
Type Appraisal None of
decision purpose
E
2 s g
?
brands.
Bettman Bettman (1977) (1977) (Study (Study & &
Kakkar 1)
Kakkar 2)
Bettman & Park (1980)
Biggs & Linsmeier , Bedard, Gaber (1985) ,
Billings (1983) & DEMO
Billings (1988) & Scherer
Depth of search
Response Search sequence search latency latency
Response Depth Search of sequence
Coded Depth Response of
statements DEMO search latency
Coded Depth Depth Search Search statements of of verbal sequence sequence search search
Depth Search of sequence search
NA
NA
AD, CJ, EBA, LN, LX
LN Nonlinear
AD, CJ, EBA, LN
DEMO
Display and depth format of affected search. response latency, search sequence,DEMO
Prior Compared knowledge affected sequence knowledge response results or subjects depth affected to to over simpler latency, Study of processing search. course depth 1 but and of did more found search not than that affect with DEMO; display moderate search low format
percentage the was of information use DEMO of strategies EBA
the strategies; study with
of
decision of
Task DEMO found early of search, complexity and to change linear and led DEMO noncompensatory used to depth searched later.
used
in
search, was strategies. DEMO variability
Shifting decreased. tasks with from similar alternatives while variability of search
Response condition not alternatives not effect decreased strategies converge. help on mode DEMO depth searched did. over inter- while affected Process to deal moving more intradimensional with depth tracing information. from increased of and linear search regression DEMO number to Depth as nonlinear those pattern of measures of search in rating did do
decision task of trials. no main
under choice and DEMO tasks of low
sequence searched Decision, was as but for intradimensional DEMO individuals more importance information by in high had
importance mode. and Search importance search
importance. more likely
response search in mode choice was
69 DEMO ;d”
8
The
Butcher (1984) & Study Scofield
Capon & Burke (1980)
Capon & Davis (19&Q)
Crow, Summers Olshavsky, (1980) &DEMO
Dahlstrand Montgomery &
Einhom, (Study & (1979)
(1984)DEMO
Rleinmuntz,
IUeinmunt.z 1)
Search variables latency
Content Response Search sequence of
Content Depth
Depth Search
Coded
Depth Search
Compared tracing regression
of
DEMO
statements verbal
of
of
sequence search
sequence search
with
search
search search
process models
NA
TABLE Strategies
l-Continued Female Total were treatment judged experienced DEMO plans. to have Those PhDs more better who Findings working appropriate used in more an treatment agency “typical” setting plans;
High aids affected
DEMO which were in search related sequence to the efficiency and response of
information nonlinear dimensions. amount strategies. of produced Individual information
individual latency differences DEMO searched plans. sought in related use more of to linear information number or of
than depth low but differences SES. by not to dimension; low search Perceived in sequence strategies large risk by alternative; and number or used content. memory from of alternatives high alternatives (search
Individual examined) sequence (search few
examined) complex processors. was Evidence somewhat that related to
Decision performance complexity conjunctive makers of processes. on the used cognitive DEMO multistage Buyers process. tasks first models eliminated involving vendors on
basis of price differences and delivery time and then
More
Found used evidence in DEMO
looked effect at delivery history. Number of alternatives had no
dimensions on strategy in attractiveness of used. the chosen ratings alternative for chosen were DEMO; vs
differences nonchosen were better alternatives than other rules increased for DEMO over time; fmal additive choice. rules
tracing
task. for in linear DEMO The strategies was superior being
and regression nonlinear model to
Nonlinear LN
NA
AD, CJ, LX
CJ, LN, LX
LN Nonlinear
G DEMO 2
F
process
Einhorn, Kleinmuntz,
Herstein (Study & Kleinmuntz (1981) 2)
(1979)
Hoyer & Jacoby (1982)
Isen & Means (1983)DEMO
Jacoby, Fisher Chestnut, (1978) &
Jacoby, (1984) Troutman, Mazursky, & Kuss
Compared tracing with process
Coded Depth Search
regression DEMO
sequence search
statements of verbal
Content Search sequence of search
Content Depth Response Search of sequence latency
Response Content Depth of of search latency DEMO
of of search search
Content Depth of search search
Nonlinear LN
NA
NA
LN, EBA
NA
NA
Found rating evidence task; regression for DEMO and and process nonlinear tracing strategy had used similar in a
Depth predictive subjects candidate. of search made ability Display was overaIl and dependent DEMO should evaluations affected complement on political and the search frequency stand each sequence; other. of which
number of verbal statements did not and differ verbal across statement
attitudes dimension related was to equally
Processing conditions related DEMO also related Past to by type but experience to alternative number search of display; sequence. of and or evaluative by display statements were
content any
meaningful contraceptives state variance and response sex in search did behavior, account and for
Mood Perceived of linear increased search. behavior. less but DEMO important strategy. Past depth risk affected Product use and purchasing of of dimensions EBA brand search. importance strategies loyalty experience Positive from not was DEMO search. and mood related led not the to states No related elimination increased to subject depth resulted to search of used depth of in DEMO
of search
latency
search.
examined search
processing looked performers of information at fewer searched. high pieces across performers Depth
over information trials
amount High
DEMO performers trials. content same systematic decreased of level of analysts as of were information. was more related of likely task information to of trials DEMO the engage amount in and
while over the
low
Jacoby, Busato-Schach Szybillo, Study (1977) &
Johnson (1985)
DEMO (1984) & Meyer
Johnson, Ghore (1986) Meyer, &
DEMO, Bettman Payne, (1986) L
Content Response Depth Search of of variables search latency search
Content Depth Response of of search latency search
DEMO Coded Search statements verbal sequence of search
Search sequence
Search Response sequence latency
TABLE strategies l-Continued
NA
LN Nonlinear
Nonlinear LN
LN Nonlinear
NA
DEMO Less manufacturer number were manufacturer information the of of most brands name frequently was did were selected not Findings available. searched affect when content DEMO dimensions. Brand of and name search. The and price
Number models which
spent latency. Brand/
actively linear regression novices
examining examined processing examined. DEMO applicant Experts of availability experts in affected files, depth did and DEMO the of affect search, type of response time information
rater
the DEMO order did not presented. more resemble The
to attention affected a particular to the number
information while
and applied of as alternatives they only DEMO extreme case.
Number
cue of evaluative values
brand/attribute number in search of increase of for alternatives. negatively processing Cue correlated but values there DEMO items did was not as slight affect the number increase of
search increased. response sequence (decimal latency and or response fraction (time spent DEMO latency. values) looking Response at
affected diiculty
with number dimensions. an
DEMO shifted
Processing alternatives
probabilities). affected mode
noncompensatory elimination of
to
alternatives noncompensatory strategies the
alternatives
Attribute in
statements strategies
affected
concentration increase use
DEMO number was processing of alternatives. was
resulted
made. and
strategies rare. strategy
in
An
the
with use
of
as
in
more
increased subjects Use
DEMO the
likely of
fewer
2 z G
F
Klayman (1985)
Lehman (1980) & Moore
Major Lehman, Elrod (1982) Moore, & 2)
Olshavsky (1979)
Onken, Revelle DEMO, (1985) &
Depth Search of
Content Depth of of
Content Content Depth Depth of of search
Coded Response Depth statements of verbal
DEMO search
of of search search search
search latency
Response latency
sequence search
LN Nonlinear
NA
NA NA
AD, CJ, LX
EBA, LN, DEMO
(1980) (Study
Task complexity affected depth of search strategies. and DEMO Mental in
children complexity. capacity increased capacity decisions searched was subjects especially use With related of noncompensatory increased increased more females. to search extensively DEMO task No complexity, effect of with search for low display on DEMO high important format
sequence as
Depth changed addition found. of search of items a new decreased but alternative did not over affect increased trials. DEMO Price of attention search. change to Subjects and
were for accessed certain more in dimensions likely a previous to search but trial. did a DEMO piece not eliminate of discontinued information
brands. search
Consistency Subjects over the examined course information of fewer the was study. dimensions acquired for more DEMO often alternative than
type person depth distinctiveness of of had no effect and consensus on the amount Type information. information of of behavior information DEMO as of affected more target or
Evidence complex task information action response indicated than for linear latency that simple when was task strategy; on acquired and the nonlinear behavior complexity when strategy was the an behavior DEMO followed emotion. task increased was an
Task rejecting complex although information; DEMO tasks alternatives relation task resulting related was complexity on not to in the decision consistent simplifying basis affected of across decision persons. time
information DEMO for distinctiveness searched.
protocols by Effect more
high
strategy complexity depth was of search. affected not strategy small strategies- Verbal strategy. with
of
amount DEMO
high capacity
familiarity
reported.
Payne (1974) Study
Payne (1976) (Study
Payne (1976) (DEMO
(1986) &
Payne, Johnson (Study Bettman, 2)
Payne,
1)
2)
(Study Johnson Bettman, 3)
(1986)
&
Depth Search
Depth Search of sequence search
Depth Response Content Search of sequence of search latency search
Response Content Depth Search sequence DEMO
Search variables
sequence
of
sequence search
of
of
search search
Coded Search statements verbal
TABLE Strategies
l-Continued Decision differences processes determine are task Findings
DEMO Time alternatives number nonlinear pressure of search strategies.
Time latency
under and search
Depth individual intradimensional and nonlinear of differences search in reliance sequence. DEMO sequence. Cue values Various produced linear
amount alternatives; subjects strategies search DEMO efiminated alternatives on basis of a small
of later
pressure as subjects affected processed depth of information search and response more
latency
alternatives dimensions DEMO,
strategies declined
information nonlinear in had
as
the study. did
pressure. sequence. of Pressure Cue values was
dependent on interdimensional and
were task DEMO complexity
effect as shifted the on number depth from linear of
affected not
subjects an not;
individual or
increased;
used early and DEMO
of
related
depth, to
a
sequence, shift quickly in
search to
but
Nonlinear LN
AD, CJ, EBA, LN
CJ, EBA, LN
NA
NA
when strategies
there were many
high based. search.
focused information. DEMO on the Processing of information was faster with
With sequence, Cue DEMO values high pressure and and affected response processing there extent latency. of
attribute processing,
affected most important depth of
search
was
(probabilities, DEMO more and search more variance not attribute was payoffs) in
search.
Payne & Braunstein
Payne & Braunstein
Payne & Ragsdale
Shields (1980)
Shields (1983)
Staelin & Payne (1976)
Sundstrom (1984)
(1977)
(1978)
(1978)
Coded statements of verbal search
Response Content Depth Search sequence of latency search
Depth Response of search DEMO
search
Content Coded Search Search statements verbal sequence sequence of
sequence search
sequence search
Depth Search of
Depth of search
of
Depth Search
AD, CJ, EBA, LN
AD, CJ, EBA, LN
NA
Nonlinear LN
NA
Nonlinear LN
AD, CJ, EBA, LN
response more
alternatives few depth affected search; strategies linear search strategies sequence,
Number latency, DEMO with of
Number of search, linear of and alternatives response affected DEMO; search use of linear sequence, strategy depth of
Product processing decreased differences (dimension) as in number use of rather was linear of DEMO alternatives than or nonlinear brand increased; (alternative) strategies individual found.
DEMO increased Processing complexity as the affected variability of of search as variability
differences were in use
and and nonlinear alternatives; of individual found.
by alternatives number alternatives likely amount importance found the of when search. of DEMO increased. for information there of progressed. a Judgment dimensions change were
sequence was related and subjects affected depth to less of
was linear was DEMO
related Perceived of to the depth
in
Task available accuracy few strategy complexity alternatives. from decreased task nonlinear depth increased No and evidence to
DEMO was
was dimension; sought but to
Task
Task complexity related subjects. DEMO was function amount the sequence amount of of search. information
depth a search search CJ was of information also related per to
the use DEMO
used
nonlinear complexity strategy. example, affected complexity
search. linear of For DEMO
EBA format strategy strategy; marginally few
sequence. strategy. search Display an DEMO
strategy
Svenson
Wilkins (1964)
Cafferty
AD applicable. Note. = additive In the table above, the following abbreviations are used: IB = information board; VPA = verbal protocol analysis; NP = not presented;
mixed). nipulated) two examined “Independent categories: for was
Wiiams, Blencoe, (1985)
DeNisi, &
Variables their
Variables” (a) difference; the were coded CJ = as conjunctive/disjunctive; the number of
“Stimuli”
(1974) Study
examined. that relation
Coded
Depth Search
Content Depth
Search statements
verbal
DEMO
of
variables
sequence search
of
search search
number were were examined of coded
TABLE Strategies
CJ, EBA, LN, l-Continued LX Value EBA, DEMO LX, cues and affected LN. Coded use Findings of decision statements DEMO revealed such as that CJ,
NA perceived decisions. search ease Confidence was of the not task. in affected decision was related to to
DEMO or differ consistency by appraisal distinctiveness task information. (choice purpose or DEMO decision of task. search did not
cue alternatives
to search processes. The code “None”
into levels for
those their (continuous, variables effect
on
DEMO number
dichotomous, that search
EBA
by
(a) were
=
the
DEMO refers to studies in which no independent variable (manipulated or nonma-
DEMO
by
directly or mixed); or
IndividuaIs subjects although used most differed a were variety in satisficing the of strategies strategies
information or rating)DEMO by
dimensions. aspects; and strategy (b) the
search manipulated
LN
DEMO
Depth the decision of for
“Cues” content were the = linear; DEMO, in labeled of the as cues or “Independent (b) (descriptive, were nonmanipulated Variables.” quantitative,
the
LX
informational =
(nonlinear) used during
appraisal Subjects than
rules. make the task probation
for consensus
lexicographic;DEMO
matrix
were and NA coded = The into and not or
z1 6 2
F
purpose searched
or
more
PROCESS TRACING
number of task trials. Capon and Burke (1980) examined DEMO effects of the
availability manipulated a decision of Means the memory buying expertise (1983) a aids designed to help research participants come to
DEMO person and on consumer of manipulated the rater states on of
the of ior. regarding Three use. Park (1980) on decision level the
DEMO Other status, subject and the characteristics decision confidence the examined of DEMO included decision the sex, maker. socioeco- Kuss,
purpose more
of DEMO factors on decision
1 study
cess of examination measures search variable the the of (N the variability Sixteen of = and search inter- 33) 38 and of and process. search these intradimensional studies sequence A majority examined (N of = the 37) studies multiple which measured allows (usually for depth two) the
Einhom sion models. et al. (1979) not compared the results of process tracing and regres-
participant’s For example, factors past on strategy experiences and Seven relevant studies to measured the DEMO task effects of behav- prior
the
familiar consumer measured they products were tasks level aspects with (Capon of performance & Davis,
ratings choice examined provided made. environmental importance For subordinates. example, and Johnson than ratings (1986) of varied training
display decision studies format), behavior. only DEMO and at
studies in of in the relation search.
examining. knowledge subjects to rate how
capability including performance (Klayman, 1985), on cognitive DEMO
of 1984), stock mental ana-
lysts 1984). in buying and trading stocks (Jacoby, Mazursky, Troutman, dc
portance the Three
studies DEMO the of
be Payne, of
pressure Two hypothesized A few studies DEMO studies by to examined the decision the impact task.
Bettman,
behaviors. studies examined Four studies a task examined and an environmental both a DEMO and factor, a person and no factor, studies 4
and examine the
ple examined measure tance ined sex), Search person multiple task DEMO process. person (task task) complexity, and factors Forty-three environmental surprisingly, on within interactive factors together. Ten studies exam-
focused alternatives. code search DEMO verbal process on the statements was content the focus 7 studies, DEMO of
effects while
environmental least one search
search patterns as well as
the process. researchers research. For
the primary examined proportion to In response DEMO information latency searched and For 2 attempted studies, 18 studies across
DEMO,
impact (1985)
ability asked
the
needs. time
(impor- pro-
product.
in
mood attempts
factors
while
varied were im-
Klayman of 4 DEMO person (1985) examined (mental attempted ability, multi- to
the
to
Williams
the of
Promotional by manipulating et al.
Olshavsky the products participant’s DEMO
to
and examine
Johnson
(1985) ratings
(1979)
the
would
DEMO
97
be
Bettman
studies
factors. task factors Most
98
ables were strategies
examined dents into
While of specific compensatory some
DEMO studies were strategies provided in terms of compensatory and/or noncompensatory
use of
their evidence egies. satory 22 Nevertheless, strategies. subjects for the used use For more of example, an both optimizing subjects compensatory Isen linear were and Means found strategy and (1983) which noncompensatory but found DEMO used noncompen- that used none some strat- of
used
were
section
Search Researchers Process and Strategy Determinants
factors pensatory, search, that response
difference DEMO and
was A categorized closer examination as
ported the compensatory conjunctive task reduced 1980; (e.g., strategies Bettman as
Olshavsky, 1979;
examine DEMO the
results variables was of studies affected which search assessed
behavior the extent and
to and In strategy this section, use by descriptive decision information makers
mers,
next strategy which
use.
various is to
the
&
number Park, 1980; of alternatives Crow, Olshavsky, and dimensions & Sum-
Payne, 1976).
relevant presented. to
study The objective characteristics DEMO
the
FORD
ET
AL.
strategy decision attempt use strategy categorized categories. respondents Twelve into of the the
elimination of a (N particular =
combination egies. linear Sundstrom the or of
using use or
of
use
noncompensatory) may
have
latency,
inlluence
identified
content the by
Strategy use. Twenty-four DEMO the 45 studies reviewed examined the
the such
(linear) such 24
strategy aspects conjunctive
indicate that most studies found
additive simplifying elimination elimination DEMO (1984) difference found by strategies by aspects that aspects strategies strategies only and 6
various search of task, process makers. and environmental, (depth the strategy In and this section, we
decision search)
(DEMO)
criterion used as depth by
decision of
of
was
8), (3)
interest search, makers. and search no For
as
using DEMO
studies,
broad
made and elimination noncompensatory to discuss by
10). that = Recall at ll), least (4) that one
elimination DEMO while
models. found then
the 96
the
moved that Other subjects studies to
strategy. (N results
meant
=
(N
sequence, the
other
and/or 21
attempt was made
aspects,
and in
response to place
(nonlinear) the some
studies
results cases of
lexicographic finding person evidence in the (N
subjects other by dimension in the
subjects
more
often
search
respon- latency vari-
categories which
strategies. measure these
study = for 6),
study strat- used
which complex began re-
12
Of
the the DEMO following studies by strategies which examined were
specific
found: (1)
linear strategies, (N
=
evidence 1 l), (2) additive DEMO the
sequence and used person (com-
of
of the
and
labeling ies making examine both task use Tusk include simplifying complexity alternatives DEMO is of the contingent task task degree nonlinear stimuli, complexity, (DEMO and to on dimensions) which and The task, strategies PROCESS task task the display the environmental, trials. factors number studies increases to TRACING format, make The examined reviewed of results their alternatives, response the DEMO decision likelihood indicate in person indicate process mode, task characteristics. dimensions, that that that tracing cue more increasing decision subjects values, man- stud- 99 or
ageable ing man, information 1983; 1976; for Payne Johnson 1985; (Biggs, Olshavsky, & Bedard, Meyer, 1979; Gaber, DEMO; Onken, Johnson, & Linsmeier, Hastie, Meyer, 1985; & & Revelle, Ghore, Billings 1985; 1986; & Marcus, Payne, Klay-
protocol 1978; simplifying Staelin strategies & Payne, It is 1976). DEMO across noted, tind-
Braunstein, 1977,
task complexity & boards and effects verbal
though, Olshavsky, that and the Summers results of (1980) one on verbal showed protocol no methods. effect analysis of task should study complexity robust be by Crow, on
(Olshavsky, & & strategy 1978; Task Davis, Braunstein, Shields, complexity use. 1984; 1979; DEMO, Klayman, 1977, Onken has 1983), also 1978; et 1985; variability been al., Shields, Payne, 1985; found of Payne 1976; to search 1980), atfect Payne & (Biggs Braunstein, and depth & response et Braunstein, of al., search 1977, 1985; latency (Capon Payne 1978). 1977,
mean
the Results Billings search proportion DEMO, indicate and Marcus of that and information increases (1983), (DEMO) decreases the in search, searched task increased some in complexity (DEMO) alternatives more increases variability search thoroughly. lead in are time. to DEMO the eliminated (1) search As variability decreases Billings noted as early task and by of in
increases while others suggests that
and while DEMO Kakkar moving (1977, from Studies a help
natives (1981) found salient)
complexity in the are
Marcus process search (1983) also DEMO that shifting from an inter- to an intradimen-
play about tency native format in political if the that affected information that subjects candidates depth DEMO was in of be organized verbal search, induced protocols. search in DEMO that search sequence, fashion Klayman by dimension for and (1985) DEMO response found Herstein or alter- la- no
while effect type play One format of of seem
aspect decision required the task of that the DEMO participant.
complexity sional Bettman linear subjects 1 to and a nonlinear 2) deal found with strategy evidence increased did. that task dis-
Sundstrom for display on search infhtenced format display (1984) sequence. found with format DEMO elementary only number (presented marginally of school to particularly evaluative In DEMO regression significant children dimensions statements important on studies, effects strategy or DEMO partic- is made alter- dis- use the
did not
on ipants sion 100 the required are information asked of to participants DEMO attribute all the values. is FORD alternatives often ET In a choice AL. process and from these tracing among ratings studies, a are set regressed the of alter- deci-
examined
with information ings natives. and verbal DEMO protocol Einhom (1988) approach. analysis et al. (1979) Williams while used both Billings et a ratings rating al. (1985) rather and DEMO choice than (1983) an a data information choice and with task
Bill- an
the board approach and of asked subjects it for ratings DEMO performance. Based on
that decision
found affect con-
mode (in the DEMO) rating does
response Scherer those
appears Billings of search that
affected DEMO,
dition addition, limited response searched processes. search amount mode more DEMO information was affected than those by response in the mode choice as condition. intradimen- In
For example, depth and as in
a search sional likely The cue search efforts determinant content was have more and been DEMO cue information likely directed values under available to search the investigate choice to pattern subjects task. their and effects. would some seem recent While DEMO re- no be
gambles
imal increases words quire man studies sults (DEMO) or indicated more versus were fraction in provided found numerical format. DEMO subjects values, The attempted researchers examining one to study manipulate hypothesized DEMO Johnson, with cue content cue that Payne, values fractions in and terms in Bett- dec- re- of
providing fected time overall search low DEMO high variances in probabilities regarding gambles af-
Major re-
difficult that difficulty processing and information than in search decimal processing sequence. values. The led DEMO
used spent more less
cue of changed breads value
shift of
and individual (1980) Svenson, searched Variations strategy found more 1974). differences in response use. that often cue Payne, There behavioral levels than in latencies Bettman, is have the behaviors evidence use cues also of been and given provided a nonlinear that Johnson found varying in the in DEMO strategies the affect (1986) form cue form search values of also of (Payne, actions emotions. found processes increases 1974; were that
rather dimension the man searched while and the variance in search patterns increased. DEMO, Leh-
with to A the political stand of candidates prior to DEMO subjects to acquire
attribute-based ilarity than of the processes. processing Biggs less values time et al. Subjects across when per (1985) information the DEMO variance less acquisition, that the in information, probabilities the less greater and the was dissim- high was
information course few and studies Moore DEMO examined (1980) study in increased introduced For and Herstein providing this (1981) labels the provided for
low. cue
resulted of their
information DEMO items. one
subjects prior
the example, found effects attention a that DEMO of (search) in change the price to in subjects for
Scherer board
increased information
and Marcus
alternatives, also found
101
PROCESS TRACING
information about each candidate. The political labeling was found DEMO
Busato-Schach name affect labeling the depth of search for the candidates. Jacoby, and search. but manufacturer’s Szybillo, did and
searched brand to
that DEMO Finally, of toothpaste latency. some (1977) studies were in manipulated DEMO examined provided to whether changes subjects being the in prior search variables They and found affect strat-
resulted information not
egy changed other task DEMO progressed hand over from found task noncompensatory and trials. no as evidence alternatives Bettman for to and were more a change Park eliminated. compensatory (1980) to a found Shields more strategies that compensatory (1980) strategies on as the the
1984; results
finding Moore, strategy Scherer, is & as 1988; that Elrod, the Jacoby depth task 1982). DEMO of et These search al., decreases In terms Lehman suggest of DEMO search & that Moore, task in variables, trials studies 1980; DEMO Lehman, a robust &
(Billings
ordering interaction depth of of
DEMO an
the In and addition, researcher the Jacoby must of be DEMO al. concerned (1984) found with
decisions, task
the multiple search DEMO analysts. decreased more for low performing than for high performing se-
between decision tasks. trials ability the decision maker in that
fects Environmental of DEMO environment characteristics. surrounding A few the studies decision have task examined on the decision the ef-
depth
of making the affect time importance the DEMO process. of while and Two the the decision studies three focus studies by made. of Payne search. have Time et focused Subjects al. constraints (1986) on under the examined have effects time been the of constraint found varying impact
to
addition, the most high
focus
based. faster on In
to was
processing of Processing information became information and tended attribute
DEMO examined time pressure pieces of more with
patterns. a
fewer information. and
decision a variance lunch special) in (buying search
more
selected resulted DEMO selecting three in
ing high Klayman a time summer pressure (1985) camp, topics which bicycle, varied choos- in im-
there between portance (1985) both searched were found topic and that importance examined alternatives, DEMO among the their high and the impact ability amount children on of decision information there processes. was conditions available. decisions an interaction Klayman When
DEMO individuals
task complexity, few more important same important depth. decisions However, and received unimportant under more search by of were high high
in DEMO in importance & given Scherer subjects had (in no They but DEMO
found ability task through that children. instructions the the for Billings choice high importance rather than task rating press) main prior condition response effect varied to beginning on searched the mode. for Results more also in-
DEMO
importance the of task. search
depth
tasks indicated 102 of low that importance. intradimensional Williams FORD search et DEMO al. AL. patterns (1985) varied were task more importance likely under by
for asking of Person subjects was to provide promotional the ratings (high importance) depth characteristics and or content need
range have use in process process. also cited and
appraisal. that
have
been of process characteristics. DEMO ratings not tracing to affected differences have (low studies, importance). a strong While by most infhrence the task purpose make individual decision DEMO They and on environmental of found search the making difference factors strategy and a stud- large ex-
Few
ies have made an attempt how DEMO assess in
or
person Bettman decisions. characteristic and
effects frequently on
(DEMO and More ovens knowledge individuals amine The knowledgeable searched their most at all with attributes more new moderate to than consumers microwave of individuals DEMO knowledge tended of brand and low to began process experience or before high information previous considering with experience. microwave by another) search brand
investigated with people Park (1980) has been found prior that
experience a DEMO
particular ovens with dimension
cereals. those began first, additive coby, then who Chestnut, with They difference switched had an also elimination a and great model to Fisher brand-based deal was by (1978) of aspects DEMO loyalty past evaluations. found representative strategy early Inexperienced of in later the task decisions. consumers while the Ja-
purchasing was greater negatively experience information DEMO with to amount buying
children groups relation Klayman While low they with and capacity respect were found measured these children able that to the DEMO way categorize they
and ability searched mental was capacity related for similar to in search elementary amounts variability of aged information as school high
DEMO training
individual
Jacoby behavior. presented ues ceptives Experts Researchers which (1982) searched maker and applied to the them. sex found ability have did DEMO only found Experts that also not to actively past brand a account examined particular also experience while paid for the case. more any novices DEMO and meaningful On attention attitudes examined the between other to variance related extreme hand, data decision in Hoyer to in the cue contra- search order pro- val- and
correlate cesses (1984) attempted and the ability DEMO groupings and
consumers
examining decision of information
applicant acquired. rating files, DEMO
measures assess and skill the with of cognitive the search decision ability process subjects maker. of variables decision into Capon and makers and strategy. DEMO and
cognitive information,
Johnson candidates as
well
(1985) as affected the found type depth of that
processed their the
the
information of
DEMO,
expertise
examined. time of
spent
ability
three
there
measures. different was
no
the
search by
between (1985)
PROCESS TRACING
acquired across complexity. dimensions more In terms information for of DEMO complexity tasks but high capacity children
prices) mance level was related DEMO security to the analysts amount (how and content accurately of information DEMO predicted searched. stock
High
mation High across systematic performers task over processing trials trials. while tended of low information. performers to performers examine the DEMO also same more at amount pieces of to information engage of
were fewer likely infor- in
female of Other search.
DISCUSSION
regarding was decision DEMO completed review the extent of to the systematically empirical of to use, research determinants examine types using process tracing strategies approaches has found strat-
nonlinear literature and
highlights egies the review used what by of process DEMO we and studies view tracing assess as listed the and researchers. the most in Table important of 1. The what In the first conclusions DEMO part of section, the derived discussion meth- from
of on last DEMO
variables of, the research by
that model search odological For ought DEMO issues to receive that tracing making more need of the is to research discussion, used be to addressed suggest as attention. a framework additional the in the Beach literature for substantive and organizing Mitchell are presented. DEMO the (1978) re-
Substantive Conclusions this
rection
evi- the di-
regarding the both
regarding of
be drawn
(compensatory, direction dence effects Based DEMO of of on that task process process characteristics to noncompensatory) review, strategy tracing tracing conclusions research use. research and Two the as are DEMO the can use has the criterion of conclusions focus taken general of and variables the decision research empirical strategies interest. the on
the
103
DEMO,
Perceived al. Capon (1978) risk associated with making the wrong decision has been
mental & Scofield, health 1984). patients were than their male inexperienced colleagues (Butcher
to
investigated et while
quently ucts subjects
by Capon and
Ph.D.‘s individual
buy. than sought
did
Jacoby low capacity DEMO al. (1984) children found on
perceived Burke (1980) risk risk
difference judged (1980) found
more lower Capon information socioeconomic and Burke (1980)
than
to
that
tasks the
of perfor- high
variables have DEMO did have and affected been better studied. treatment Experienced plans for
and
not Jacoby affect depth
et
decision ai. but (1978). not
sequence behavior Jacoby
consumers used
found linear that high socioeconomic
in
strategies deciding DEMO more prod- fre-
and found Burke that
makers
decision process
and
cused 104 First, attention most of on the the research effects of using task process rather than tracing environmental approaches and has per- fo-
(1972), solving
is ing effects in problem on by into more DEMO tasks, As strongly stated environment and a emphasized by the Newell DEMO the and the importance Simon, if behavior of task
behavior analysis DEMO maker. ently. The demanded They research behavior If of tells put decision the limits using unless
rectly the by Given teristics has lation Newell DEMO examine this and and and origin, Simon their the Simon for (1972)
task research pensatory is strategy A
linear emphasis surement in DEMO the a variety process of tracing specific literature strategies
in level the ing
about different task situation the
contend, the understanding of to
the cognitive focus on strategy processing of process
task situation, theory
a therefore, rational encompasses and research task tracing that adaptation information issues Payne is both part to an of of task the analysis broader
(with the of necessary research possible exception using to use tracing is information not DEMO research in
general conclusion regarding the direction of process tracing
use
to
reliably coding
process it
ing Newell
others. of in
large not characteristics DEMO of led knowledge noncompensatory given the effects process the of
aspects, DEMO the use. additive A number difference, of studies linear, lexicographic) DEMO a decision maker
amount
use.
in begin this found review (conjunctive, discussed decision the given has modeling been
practice responses strategies to the
DEMO of structural interest by
surprising on
major
not and that
nonlinear or the of cues, strategies it is of
their on
compensatory Nevertheless, DEMO operationalizing various of introduction results have noncompensatory reporting are papers in terms only to of rely the
more
their specificity and of the easier DEMO to report
to strategies. this in
specific More decision attention strategies. may and to also to
FORD
ET AL.
person than problem exhibits about
DEMO of the
solving
judgment on Unfortunately, taxonomy task task the effects DEMO
tracing have complexity) predictable to study of a to effects on DEMO
development the specific strategies
the difficulty
cumulate Certainly, reflect clearly presenting DEMO distinguish warranted. across issues results between relevant studies. at this re-
measurement clearly is
development task to
would
solving the it,
(1976) DEMO processing adapted
act
problem task and
solv- an
makers.
relatively the research elimination and use and describ- mea- by
more charac-
While of on DEMO com- this the
concepts of
then decision differ-
the
cannot
developed methods to
used di- by
tasks.
research the son pioneering characteristics
in
on
DEMO
the work
importance on a
of
decision Newell of
framework
task
behavior. and characteristics Simon The
(1972).
focus
is
for understanding
most in
decision
information Newell likely
and
based making Simon
process-
on
surprising is
DEMO have
emphasis criterion
onstrate the ical Two problem evidence. substantive the extensive task. First, conclusions In from most use an of PROCESS studies, overall noncompensatory are derived perspective, the nonlinear from strategies the the use review results of in cues of firmly completing the was empir- dem- the
of alternatives
pensatory DEMO
frequently research model studies is not more in sufficient arriving when one is interested in the processes the decision
maker ond with the to DEMO strategy contention the used set use. of studies by The Pitz research reviewed and Sachs indicates is (1984) that task that that complexity DEMO the the simple number is test strongly of of dimensions the related linear
maker and different alternatives types will types board use of processing DEMO others), of nonlinear tasks approaches increase, samples (housing in and (students, there strategies. across decisions, is a both consumers, greater DEMO finding likelihood professional staffs), dif-
demands to format, in making DEMO the process of task. as Some decision a to function process evidence making of tracing. other of seems As to stated be highly by
DEMO specifically at a decision. is on that the the determinants most robust of strategy findings use, associated a sec-
decisions, and in-
verbal DEMO protocol has product analysis contingent (1982)
been the of contingent DEMO Research effects that is de- is
last
Methodological makers, behavior coding DEMO number This of review of the include issues methodological of Issues which the the process labeling can issues have tracing of implications the that DEMO alternatives need to for indicates be understanding addressed. presented that to there The decision decision meth- are a
jects of a
ferent information evaluations DEMO
decision on the
display scribed needed
relation The Labeling labels with
type
improve section of decision) of our
the
understanding discussion. has
also
TRACING
pensatory ber dominant
were
are
using
strategies eliminated dimensions were
reported providing DEMO structural
and decision (linear, additive making difference) identified small by DEMO were the
strategy. different modeling The types
were
from
found
consideration. with results the conjunctive The
approach. of
use
strategy used of
information indicate DEMO
task
that
been that
contingent
researchers. a
conclusion than various process the
the
characteristics nature
decision
of
process of matrix intercon-elation strategies,
the
DEMO
alternatives. and which structural lists of the cues, quality the type DEMO decisions decision made, required,
alternatives are a
Most
number modeling
DEMO
process
quite
of meaningful
number noncom- the tracing most
results supports of
found
Payne
decision with
of
when the
as
and
of
105
Com- DEMO task
(e.g., the
the the
mode strategies of
after
substantive
of the
approaches. alternatives tracing studies to and
provide dimensions. mak-
sub-
decision
106
been alternatives how nation situations sion Experiments strategy. subjects relatively of DEMO An unlabeled about alternatives. condition would Some
which subjects may have known a great deal. Given that prior knowledge
or more
one strategy of DEMO the decision object has been shown to affect depth of search and
processes lated report Schmitt et & research Dudycha, 1975a, 1975b).
DEMO cluding effects with extreme of script prior values. notions theory knowledge Hypotheses (Abelson, or experience on has the been 1976, derived use need of 1981; information from to Payne, be cognitive developed 1982) that psychology conflicts regarding and tested. with the in-
that 1982), needs DEMO
ings choice tigation type & are frequent from Marcus, is the DEMO type 1983; of a set decision Billings of alternatives. & task DEMO, required. Billings in press) While and have structural his associates required modeling (Bill- both
followed Strategy
within aspect the of made the framework task (Payne,
of
em. tives. disconfirm Consequently, Yet, the the decision effects the of information makers’ labeling FORD preconceived alternatives in the DEMO notions on must decision about either behavior the confirm alterna- has or
how also
while which others subjects
intercorrelation. use, alternatives it
Johnson values using process and (1985) found
approaches While has most framed a DEMO decision. his/her ask
needed the choice and to
fects different task from across
decision decision required makers to in rate process or evaluate DEMO
of understand rating decision
coding. and the initial The major work by strategies Payne (1976) examined and
Johnson al.,
cue by
different DEMO environmental
models values, been of
factor cues. ignored The in
1986)DEMO
issues
in
preexperiment ignored using unlabeled in
and his
have
intercorrelation regarding using
ET AL.
the
involved probably
is reasonable
begun colleagues to
notions DEMO alternatives
products had studies allow reviewed an assessment involved
Until shown and decision the
tracing that effects decision (Johnson, approaches. the on effects DEMO strategy 1985; of Payne Johnson paid cue that more structure et DEMO et al. attention al., (1986) 1986; on an decision Payne
required why in process these affected factors. tracing effects and
samples
the DEMO tasks as well as under
occur studies
search
and
no
alternatives, DEMO
and process. how by Svenson have
all
studies
cue would level, DEMO
structural of cues has
to
assess
affect
information would
allow
search for
the
exami- deci-
and
also believe
recently,
have
of
little
process DEMO an effect
preconceived tracing on information notions
search. about have
researchers
to
manipu- to earlier
cues
further theory. researcher inves- the a
researchers robust (1979). have De-
or
prior decision information objects
intercorrelation be making DEMO significant (e.g., of
concluded Research these that ef- is
about
been
similar
suggestion research Another
Type
to ing spite between conceptual reliability different distinctions types this PROCESS of DEMO strategies TRACING strategies, is a difficult operationally task. We distinguish- attempted DEMO
did
process Additionally, but
rules coder categorization used agreement. individual few DEMO decision studies
assess of
report the attempts the
jective maker reported mation counting code not responses in boards inter- the case require and into DEMO to intradimensional verbal decision judgment protocol strategies. analysis researcher shifts This (DEMO, and classification even to 1976) go the beyond is use or fairly the of sub-
for categorizing many
of if the is simply DEMO total
amount damental in and searchers The their to lack evaluate conclusions of for must information of researchers reliability pay the more about degree DEMO to attention strategy have to which at to least use. error rules While two sources people regarding time (Einhorn consuming, code classification these DEMO strategies al., it is 1979) fun- of
linear strategies
information suggests that process tracing re-
patterns may use also of to rather develop (e.g., conjunctive, a continuous to lexicographic) measure using categorical of the are degree reli- or
of nominal environmental, able. cesses search Decision It measurement quality. strategies and Process person used of information characteristics tracing decision DEMO search makers. affect has strategies. From found the types a that more of various search pragmatic task,
into information be useful than
continue
DEMO the perspective, The quality development examination and of is the important DEMO decisions contingent of of the decision to made linkage the by nature extent problems (e.g., of of strategy that see decision such Jacoby, with of and behavior an making decision Speller, identifiable has that quality & an has Kohn, effect high been requires quality on 1974). dem- pro- the
approaches. the decision One process reason in
der alternative DEMO Process to enhance for (e.g., improving decision see and Jacoby structural quality. the effectiveness et al., modeling 1984). Such research could lead for or- to
ear lighted review
cess the ring such development information DEMO linear from methods that of process tracing methods was to investigate the pro-
rather on behavior than inferring occur- of
focused
while of behavior DEMO outputs with task a method of decision which
was the being performed process. The results our
have al., nonlin- high- com- 1979)
structural al., process.
1983; studies demonstrate approaches have
approaches modeling a
cues. (Billings tracing structural Yet,
process of
indicate of two use while DEMO few directly et the
pared use the the
modeling
& Marcus, DEMO 1978;
tracing
decision making the
although Svenson, Billings several measures DEMO) and Marcus have authors lack called (1983)
(Einhom
convergence DEMO
suggest
multiple
&
Hogarth, that because indices
process
1981; of DEMO
the
tracing
represent Payne decision
and
et different
FORD ET AL.
stages 108 of the decision process. Process tracing examines DEMO information
process use different making. decisions. or approaches al. strategies examine the during that both integration decision the
often makers or acquisition use. tracing DEMO atic which stages combination and For precludes of would and They error example, structural allow suggest the regression for models that in of judgments. provide analyses detailed valuable error can level of provide in subjects judgments DEMO process importance estimates or but tracing even about of a decisions different analysis strategy system- partic-
may decision use estimation Einhorn the large numbers DEMO of decision (1979) relative of They contend suggest that of of a process two
ular model, some cue of this information. of in matrix a a process process can provide tracing tracing
tween study effects DEMO statistical Einhom informatively may subjective to include modeling. and serve Hogarth and to in investigated a Disagreement better statistical regression (1981) inform weights DEMO by analysis. one can a indicate combination occur (Schmitt regarding because DEMO & of the Levine, process (1) people 1977) tracing do may lack and be
can
jective insight, cues approaches cues to not weights which (2) attended people attention is tell to an attend DEMO receive artifact whether is not to inappropriate of but paid disagreement the cannot are statistical correlated use statistical cues between modeling with that weights. DEMO statistical lack procedures. variance, such Use and that of (3)
both sub- the
Einhorn Payne, Perspective behavior have researchers can et 1982). be noted al., more 1979; that productive process tracing in DEMO, explaining research 1979). cognitive has mainly processes been
decision a DEMO
devoted tracing explication if ell, to a Theoretical mon, complex Researchers research decision 1978; 1972; research to function of making a is DEMO theory descriptive more in of (Pitz closely which a compromise approach & the Sachs, tied to 1984; to psychological decision making theory rather (Ogilvie than the &
that cision Schmitt, A number making from A have cost/benefit Einhom selection analysis 8z is a rational perspective
DEMO decision the
Future process
cost/benefit highlighted perspective the utility (Beach DEMO examining Newell & Mitch- & de- Si-
as
Hogarth, 1981;
DEMO, and a correct other
probability the be balanced and decision minimize DEMO costs expending such strategy cognitive between time, will of (Christensen-Szalanski, DEMO a lead effort, decision a desire to strategy to make which DEMO is a decision, include correct seen 1978). as
of
but DEMO affecting regression variance judgment weights Alternatively, is and
The
difficult
the
DEMO to the
determine
results
1979).
the types
disagreement of
nonlinear
be-
desire that against a to
information while processes structural into
This sion strategy, perspective the assumes higher the PROCESS probability TRACING that a “correct” solution can be
problems pothesizes characteristics which Mitchell acteristics decision (1978) (Payne, (rules of that the of makers the problem DEMO choose This contingency different strategies model in of dealing decision with making decision hy-
issues process potheses characteristics characteristics. complexity, of Beach
characteristic). past
these An examination task the decision structure of
cost/benefit tracing DEMO of related that these studies to characteristics, the
level about alternatives. DEMO simplifying the studies An analysis of indicates task strategies complexity) of DEMO been to gather and process information
generated. pensatory Beach and Conversely, DEMO differ in costs with more formal, com-
tracing generated need approaches DEMO be from addressed the is and
Task the the outcome ambiguity maker of is the the concerned while task decision task changes in the DEMO task instability decision and the influences the clarity is problem extent defined of future the to and as the
cost/benefit
number task that DEMO alternatives model had and/or dimensions
the to
include or purposes Task
discussed decision maker as a person has
degree of sion
degree only DEMO plexity
From increase strain
“well-
task,
one a
strategies Mitchell
fixed
analysis decision are or described of
the present
and are changes of DEMO the be
complexity judgment becomes the
the defined.” alternatives Abelson available In
that the more formalized or analytic the deci- 109
task the and DEMO process greatest familiarity instability below are within a presented. (1978) and tracing impact this or of the framework the the on research The DEMO decision that research to the to behavior task (for the
therefore, the perspective, results have process use predicted the of
task The is
of
environment, complex components function of and
the testing hy-
the of Beach the personal char-
and
task,
strategy maker.
the
posit research.
DEMO) seen
as
framework (1978)
strategies. costing have developed more
to use
for understanding
the
than most
the
conditions simpler comprehensive noncom-
that
DEMO
under
highlight problem using
the is
which goals deci- the
demonstrated simplifying, tracing task complexity,
in benefits an Onken increase of et reducing al. in the
noncompensatory that increases have
(1985)
been in
amount that suggest strain
task
of
and
and task to make (1985) DEMO, and a have rating their the described or associated objectives choice DEMO from outcome
well-defined alternatives, Levi
to
kinds be among attained of DEMO those tasks
in
and more of consumer the salient.
ambiguity, that DEMO,
have
experience
by the
Task
studies
decision
with
complexity the
decision problem
defined as
decision
reveals
maker. that
tasks
the strategies. effects studied. DEMO of
cognitive that through
maker used (regardless in process tracing of DEMO
this
1982).
model placed in
degree
which
problems. task to which which
to
FORD ET AL.
bilities 110 are clear to the decision maker. With DEMO of tasks or problems,
inability choices components a clear (Abelson DEMO assign
decision maker does not have
the quently, outcomes, or of the uncertainty, alternative is one of available the or
the critical to of an ill-defined
uum problem. focus decision teristics testing As examining in DEMO propositions of maker. the task Returning ambiguity from of the the of goals to and the instability and Beach characteristics and the and Mitchell DEMO, the charac-
Simon how much (1976), uncertainty it is useful (or to task consider structure) tasks as is faced on a DEMO by the
noted terms by of
structure relate to
found of ambiguity related complex stability that to on analytical the stability the clarity search DEMO task (defined process. possible task For solvability solutions. example, selection to expand use Waller Stein the of the nonanalytic (1981) task) and tasks Mitchell was found examined positively that (1984) more the to
DEMO Beach Mitchell
of the the effects strategies. of for the as affected the of or
incorporate the increases changes states mine. Future calculation that DEMO in process in important a search tracing processes research research issue, DEMO needs therefore, use task surrounding Mitchell by ambiguity, decision is the (1978) the examination makers instability, suggest as task that or of
perspective strategy deter-
decision of cost/benefit more a
different uncertainty, critical of probabilities component degrees these of associated task probabilities in the structure. DEMO are A decision diEcult outcomes. to With is
uncertainty other the include accountability Environmental key task the factors factors). irreversibility increases of relevant DEMO the (due task to of the to to the and the DEMO the decision, Beach level decision of and the maker, significance and the of the time task, and/or task the
gests money gies. stant), that decision constraints studies manipulate As when makers decisions on DEMO will decision are tend irreversible to process. use For example, analytical DEMO aspects model decision to strate- mea- con- sug-
more (holding complex, other
factors tracing Billings or examine approaches and their
exceptions, these process have effects attempted (1988), on
(1983, Few and Williams the using et al. (1985) manipulated task importance the (signifi-
cision strategies
process. sure or Scherer Klayman
specific the & Levi, goals probabilities to 1985). be obtained decision Conse- to
model such of uncertainty the DEMO suggest task. ambiguity the Research as utility they and
decision
cance) DEMO studies, and Payne, on found the Bettman, use some,
DEMO
of
strategy albeit and Johnson with small,
high time pressure.
more
impact (1986) use found on of noncompensatory strategy that
time
use.
DEMO In two de-
environmental these tracing Since factors studies most constant process factors reveals in DEMO on that the decision PROCESS design. the studies typical behavior, TRACING DEMO have closer decision not examination they, examined environment in effect, of the the have effects included process held of
for consequences the situations DEMO the studies a accountability decision laboratory the in issues decisions maker which to based the were of the to decision the appear complete rarely DEMO decision decision to of maker incorporated be decision the task maker mainly experiment as was a was function under making of into low low DEMO the as (e.g., in of significance quickly which studies the students decisions there as and pressures possible. and recruited for were made). DEMO most no of
tracing ers Based would studies, on tend
few DEMO crease incentives the for for perceived in optimal the this (low DEMO to cannot review of use of decision interesting task the simplifying simplifying be support task significance, determined making) such for these strategies. strategies, as making in predictions that complexity, from no Whether or present more as which a many basic the a research function have results studies DEMO tested are efforts. of found due the the
is to note studies the of
and have Beach the option Beach a major and (1979) to Mitchell impact change on model strategy that have allowing use. found For or not that example, environmental irreversibility) MacAllister, the factors Mitchell, affected maker can
task strategy decision pressure, use task and used DEMO found perceptions task rated more his/her the analytical problem decision of the decision task. as (decision more Subjects allowing strategies, important with DEMO decision an than irreversible when more the
and Wailer an and Mitchell (1984)
decision decision (1981), nipulating egy use, would perceived was was the significance reversible. not important affect pressure, the In of one the addition, operation task to and MacAllister et al. (1979), Stein
have found similar were effects on by strat-
of company company).
ma- the
(decision perceived the makers task or importance were MacAllister told told
the that that et
al. (1979) also found that DEMO in which the person perceives him/
of
herself this the through testing selection research, as the personally use of it appears more process accountable analytic the our understanding tracing decision for approaches the the strategies. DEMO of Beach the decision of would Based the decision be on making the results result process by in
and Mitchell enhanced model as of
DEMO
the that evidence studies a more “correct” or accurate decision could be made. The results of
environment makers it
task to decision Nevertheless, characteristics
to
the
environmental use Beach
simplifying,
and Mitchell
111
characteristics noncompensatory DEMO accountability, a decision predicts which strategies. typify that decision the
more DEMO environment no analysis monetary to in- so
the
There
process mak- are
“benefits”
and expanding
notions of
gies. related 112 Person to the characteristics. effects of environmental The FORD DEMO ET characteristics AL. characteristics on of decision the decision strate-
knowledge likely expend maker cision success, to makers knowledgeable, that a use the DEMO about may more who affect complex, are on decision the analytical, other behavior end knowledge, the compensatory of decision and include the motivated their continua. the relative strategies the individual decision For Unfortunately, than maker’s de-
ability amount the to available exercise of strategies that on motivation DEMO of
and only confident Mitchell one study model has been as cognitively related conducted effort to complex, person that specifically characteristics. and task. explores Christensen- the Beach to a
examination in strategy
example, is more
less problems. Szalanski ences skilled An or unskilled (1980) Nevertheless, in their selection compared of in the mathematics process decision and tracing and took DEMO indicated processes found skilled literature more that that time and the of indicates there unskilled to students unskilled solve were that the groups. who DEMO no decision few were was
differ- per-
cision son characteristics maker has rarely have been been systematically examined. The examined knowledge and base in DEMO of the cases, de-
Jacoby, ity knowledge products maker Klayman, DEMO strategies. of the has alternatives. 1982; (e.g., 1985) decision basically A has systematic Jacoby Bettman been have maker been operationalized The found DEMO & al., examination studies ignored Park, (Capon that 1978) ability 1980; which in rather & process as Butcher Davis, of has DEMO prior the than a limited examined tracing motivation 1984; experience & DEMO Scofield, knowledge influence Jacoby research. the of with 1984; cognitive et the on of consumer al., Hoyer decision decision 1984; abil- &
teristics of strategy studies Despite the decision on selection on decision the DEMO the lack maker. decision as makers use, of decision a empirical DEMO For it modeling process, would are example, makers of of support be the the it useful studies alternative is are knowledge, given intuitively for to the the closely effects decision focus ability, appealing examine of of strategies process and person how to motivation consider charac- knowl- tracing DEMO
assigned tracing is off’ about the decision alternative decision to is determine aware strategies of
edgeable cess weights maker to given to Structural various DEMO
be the “trade
in
in deriving how decision strategy strong outcomes). interest use Pro-
how able to knowledgeable them. of have their had DEMO a
which more closely
complete decision extent (e.g.,
makers can
DEMO task. studied. and In benefits,in this way, the the process DEMO knowledgeable and by which of to an determine chosen assigned decision the to
the strategy the task
highly
decisions the between results
research
needs DEMO
PROCESS TRACING 113
The comparison indicates of that the few process factors DEMO hypothesized literature to to
the affect empirical the Interactive Beach Beach decision evidence and and effects. Mitchell behavior Mitchell suggests model have that been DEMO testing examined, process the propositions tracing Theoretical approaches developed rationale can DEMO and in-
model
crease our understanding of the decision making process. Nevertheless,
also
Beach three and literature to affect components Mitchell (1978) DEMO environment, disregard only a preliminary examination and testing (1985) guide DEMO characteristics interaction the as to how
person
interact tracing these plexity), study which environment attempted the single within (task examined to systematically study. importance), a a single examine and the (mental effects of ability) task (com- char-
process
process. An for Klayman the
study. person
DEMO the only of
combination acteristics havior of dent might needs ability While cognitive that that be. to on some be For the strategy within DEMO ability, focused and example, tasks studies what a little being on the have From while determining empirical impact utilized been researchers an interactive DEMO when evidence those which more have factors factors of suggested its on affect should the decision on the be decision importance studied process be- DEMO
multiple factors in a study, more work
becomes of the evi-
DEMO as structure empirical of cogni-
perspective, of and
found.
task cognitive
DEMO structured effects it
cognitive decision
the of
task process research tive the becomes. ability and be is obviously varied be decision The determined. and DEMO use ability needed outcomes its interactive should More in of the have well-defined this testing
impact on tasks. We
this
conceptual more area. effects DEMO uncertain requires or that unstructured the
with work various as well
literature Conclusion ing ing. sented In the Substantive this and rigor review, using several of the process conclusions we methodological research have tracing attempted have DEMO approaches been issues to from outlined. summarize this literature We have the growing used have the been body Beach pre- of
promise the
that DEMO could the study contribute of decision to improv- mak-
strategies
frame- (DEMO)
be
and work focused define concluded the used. Mitchell and a their conditions guide of model the process under future of decision decision DEMO tracing review which research making making develops particular approaches, of directions. DEMO to research provide literature the promise Pitz is an will integrative and lead of the to process a more
review for of
Our research DEMO is direction that this
decision it by not stating yet Sachs that possible despite will to
decision reveals of
task,
multiple components
has
DEMO
making tracing 114 approaches behavior.
S.
Abelson, Abelson, 36, CarroIl 715-729. R. R. & P. P. (1976). (1981). W. Payne DEMO Psychological (Eds.), processing status in attitude of and the social DEMO formation behavior. concept. and decision-making. American Hillsdale, NJ: Psychologist, Erlbaum. DEMO J.
J. Cognition
Abelson, E. Aronson R. P., & (Eds.), Levi, Handbook A. (1985). Decision of social psychology. making and decision HiIIsdale, theory. NJ: Erlbaum. In G. Lindzey &
R., & cue
Beach, Anderson, strategies. conIIrguraI L. N. H. Academy Mitchell, (1%9). utilization Comment of T. Management R. in clinical (1978). on “An judgment.” A Review, analysis-of-variance contingency 3, Psychological 43W9. model DEMO model Bulletin, for the 72, assessment 63-65. of
Bettman, Bettman, Bettman, strategies: sity sition. Working J. J. J. information In R., R., B. & B. Paper Jacoby, Kakkar, Anderson acquisition No. J. 61-85-86. (1976). (Ed.), (1977). &Payne, analysis strategies. Patterns Advances Effects of J. choice. W. of Journal of (1986). in processing consumer information Unpublished Cognitive of in research consumer presentation effort DEMO, (Vol. and information decision 3, format Duke pp. 3, 315-320). 233-240. on Univer- making acqui- con-
R., A Johnson, componentiul DEMO J.,
& P.
sumer Park, C. Consumer Research,
Bedard, process decision 7, on Gaber, behavior B. G.,
and decision & Marcus, Scherer, Human Processes, strategies: behavior: Performance, S. L.
Scofield, studying 24,
processing Davis, R.
J. the
970-987. and DEMO similarity F.,
on
Behavior models R. Decision S., S., of making &
decision man R.
70-84. M.
and J. J.
Christensen-Szalanski, DEMO havior 307-323. implications and strategies: Human
Dahlstrand, Crow, egies: L. E., A U., protocol Olshavsky, & Montgomery, analysis. R. H. (1984). Information search and evaluative processes in
Bettman, of Consumer the J. choice R., Research, &
Biggs,
Billings,
Billings,
Butcher, E., &
tracing Supervision, for
formation sumer N., N., information & & Burke,
Capon, Capon,
Christensen-Szalanski, 22, DEMO
for increasing FORD our ET understanding AL.
REFERENCES
234-248. consumer (1980)DEMO Effects decision of of prior processes: knowledge A protocol and experience DEMO Journal and
problem-solving The use
Measures 31, tracing
The versus of
DEMO M. E. (1984). competence. a standardized
processing. (1984). (DEMO). strategies. some J. (1978). Cognitive Individual, data. Journal Journal Problem-solving Organizational ability of of Marketing measures Behavior strategies: Research, as DEMO A Human selection Performance, mechanism,
The J. Performance, J. Journal & Summers, of Consumer J. 0. (1980). Research, Industrial 17, 34-44. buyers’
C.,
W.
A. (1983).
Process
41, M. Judgment (1988). 1-19.
&
effects
J. (1980).
W.,
of
deadlines 25, A
further
107-122.
and
Linsmeier, bank
331-352. effects DEMO of
product Consumer
examination analytic aptitudes. of the
of individual decision
phase
loan
versus of compensatory response Organizational policy capturing. mode and noncompensatory Organizational
DEMO simulation Education and process and
Research, and predictors task-related 7,
DEMO
T. officers. J.
class,
(1985).
Management The
effects
Science, of task
size 31, of
11, 314-326.
Organizational of
and Behavior DEMO and Hu- on
551-563. of
factors consumer in con- in-
Be-
problem-
choice strat-
the selection of decision
decision 113-123. PROCESS TRACING
Dawes, Bulletin, R. M., J., 81, & 95-106. Corrigan, B. (1974). Linear models in decision making. DEMO
Goldberg, cess-tracing H. L. J., R.
Herstein, Hoffman, Isen, DEMO, Hoyer, Jacoby, decision cation mation A. G. W. M., J. P. (1980). to D., processing A. J. making contraceptive & & (1981). Means, The Jacoby, in inthtence decision Keeping voting. DEMO J. decision (1983). (1982). Journal model. the of some voters The making. Three-dimensional of ACTA task influence Personality limits Advances variables DEMO, in of mind: and positive on in information Consumer Social cognitive A 45, cognitive affect 187-l%. Psychology, operations acquisition: Research, on DEMO decision 40, 9,61fi-623. in analysis An 843-861. an making appli- DEMO of
Jacoby, information 532-543.
tion Kuss,
Jacoby, Jacoby,
Johnson, Johnson, Johnson, Klayman, E. J. J., (19113).
Klayman, North-Holland. 0. Svenson,
Analysis &
Lehman, Lehman, ment
Einhorn, DEMO, ment H. and
(1960). 116-131. The
strategy. J., Chestnut, Social Cognition, R. W.,
investigation. J., acquisition: Chestnut, research: A., Troutman, Implications T.,
Disutility information J., J., Mazursky, of
Jacoby, in
mental
making: A computer based process tracing study. DEMO Psychologiu, 115 56,
Review M.
Psychologist, models 23, or DEMO simple
paramorphic representation of clinical judgment. Psychological
acquisition in dt nondurable purchasing. Journal of Marketing Research, 15,
Advances &
feedback. Troutman, Kohn, of Marketing Journal C. T., A. & (1974). Research,
representations Unpublished processes: E. E. E. choice Szybillo, J. J., J., situations. G., & Busato-Schach, Journal of Consumer J. (1977). DEMO, Information 3, acquisition
D.
Johnson, Jacoby, brand J.,
behavioral J., Jaccard, Social
choice. Kleinmuntz, & models Hogarth, Annual of
DEMO R. D. M.,
47,
American (196tI).
Simple
Speller,DEMO
load. outcome
D.
Journal E., D., &
(1981). & Psychological of Kleinmuntz,
Psychology,
Behavioral
Review, B. 32,
decision (1979). 53-88.
processes? 86, Some research or clinical
Linear theory: 465-485. Processes
2(l), Fisher,
Weigle,
Consumer of a K.
lg-31.
process C.,
Research, & methodology, Fisher, Mazursky, DEMO 3, psychology. D. (in
regression
and of judg- pro-
W. A. (1978). A behavioral process approach to
W.
press).
(1985)DEMO
Kuss, A.
of Applied
Brand
11,
choice 63-69.
(1984). Psychology,
When behavior 69, feedback 531-545. as a function is ignored: of
Unpublished The Payne, Meyer, & Meyer, effect J. of DEMO varying J.
(1985).
using R., R., longitudinal & Moore,DEMO
Organizational D. J.
for
306-314. A. research (1976). Prepurchase paradigm, Journal New of directions and informa- Experi- pilot
manuscript, Expertise Carnegie-Mellon and decision under University. uncertainty: Performance andprocess. behavior in
efficient R. W., DEMO,
Moore, Behavior Children’s W.
process
Psychology. J.,
in
Description DEMO W., in
manuscript, & & (1984).
A. and decision DEMO
data. L., L. & (1980). Journal
Elrod,
strategies Validity Decision
and
context.
of Vari sets. Bettman, Ghore, predecisional (Eds.), Unpublished S.
Compensatory Journal
Carnegie-Mellon J. (1986). R. (1986).
DEMO
manuscript, When of
information and Information University.
ofMarketing T. (1982). of Processes, information their The adaption 35, 179-201. to task
choice DEMO
choice Consumer aiding search Carnegie-Mellon models decision displays patterns. fail: processes. DEMO In P.
Research,
development display
17,
45w59. boards: of
DEMO
distinct
An
Research, of noncompensatory 11,528-541.
Compensatory University.
Hum- New
DEMO choice
judgments.
Bulletin,
phreys, reversals. York:
209-216.
W.
116 Research, process segments 46,
244. ability, selection and of
DEMO, Major, Olshavsky, Newell, R.
Onken, J.,
Payne,
DEMO,
Payne, J. W. making. (1982). Contingent decision behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 92, 382-402.
Shields, Schmitt, Schmitt, cue probability N., DEMO Dudycha, learning. A. L. Memory (1975b). and Positive Cognition, DEMO negative 3,78-84.
investigation. &
Performance, An J.
Review market Consumer G., J. &
probability ory, 104, N.,
proposals. performance DEMO N., D. &
Shields,
Evidence M.
D.
from (1983)DEMO corporate Effects managers. of
information
The
Accounting supply
and
Payne, Payne,DEMO
Schmitt,
Pitz,
FORD ET AL.
MacAllister, D. W., decision reversibility. 48-59. Mitchell, T. R., & Beach, L. R. (1979)DEMO The contingency model for the
information. and J. R., & & DEMO, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Clitfs, NJ: Pren-
W.
W.
Bettman, Braunstein,
Payne, Payne,
cision tracing DEMO J.
tice-Hall. B. A.,
protocols Pittsburgh, J.
mance, information J.
Payne,
acquisition J. W.,
Social (1980). Psychology, Information
(1974). and PA:
(1976). 366-387. search Task
16,
&
alternative W.,
of
Sachs, &
Unpublished J. R.,
W.,
W., W.,
Braunstein, behavior. Braunstein, 22, approach DEMO Memory M.
shopping 307-315. & Psychology, Research, learning. Dudycha, Ragsdale, N. behavior: (1984). Journal 5, E. A. 35, 571-577. DEMO L. 139-163. Judgment
39,
Organizational Schmitt, N.
comments and
Unpublished DEMO & L.
M.
Some
of
(1980). Levine, Organizational reports. Some R. Accounting, effects of
Carnegie-Mellon A
over time: A stochastic modeling DEMO Journal of Marketing
strategies:
Organizational An
acquisition 1010-1023.
(1979). DEMO
Situational and Human influences Performance, on linear 23, and 292-306. nonlinear
process complexity protocol (Complex tracing Performance, analysis. and study Information contingent DEMO Organizational risky
manuscript, Johnson, (1977).
manuscript. Contingent E.
empirical
DEMO attribution processes. Journal ofPersonality
use of
Processing decision processing making, Working DEMO Paper No. of verbal 274).
Duke J. (1986). University DEMO Adaptive Working in strategy risky Paper choice: selection No. A 62-85-86. DEMO in de-
L., to decision & L.
and decision: effect Psychology: of Theory cue and application. Annual
(1977). Behavior Statistical information DEMO, and versus Human subjective Performance, Review, demand 58, on 284-303. judgment
(1978).
(1975a). Experimental The
load
and CarrolI,
DEMO test
of
and the effects Human
of
Performance, signiticance, account- 24, 221
Behavior
in
decision and
making: An
Human Perfor-
(1978).
Cognition, research. J. Risky S. 6, choice: 554-561. An examination of information
(1978).
findings Verbal
and
protocols a discussion and direct of methods. observation Advances of
redundancy Human Learning in multiple and
and on DEMO Society, weights: patterns 5, 429-442. used
Organizational Exploring pre-decisional Behavior
DEMO
behavior: Human
cue redundancy in multiple
20,
accuracy:
Some DEMO
super-
in
Mem- cue
problems to analyze and
ogy: replication cation DEMO strategies Hastie, W. and (1979). extension.
Human
R., &
Perception in a
complex Revelle, and decision-making W. (1985). Individual DEMO, task. M-27. Journal differences ofExperimental in the use
of
Psychol- simpliii-
DEMO
Task
Organizational complexity
and
Behavior contingent
and
processing Human Pegormance, in DEMO making: 24,3UO- A
Slavic, Simon, Slavic, J. A. (1976). Discussion: Cognition PROCESS and social behavior. In J. S. Carrel & J. W.
Stein, Staelin, ers. R., In J. & S. Payne, Carroll
Sundstrom, Relations, Hillsdale, J.
Svenson, ican
Tversky, Wailer, Human Human strategies W. DEMO, Performance, Performance, for & Mitchell, the cost 23, 33, T. variance R. 397-413. 86112. (1984). investigating The effects problems. of context Organizational on the selection Behavior of decision and
RECEIVED: zational Behavior DeNisi,
TRACING
Payne P., (Eds.), Fischhoff, Cognition B., & and Lichtenstein, social behavior. S.
Review Performance, the P., 6,DEMO (1976). W. Payne Studies (Eds.), of
study
(1981)DEMO NJ: Contextual Erlbaum.
Svenson, In reports 0. (1979). from DEMO the Psychological descriptions Laboratories, of
Williams, praisal Decision K. November Making, pp. 4, 1986 294-304). London: Tavistock.
& of Lichtenstein, DEMO Psychology, Erlbaum. decision
information & W.
underlying Psychological 0. G. (1974). 34, A. assumptions. (1984, 819-834. A
281-299. A. (1972)DEMO Elimination by aspects: decision A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 79,
Wilkins, L. purpose: T. J., (1964). Effects and DEMO A. deviance on (Appendix IV - Confidence and Competence in
117
DEMO S. 28, processing (1971). l-39. Comparison in (1977). DEMO, Bayesian Organizational Behavioral NJ: social and seeking regression behavior Behavior behavior theory. approaches (pp. and Annual to
note Association, on factors Paper DEMO the selection of strategic annual during decision methods. Human
Human S., DEMO purpose Blencoe, Decision A.
judgment. of
J. the Cognition information and DEMO
August). Process description of decision making: Comments on
think Stockholm,DEMO
185-202). consum- Human
a 421. Amer- home. and
Organi- of ap-
presented aloud Toronto, Canada. at the obtained 92nd convention the of of the
Behavior No.
role
protocols making. University Organizational of choice
information Processes, G., & Cafferty, acquisition 35, 314-339. T. P.
and (1985)DEMO utilization. The{1g42fwefx}