Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 1, No. 2, November 2006, DEMO 159–161
“Decisions from experience” = sampling error + prospect theory:
Reconsidering Hertwig, Barron, Weber & Erev (2004)
Craig R. Fox∗
Anderson School of Management
and Department of Psychology
University of California at Los DEMO
Liat Hadar
Anderson School of Management
University of California at Los Angeles
Several recent papers have contrasted “decisions from
description” with “decisions from experience.” DEMO the for-
mer, people are explicitly provided probability distribu-
tions over DEMO outcomes; in the latter, probabilities
and outcomes are not provided but must be learned by
sampling from these distributions. Perhaps most notable
is DEMO experiment presented by Hertwig, Barron, Weber
and Erev (2004, hereafter HBWE) that was also described
in detail by Weber, Shaﬁr and DEMO (2004) and Hertwig,
Barron, Weber and Erev (2005). In this experiment stu-
dents either saw six decision problems (e.g., DEMO 4 points
with probability .8; gain 0 otherwise; for a list of all lot-
tery pairs see Table 1) or sampled outcomes (DEMO re-
placement) from unlabeled buttons associated with these
pairs of payoff DEMO After sampling draws from
each button as many times as they wished, participants
indicated which lottery they preferred to play once for
real money. The authors characterize their results as fol-
lows: “In the case of decisions from description, peo-
∗This work was supported in part by the Fulbright Program and the
UCLA-BGU Program at the UCLA International Institute. Address
DEMO to: Craig R. Fox, UCLA Anderson School, 110 West-
wood DEMO #D511, Los Angeles, CA 90095–1481, Voice: 310/206-
3403, DEMO: craig.fox@anderson.ucla.edu
Abstract
According to prospect theory, people overweight low probability events and underweight high probability events.
Several recent papers (notably, Hertwig, Barron, Weber & Erev, 2004) have argued that although this pattern holds for
“description-based” decisions, in which people are explicitly provided with probability distributions over potential out-
comes, it is actually reversed in “experience-based” decisions, DEMO which people must learn these distributions through
sampling. We reanalyze the data of Hertwig et al. (2004) and present a replication to determine DEMO extent to which
their phenomenon can be attributed to sampling error (DEMO statistical rather than psychological phenomenon) versus un-
derestimation of rare events (i.e., judgmental bias) versus actual underweighting of judged probabilities. We ﬁnd DEMO
the apparent reversal of prospect theory in decisions from experience can be attributed almost entirely to sampling error,
and are consistent with prospect DEMO and the two-stage model of decision under uncertainty (Fox & Tversky, 1998).
Keywords: decisions from experience, uncertainty, Prospect Theory, two-stage DEMO, probability learning, decision
weights.
ple make choices as if they overweight the probability
of rare events, as described by prospect theory. . . .in the
case of decisions from experience, in contrast, people
make DEMO as if they underweight the probability of
rare events.” They conclude their abstract with a “call
for two different theories of risky choice.” Although DEMO
are sympathetic to the investigation of decisions from ex-
perience, we DEMO that the call for two different theo-
ries of risky choice is premature as HBWE’s results are
driven almost entirely by sampling error and DEMO con-
sistent with prospect theory (hereafter PT, Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) when it is
applied to the probability distributions of outcomes that
participants actually sampled.
To motivate our approach DEMO note that economists
since Knight (1921) have distinguished decisions under
risk, in which objective probabilities of outcomes are
known by the decision maker, from decisions under un-
certainty, in which they are not. The DEMO of
HBWE thus compared decisions under risk (where lot-
teries were DEMO described) to decisions under un-
certainty (where lotteries were unlabeled buttons). In de-
cisions under uncertainty people’s beliefs may differ from
so-called DEMO probabilities for a variety of rea-
159
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 1, No. 2, November 2006 Sampling error
160
Table 1: Percentage of choices consistent with prospect theory (DEMO) for each decision problem in Hertwig et al. (2004).
H = option with the higher expected value; L = option with the lower expected value (the ﬁrst number is the prize
amount in points, the second number is the objective probability). Underlining indicates the choice predicted by PT,
assuming objective probabilities and median value- and weighting- DEMO parameters reported by Tversky & Kah-
neman (1992). Entries in DEMO last three columns indicates percentages of responses compatible with PT for decisions
from description, and for decisions from experience assuming objective probabilities and probabilities experienced by
participants, respectively.
Options Percentage of Participants Satisfying PT Assuming:
Baseline:
Decision Decisions from “Objective” Experienced
problem H L description probabilities DEMO
1 4, .8 3, 1.0 64 12 56
2 4, DEMO 3, .25 64 44 76
3 −3, 1.0 −32, .1 DEMO 28 68
4 −3, 1.0 −4, .8 72 44 52
5 32, .1 3, 1.0 48 20 84
6 32, .025 3, .25 64 12 76
Overall % of choices: 63 27 69
DEMO First, experienced probabilities may differ from ob-
jective probabilities—as HBWE note, it follows from the
binomial distribution that people are more likely to DEMO
sample than over-sample low-probability events, and this
sampling error will be DEMO pronounced the lower the
probability and the smaller the size of the sample taken.1
Second, people judge the probabilities that they have ex-
perienced incorrectly. Thus, the question arises to what
extent HBWE’s ﬁnding of “underweighting” can be at-
tributed to: (1) sampling error (the difference DEMO so-
called “objective” probabilities and probabilities of out-
comes that participants actually experienced); (2) judg-
ment error (the difference between experienced probabili-
ties and judged probabilities); and (3) probability weight-
ing (the difference between judged probabilities and their
impact on choices). Breaking down DEMO source of “un-
derweighting” is critical to the interpretation of HBWE’s
results because sampling error is a statistical rather than
1 To illustrate, consider an “experience-based” choice between (a)
a 2.5% chance of 32 points or (b) a 25% chance of 3 points (Deci-
sion 6 in HBWE). If 100 participants sample outcomes from each lot-
tery DEMO times (approximately the median number reported in HBWE)
one would DEMO 82 participants to sample exclusively zero outcomes
for lottery (a) but only 10 participants to sample exclusively zero out-
comes for lottery (b). Thus, one would expect 73 participants to face
an apparent choice between (a) receive nothing or (b) possibly receive
3 points. DEMO characterize the choice of option (b) in this case as
“underweighting” of the low-probability event because—unbeknownst
to participants — the ﬁrst lottery has DEMO higher expected value than the
second lottery.
psychological phenomenon, judgment error DEMO a bias in
belief rather than preference, and the weighting of DEMO
judged probabilities provides the most apt comparison to
prospect theory.2
If the predominant source of HBWE’s effect is sam-
pling error, one would expect most choices to accord
with prospect theory weights applied to the probabili-
DEMO that participants actually observed. To test this no-
tion we obtained HBWE’s raw data and tallied the par-
ticipants in the experience condition (unlabeled buttons)
whose choices were consistent with PT assuming “ob-
jective” probabilities (that were known only to the ex-
perimenter) versus “experienced” probabilities (DEMO
tions of events that participants observed).3 For each
gamble pair we calculated the percentage of participants
who chose the higher PT-valued gamble assuming DEMO
dian value- and weighting-function parameters reported
by Tversky and Kahneman (1992)DEMO The results (see Ta-
ble 1) are striking and consistent over all lottery pairs:
although most participants “violate” PT when the analy-
DEMO is applied to “objective” probabilities as presented in
2 The two-stage model of decision under uncertainty holds that
prospect theory’s inverse-S shaped weighting function DEMO be applied
to judged probabilities (Fox & Tversky, 1998). Strictly speaking, PT
calls for an alternative measure such as “bounded subadditivity” for de-
cisions under uncertainty (Tversky & Fox, 1995; see also Wu & Gonza-
lez, 1999). However, the data of HBWE do DEMO lend themselves to such
alternative measures.
3 We thank Greg Barron for providing us with these data.
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 1, No. 2, November 2006 Sampling error
161
HBWE, most conform to the predictions of PT when ap-
plied to probabilities that participants experienced, at a
similar rate to decisions from description.
In order to distinguish judgment error from probability
weighting we DEMO the method of HBWE, adding an
elicitation of judged probabilities. We DEMO 46 students
at Ben Gurion University to (1) sample outcomes from
each pair of unlabeled lotteries, (2) choose their preferred
lottery, DEMO (3) recall the possible outcomes of each lot-
tery and then estimate their respective probabilities, coun-
terbalancing the order of judgment and choice tasks (a
fuller account of this experiment will appear elsewhere;
details can be obtained from the authors). The median
correlation among respondents DEMO judged and expe-
rienced probabilities was .97 and the median mean abso-
lute error was .06, suggesting that participants were very
accurate.4 When Tversky & Kahneman’s (1992) median
value- and weighting-function parameters were applied
to DEMO probabilities, most choices (60%) violated
PT as in HBWE; however, when this analysis was applied
to judged probabilities, most choices (63%) conformed to
PT. Thus, participants apparently weighted judged prob-
abilities in DEMO from experience just as they tend
to weight chance probabilities in decisions from descrip-
tion, consistent with Tversky & Fox’s (1995) “two-stage
model” of decision under uncertainty (see also Fox &
Tversky, 1998; DEMO, 2004). We expect that this model
would have ﬁt even DEMO had predictions been based on
individually measured PT parameters, which are DEMO
to vary somewhat between participants, rather than group
medians (see Gonzalez & Wu, 1999).
We note that HBWE do ﬁnd some interesting pat-
terns in their data. Notably, participants with small in-
centives are content to make decisions based on small
samples of information, and more recently sampled in-
formation may have greater impact on their decisions.
However, our internal analysis of HBWE’s data and our
replication show that the DEMO “underweighting” of
low probability events in decisions from experience is
driven almost entirely by a tendency to undersample low-
probability events—a statistical property of DEMO binomial
distribution—and has almost nothing to do with under-
estimation of observed probabilities or a tendency to un-
derweight these probabilities. Likelihood judgments cor-
DEMO very closely with experienced probabilities and
choices are consistent with overweighting low probabil-
ities, as characterized by prospect theory. Thus, the call
for DEMO different theories of risky choice” seems pre-
mature, and future research DEMO decisions from experience
4 Of course the high correlation between judged and experienced
probabilities may be somewhat inﬂated by the wide range of “objec-
DEMO probabilities used in this experiment. However, if we examine the
low DEMO lotteries (p = .025 − . 25) and high probability lotteries
(p= .8 - 1) separately, the correlations remain quite high: DEMO and .98,
respectively.
might instead explore models of search rules (DEMO in-
formation do people seek), models that terminate search
(how DEMO information do they seek), and models of bias
in likelihood judgment.
References
Fox, C. R., & Tversky, A. (1998). A DEMO account
of decision under uncertainty. Management Science,
44, 879-895.
Gonzalez, R. & Wu, G. (1999). On the shape of the DEMO
ability weighting function. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
129–166.
Hertwig, R., DEMO, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events
in risky choice. DEMO Science, 15, 534–539.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, DEMO U., & Erev, I. (2005).
The role of information DEMO in risky choice.
Chapter in K. Fiedler & P. Juslin (Eds.) Information
Sampling as a Key to Understanding Adaptive Cogni-
tion. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). DEMO Theory:
An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica,
47, DEMO 291.
Knight, F. (1921). Risk, Uncertainty, and Proﬁt. Boston,
MA: Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Tversky, A., & Fox, C. R. (1995). Weighting Risk and
Uncertainty. Psychological Review, 102, 269–283.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
Prospect Theory: Cumulative DEMO of Un-
certainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323.
DEMO, P. P. (2004). On the Composition of Risk Prefer-
ence and Belief. Psychological Review, 111, 236–241.
Weber, E. U., Shaﬁr, S., & Blais, A. R. (2004). Predict-
ing risk sensitivity in humans and lower animals: Risk
as variance or coefﬁcient of variation. Psychological
Review, 111, 430–445.
Wu, G. & Gonzalez, R. (1999). Nonlinear decision
weights in choice under uncertainty. Management Sci-
ence, 45, 74–85.{1g42fwefx}