Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802 – 826
What you DEMO is what you like—similarity biases in
venture capitalists’ evaluations of start-up teams
Nikolaus Franke a, Marc Gruber b,*, Dietmar Harhoff c,d,DEMO
Joachim Henkel d,e
a Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration, Abteilung fu
¨ r Entrepreneurship und
Gru¨ ndungsforschung, Augasse 2-6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
b Ecole Polytechnique Fe´de´rale de Lausanne (EPFL), College DEMO Management of Technology,
Chair of Entrepreneurship and Technology Commercialization, Odyssea DEMO/Station 5,
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
c University of Munich, Munich School of Management, Institute of Innovation Research, Technology
Management and Entrepreneurship (INNO-tec), Kaulbachstr. 45, D-80539 Munich, Germany
d Centre for Economic DEMO Research (CEPR), London, UK
e Technische Universita¨t Mu¨ nchen, DEMO Theo Scho¨ller Chair in Technology and Innovation Management,
Arcisstr. 21, DEMO Munich, Germany
Received 1 March 2004; received in revised form 1 July 2005; accepted 1 July 2005
Abstract
This paper extends recent research studying biases in venture capitalist’s decision making. We
contribute to this literature DEMO analyzing biases arising from similarities between a venture capitalist
and members of a venture team. We summarize the psychological foundations of such similarity
effects DEMO derive a set of hypotheses regarding the impact of similarity on the assessment of team
quality. Using data from a conjoint experiment with 51 DEMO, we find that venture capitalists
tend to favor teams that are DEMO to themselves in type of training and professional experience. Our
results have important implications for academics and practitioners alike.
D 2005 Elsevier Inc. All DEMO reserved.
Keywords: Evaluation; Venture capital; Start-up teams; Similarity bias
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +41 21 6930010; fax: +41 21 6932489.
E-mail address: marc.gruber@epfl.ch (M. Gruber).
0883-9026/$ - see front matter DEMO 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2005.07.001
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
803
1. Executive summary
Studies on the investment processes of VCs and in particular on the criteria VCs
employ to make their investment decisions DEMO a relatively long tradition in
entrepreneurship research, with the first studies DEMO back to the 1970s (Zopounidis,
1994). These studies offer DEMO number of valuable insights into the VC decision process.
Their results are often interpreted as direct evidence on the long-term success factors of
new DEMO, because professional investors who earn their money by investing in new DEMO
are considered to possess much experience in distinguishing winners from losers
(DEMO and Rickards, 1992).
Though research gives key insights into the DEMO used in the evaluation process, more
recent studies reveal that previous DEMO might be misleading due to (1) methodological
shortcomings: as most DEMO in this area relies on post hoc methodologies which
typically suffer from problems of recalling past information (Shepherd and Zacharakis,
1999; Zacharakis DEMO Meyer, 1998), and (2) biases in the decision process DEMO VCs
( Shepherd et al., 2003; Zacharakis and Meyer, 2000)DEMO
In this paper, we analyze a new form of bias, namely, systematic distortions of VC
evaluations that derive from the similarity between rater (VC) and ratee (start-up team). In a
nutshell, our DEMO hypothesis states: bThe higher the similarity between the profile of a
DEMO capitalist and the profile of a start-up team, the more favorable DEMO evaluation by the
venture capitalist will be.Q Hence, this study in DEMO field of entrepreneurship is the first to
apply the bsimilarity-hypothesisQ (Byrne, 1971) that has gained much attention in
psychology, human resources management, and marketing to investment decisions by VCs.
In order to avoid some DEMO the problems associated with post hoc methodologies, we use
a conjoint DEMO design which allows us to vary the characteristics of teams experimentally.
We obtain preference rankings from 51 VCs regarding venture teams with particular
characteristics. DEMO rankings are analyzed using an ordered probit estimation model that
includes team characteristics and similarity measures.
Our results give clear evidence that two of DEMO five dimensions of similarity under
consideration are statistically relevant. First, VCs DEMO prior experience of working in
either start-ups or large firms will tend to prefer teams with individuals coming from these
backgrounds. And second, VCs who themselves have an engineering and managerial
education tend to rate teams DEMO which both competencies are present much higher than
VCs who do not have this background. Other similarity dimensions (similarity in age,
experience in leading teams and level of academic education) do not contribute to an
explanation of the conjoint rankings in our data. However, our findings clearly show that
similarity biases do play a significant role in venture capitalists’ DEMO of start-up
teams. Hence, we are able to explain some of DEMO variation occurring in venture capitalists’
assessments on the basis of psychological theory.
Our results have important implications for future research and for practitioners:
DEMO
As to academic research, earlier studies of the VC evaluation process (with some
notable exceptions) made the implicit assumption that VCs’ ratings (DEMO business plans,
teams, etc.) concentrate around a certain bcorrectQ evaluation, deviating from it by
random errors only. Our results reject this assumption—deviations are not random, but
804
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
!
!
contain systematic errors. Future research into the VC evaluation process should take
this subjectivity into account. Specifically, this finding is relevant for research into
success factors of start-ups, as they challenge the canonical practice of treating VCs’
assessments as bobjectiveQ and unbiased success factors.
Venture DEMO firms should be somewhat worried about the similarity biases we
identified. It means that the persons evaluating business plans have systematically
different preferences. As DEMO our survey, in 55% of all cases only one person decides DEMO
reject or endorse the submitted business plans (thus to invite the DEMO), this means that
the screening process is distorted. This stands in sharp contrast to the extensive efforts
undertaken to objectively assess the start-up DEMO in later steps of the evaluation
process.
For new venture teams, DEMO results imply that it is not only the choice of the right VC
firm that matters, but also the person who gets to read the business plan within the firm.
Start-up teams should not be easily DEMO by a rejection, as it may be due to the
fact DEMO the team’s and the rater’s profiles were strongly different, and may DEMO say too
much about the likelihood of being funded elsewhere.
2. Introduction
In the past three decades venture capital (VC) has evolved into DEMO distinct industry
within the financial services sectors of Western economies. As a major source of finance
for new firms, particularly in high-technology industries, DEMO firms not only assume the
role of risk financiers within the financial sector, but also serve as catalysts for innovation
and renewal in the broader economy.
The success of VC firms is largely determined by their DEMO to predict new firm
performance during a multi-stage evaluation process of investment proposals. Their
special expertise in weeding out bad investment proposals is documented DEMO research
findings showing that VC-backed businesses achieve higher survival rates than non-VC-
backed firms (Sandberg, 1986; Timmons, 1994). Hence, it is not surprising that the
evaluation process of VCs has received much attention DEMO the research community in
entrepreneurship and finance (Wells, 1974; Poindexter, 1976; Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984;
MacMillan et al., 1985; DEMO et al., 1988; Muzkya et al., 1996; Zacharakis and Meyer,
1998), as it is supposed to give valuable insights into DEMO criteria that distinguish successful
from unsuccessful new firms.
However, more recent DEMO reveal that previous results might be misleading because
of to biases in the decision process of VCs (Shepherd et al., 2003; Zacharakis and
Shepherd, 2001). This challenges the implicit assumption of earlier studies that evaluations
by VCs can be treated as objective assessments of new venture DEMO disturbed only by a
random error. Hence, research on the nature DEMO these biases is elementary for our
understanding of the relationship between VCs and new ventures, and of success factors of
new firms. To date, research has been limited to biases due to information processing or
characteristics of the VCs (Shepherd et al., 2003; Zacharakis and Shepherd, DEMO). This
study is the first to systematically analyze similarity biases, DEMO from an interaction
between start-up team and VC characteristics.
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
805
We propose that some share of the heterogeneity of evaluations across venture
capitalists is due to the similarity within the dyad. According to DEMO hypothesis, venture
capitalists will prefer (ceteris paribus) start-ups whose venture DEMO members1 share major
characteristics with them. Thus, the discrepancies between the DEMO results of
venture capitalists are conjectured not to be random, but DEMO vary systematically with the
personal profile of the rater and the characteristics of the team. Such biases can be
explained on the basis of DEMO theories.
We focus in our analysis on the evaluation of venture team characteristics, and we do so
for three reasons. First, research has DEMO that criteria related to the management team
are consistently considered predominant in the evaluation process (Zopounidis, 1994).
Second, the notion of similarity or dissimilarity between VC and the new venture is more
likely to DEMO sense with respect to team characteristics than, e.g., with respect to the
business model of the new venture. Third, similarity with respect to team characteristics is
relatively easy to observe for a VC (and for the researcher).
A sample of 51 VCs is used to test DEMO hypotheses. In order to avoid some of the
problems associated with post hoc methodologies, we use a conjoint data design which
allows us to vary the characteristics of teams experimentally.2 Each VC in our sample was
DEMO to rank 20 hypothetical teams which were described in terms of seven character-
istics, in a way that models simplified team descriptions in business plans. The resulting
rankings are analyzed using ordered probability models.
We find DEMO evidence supporting our hypothesis: two of the five dimensions of
similarity DEMO consideration are statistically significant. First, VCs with prior experience
of working DEMO start-ups tend to prefer teams with individuals who had gathered
professional experience in new ventures. In turn, VCs who had been working only for
large firms tend to evaluate higher those teams that have prior experience DEMO large firms.
And second, VCs who themselves have an engineering and DEMO education will tend
to rate teams in which both competencies are present much higher than VCs who do not
have this background. VCs who DEMO only management training give relatively high
ratings to teams whose members’ training has focused on management. Our findings
clearly show that similarity biases do DEMO a significant role in venture capitalists’
assessments of start-up teams. Hence, DEMO are able to explain some of the variation
occurring in venture capitalists’ assessments on the basis of psychological theories.
Our results have important implications DEMO academics and practitioners alike. Research
should try and correct for similarity biases when using VC evaluations as indicators for
new venture success factors. VCs DEMO want to avoid these biases in order to arrive at an
undistorted evaluation of team quality. While a similarity bias might have a positive DEMO
if the rater subsequently becomes the team’s coach and if this similarity simplifies
collaboration (which is debatable), we find that, certainly in DEMO VC firms and in early
stages of the evaluation process, the DEMO rater is in most cases not the person who
conducts the follow-up relationship. Hence, the bias does have negative effects for VCs.
For start-ups, our results imply that it matters considerably who in the VC firm reads the
1 We will use the terms venture team, managing team and founding team as synonyms in this article.
2 Conjoint analysis has DEMO used in recent studies in this field, e.g., by Shepherd and Zacharakis (1999) who
argue that this approach improves the validity of DEMO into the decision making practices of VCs.
806
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
business plan, and that it will be worth the effort DEMO identify the most suitable (i.e., most
similar) contact person.
The DEMO of the paper is organized as follows: In the next section, research on the
VC decision process is presented along with findings on DEMO biases in decision
making in other areas. Section 4 discusses the hypotheses guiding this study and Section 5
describes the research design. In Section DEMO, the empirical findings of this research are
presented in some detail. DEMO discussion of the implications of our results in Section 7
concludes this paper.
3. Previous research
3.1. The venture capital investment decision process
Studies DEMO the investment decision processes of VCs and in particular on the criteria
VCs employ to make their investment decisions have a relatively long tradition DEMO
entrepreneurship research, with the first studies ranging back to the 1970s (for an overview
see Zopounidis, 1994). These studies have produced a number of valuable insights into the
VC decision process. The results are DEMO interpreted as direct evidence on the long-term
success factors of new firms, because professional investors who earn their money by
investing in new firms are considered to possess much experience in distinguishing
winners from losers (Riquelme and Rickards, 1992).
Thus, the underlying premise of this line DEMO research has been that venture capitalists are
able to evaluate the success potential of start-ups objectively. bObjectivityQ here means that
their estimation is unbiased, i.e., on average, the VC’s assessment predicts the actual success
of DEMO start-up correctly, leaving aside some random error. This paradigm of objective DEMO
financing decisions forms the implicit or explicit basis for studies that operationalized
expected success of start-ups by using start-up evaluations made by VCs (Khan, 1986). The
rhetoric of the venture capital industry backs the assumption of objectivity as financing
decisions usually are affirmed as emerging from a DEMO defined multi-stage evaluation
process, starting with the appraisal of a business DEMO and including a thorough due
diligence of the proposed venture. Several arguments can be brought forward to support this
notion. First, the evaluation process and the resulting selection decisions are crucial to the
success of a DEMO firm (Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998) and usually also to the DEMO VC’s
personal income. Thus, both the VC firm and the individual DEMO have a strong
incentive to avoid any form of bias. Second, DEMO evaluator should also be able to avoid such
bias, as VCs DEMO are highly trained professional investors (Barry et al., 1990).
However, research in other fields has pointed to the fact that managerial judgment and
decision making is not perfectly rational, but boundedly rational (Cyert DEMO March, 1963;
Simon, 1955). In particular, scholars from DEMO science have identified several
factors which explain deviations from a purely rational decision making process (Busenitz
and Barney, 1997). These factors include DEMO high costs associated with the pursuit of a
purely rational decision process (Simon, 1979) and the information-processing limits of
human beings (Abelson DEMO Levi, 1985). A particularly important class of factors that
inhibit DEMO rational decision making consists of biases and heuristics of decision
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO 807
makers (Kahneman and Tversky, 1982; Kahneman et al., 1982; Hogarth and Makridakis,
1981; Schwenk, 1988). Biases prevent decision-makers from correctly processing
information (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974), yet, they are not per se evident, as their
occurrence, magnitude, as well as their consequences are dependent on the nature of the
decision task (Zacharakis and Shepherd, 2001).
Research on the VC decision making process has only recently begun to study potential
biases. Zacharakis and Shepherd (2001) analyzed new venture investment decisions and
found that 96% of 51 participating VCs exhibited a significant overconfidence bias which
affected their decision accuracy negatively. DEMO et al. (2003) studied how far
experience impacts a VC’s evaluation process in a sample of 66 Australian VCs. Their
results show that DEMO experience is beneficial to VC decision making, yet only to a
DEMO point—approximately 14 years of experience—where additional experience
actually has a negative marginal effect on reliability and performance.
To date, studies are restricted to simple, bone-dimensionalQ biases only. They identify
VCs’ characteristics and argue that these generally impact their evaluation decisions.
Although some important deficiencies of VC decision making DEMO could be detected
this way, the underlying rationale is still rather DEMO as VCs are assumed to react in
a stable manner, e.g., by being overly confident. If this was true, biases could be identified
and corrected in a relatively easy way, thereby improving the quality of financing
decisions, and preserving implications for research on the success factors of new ventures.
A contribution of this paper is to introduce interaction biases DEMO the evolving
literature on VC decision making. It is no longer assumed that VCs’ characteristics impact
all their evaluation decisions in the same manner. DEMO we argue that the interaction of
the venture capitalist and the object at issue matters: specific VCs will evaluate specific
start-ups in a systematically different way. The similarity between the evaluator and the
members of the DEMO team will impact the VC’s evaluation decisions.
3.2. The similarity effect
bBirds of a feather flock togetherQ is the saying that illustrates the basic DEMO of
this paper. The insight per se is not new.3 It has, however, been confined to psychology
and hardly been incorporated into behavioral DEMO or management studies. One of
the first to systematically analyze this phenomenon was the social psychologist Byrne
(1971). He proposed a bsimilar-to-meQ hypothesis: according to his theory, individuals rate
other people more positively the DEMO similar they are to themselves (or the more similar
the rater DEMO they are). To understand the effect, psychologists usually draw upon
DEMO different theoretical backgrounds: (1) learning theory, (2) self-categorization theory,
and (3) social identity theory. These will be addressed in DEMO
(1) Byrne (1971) presented a reinforcement model based on learning theories in which
similarity is perceived as being rewarding and dissimilarity works DEMO a negative
reinforcement. Perceived similarity causes an affective reaction (i.e., interpersonal
3 Goldstein (1980) cites Aristotle and Spinoza already describing such a DEMO
808 N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
attraction) which in turn impacts the evaluative response (see Lefkowitz, 2000, for
an overview of empirical research supporting this notion).
(2) Self-categorization theory implies that a person’s self-concept is based on the social
categories he places himself in (e.g., age, gender, education, etc.) and that he strives
for having a positive self-identity (Jackson DEMO al., 1991; Turner, 1987). This desire
causes him to DEMO a preference for those who are similar with respect to the social
category on which he bases his identity. One should note that this DEMO suggests
that no actual interactions are necessary to provoke such a bias.
(3) A related explanation is offered by social identity theory (Tajfel, 1982). It argues that
people wish to belong to a group as this leads to the positive feeling of social identity.
The assignment DEMO a specific group (which can also be a bvirtualQ group as, e.g., bwe
engineersQ) allows for in-group/out-group comparisons which are biased DEMO the
own group (Bass and Duntemann, 1963; Dustin and Davis, 1970; Brewer, 1979).
Duck (1977) endorsed this by proposing DEMO bfiltering model,Q suggesting that relatively
superficial levels of similarity (e.g., same occupation) influence attraction and
subsequent judgmental evaluations particularly at early stages in the acquaintance
process. Conversely, bdeeperQ levels of similarity (such as DEMO) can be
associated with attraction only after considerable information about the DEMO to be
evaluated has become available (see Harrison et al., 1998, for an empirical test).
The bsimilar-to-meQ hypothesis could be confirmed for many situations outside
business life (e.g., marriage decisions). It has DEMO been successfully applied to some
management fields that have a long tradition of psychologically rooted reasoning, such as
human resources management and marketing. For example, Lichtenthal and Tellefsen
(2001) provided an overview of studies that explain the different outcomes of buyer–seller
relationships by their actual and perceived DEMO Homburg et al. (2002) studied the
effect of similarity on marketing channel relationships and found that relationship
effectiveness is positively affected by similarity. DEMO is considerable evidence that
similarity affects the outcome of employment (e.g., Pfeffer, 1983) and graduate selection
interviews (Anderson and Shackleton, 1990)DEMO Supervisors’ ratings of the effectiveness of
subordinates are also affected by similarity biases (e.g., Tsui and O’Reilly, 1989).4
As discussed above, DEMO paradigm of objective financing decisions of VCs has been
challenged only recently. Thus, it may not be astonishing that to date no study of similarity
effects has been carried out in the realm of VC financing DEMO
4. Hypotheses
In our study, we want to test for similarity DEMO in the venture capital decision making
process as described in Section 3.1. Even though similarity effects have been found in
4 In some situations DEMO might be limits to similarity-effects. For example, when people are identical DEMO have
the feeling that others are closer to their bideal selfQ than they are themselves, this may not lead automatically to
attraction (e.g., Herbst et al., 2003). Also, in some situations (e.g., DEMO complementary characteristics are
desirable) opposites (rather than similar individuals) attract DEMO other (Dryer and Horowitz, 1997).
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
809
other fields, it is not obvious that significant and sizeable DEMO can be detected for VCs
and venture teams. After all, as DEMO shown in Section 3.1, there are indeed good reasons to
assume DEMO the VC decision process is rational to a very high degree. In that regard, the
deck is stacked against finding evidence in favor of our hypothesis. However, if similarity
biases are present, describing and accounting DEMO them is important, since earlier empirical
results may be incomplete or DEMO unreliable.5
bSimilarityQ can be defined along a number of dimensions. In our study, we focus on
the evaluation of the start-up management team characteristics for three reasons. (1)
Research has shown that criteria related to the management team are consistently
considered predominant in the VC evaluation process (Zopounidis, 1994).6 Compared to
the perceived quality of the start-up team, aspects such as market attractiveness, cashout
potential, or product characteristics are rated as of lower importance. (2) The notion of
similarity or DEMO between start-up team and VC makes more sense with respect to
personal characteristics than, e.g., with respect to the start-up’s business model or DEMO
(3) Similarity or dissimilarity with respect to team characteristics is relatively easy to
detect for a VC. It should be noted that other DEMO of the start-up can also be subject to
similarity impressions. Any business plan reveals potentially similar preferences,
appraisals of future development of markets, argumentation patterns, conclusions, etc.
But these are neither as likely to DEMO observed by the VC nor to be measured easily in an
empirical study.
Thus we state as our basic hypothesis:
The higher the DEMO between a venture capitalist and the members of a start-up
team, DEMO more favorable the evaluation by the venture capitalist will be.
Theories of self-categorization and social identity suggest that this general hypothesis
applies to dimensions DEMO that are salient and of subjective importance to the evaluator
(e.g., Turner, 1987). Only then do individuals perceive others either as members of the
same category as themselves or as members of a category DEMO from their own (Van
Der Vegt et al., 2003). The identification of such dimensions is difficult as an individual’s
lens for sense-making DEMO signification varies across situations, institutional contexts, and
over time (Smircich, 1983).
In the following, we transform our basic hypothesis into testable (ceteris paribus)
hypotheses. Our choice of dimensions with respect to which we formulate similarity
hypotheses is guided by three considerations. First, as will be laid out in Section 5.2, we
focus on a particular stage of the evaluation process, namely the assessment of the written
5 A VC’s preference for founders whose profiles resemble his or her own would DEMO rational if (a) such similarity
simplified future collaboration between the VC and the start-up in case of financing, and (b) there was a good
chance that the rater became the coach of the future DEMO firm. However, given the size of VC firms
assumption (b) DEMO in most cases not be fulfilled. We comment in detail on conjecture (a) as an alternative, but
unlikely explanation of our results in Section 7 of the paper.
6 In our research, we can confirm this finding. When asked to rate the relative importance (a constant number of
12 points should be distributed among the three choices according to DEMO subjective importance), the 51 venture
capitalists placed a mean value of 3.2 on the product idea, 3.4 on the market, and 5.4 DEMO the venture team. The
differences between these means in two sided t -tests are highly significant (product to team (t = 8.41,
DEMO b 0.0001), market to team (t = 7.32, p b 0.0001)).
810
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
business plan. Hence, we only take those venture team characteristics DEMO account that
appear in the team description as part of the business plan. Our measures of similarity need
to relate to these variables then. DEMO, we only include dimensions for which there is
reason to believe DEMO they are salient and important to the venture capitalists. And third,
since we use a conjoint technique for our data collection, we have to keep the thought-
experiments manageable for the interviewees. We therefore have DEMO focus on a limited
number of team attributes.
Taking into account the above-mentioned considerations, we conducted seven
exploratory interviews with venture capitalists, analyzed DEMO dozens of real business
plans, and evaluated the existing literature. This DEMO us to choose the following dimensions
of similarity for our study: DEMO, educational background, field of training (management or
technical), prior DEMO experience (large firm or start-up) and experience in leading
teams in previously held positions. These dimensions give rise to the following five
hypotheses:DEMO
Hypothesis 1. VCs will prefer start-up teams that are similar to themselves with respect
to age.
Hypothesis 2. VCs will prefer teams in which DEMO own level of education is shared by a
large number of team members.
Hypothesis 3. VCs will prefer teams in which their own field DEMO training (management or
technical) is shared by a large number of team members.
Hypothesis 4. VCs will prefer teams in which their own DEMO background (start-up
vs. large firm) is shared by a large number of team members.
Hypothesis 5. VCs will prefer teams in which their DEMO experience in leading teams is
shared by a large of number of venture team members.
We also include in our analysis two team characteristics DEMO do not lend themselves
easily to the formulation of similarity hypotheses—the extent of experience in the industry
in which the start-up is assumed to DEMO founded, and the extent to which the team members
are acquainted. DEMO do include these variables because the team descriptions used in the
conjoint analysis, even though they are necessarily simplified, need to be realistic. DEMO
implies that they must contain the most important team characteristics.7
5. Research design
5.1. The sample
For the present study, a total of 51 interviews were conducted between December 2001
and April 2002 in 26 different DEMO firms, with individuals actively involved in the
7 Interviewees in a DEMO analysis typically find it difficult to rate objects that are described in an unrealistic
or incomplete manner.
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO 811
evaluation of business plans. The VC firms were located in Munich, Berlin and Vienna.
The description in the Appendix shows that our sample contains VC firms of different
sizes, degree of internationalization, and industry DEMO The focus of the respective VC
funds is on telecommunication, software, and e-/m-commerce rather than on biotechnol-
ogy, since the VC firms were chosen to match our hypothetical business model (see
below).
5.2. Conjoint approach—the interviews
In order to test our hypotheses, we had to collect two types of data: (1) information on
VC characteristics and (2) information on VC evaluation of start-up teams, and to
operationalize our similarity measures from the collected VC and team data.
5.2.1. Information DEMO VC characteristics
Interviewees were asked about their age, education, professional experience, and
experience as a venture capitalist. In Table 1, we describe DEMO operationalization of VC
characteristics as we employ them later in the construction of similarity variables.
In addition, information was collected about the venture capital firm covering its size,
funds volume, specialization on industries or financing stages, and its evaluation process.
An aggregate description of the data obtained is provided in the Appendix.
5.2.2. Conjoint design
In collecting information on DEMO evaluation of start-up teams, we focus on an important
early step DEMO a venture capitalist’s assessment of a new venture, namely, the appraisal of the
business plan. During this stage of the evaluation process, a decision has to be made
whether to reject the venture proposal, or to pursue it further and to invite the venture team
for a DEMO (Dixon, 1991; Bagley and Dauchy, 1999). With more than 80% of new
venture proposals typically being rejected during this initial stage (Roberts, 1991), the
business plan is a particularly crucial document for venture capitalists and new venture
teams alike.
One central piece of the DEMO plan is the team description. This presentation of the
venture team is the focus of our analysis. There are four reasons for this choice. DEMO, as
was argued above, the initial assessment of the business plan is decisive for the project’s
further fate. Second, a venture capitalist’s criteria in evaluating a team depend on the stage
of the evaluation process, for reasons of observability. For example, the willingness of
team members to cooperate within the team cannot be observed from the written business
plan, and qualities such as perseverance and stress resistance will only be observable DEMO the
long run. Hence, when studying venture capitalists’ choice criteria it DEMO important to clearly
identify the step in the decision process where these criteria are applied. Third, we focus
on this particular step because the team characteristics that are relevant here are
comparatively objective, unlike, e.g., personal fit between team members (which becomes
relevant in later stages). Fourth, the evaluation of the start-up team as described in the
business plan can very well be simulated using conjoint analysis (see below). While in
most other instances conjoint cards describe some real-world object that DEMO interviewee is
asked to imagine, in our case the team description DEMO the conjoint card is of the same
Table 1
Attributes and realizations of VC characteristics pertaining to similarity effects
DEMO of VC 30 years and Between 30 and
younger, N =8 DEMO years old, N =34
40 years and older, N =9
Level of education of VC Apprenticeship, N =4 Doctoral degree, N =11 DEMO degree, but no apprenticeship
and no doctoral degree, N =36
Field of education of VC Engineering or science
only, N =11
Business administration
only, N =25
Engineering/science and business
administration, N =12
Other, N =3
Prior job experience of VC Start-up only, N = 2 Large firm only N = 15 Start-up and large firm, N = 16 Other type of firm, N =18
Prior VC experience in
leading teams
None, N =9 For 1–5 employees, N =20 For 6–20 DEMO, N =16 For more than 20 employees,
N =6
812
DEMO Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
813
nature as the object itself, namely, the team description in the business plan. Hence, apart
from the necessary simplification of the team description, the conjoint approach in our
analysis is unusually realistic; the DEMO that bpaper venturesQ lack external validity
(Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999) DEMO not apply.
There are several other reasons why a conjoint approach is suitable for the question at
hand, and why it is superior to commonly used post hoc methods which collect data on
VCs’ self-reported decision DEMO (Shepherd, 1999; Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999;
Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998). In retrospective surveys, venture capitalists may
intentionally bias the DEMO, or they may lack sufficient insight into their own decision
processes DEMO report them properly. The first problem is alleviated by the conjoint approach,
since the link between responses and final results is less obvious; the second problem is
actually solved by this approach, since we do not require the VCs to report a model of their
own behavior.
DEMO evaluation of a start-up team by a VC depends on the type of the venture. For
example, a biotechnology venture team most likely requires scientists from molecular
biology, while for an online service, founders with DEMO and information
technology knowledge are needed. Hence, we had to define DEMO type of business that
the team under consideration was about to start with some degree of specificity. On the
other hand, too specific a description of the venture would have implied the risk that
individual interviewees DEMO the hypothetical start-up with a particular past
experience; this would have DEMO the external validity of our analysis. After a
number of exploratory interviews on that matter we chose a description of the hypothetical
venture that DEMO the type and maturity of the venture, while remaining sufficiently
general (see Fig. 1). To ensure comparability, the venture description was identical for
all teams.
The variables used in the team descriptions and their DEMO are listed in Table 2.
Given the high level of professionalism of our interviewees, it seemed feasible to use a full
profile rank order method. Employing a reduced set plus two hold-outs led to 20 conjoint
DEMO Intuitively, this roughly amounts to randomly combining the various realizations of
DEMO of the seven attributes.
We communicated to the interviewees that the team consists of four members. We
chose this team size for several reasons. DEMO, this was found to be a very common team
size. Then, varying the number of team members did not seem to be too DEMO, since
VCs would often support the search for individuals to fill DEMO positions in a venture
project is based on a patented technical product
considerable cost savings for users
value proposition is clearly visible
potential users DEMO small and medium-sized industrial firms
a working prototype exists
Fig. 1. Description of the venture as presented to interviewees.
814
Table 2
Attributes and realizations of team characteristics as used on DEMO cards
Variable Realization 1 Realization 2 Realization 3
Age of team members
Level of education:
university degree
Field of education
Prior job experience:DEMO
type of firm
Relevant industry experience
Experience in leading teams
(5 DEMO 10 people)
Acquaintance among team
members
Bold print indicates the respective reference cases used in the regression.
team. Finally, the even number of team members means that if the team is described as
bsome management, some engineering educationQ , then this could easily be interpreted as
an DEMO split between the two subgroups.
A pre-test, where five venture capitalists DEMO interviewed, confirmed that attributes
and parameter values on the conjoint cards DEMO well chosen, and that the task to rank 20
hypothetical teams DEMO manageable. The initial business plan description was found to be
too specific; it was corrected accordingly prior to the main survey. Structured interviews
were then conducted by one interviewer who was present during the whole interview.
DEMO the interviews, none of the participants encountered any problems in ranking DEMO
20 cards with the description of team characteristics, which were presented DEMO all
participants in the same order. In order to keep the interviews short and manageable, we
asked for ordinal, not metric information on DEMO interviewees’ team evaluations.
5.2.3. Operationalization of similarity variables
In order to test our hypotheses, we had to operationalize similarity with respect to a
number of dimensions, based on the data we had collected from our interviewees and the
team descriptions. The similarity measures which we used in the DEMO tests of these
hypotheses are defined as follows.
We measure similarity in age (Hypothesis 1) via two dummy variables. The first one is
DEMO as one if the VC rater is older than 40 and the team members are between 35 and 45
years old (zero in all other cases). The second dummy variable is coded as one if DEMO VC
rater is younger than 30 and all team members are in the age bracket between 25 and 35
years, and again zero in all other cases.
Similarity in the level of university education (Hypothesis 2) is somewhat more
difficult to define, since all of the interviewed DEMO capitalists have a university degree.
In order to test for potential effects of similarity in education, we use the following
operationalization. We defined one dummy variable which was coded as one if the first
degree of DEMO VC had been an apprenticeship training and if the simulated team did not
contain any individual with university training (zero in all other cases). We then defined
another dummy variable for those cases in which DEMO team members were supposed to have
25–35 years (N =6) 35–45 years (N =6)
None of the team Some team
members (DEMO =6) members (N =7)
All management Some management,
(DEMO =9) some engineering (N =5)
Mostly large firms Some large firms,
(N =9) some start-up (N =5)
No one (N =7) Some (N =7)
No one (N =6) Some (N =7)
Brief (N =7) For a longer time,
privately (N =7)
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
25–45 years (N =8)
All team members
(N =7)
All engineering (N =6)
Mostly DEMO (N =6)
All (N =6)
All (N =7)DEMO
For a longer time,
professionally (N =6)
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
815
university training and the VC herself had obtained a doctorate degree (again coded one in
this case, and zero in all other DEMO).8 Since none of the four VCs who had initially gone
through apprenticeship training had acquired a doctorate, the two variables do not overlap.
Similarity in the field of education (Hypothesis 3) is measured using DEMO dummy
variables. The first one is coded as one if the VC and all team members have technical
training only, and as zero in all other cases; correspondingly, the second one assumes the
value of DEMO if the VC and all team members have management training only, DEMO zero in
all other cases. The case of complementary competencies (VC DEMO both technical and
management training and the team includes some team members with management and
some with technical backgrounds) is a separate dummy variable.
Similarity in prior job experience (type of firm) (Hypothesis 4) DEMO again operationalized
by identifying three groups of observations where similarity is most pronounced. The first
variable identifies cases where the VC rater had been DEMO in start-ups only before
joining the VC industry, and where the DEMO of the team had start-up experience only.
The second variable characterizes analogous cases where the experience of the VC and the
team members comes DEMO working in large firms. Finally, we generated one variable for
those DEMO in which both the VC and the team members had obtained experience in start-
ups and large firms.
We measure similarity in team leadership DEMO (Hypothesis 5) accordingly by
identifying one group of observations for which both the VC and all team members have
only weak experience in DEMO responsibility; and another group for which both the
VC and all DEMO members have extensive experience of this type.
6. Empirical results
Our objective is to describe the impact of our team variables and of the DEMO
measures on the assessment that a team in our conjoint experiment receives. We describe
in the following our multivariate analysis in which we try DEMO test for similarity effects,
once the impact of team characteristics has been taken into account. Our estimation
relies on a latent variable approach. DEMO assume that venture capitalist k assigns team i a
metric indicating the VC’s willingness to finance the team. We model the metric that a
DEMO receives as a continuous function Rki of our seven basic team variables
( j =1,..., 7)—which enter the equation with two realizations Dj1 and Dj2 each—and
twelve similarity variables Sm (m =1,..., DEMO) as discussed before. The metric can then be
written as:
DEMO
¼
b0
þ
X
¼
1
j
7

j1Dj1i
þ
bj2Dj2i
þ
X
¼
1
m
cmSmi
þ
eki
12
b
The error DEMO are assumed to be i.i.d. within each VC (across team cases), but not
necessarily independent across VCs (within team cases). The DEMO that the 20
8 Doctoral degrees are more common in continental Europe than in Anglo-Saxon countries. In our sample of 51
VCs, 11 of them had obtained a doctorate degree. In the presence of similarity biases, this group would show
more affinity towards teams consisting of members who DEMO have academic training.
816
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
simulated teams receive may very well be affected by unobservable interpretations of a
particular team constellation which are shared across the rating VCs. DEMO this case, one
would expect that corr(Eki, Eli) p DEMO We do not observe the metric Rki itself, but instead
observe DEMO ranking information from our conjoint experiment. From the rankings, we
compute DEMO ranking quartile in which team i was put by the venture capitalist. We then
apply an ordered probit model9 to the quartile information. The DEMO correlation
across VCs (within teams) is taken into account by representing our data as a cluster
sample and employing a Huber–White variance–covariance estimator DEMO order to obtain
conservative statistical inference results.10 We can use our maximum-likelihood estimators
to test the hypotheses derived in Section 4 and to retain DEMO preferred specification which
includes the similarity measures that are statistically relevant. Finally, we compute the
effect sizes of our variables, since the coefficients DEMO the ordered probit cannot be
interpreted easily.
Since our right-hand side variables are discrete binary regressors, we need to define
reference groups within each dimension. We do so by identifying, for each team
characteristic, the DEMO realization which figures most frequently among the top five teams.
This preferred realization, indicated by bold print in Table 2, was used as DEMO reference
case for the respective characteristic. The coefficients for our dummy variables will then
indicate the extent to which the team’s success is reduced DEMO deviating from the bdream
teamQ characteristics. Therefore, we should expect negative DEMO for all of the
respective dummy variables. As to our similarity measures: the base case is a combination
of venture capitalist and team to be rated without any similarity as measured by our twelve
dummy variables DEMO at the end of Section 5.
The estimation results are displayed in Table 3. A positive coefficient in these results
always implies a positive DEMO, i.e., an improvement of a team’s ranking. To discuss the
effect size of our variables, we list in column (4) the marginal effect of the respective
variable on the probability of being in the DEMO quartile of the rankings. The marginal effects
are based on the specification in column (3).11
9 See Davidson and MacKinnon (1993, ch. 15) for a detailed description of binary and ordered probability
models. We experimented with alternative specifications, e.g., (i) simple probits using top DEMO status as the
dependent variable and (ii) ordered probits using the top five ranks and the three subsequent quartiles as the
ordinal dependent DEMO Qualitatively, the results are similar and the inference results are the DEMO as the ones
reported here. Using specification (ii), i.e., taking the exact ranking in the top quartile into account leads to an
DEMO of information used, but since we need to estimate a larger DEMO of threshold parameters at the
same time, the overall effect on DEMO precision of our estimates is neutral. These estimates are available upon
request. The choice of ordered probit over other types of ordered probability models DEMO arbitrary. Using ordered
logit estimators yields qualitatively similar results, which is DEMO surprising, since the logit and the normal
distribution are very similar. DEMO, in a small sample as the one here we cannot test DEMO which
distribution is the better choice.
10 For the estimation, we DEMO the ordered probit estimator in STATA 8.0.
11 Closer inspection of the data shows that there is no major multicollinearity problem. The correlation
coefficients DEMO the team characteristics appearing in our team descriptions are extremely low and never
exceed 0.15 which is due to our conjoint design. The correlation DEMO similarity variables and team
characteristics can be higher; but the maximum DEMO we observe is a Pearson product-moment correlation
coefficient of 0.432 for the correlation between the variable bVC and team with experience mostly in large DEMO
and bteam membersT prior job experience mostly in large firmsQ.
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
817
We first discuss the results for our team characteristics variables. While these results
are not the primary focus of the paper, they are illustrative of the advantages of the
conjoint approach followed in this paper. DEMO the estimates in column (1) of Table
3. We achieve a reasonable pseudo-R -squared value12 of 0.227 with this estimate, and we
easily reject the hypothesis that all coefficients are jointly equal to zero. As DEMO expected,
all coefficients carry negative signs, indicating that the reference DEMO of our dummy
variables do indeed characterize the bdream teamQ configuration. All but one of the
coefficients are significant at the 5% or 1% DEMO We find that VCs prefer to see teams
with older (i.e., more experienced) founders all of whom have an academic education,
experience in the relevant industry and experience in leading teams, a mixed background
in the field of training and experience in both start-ups and large DEMO
Our hypotheses state that particular VC raters will prefer particular teams if there is
similarity between the rater and the team. We would therefore DEMO to see positive
significant coefficients for our similarity variables if such effects were present. Such a
result would clearly indicate that the assessments of DEMO VC raters will be influenced
by their own experience and background. In column (2) we introduce all of our twelve
similarity measures into DEMO regression in order to test this hypothesis. There is a
significant gain in explanatory power—performing a Wald test on the hypothesis that all
similarity DEMO are jointly equal to zero is clearly rejected (v2(12) = 55.98,
p b 0.0001). But the results also show that DEMO two of the five subgroups of similarity
variables carry coefficients that are individually significant at the 10% level or better.
Similarity in age (Hypothesis 1), in level of education (Hypothesis 2) and in experience DEMO
leading teams (Hypothesis 5) do not appear to matter statistically. We perform Wald tests
for each of the groups and for all three DEMO jointly.13 We cannot reject the hypothesis
(either by group or jointly) that these similarity variables do not matter statistically.
Conversely, we also test whether the remaining two blocks of similarity variables (field of
education, DEMO 3, and type of professional background, Hypothesis 4) have any
DEMO relevance. Again using Wald tests derived from the results in column (DEMO), we
compute test statistics for Hypothesis 3 (v2(3) = 14.41, p b 0.001) and Hypothesis 4
(v2(3) = DEMO, p b 0.001) which demonstrate the statistical relevance of these two types of
similarity measures. The joint test yields a v2 test statistic DEMO 46.72 with 6 degrees of
freedom ( p b 0.001).
As indicated in the hypotheses section, it is difficult to assess a priori which
dimensions are salient and important to VCs. Hence, it is not surprising that not all
hypotheses are supported. It is interesting to note, however, that the dimensions of
similarity that are statistically relevant differ from those that are not. Both the field of
education and the professional DEMO are (a) freely chosen by the respective person
and (b) in most cases constant over time. In contrast, age and personnel responsibility
are not a matter of choice, and they vary over time. It seems in alignment with theory of
12 This measure cannot easily be DEMO with the R2 from an OLS regression. If we simply used OLS to
regress the rank position on the independent variables used in column (2), the R2 would be 0.542.
13 The test statistics are: for similarity in age (Hypothesis 1)—v2(2)= 0.89, p DEMO 0.641; for similarity in type of
education (Hypothesis 2)—v2(2)= 0.10, p =0.952; for similarity in leadership experience (Hypothesis 5)—
v2(2)= 1.13, p =0.568. The joint test yields a v2 test statistic of 8.44 with 6 degrees of freedom ( p DEMO 0.208).
Table 3
Ordered probit estimation results on rank quartiles
Independent variable (1)
All team members between 25 and 35 years old
All team DEMO between 25 and 45 years old
No team member with academic education
Some team members with academic education
All team members with business administration
DEMO only
All team members with technical training only
Team members’ prior job experience mostly in
large firms
Team members’ prior job experience mostly in
DEMO
No team member with prior experience in the
relevant industry
Some team members with prior experience in
the relevant industry
No team member with DEMO experience in
leading teams
Some team members with prior experience in
leading teams
Team members acquainted privately for some time
Team members acquainted only DEMO
VC 40 years and older—team members between
35 and 45 years old
VC 30 years and younger— team members
between 25 and 35 years DEMO
VC with apprenticeship training—no team member
with academic education














Coefficient (S.E.)
0.497*** (0.088)
0.372*** (0.095)
0.977*** (0.086)
0.176** (0.074)
1.064*** (0.091)
0.810*** (0.075)
0.134* (DEMO)
0.158** (0.073)
1.810** (0.090)
0.351*** (0.078)
DEMO (0.049)
0.164** (0.070)
0.359*** (0.070)
0.616*** (0.063)








(2)
Coefficient (S.E.)
 0.460*** (0.097)
 0.346*** (0.089)
 0.988*** (0.075)
 0.174*** (0.061)
 1.116*** (0.099)
 0.714*** (0.066)
 0.162 (0.119)
0.145* (0.074)
1.825*** (0.090)
0.353*** 0.078)
0.763*** (0.067)
0.140* (0.077)
0.362*** (0.070)
0.622*** (0.064)
0.164 (0.190)
0.061 (0.229)
0.075 (0.172)





(3)
Coefficient (S.E.)
 0.500*** (0.089)
 0.373*** (0.096)
 0.982*** (0.086)
 0.173** (0.075)
 1.107*** (0.099)
 0.723*** (0.067)
 0.166 (0.112)

DEMO
0.149** (0.073)
1.824*** (0.091)
0.353*** (0.077)
0.809*** (0.049)
0.168** (0.070)
0.362*** (0.069)
0.621*** (0.063)
(4)
Marginal effects
0.113
0.086
0.205
0.044
0.245









0.169
0.035
0.032
0.375
0.108
0.171
DEMO
0.078
0.126
818
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
VC with doctorate degree—all team members with  0.007 (0.177)
academic education
VC and team with technical training only  0.105 (0.121) DEMO 0.069 (0.117) 0.014
VC and team with management training only 0.254** (0.104) 0.235** (0.106) 0.050
Team and VC with management and DEMO 0.350** (0.175) 0.343** (0.169) 0.075
training
VC and team with experience mostly in start-ups 0.319* (0.186) 0.331** (0.168) 0.073
VC DEMO team with experience mostly in large firms 0.174 (0.117) 0.174* (DEMO) 0.037
VC and team with experience in start-ups and 0.083** (0.034) 0.071** (0.026) 0.015
large firms
VC and team with strong experience in leading teams 0.059 (0.076)
VC and team with weak experience in leading teams  0.104 (0.191)
Cutoff value 1  3.871 (0.188)
Cutoff value 2  2.887 (0.169)
Cutoff value DEMO  1.854 (0.143)
Test 1: all team characteristics—p -value (DEMO) pb 0.001 (14)
Test 2: all similarity variables—p -value (df)–
Test 3: similarity in age, type of education, leading –
teams—p -value (df)
Test 4: similarity in firm type DEMO, discipline –
of training—p -value (df)
 3.740 (0.176)  3.796 (0.193)
 2.750 (0.158)  2.806 (0.174)DEMO
 1.707 (0.129)  1.765 (0.147)
pb 0.001 (14) pb 0.001 (14)
pb 0.001 (12) –
p = DEMO (6) –
pb 0.001 (6)
pb 0.001 (6)
Observations 1020 1020 1020
logL  1093.59 1087.25  1088.20
Pseudo R2 DEMO 0.2313 0.2304
v2 2170.7 1325.4 826.7
Degrees of freedom 14 26 20
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; DEMO at 1%.
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
819
820
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
social identity that stable and choice-based variables are more important for constituting
similarity bonds between individuals than characteristics that are contingent on the
DEMO (Garza and Herringer, 1987). This finding may provide an important hint
for further tests of the similarity hypothesis.14
Note also that all DEMO that are individually significant carry a positive sign.
This is consistent with our expectations—after all, we stated in our hypotheses that
increased similarity would lead to an improvement in the ranking of the respective
team.15 The DEMO that we do not find any negative, statistically significant coefficients
supports DEMO theoretical interpretation of similarity biases quite nicely. Suppose that
because of her own experience, a venture capitalist can assess a team sharing some
characteristics with the VC more precisely than other VCs who do not have DEMO particular
experience. Then we would expect that some of the assessments made by the well-
informed VC would be more positive, and some more negative than those of other VC
raters. It is the very fact DEMO our significant similarity effects are all associated with
positive coefficients that makes it extremely difficult to argue that such effects emerge
from a rational DEMO completely logical assessment of team quality. In our view, they
constitute DEMO evidence supporting the notion of important similarity biases in the
assessment process.16
Since the inclusion of a large number of statistically irrelevant variables is DEMO to
affect the overall precision of our estimates, we restrict the DEMO in column (4) to
the basic team characteristics and those similarity variables that were jointly significant in
column (3). Indeed, estimating DEMO specification gives us a modest gain in precision, but
the estimated DEMO differ only marginally from those displayed in column (3). Now,DEMO
five out of six of the remaining similarity variables carry significant, DEMO coefficients
(with p b 0.1).17
In column (4) of DEMO 3, we finally compute the effect sizes associated with our
variables. DEMO order to have an intuitively appealing interpretation, we compute the
average DEMO in the probability of being among the top five teams associated with
switching from the respective reference group to the group indicated by our DEMO
independent variable. All other variables are held constant so that the computed marginal
effects differ across observations. We report the average of the observation-specific
DEMO Following this logic, we would also expect the level of education DEMO show a significant effect. However, as we
pointed out before, our sample provides little variation in this variable, which at least partly explains the lack of
significance.
15 Although we have a directional hypothesis, the level of significance indicated in Table 3 for the individual
variables is DEMO on two-sided tests.
16 As one referee suggested, it is possible DEMO differentiate our reference groups w.r.t. the dissimilarity between VC
and team. When we introduce—for each of the five groups of similarity variables—a set of DEMO variables
(in total 10 additional variables), we find them to DEMO insignificant jointly as well as individually. We need to
interpret this result cautiously, since we have only ordinal measures of similarity. The statistical insignificance of
all dissimilarity regressors may be due to our operationalization. Nonetheless, we find it worthwhile to study the
potentially differential impact of similarity and DEMO in future work.
17 The test statistics for this specification are: DEMO similarity in field of training (Hypothesis 3)—v2(3) = 9.64,
p = 0.020; for similarity in type of professional background (DEMO 4)—v2(3)= 15.94, p = 0.001. The joint
test DEMO a chi-squared test statistic of 28.51 with 6 degrees of freedom ( p = 0.001).
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
821
marginal effects. To give an example, our reference case for DEMO age is a team with
members between 35 and 45 years old. Holding every other variable at their empirical
values, a shift to a team with members who are between 25 and 45 years old reduces DEMO
probability of being in the top quartile of teams on average by 11.3 percentage points. A
shift to a more heterogeneous team whose members DEMO between 25 and 45 years old
causes a slightly smaller average reduction of 8.6 percentage points. Thus, the marginal
effects in column (4) describe, for an otherwise average team, the bpenaltyQ for deviating
from DEMO optimal realization of the respective characteristic.
For our purposes, the team DEMO themselves are not the primary focus. We would
like to see if the statistically significant results regarding our similarity effects also
translate into notable DEMO sizes. For some of the similarity variables, this is indeed the
DEMO: in cases where the VC and the team have received training DEMO technical fields and
management, the likelihood of being in the top DEMO of teams increases by 7.5
percentage points. Similarly, in cases where DEMO VC and the team members have had
professional experience in start-ups only, the teams are awarded a 7.3% bonus, after
taking all other DEMO into account. These effect sizes are hardly trivial. Note that
teams whose members have management training only receive a penalty of 24.5
percentage points (relative to the optimal configuration). But in cases where the VC
DEMO this disadvantage, the team receives a bonus of 5.0 percentage points. DEMO, a
configuration of VC and team members both having solely a DEMO background
results in a 3.7 percentage point gain for the team. We can conclude that the effects
associated with the similarity biases are somewhat DEMO than those for the basic team
variables, but they do have DEMO significant and strong effect on the overall selection of
teams by venture capitalists.
To summarize, we find a consistent tendency for some similarity measures to have a
positive effect on team assessments. We do not find DEMO evidence that similarity measures
have a negative impact on team ratings. As we pointed out, this asymmetry in our results is
very important for our interpretation. While our evidence appears to be stable in statistical
terms, the estimated rank movements also show that similarity effects are smaller than DEMO
impact of the major team characteristics, but by no means unimportant. DEMO existence of
these similarity effects brings about a number of implications which we discuss in the
final section.
7. Discussion and conclusion
The purpose DEMO this research study is to test if VC evaluations of start-up teams suffer
from a similarity bias. The results of our study confirm the DEMO of this distortion due
to the interaction of characteristics of VC and start-up team. The more closely the team
members’ profiles resemble that of DEMO VC with respect to two important dimensions, the
better—on average—the team DEMO be rated. We find a rather strong similarity bias for the
type of education: VCs who had received training both in engineering and in business gave
a significantly higher rating than other VCs to teams whose DEMO have an education
partly in engineering, partly in business. Similarly, VCs who had received training in
business administration only rated teams whose members DEMO have an education only in
822
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
business higher than other VCs. A strong bias also exists with respect to the type of firm
where VC and members of the DEMO team have gathered prior professional experience.
A rater who had been working exclusively in start-ups before joining the VC industry has
a highly significant DEMO for teams whose members have prior experience mostly
from start-ups. The same effect can be observed for VCs with prior experience obtained in
large DEMO only; these individuals tend to prefer teams whose members have largely DEMO
from a large-firm background.
As with any empirical study, our analysis DEMO results come with some caveats. Due to
our research design, we DEMO limited to five dimensions of similarity. We find significant
effects for stable and choice-based characteristics. It may well be that other stable (e.g.
sex, social and regional origins) or choice-based (e.g. university or other affiliations)
characteristics have a likewise similarity effect. Future research on this issue DEMO
necessary.
One important alternative explanation of our results deserves a detailed comment.
VCs might rate teams whose background is different from their own and DEMO unfamiliar
to them on average correctly. However, they may be less DEMO in assessing the team
members’ credentials in the respective field, and DEMO attain a lower accuracy in their
rating. Given risk aversion, the DEMO might perform a risk-correction and downgrade the
respective team. This effect would be even more pronounced if erroneous positive
evaluations are considered more severe DEMO erroneous negative evaluations by the VC.
However, the latter assumption seems DEMO given the early evaluation phase that
we consider. A false positive merely means that one team too many is invited for
presentation. In fact, a false negative—excluding a team which in fact has a high
potential—might DEMO constitute the bigger downside for the rater. Apart from that, in
DEMO experiment there were no credentials to assess. Finally—and most importantly—we
find that VCs with both management and technical education still rate pure management
teams DEMO well as pure technical teams lower than heterogeneous teams. They do so
despite the fact that they (the VCs) are familiar with these DEMO respective
background, such that a downward risk correction is not appropriate. DEMO, the
suggested alternative explanation of our findings does not appear convincing—they DEMO
indeed best be explained as similarity effects.
Our results have important implications for future research and for practitioners, for
prospective entrepreneurs as well as their advisors and investors. As to academic research,
most earlier studies DEMO the VC evaluation process (with some notable exceptions discussed
before) made the implicit assumption that VCs’ ratings (of business plans, teams, etc.) are
centered around a bcorrectQ evaluation, deviating from it by random DEMO Our results
reject this assumption—deviations are not random, but contain systematic DEMO These
biases can be explained by including characteristics of the rater into the analysis. Future
research into the VC evaluation process should take these DEMO into account. Similarly,
they are relevant for research into success factors of start-ups, as far as this includes
assessments by VCs.
A rather interesting avenue for further research is to investigate similarity biases in later
DEMO of the evaluation process. The present study finds significant biases even though the
information describing the team was presented in a relatively objective manner, namely, in
written form. Hence, we would expect even stronger distortions DEMO later stages of the
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
823
evaluation process, where personal interaction between rater and ratees plays DEMO more
prominent role. However, studying such effects will be challenging. Experimental DEMO
become difficult to realize when face-to-face interaction is involved. On the other hand,
real-world interactions—interviews, presentations—between VCs and venture teams are
hard to observe, and even then they pose the problem of disentangling effects of team and
business plan characteristics.
Venture capital firms should be somewhat worried DEMO the similarity biases we
identify. After all, what the bideal teamQ DEMO a new venture is should depend on the
venture itself and maybe on some characteristics of the VC firm. The rater’s personal
profile, however, should only matter if this same person is likely to be the venture’s
coach in case the VC firm does grant financing. Under such DEMO it
is possible—though by no means sure—that similarity simplifies interaction between
the parties. A similarity bias would hence have some positive effects. In general,DEMO
however, the initial rater will not be the team’s future coach, such that the bias’
negative effects come to bear. The influence of DEMO biases on financing decisions
is aggravated by the fact that, in DEMO survey, in 55% of all cases plans are read by only
DEMO person before a decision to reject the proposal or to proceed with the evaluation is
taken.
Hence, what can VC firms do to deal with the problem of biased evaluations? First
of all, raters should DEMO to get better insights into their individual decision processes
( Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998; Shepherd, 1999), and should in particular find out if and
to what degree they are prone to similarity biases. This DEMO be done by systematic
comparison and discussion of real team evaluations by different raters. Alternatively,
VCs may employ an analysis as performed in DEMO study, which could thus serve as a
sort of decision aid DEMO VCs similar to those suggested by Shepherd and Zacharakis
(1999). DEMO, business plans (except those that are either good or bad beyond doubt)
should be evaluated by more than one person, where it is clearly important that the
readers’ profiles are different. This leads to DEMO third suggestion, namely, that VC firms
should recruit their analysts in such a way that they to achieve a healthy heterogeneity
among their DEMO, in particular with respect to the type of education they have DEMO
and prior professional experience.
For new venture teams, our results imply DEMO it may be important to find the right
person within a VC firm who gets to read the business plan first. Thus, there are at
least two practical implications for a start-up team seeking venture capital. DEMO, while
the common recommendation in the entrepreneurship literature states that start-up
DEMO should attempt to submit their business plan via a person who is known to the
VC, the majority of plans are still handed in on a bcold-callQ basis. Thus, for those
start-up teams that lack personal access to the VC of their choice, it seems to be a
promising strategy to conduct some prior research on the professionals in the DEMO firm
who are involved in scanning business plans. Then they can try to submit their plan
directly to the person whose profile fits best DEMO to the criteria discussed in this
paper. Though there are several evaluation criteria being used by VCs during the
screening process, this strategy which focuses on the predominant evaluation criteria
should to some extent improve the DEMO of getting past the first round of
evaluations, where typically more DEMO 80% of all new venture proposals are rejected
824 N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
(Roberts, 1991). Second, start-up teams should not be DEMO discouraged by a
rejection, as it may be due to the DEMO that the team’s and the rater’s profiles were
significantly different, and DEMO not say too much about the team’s and the venture’s
true qualities.
Predicting new firm performance is a very challenging undertaking. Given the sums
DEMO are at stake in the VC industry, the quality of an DEMO evaluation process is
crucial. Since, as MacMillan et al. (1985) DEMO out, one should bet on the jockey, not
the horse in order to identify emerging firms with high prospects for success, our
analysis focuses on team characteristics—the most important dimension of a new
venture. By DEMO out flaws in the standard process, this study should hopefully be
DEMO useful contribution to improving theory, and the evaluation process of venture
DEMO
Acknowledgement
The authors are grateful for research assistance by Karin Hoisl and David Riessner,
and financial support by the ODEON Center for Entrepreneurship DEMO the University of
Munich. Furthermore, the insightful suggestions of the anonymous DEMO are
gratefully acknowledged.
Appendix A. Demographics of surveyed VC firms and individuals
VC firms (N = 26)
Age (years): Mean=8.2, standard dev. = 12.6, median= 3, range: 1–56
Size (number of DEMO): Mean=75.4, standard dev. = 202.8, median= 9, range: 1–800
Funds volume (EURO):* b 10 mio.: 2; 26–100 mio.: 8; 101–250 mio.: 5;N 250 mio.: 9; n.a.: 2
Investment stage:* ** Seed: 10; start-up: 17; first-stage: 20; expansion: 17; later stages: 8
Industry focus:* ** Telecommunication: 23; software: 22; e-/m-commerce: 19;
electrical engineering: 13; biotechnology: 10; services: 5; other: 13
Location of interviews (offices):* Munich: 40; Vienna: 7; Berlin: 4
Individuals (N= 51)
Age: Mean=35.0, standard dev. = 6.7, median= 34, range: 24–57
Education level:* ** Apprenticeship: 4; university degree: 51; MBA: 15; doctorate: 11
Education type:* ** Business/DEMO: 39; engineering: 18; science: 6; law: 3; other: 2
VC experience (years): Mean=3.9, standard dev. = 5.2, DEMO, range: 0–30
Tenure with firm (years): Mean=2.4, standard dev. = 2.0, median=2, range: 0–11
Number of business plans evaluated: DEMO, standard dev. = 455, median= 300, range: 0–2000
Prior professional experience:
Type of firm:* ** Start-up: 22; SME: 23; large firm: 35; no prior experience: 0
Industry:* ** DEMO consulting: 28; manufacturing: 25; financial services:
13; other: 9
Personnel responsibility* None: 9; 1–5 subordinates: 20; 6–20 subordinates: 16; N 20
subordinates: 6
*For categorical variables, the number of respondents who chose the respective category is given.
**Multiple answers possible.
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) DEMO
825
References
Abelson, R.P., Levi, A., 1985. Decision making and decision theory. In: Lindzey, G., Aronson, E. (Eds.), The
Handbook of Social Psychology vol. 1. Random House, New York, pp. DEMO 308.
Anderson, N., Shackleton, V., 1990. Decision making in the graduate selection interview: a field study. Journal of
Occupational Psychology 63, DEMO – 77.
Bagley, C., Dauchy, C., 1999. Venture capital. In: Sahlman, W., Stevenson, H.H., Roberts, M.J., Bhide´, A. (Eds.),
The Entrepreneurial Venture, 2nd edition. Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 262 – 303.
Barry, C.B., Muscarella, C.J., Peavy III, J.W., Vetsuypens, M.R., 1990. The role of venture capital in the creation
of public companies. Journal of Financial Economics 27, 447– 471.
Bass, B.M., Duntemann, G., 1963. Biases in the DEMO of one’s own group, its allies, and opponents. Journal
of Conflict Resolution 7, 16 – 20.
Brewer, M.B., 1979. In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: a cognitive-motivational analysis.
Psychological Bulletin 86, 307 DEMO 324.
Busenitz, L.W., Barney, J.B., 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations:
biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal DEMO Business Venturing 12, 9 – 30.
Byrne, D., 1971. The DEMO Paradigm. Academic Press, New York, NY.
Cyert, R.M., March, DEMO, 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Davidson, R., MacKinnon, J.G., 1993. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics. Oxford University Press,
New York.
Dixon, R., 1991. Venture DEMO and the appraisal of investments. OMEGA: International Journal of
Management Science DEMO, 333 – 344.
Dryer, D.C., Horowitz, L.M., 1997. When DEMO opposites attract? Interpersonal complementarity versus similarity.
Journal of Personality and Social DEMO 72 (3), 592 – 603.
Duck, S.W., 1977. The DEMO of acquaintance. Sazon House, Farnborough.
Dustin, D.S., Davis, H.P., DEMO Evaluative bias in group and individual competition. Journal of Social
Psychology 80, 103 – 108.
Garza, R.T., Herringer, L.G., 1987. Social identity: a multidimensional approach. Journal of Social Psychology
127 (3), 299– DEMO
Goldstein, J.H., 1980. Social Psychology. Academic Press, New York.
Harrison, D.A., Price, K.H., Bell, M.P., 1998. Beyond relational demography: DEMO and the effects of surface- and
deep-level diversity on work group cohesion. Academy of Management Journal 41, 96 – 107.
Herbst, K.C., Gaertner, L., Insko, C.A., 2003. My head says byes,Q but DEMO heart says bnoQ: cognitive and
affective attraction as a function of DEMO to the ideal self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
84, DEMO – 1219.
Hogarth, R.M., Makridakis, S., 1981. Forecasting and planning: an evolution. Management Science 27 (2),
138 – 155.
Homburg, C., Schneider, J., Fassnacht, M., 2002. Opposite attracts, but similarity works: a study of
interorganizational similarity in marketing channels. ISBM Report 6-2002.
Jackson, S.F., Brett, J.F., Sessa, V.I., Cooper, D.M., Julin, J.A., Peyronnin, K., 1991. Some differences make a
difference: individual dissimilarity and group heterogeneity as correlates of recruitment, promotion, and
turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology 76, 675 – 689.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1982. The psychology of preferences. Scientific America 246, 160 – 173.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., Tversky, A., 1982. DEMO Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
DEMO, A.M., 1986. Entrepreneur characteristics and the prediction of new venture success. Omega - International
Journal of Management Science 14, 365 – 372.
Lefkowitz, J., 2000. The role of interpersonal affective regard in supervisory performance DEMO: a literature
review and proposed causal model. Journal of Occupational and DEMO Psychology 73, 67– 85.
Lichtenthal, J.D., Tellefsen, T., 2001. DEMO a theory of business buyer–seller similarity. Journal of Personal
Selling and Sales Management 1, 1 – 14.
MacMillan, I.C., Siegel, R., Subba Narasimha, P.N., 1985. Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new
DEMO proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1, 119 – 128.
826
N. Franke et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2006) 802–826
Muzkya, D., Birley, S., Leleux, B., 1996. Trade-offs in the investment decisions of European venture capitalists.
Journal of Business Venturing DEMO, 273 – 287.
Pfeffer, J., 1983. Organizational demography. In: Cummings, L.L., Staw, B.M. (Eds.), Research in Organizational
Behavior, Greenwich, CT vol. 5. , pp. 299– 357.
Poindexter, J., 1976. The Efficiency of Financial Markets: The Venture Capital Case. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, DEMO York University, New York.
Riquelme, H., Rickards, T., 1992. DEMO conjoint analysis: an estimation probe in new venture decisions. Journal
of DEMO Venturing 7, 505– 518.
Roberts, E.B., 1991. Entrepreneurs in High-Technology—Lessons DEMO MIT and Beyond. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Sandberg, W.R., DEMO New Venture Performance. Lexington, Lexington, MA.
Sandberg, W.R., Schweiger, DEMO, Hofer, C.W., 1988. The use of verbal protocols in determining DEMO
capitalists’ decision processes. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 12, 8 – 20 (Winter).
Schwenk, C.R., 1988. The cognitive perspective on strategic decision-making. DEMO of Management Studies 25
(1), 41 – 55.
Shepherd, D., 1999. Venture capitalists’ introspection: a comparison of bin useQ and bespousedQ DEMO policies.
Journal of Small Business Management 27, 76– 87.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., 1999. Conjoint analysis: a new methodological approach for DEMO the
decision policies of venture capitalists. Venture Capital 1, 197 – DEMO
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., Baron, R.A., 2003. VCs’ decision processes: evidence suggesting more
experience may not always be better. Journal of Business Venturing 18, 381 – 401.
Simon, H.A., 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics 69, 99 – 118.
Simon, H.A., 1979. Information processing models of cognition. Annual Review of DEMO 30, 363 – 396.
Smircich, L., 1983. Concepts of culture DEMO organizational analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly 28,
339– 358.
Tajfel, H., 1982. Social Identity and Intergroup Relations. Cambridge University Press, New York, DEMO
Timmons, J.A., 1994. New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st DEMO Irwin, Homewood, IL.
Tsui, A.S., O’Reilly III, C.A., 1989. Beyond simple demographic effects: the importance of relational
demography in superior–subordinate dyads. Academy of Management Journal 32, 402 – 423.
Turner, J.C., 1987. Rediscovering the Social Group: a Self-Categorization Theory. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgement under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. DEMO 185, 1124– 1131.
Tyebjee, T.T., Bruno, A.V., 1984. A DEMO of venture capitalists investment activity. Management Science 30,
1051 – 1066.
Van Der Vegt, G., Van De Vliert, E., Oosterhof, A., 2003. Informational dissimilarity and organizational
citizenship behavior: the role of intrateam DEMO and team identification. Academy of Management
Journal 46 (6), 715 DEMO 727.
Wells, W.A. 1974, Venture Capital Decision Making. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Zacharakis, A.L., Meyer, D.G., 1998. A lack of insight: do venture capitalists really understand their own decision
process? Journal of Business Venturing 13, 57– 76.
Zacharakis, A.L., Meyer, D.G., 2000. The potential of actuarial decision models: can DEMO improve the venture
capital investment decision? Journal of Business Venturing 15, 323 – 346.
Zacharakis, A.L., Shepherd, D.A., 2001. The nature DEMO information and overconfidence on venture capitalists’
decision making. Journal of Business Venturing 16, 311 – 332.
Zopounidis, C., 1994. Venture capital modeling: DEMO criteria for the appraisal of investments. The Financier
ACMT 1, 54 DEMO 64 (May).{1g42fwefx}