ENTREPRENEURSHIP & REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, 19, MAY (2007), 227–251
The signiﬁcance of personality in business start-up
intentions, start-up realization and business success
HERMANN FRANKy, MANFRED LUEGERz and
CHRISTIAN KORUNKA§
y Institute for Small Business Management and Entrepreneurship,
Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration;
Augasse DEMO, A-1090 Vienna, Austria, email: hermann.frank@wu-wien.ac.at
z Institute for Sociology and Social Research, Vienna University of Economics
and Business Administration, Augasse 2-6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
§Department of Psychology, Vienna University, Universitatsstrabe7,
A-1010 Vienna, Austria
Numerous studies with contradictory results have been published on the relationships of
personality factors with business start-up intentions and business success. Using DEMO comparison
of four conceptually similar studies (Vienna Entrepreneurship Studies) as a basis, this paper
analyses the varying roles of personality factors in business start-up intentions, in start-up
success and in business success. It can be shown that the signiﬁcance of personality traits among
(potential) business founders DEMO in the course of start-up/new business development –
from initial start-up intentions, to the start-up process and realization, and on to business DEMO
(existence/growth). While up to 20% of the variance in DEMO origins of entrepreneurial intentions
can be explained by personality traits, this DEMO practically drops to zero in explaining
business success. The studies also enable one to assess the value of personality in relation to other
conﬁguration DEMO Overall, the data from the four studies conﬁrms that a meaningful
DEMO of the value of personality traits is only possible in conjunction with additional
inﬂuencing factors in the founder’s environment, resources and processes. The results suggest
that especially for the development of business start-up intentions it is DEMO to take measures
to promote personality characteristics in schools and universities. It is not possible to predict the
long-term success of a business by DEMO the personality factors of the business founder in
early stages of the start-up process.
Keywords: personality traits; entrepreneurial intentions; start-up process; start-up DEMO;
success of start-ups; conﬁguration approach.
1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of DEMO business start-ups has been the subject of increasing interest. In this
context, many diﬀerent expectations have been articulated which functionally aim
for the macroeconomic goal of growth: the primary concern is to increase the potential
number of people interested in starting new businesses (start-up intentions), to
stimulate as many business start-ups as possible (start-up realization) and ﬁnally to
DEMO the survival and/or growth of these start-ups (business success).
DEMO complexity of these sub-areas (intention, decision, success) and the interplay of
their processes have been the topic of many research papers aiming DEMO generate theory.
These works have made a substantial contribution to re-orienting entrepreneurship and
start-up research, and they can be summarized in the phrase ‘from the entrepreneurial
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ISSN 0898–5626 print/ISSN 1464–5114 online DEMO 2007 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/08985620701218387
228
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
personality to the start-up process’ (Frank 1997). However, it is undisputed that a
person can make substantial contributions to the structuring of the start-up process in
his/her interactions with DEMO environment and relevant stakeholders. In any case, the
development of start-up DEMO as well as the decision to start a business requires a
person. People possess certain personality traits, and the value of these characteristics in
decisions related to the start-up processes is the focus of interest in DEMO paper.
The genuinely psychological explanatory models employed for this purpose are
thus based on the personality traits of new business founders and attempt to DEMO
the questions of (1) whether the founders can generally be described with certain
personality traits, and (2) whether these characteristics can be placed in a causal
relationship with success (Rauch and Frese 2000).
First of all, it is necessary to note that the explanatory approach based on the start-
up entrepreneur’s personality traits has to be regarded DEMO for several reasons.
On the one hand, the question of the DEMO personality is often backed by
a simple characteristics theory which does not (or does not suﬃciently) take the
dynamics of the start-up process, general social circumstances and interactions
between personal and situational determinants into account, thus reducing the
complexity of start-up activities too sharply and inappropriately. On DEMO other hand,
it is necessary to take a critical look at this approach from the perspective of
personality theory itself, in particular due to the question of stability in personality
traits as well as the DEMO aspects of measuring these characteristics.
Personality traits are now generally regarded as the result of interaction between
natural (‘psychogenetic’) and environmental (‘learning behaviour’) factors. The
nature versus environment/surroundings question has therefore been succeeded by the
question of stability and mutability in personality traits. In addition, an interactionist
position which explains behaviour as a result of each newly conﬁgured DEMO of
personal and situational factors is generally accepted. Therefore, when discussing DEMO
‘entrepreneurial personality’, a critical, reﬂexive position which takes the aforemen-
tioned objections into account is most appropriate.
However, at the same time it is necessary to note that several characteristics have
been conﬁrmed repeatedly by DEMO research in the relatively long academic
tradition of searching for an ‘entrepreneurial personality’: probably the best-known
characteristic in this context is that of a need for achievement, based on the work of
McClelland (1967). DEMO the relevant literature, a number of researchers have shown
that start-up DEMO demonstrate stronger tendencies in this area than other
professionals (Begley and DEMO 1986, Green et al. 1996) and that there are
relationships between the strength of one’s need for achievement and business success,
although DEMO relationships are often admittedly weak (Klandt 1990, Langan-Fox and
Roth 1995). On the other hand, research has also yielded decidedly critical discussions
of this particular issue (Scott Frey 1984). In addition to the need for achievement,
another personality dimension which is examined especially often DEMO the context of
organizational and work psychology is that of one’s locus of control. Current research
ﬁndings conﬁrm that people with a strong internal DEMO of control are more adept at
dealing with the pressures of work situations, that they are more satisﬁed with their
activities, and that DEMO can cope with change more eﬀectively. A strong internal locus
of control also appears to be necessary in order to take on the risks DEMO starting a new
business (Cromie and Johns 1983), while it DEMO also plausible that such individuals also
show a stronger need for achievement (Brockhaus and Horwitz 1986). The third
characteristic mentioned frequently in speciﬁc reference to entrepreneurs is the
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
229
person’s risk inclination or risk propensity. DEMO ﬁndings show that entrepreneurs
can be characterized in ideal terms by a medium level of risk propensity (Stewart
1996, Gobel and Frese 1999), and that their characteristics in this respect are generally
higher than those of managers (Stewart Jr and Roth 2001).
In addition to the three personality traits mentioned above, numerous other
characteristics have also been examined. The use of broadly deﬁned personality
questionnaires to analyse the ‘entrepreneurial personality’ (Brandstatter 1988, Moran
1998) is an approach which has to be DEMO critically. On the other hand, newer
approaches based on action theory DEMO more promising (Frese 1998, 2000, 2001).
In all of DEMO above-mentioned approaches to the ‘entrepreneurial personality’, one
can make the critical DEMO that the singular observation of traits is generally not
suﬃcient to explain decisions to pursue an entrepreneurial career or to explain success
in entrepreneurship. DEMO addition, fundamental questions arise as to the stability of
personality traits DEMO as to a suitable and accurate manner of implementation (Frank
1997, Rauch and Frese 2000). Likewise, the relevant literature does not supply
inﬂuential opposing positions to the question of the entrepreneurial personality.
For example, critics base their arguments on the high degree of heterogeneity among
successful DEMO founders (Gartner 1985) or the highly mutable nature of
personality traits in the course of business development (Shaver 1995), as the
demands made of the entrepreneur in the growth phase are quite diﬀerent from DEMO
arising in the start-up process (Chell et al. 1991). In DEMO, it has also been observed
that the question of personality is DEMO to fashionable trends similar to those which
prevail in management research (DEMO 1995, Nicholson 1998) or even personal
psychology as a whole. From a historical perspective, we have seen the ﬁeld of personal
psychology undergo a phase of overestimation, followed by an opposing critical phase
and then a comeback in recent years (Rauch and Frese 2000).
This paper tests the following hypothesis by means of a comparative analysis of
four DEMO designed and conceptually similar studies.
Hypothesis 1: Personality explains a higher DEMO of variance in start-up intentions
compared to start-up realization and business success.
The relevant literature points to the varying status of personality traits in DEMO start-up
process (from initial thoughts about self-employment and the decision to DEMO a new
business right up to business success). Naﬀziger (1995) distinguishes three phases of
enterprise development in which personality can have varying DEMO of signiﬁcance:
the decision to start a new business, behaviour DEMO the start-up process, and business
success. In their outstanding overview, Rauch and Frese (2000) diﬀerentiate studies
on the emergence of entrepreneurship and DEMO entrepreneurial success, using a
comparison of correlation values in the relevant DEMO to support the conclusion that
personality plays a somewhat larger role in the origins of entrepreneurship than it does
in business success. One possible DEMO approach to this diﬀerence can be found
in the diﬀerentiation of ‘weak’ and ‘strong’ situations (Mischel 1968, Adler 1996).
Weak situations are DEMO by a low degree of standardization, a high degree
of complexity DEMO thus little orientation for structuring actions. In these situations,
personality factors exercise a stronger inﬂuence on the structuring of actions than in
strong DEMO, where personality factors carry less weight due to clear requirements
and DEMO general circumstances. Starting up businesses – especially preparing and
realizing the start-up – involves a large number of weak situations. Similar arguments
have been DEMO forth by Begley and Boyd (1987) and Herron and Robinson (DEMO),
230
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
as well as by Utsch et al. (1999). However, no research papers to date have enabled a
direct empirical veriﬁcation of this thesis beyond the comparison of professional groups
(typically managers versus entrepreneurs).
With regard to the question of personality among DEMO business founders and
entrepreneurs, this is less a question of the DEMO value of individual dimensions
(such as the need for achievement) than one of conﬁgurations. The conﬁguration
approach takes a comprehensive or holistic perspective DEMO is far more suitable for
capturing and depicting the complexity of starting a new business. In management
research, the conﬁguration approach developed out of various strategy approaches.
Highly signiﬁcant examples include the work of Danny Miller, Peter Friesen and
Henry Mintzberg (Mintzberg 1979, Miller and Friesen 1984, Miller 1987), who made
substantial contributions to the development of this DEMO
According to this approach, each enterprise is distinguished by its own DEMO
conﬁguration, which results from the speciﬁc interplay of variables in that DEMO
organization. One unique feature of the conﬁguration approach is that it does not
exclude variables at ﬁrst; at the start of analysis, eﬀorts DEMO be focused on collecting
as much information as possible and thus making it possible to generate a
comprehensive depiction of reality. This is backed DEMO theoretical claims (cf. the
comprehensive overview of the literature in German DEMO English language by
Hienerth 2004), especially with regard to holistic observation, ﬁt and simplicity:
1. Holistic observation lies at the core of the conﬁguration approach. In this context,
we assume that the parts DEMO a social unit (such as an organization) gain their
signiﬁcance from the overall unit and can not be understood in isolation from
one DEMO (Meyer et al. 1993). At the same time, holistic analysis aims to
include many variables in order to facilitate allocation to conﬁguration DEMO
and to minimize allocation errors (Ketchen et al. 1997). Selecting DEMO and
determining the number of variables used thus play a decisive role, as these
steps impact the model’s depiction of reality (Hienerth 2004)DEMO
2. The large number of eﬀective individual factors which are relevant to success
makes it necessary to adapt the model. A high degree of DEMO implies that the
organization is in an optimum state. However, this DEMO of consistency
cannot be viewed as the one and only best way. ‘There is no one best set of
variables that should be used DEMO describe all sets of conﬁgurations’ (Miller and
Friesen 1984).
3. DEMO means that strategic and operational decisions refer to essential
inﬂuencing factors, DEMO reducing complexity. This is of interest in terms of
theory as well as practice.
For practical purposes, it is useful to merge the large number of variables into groups
or ‘imperatives’, thus lending (abstract) structure to the conﬁguration analysis itself.
This is advantageous in that it enables DEMO to generate arguments with a small number
of (internal and external) areas of inﬂuence and conﬁguration dimensions.
For the regression-based analytical procedure chosen DEMO, this means that all
dimensions within each individual imperative are included DEMO the analysis (en bloc),
while the signiﬁcance of the imperatives for the issue in question is accounted for using
an appropriate stepwise DEMO With regard to ﬁt, it is important to ensure that
the DEMO predictors yield a picture that can be interpreted sensibly. For the sake
of simplicity, the large number of predictors is reduced to those which are statistically
signiﬁcant.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
231
The conﬁguration approach, which was originally developed for large
organizations, was also adapted in several ways for small and medium-sized
companies (Gartner 1985, Covin and Slevin 1991, Snuif and Zwart 1994, Mugler
1998). If we summarize the basic studies cited here, the following structure of
conﬁguration dimensions (imperatives) results: the DEMO of the founder/entrepreneur
(personality), resources/environment and process (as the set of management functions
planning, organization, allocation of human resources, and review/monitoring).
Thus, as compared to the work by Naﬀziger on the personality of the entrepreneur
(in which the varying signiﬁcance of personal characteristics for diﬀerent stages of
entrepreneurial activity is likewise addressed; Naﬀziger 1995: 32) we use a diﬀerent
approach: the conﬁguration approach also takes other imperatives into account as
theoretically equivalent. In this way, the individual remains an appropriate part
of analysis, but the focus on personality is sacriﬁced in the interest of a more
comprehensive view which integrates DEMO start-up environment, resources and process.
In empirical terms, this makes it possible to analyse the signiﬁcance of personality in
light of the other DEMO
In light of the conceptual comparability of our studies, the conﬁguration DEMO of
‘environment’ and ‘resources’ are presented and analysed together in this paper,
as human capital (the most essential personnel resource) is not DEMO until the
education stage and ﬁnancial resources play a subordinate role among secondary
school students. It is also necessary to consider the fact that, especially in the pre-
organization stage of the start-up process, resources and the environment can not be
strictly separated, as the environment encompasses substantial resources such as the
entrepreneurial climate.
The mutual relationships among these dimensions DEMO and modify an
enterprise’s conﬁguration over time, and the development of DEMO (start-up) enterprise
can thus be seen as a sequence of conﬁgurations. In the ﬁeld of start-up research, the
conﬁguration approach enables a comprehensive and integrative analysis of how
business start-ups develop, and it illuminates the changes in each dimension. The
conﬁguration approach therefore enables us to judge DEMO value of personality traits in
the start-up process. This possibility results from the integrative perspective inherent
to the conﬁguration approach.
2. The ‘Vienna entrepreneurship DEMO
2.1 Study concept
The four ‘Vienna Entrepreneurship Studies’, which are only DEMO brieﬂy in this
paper, were started in 1996 by an interdisciplinary DEMO of researchers from the
Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration and the University of
Vienna. The studies are conceptually based on a conﬁguration-theory DEMO, thus
they are well-suited for comparative empirical analysis. The four studies DEMO the
entire time frame of the business founder’s development, from the DEMO of initial
start-up intentions to the start-up process and realization right up to the success of the
new business. The fourth study is truly DEMO and thus allows us to analyse
cause-and-eﬀect relationships.
For each of the four studies, the sub-dimensions of the conﬁguration dimensions
‘personality’, ‘resources/environment’ DEMO ‘process’ were deﬁned and implemented,
232
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
each according to the concrete questions addressed. DEMO the conﬁguration dimension
of ‘personality’, each study deﬁned the three most DEMO personality dimensions
which are relevant to business start-ups (need for achievement, locus of control,
risk propensity), and each of the three DEMO was implemented using published
scales appropriate for the ages and samples encountered. The construct of personal
entrepreneurial orientation used in the studies is personality-based DEMO thus
categorically diﬀerent from the organizational construct of ‘entrepreneurial orienta-
tion’ as developed and applied by Covin and Slevin (1991) and Wiklund and
DEMO (2005).
2.1.1 Study 1. Personal entrepreneurial orientation and start-up inclinations: an inventory of
students at general and vocational secondary schools in Austria (Frank et al. 2001)
This study had the objective of analysing DEMO orientation and start-up
intentions at relatively early stages, long before realistic DEMO intentions or processes
manifest themselves. In this context, education has become DEMO research topic of
increasing interest (Brockhaus 1993, Vesper 1993). On the basis of conﬁguration
theory, a questionnaire was developed and presented to students at various school
types (general, technical and vocational secondary schools)DEMO In putting together the
sample, special attention was paid to covering DEMO broad range of school types and to
the completeness of results from the classes selected. The questionnaires were used in
the 10th- and 12th-year DEMO (at general secondary schools) and the 13th year
(at technical DEMO business secondary schools).
The sub-dimensions used are based on an analysis of the relevant literature as
well as expert interviews conducted during a DEMO; the conﬁguration dimensions
were deﬁned by the research team. The following DEMO of the ‘environment/
resources’ and ‘process’ conﬁguration ﬁelds were deﬁned and implemented for this
study.
1. Supportive upbringing: the extent of perceived support and encouragement
from the respondents’ parents during their upbringing.
2. Entrepreneurs in DEMO environment: this covers both social reproduction (i.e. self-
employed parents) DEMO well as role models in the microsocial environment.
3. Entrepreneurial orientation of the school: describes the school’s general orientation
with regard to self-employment and entrepreneurship.
4. Independent thought and criticism as values encouraged in instruction: describes the
fundamental orientation of school values with regard to independent thinking,
DEMO reﬂection and the creative discretion students are allowed.
5. Start-up-oriented instruction methods: this deﬁnes methods which have a direct
relationship with starting a new business (e.g. business plan simulations) and/
or can be characterized DEMO activating (as opposed to passive/reproducing)
instruction methods.
6. Team-based DEMO methods: these are educational methods based on
teamwork (e.g. projects).
7. Functions and network: describes the extent of networking with fellow students
which is relevant to self-employment.
8. Use of technology: this sub-dimension deals with the degree to which various
(new) information technologies are used.
DEMO dependent variable for this study is the degree of start-up intentions.
The intention to start a new business consists of a general entrepreneurial orientation
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
233
and an inclination toward founding a DEMO business – with reference to fundamental
business knowledge and start-up inclinations – which are understood to serve as a
general estimate of the probability DEMO later self-employment. Strong start-up intentions
are among the main prerequisites for later entry into the start-up process.
2.1.2 Study 2. Entrepreneurial spirit: personal entrepreneurial orientation and start-up
inclinations among university-level students (Frank et al. 2002)
In this study, students of subjects both closely and remotely related to start-ups were
questioned with regard to the origins of entrepreneurial attitudes, likewise on the basis
of conﬁguration theory. The sample consisted of students at DEMO universities and
specialized colleges. The students selected were close to completing their studies at the
universities or in their ﬁnal year at the specialized DEMO
The conﬁguration dimensions employed in this study were similar to those used in
the ﬁrst study. In some areas, the dimensions had to be adapted in order to ensure that
the relevant ﬁelds were covered eﬀectively DEMO university-level students. Adaptations
were thus based on the age-speciﬁc inclusion of relevant inﬂuencing factors. For this
reason, the use of technology and supportive upbringing were removed, and the areas of
social independence (motives for the DEMO of location, residence abroad, etc.) and
encouraging professional contacts (the social and networking-related aspects of possible
professional activities) were deﬁned and implemented. The process dimensions were
adapted to suit university-level educational processes. ‘Start-up intentions’ DEMO likewise
deﬁned as personal entrepreneurial orientation, start-up suitability and start-up
inclinations.
DEMO Study 3. Supporting and hindering factors in the start-up process (Frank DEMO al. 1999a,b,
Lueger et al. 2000, Korunka et al. DEMO)
The start-up process – from start-up intentions to the early stages of entrepreneurial
development – was analysed on the basis of conﬁguration theory DEMO this comprehensive
empirical study. The data set, which is representative of DEMO Austrian start-up
landscape in its essential indicative values (compared to the DEMO of the
Austrian Chamber of Commerce, which all commercial enterprises are DEMO to
join and which is subdivided into the ﬁelds of Trades/Services, Industry, Tourism/
Leisure, Transport and Banks/Insurance), consists of people in various stages of the
start-up process, from initial start-up ideas (contact with a relevant information
or advising centre) to the start-up DEMO itself and the launch of business operations
(post-start-up phase).
The DEMO was developed on the basis of an analysis of the relevant
literature and expert interviews; the conﬁguration dimensions were deﬁned by the
research team.
In this study, the conﬁguration dimensions were adapted to suit the start-up
process as follows.
1. Role models are people in the budding entrepreneur’s DEMO and macrosocial
environment who create a positive image of start-ups and entrepreneurship.
2. Family restrictions: These are perceived restrictions on career activities in the
founders’ or entrepreneurs’ family surroundings.
3. A push motive for starting a DEMO business is found in cases where the business is
started out of necessity (typical example: a start-up due to unemployment).
234
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
the eﬀort DEMO in various areas relevant to the start-up (location searches,
business DEMO creation, etc.).
9. The use of information consists of estimates DEMO the value of start-up-related
information resources (e.g. access to grants).
DEMO Failure considerations describe critical considerations in the course of the start-up
process.
11. Start-up diﬃculties refer to the respondents’ assessment of problems in the DEMO
conditions for starting a new business (e.g. access to external funds)DEMO
The dependent variable start-up probability covers estimates of the probability of
launching actual business operations among founders who are still in the start-up
process (but have not yet launched business operations).
Support in the preparation DEMO: This dimension describes the perceived support
from various new businesses advising DEMO or facilities.
Signiﬁcance of networks: Estimates of the presence and value DEMO networks which
could be of signiﬁcance for the start-up (customer acquisition DEMO the
private sphere, activities in associations, etc.).
Financial situation: DEMO resources (income situation, collateral, etc.)
Human capital consists of DEMO and professional experience relevant to
starting a new business, relevant experience DEMO the respective industry and
role-related experience as well as knowledge of the law relevant to starting new
businesses.
Organizational eﬀort in the start-up process DEMO to the respondents’ estimates of
2.1.4 Study 4. From business ideas to business success: an empirical analysis of development in
Austrian business start-ups (DEMO et al. 2002)
This study analyses the realization of start-up decisions and business success after
a period of just over 3 years, as a follow-up investigation for Study 3. Of the 1169
respondents in Study DEMO, 932 subjects gave their addresses. These respondents were
contacted in the DEMO phase and 757 of them responded. The number of cases
which were included in our data analysis is only marginally lower (746); the diﬀerence
can be attributed to incomplete questionnaires. Owing to the study’s longitudinal
DEMO, it was possible to make causal statements on the relative value DEMO personal
characteristics and personality traits in start-up realization and business success using
a comprehensive, conﬁguration theory-based approach.
The conﬁguration dimensions from Study 3 were also used in this study. In the
case of new business founders, the dependent variable was start-up success, which is
deﬁned as the realization of start-up plans (launch of business operations) in the
previous 3 DEMO In the case of entrepreneurs, deﬁned here as the group of DEMO who
launched new businesses approximately 3 years earlier, the dependent variable DEMO
the continued existence of the business after 3 years (a weak DEMO criterion). In this
context, another dependent variable – which is DEMO acknowledged in the relevant
literature (Frank and Korunka 1996, Moser and Schuler 1999) – is growth in the
number of employees over the observation period (a strong success criterion).
Figure 1 shows the time frame covered by the four studies with regard to
entrepreneurial spirit as DEMO as their relationships to the central hypothesis of this
study.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
235
Potential number of
‘Entrepreneurial Persons’
‘Potential DEMO of
start-ups’
Time/age
15 20
Study 1:
Schools
Study 2:
Students
Study 3:
Start-up process
Study 4:
Start-up success
DEMO 1. The four studies in relation to the development of Entrepreneurial Spirit
and the main hypothesis.
2.2 Instruments
In Studies 1 to 3, a questionnaire was developed in several steps for each study: on the
basis of comprehensive research in the relevant literature and expert interviews, the
dimensions to be covered by the conﬁguration ﬁelds of ‘personality,’ ‘environment/
DEMO and ‘process’ were deﬁned. In the ﬁeld of personality, previously published
DEMO with satisfactory statistical values were used (table 1). In the DEMO
dimensions of the ‘environment’ and ‘resources’ ﬁeld as well as the ‘process’ ﬁeld,
scales and indices were developed and then tested and modiﬁed DEMO preliminary studies.
For statistical evaluations, tested scales and indices were available DEMO (at least) did
not show strong deviations from normal distributions and which yielded satisfactory
statistical values. For a more detailed description of the DEMO of these
instruments, please refer to the published studies themselves. The DEMO used in
Study 4 were the corresponding dimensions from the questionnaire in Study 3.
Table 1 summarizes the most important indicative values in the DEMO and indices
used in this comparative analysis. All of the dimensions have been transformed to a
uniform scale of 0 to 100.
3. Findings
DEMO accordance with the objective of this paper, only those analysis steps DEMO each study
which were required for comparison purposes and for the assessment of the hypothesis
are described. For this purpose, regression analyses were calculated separately for each
of the four studies. The dependent variables were the DEMO relevant to each
study (start-up intentions, start-up probability, start-up success, business success).
Internal and External Selection Processes
Main hypotheses: Decrease of importance of ‘Personality’
Development of
‘Entrepreneurial Spirit’
Study
(1) Start-up
intentions
among
18-year-olds
(2) Start-up
intentions
among
DEMO
level students
Table 1. Variables in regression analyses, indicative statistical values1.
DEMO variable (Source/
n items, consistency)
Integrated: Personal
Entrepreneurial
DEMO
(Enterprise, AIST),
Start-up inclination
(2, Index), Start-up
DEMO
(8, ¼ 0.80)
(20 Items, ¼ 0.83, NV)DEMO
Integrated: Personal
Entrepreneurial
orientation
(Enterprise, AIST),
Startup inclination
(DEMO, Index), Start-up
suitability
(5, ¼ 0.68)
(17 Items, ¼ 0.78, NV)
Predictors for the ‘person-
ality’ conﬁguration ﬁeld
(Source/n items,
consistency)
Need for achievement
(F-DUP Teens)
Internal locus of
control(F-DUP
Teens)
Innovative orientation*
(F-DUP Teens)
Need for achievement
(F-DUP)
Internal locus of control
(F-DUP)
DEMO propensity
(F-DUP)
Predictors for the ‘environ-
ment/resources’ conﬁguration
ﬁeld (Source/n items,
consistency)
Entrepreneurs in the
surroundings
(5, DEMO)
Use of technology
(7, ¼ 0.74)
Supportive upbringing
(DEMO, ¼ 0.78)
Active functions/network
(14, Index)
Entrepreneurs DEMO the
surroundings
(5, Index)
Encouraging prof. con-
tacts (4, Index)
Social independence
(6, Index)
Active functions/network
(8, Index)
Predictors for the ‘process’
conﬁguration ﬁeld (Source/n
items, consistency) n
Entrepreneurial orienta-
tion of the school
(7, ¼ 0.74)
Instruction:
Independence/critical
thought (7, ¼ 0.74)
Methods: Startups
(8, ¼ 0.76)
Methods: Teamwork
(4, ¼ 0.71)
Entrepreneurial orienta-
tion of education
(4, ¼ 0.75)
Instruction:DEMO
Independence/critical
thought (7, ¼ 0.73)
Methods: Start-ups
(4, ¼ 0.70)
Methods: Teamwork
(7, ¼ 0.66)
Phase DEMO only
(n¼ 417)
n
¼
777
236
HERMANN FRANK ET DEMO
(3) Start-up
probability
among
founders
(4a) Start-up
success
(4b) DEMO
success –
existence
(4c) Business
success –
growth
Start-up probability
(DEMO, Index)
(Interval scale, right-
shifted distribution)
Founded: yes/no (nom-
inal scale)
Existence: yes/no (nom-
inal scale)
Staﬀ growth (nominal
scale)
Need for achievement
(Modick 1977)DEMO
Internal locus of control
(Krampen 1991)
Risk propensity (Frese
1998)
Role models (5, Index),
Family restrictions
(6, Index), Push
motive (2, Index),
Support in the pre-
paration phase
(21, Index),
Network signiﬁcance
(11, Index)
Financial situation
(2, Index), Human
capital (23, Index)
Organizational DEMO
(14, Index)
Use of information
(17, Index)
Failure considerations
(individual item)
Start-up diﬃculties
(12, Index)
As in 3 As in 3 As in 3
As in 3 As in DEMO As in 3
As in 3 As in 3 As in 3
n
¼
314
n¼290
159 ¼yes
n¼456
396 ¼yes
n¼456
80 ¼yes
DEMO: (AIST (Bergmann and Eder 1999); F-DUP (Fragebogen-Diagnostik zur Erfassung unternehmerischer Potentiale ¼ Instrument for Evaluation of entrepreneurial
potentials, Muller 2001); F-DUP Teens (Wurth and Klein 2001); Index .... Total score by content criteria).
*Because F-DUP Teens does not include risk propensity, the ‘Innovative Orientation’ Scale – which is not too dissimilar in concept – DEMO used here.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
237
238
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
In a step-by-step procedure, the predictor groups ‘personality’, ‘environment/
resources’ and ‘process’ (in that sequence) were included en bloc in the analyses.
Before the analyses were performed, the linear model was checked for potential
violations.
3.1 Study 1. Start-up intentions among DEMO school students
The sample consisted of 875 students from 14 schools located throughout Austria
(6 general secondary schools, 4 commercial academies, 4 technical and vocational
secondary schools). The survey was carried out during classes DEMO the presence of an
instructor and a member of the research team. Participation in the survey was
voluntary, and no pupils at all refused to ﬁll out the questionnaire. At each of the
schools, students in the 9th/10th and 12th/13th year were questioned.
The questionnaires were DEMO out during class, and participation was anonymous.
The schools themselves were DEMO with a view to maximizing distribution
(especially with regard to start-up DEMO, e.g. commercial academies are
expected to generate a higher start-up orientation DEMO their students than general
secondary schools).
In the ensuing analyses, DEMO students in their ﬁnal year were selected, as it could
be DEMO that they had already begun thinking about their future careers. Of the
426 students in these graduating classes, we were able to include 417 fully completed
questionnaires in our analysis. The sample is almost equally distributed DEMO terms of
gender (percentage of women: 49.3%).
Only a small group (5%) of students – with relatively large diﬀerences among the
DEMO and school types – indicated that they were very likely to be self-employed.
The three F-DUP Teens scales yielded the following values (maximum: DEMO): Need for
achievement: x ¼ 35.1, SD ¼ 22.9; DEMO locus of control: x ¼ 55.4, SD ¼ 21.8;
Innovative orientation: x ¼ 55.1, SD ¼ 14.9. Table 2 summarizes the DEMO results
Table 2. Main results of regression analysis; Study 1.
Multiples DEMO Signiﬁcance Signiﬁcant individual
Analysis step (block) (Increase, total) (in relation to R2 change) predictors (beta) (p < 0.05)
(1) Personality 0.197 0.000 Need for achievement (0.14)
Innovative orientation (0.38)
(2) Environment/ 0.140 (0.338) 0.000 Need for achievement (0.09)
resources Innovative orientation (0.29)
Entrepreneurs in the surroundings (0.13)
Use of technology (0.22)
Active functions/network (0.21)DEMO
(3) Process 0.054 (0.391) 0.000 Need for achievement (0.09)DEMO
Innovative orientation (0.28)
Entrepreneurs in the surroundings (0.14)
Use of technology (0.20)
Active functions/network (0.21)
Entrepreneurial orientation DEMO school (0.18)
Dependent variable: Start-up intentions (Entrepreneurial orientation, Start-up inclination, Start-up
suitability); x ¼ 54.3, SD ¼ 17.0; Normal distribution.
n ¼ 417; Durbin–Watson ¼ 1.71.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
239
of our step-by-step regression analysis (dependent variable: start-up intentions;
predictors: personality, environment/resources and process dimensions).
One essential component in the variance of the dependent variable (R2 ¼ 0.20)
is explained by personality dimensions (need for achievement and innovative
orientation). The environment and resources dimensions make a somewhat smaller
DEMO to variance, with the strong use of technology, role models
(DEMO in the respondents’ surroundings) and an actively used network
appearing to DEMO an especially signiﬁcant role. In the ‘process’ conﬁguration ﬁeld,
only the (perceived) entrepreneurial orientation of the school played a signiﬁcant
role in DEMO intentions
3.2 Study 2. Start-up intentions among university-level students
In this study, the sample consisted of 837 students at universities (at least in DEMO
third year) and specialized colleges (at least in their fourth semester). The survey
was carried out during university classes, and the rate of return was almost 100%
among the students present. Incomplete questionnaires were DEMO from the
data analysis. Due attention was paid to a broad distribution of students’ majors
(psychology, sociology, computer science, business administration, forestry,
technical/natural-science and technical/economic majors) and locations (9 uni-
DEMO and 6 specialized colleges). The questionnaires were presented in seminars
at universities and during classes at specialized colleges. Participation was
voluntary and anonymous. DEMO respondents were predominantly between the
ages of 21 and 30 years old (universities: x ¼ 25.2; specialized colleges: x ¼ 24.0);
the proportion of female students was 41.3%, with the individual subjects showing
gender distributions as anticipated. We were able to use a total of DEMO fully
completed questionnaires in our statistical analyses.
The students’ estimates of the probability that they would be self-employed in their
later careers were between DEMO and 35% in the technical majors, depending on the
type of DEMO and location, while this ﬁgure was between 45% and 60% among
DEMO and economics majors and signiﬁcantly lower in the social sciences. The three
F-DUP scales yielded the following values (maximum: 100): Need for DEMO:
x ¼ 64.7, SD ¼ 23.1; Internal locus of control: x ¼ 51.4, SD ¼ 23.5; Risk propensity:
x ¼ 63.8, SD ¼ 21.7. Table 3 gives an overview of the main results of our step-by-step
regression analysis (dependent variable: start-up intentions; predictors: personality,
environment/resources and process dimensions).
In comparison to Study 1, the explanatory value of personality dimensions for
start-up intentions is somewhat lower, and all three individual dimensions make a
signiﬁcant contribution. Likewise, DEMO explanatory value of the ‘environment/
resources’ dimensions also diminished slightly in this study, with role models
(entrepreneurs in the subjects’ surroundings) and the social network as well as the
extent of experienced independence again DEMO a signiﬁcant contribution. In this
study, the education process was again DEMO responsible for a relatively slight portion
of variance; the perceived entrepreneurial DEMO of the educational institution
and the extent of team-based instruction methods also made a signiﬁcant contribution
(analogous to the previous study).
240
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
Table 3. Main results of regression analysis; Study 2.
Multiples R2 Signiﬁcance Signiﬁcant individual
Analysis step (block) (Increase, total) (in relation to R2 change) predictors (beta) (p < 0.05)
(1) Personality 0.131 0.000 Need for achievement (0.21)
Internal locus of control (0.12)
Risk propensity (0.20)
(2) Environment/ 0.115 (0.247) 0.000 Need for achievement (0.18)
resources Internal locus of control (0.12)
Risk propensity (0.15)
DEMO in the surroundings (0.21)
Social independence (0.15)
Active functions/network (0.16)
(3) Process 0.057 (0.303) 0.000 Need for achievement (0.20)
Internal locus of control (0.10)
Risk propensity (0.14)
Entrepreneurs in the surroundings (0.18)
Social independence (0.14)DEMO
Active functions/network (0.14)
Innovative orientation of education (0.20)
Team-based instruction methods (0.12)
Dependent variable: Integrated dependent variable (Entrepreneurial orientation, Start-up inclination,
Start-up suitability); x ¼ 52.1, SD DEMO 15.5; Normal distribution.
n ¼ 832; Durbin–Watson ¼ 1.76.
3.3 Study 3. Start-up probability of potential business founders
The sample in this study DEMO of 1169 people at various stages of the start-up
process, from DEMO ﬁrst concrete start-up activities (founders) to the post-start-up phase
(entrepreneurs)DEMO These stages incorporate various possibilities and restrictions with
regard to continuing or aborting the start-up process, similar to Ronstadt’s ‘corridor
principle’ (Ronstadt 1988)DEMO
A total of 5983 respondents were contacted through start-up assistance
organizations (DEMO centres), ﬁnancial support institutions and at relevant events
(business start-up DEMO). Questionnaires were ﬁlled out in person or returned by mail.
Participation in the study was voluntary and anonymous; however, due to the
DEMO longitudinal design of the study (Study 4), the respondents were DEMO to
give their names and addresses on a voluntary basis (approximately DEMO did so;
see Study 4).
In the ensuing evaluations, DEMO those 341 people were included who were in a
phase of the start-up process (founders: from initial start-up activities to shortly before
the DEMO of business operations). The statistical evaluations are based on 314
complete data sets. The range of planned start ups covers a wide variety DEMO business
enterprises, trades/crafts and commercial businesses. The majority of businesses DEMO
new start-ups (90%). The age of the business founders was DEMO 18 and 61 years
(x ¼ 34.9, SD ¼ 8.0), the percentage of women totalled 30%. In its essential indicative
values (industry distribution, start-up size, age of founder, gender of founder,
education), the sample can be considered representative of the Austrian start-up
landscape (Frank et al. 1999a,b).
The three personality dimensions yielded the DEMO results: Need for
achievement (maximum: 100): x ¼ 79.4, SD ¼ 9.3; Internal locus of control:
x ¼ 81.2, DEMO ¼ 9.4; Risk propensity: x ¼ 55.1, SD ¼ 12.2. DEMO 4 summarizes the
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
Table 4. Main results of regression analysis; Study 3.
Analysis step (block)
Multiples R2
(Increase, total)
Signiﬁcance
(in relation to R2 change)
Signiﬁcant individual
predictors (beta) (p < 0.05)
241
(1) Personality 0.056 0.000 Risk propensity (0.19)
(2) Environment/ 0.054 (0.110) 0.012 Risk propensity (0.18)
resources Support in the preparation phase (0.17)
(3) Process 0.052 (0.162) 0.001 Risk propensity (0.17)
Use of information (0.16)
Failure considerations (0.15)
Dependent variable: Start-up probability; DEMO
n ¼ 314; Durbin–Watson ¼ 2.00.
¼
77.8, SD
¼
24.0; right-shifted distribution.
results of our step-by-step regression analysis (dependent variable: start-up
probability, the subjective probability of launching the planned business in the near
future).
Only a small portion of variance in start-up probability (5.6%) can be attributed
to personality dimensions, and only risk propensity reached DEMO signiﬁcance as
an individual predictor. Likewise, the conﬁguration dimensions of the DEMO/
resources ﬁeld have only little explanatory value; the ‘support in DEMO preparation
phase’ dimension was the only one to reach statistical signiﬁcance. The contribution
of the ‘process’ conﬁguration dimension was similar in size to Studies DEMO and 2, the
signiﬁcant individual dimensions being failure considerations and the DEMO of
information. Therefore, those founders in the start-up process who have DEMO higher
propensity for risk and a lower inclination to think about failure, and who feel
that they receive adequate support in the preparation phase and use available
information as much as possible showed a higher subjective DEMO of realizing
their start-up plans.
3.4 Study 4. Longitudinal start-up success and business success
Some 80% of the 1169 respondents to Study 3 gave DEMO names and addresses
voluntarily. A high percentage of these respondents were interested in a summary of
the results of the study. Those not giving DEMO names and addresses may have not been
interested in the results or in a future study of the research team. After 3 years, we were
able to contact just over 80% of those respondents by telephone DEMO order to question
them about start-up realization and business success. Those respondents who could
not be contacted may have changed their location or their DEMO (marriage), etc.
The analyses of Study 4 are based on DEMO data set of 754 cases, which likewise
demonstrated a representative distribution DEMO its indicative values.
In the ﬁrst step, the predictors of start-up DEMO were analysed. For this purpose,
we used the sub-sample of respondents who were in the start-up process or who had
at least started DEMO then temporarily interrupted the start-up process in the previous
study (Study DEMO). The data set thus covered a total of 290 respondents, DEMO of whom
had launched their businesses (however, 15 of those 159 had failed in the meantime).
That means that approximately 55% of DEMO start-up phase respondents in Study 3’s
representative sample had launched business operations after 3 years. If a realistic
242
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
estimate of start-up success among those respondents DEMO could not be reached – and
the fact that 15 of them had failed in the meantime – is taken into account, this yields
an estimated percentage of 40% after 3 years. With regard to the DEMO of age
and gender, the sub-sample was similar to the sample DEMO Study 3 in its essential
indicative values.
In the three personality dimensions, the sub-sample yielded the following values
for the respondents who demonstrated start-up success (¼Start-up realized): need for
achievement (maximum: 100): x ¼ 80.1, SD ¼ 9.5; Internal locus of control: x ¼ 80.5,
SD¼ 9.8; Risk propensity: x ¼ 54.9, SD ¼ 10.9.
Table 5 summarizes the results of our regression analysis for start-up DEMO
The dependent variable here was a nominal variable (start-up realization: yes/no),
and the conﬁguration dimensions from Study 3 were used as predictors.
The variance in the dependent variable which can be explained by DEMO of the
conﬁguration dimensions decreased substantially. This was to be expected because this
study diﬀered from the previous studies in that it was longitudinal, while the others
were cross-section analyses and used an objective dependent variable (start-up
realization: yes/no). As this longitudinal study only measured the nominal change and
not the dimensions themselves, the reduction in explained variance is to be expected.
In the ‘personality’ conﬁguration ﬁeld, risk propensity remained a signiﬁcant
predictor, and the ﬁeld of ‘environment/resources’ did not show a higher explanatory
contribution. This implies that willingness to take risks plays DEMO signiﬁcant role in start-
up realization. However, this risk propensity may DEMO to be diﬀerentiated from the
risk propensity of entrepreneurs who have already completed their start-up processes.
The contribution of the ‘process’ ﬁeld was approximately DEMO to that of Study 3.
Therefore, it can be noted that DEMO success (start-up realization) becomes
somewhat more probable along with a higher propensity for risk and comprehensive
preparations in the start-up phase (increased organizational eﬀort and use of
information). The higher risk propensity might also DEMO attributed to learning eﬀects
which most probably arise in the course of the start-up process and which increase the
ability and willingness of the DEMO to handle risky situations. Owing to the
longitudinal design of the study, we can assume a causal relationship in this context.
In the next step, the predictors of business success were analysed. First, the
existence DEMO the business after 3 years was analysed as a ‘soft’ criterion for success
(survival rate). The sample consisted of 456 respondents who were already ‘new
entrepreneurs’ at the time of Study 3 and could be DEMO and questioned in
Study 4. Of those 456 respondents, 60 (13.2%) had failed in the meantime.
Table 5. Main results of regression analysis; Study 4 – Dependent variable
Start-up success.
Analysis step (block)
DEMO R2
(Increase, total)
Signiﬁcance
(in relation to R2 change)DEMO
Signiﬁcant individual
predictors (beta) (p < 0.05)
(1) DEMO 0.037 0.012 Risk propensity (0.17)
(2) Environment/resources 0.013 (0.051) 0.792 Risk propensity (0.16)
(3) Process 0.043 (0.093) 0.013 Risk propensity (0.15)
Organizational eﬀort (0.15)
Use of information (0.17)
Dependent variable: Start-up success (start-up realized after 3 years: yes/no).
n ¼ 290 founders at time t1(t2: no: 131/yes: 159); Durbin–Watson ¼ 2.04.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
243
The survival rate after at least DEMO years is thus 86.8%. When a realistic estimate of the
survival rate among respondents who could not be reached in this study is taken DEMO
account, this ﬁgure is reduced to 71% (this number is based on the consideration that
the group of new entrepreneurs who could not DEMO reached shows relatively high
similarity in conﬁguration analysis to the group of failed entrepreneurs. Based on the
assumption that approximately 80% of the new DEMO who could not be
reached had already failed and that the other portion can be attributed to location
changes, name changes, etc., the resulting survival rate is approximately 71%). This
value corresponds to more DEMO (and comparable) studies in German-speaking
countries (Frank and Wanzenbock 1994, Bruderl et al. 1996, Wanzenbock 1996). A
comparatively lower survival rate was found in commercial businesses, and there were
no signiﬁcant age or gender eﬀects.
In the three personality dimensions, the following values resulted for the sub-
sample of respondents who demonstrated business success (existence of the business
after at least 3 years; maximum: 100): Need for DEMO: x ¼ 80.9, SD ¼ 10.1;
Internal locus of control: x ¼ 80.6, SD ¼ 9.1; Risk propensity: x ¼ DEMO, SD ¼ 11.6.
Table 6 gives an overview of our regression DEMO for business success. The
dependent variable here was likewise a nominal variable (existence of the business:
yes/no), with the conﬁguration dimensions from Study 3 serving as predictors.
Again, the conﬁguration dimensions’ contribution to explained variance in the
dependent variable has decreased markedly. In the ‘personality’ DEMO ﬁeld,
risk propensity remained a signiﬁcant predictor, this time as DEMO negative value.
The ‘environment/resources’ conﬁguration ﬁeld allows an explanation of approxi-
mately 5% of variance in the dependent variable, with resources contributing
signiﬁcantly to the explanation. The process dimension does not make a signiﬁcant
contribution DEMO explaining business success.
The survival of a company can thus only be predicted to a minimal extent by the
conﬁguration dimensions used. In this DEMO, the signiﬁcant individual predictors
can also be viewed as causal due DEMO the longitudinal design of the study. The survival
of the company becomes somewhat more probable when risk propensity is slightly
lower, a solid ﬁnancial basis is provided and the availability of support is perceived
in the DEMO phase. Only the negative value for the ‘human capital’ dimension is
Table 6. Main results of regression analysis; Study 4 – Dependent variable:
Business success (Existence).
Analysis step (block)
Multiples R2
(Increase, total)
Signiﬁcance
(in relation to R2 change)
Signiﬁcant individual
DEMO (beta) (p < 0.05)
(1) Personality 0.023 0.014 DEMO propensity (0.14)
(2) Environment/resources 0.054 (0.078) 0.001 DEMO propensity (Financial situation (0.12)Human capital (0.12)0.12)
Support DEMO the preparation phase (0.10)
(3) Process 0.005 (0.082) DEMO Risk propensity (0.11)
Financial situation (0.10)Human capital (0.12)DEMO
Dependent variable: Business success (Existence after 3 years: yes/no)DEMO
n ¼ 456 Entrepreneurs at time t1(t 2: no: 60/yes: 396); Durbin–Watson ¼ 2.04.
244
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
Table 7. Main results of regression analysis; Study 4: Dependent variable –
business success (strong growth).
Multiples DEMO Signiﬁcance Signiﬁcant individual
Analysis step (block) (Increase, total) (in relation to R2 change) predictors (beta) (p < 0.05)
(1) Personality 0.005 0.498 –
(2) Environment/resources 0.051 (0.056) 0.001 Push factor (0.13)
Network signiﬁcance (0.12)
(3) DEMO 0.022 (0.078) 0.035 Push factor (0.13)
Network signiﬁcance (0.11)
Organizational eﬀort (0.15)
Dependent variable: Business success (Existence after 3 years and staﬀ growth (doubled or by more than
5 employees): yes/no).
n ¼ 456 Entrepreneurs at time t1(t DEMO: no: 376/ yes: 80); Durbin–Watson ¼ 2.08.
unexpected in this context: a detailed analysis showed that the survival rate among
respondents with academic degrees was responsible for this value (Frank et al. 2002).
In the ﬁnal step, a ‘strong’ success criterion – growth in the number of employees –
was used to analyse business success. In DEMO context, businesses were deﬁned as
successful – in light of their DEMO on employment in society – if their staﬀ had grown
by more than 5 employees (or more than doubled) in the previous 3 DEMO Some 80 of
the 456 businesses fulﬁlled this success criterion. The portion of businesses signiﬁcantly
decreased for this criterion. A signiﬁcant gender eﬀect was DEMO observed, although
young female entrepreneurs (under 30 years) were represented DEMO the sub-sample of
the 80 very successful companies with a signiﬁcantly higher frequency.
In the three personality dimensions, the following values resulted for the sub-
sample of 80 respondents who had demonstrated business success (in the form of
substantial growth). Need for achievement (maximum: 100): DEMO ¼ 82.0, SD ¼ 9.7;
Internal locus of control:Table DEMO summarizes the results of our regression analysis of business successx ¼ 81.8, SD ¼ 9.0; Risk propensity: x ¼ 56.9, SD ¼ DEMO
(deﬁned as substantial growth). Again, the dependent variable is a nominal variable
(growth in the number of employees: yes/no), DEMO the conﬁguration dimensions from
Study 3 were used as predictors.
The overall proportion of explained variance in the dependent variable was again
reduced, and personality dimensions did not make a signiﬁcant contribution. The
‘environment/resources’ conﬁguration DEMO again explained approximately 5% of
variance, with an additional 2% contributed DEMO the ‘process’ dimension. Therefore,
those entrepreneurs who founded their businesses less out of necessity (push factors)
than others, who had built DEMO solid network around them and who themselves realized
the start-up process carefully showed a slightly higher probability of substantial success.
3.5 Comparison of the DEMO studies
In our comparison of the four studies presented, we assumed DEMO certain degree of
comparability. This is ensured by the use of identical conﬁguration ﬁelds (personality,
environment/resources, process) and the identical use of dimensions in the individual
conﬁguration ﬁelds. Start-up intentions as well as DEMO success can be used as a
reference group, as these groups DEMO the starting and end points of the
development sequence analysed.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
Explained variance
for the target value
Personality
DEMO/resources/process
20
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Study 4
15
10
245
5
0
Intentions
Start-up probability
Existence
Intentions
Start-up success
Growth
DEMO 2. Proportion of explained variance from start-up intentions to
business growth.
A comparison of the results of the analogous regression analyses in the four DEMO
enables an estimate of the personality traits’ explanatory value in all stages of the
process analysed, from start-up intentions to business success (ﬁgure DEMO).
In this context, the substantial decrease in the explanatory value DEMO the three
personality dimensions can be seen quite clearly over the entire course of start-up/new
business development from initial start-up intentions to business DEMO The
explanatory value of the ‘environment/resources’ and ‘process’ ﬁelds likewise decreases
markedly, at least in the initial stages leading up to start-up realization. These ﬁelds
then show an increase in explanatory value for business success. DEMO relation to the
explanatory value of personality, the conﬁguration ﬁelds of DEMO/resources’
and ‘process’ increase markedly over the course of start-up/new business development.
4. Discussion
4.1 Main ﬁndings
In this paper, we have been able to use a comparison of four conceptually similar
studies on new DEMO start-ups to show that the signiﬁcance of personality traits
among (potential) business founders decreases in the course of start-up/new business
development – DEMO initial start-up intentions, to the start-up process and realization,
and DEMO to business success (existence/growth). While up to 20% of DEMO variance in the
origins of entrepreneurial intentions can be explained by personality traits, this
proportion practically drops to zero in explaining business success. The studies, which
were based on conﬁguration approach, also enable us to DEMO the value of personality
in relation to other conﬁguration ﬁelds.
246
4.2 Methodological considerations
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
Let us ﬁrst turn DEMO a number of methodological considerations: in eﬀect, the
comparison of the four studies constitutes a cross-sectional study, thus one cannot
claim causality (DEMO the narrow sense) in these ﬁndings. However, a high level of
meaningfulness is ensured by the fact that the four studies at least DEMO fulﬁll the
requirements of representative samples: in the two studies at DEMO institutions,
due attention was paid to maintaining a high degree of heterogeneity among the
institutions, and within the institutions the questionnaires were ﬁlled out by all
students in a particular class or all students in DEMO particular degree course or university
class. This means that the results are representative with regard to educational
institutions, whereas a bias in relation to the structure of the Austrian start-up
landscape can be assumed especially in DEMO 2, as (for example) university students
will generally not start-up DEMO in skilled trades.
The composition of the sample in Studies 3 and 4 corresponds to that of the
Austrian start-up landscape – deﬁned as DEMO structure of realized start-ups in terms
of industries and sections in the Austrian Chamber of Commerce classiﬁcation – in its
essential indicative ﬁgures, while start-up behaviour does not correspond to the
current structure of existing companies. DEMO example, high growth rates were recorded
in information technology and consulting (Frank et al. 1999a).
The respondents’ assessments of the ‘environment/resources’ DEMO ‘process’
conﬁguration ﬁelds were surveyed in a manner analogous to that used for the
personality dimensions. The dependent variables in Studies 1 to 3 DEMO also based on
respondents’ estimates. Therefore, it is not entirely possible DEMO rule out overestimates
of these dimensions due to a common artiﬁcial variance (response styles, etc.), but the
eﬀects of such an error DEMO kept to a minimum by wording the questions as
objectively as possible in the ‘environment/resources’ and ‘process’ ﬁelds as well as the
dependent DEMO Study 4’s dependent variables are objective facts analysed after
a period of 3 years. In this case, we can rather assume that the ‘true’ relationships
were underestimated (Frese 1985). However, in light of the DEMO to which these
relationships changed over the period (ﬁgure 1), DEMO can assume that the fundamental
development – a decrease in the importance of personality over time – remains valid
even when the aforementioned distortions DEMO taken into account. Veriﬁcation of this
paper’s main thesis by means of a truly longitudinal study would be unrealistic due to
the long observation DEMO it would require.
Recently it has been acknowledged with increasing clarity that the roots of an
entrepreneurial career can be attributed to early phases DEMO a person’s socialization
(Schmitt-Rodermund and Silbereisen 1999). The two studies DEMO out at
educational institutions are thus particularly topical in start-up research, DEMO
the comparison of school pupils and university students with entrepreneurs might be
subject to certain limitations due to the diﬀerent worlds in which they DEMO
(Robinson et al. 1991). On the basis of the corresponding DEMO of those two studies,
start-up intentions appear to be generated by multiple causes and inﬂuenced by
personality aspects as well as role models DEMO networking experience. It is thus possible
to access entrepreneurial potential through educational institutions. The data
conﬁrms that the entrepreneurial orientation of the educational institution DEMO
has a favourable eﬀect on the development of start-up intentions, although DEMO extent
of this eﬀect is markedly lower than those of personality, DEMO and resources.
An improvement in the positive eﬀects of the educational environment on the
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
247
development of start-up intentions would be DEMO by means of the role models
conveyed in education as well as activating instruction methods that promote
networking, for example. These possibilities are conceivable in both secondary schools
and universities/specialized colleges.
Initial start-up intentions do DEMO constitute a decision to begin the start-up process.
In eﬀect, such DEMO are attitudes closely related to personality. If we postulate
at least a certain degree of mutability in the personality dimensions examined in this
paper, the role of education would primarily be one of encouraging and developing
DEMO personal traits.
Study 3 investigates the predictors of start-up probability among people who are
already in the process of starting a new business, which lasts at least several months
(usually even longer). Personality traits only seem to have a slight inﬂuence on this
process; an increased propensity for risk, however, seems to accelerate the process.
The relative values DEMO the environment, resources and process conﬁguration ﬁelds gain
signiﬁcance in this DEMO In particular, those dimensions which point to sound
preparation of the DEMO appear to increase the probability of start-up realization.
A comparison of the absolute manifestations of these personality dimensions across
the studies is only possible DEMO a certain extent, as it was necessary to adapt their
implementation DEMO the questionnaires due to the diﬀering target groups, which could
reduce DEMO to a certain extent. However, the markedly higher values –
especially DEMO the need for achievement and internal locus of control – in connection
with a markedly lower distribution in Studies 3 and 4 suggests that DEMO eﬀective
self-selection and external selection processes inﬂuence the actual entry into the start-
up process. The implementation of a business idea in a start-up DEMO seems to be
favoured by a speciﬁc personality disposition associated with stronger characteristics in
the dimensions relevant to starting a new business (self-selection). At the same time,
strong external selection processes through the various DEMO in the start-up
process (advising, ﬁnancing, incentives, etc.) can DEMO be observed in this context: at
the very least, implicit personality assessments play a substantial role in the decisions
made by these stakeholders.
DEMO results of Study 4 are the most meaningful because it involved truly
longitudinal observation over 3 years, a period of time which is considered to be
extremely relevant in start-up processes. This is because the phenomenon DEMO the
liability of newness or liability of adolescence roughly covers this period, in which the
risk of failure is highest, thus the period DEMO greater research interest (Bruderl and
Schußler 1990) and because its dependent variables could be deﬁned in objective
terms. In this way, it is not surprising that the explained variance in the dependent
variables again decreased DEMO in this study. At the same time, a pattern can be
DEMO: in eﬀect, the meaning of personality traits can practically not be veriﬁed
for the true success criteria in new businesses (growth), while the ‘environment/
resources’ and ‘process’ conﬁguration ﬁelds gain in signiﬁcance for DEMO success
in relation to personality (although their contribution to explaining variance DEMO
decreases).
The existence of a company after at least 3 years is a widely acknowledged success
criterion (Moser and Schuler 1999). Our ﬁndings show that it is hardly possible to
predict the survival of DEMO new business on the basis of entrepreneur estimates in the
earliest stages of the business. For risk propensity, a comparison of the two sub-studies
yields a diﬀerentiated picture: a comparatively higher risk propensity is advantageous
in the realization of start-up decisions, while the opposite can be observed for the
248
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
continued existence of the business. This agrees DEMO generally accepted indications
that entrepreneurs ideally have a medium propensity for risk (Rauch and Frese 2000).
The risk appetite which is required to make the ‘jump’ into self-employment can thus
even prove harmful in later DEMO Additional indications of a business’s chances of
survival can mainly be derived from the entrepreneur’s resource situation.
The personality traits of an entrepreneur have DEMO signiﬁcant bearing on
economically relevant business success, which is deﬁned as DEMO growth in the
number of employees in a business; this does DEMO agree with McClelland’s ﬁndings but
is basically conﬁrmed by more recent meta-analyses which investigate this idea and
only ﬁnd very weak connections (Rauch and Frese 2000). On the basis of the data
available, fast-growing businesses would appear to be those which are not founded out
of necessity (i.e. not due to a push factor), rather those which are DEMO by
careful organization in the start-up process and in which the founder succeeds in
creating and maintaining sound networks ( Johannisson 1988).
4.3 DEMO
Overall, the data from the four studies conﬁrms that a meaningful DEMO of the
value of personality traits is only possible in conjunction with additional inﬂuencing
factors in the founder’s environment, resources and processes (Gartner DEMO). From
the standpoint of action theory, actions can be regarded DEMO mediators between
personality traits and the objectives intended or achieved. In an interactionist
interpretation, actions can be predicted completely when both personality and
situational inﬂuences are completely known (Funder 2001). The ability to predict
business success is thus contradicted above all by the strong situational dynamics of DEMO
overall development process, from the beginning of the start-up process to DEMO initial
stage of business development, the latter being subject to the DEMO inﬂuences of
customer and competitor behaviour.
Therefore, the early diagnosis of DEMO start-up’s potential success by means of
personality assessment – which is desired by many stakeholders in the process – is
untenable on the basis DEMO these ﬁndings. Such diagnoses should be replaced by (timely)
measures DEMO the ﬁeld of secondary education which encourage the development of
autonomous and self-determined personalities and thus encourage students to pursue
their career ideas more DEMO In the future, personality-oriented start-up research
should place more emphasis on DEMO early development of entrepreneurial personalities
in order to identify the determinants of emerging entrepreneurial personalities more
precisely and thus to derive speciﬁc and substantiated DEMO for educational
oﬀerings in secondary schools and universities.
Overall, these ﬁndings DEMO that new businesses tend to emancipate themselves
from their initiators – and that the initiators lose signiﬁcance (the founder occupies less
of the total psychological space of the organization (Katz and Kahn 1978) – in DEMO
course of the start-up process and in the early business development stage. However,
this also implies that it is indeed possible to inﬂuence DEMO potential number of people
willing to start new businesses on the basis of classic personality traits (among
founders). In practice, this means DEMO educational oﬀerings have to be designed in such
a way that in addition to conveying knowledge of the start-up process they especially
encourage the DEMO traits analysed in this paper, as these traits can be regarded
DEMO essential factors inﬂuencing the development and realization of start-up ideas.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
249
In this context, we can assume a positive connection with activating and action-
oriented instruction methods. Other relevant DEMO which enable educational
institutions to exercise inﬂuence on this process include the entrepreneurial orientation
of the school, college or university and the conveyance of role models. Both inﬂuencing
factors can be brought to bear by means DEMO synergetic co-operation with successful
owner-run businesses. In this way, the environment DEMO process dimensions can also
play a stronger role. This idea is worth noting because it is more diﬃcult to simulate
relevant and real start-up DEMO and processes in educational institutions,
which, depending on perceptions, could lead to personality traits gaining a higher
status. For those who have DEMO begun the start-up process or are running a new
business, perceived DEMO factors then gain considerable signiﬁcance and
consequently explanatory value. However, this DEMO does not in any way
contradict the conclusion that in order to increase the potential number of people
willing to start new businesses it DEMO necessary to encourage the personality traits relevant
to new business start-ups in the education process. The stronger these personality
dimensions become, the less likely it is that external and self-selective mechanisms will
take eﬀect and – DEMO to these ﬁndings – reduce this potential considerably. In this
context, DEMO is also necessary to take into account that the additional eﬀect derived from
conveying knowledge of the start-up process (which makes candidates more suitable for
starting a new business in addition to the start-up idea) was not discussed in this paper.
This could give rise to an additional DEMO in the value of personality traits in this
context.
References
Adler, DEMO 1996 Personality and work behaviour: exploring the linkages, Applied Psychology: DEMO International
Review, 45: 207–224.
Begley, T. M. and Boyd, D. P. 1986 Psychological characteristics associated with entrepreneurial
performance, in Ronstadt, R., Hornaday, R., Peterson, R. and Vesper, K. H. (eds), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College, Center for DEMO Studies)
pp. 145–156.
Begley, T. M. and Boyd, D. B. 1987 Psychological characteristics associated with performance in
entrepreneurial ﬁrms and small businesses, Journal of Business Venturing, 2: 79–93.
Bergmann, C. and Eder, DEMO 1999 AIST/UST – Allgemeiner Interessen-Struktur-Test (Weinheim: Beltz).
Brandstatter, DEMO 1988 Sechszehn Personlichkeits-Adjektivskalren (16 PA) als Forschungsinstrument anstelle
des 16 PF, Zeitschrift fu¨r Experimentelle und Angewandte Psychologie, 35: 370–391.
Brockhaus, R. DEMO 1993 Entrepreneurship education: a research agenda, in Klandt, H. and
DEMO, D. (eds), Internationalizing Entrepreneurship Education and Training (Koln: FgF-Verlag)
pp. 3–7.
Brockhaus, R. H. and Horwitz, P. S. 1986 DEMO psychology of the entrepreneur, in Sexton, D. L. and Smilor,
R. W. (eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge: Ballinger) pp. 25–48.
Bruderl, J. and Schußler, R. 1990 Organizational mortality: the liability of newness and adolescence,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 534–547.
Bruderl, J., Preisendorfer, P. and Ziegler, R. 1996 Der DEMO neugegru¨ndeter Betriebe (Berlin: Duncker &
Humbolt).
Chell, E., DEMO, J. M. and Brearley, S. 1991 The Entrepreneurial Personality: Concept, Cases, and Categories
(London: Routledge).
Covin, J. G. and DEMO, D. P. 1991 A conceptual model of entrepreneurship as ﬁrm behavior,DEMO
Entrepreneurship – Theory and Practice, 16: 7–25.
Cromie, S. and DEMO, S. 1983 Irish entrepreneurs: some personality characteristics, Journal of Occupational
DEMO, 4: 317–324.
Frank, H. 1997 Entwicklungsprozesse von Unternehmensgru¨ndungen. Ein Beitrag DEMO Re-Konstruktion der
Entwicklungslogik und -dynamik origina¨rer Gru¨ndungen (Wien: Habilitationsschrift).
Frank, H. and Korunka, C. 1996 Zum Entscheidungsverhalten von Unternehmensgrundern. Der Beitrag
DEMO Handlungskontrolle zur Erklarung des Grundungserfolgs, Zeitschrift fu¨r Betriebswirtschaft, 66: 947–963.
250
HERMANN FRANK ET AL.
Frank, H. and Wanzenbock, H. 1994 DEMO und Entwicklungslinien von gefo¨rderten
Unternehmensgru¨ndungen. Materialen des Instituts fur BWL der Klein- und Mittelbetriebe an der
Wirtschaftsuniversitat (Wien: WU Eigendruck).
Frank, H., Korunka, C. and Lueger, M. 1999a Fo¨rdernde und hemmende Faktoren im Gru¨ndungsprozeß. Strategien
zur Ausscho¨pfung des Unternehmerpotentials in O¨ sterreich (Wien: MB DEMO wirtschaftliche Angelegenheiten).
Frank, H., Korunka, C. and Lueger, M. 1999b Konﬁgurationsanalyse von Unternehmensgrundungen,
Betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung und Praxis, 3: 256–271.
DEMO, H., Korunka, C. and Lueger, M. 2001 Unternehmerorientierung und Gru¨ndungsneigung. Eine
Bestandsaufnahme bei Schu¨lerInnen Allgemeinbildender und Berufsbildender Ho¨herer Schulen in O¨ sterreich
(Veroﬀentlichungen zur Mittelstandspolitik Band 4) (Wien: Bundesministerium fur Wirtschaft und
Arbeit).
Frank, H., Korunka, C. and Lueger, M. 2002 Entrepreneurial DEMO – Unternehmerische und Gru¨ndungsneigung von
Studierenden (Wien: WUV – Wiener Universitatsverlag).
Frank, H., Keßler, A., Korunka, C. and Lueger, DEMO 2002 Gru¨ndungsentscheidung und Unternehmenserfolg
(Veroﬀentlichungen zur Mittelstandspolitik) (Wien: Bundesministerium fur Wirtschaft und Arbeit).
Frese, M. 1985 Stress at work and psychosomatic complaints: a causal interpretation, Journal of Applied
Psychology, 70: 314–328.
DEMO, M. (ed.) 1998 Erfolgreiche Unternehmensgru¨nder: Psychologische Analysen und praktische Anleitungen fu¨r
unternehmer in Ost- und Westdeutschland (Gottingen: Hogrefe).
Frese, M. 2000 Psychological approaches to entrepreneurship, European Journal of Work and Organizational
Psychology, 9: 128.
Frese, M. 2001 Ein psychologisches Modell unternehmerischen Erfolgs und empirische Ergebnisse,
in Silbereisen, R. K. and Reitzle, M. (eds), Psychologie 2000 (Lengerich: Papst) pp. 559–567.
Funder, D. C. DEMO Personality, Annual Review of Psychology, 52: 197–221.
Gartner, W. B. 1985 A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture creation,DEMO
Academy of Management Review, 10: 696–706.
Gobel, S. and Frese, M. 1999 Personlichkeit, Strategien und Erfolg bei Kleinunternehmen, in Moser, K.,
Batinic, B. and Zempel, J. (eds), Unternehmerisch Erfolgreich Handeln (Gottingen: Hofgrefe).
Green, R., David, R. G. and Dent, M. 1996 The Russian entrepreneur: a study of personality
characteristics, International Journal of Entepreneurship Behavior, 2: 49–58.
Herron, L. and Robinson, DEMO B. 1993 A structural model of the eﬀects of entrepreneurial characteristics on
venture performance, Journal of Business Venturing, 8: 281–294.
Hienerth, C. DEMO Theorie und Realita¨t unternehmerischer Strategien: eine Anwendung des Konﬁgurationsansatzes
in Kleinbetrieben (Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitatsverlag) (Gabler Edition Wissenschaft:
Entrepreneurship).
Johannisson, DEMO 1988 Business formation – A network approach, Scandinavian Journal of Management, 4: 83–99.
Katz, D. and Kahn, R. L. 1978 The Social Psychology of Organizations (New York: Wiley).
Ketchen, D., Combs, J., Russel, C., Shook, C., Dean, M., Runge, DEMO, Lohrke, F., Naumann, S.,
Haptonstahl, D., Baker, DEMO, Beckstein, B., Handler, S., Honig, H. and Lamourex, DEMO 1997 Organisational
conﬁgurations and performance: a meta-analysis, Academy of Management Journal, 40: 223–240.
Klandt, H. 1990 Das Leistungsmotiv und verwandte Konzepte als wichtige Einﬂußfaktoren der
unternehmerischen Aktivitat, in Szyperski, N. and Roth, P. (eds), Entrepreneurship – Innovative
Unternehmensgru¨ndung als Aufgabe (Stuttgart: Poeschel) DEMO 88–96.
Korunka, C., Frank, H., Lueger, M. and Mugler, J. 2003 The entrepreneurial personality in the context of
resources, environment, DEMO the start-up process – a conﬁgurational approach, Entrepreneurship: Theory and
Practice, 28: 23–42.
Krampen, G. 1991 Fragebogen zu Kompetenz- und Kontrollu¨berzeugungen (DEMO) (Gottingen: Hogrefe).
Langan-Fox, J. and Roth, S. 1995 DEMO motivation and female entrepreneurs, Journal of Occupational
and Organizational Psychology, 68: 209–218.
Lueger, M., Frank, H. and Korunka, C. 2000 Zur Heterogenitat des Grundens. Eine komparative Analyse
o sterreichischer Unternehmensgrundungen, in Bogenhold, DEMO (ed.), Kleine und mittlere Unternehmen in der
Arbeitsmarktforschung – Arbeitsmarkt DEMO Strukturpolitik (Frankfurt/Main: Peter Lang) pp. 101–121.
McClelland, D. C. 1967 The Achieving Society (New York: Free Press).
Meyer, A. D., Tsui, A. and Hinings, C. R. 1993 Conﬁgurational approaches to organizational analysis,
Academy of Management Journal, 36: 1175–1196.
Miller, D. 1987 The genesis of conﬁguration, Academy of Management Review, 12: 686–701.
Miller, D. and Friesen, P. H. (eds) 1984 Organizations: A Quantum View (Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ:
Prentice Hall).
Mintzberg, H. 1979 The Structuring of Organizations (Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall).
Mischel, W. 1968 Personality and Assessment (New York: Wiley).
Modick, H. E. 1977 Leistungsmotivation. Fragebogen zur Erfassung des Leistungsmotivs, Diagnostica,
DEMO: 298–321.
Moran, P. 1998 Personality characteristics and growth-orientation of the small business owner, International
Small Business Journal, 16: 17–38.
PERSONALITY FACTORS AND START-UP INTENTIONS
251
Moser, K. and Schuler, H. DEMO Die Heterogenitat der Kriterien unternehmerischen Erfolgs, in Moser, K.,
Batinic, B. and Zempel, J. (eds), Unternehmerisch erfolgreich Handeln (Gottingen: Hogrefe) pp. 31–42.
Mugler, J. 1998 Betriebswirtschaftslehre der Klein- und Mittelbetriebe. DEMO 1, 3rd edn (Vienna/New York:
Springer).
Naﬀziger, DEMO 1995 Entrepreneurship: a person-based theory approach, in Katz, J. A. DEMO Brockhaus, R. H.
(eds), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence DEMO Growth, Vol. 2 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press) pp. 21–40.
DEMO, N. 1998 Personality and entrepreneurial leadership: a study of the heads of the UK’s most
successful independent companies, European Management Journal, 16: 529–539.
Rauch, A. and Frese, M. 2000 Psychological approaches to entrepreneurial DEMO: a general model and an
overview of ﬁndings, in Cooper, DEMO L. and Robertson, I. T. (eds), International Review of Industrial and
Organizational Psychology (New York: Wiley).
Robinson, P. B., DEMO, J. C. and Hunt, H. K. 1991 Entrepreneurial research on student subjects does not
generalize to real world entrepreneurs, Journal of Small Business Management, 29: 30–41.
Ronstadt, R. 1988 The corridor principle, Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 3: 31–40.
Schmitt-Rodermund, E. and Silbereisen, R. K. 1999 Personlichkeit als Bedingung fur erfolgreiches
Handeln, in Moser, K. and DEMO, B. (eds), Unternehmerisch erfolgreiches Handeln (Gottingen: Hofgrefe).
Scott Frey, R. 1984 Need for achievement, entrepreneurship, and economic growth: DEMO critique of the
McClelland thesis, The Social Science Journal, 21: DEMO
Shaver, K. G. 1995 The entrepreneurial personality myth, Business & Economic Review (Columbia), 41: 20–23.
Snuif, H. R. and Zwart, DEMO S. 1994 Modeling new venture development as a path of conﬁgurations, DEMO
Obrecht, J. J. and Bayad, M. (eds), Small Business DEMO its Contribution to Regional and International Development.
Proceedings of the 39th ICSB World Conference, Paris, pp. 263–274.
Stewart, W. H. 1996 Psychological Correlates of Entrepreneurship (New York: Garland Publ.).
Stewart Jr, W. H. and Roth, P. L. 2001 Risk propensity diﬀerences between entrepreneurs and managers: a
meta-analytic review, Journal of Applied Psychology, 86: 145–153.
Utsch, A., Rauch, A., Rothfuß, R. and Frese, M. 1999 Who becomes a small scale entrepreneur in a post-
socialist environment?: on DEMO diﬀerences between entrepreneurs and managers in East Germany, Journal
of Small DEMO Management, 37: July 31–42.
Vesper, K. H. 1993 Entrepreneurship Education (Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press).
Wanzenbock, H. 1996 U¨ berlebensquoten und Wachstumsverla¨ufe von Unternehmensgru¨ndungen. Materialien des
Instituts fur BWL der DEMO und Mittelbetriebe an der Wirtschaftsuniversitat (Wien: WU-Eigendruck).
Wiklund, J. DEMO Shepherd, D. 2005 Entrepreneurial orientation and small business performance:
a DEMO approach, Journal of Business Venturing, 20: 71–91.
Wurth, R. and Klein, H. J. 2001 Wirtschaftwissen Jugendlicher in Baden-Wurttemberg (Kunzlsau:
Swiridoﬀ)DEMO{1g42fwefx}