VENTUR E CA PITAL,
2002,
VOL.
4,
NO .
DEMO,
275 ± 287
Angles on angels: financing technology-based
ventures – DEMO historical perspective
JOHN FREEAR, JEFFREY E. SOHL and WILLIAM WETZEL
(Final version accepted: 5 August 2002)
This paper reviews 20 years of research on the angel segment of the venture capital market.
A lot DEMO been learnt from one-shot studies of the attitudes, behaviour and characteristics DEMO
business angels. Taxonomies have been developed. However, we now need systematic
DEMO into the dynamics of the angel market. The paper calls for longitudinal studies of
angel and entrepreneurial behaviour, information flows, links to other DEMO segments,
information quality, formal and informal networks and the latent DEMO problem. The
research base needs to be put on a solid theoretical and conceptual foundation. This research
will provide the guidance required by public DEMO to unlock the capital and know-how of
the millions of latent angels.
Keywords: entrepreneurship; venture capital; informal venture capital market; investment
risk; funding gap
Introduction
Why is research into the financing of entrepreneurial technology-based
DEMO so important? We believe that there are three compelling reasons.
First, the technology-based entrepreneurs and venture investors of the
United States constitute a DEMO competitive edge in world markets. Second,
private investors (business angels) are the primary source of equity
financing for start-up and early stage DEMO technology-based
ventures. Third, the capital and the know-how of self-made high-net-
DEMO individuals are two of the least understood and largely under-utilized
economic resources in the United States and, indeed, in other countries.
John Freear DEMO Professor of Accounting and Finance and former Associate Dean at the Whittemore
School of Business and Finance. Jeffrey E. Sohl is Director of the DEMO for Venture Research and the
Willia m Rosenberg Professor at the Whittemore School of Business and Economics at the University of
New Hampshire. William DEMO Wetzel Jr is Emeritus Professor of Management at the Whittemore School
of Business and Economics at the University of New Hampshire and Director Emeritus DEMO the Center
for Venture Research. He was founder of the Venture Capital Network Inc in 1984 (now the
Technology Capital Network at MIT). Professor Wetzel was the Ernst and Young New England
Supporter of Entrepreneurship DEMO 1998. Contact details: Jeffrey Sohl, Center for Venture Research,
Whittemore School of Business and Economics, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824,
USA; e-mail: cvr@unh.edu
Venture Capital ISSN
1369-106 6 print/DEMO 1464-534 3 online
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI:
#
10.1080 /DEMO 3
2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
276
JOHN
FREEAR
ET
A L .
Despite twenty years of research, we still know very little about the angel
segment of the venture DEMO markets – about how to unlock more of the
available capital of active angels and, of far more significance to our
entrepreneurial economy, DEMO how to convert latent angels into active
investors.
We have learned about all we can from one-shot studies of the attitudes,
behaviour and DEMO of business angels. What we need now are
systematic insights into the dynamics of the angel market. These insights
are critical not only because DEMO the central role played by angels in the farm
system where technology-based ventures are spawned, but also because of
the multi-faceted differences between the inefficient, idiosyncratic angel
market and the visible and relatively efficient institutional venture capital
market.
Entrepreneurs ,
risk,
reward s
and
markets
Entrepreneurial venture creation is a dynamic process undertaken by
entrepreneurs founding high-growth, often technology-based ventures. It
is defined less by absolute size, more by growth and the potential for future
returns. Commonly, however, entrepreneurial ventures with high DEMO
potential require funding far beyond that supplied by the founders. The
ventures must seek funding, therefore, from other sources. Finance
markets provide a DEMO of bringing together investors and entrepreneurs
– at a price.
The willingness and the prices at which potential investors and
entrepreneurs will be brought DEMO will be determined by their various
perceptions of risk and return, DEMO by the availability of reliable data about
available investment opportunities. Generally, DEMO people are averse to
risk. They require compensation for taking on additional perceived risk.
Attitudes to risk vary from individual to individual. Some (risk takers)
require less compensation than others (risk avoiders) for taking DEMO given
amount of risk.
Risk has several components. One is time related: the longer the period
of exposure, often the greater the risk. DEMO is related to the nature of
the business, the quality of DEMO management, its financial position, its
competitive position and its market strength. These factors, in combina-
tion, are known as ‘alpha’ or firm-specific, risk. Where there are highly
efficient capital markets, alpha risk may be diversified away by portfolio
decisions. Risk that is more general, or systematic, is known as ‘beta’ risk,
and cannot be diversified away, DEMO as it does on national and
international conditions that affect all companies. The analogy sometimes
used is that a rising tide raises all boats (beta risk) except, presumably,
those that are leaking badly (alpha risk). Consequently, where highly
efficient markets exist, the investor seeks DEMO only for the risk that
cannot be removed – beta risk. Where markets are less efficient, and where
investors do not diversify, alpha DEMO remains a significant and material
component of total (alpha plus beta) risk. The many financial instruments
that offer different risk/reward blends satisfy DEMO differing risk/reward
ANGLE S
ON
ANGELS
277
preferences of a variety of lenders and DEMO These instruments range
from low-risk debt contracts secured by mortgage on real property through
to high-risk equities and derivatives.
What are the consequences of DEMO profiles and attitudes for financing?
Early stage (seed and start-up) entrepreneurial ventures are likely to begin
in a small way but have DEMO high-risk profile. Initially, many such ventures
will be financed from ‘internal’ DEMO, principally using the resources of
the founders and their families and DEMO ‘Bootstrapping’ is defined as
highly creative ways of acquiring the use of resources without borrowing
money or raising equity financing from traditional sources (Freear et al.
1995b, 1995c). It may be divided into two overlapping parts, product
development and business development. The more common business
development bootstrapping techniques include reduced or deferred
compensation for the founders, founders’ savings, DEMO card debt, home
equity loans, low rental space and working out of the home. Special deals
on hardware access, prepaid licenses, royalties DEMO advances from customers,
customer-funded research and development and turning consulting
projects into a commercial project represent the most common forms of
product development DEMO High technology entrepreneurs,
particularly software entrepreneurs, appear to rely more DEMO on
business bootstrapping than on product development bootstrapping
(Freear et al. DEMO, 1995c).
Among the external sources are bank loans. Usually, loans are secured
on personal assets, as the venture has few assets early in existence, and, of
course, has no track record of earning net free cash flow. Formal corporate
alliances are another popular method. The DEMO venture forms
an alliance with a larger corporation to develop complementary products
and services, in exchange for funding and/or other support. The evidence,
at least as far as software entrepreneurs are concerned, is that alliances are
popular because they boost revenues. About three-quarters of the
respondents DEMO a survey of software entrepreneurs had formed alliances.
More than half of those in an alliance indicated that the alliance accounted
for more than DEMO of their revenues. (Freear et al. 1995b, 1995c).
The remaining two sources are venture capital funds and private
investors (angels), both of which use equity as the primary financing
vehicle. In the Freear DEMO al. (1995a) survey, one quarter of the respondents
had used DEMO equity financing. The respondents showed a distinct
preference for angel financing over venture capital fund financing. As is the
case in other surveys (for example, Avery and Elliehausen 1986, Wetzel
1987, Gaston and Bell 1988, Freear and Wetzel 1989, 1990, and Sullivan
and Miller 1990), angels were found to be the primary source of external
equity financing DEMO the high-risk, early stage (seed and start-up) of an
entrepreneurial DEMO existence.
To offset the high alpha risks, angels will tend to DEMO in
entrepreneu rial ventures as part of a total portfolio that contains
investments with differing risk characteristics. By working with formal
and informal groups DEMO angels, they will be able to spread their investments,
and DEMO their risk, across a larger number of investments, a similar
strategy to that adopted by mutual funds and venture capital funds. The
278
JOHN
FREEAR
ET
A L .
early stage ventures that grow DEMO quickly and robustly may
become attractive enough to investors to enable their founders to cash-out
through an initial public offering or to be acquired DEMO a larger company.
There are inefficiencies and funding gaps in the all of the above
financing sources and their associated markets (Wetzel 1987, DEMO et al.
1988, Riding and Short 1988, Gaston 1989, Freear DEMO al. 1990, 1994b). In
this paper, we concentrate on the last two, venture capital funds and private
investors (angels). Venture DEMO funds invest in larger ventures, and often
make repeat investments in DEMO same ventures, and so make little impact on
the early stage DEMO of entrepreneurial ventures. The high fixed costs
of the due diligence that must be performed by active partners in venture
capital funds to protect DEMO own interests and those of the other partners,
inhibit investment in smaller ventures.
Venture capital funds are more visible, command more resources, DEMO
tend to be more organized than angels (Timmons and Sapienza 1992,DEMO
Meyer, et al. 1995, Timmons and Bygrave 1997). Angels, DEMO the other
hand, have been much less visible, much more difficult to find, and they
have invested much smaller amounts than have venture capital funds,
although their total financing impact has been much greater. DEMO have
tended to have a longer exit horizon than venture capital funds. At the seed
and start-up stages, there is a funding gap between the approximately
$US100 000 upper limit of internal financing and the approximately DEMO
million lower limit of venture capital fund financing (Seymour and Wetzel
DEMO, Obermayer 1983, Wetzel 1983a, Wilson 1984, Freear and Wetzel
1992, Freear et al. 1994b). It is here that angel financing becomes
significant. The private investor market, in particular, is very inefficient
from DEMO point of view. In addition to a financing gap, there is DEMO an
information gap. Angels generally try to walk a fine line between their
desire for anonymity so as to avoid constant funding requests, and their
wish to maintain an adequate flow of potentially worthwhile deals. Other
DEMO and gaps include the delay, which is commonly about six
months, between the decision to seek financing and finding it, the desire to
protect confidentiality and the need to persuade investors to invest (Freear
et al. 1994a, Freear and Sohl, 2001).
As recently as 1998 DEMO additional new funding gap has emerged in the
United States’ equity markets (Sohl 1999). This secondary market gap
occurs in the early stage of equity financing. As the venture capital industry
has progressed to larger DEMO later stage financing, and the informal market
has remained active below DEMO $US2 million threshold, an ensuing capital
gap in the $US2 – DEMO million range has developed. The funding gap is more
of a capital gap than the capital/information gap in the seed and start-up
stage, and it has been steadily increasing. These larger capital require-
ments, still considered early stage deals, have spawned a new hybrid of
angel financing – the angel alliance. These alliances represent relatively
large groups of business DEMO willing to fund some second round, early
stage deals. In addition, some of the capital requirements in this secondary
gap have been met DEMO co-investment between private investors and
early stage financing entities. However, both DEMO angel alliances and the co-
investment strategies do not appear to be sufficiently satisfying the early
ANGLE S
ON
ANGELS
279
stage equity capital needs of the high DEMO sector. As such, high-tech
companies fortunate enough to secure seed and DEMO financing still face
formidable hurdles as their equity requirements progress to the $US2 – 5
million range. Of course, without seed and start-up capital, many of these
high-tech ventures do not even get past their initial stages of development
(Sohl 2003).
Learning
about
angel s
Today, DEMO doubts that private investors exist. Their existence has been
amply demonstrated by many studies (see the reference list at the end of
this paper). It was not always so. Their reticence made them difficult to
DEMO, let alone study. An early technique used to establish their existence
DEMO what might be called the ‘black hole’ approach. Using a broad-brush,
aggregated, statistical approach, researchers discovered that much early
stage funding of DEMO ventures was not accounted for by banks,
venture capital funds or other known funding sources (Birch 1979,
Directorate of Economic and Policy Analysis 1984, Congressional Office
of Technology Assessment 1984, Wetzel 1986, Gaston and Bell 1988,
Gaston 1989, Ou 1987, 1993. For UK DEMO, see Harrison and Mason 1992
and Mason and Harrison 1992). DEMO other source had to exist.
A second approach revealed how high-risk (DEMO high-technology)
start-ups in a particular geographical region were financed (see DEMO for
references). These early studies found that private investors were a
significant source of early stage equity financing. Once the existence of
such DEMO had been established, other approaches were developed,
notably by seeking DEMO discover the investment behaviour of high-net-worth
individuals. These individuals were identified through where they lived,
their life style and possessions (such as large houses, expensive cars, boats
etc.), or through their membership of DEMO round tables, breakfast
clubs, informal angel networks and the like (DEMO et al. 1994a).
The research into the angel phenomenon has been based mostly on
convenience samples rather than representative samples of the population
DEMO individual investors. Some research has concentrated on the conceptual
and theoretical issues (Brophy 1986, Bygrave 1987, 1988, Giammarino and
Lewis 1988, Norton 1990, Sullivan and Miller 1990, Fiet 1991, 1995a,
1995b, DEMO and Tennenbaum 1993a, 1993b). The majority of the
research output, however, has been empirically based, seeking to learn
more about the DEMO, behaviour and characteristics of the angel
population (often known as the ‘ABCs’ of angels). At the national, United
States, level, there have been statistical studies, for example, of start-up
ventures and wealthy DEMO (Ou 1987, 1993) and studies of private
and limited offerings DEMO Regulation D of the Small Business Investment
Incentive Act of 1980 (DEMO of Economic and Policy Analysis 1984).
Most of the studies have employed survey techniques. At the local or
regional level, there have been surveys of investors and entrepreneurial
ventures in particular cities or regions (Rubenstein 1958, Baty 1964,
Hoffman 1972, Seymour and Wetzel 1981, Hekman and Miles 1982,
280
JOHN
FREEAR
ET
A L .
Brophy 1982, Wetzel 1983b, DEMO 1983, Tymes and Krasner 1983,
Schell 1984, Bruno and Tyebjee 1984, Wilson 1984, Harr et al. 1988, Aram
1989, Birch DEMO al. 1993. For the UK, Mason and Harrison 1994; for
Canada, Short and Riding 1989). There have been surveys of ventures
receiving venture capital funds and/or making initial public offerings,
which included DEMO earlier funding sources (Charles River Associates
Inc.1976, Bruno and Tyebjee 1984). Formal networks were set up to bring
together angels and entrepreneurs. DEMO some cases, they were willing to
supply data about their activities (Freear et al. 1993, 1994b). Several studies
have focused on (DEMO high-technology) entrepreneurial ventures, and
particularly on seeking ways of facilitating the financing of innovation and
its commercialization by improving the quality and reliability DEMO the
technology assessment (Sohl and Wetzel 1996). Yet other studies DEMO
sought access to private investors through the ventures in which they invest
(Aram 1987, 1989, Gaston and Bell 1988, Gaston 1989, Rhunka and Young
1991, Ehrlich, et al. 1994, Freear et al. 1995a. For the UK Mason and
Harrison 1992). In addition, there have been public policy studies on urban
renewal, and regional and national economic revitalization (Romeo and
Rappaport 1984, Wetzel 1995. For the UK, Hay and Abbott 1993, Mason
and Harrison 1995a, Harrison and Mason 1996, Mason 1996. For Finland,
Lumme et al. 1998. For Belgium, Manigart and Struyf 1995).
The findings of these studies are well documented, as the preceding
paragraph demonstrates. ‘Typical’ angel profiles have been developed over
DEMO past few decades (see the section on Taxonomy’, below). Angels are
significant suppliers of equity risk capital at the early stages of DEMO
entrepreneurial venture’s life. Angels are predominantly affluent, self-
made men in DEMO forties or older, with graduate degrees, who tend to
invest in the industry in which they made their money. They invest for
more DEMO just financial return, although that is an important factor.
Examples of DEMO motivations include: the fun and excitement of being
involved in the DEMO stage growth of a new business, job creation, urban
renewal, DEMO assisting women and minority entrepreneurs. They expect to
be involved actively in the ventures in which they invest, as informal
consultants or board members. Consequently, they have tended to invest
close to home, typically within DEMO day’s drive. They tend to exhibit a clear
preference for technology-based ventures.
Angels find out about investment opportunities through friends and
business associates, and often operate in ‘loosely joined networks’ in ‘hot
spots’ such as California, Chicago and Boston (Hoffman 1972, Seymour
and Wetzel 1981, Brophy 1982, Tymes and Krasner 1983, Shapero 1983).
They invest patiently, for at least five to seven years, often longer, although
exit provisions DEMO commonly included in the initial investment agreement.
Each year, they consider DEMO and reject two or three investment
opportunities, and accept, at most, one or two opportunities each year.
They perceive significant risk differences between early stage and later
stage investments, and these differences are reflected in their return
expectations. Frequently, they express dissatisfaction about the poor
channels of communication between investors and entrepreneurs. They
often prefer not to invest alone, but rather with other individuals, and/or a
ANGLE S
ON
ANGELS
281
respected lead investor (Baty 1964, Shapero DEMO, Wetzel 1983a, Freear et
al. 1990, 1993. For the UK, Mason and Harrison 1995a). The trend
towards a form of syndicated DEMO has gathered momentum in recent
years.
Ange l
taxonom y
In the literature of the informal venture capital there has developed in the
last DEMO years a taxonomy or classification of angels, sometimes resulting in
unfortunate DEMO We have seen virgin angels, latent angels, wealth-
maximizing angels, DEMO angels, entrepreneur angels, income-
seeking angels, corporate angels, archangels, DEMO corporate and institu-
tional archangels (Seymour and Wetzel 1981, Aram 1987, Gaston and Bell
1988, Gaston 1989, Freear and Wetzel 1989, DEMO, Postma and Sullivan
1990, Freear et al. 1990, 1992, 1994a, 1994b, 1997, Sullivan 1991, Kelly
and Hay 1996. For the DEMO, see Harrison and Mason 1992, Stevenson and
Coveney 1994, Mason DEMO Harrison 1995b. For Sweden, see Landstro¨ m,
1993).
Perhaps DEMO, the spate of new terms, once in full flood, is DEMO
up. The fact that researchers in the field have attempted a classification
system for angels is a clear indication that the generalizations of the
DEMO section, while useful, are also dangerous. Stereotyping must be
avoided. The very use, or abuse, of such taxonomies may force us to DEMO
angels in particular boxes (or on particular clouds?). Such activities are the
clearest indication yet that the research on the attitudes, behaviour and
characteristics of angels has reached or exceeded its limits.
Yet, despite all the good work that has been done, we still do not know
how the angel investing process really works over time, or whether or not it
is the same for all industries or regions, let alone countries.
Future
researc h
questions
At least, compared with three decades ago, we have now some sense of what
we do not know, and this is a significant advance. It is clear, for example,DEMO
that more work is neede d o n longitudina l studies o f angel an d
entrepreneurial venture behaviour. We must conduct studies of DEMO degree
of efficiency and effectiveness of the informal venture capital market,
especially relating to problems of information flow, links to other market
segments, information quality, formal and informal networks, and the
latent angel problem. High quality research is taking place in several
countries, as well as in the USA. We need to improve communication
among researchers, to learn from one another methodologically, and to
obtain new insights into the processes of angel investing in ways that often
only comparative studies can provide. DEMO, we need to base our
research more firmly on a solid DEMO and conceptual foundation.
Past studies have examined a variety of efforts to create more efficient
angel capital markets. Neither individually nor collectively can these DEMO
JOHN FREEAR ET A L .
282
be considered acceptabl e solutions DEMO the obstacles encountered by
promising entrepreneurs in their efforts to raise angel financing.
It is our firm belief that angel investors are a breed DEMO We liken
them to wild flowers. They are going to do their thing despite our most
imaginative efforts to organize them into a traditional DEMO
efficient market. However, that belief does not lead us to the DEMO that
we are powerless to create a more effective angel capital market. To stretch
the wild flower analogy one step further, we are convinced that we can blow
the pollen around more vigorously to the benefit DEMO both angels and
entrepreneurs. Data collected systematically over an extended period of
time can provide the insights needed to tell us in which directions DEMO blow
and how hard. Public policy can play a catalytic role in creating more
effective angel capital markets, but only if it is based on sound theoretical
foundations and reliable data.
What kind of longitudinal data DEMO we need? Future research must seek
to answer at least ten DEMO of questions.
1. We find that angels typically invest in clusters. Find one angel and you
have found half a dozen or more. We DEMO to understand how these
clusters form, by tracking new clusters as DEMO come to light and by
asking questions about the conditions that enhance or impede the
creation of groups of active angels. Clusters of angels DEMO organic
bodies. Tracking groups of angels will reveal how, and how DEMO,
new players join the group and why existing players drop out. What
determines which members of a ‘cluster’ participate in any given deal?DEMO
How and why does the composition of the investing group change from
deal to deal?
2. Is there a ‘lead’ angel in most DEMO? Does that role depend upon the
background of one or more DEMO members?
3. What role does the group play, beyond investing DEMO, in each deal in
their portfolio? Does that role change according to key characteristics
of the ventures they back?
4. How powerful DEMO their appetite for deal flow? Do they actively seek new
opportunities DEMO is the process essentially passive? Does their appetite
for deal flow DEMO over time? If so, why? For example, how is their
appetite for deal flow dependent on the conditions in the public equity
DEMO?
5. Through what channels do promising deals come to the attention of a
group of angels? Does the source of deal flow change over time?
6. In creating deal flow what is the relative DEMO of friends,
business associates, gatekeepers (bankers, attorneys, accountants,
professional venture capitalists), formal venture capital networks (e.g.
Technology Capital Network at Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy), and venture capital forums?
DEMO Since business angels tend to invest close to home we need to know
about regional differences in angel behaviour in the United States and
DEMO countries, and what factors determine changes on that behaviour
over time. DEMO, we need to know what factors tend to diminish
the significance DEMO geography in the investment decision.
ANGLE S
ON
ANGELS
283
8. Since angels are known to be DEMO investors, are there factors that
raise or lower their exit horizons? Is their holding period dependent
upon capital gains taxes, for example?
9. Why are not more than 20% of qualified investors actually active
DEMO? How do we convert latent angels into active angels? Is it a
function of their felt level of confidence and competence in their DEMO
to deal intelligently with the ‘central mysteries’ of venture investing –
pricing, structuring and exiting the deal? Are latent angels interested in
on-the-job DEMO by co-investing with experienced angels? How do
interested latent angels handle DEMO issue? For example, how much
interest do latent angels have in learning the craft through local
workshops? There is a wealth of war story wisdom, how-to-do-it and
how-not-to-do-it information available on the Internet. Would a single
website containing an annotated set of links to these sources provide DEMO
effective solution to latent angels’ need to learn the ‘tricks of the trade’?
Would such a source of quality information be of equal DEMO to
entrepreneurs seeking their first round of outside equity?
10. What are angels’ ‘return on investment’ expectations and do they
change as conditions DEMO the capital markets change? What non-financial
factors influence angels’ investment decisions? What are the realized
financial and non-financial returns on angel portfolios? How and why
do they change over time?
Conclusion
Reliable answers to DEMO questions and many more will provide the
guidance required by public policy as it chooses when and how hard to
blow around the wild DEMO pollen required to unlock the capital and the
know-how of this country’s millions of latent angels. Finding these
answers will require systematic and imaginative DEMO over an extended
period of time. In venture capital jargon – the upside reward is well
worth the risk.
References
Aram, J. D., DEMO, Informal Risk Capital in the Eastern Great Lakes Region (Washington, DEMO: Office of
Advocacy, US Small Business Administration).
Aram, J. DEMO, 1989, Attitudes and Behaviors of Informal Investors toward Early-Stage Investments,
Technology-Based Ventures and Coinvestors. Journal of Business Venturing, 4, 333 – DEMO
Avery, R. B., and Elliehausen, G. E., 1986, Financia DEMO Characteristics of High Income Families. Federal
Reserve Bulletin, 72(3), DEMO – 177.
Baty, G. B., 1964, The Initial Financing of DEMO New Research-Based Enterprises in New England (Boston,
MA: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston).
Birch, D., 1979, The Job Generation Process. MIT Program on Neighborhood and Regional Change,
Economic Development Administration (Washington, D.C.: US Department of Commerce).
Birch, D., Haggerty, A., Parsons, W. and Rossel, C., 1993, Entrepreneurial Hot Spots (DEMO, MA:
Cognetics).
Brophy, D., 1982, Venture Capital Research. In C. A. Kent, D. L. Sexton and K. H. Vesper (DEMO)
Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall).
284
JOHN
FREEAR
ET
A L .
Brophy, D., 1986, Venture Capital Research. In D. L. Sexton and R. W. Smilo r (eds) The Art and
Science of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger), DEMO – 144.
Bruno, A. V. and Tyebjee, T. T., 1984, Venture Capital Allocation Decisions and Their Performance
(Santa Clara, CA: University of Santa Clara).
Bygrave, W. D., 1987, Syndicated Investments by Venture Capital Firms: A Networking Perspective.
Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 139 – 154.
Bygrave, W.D., 1988, The Structure of Investment Networks of Venture Capital Firms. Journal of
Business Venturing, 3, 137 – DEMO
Charles River Associates, Inc., 1976, An Analysis of Capital Market DEMO Experimental
Technology Incentives Program (Washington, D.C.: National Bureau of Standards)DEMO
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, 1984, Technology, Innovation and Regional DEMO
Development (Washington, D.C.: US Congress Office of Technology Assessment).
DEMO of Economic and Policy Analysis, 1984, An Analysis of Regulation D (Washington, D.C.:
US Securities and Exchange Commission).
Ehrlich, S. A., De Noble, A. F., Moore, T. and Weaver, R. R., 1994, After the Cash Arrives: A
Comparative Study of Venture Capital and Private Investor Involvement in Entrepreneurial
Firms. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 67 – 82.
Fiet, J. O., 1991, Network Reliance DEMO Venture Capital Firms and Business Angels: An Empirica l and
Theoretical DEMO In N. C. Churchill, W. D. Bygrave, J. G. Covin, DEMO L. Sexton, D. P. Slevin,
K. H. Vesper and W. DEMO Wetzel (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA:
Babson College), 445 – 455.
Fiet, J. O., 1995a, Reliance upon Informants in the venture Capital Industry. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, DEMO – 223.
Fiet, J. O., 1995b, Risk Avoidance Strategies in DEMO Capital Markets. Journal of Management
Studies, 32, 551 – 574.
Freear, J., and Sohl, J. E., 2001, The Characteristics and Value-Added Contributions of Private
Investors to Entrepreneurial Software Ventures. Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 6, 84 – 103.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and DEMO, W. E., Jr, 1990, Raising Venture Capital: Entrepreneurs’ Views DEMO the
Process. In N. C. Churchill, W. D. Bygrave, J. A. Hornaday, D. F. Muzyka, K. H. Vesper and
W. E. Wetzel DEMO (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College),
223 – 237.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1992, The Investment Attitudes, Behavior and
Characteristics of High Net Worth Individuals. In N. C. Churchill, S. Birley, DEMO D. Bygrave, D.
F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and W. E. Wetzel Jr (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research
(Wellesley, MA: Babson College),374 – 383.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1993, Angel Profiles: A Longitudinal Study. In DEMO C.
Churchill, S. Birley, W. D. Bygrave, J. Doutriaux, E. J. Gatewood, F. S. Hoy and W. E. Wetzel
Jr (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College), 557 – 558.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr., 1994a, Angels and Non-Angels: Are There Differences?
Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 109 – 123.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1994b, The Private Investor DEMO for Venture Capital.
The Financier, 1(2), 7 – 15.
DEMO, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1995a, Angels: Personal Investors in the Venture Capital
Market. Entrepreneurship and DEMO Development, 7, 85 – 94.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. DEMO and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1995b, Early Stage Software Ventures: What Is Working
and What Is Not. Report for the Massachusetts Software Council.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1995c, Who Bankrolls Software Entrepreneurs. In W. D.
Bygrave, B. J. Bird, S. Birley, N. C. Churchill, M. Hay, R. DEMO Keeley and W. E. Wetzel Jr (eds)
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO (Wellesley, MA: Babson College), 394 – 406.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1997, DEMO Informal Venture Capital Market: Milestones
Passed and the Road Ahead. In DEMO Sexton and R. Smilo r (eds) Entrepreneurship 2000 (Chicago:
DEMO Publishing Company), 47 – 70.
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1989, Equity Capital for Entrepreneurs. In R. H. Brockhaus, N. C.
Churchill, J. A. Katz, B. A. Kirchoff, K. DEMO Vesper and W. E. Wetzel Jr (eds) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College), 230 – 244.
ANGLE S
ON
ANGELS
285
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1990, Who Bankrolls High-Tech Entrepreneurs. Journal of Business
Venturing, 5(2), 77 – 89.
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1992, The Informal Venture Capital Market in the 1990s. In DEMO L.
Sexton and J. D. Kasarda (eds) State of the Art of Entrepreneurship (Boston, MA: PWS-Kent),
462 – 486.
Gaston, R. J., 1989, The Scale of the Informal Capital Markets. Small DEMO Economics, 1, 223 – 230.
Gaston, R. J. and Bell, S. E., 1988, The Informal Supply of Capital (Washington, D.C.: Office of
Economic Research, US Small Business Administration).
Giammarino, R. DEMO Lewis, T., 1988, A Theory of Negotiated Equity Financing. Review DEMO Financial
Studies, 1, 265 – 288.
Harr, N. E., Starr, J. and MacMillan, I. C., 1988, Informal Risk Capital Investment DEMO on the
East Coast of the U.S.A. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 11 – 29.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M., 1992, The Role of Investors in Entrepreneurial Companies: A
Comparison of DEMO Investors and Venture Capitalists. In N. C. Churchill, S. Birley, W. D.
Bygrave, D. F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and W. E. Wetzel DEMO (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research (Boston, MA: Babson College), 388 – 404.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M., DEMO, Developments in the Promotion of Informal Venture Capital
in the U.K. DEMO Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior &Research, 2(2), 6 – 33.
Hay, M. and Abbott, S., 1993, Investing for the Future DEMO Promoting Seed, Startup, and Early Stage
Venture Capital Funding of New Technology-Based Firms in the UK (London Business School
and Advent Ltd).
Hekman, J. S. and Miles, M. E., 1982, North Carolina DEMO of Venture Capital Markets (Chapel Hill,
N.C.: University of North Carolina).
Hoffman, C. A., 1972, The Venture Capital Investment Process: A Particular Aspect of Regional
Economic Development (University of Texas at DEMO: PhD Dissertation).
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 1996, DEMO Investors and Early Stage Finance. Journal of Entrepreneurial and
Small Business Finance, 5, 159 – 174.
Landstro¨ m, H., 1993, Informal Risk Capital in Sweden and Some International Comparisons. Journal
of Business Venturing, 8, 525 – 540.
Lumme, A., Mason, C. and Suomi, S., 1998, Informal Venture Capital: Investors, Investments and
Policy Issues in DEMO (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers).
Manigart, S. and Struyf, C., 1995, Financing High-Technology Startups in Belgium. In W. D.
Bygrave, B. J. Bird, S. Birley, N. C. Churchill, M. Hay, R. DEMO Keeley and W. E. Wetzel Jr (eds)
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO (Wellesley, MA: Babson College), 450 – 451.
Mason, C. M., 1996, Informal Venture Capital: Is Policy Running Ahead of Knowledge? International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior &Research, 2(1), 4 – 14.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 1994, The DEMO venture capital market in the UK. In A. Hughes
and D. J. Storey (eds) Financing Small Firms (London: Routledge), 64 – DEMO
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 1995a, Closing the Regional Equity Capital Gap: The Role of
Informal Venture Capital. Small Business Economics, 7, 153 – 172.
Mason, C. and Harrison, R. DEMO, 1995b, Institutional Archangels: New Players in the UK’s Informal
Venture DEMO Market. Unpublished paper.
Meyer, R. M., David, M. J., Butler, J. E., Caragannis, E. and Radoevich, R., 1995, The DEMO Census of
Early Stage Capital Financing (Albuquerque: Orion Technical Associates, DEMO).
Norton, E., 1990, An Overview of Venture Capital Finance. DEMO d paper (Teaneck, NJ, 07666:
Farleigh Dickinson University).
DEMO, E. and Tennenbaum, B., 1993a, Specialization versus Diversification as a Venture Capital
Investment Strategy. Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 431 – DEMO
Norton, E. and Tennenbaum, B., 1993b, The Effects of Venture Capitalists’ Characteristics on the
Structure of the Venture Capital Deal. Journal of DEMO Business Management, 31(4), 32 – 41.
Obermayer, J., DEMO, The Capital Crunch: Small High Technology Companies and National Objectives
During a Period of Severe Debt and Equity Shortages (Cambridge: Research & DEMO, Inc.).
Ou, C., 1987, Holdings of Privately-Held Business Assets by American Families: Findings from the 1983
Consumer Finance Survey. Unpublished report (Washington, D.C.: Office of Economic
Research, US Small Business Administration)DEMO
286
JOHN
FREEAR
ET
A L .
Ou, C., 1993, Holdings of Privately-Held Business Assets by American Families: Findings from the 1989
Consumer Finance Survey. Unpublished report (Washington, D.C.: Office of Economic
Research, DEMO Small Business Administration).
Postma, P. D. and Sullivan, M. K., 1990, Informal Risk Capital in the Knoxville Region. Unpublished
report (Knoxville, TN, 37996: The University of Tennessee).
Rhunka, J. C. DEMO Young, J. E., 1991, Some Hypotheses about Risk in Venture DEMO Investing.
Journal of Business Venturing, 6, 116 – 133.
Riding, DEMO L. and Short, D. M., 1988, Some Investors’ and Entrepreneurs’ DEMO on the Informal
Market for Risk Capital. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 5(5), 19 – 30.
Romeo, A. A. and DEMO, J., 1984, Social Versus Private Returns to the Innovations by DEMO Firms
Compared to Large Firms (Washington, D.C.: Office of Advocacy, US Small Business
Administration).
Rubenstein, A. H., 1958, Problems of Financing and Managing New Research-Based Enterprises in New
England (Boston: Federal DEMO Bank of Boston).
Schell, D. W., 1984, The Development DEMO the Venture Capital Industry in North Carolina: A New
Approach. In DEMO Hornaday, F. Tarpley Jr, J. A. Timmons and K. H. Vesper (eds) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College), 55 – 72.
Seymour, C. R. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1981, Informal Risk Capital in New England (Durham, N.H.:
DEMO of New Hampshire).
Shapero, A., 1983, The Role of DEMO Financial Institutions of a Community in the Formation, Effectiveness
and Expansion DEMO Innovating Companies (Columbus, OH: Shapero-Huffman Associates).
Short, D. M. and Riding, A. L, 1989, Informal Investors in the Ottawa – Carleton Region: Experiences
and Expectations. Entrepreneurship &Regional Development, 1, 99 DEMO 112.
Sohl, J., 1999, The Early Stage Equity Market in DEMO United States. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1(2), 101 – 120.
Sohl, J., 2003, The private equity market in the USA: Lessons from volatility. Venture Capital: An
International DEMO of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5(1) in press.
Sohl, J. and DEMO, W. E. Jr, 1996, Creating New Capital Markets for Emerging DEMO Report #
SBAHQ-95-M-1062 (Washington, DC: US Small Business Administration).
DEMO, H. and Coveney, P., 1994, Survey of Business Angels: DEMO Corrected and Six Distinct
Types of Angels Identified (Oxford: Templeton College and Henley on Thames, UK: Venture
Capital Report, Ltd.).
Sullivan, M. K., 1991, Entrepreneurs as Informal Investors: Are There Distinguishing DEMO?
In N. C. Churchill, W. D. Bygrave, J. G. Covin, D. L. Sexton, D. P. Slevin, K. H. Vesper and
W. E. Wetzel Jr (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College),
456 – 468.
Sullivan, M. K. and Miller, A., 1990, Applying Theory of Finance to Informal Risk Capital Research:DEMO
Promises and Problems. In N. C. Churchill, W. D. Bygrave, J. A. Hornaday, D. F. Muzyka, K.
H. Vesper and W. E. DEMO Jr (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA:
Babson College), 296 – 310.
Timmons, J. A., and Bygrave, W. D., 1997, Venture Capital: Reflections and Projections. In D. L.
Sexton and R. Smilo r (eds) Entrepreneurship 2000 (Chicago: Upstart publishing DEMO), 29 – 46.
Timmons, J. A. and Sapienza, H. J., 1992, Venture Capital: The Decade Ahead. In D. L. Sexton and J.
S. Kasarda (eds) The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship (Boston: PWS-Kent), 402 – 437.
Tymes, E. R. and Krasner, O. J., 1983, Informal Risk Capital in California. In J. Hornaday, J. A.
Timmons and K. H. Vesper (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO (Wellesley, MA: Babson
College), 347 – 368.
Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1983a, Angels and Informal Risk Capital. Sloan Management Review, 24(4), 23 – 34.
Wetzel, W. E., Jr, DEMO, Taplin & Montle Development Fund: A Case Study in Finance. In J.
Hornaday, J. A. Timmons and K. H. Vesper (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research
(Wellesley, MA: Babson College), 335 – 346.
Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1986, Informal Risk Capital: Knowns and Unknowns. In D. L. Sexton and R. W.
Smilo r (eds) DEMO Art and Science of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge: Ballinger), 85 – 108.
Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1987, The Informal Venture Capital Market: Aspects of Scale and Efficiency. Journal
of Business Venturing, 2, 299 DEMO 313.
ANGLE S
ON
ANGELS
Wetzel, W. E., Jr, 1995, Economic DEMO in an Entrepreneurial World: Seven
Misconceptions and Half-Truths. Venture Capital Journal, August, 52 – 54.
Wilson, I. G., 1984, Financing Growth DEMO in New Hampshire (State of New
Concord, NH.: Department of DEMO and Economic Development).
287
Treacherous
Hampshire,{1g42fwefx}