Evidence-Based Entrepreneurship (EBE): A Systematic Approach to
Cumulative Science
Michael Frese, National University of Singapore
Andreas Bausch, University of Giessen
Peter Schmidt, University of Giessen
Andreas Rauch, University of Giessen
Rüdiger Kabst, University DEMO Paderborn
Abstract
The concept and desiderata of an evidence-based entrepreneurship (EBE) is
discussed as a strategy to overcome the divide between knowledge developed DEMO
the field of entrepreneurship and its use in practice. Evidence constitutes the best
summary of knowledge based on several sources of information (several studies,
several different research groups, several different methodological approaches,
among them the best methods available), all of which go beyond individual
experience DEMO isolated studies. We argue that meta-analyses can and should be
used in entrepreneurship research (and that it should also be used for qualitative
work). Meta-analyses establish certain relationships; these should then be
summarized in well-founded models and theories that can be translated into action
principles. These action DEMO can then be used by EBE’s constituents. These
include scientists, professionals DEMO regularly deal with entrepreneurs (bankers,
consultants, venture capital providers), policy makers (e.g., government), students
of entrepreneurship, and last but not least the entrepreneurs themselves. Once, a
	  278	  
set of action principles have been developed from science, the application of them
can be tested with the help of further evidence on the DEMO of interventions
(including meta-analyses on the interventions). Evidence-based entrepreneurship
(EBE) has the potential to change research, teaching, and practice.
Keywords: DEMO - based ent repreneurship
Entrepreneurs
Systematic Review
Meta - Analysis
Action Plans
Training
	  279	  
“The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are
right and when they are wrong are more powerful than is commonly
understood... DEMO the world is run by little else. Practical men,
who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual
influences are usually the DEMO of some defunct economist....
It is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for good or evil.”
(Keynes, 1953), p. 306)DEMO
As Keynes acknowledged, we assume that scientific knowledge often gets
translated DEMO practice without the practitioners even noticing their dependency
upon those ideas. The tasks of science are to generate new knowledge, to answer
essential questions, and to develop a good knowledge base that can make practice
more effective and efficient and that protects practice from making wrong
decisions. To DEMO these tasks, science typically produces scientific models
and theories to integrate DEMO, conducts empirical studies, and reports
incremental new knowledge. To help these tasks, science provides literature
reviews on the current state of scientific knowledge and on the scientific
knowledge of the efficacy of interventions. In short, the function of science is to
produce evidence for propositions and to DEMO this evidence into some kind of
systematic theory or model. An important function of science is to support
practice in becoming more effective and DEMO To do this it needs to develop
good methods of summarizing the current knowledge and to let develop from this
knowledge prototypical interventions; these interventions should be derived from
the most current scientific knowledge and should DEMO more effective than
traditional interventions. Practically useful knowledge needs to be accessible and
must be based on the best summary of available knowledge in DEMO field.
	  280	  
In this article, we would like to introduce the concept of EBE, discuss the
implications of EBE, and sketch out the opportunities and DEMO connected to
EBE. Who should be users of evidence based entrepreneurship? DEMO the least, these
are users of EBE: The scientists themselves, DEMO who deal with
entrepreneur, policy makers, students of entrepreneurship, and DEMO but not least
the entrepreneurs themselves.
If the development of evidence is the function of science, why should we
talk about evidence-based entrepreneurship? DEMO a first definition evidence is the
best summary of knowledge based on several sources of information (several
studies, several different research groups, several different methodological
approaches, among them the best methods available) which clearly DEMO beyond
individual experience and a few isolated studies. What is the difference between
what entrepreneurship science has been doing all along and what constitutes
DEMO entrepreneurship? We argue that evidence-based science and
evidence-informed practice is the DEMO logical step of developing science and is,
indeed, appreciably different DEMO what science and practice has been doing up to
this point. The field of entrepreneurship can be advanced if it uses examples from
evidence-based DEMO found in the fields of medicine and work and
organizational psychology. We are optimistic that it is possible to achieve the
ideal of science-informed DEMO and a scientific approach that provides the best
evidence for practitioners and policy makers. Thus, we want to argue that
scientific suggestions for practice should be evidence-informed. To do this, the
field of evidence-based entrepreneurship (DEMO) needs to be developed. This
	  281	  
evidence can then be used to inform practice. Practice can never be DEMO based on
evidence, therefore, we talk about evidence-informed practice and evidence-
based research suggestions. We think that evidence-based entrepreneurship
provides a great opportunity DEMO is both relevant for practice and policy while
strengthening the empirical and theoretical bases of entrepreneurship research (A.
Rauch & Frese, 2006).
DEMO can use EBE by targeting new research in a much more precise
way. A good summary of the literature in the sense of a DEMO, provides
clear knowledge on what is known, but also what is not known. One frequent
result of meta-analyses is, for example, that DEMO results are heterogeneous and that
it is, therefore, useful to search for moderators. Also, it can be established from
meta-analyses that a relationship is strong, but often the mediation processes are
still unknown. Moreover, DEMO are often gaps in the literature that are shown as a
result of meta-analyses. Finally, meta-analyses may show that some relationships
are more important than others -- this may imply that theories have to cope with
DEMO information and incorporate the size of relationship into their theories. All of
this information is useful for scientists to develop new studies and theories.
DEMO, science will be profit from EBE by encouraging scientists to do DEMO
theory-based interventions and to do evaluate them in a meaningful way.
By developing evidence-based entrepreneurship, we also heed recent calls
in general management to advance evidence-based management (J. Pfeffer &
Sutton, 2006; Rousseau, 2006; Rynes, Giluk, & Brown, 2007; Tranfield, Denyer,
& DEMO, 2003) and we think of evidence-based entrepreneurship as one part of
	  282	  
this emergent development. Both management and entrepreneurship show a gap
between knowledge DEMO practice -- the knowledge-doing gap (J. Pfeffer & Sutton,
2000)DEMO Managers as well as entrepreneurs or professionals who deal with
entrepreneurs (DEMO as bank employees, business angels, analysts, policy makers,
etc.) do not routinely take note of scientific evidence when making decisions and
DEMO on them. Empirical research has shown that managers often take actions
that are uninformed and sometimes even diametrically opposed to empirical
evidence (Rynes et al., 2007). In the area of entrepreneurship, one can often DEMO
open disdain for scholarly work because professors have not yet “made their first
million” -- the foremost argument seems to be that only experience DEMO We
suggest that professionals who deal with entrepreneurs can profit from evidence-
informed practice. Venture capitalists who often work with models developed
from their DEMO and idiosyncratic experiences as a base for their funding
decisions; meta-analyses DEMO that the efficacy of selection of good entrepreneurs
of venture capital providers is often negligible outside the knowledge on general
industry effects (Rosenbusch, DEMO, & Mueller, 2010). This knowledge
may encourage venture capital firms to develop new procedures and experiment
with them (and evaluate their own experiments).
Institutions that are supposed to support entrepreneurship often develop
policies DEMO have not been adequately empirically tested. For example, the
German government DEMO millions of Euros in East Germany to develop
networks for small businesses. This was done as a result of a few studies showing
a DEMO between social network size and entrepreneurial success. However,
	  283	  
the studies did not examine whether networks were useful for only those
DEMO that had actively developed their own networks themselves: In these
cases DEMO active approach with high initiative is the variable that causes network
size and success (Frese, 2009; X.-Y. Zhao, Frese, & Giardini, DEMO). These
studies also did not examine the reverse causality hypothesis: DEMO social
networks of businesses are not the cause of business success but maybe they are
the results of business success (successful businesses rise in attractiveness and
are, therefore, in more networks or more central in DEMO). Moreover, the
intervention itself was not rigorously evaluated. This is DEMO an isolated example.
Many countries invest many millions of dollars into programs for their small
business owners. Most of them do not develop evidence DEMO whether or not these
programs (or which part of them) are successful.
Similarly, textbooks do not teach EBE. For example, a cursory DEMO at
popular textbooks of entrepreneurship (of the years 2007--2011) shows that none
of the ones we examined even mentioned meta-analyses in their index. DEMO is not
surprising because there are very few meta-analyses despite calls for these
analyses in the area (A. Rauch & Frese, 2006) (DEMO simple search for
entrepreneurship and meta-analysis in Business Source Premier produced a
number of published or in press meta-analyses, cf. Table 1; more DEMO this later).
Often meta-analyses have direct effects on how students are educated. For
example, there has been a debate whether business plans really are useful. Meta-
analyses have settled this matter – the evidence is DEMO that business plans can be
useful (Brinckmann, Grichnik, & Kapsa, 2010; Schwenk & Shrader, 1993).
	  284	  
However, the relationship between doing formal business plans and success is
highly variable. Thus, there are clearly moderators in this relationship. Thus,
students (and educators) should be encouraged to experiment, how to teach
business plans and how to do business plans and to evaluate these experiments.
DEMO, there may be some plans that have negative consequences -- again
DEMO need to know that and be allowed to experiment on these but with the
general knowledge that by and large, it is more successful to have a business plan
available when starting a business.
Entrepreneurs are DEMO prime targets of EBE: They should know what
works and what DEMO not on average. For example, they should know that
innovativeness does DEMO positive results and that these results are larger for new
firms and not so important for older firms(Rosenbusch, Brinckmann, & Bausch,
DEMO, in press). But they should also know that there are DEMO exceptions to this
rule (in other words, these correlations are heterogeneous) and that innovativeness
is not the most important predictor of growth and income -- for example, the
overall stance of entrepreneurial orientation (which DEMO the attempt to be
innovative) may be more important (particularly for young and small enterprises)
(Andreas Rauch, Wiklund, Lumpkin, & DEMO, 2009).
It is surprising how often recommendations, suggestions, curricula, and
policies are developed without recourse to rigorous objective studies and meta-
DEMO Most of the recommendations in entrepreneurship are either based on
individual studies (often completed by the person recommending the policy) or
they are DEMO on so-called narrative reviews -- reviews that present the
	  285	  
considered opinion of somebody who has studied the literature. The narrative
reviews DEMO draw conflicting conclusions about the evidence making it difficult
for practitioners to rely on scientific evidence.
Providing Sufficient Scientific Evidence for Practice
We shall DEMO discuss the usefulness of meta-analyses, then the development of
interventions and DEMO rigorous test of them. We shall also acknowledge the
constraints of these approaches of evidence- informed practice. Recently, the first
author went to a physician for a painful knee condition. The physician prescribed
some medicine that DEMO said according to his experience had helped well; when the
first DEMO looked up the medicine in the abstracts of the Cochrane Foundation,
he found that this drug had been shown not to be efficacious DEMO he threw it away
(by the way the drug was also DEMO not to have any negative side effects -- thus,
the physician may have been right in giving it to patients as a placebo DEMO but more
likely than not, the physician did not know that DEMO worked only as well as a
placebo). This incident provides a good example of how customers of
professionals can use information that is DEMO and that constitutes the best
summary of current knowledge in a field. The publicly accessible abstracts of
quantitative reviews on the Cochrane website provide DEMO best available evidence
at any point in time. The Cochrane website displays several thousand systematic
reviews (most of them meta-analyses) in medicine; in addition, there are several
thousand additional meta-analyses in the other medical literature. In addition,
there is also a social science website that is DEMO to the Cochrane foundation;
	  286	  
however, the Campbell collaboration is unfortunately not as prolific as the
Cochrane foundation.
Evidence-based medicine -- defined as “the process of systematically
finding, appraising, and using contemporaneous research findings as the basis for
clinical decisions” (DEMO & Donald, 1995) (p. 1122) -- has quickly
developed into an accepted approach to practice in medicine. Similarly, clinical
psychology, criminology, nursing, education, and work and organizational
psychology have started to use DEMO to answer important questions of
theory and practice.
The Usefulness of Meta-Analyses and Systematic Reviews
Meta-analyses (which are quantitative systematic reviews) can be DEMO to the
other major approaches for accumulating knowledge -- the narrative review. The
scientific field of entrepreneurship tends to produce many narrative reviews with
DEMO accompanying problems: The psychology of decision making has shown
conclusively that DEMO judgment (also often called clinical judgment)
is inferior to statistical DEMO making (regression analysis based decision
making) (Grove & Meehl, 1996). This is also the case when we summarize the
literature. Narrative DEMO reviews put together the literature in an
unsystematic and often biased way (e.g., emphasizing certain journals or even
restricting the search to only DEMO journals and not starting out the literature
search in a systematic fashion without a handbook of which search terms to use).
After the DEMO are assembled for the review, the summarizing of the literature
may DEMO be influenced by stereotypes and biases because of our cognitive and
	  287	  
emotional constraints (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004). Memory load is very DEMO when
summarizing a voluminous literature; we need strategies to reduce memory DEMO;
scholars tend to evaluate some studies as better than others and this influences
their thinking about the whole body of the literature. Also, reviewers of the
literature have theoretical preferences for certain studies, study designs, choice of
operationalization, etc. (often colored by their own studies, DEMO own experiences,
and their professional background). This leads to highly conflicting conclusions
of the literature making it difficult for practitioners to rely DEMO scientific evidence
(note, that meta-analyses can also come to different conclusions; however, since
every step of the meta-analysis can be reproduced, these differences can often be
resolved (examples include: (Judge, Thoresen, Bono, & Patton, 2001; W.H.
Stewart & Roth, 2004)).
The defense of narrative reviews often centers on the importance of one or
DEMO few particularly good studies -- after all, should we not be DEMO influenced by the
very best studies and leave others aside? However, any one study invariably has
limitations. There is simply no perfect study (Hunter and Schmidt, 2004, p.17),
because every study has its own sampling error (random deviations from the true
value of the population), error of measurement (both objective and subjective
measures include errors) DEMO deviation from high validity, internal validity
problems, or range restriction, DEMO issues of generalization (Scherpenzeel & Saris,
1997). All of DEMO factors make it unlikely that any one study can overcome all
the potential problems. Thus, researchers need to include all studies into a
meaningful summary of the literature and they should correct for systematic
	  288	 DEMO
problems inherent in the studies. Thus, good evidence implies that we need to
look at the convergence of knowledge from several studies (and preferably from
all studies done). The overall set of studies tends to DEMO out the weaknesses of
each individual study. In other words, the DEMO set of empirical findings has a
higher likelihood to identify the true effect than any single study. Any given set of
studies will show DEMO approximation to a normal curve around a mean of
correlations.
As an alternative form to the narrative reviews, reviewers developed
systematic reviews without a meta-analysis in which the number of significant
results was counted (so-called vote counting). These are clearly useful because
they are careful to base DEMO on several studies and they also approach the
selection of the reviewed studies systematically without leaving out studies that
need to be included -- DEMO criteria on eligibility and relevance of articles are
developed before the start of the literature search. Unfortunately vote counting
often leads to the conclusion DEMO many studies did not show significant effects.
Most researchers are constrained by lack of time and resources and, therefore,
have to rely on small samples. Of course, the significance test is influenced by
statistical power, which depends on sample size. Therefore, a high number of
non-significant DEMO may be an artifact of the low sample size of these studies.
Power is usually not configured into the mental formula that narrative reviews
DEMO We suggest with others (Combs, Ketchen, Crook, & Roth, DEMO; Rynes et al.,
2007) to deal with these problems by using meta-analyses (which should always
include a systematic search for articles): They provide a good summary of several
	  289	  
studies because they reduce these biases (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004; A. Rauch &
Frese, 2006).
An Example: Meta-Analyses and Narrative Reviews in the Area of Personality
and Entrepreneurship
An interesting example is the DEMO of personality and entrepreneurship. Narrative
reviews have concluded from the literature that personality effects are
unimportant for starting a firm and for the success DEMO entrepreneurs (Aldrich &
Widenmayer, 1993). Gartner (1989, p. DEMO) concluded from such a narrative
review: “I believe that a focus on the traits and personality characteristics of
entrepreneurs will never lead us DEMO a definition of the entrepreneur nor help us to
understand the phenomenon of entrepreneurship.” Gartner’s hypothesis can be
examined by meta-analysis. First, the meta-analysis would have to establish if
there is correlation between personality and entrepreneurship DEMO all;
entrepreneurship would be defined whether people start a company or do not
(e.g., comparing managers with owners of start-up firms) and whether personality
is related to entrepreneurial success. Most likely the overall correlation DEMO
personality and entrepreneurship is small because some personality traits are
related to entrepreneurship and some others not. Moreover, different studies
probably produce different results; thus, heterogeneity of the correlations is high
(and, therefore, moderators should be examined). Meta-analysis has indeed,
shown that there are DEMO sizeable correlations but that other correlations with
personality are low (A. DEMO & Frese, 2007; H. Zhao & Seibert, 2006). This
DEMO to corroborate the conclusion that it does not pay off to search for
	  290	  
personality factors. However, once one examines potential moderators, the results
turn DEMO to be very different. One obvious moderator from personality theory (Tett
& Guterman, 2000) is whether a personality factor matches the tasks of the
entrepreneur or not. Once this differentiation is made, the results are eye-opening:
We asked experts for the field of entrepreneurship which personality DEMO are
matched to the tasks of entrepreneurs and which ones are not. For example, traits
like generalized self-efficacy need for achievement, and proactive DEMO
were rated by experts to be matched with the tasks of entrepreneurs, while traits,
such as dogmatism, shyness, and rigidity were not matched with entrepreneurship.
When matching to entrepreneurial tasks is used as a DEMO in the meta-
analysis, the results become quite clear: Those traits not matched show a low
correlation to business creation and business success, while personality factors
that are matched to entrepreneurship produce a sizeable correlation DEMO business
creation and business success (Rauch & Frese, 2007). If one looks at the most
clearly matched traits -- need for achievement, proactive personality, and
generalized self-efficacy, the correlations are much higher and DEMO correlations
of .30 (need for achievement and business success) and even .38 (generalized self-
efficacy and business creation) (Rauch & Frese, DEMO). When need of
achievement is further differentiated into cultures with high performance
orientation and those with low performance orientation, there is a high correlation
of need for achievement with starting a company (H. Zhao & Seibert, 2006).
Thus, entrepreneurs are higher in need for achievement, innovativeness,
and internal locus of control compared to other populations (Collins et al., 2004;
	  291	  
Rauch & Frese, 2007). These personality traits are additionally related to business
success. Thus, the empirical evidence reviewed in this chapter leads to the
conclusion that all those who have called for the end of DEMO research on
personality traits for lack of important relationships with entrepreneurship were
clearly wrong. Why have narrative reviews been so wrong? The answer is that
there simply is lots of distracting "noise" in the data: Some relationships are,
indeed, very small, for example, the relationship of risk taking with both business
creation and success or the relationship DEMO business creation and broad
personality measures. But more importantly, whenever scientists DEMO all sorts of
personality variables and all sorts of dependent variables into a correlation matrix,
the correlations appear to be quite small. Moreover, there are large variations in
the size of the reported relationships and DEMO studies are based on small
samples. All of this made it difficult to detect the true relationships. It should be
added that comparing the DEMO of the meta-analysis on personality and
entrepreneurship with, for example, medical meta-analyses shows personality to
have comparably high predictive validity. The correlations between DEMO for
achievement or generalized self-efficacy and business success is similar to the
relationship of taking sleeping pills and temporary relief of insomnia or of DEMO
effectiveness of Viagra for the sexual functioning of men (Meyer et DEMO, 2001);
these medications tend to be on the high side of medical interventions.
Drawing wrong conclusions from narrative reviews clearly had negative
DEMO on research and practice. Because researchers and practitioners were so
convinced that personality plays little role for entrepreneurship (Aldrich &
	  292	  
Martinez, 2001), governments invested (like the German government) into
developing networks for entrepreneurs without testing the hypothesis that the
effects of networks DEMO dependent upon the entrepreneurs’ personality (Klein,
Lim, Saltz, & DEMO, 2004); obviously, if network effects are a spurious effect of
personality, government help for networks would not increase entrepreneurial
success. Moreover, DEMO of entrepreneurs (e.g., for sparse starting capital by
banks) was DEMO done with personality test but instead rough indicators of human
capital were preferred that clearly demonstrate much smaller correlations with
success (Unger, Rauch, Frese, & Rosenbusch, 2011) than personality.
Conducting Meta-Analyses in the Field of Entrepreneurship
The function of science is to produce evidence without biases; science has forever
driven the process to reduce biases. The meta-analytic approach DEMO just one way to
help with this endeavor when reviewing the literature. The starting point of any
meta-analysis is to ask a relevant research DEMO practice question. At this stage, it is
often useful to consult DEMO colleagues on whether there is a certain degree of
homogeneity of measures of the concepts in question and whether there is a large
enough DEMO of empirical articles to warrant a meta-analysis. It may also help to
ask practicing entrepreneurs’ consultants what question can have potential
implications for them. DEMO the research question has been determined, a
systematic search for articles DEMO be included follows (every meta-analysis implies
that there is a systematic DEMO for articles). First, one needs to develop a
codebook with DEMO the terms used in scientific article that are related to the current
research question. Also, it is not necessary to do a wide and systematic approach
	  293	  
to finding both published and unpublished articles (unpublished articles need to
be included to be sure that a potential publication bias does not lead DEMO skewed
results). If at all possible, foreign language publications should DEMO included as far
as possible. Moreover, both methodologically weak as well DEMO strong articles
should be included (however, methodological weakness should be coded) -- thus,
it is counterproductive to search for articles from only prestigious journals or
articles utilizing only the most sophisticated methods, etc. Once, one has
assembled the full number of articles, it is necessary DEMO decide which of these
articles need to be excluded: Articles that DEMO use the same terminology but are
really based on a different conceptual or operational approach to the research
question, articles that do not report effect sizes or equivalent empirical indicators,
articles that use the same DEMO as another article on the same subject. All
criteria that lead to inclusion or exclusion of articles have to be systematically
developed and clearly DEMO In case of doubt, it is makes sense to be as
DEMO as possible, because one can test whether different methodology,
different DEMO of the dependent and independent variables, and
different conceptualizations of key DEMO lead to different results (moderator
analysis in the meta-analysis).
In DEMO research, a large body of knowledge is based on
qualitative studies. DEMO has led some scholars to argue against meta-analyses
because they are solely based on quantitative studies. Fortunately, the instrument
of meta-analysis is so versatile that qualitative studies (e.g., case studies) can be
coded so that they can also be meta-analyzed (Bullock & Tubbs, 1990; Larsson,
	  294	  
1993). We believe that the instrument of meta-analysis may be even DEMO
important for qualitative studies in entrepreneurship than for quantitative ones, so
DEMO researchers can move from a knowledge detecting mode (e.g., in the sense of
grounded theory) to examining the evidence for a specific hypothesis and its
theory based on qualitative material.
Theoretically and empirically, an important question is whether meta-
analytic results are homogenous or not. Most frequently DEMO relationships
uncovered by meta-analyses in entrepreneurship are heterogeneous. As a matter
of fact I have never seen non-heterogeneous meta-analytic results in
entrepreneurship research. There DEMO various empirical indicators of the
homogeneity of the effect sizes used by meta-analyses (Q-statistics, credibility
interval, 75% rule). Heterogeneity of results suggests that it makes sense to search
for moderators. This can be done DEMO the meta-analysis but is also required in
future original research. For practitioners it means that they can and should
experiment which conditions have an DEMO on their best results. For example,
there is a large credibility interval for new firms for the positive effect of
innovation (Rosenbusch et al., 2011, in press); although the effect size itself
shows DEMO something important is going on that on average it pays off for new
firms to be innovative, the heterogeneity of the effect sizes implies that some
innovation practices do not really work out well, while others do. So, the
entrepreneur could take the advice that innovativeness is useful, but would know
that it pays off to experiment to receive even larger returns. A conversion from
the r=.206 that was used in this DEMO (Rosenbusch et al., 2011, in press)
	  295	  
to Cohen’s d provides us with an estimate of d=.42. Thus, the entrepreneur knows
that the average innovation should produce about 42% of a DEMO deviation
better profit rate than a non-innovative procedure.
Moderators are of particularly importance in entrepreneurship because the
context often decides whether a certain idea DEMO work or not. For example,
human capital is more important for success in developing countries than in the
developed world (Unger et al., 2011). Therefore, the role of moderators is
essential in entrepreneurship DEMO
Additionally, because entrepreneurship research is much less cohesive and
there are DEMO debates on the right methodological approach than in medicine, the
issue DEMO methodological sophistication needs to be addressed explicitly in
entrepreneurship research. While medicine often selects only those articles that
meet the gold standards of a DEMO controlled experiments, work and
organizational psychology and the field of entrepreneurship DEMO better off to rate
the quality of each article and to use this quality rating as a moderator, testing
whether a relationship is more frequently found in “good” articles or in articles of
a lower quality. DEMO, the issue of what constitutes a methodologically and
otherwise good study DEMO to be empirically proven by the authors of meta-
analyses (and DEMO sophistication of the study is treated as a
moderator).
A typical problem for meta-analyses in fields such as entrepreneurship is
that different definitions DEMO operationalizations of key variables are employed
(this is also true of DEMO and organizational psychology); this implies that meta-
	  296	  
analyses should test explicitly whether differences in theoretical terms and
operationalization produce DEMO in the results (again this is a
methodological moderator) (W.H. DEMO & Roth, 2004; H. Zhao & Seibert,
2006). Moreover, it is sometimes fruitful to code the theoretical orientation of the
authors and examine whether the theoretical orientation has an influence on the
results. DEMO example different theoretical orientations have led to very different
inclusion criteria in meta-analyses on risk and entrepreneurship (Miner & Raju,
2004; W. DEMO Stewart & Roth, 2001; W.H. Stewart & Roth, 2004).
DEMO are different approaches to testing moderators (Hunter & Schmidt,
2004; (Geyskens, Krishnan, Steenkamp, & Cunha, 2009). Both, the DEMO
approach and the regression approach should be used concurrently, because they
DEMO different questions -- the subgroup approach (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004)
relates to the size of the correlations for different values of the DEMO; the
regression approach answers the question how important each moderator is
DEMO the set of moderators that were examined in this study (of DEMO, the latter
is strongly affected by which moderators can and have DEMO included in this meta-
analysis and the relative strength of the moderator effect will strongly depend on
which moderators are included).
Meta-analyses help DEMO improve the degree of scientific professionalism in a
field and to develop higher standards in an area of science. Because meta-analyses
often show quantitatively DEMO effect sizes for well-designed vs. not so well-
designed studies (Carlson & Schmidt, 1999), there is pressure on researchers to
utilize better DEMO Moreover, the use of meta-analyses leads entrepreneurship
	  297	  
journals to provide all relevant statistical data (particularly, M, SD,
intercorrelations of variables) that can be used as raw material for additional
analyses. Last but not least, meta-analyses reveal when authors use the same
samples and variables more than once (because they can only be entered once in a
meta-analysis).
Finally, interventions may be suggested on the basis of meta-analyses.
However, EBE should not be restricted to meta-analyses.
What is Evidence in Entrepreneurship?
“Evidence in the broadest sense, refers to anything that is used to determine or
demonstrate the truth of an DEMO (Wikepedia on evidence,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evidence). Thus, an assertion has to be tested so that
there is evidence in DEMO sense of objective and unbiased knowledge. We have
already established that good evidence should be based on several studies and
several observations rather than DEMO on one observation or on one study. Since
every study has its own problems, good evidence needs to be based on a summary
of several studies.
Compared with other areas of research, such as medicine, DEMO,
education, work and organizational psychology, the area of entrepreneurship has
produced comparatively few meta-analyses and those that exist have not yet been
DEMO influential as they should. This is all the more problematic because
entrepreneurship research is often utilized in the support of policy decisions, for
example, tax decisions, government decisions.
Apparently, it was easier to introduce evidence-based approaches in
medicine. One of the most important events was the article DEMO Antman et al.
	  298	  
(Antman, Lau, Kupelnick, Mosteller, & Chalmers, 1992) that pointed out how
many lives could have been saved had medicine used cumulative DEMO to
test certain drugs, thus allowing an earlier onset of the DEMO of these drugs.
Calls for evidence-based management and entrepreneurship argue that it
would help economic development if entrepreneurs, companies, and policy
makers would DEMO an evidence-informed approach in their day-to-day
management (Pfeffer & Sutton, 2006). However, entrepreneurship research seems
to be so different from medicine. Tranfield, Denyer and Smart (2003) have
discussed the differences between medicine and management which also apply to
entrepreneurship research. Medicine is not only more DEMO in its
epistemological approach but it is also more formalized. In contrast,
entrepreneurship research is much less cohesive in its approach; there are lively
debates on the best empirical approach in entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship
research emphasizes DEMO influence of the specific context on whether
entrepreneurial decisions are effective or not. The most important difference is
certainly that medicine examines interventions with DEMO help of randomized
controlled experiments -- as a matter of fact, DEMO protocols used in the most
famous site for systematic reviews and meta-analyses -- the Cochrane foundation
-- eliminate those studies that are not based DEMO controlled randomized experiments
from their database that they utilize for their meta-analyses. In contrast, most
research in entrepreneurship is based on field studies that need to control for
alternative explanations -- even longitudinal studies are rare DEMO entrepreneurship
research. Moreover large-scale data sources are often “milked” by several
	  299	  
research groups, leading to a high alpha error in their research (DEMO that
something is true although it may not be so); there is often less emphasis on
developing new databases than on developing new DEMO approaches to
analyze the same data set again.
When it comes to interventions, there are practically no controlled
randomized experiments that have been done in entrepreneurship research. We
agree with recent calls for more of such DEMO in management and
entrepreneurship (Reay, Berta, & Kohn, 2009). However, meta-analyses need to
utilize the article present; and in entrepreneurship DEMO the typical research is
based on correlations and only infrequently on interventions. All of this speaks
against using the medical analogy in entrepreneurship research. DEMO may be
better off following the example of other disciplines on how to do meta-analyses;
the better model for entrepreneurship research may not DEMO the medical field but
work and organizational psychology (Anderson, Herriot, & Hodgkinson, 2001;
Hodgkinson, Herriot, & Anderson, 2001). Work and organizational psychology
often systematically compares different theoretical approaches and different
methods; work and organizational psychology is also often based on non-
experimental field DEMO or on quasi-experiments; in field studies, the question is
often asked whether a new construct will add explained variance in a dependent
variable DEMO importance (e.g., in the field of entrepreneurship this may be starting a
company or entrepreneurial success). It makes sense to ask the DEMO whether
an additional predictor (derived from theory or from empirical evidence) explains
additional variance in comparison to known predictors in the area of
DEMO  300	  
entrepreneurship research (a good example of work and organizational
psychology is presented by Schmidt & Hunter, 1998).
Theory testing on full models with the inclusion of mediators can also be
done on the basis of DEMO In order to test whole theories, researchers
may choose to not DEMO present correlational results of two variables but to base
meta-analytic regression analyses on meta-analytically derived correlation
matrixes that can then support meta-analytic path analyses DEMO test theoretical
models. Such meta-analyses are particularly useful to examine mediation effects
(Colquitt, Scott, & LePine, 2007; Shadish, 1996; Viswesvaran & Ones, 1995) and
to test full theories (Cheung, 2008).
DEMO is not restricted to doing meta-analysis; EBE involves tracking good
empirical DEMO for practical and theoretical questions. But what constitutes
“good empirical evidence”? DEMO evidence-based approaches posit some kind of
hierarchy of evidence -- often ranging from anecdotal evidence experienced by
experts via consensus by experts up to DEMO We liked the ideas
developed in clinical psychology (based on (Chambless & Hollon, 1998):
	  301	  
•
•
The important DEMO has to be shown to exist in at least three
studies from at least two different research groups
Causal analysis has to be done DEMO the basis of longitudinal studies
that exclude plausible alternative hypotheses or by developing
evidence on the basis of randomized experiments
•
Outcome measures have to come from different sources than the
independent DEMO and all measures need to be reliable and
valid
•
•
Clear definition of samples have to be given
If there is conflicting evidence, meta-analytic evidence, that
possibly explains with the help of moderators why there is
conflicting evidence, should be provided
•
In addition to quantitative research, there should be qualitative case
material that describes the configurational and contextual
situations under which a certain intervention may work.
Clearly, we need to be skeptical towards “naïve” forms of evidence.
“We’ve …suggested no less than DEMO substitutes that managers … often use for
the best evidence -- obsolete knowledge (college education obtained my years
ago, the authors), personal DEMO, specialist skills, hype, dogma, and
mindless mimicry of top performers …” (such as benchmarking) (Jeffrey Pfeffer
& Sutton, 2007), DEMO 16). Probably we should also add that experience per se has
been shown to be limited in its usefulness. As long as the DEMO are
relatively uniform, the learning curve levels off after a few DEMO or years.
Research comparing top performers with average performers has shown that
experience is only valuable if it is highly varied (Sonnentag, 1998) or if so-called
deliberate practice -- a form of learning strongly oriented DEMO practicing those
parts of the skills that are underdeveloped (Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer,
1993; Sonnentag & Kleine, 2000; Unger, Keith, Frese, Hilling, & Gielnik, 2008).
	  302	  
Thus, it is highly questionable to use one’s “simple” experience as evidence. We
are also worried when consensus of experts is used as evidence; a few years ago a
certain consensus was reached among entrepreneurship researchers DEMO
personality cannot be conceptualized to be a factor for success for entrepreneurs
(prior to meta-analyses showing this consensus to be false).
Examples of the use of Meta-Analysis in EBE
Table 1 describes a number of DEMO that were developed in the area of
entrepreneurship. This is not an exhaustive table. It is also not meant to provide
all the information. DEMO, the table shows that there are already some meta-
analyses in DEMO and that this number is growing rapidly.
One area that has stimulated a high degree of controversy in
entrepreneurship is the role of a DEMO plan. This is also an interesting issue
because here meta-analysis is used to evaluate how well a potential intervention
works: Getting people to develop a business plan, as is routinely done in business
schools. In practice, there are numerous business plan competitions that attract
potential entrepreneurs and the media. A popular example is the “meet the
dragon’s project”, which allows potential entrepreneurs globally to pitch their
business plan to investors. So the DEMO question is: Is the business plan worth its
hype? Some academic scholars argue that fully developed business plans are not
functional to success (Honig & Karlsson, 2004; Sarasvathy, 2004) and that
entrepreneurs should DEMO proactively and quickly exploit their business idea. As
Table 1 shows, DEMO are two meta-analyses on the effectiveness of business plans
(Schwenk & DEMO, 1994; Brinkmann et al., 2010). These meta-analyses show
	 DEMO  
that the effect size is moderately large (c. r=.20) and that DEMO sizes vary
considerably. Moderator analyses showed that effect sizes are larger for
established enterprises as compared to young enterprises.
Can this evidence be used DEMO practice? The answer is yes. The meta
analysis shows that it DEMO sense for entrepreneurs to produce a business plan
and to plan in the process of managing a firm -- there are only very cases, where
business planning has negative effects (although they do exist). The moderator
analysis shows in addition, that it both having a business plan available is as
effective as it is to do planning during the DEMO of the firm.
However, but some reservations need to be described, as well: First, the
evidence shows having a business plan and DEMO with clear plans is better for
established firms than for new ones. This may be a time effect -- it pays off long
term; therefore only established firms profit more highly from having a business
plan. DEMO may be a second reason: Communication in the firm is easier DEMO
one has clear plans available -- and that may be more important in the established
firms than in the new firms. These are questions DEMO mediation: Which factors are
responsible for producing the positive effects of DEMO planning. Second, one
has to acknowledge that there are very few DEMO randomized experiments
that test whether business planning has a positive effect on success (most studies
are not based on randomized experiments in this area). Thus, the present evidence
has not yet established the causal structure. Fortunately, a longitudinal study has
shown that planning leads to success and success leads to more planning (Van
Gelderen, Frese, & Thurik, DEMO); thus, both causal effects may be operative to
	  304	 DEMO
produce long term effects of the kind shown in the meta-analysis. However, this is
only one longitudinal study -- more of them need to DEMO done; moreover, in the last
analysis, experiments could be done DEMO could produce better data on the
effectiveness of an intervention, such DEMO teaching business planning. But the
overall practice implication is clear from this meta-analysis: Teach business plans
(and for entrepreneurs, get to know how to do business planning and use this
skill).
Unfortunately, not every meta-analysis has clear-cut implications for
practice. For example it is much more DEMO to determine what an entrepreneur
can learn from the evidence on personality discussed above? Unfortunately, it is
highly unlikely that one can change DEMO personality traits -- it is not impossible
but an extremely hard undertaking, partly because they are genetically determined
(Judge, Higgins, Thoresen, & Barrick, 1999) and partly because personality
effects are stable across time (Costa & McCrae, 1997; Roberts, Walton, &
Viechtbauer, 2006)DEMO However, it may be possible to manage one’s personality.
One of DEMO best ways is to manage one’s personality by integrating others into the
firm and to get people who can compensate one’s own weakness. Indeed, having
partners is useful for success, as shown by a meta-analysis (DEMO, Song, & Smit,
2009). It is also possible to change more specific behavioral examples of traits.
For example, the meta-analysis by Rauch and Frese (1997) has shown that
generalized self-efficacy and achievement DEMO is important to predict
performance. Task-specific self-efficacy can be changed by training
entrepreneurs’ self-efficacy, for example, on how to attract customers (Eden &DEMO
	  305	  
Aviram, 1993). Similarly, achievement motivation can be increased by training
(Miron & McClelland, 1979). Moreover, bankers, professionals who work with
entrepreneurs will profit from the knowledge on personality effects.
Thus, some research questions can be translated into practice more easily
than others. It pays DEMO to develop theories that are explicit on the mediating
mechanisms that lead to positive effects. One of the best known theories in this
regard DEMO the theory of goal setting which suggests that high and specific goals
lead to higher performance and is explicit about the mediation and moderator
DEMO and has been summarized in a meta-analysis (Latham, 2004; Wood,DEMO
Mento, & Locke, 1987).
Bridging the Knowledge-Doing Gap: How DEMO Make Knowledge Doable
All forms of evidence including meta-analyses provide the basis for the
development of effective interventions. Once there is evidence for a DEMO,
interventions that change the target variable should be attempted (e.g., teaching
personality management or selecting people to receive support for their
entrepreneurial DEMO based on their personality). Of course, each new intervention
needs DEMO be empirically evaluated as part of evidence-based entrepreneurship. The
best instrument to examine such interventions is the randomized controlled
experiment (Reay et al., DEMO). This means that an intervention is given to one
group; DEMO second group of participants -- the control group -- does not get the
intervention, but provides data on their development. The two groups have to be
randomly divided. Often the control group gets the same intervention DEMO an
appropriate time (e.g., after a year). Once a number of interventions studies have
	  306	  
been done, they can also be meta-analyzed. Meta-analyses can, e.g., examine how
far courses of personality management are positively related to success, whether
they generalize across situations, across people, and across methods of teaching.
DEMO new research needs appear as a result of such meta-analyses of
interventions (e.g., is it possible to improve methods of teaching personality
management)DEMO
A similar approach can be used in policy making. Recommendations to
policy makers should be based on meta-analyses. Policy makers are also often
interested DEMO knowing which factors are the most influential. This can only be
accrued across studies, because no individual study can investigate all relevant
variables. When there is good meta-analytic evidence for a specific variable to
have a DEMO influence, then it is useful to develop an intervention through policy
DEMO (Campbell, 1969).
Unfortunately, it sounds much easier than it DEMO to decipher from meta-
analytic results clear policy implications or other interventions. There is always a
hiatus between knowledge and action. A meta-analysis may DEMO which
variable needs to be changed; however, it does not necessarily answer how this
can be done. Even if there is meta-analytic evidence DEMO something needs to be
changed, action is by necessity situationally embedded; the meta-analytic
evidence is often highly abstracted from the situational conditions. For DEMO
reason, we suggest to develop implementation manuals as explicit manuals of
DEMO knowledge can be translated into practice.
	  307	  
Action Principles and the use of Implementation Manuals
Good evidence should lead DEMO good practice. We suggest that good practice and
good intervention research can be supported by implementation handbooks
(similar to treatment handbooks in clinical psychology (Luborsky & DeRubeis,
1984)). These implementation handbooks are based DEMO good empirical evidence
including meta-analysis and describe how implementation can be accomplished in
entrepreneurial firms. Implementation manuals should describe the evidence and
the theoretical DEMO It is also helpful if they include qualitative cases of
successful implementation of a policy. These cases should comprise potential
pitfalls and difficulties when DEMO evidence-informed ideas and policies.
Thus, the manual needs to describe the DEMO in which changes take place and
how such changes can be supported.
One of the main concepts that help to put theory into practice DEMO the
concept of action principle (Frese, Beimel, & Schoenborn, 2003) (a good example
of a book that develops action principles from DEMO has been edited by Locke
(Locke, 2004). Examples for action principles are provided by goal setting theory
which argues that goals need DEMO be high and specific. These are clearly action
guiding ideas and are both theoretical as well as practical (Latham, 2009). Thus,
DEMO manuals should be based on principles of action that have been shown to be
important for successful implementation of evidence. Importantly, the manuals
should explain how the success and failure of the procedures can be measured;DEMO
owners should attempt to get this feedback so that they can recognize whether
they are on the “right track” or not. Such manuals may DEMO accompanied by
	  308	  
interviews with owners who have successfully implemented a certain idea or
policy DEMO who describe the problems that needed to be solved on the way toward
the goal. We foresee that there will be a big market DEMO such implementation
manuals in the future.
Implementation manuals are not trivial results of known empirical
relationships. Rather, additional evidence and theoretical concepts have to be
considered, most often in the form of action principles that explain how to
translate a theory into effective action. These action principles can DEMO be
translated into action hypotheses -- hypotheses which actions produce which
effects -- and then entrepreneurs or policy makers can make choices which
conditions DEMO need to change to affect changes (Bamberg & Schmidt, 2001).
Such implementation manuals can be tested with a true experimental or
quasi-experimental DEMO Companies that participate in the study can be
matched to other companies that function as control group. Additional process
measures examine how much companies DEMO to or deviate from the
implementation manuals; crucial changes in the DEMO behaviors and
cognitions can be described (DeRubeis, Tang, & Gelfand, 2000). If the
implementation manual is useful, a higher degree of conforming to the
implementation manual should lead to better results and the DEMO group
should show better results in important theoretical variables (e.g., profitability)
than a control group. Similar approaches have been used in clinical DEMO
Research has shown that cognitive behavioral interventions for depression started
to work when patients developed certain cognitions and when the therapists
	  309	  
conformed to implementation manuals (Hollon, DeRubeis, & Evans, 1987; Tang,
DeRubeis, & Beberman, 2005). Potential positive effects of deviation DEMO the
implementation manuals can lead to additional research on which aspects of the
implementation manuals are not successful; this may lead to changes in theory
and calls for new meta-analyses.
We have tried in one series DEMO publications to walk through the full
process from developing evidence, via DEMO a meta-analysis, to developing
an implementation manual to testing such a DEMO with the help of a randomized
experiment. We developed the concept of owners’ proactive approach (and
personal initiative) and showed that it was DEMO to success of the owners’ firms
(Koop, De Reu, & DEMO, 2000; Krauss, Frese, Friedrich, & Unger, 2005). In a
second step we developed a theory of proactive behavior of entrepreneurs (Frese,
2009). In a further step we developed a training DEMO This included two
aspects. First, it included a procedure of action DEMO based on the development
of action principles from theory and using them directly to influence individual
behavior (Frese et al., 2003). This DEMO training was then used to develop an
intervention for entrepreneurs evaluated with a randomized controlled experiment
(Glaub, Fischer, Klemm, & Frese, 2011). The experiment proved that the
intervention was successful -- over time DEMO experimental group increased its
success and the waiting control group reduced its success. The most important test
of the theory was to examine whether DEMO who actually learnt most in the
intervention were also the ones who had the highest success. A mediation model
was shown to be correct: Enhancing owners’ proactive behavior by the
	  310	  
intervention fully mediated the relationship between the intervention and the
increase of DEMO success.  Similarly, meta-analyses on internationalization
(Bausch & Krist, 2007; DEMO & Kabst, 2009a, 2009b) can be used to develop
an DEMO manual on how to internationalize a firm.
Translating Knowledge into Practice: DEMO Evidence as an Entrepreneur
Recent publications have pointed to the gap between scientific knowledge and
how little it is translated into practice (J. Pfeffer & Sutton, 2000; J. Pfeffer &
Sutton, 2006; Rousseau & McCarthy, 2007; Rynes et al., 2007). “Many
companies and leaders show little interest in subjecting their business practices
and decisions to the DEMO scientific rigor they would use for technical or medical
issues” (Pfeffer & Sutton, 2006, p. 12). Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) give example
after example in the area of management to illustrate the desirability DEMO even the
necessity for managers to utilize evidence-based approaches. Rynes et al. (2007)
show how often practitioners of management do not have the right knowledge --
actually putting the right policies into place may be DEMO less frequent.
Owners can use information from EBE in three ways: DEMO, they can get
inspiration and knowledge directly from empirical evidence, from multiple
studies, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses. Most commentators on evidence-
informed DEMO have shown that it is unlikely that many business owners
will have the time and expertise to read the scientific literature. It is somewhat
DEMO likely that owners might take a theoretical statement and use it to inspire
organizational practices from such a theory. Sources of such models and DEMO
may be journals that translate scientific findings or courses in business schools or
	  311	  
science informed consultants. The second approach is to use implementation
manuals. We DEMO entrepreneurship researchers to produce such implementation
manuals as a way of making evidence practical. Third, business owners can
collect evidence themselves. Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) provide a number of
examples how industry uses quantifiable evidence DEMO exist in most firms.
Examples include evidence on the efficacy of advertisements, of different
presentations of a homepage, or of HR strategies of DEMO and retaining the best
employees. Google proves that true experiments can be done, for example, around
issues of presentation of computerized material for DEMO
Limitations of the EBE Approach
These are the potential limitations of an EBE approach:
	  312	  
•
Garbage-in/garbage-out: If badly designed studies define an area,
the resulting meta-analysis will also lead to DEMO results.
Cochrane meta-analyses often use inclusion criteria such that
“good” studies are included into their meta-analyses -- true
experiments with random control and experimental DEMO and
double blind conditions. Their reviews are, therefore, often based
on only a few studies. Hunter and Schmidt (2004) warn of this
DEMO because invariably biases may creep into the decision on
which articles to delete. This is particularly so in entrepreneurship.
We, therefore, suggest a DEMO procedure for entrepreneurship --
the following safe-guards should be used: First, meta-analyses
should differentiate between methodologically “sound” and not so
good studies and test empirically whether the results are the same
for DEMO “good” and “bad” studies. Second, they can test whether
more recent DEMO (possibly based on better methodology) have
similar results to older ones. Third, meta-analyses should correct
for certain problems in the literature, for DEMO, unreliability of
measures. Fourth, a meta-analysis can examine whether good
(DEMO, valid) measures show similar effects to not so good
measures. Thus, meta-analyses should include a number of
methodological moderators to examine such issues.
•
Non-significant results are often not published and this may lead to
DEMO in meta-analyses. Two countermeasures are used: First,
reviewers attempt to DEMO as many unpublished studies as possible
(often doctoral studies) and compare their results to the published
ones. Second, a so-called fail safe index calculates how many
unpublished null-effect studies would be needed to reduce the
DEMO results to non-significance (Rosenthal, 1979).
•
One-size-fits-all. Meta-analyses often aggregate across various
industries, measures, contexts. In contrast, entrepreneurship
research often emphasizes the contextual dependency of
entrepreneurship concepts. There are so many differences in
DEMO, industries, consumer tastes, etc. Often the same strategies
in different DEMO may lead to the different effects. In principle,
these differences can be examined with meta-analyses as well (and
	  313	  
often meta-analyses will actually find such effects) or at least point
out the need for future moderator studies. However, the danger of a
one-size-fits-all approach exists. Therefore, we suggest that
implementation manuals should be combined with case studies and
careful consideration of context variables. Moreover, we suggest
developing theories of configurations and examining them
empirically. Moreover, meta-analyses can be combined with
qualitative reviews of contextual issues in the literature.
•
Entrepreneurship often DEMO that an owner does something
different from others. Particularly, small fledging DEMO
units use a niche approach that may be directly opposed to the
typical approach of doing things. We agree with this statement.
Fortunately, meta-analyses often examine processes and not the
content of decisions. Success may come DEMO being different in
content but not necessarily different in processes from others. But
obviously, this hypothesis needs to be tested both empirically and
meta-analytically.
Implications for Entrepreneurship Research and Practice
Evidence-based entrepreneurship is full of new DEMO Relevant consumers
of EBE are scientist, consulting firms, CEOs, board DEMO directors, banks,
institutions for developing nations (e.g., the World DEMO), governments, and last
but not least individual entrepreneurs. EBE does DEMO mean that professional
knowledge is invalidated (APA-Presidential-Task-Force-on-Evidence-Based-
	  314	  
Practice, 2006); EBE is a necessary add-on for consultants, banks, entrepreneurs,
etc. who should consider the knowledge reported within EBE and DEMO make their
own autonomous and considered decisions.
Evidence-based entrepreneurship is not the same as empirical
entrepreneurship research. Evidence implies that there is more than DEMO source for
an empirical relationship. We have emphasized meta-analyses because they can
be used in those areas of entrepreneurship in which several studies are DEMO (a
rule of thumb may be that more than 10 empirical DEMO should be available as a
literature base for a meta-analysis). We do not want to equate EBE with only
meta-analyses because some areas DEMO entrepreneurship are not mature enough to
produce enough empirical articles. Therefore, DEMO think that any type of
triangulation should be used to derive evidence from empirical studies. Several
studies (preferably with different methodology and from different authors and
from different industry and cultural contexts) should be taken to derive evidence.
The same also applies for qualitative studies. Rating procedures can DEMO used in a
similar way as meta-analyses to test whether evidence across different case
studies can be accrued. Moreover, a set of studies that leads to similar findings
can be taken as evidence in entrepreneurship research.
DEMO evidence-based approach will change research and teaching in
entrepreneurship (for teaching, please consult, (Rousseau & McCarthy, 2007).
There are easy connections between evidence-based management and EBE.
However, specific approaches that are more akin to entrepreneurship may
complement the approach of evidence based management. For example, bets may
	  315	  
be placed on certain approaches, much like business angels place bets on certain
entrepreneurial ideas. For example, an approach based on an implementation
manual for an initial public offering may lead to better share prices than DEMO
approach that is not evidence based (Daily, Certo, Dalton, & Roengpitya, 2003).
Investors may place bets on certain approaches by investing in approaches that are
evidence based. One step beyond this idea, investing itself may be conceptualized
to be evidence of an investor’s belief that DEMO certain idea may be viable in the
future much like the share price is a bet on future viability of a firm (Sarasvathy,
2001). Future research could establish the relationship of such bets and DEMO
the behavior of the firms conforms to scientifically derived evidence and how
deviations might be explained.
	  316	  
References
Aldrich, H. E., & Martinez, M. A. (2001). DEMO are called, but few are chosen:
An evoluationary perspective for DEMO study of entrepreneurship.
Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 25(4), 41-56.
Aldrich, H. E., & Widenmayer, G. (1993). From traits DEMO rates: An ecological
perspective on organizational foundings. In J. A. Katz & R. H. Brockhaus
(Eds.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, DEMO Growth (Vol.
1, pp. 145-195). Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press.
Anderson, N., Herriot, P., & Hodgkinson, G. P. (2001)DEMO The practitioner-
researcher divide in industrial,work and organizational (IWO) psychology:
Where are we now, and where do we go from here? Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 74, 391-411.
Antman, E. DEMO, Lau, J., Kupelnick, B., Mosteller, F., & Chalmers, T. C. (1992). A
comparison of results of meta-analyses of randomized control trials and
recommendations of clinical experts. Journal of the American Medical
DEMO, 268, 240-248.
APA-Presidential-Task-Force-on-Evidence-Based-Practice. (2006). Evidence-
based practice in psychology. DEMO Psychologist, 61, 271-285.
Bamberg, S., & Schmidt, P. (2001). Theory driven subgroup-specific evaluation
of an intervention to reduce private car DEMO Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 31, 1300-1329.
	  317	  
Bausch, A., & Krist, M. (2007). The effect of DEMO related moderators on the
internationalization-performance relationship: Evidence from meta-
analysis. Management DEMO Review, 47, 319-347.
Brinckmann, J., Grichnik, D., & Kapsa, D. (2010). Should entrepreneurs plan or
just storm the castle? A meta-analysis on contextual factors impacting the
business planning–performance relationship in small DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing, 25, 24-40.
Bullock, R., J, & Tubbs, M. E. (1990). A case meta-analysis of gainsharing plans
as organization development interventions. Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science, 26, 383-404.
DEMO collaboration website (http://www.campbellcollaboration.org/)
Campbell, D. T. (1969). Reforms as experiments. American Psychologist, 24,
409-429.
Carlson, K. DEMO, & Schmidt, F. L. (1999). Impact of experimental design DEMO effect
size: Findings from the research literature on training. Journal of DEMO
Psychology, 84, 851-862.
Chambless, D. L., & Hollon, S. DEMO (1998). Defining empirically supported
therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical DEMO, 66, 7-18.
Cheung, M. W.-L. (2008). A model for integrating fixed-, random-, and mixed-
effects meta-analyses into structural equation modeling. DEMO
Methods, 13, 182-202.
Cochrane foundation website
(http://www.cochrane.org/reviews/DEMO/topics/index.html)
	  318	  
Colquitt, J. A., Scott, B. A., & LePine, J. A. (2007). Trust, trustworthiness, and
trust propensity: A meta-analytic test DEMO their unique relationships with
risk taking and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 909–
927.
Combs, J. G., Ketchen, D. J., Crook, T. R., & Roth, P. L. (2011). Assessing
cumulative evidence within 'Macro' research: Why meta-analysis should
be preferred over vote counting. Journal of Management Studies, 48, 178-
197.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1997). Longitudinal stability of adult personality.
In R. Hogan, J. Johnson & S. Briggs (Eds.), DEMO of personality
psychology (pp. 269–292). San Diego, Calif:: Academic Press.
Daily, C. M., Certo, S. T., Dalton, D. R., & Roengpitya, R. (2003). IPO
underpricing: A meta-analysis and DEMO synthesis. Entrepreneurship:
Theory & Practice, 27(3), 271-295.
DeRubeis, R. J., Tang, T. Z., & Gelfand, L. A. (2000). Recent findings
concerning the processes and outcomes of cognitive therapy for
DEMO ; In: Stress, coping, and depression. .; Mahwah, NJ, US:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 2000. pp. 223-240. [Chapter].
In S. L. Johnson, A. M. Hayes, T. M. Field, N. Schneiderman & P. M.
McCabe (Eds.), Stress, coping, and depression (pp. DEMO). Mahwah,
NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
	  319	  
Eden, D., & Aviram, A. (1993). Self-sefficacy training to DEMO reemployment:
Helping people to help themselves. Journal of Applied Psychology, DEMO,
352-360.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate
practice in the acquisition DEMO expert performance. Psychological Review,
100, 363-406.
Frese, M. (2009)DEMO Towards a psychology of entrepreneurship: An action theory
perspective. Foundations and DEMO in Entrepreneurship, 5, 435–494.
Frese, M., Beimel, S., & Schoenborn, S. (2003). Action training for charismatic
leadership: Two evaluation studies of a commercial training module on
inspirational communication of a vision. DEMO Psychology, 56, 671-
697.
Geyskens, I., Krishnan, R., Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M., & Cunha, P. V. (2009). A
DEMO and evaluation of meta-analysis practices in management research.
Journal of Management, DEMO, 393-419.
Glaub, M., Fischer, S., Klemm, M., & DEMO, M. (2011). A theory based
controlled randomized field intervention to enhance personal initiative in
African small business owners – a contribution to DEMO based
management. submitted for publication.
Grove, W. M., & Meehl, DEMO E. (1996). Comparative efficiency of informal
(subjective, impressionistic) and formal (mechanical, algorithmic)
prediction procedures: The clinical–statistical controversy. Psychology,
	  320	  
Public Policy, and Law, 2, 293-323.
Hodgkinson, G. P., Herriot, P., & Anderson, N. (2001)DEMO Re-aligning the
stakeholders in management research: Lessons from industrial, work and
organizational psychology. British Journal of Management-Special Issue,
12, S41-S48.
Hollon, DEMO D., DeRubeis, R. J., & Evans, M. D. (1987)DEMO Causal mediation of
change in treatment for depression: Discriminating between nonspecificity
DEMO noncausality. Psychological Bulletin, 102, 139-149.
Hunter, J. A., & Schmidt, F. L. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting
error and bias in research findings (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, Calif.:
Sage.
DEMO, T. A., Higgins, C. A., Thoresen, C. J., & Barrick, M. R. (1999). The Big
Five personality traits, general mental ability, and career success across
the life span. Personnel Psychology, DEMO(3), 621-652.
Judge, T. A., Thoresen, C. J., Bono, J. E., & Patton, G. K. (2001). The job
DEMO relationship: A qualitative and quantitative
review. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 376-407.
DEMO, J. M. (1953). The general theory of employment, interest, and money.
New York: Harcourt Jovanovich.
Klein, K. J., Lim, DEMO, Saltz, J. L., & Mayer, D. M. (2004). DEMO do they get
there? An examination of the antecedents of centrality DEMO team networks.
Academy of Management Journal, 47(952-963).
Koop, S., De Reu, T., & Frese, M. (2000). Sociodemographic factors,
	  321	  
entrepreneurial orientation, personal initiative, and environmental
problems in Uganda. In M. Frese (Ed.), Success and failure of
microbusiness owners in Africa: A psychological approach (pp. 55-76).
Westport, Ct.: Quorum.
Krauss, S. I., Frese, M., Friedrich, C., & Unger, J. (2005). Entrepreneurial
orientation and success: A psychological model  of success in Southern
African small scale business owners. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 14, 315-344.
Larsson, R. (1993)DEMO Case survey methodology: Quantitative analysis of patterns
across case studies. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 36, 1515-1546.
Latham, G. P. (2004). Motivate employee performance through goal-setting. In E.
A. Locke (Ed.), Handbook of principles of organizational behavior (pp.
107-119). Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Latham, G. P. (2009). Becoming the evidence-based manager. Boston, Mass:
Davies-Black.
Locke, E. A. (Ed.). (2004). Handbook of principles of organizational behavior.
Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Luborsky, L., & DeRubeis, R. J. (1984). The use of psychotherapy treatment
manuals: A DEMO revolution in psychotherapy research style. Clinical
Psychology Review, 4, 5-14.
Meyer, G. J., Finn, S. E., Eyde, L. D., Kay, G. G., Moreland, K. L., Dies, R. R., et
al. (2001). Psychological testing and psychological assessment: A review
of evidence DEMO issues. American Psychologist, 56, 128-165.
	  322	  
Miner, J. B., & Raju, N. S. (2004). Risk DEMO differences between managers
and entrepreneurs and between low- and high-growth entrepreneurs: DEMO
reply in a more conservative vein. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(DEMO),
3-13.
Miron, D., & McClelland, D. C. (1979)DEMO The impact of achievement motivation
training on small business performance. California Management Review,
21(4), 13-28.
Pfeffer, J., & Sutton, R. I. (2000). The knowing-doing gap. Boston, Mass.:
Harvard Business DEMO Press.
Pfeffer, J., & Sutton, R. I. (2006). Hard facts, dangerous half-truths, and total
nonsense. Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business DEMO
Pfeffer, J., & Sutton, R. I. (2007). Evidence based management. Public
Management, 89, 14-25.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2006). Meta-analyses as a tool for developing
entrepreneurship research and theory. Advances in Entrepreneurship,
Innovation, and Economic Growth, 9, 29-51.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2007). Let's put the DEMO back into entrepreneurship
research: A meta-analysis on the relationship between business DEMO'
personality traits, business creation and success. European Journal of
Work DEMO Organizational Psychology, 16, 353-385.
Rauch, A., Wiklund, J., Lumpkin, G. T., & Frese, M. (2009). Entrepreneurial
Orientation and DEMO Performance: An Assessment of Past Research
	  323	  
and Suggestions for the Future. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice,
33(3), 761-787.
Read, S., Song, M., & Smit, W. (DEMO). A meta-analytic review of effectuation
and venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 24, 573-587.
Reay, T., Berta, W., & Kohn, M. K. (2009). What's the evidence on evidence-
based management? Academy of Management Perspectives, 23(5 or 6), 5-
18.
DEMO, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level
change in personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of
longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 1-25.
Rosenberg, W., & Donald, A. (1995). Evidence based medicine, an approach DEMO
clinical problem solving. British Medical Journal, 310, 1122-1126.
Rosenbusch, N., Brinckmann, J., & Bausch, A. (2011, in press). Is innovation
always beneficial? A meta-analysis of the relationship between innovation
and performance in SMEs. Journal of Business Venturing.
Rosenbusch, N., Brinckmann, J., & Mueller, V. (2010). Does Acquiring Venture
Capital Pay Off for the Funded Firms? A Meta-Analysis on the
Relationship between Venture Capital Investment and Funded Firm
Financial Performance. Paper presented at the Babson, Lauzanne.
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The "file drawer problem" and tolerance for DEMO results.
Psychological Bulletin, 86, 638-641.
Rousseau, D. M. (2006). Presidential Address: Is there such a thing as "evidence-
	  324	 DEMO
based management"? Academy of Management Review, 31, 256-269.
Rousseau, D. M., & McCarthy, S. (2007). Educating managers DEMO an evidence-
based perspective. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 6,DEMO
84-101.
Rynes, S. L., Giluk, T. L., & Brown, DEMO G. (2007). The very separate worlds of
academic and practitioner DEMO in human resource management:
Implications for evidence/based management. Academy of Management
Journal, 50, 987-1008.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2001). Causation DEMO effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift
from economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency. DEMO of
Management Review, 26, 243-263.
Scherpenzeel, A., & Saris, DEMO E. (1997). The validity and reliability of survey
items. Sociological DEMO and Research, 25, 341-383.
Schwenk, C. R., & Shrader, DEMO B. (1993). Effects of formal strategic planning on
financial performance DEMO small firms: A meta-analysis. Entrepreneurship:
Theory and Practice(Spring), DEMO
Schwens, C., & Kabst, R. (2009a). Determinanten früher Internationalisierung:
eine Meta-Analyse ("determinants of early internationalization: A meta-
analysis")DEMO Zeitschrift für Betriebswirtschaft, 19, 1-26.
Schwens, C., & Kabst, DEMO (2009b). How early opposed to late internationalizers
learn: Experience of others and paradigms of interpretation. International
Business Review, 18, 509-522.
	 DEMO  
Shadish, W. R. (1996). Meta-analysis and the exploration of causal DEMO
processes: A primer of examples, methods and issues. Psychological
Methods, DEMO, 47-65.
Sonnentag, S. (1998). Expertise in professional software design: A process study.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 703-715.
Sonnentag, S., & Kleine, B. M. (2000). Deliberate practice at work: DEMO study with
insurance agents. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 73, 87-102.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2001). DEMO propensity differences between
entrepreneurs and managers: A meta-analytic review. Journal of DEMO
Psychology, 86, 145-153.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. DEMO (2004). Data quality affects meta-analytic
conclusions: A response to Miner and Raju (2004) concerning
entrepreneurial risk propensity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 14-21.
Tang, T. Z., DeRubeis, R. J., & Beberman, R. (2005). Cognitive changes, critical
sessions, and sudden gains DEMO cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 168-172.
Tett, R. P., & Guterman, H. A. (2000). DEMO trait relevance, trait expression,
and cross-situational consistency: Testing a principle of trait activation.
Journal of Research in Personality, 34, 397– 423.
DEMO, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology of
developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means of
	  326	 DEMO
systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14, 207-222.
Unger, J. M., Keith, N., Frese, M., Hilling, C., & Gielnik, M. (2008). Deliberate
practice in entrepreneurship: Relationships DEMO education, cognitive
ability, knowledge, and success. Giessen: submitted for publication.
Unger, J. M., Rauch, A., Frese, M., & Rosenbusch, N. (2011). Human capital and
entrepreneurial success: A meta-analytic review. DEMO of Business
Venturing, 26, 341–358.
Van Gelderen, M., Frese, DEMO, & Thurik, R. (2000). Strategies, uncertainty and
performance of small business startups. Small Business Economics, 15,
165-181.
Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. (1995). Theory testing: Combining psychometric
meta-analysis and structural equations modeling. Personnel Psychology,
48(4), 865-885.
Wood, R. E., Mento, A. J., & Locke, E. A. (1987). Task complexity as a
moderator of goal effects: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 72, 416-425.
Zhao, H., & Seibert, S. E. (2006). The big five personality dimensions and
entrepreneurial status: DEMO meta-analytical review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 91, 259-271.
Zhao, X.-Y., Frese, M., & Giardini, A. (2010). Business owners' network size and
business growth in China: The role of comprehensive social competency.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 22, 675–705.
	  327	  {1g42fwefx}