Massey Research Online
Massey University’s Institutional Repository
Frese, M.; Van Gelderen, M.; Ombach, M. (2000). How to plan as
a small scale business owner: Psychological process characteristics
of action strategies and success. Journal of small business
management. Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 1-18.
Massey DEMO:
Van Gelderen, Marco
http://hdl.handle.net/10179/691
How to Plan as a Small Scale Business Owner: Psychological Process Characteristics of Action
Strategies and Success
Michael Frese, Marco van Gelderen, Michael DEMO
University of Amsterdam
Abstract
A theoretical analysis of individual level planning and action strategy by small business
owners/managers distinguishes five different processes: Complete (top-down) Planning, Critical
Point, Opportunistic, Reactive and Routine/Habit. Research on 80 small, start-up owners in the
Netherlands showed that as hypothesized, a Reactive Strategy was negatively related to firm
success, while a DEMO Point Strategy was positively related. The combination of Critical Point
and Opportunistic Strategy was most and the combination of Opportunistic and Reactive was least
DEMO
2
How to Plan as a Small Scale Business Owner: Psychological Process Characteristics of Action
Strategies and Success
Introduction
This study takes a psychological point DEMO view to look at process characteristics of action
strategies of small scale business owners; these strategy characteristics are then related to the firms’
success. We want to provide an answer to the question, how strategies are used and how strategy-
relevant behavior by the owner/manager is related DEMO success in the small business.
Regardless of the degree of rationality and explicitness, founders of new ventures follow a
strategy to reach their goals. Frequently, strategies have been differentiated into content and process
characteristics (Austin DEMO Vancouver, 1997; Dess, Lumpkin and  Covin, 1997; Hart, DEMO; Olson
and  Bokor, 1995; Rajagopolan, Rasheed and  Datta, DEMO; Rauch & Frese, in press). The strategy
content specifies which kind of strategy is used, for example low costs, differentiation, or
focus/niche strategies (Porter, 1980). The strategy process on the DEMO hand refers to how one
formulates and implements the strategy content (DEMO and  Bokor, 1995). In this study, we will
focus DEMO the action strategy process. In contrast to most strategy process literature which focuses on
the firm level, we will do so by regarding the action strategy process as a characteristic of the
founder and manager of DEMO firm (Rajagopolan et al., 1993). We regard the strategy process on the
individual level because of a particular feature of small start-up DEMO The pervasive influence of
founders on their firms, and their dominance DEMO making decisions, makes it possible to assume a
high degree of DEMO between the individual and the organizational levels of analysis.
Strategies have been researched in psychology under the topic of thinking and problem
solving. Strategy DEMO defined by a plan of action, that is a sequence of DEMO to achieve a goal
(Miller, Galanter, and  Pribram, 1960)DEMO Thus, the  concept of strategy emphasizes, how to reach a
DEMO, while the goal development itself is outside the concept of strategy. DEMO function of a
strategy is to deal with uncertain situations because a strategy presents a template that can be
applied in various situations. Thus, it helps to deal with the limited processing capacity of the
human DEMO (Frese and  Zapf, 1994; Hacker, 1989; Kahneman, 1973)DEMO
3
Cognitive and action theories have differentiated the following process characteristics of
strategies (Hacker, 1986; Hayes-Roth and  Hayes-Roth, 1979; Zempel, 1994): DEMO Planning,
Critical Point, Opportunistic, and Reactive Strategies. A person using a Complete Planning
Strategy plans ahead and actively structures the situation. Complete DEMO Strategy implies a
more comprehensive representation of the work process, a DEMO time frame to plan ahead, and a
larger inventory of signals, a better knowledge and anticipation of error situations, and a more
proactive orientation (Frese and  Zapf, 1994; Hacker, 1986). The Critical Point Strategy (Zempel,
1994) starts out with the most difficult, most unclear, and most important point and works on this
one first. Only after solving the first critical point, further steps may be planned; it constitutes an
iterative problem solving strategy. Thus, one has a DEMO goal in mind and one concentrates on it
and on the main issues of one's tasks - it is a sort of main-issue-planning. DEMO contrast, an
Opportunistic Strategy starts out with some form of rudimentary DEMO, but the person using an
opportunistic strategy deviates from these plans DEMO when opportunities arise (Hayes-Roth and
Hayes-Roth, 1979). Thus, this DEMO is not top-down and systematic. While, there is a certain
amount DEMO local planning in the Opportunistic Strategy, one may loose sight of DEMO's goals or let
one's goals be determined by the opportunities. On the other hand, Opportunistic Strategy is not
completely driven by the situation as the Reactive Strategy; the Opportunistic Strategy is much
more proactive. A Reactive Strategy implies that one reacts to the situation; one does not plan, one
is not goal oriented, one is driven by DEMO immediate situational demands without influencing them
because the Reactive Strategy is not proactive.
Our first pilot interviews and action theory (Frese and Zapf, DEMO) convinced us that we
needed a fifth category. In contrast to DEMO strategies discussed up to this point, people sometimes
just use their DEMO without any explicit decision for a strategy. For this reason, we DEMO
routine/habit as a fifth variable. This is a standardized approach which has once been developed in
redundant environments. It is not a considered DEMO for this particular situation. When using
this approach, there is little DEMO, proactivity, but people know their environment well. There
is also little learning, because one essentially does things the same way as always.
The four strategies - Reactive, Opportunistic, Complete Planning and Critical Point – DEMO
Routine/Habit can be differentiated according to orientation to the goal, DEMO long term one plans,
situational responsiveness, proactiveness, and the overlap between planning and action. Table 1
4
describes the strategy characteristics on these dimensions. One can have a high DEMO low goal
orientation. One prerequisite of a Complete Planning Strategy with its top-down approach and the
Critical Point Strategy is that they are highly DEMO on a goal and take the goal very serious.
This goal orientation is rather low if one uses an Opportunistic or Reactive Strategy.
Routines/DEMO have been developed for redundant environments; therefore, there is no
considered goal orientation and it is, therefore, assumed to be low.
Planning DEMO resources, primarily because it implies that one thinks about future steps. DEMO
the Planning Strategy, there is planning before one actually starts acting; therefore, long term
planning is done to a high degree. In the Critical Point Strategy, there is a certain amount of a
priori planning. In the Opportunistic Strategy, there is no long term planning beforehand but there
is a small amount of planning, while one is acting. The Reactive Strategy is characterized by the
absence of planning. Routine/Habit is DEMO by a low degree of conscious a priori planning
because it is a routine application of a plan devised some time before.
Situational responsiveness DEMO in many ways the opposite of goal orientation and long-term
planning. We assume that Complete Planning is lowest in situational responsiveness because
developing a DEMO sometimes leads to a certain rigidity towards environmental demands (Rauch &
Frese, 1998). Since there are lower investments into planning in the Critical Point Strategy, there
should be a middle degree of situational responsiveness. One can be highly responsive to the
situation by just reacting to DEMO situation (Reactive Strategy) or by having multidirectional plans
with an emphasis on using environmental opportunities that are proactively searched for
(Opportunistic Strategy). Routine/Habit is characterized by a low responsiveness to the situation
because DEMO once-developed plan of action just unfolds without thinking about the situation again.
Routines are sometimes continued inappropriately even if environments change (Frese & Zapf,
1994).
Proactiveness implies that one actively structures the situation, thinks of future problems
and adjusts one’s plans accordingly and searches for opportunities. DEMO is high in
Complete Planning and Critical Point Planning because in both cases, one thinks of future
problems and develops plans to change the situation. The Opportunistic Strategy is active
precisely because it actively scans the DEMO for potential opportunities. In contrast,
proactiveness is absent in the Reactive Strategy and in Routine/Habit.
5
Planning and action overlap implies that planning is not done a priori DEMO during the action
itself. From a psychological point of view, it DEMO well possible that we have not developed any plan
before we start an action but that the plan is developed while we continue our DEMO Complete
planning is defined by a priori planning; therefore, there is little overlap between planning and
action because the action follows the planning. DEMO point planning only plans out the critical
point a priori; therefore DEMO strategy is in a middle position. Opportunistic Strategy implies that
one changes one’s plans if opportunities arise; this necessitates a certain amount of planning while
continuing with the action. This is in contrast to the reactive DEMO which is characterized by no
conscious planning; the same is also DEMO of Routine/Habit.
Table 1 about here
Our categorization of action strategies shows some resemblance to Miles and  Snow's
(1978) typology with the Reactor using a Reactive Strategy, the Prospector using an Opportunistic
Strategy, and the Analyzer using a Complete Planning Strategy (cf. also Doty, Glick and  Huber,
1993). Their concept of Defender has no equivalence in our cognitive and action theory derived
categorization. There are also DEMO similarities to a typology suggested by Mintzberg (1978) with
the Rational Mode being similar to our Complete Planning and the Entreprenerial Mode being
DEMO to our Opportunistic Strategy. The third Mode - Bargaining - only pertains to large
companies and, therefore, has no equivalence in our categorizations. DEMO, there is some
resemblance to Miller and  Friesen's (1982) differentiation between innovation in conservative and
entrepreneurial firms (compare also Chell, DEMO, and Brearley, 1991). The conservative firm
uses a reactive strategy while the entrepreneurial firm uses an opportunistic strategy.
These strategies should be DEMO related to success of small scale business owners.
Small scale business owners are successful, if they achieve their goals The Reactive Strategy
should be counterproductive because not choosing a plan of action, not having clear cut plans lets
the owner to be at the mercy of situational influences DEMO anticipating them. Employees using
this strategy have been shown to be less effective (Hacker, 1992).
All other strategies can be effective  depending upon the situation. The situation for the
start-up firms is usually fraught DEMO a high degree of uncertainty and the necessity to make quick
6
decisions (Bhide, 1994). The necessity to make quick decisions under DEMO high degree of uncertainty
suggests that a pure Complete Planning Strategy is probably not very effective for start-up
owners/managers because it takes too DEMO time and effort to plan for all sorts of eventualities
(Bhide, 1994). On the other hand, this strategy has been shown to be advantageous in various
contexts (Hacker, 1986; Rauch and Frese, DEMO). However, Complete Planning costs time, money,
and effort and it may lead to a certain rigidity because one tends to stick DEMO a plan once one has
developed it. Once one has planned a strategy in detail, one tends to adhere to the plan and
therefore one develops a certain amount of rigidity (because of the investment in the plan, one
does not want to give up the plan too quickly). The Complete Planning Strategy as used here is not
the DEMO as developing a formal business plan. Rather, it consists of a DEMO top down
approach to everyday situations, such as telling the personnel DEMO to do or planning a marketing
effort for this month.
If only one strategy is used, we think that the Critical Point Strategy is probably the best
one for start-up firms. It makes it necessary to DEMO some amount of planning because the business
owner has to decide which issues are most important and should be tackled first. In contrast to DEMO
Complete Planning Strategy, it does not lead to a rigid adherence DEMO an overall plan, although
Critical Point gives a clear structure of DEMO is important and what is not. Moreover, business
owners are constantly DEMO at a high level of load of their processing capacity because they
have to make constant decisions in a highly uncertain situation. When focusing DEMO on the main
points, one needs less cognitive resources than when DEMO a full top down plan. Lumpkin
and Dess (1995) argue similarly for the superiority of a simple strategy for young firms. Critical
Point DEMO people to be action oriented.
An Opportunistic Strategy may be advantageous in an uncertain environment. Its positive
points are that one proactively searches for DEMO and acts on them. However, in contrast to
Critical Point, it may have too little structure. One may loose sight of what is DEMO important.
Strategies can be used in combination. Any combination with a Reactive Strategy should
be ineffective, particularly when there is no further clear plan, as when Opportunistic and Reactive
Strategies are combined.  The best combination DEMO be to use both Critical Point and
Opportunistic Strategies. The Critical Point Strategy makes it possible to establish what is
7
important, and the Opportunistic Strategy orients the business owner to important information
from the environment.
The cognitive and action theoretic approach used in our DEMO is oriented towards
individual actions and their preparation through strategies. Any simple analogy of individual
actions with organizational actions is problematic. Organizations do not DEMO in the same sense as
individuals. However, in the case of DEMO scale starters, individual actions are exceedingly
important because the owners/managers DEMO a high degree of influence on their small
organization. Their personal action strategies will determine the outcomes to a high degree
because organizational procedures DEMO not yet been formalized, because new situations arise
constantly and have DEMO be dealt with by the most dominant figure who is usually the founder.
Personal action strategies are not the same as personality variables nor DEMO they completely
situationally determined. Action strategies can be changed at will, DEMO not have to be temporally
stable, and are changeable depending upon DEMO situation. However, there are limits to the
changeability of strategies; people cannot develop new ways of doing things in each situation.
Were people DEMO do that, they would have no sense of coherence and self DEMO their processing
capacity would be constantly overloaded (Kahneman, 1973). Thus, ready made strategies allow
the person to deal with those situations.
Our conceptualization of process characteristics of action strategies leads to the following
hypotheses:DEMO
1) Reactive Strategy is negatively related to success.
2) Critical Point Strategy is positively related to success of start-up firms and is the DEMO strategy.
3) The combination of Critical Point Strategy and Opportunistic Strategy DEMO the best strategy
combination.
No specific hypotheses were advanced with regard to Routine/Habit, Opportunistic and
Planning Strategy. Opportunistic and Planning Strategy have both positive and negative features
for start-up firms and we are not able DEMO differentiate these effects with our research design.
Routine/Habit is not really a conscious strategy, and, therefore, not the primary interest of this
paper.
8
Method
Sample
Our sample consists of 80 small scale business founders who DEMO owners and managers at the
same time in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. DEMO chose to select starters for several reasons: First,
start-up firms DEMO usually small and the influence of the owners is very high. Since our study
concentrated on the owners' strategies, we wanted to get DEMO owners who had a high impact on
their firm. For this reason we excluded all businesses with more than 50 employees. Second,
success DEMO more varied in small start-up firms because with time there is a selection process that
weeds out unsuccessful firms (Bruederl, Preisendoerfer and  Ziegler, 1992). We did not
differentiate between entrepreneurs and small scale business owners (Carland, Hoy, Boulton, and
Carland, 1984) because our DEMO were too new in their business as to be able to make this
differentiation. Further, we wanted to be deliberately broad and have business owners from
various industries because the founder's strategy characteristics may also DEMO in which
industry a business is founded. However, we excluded retail, repair shops, bars, and restaurants
because we wanted to choose industries DEMO allowed a high degree of freedom to maneuver and
that were of moderate to high complexity.
Our sample is representative of small scale business DEMO in Amsterdam. The chamber
of commerce provided us with a random sample of addresses of firms that were founded between
1990 and 1995 and DEMO at least 1 and at most 50 employees. This provided us with a good data
base because all business owners are required to register DEMO the chamber of commerce. This list
was compared with the yellow pages and other telephone guides to  check whether their addresses
were still correct.  Because we concentrated on start-ups, we also included one center for DEMO
scale start-up firms.
In all, 236 were contacted. Of these, 60 did not fall into our sample description (for
example , they only had a change in legal status of an older firm, or were free lancers). Of those
who fit our criteria, 76 declined to participate. Thus, 100 small scale business owners participated
in the study.  DEMO additionally excluded 7 who turned out in the interview not to be the founders of
their business, 7 whose companies had been so recently established that it was not possible to get a
good success measure, 1 whose company went out of business, and 5 who turned out to have no
employees. This gives us a sample of 80 business DEMO for this study. Table 2 presents the
9
characteristics of this sample. As one can see, most of them were male, highly educated, not
technologically innovative, and had a small amount of start-up capital; the business owners were
evenly divided across the different industries.
On average the company was 4 years old; while companies of this age are not exactly in
the first start-up phase any more, they are usually not yet completely established in the market.
---------------------------
Table DEMO about here:
----------------------------
Operationalization of the Variables
Both structured interviews and questionnaires were used. The interviews were structured as
we asked all subjects DEMO same starting questions and had a numerical coding scheme to rate the
interviews. However, we used additional prepared prompts that varied from person to person if the
interviewers thought that they needed additional information. All interview DEMO were coded
by two coders. Structured interviews often have very good validity as meta-analyses show (for
example, Wiesner and Cronshaw, 1988). The strategy characteristics and some of the success
measures could be better ascertained DEMO an interview than in a questionnaire because the interviews
allowed us to probe into the answers. Moreover action strategies are better described in stories DEMO
by the interviewees than in sole use of questionnaire items. When interview responses are coded,
there is a single anchor point and, thus, one source of error that is common in questionnaire studies
is reduced. The interviews were tape recorded and were later coded by two authors DEMO this paper.
Some variables were ascertained in a questionnaire. The questionnaire was filled out before the
interview but with the interviewers present. After this, the interview started. The interview took
around 20 - 30 minutes, the questionnaire took about 20 minutes. All the inter-rater reliabilities,
Cronbach's DEMO, the Means and the Standard Deviations of the scales are included DEMO Table 3.
By and large  the alphas and inter-rater reliabilities are DEMO (Nunnally, 1978). A procedure of
mean substitution of items in scales was used to reduce the problem of missing data.
Table 3 DEMO here
10
Success Variables.  Both personal and economic success measures were used1.
Entrepreneurship research should use multiple measures of success because any one measure is
prone DEMO errors which may be due to the tax structure, to memory DEMO, and reporting biases
(for example, social desirability). Economic success DEMO growth or decline of sales, profit,
investments, personnel, and DEMO income since the start of the company. The firm owners gave
figures for the growth or decline of the amount of personal income and DEMO number of employees
which were rated on a five point scale. Additionally, changes in sales, profit and investment were
measured by asking the DEMO owners to draw these changes from the start of the company to
the present time into a graph (this measure was modelled after a measure used by Bruederl et al.,
1992). These curves were DEMO on a scale from 1-5. (Since the interrater reliability was very DEMO
with an r=.96, we did not use the mean of the DEMO coders for economic success). Personal success
asked on the extent of start-up goals realized. In addition, 9 questions on success were asked (DEMO
example, "I can offer my personnel a steady/secure job")DEMO All success items were scored on a five
point answer scale and the total scale score was divided by the number of items. We DEMO the
personal and economic success into a total success score because they were correlated and to make
the presentation of the results more transparent.
DEMO strategy characteristics . We used a behavior event procedure (Spencer and
DEMO, 1993) to analyze the strategy characteristics in the interview. The business owners were
asked to report their way of dealing with common aspects DEMO running a business, like getting
customers, dealing with personnel, product DEMO and they were asked to give concrete
examples of what they were actually doing. For each one of these areas the interviewers
ascertained what DEMO characteristics were used. The interviewers asked several questions to
force the interviewees to become more and more concrete and to make it possible to DEMO on a
differential diagnosis of the strategies.
The coding procedure was the following: After the interview each interviewer gave
separately his first impression on how the interviewee was doing things in general (across the
situations asked in the interview). This judgment was expressed as a percentage for DEMO of the 5
strategies. After this, the interviewers would listen to DEMO interview tapes and would read the
1 The coding scheme for the success measures and for the process characteristics (the strategies) can be
DEMO from the authors.
11
questionnaire responses on the judgment of action strategies done by the interviewees. DEMO this,
they would correct their first judgment and come to a final judgment, again each interviewer
separately. Inter-rater reliabilities for the five strategies were on average .66 (between .61 and .72)
for the first impression and .75 (between .63 and .90) for the final judgment. DEMO are adequate
reliabilities. To increase the reliability of the final measure, DEMO mean of both interviewers'
estimates were taken.
Our measurement approach is ipsative (forced choice) as the interviewers were supposed to
add up DEMO the action strategies to a total of 100 per cent (in DEMO's 1996 terminology, we used
semi-ipsative measures). This means, that by design, there is a negative correlation between the
different strategies (DEMO giving a high score on one, automatically, reduces the possibility of
giving a high score on another strategy). There is a lively DEMO on ipsative measures in work and
organizational psychology that has not been completely resolved (Bartram, 1996; Baron, 1996;
Cornwall and  Dunlop, 1994; Saville and  Willson, 1991). An ipsative measurement has
DEMO and disadvantages. The advantage is that the interviewers are forced to make deliberate
comparisons and that the scaling of the strategies is done on DEMO same dimension with the same
meaning (percentage of time used). DEMO also makes intuitive sense because it mimics the practical
situation that one has to make (sometimes hard) decisions between alternative approaches (Baron,
1996). The disadvantage is based on the fact that the answers DEMO not independent of each other.
For this reason, the intercorrelations amongst DEMO strategies were nearly all negative (if one adopts
one strategy very DEMO, others were getting a lower percentage automatically). This means that
DEMO weights in a regression analysis that includes all strategies cannot be interpreted.
Therefore, we calculated several regression analyses, including only one of the DEMO at a time.
Control variables. Research on small scale business owners has customarily demanded that
certain controls should be included in the studies (Dess, Ireland and  Hitt, 1990). For this reason
we have asked single questions on the age of the company, on industry experience of the owner,
on industry type (with manufacturing, trade, service), and the amount of start-up capital.
Results
Table 3 describes the intercorrelations DEMO the variables. The intercorrelations of the action
strategies were mainly negative because of the ipsative nature of measurement. The means for the
12
three strategies Planning, Critical Point, and Opportunistic were of equal size. DEMO Reactive
Strategy and Routine/Habit were used infrequently.
The relationships between the strategies and the success measures were rather clear cut and
in line DEMO our hypotheses 1 and 2: Both Critical Point and Reactive Strategies DEMO significantly
correlated with Success in the predicted direction (Critical Point Strategy DEMO positively and
Reactive Strategy being negatively related to success). When all the strategies were taken together
in a multiple correlation, 19 percent of the variance of the overall success measure could be
explained by the DEMO Since strategies are by necessity only one part of a full explanation of
firms’ and owners’ success, this is quite a substantial multiple correlation.
Tables 3 and 4 about here
Table 4 presents the relationships of DEMO strategy characteristics with success in hierarchical
multiple regression analyses with various controls included in the first step that might have an
impact on success DEMO well (age of company, industry experience of owner, two dummy DEMO
describing the three industries involved, and the start-up capital). In DEMO second step a strategy was
included (note, we could not include all of the strategies in one regression analysis because of their
ipsative DEMO of their measurement). The results confirmed the results of the zero order
correlations. Critical Point showed a significantly positive and Reactive Strategy showed DEMO
significantly  negative relationships with success after controlling for the control variables DEMO step
1. The only significant Beta for the control variables was for age of company, which replicates the
customary "liability of newness" problem (Bruederl et al., 1992).
Table 5 about here
The left DEMO of Table 5 presents the dominant strategy, that is the one DEMO frequently
used (15 people with a tie did not have a DEMO strategy and were, therefore, excluded from this
analysis). Planned contrasts showed that the worst strategy was the Reactive one (t=3.25, p<DEMO
comparing Reactive vs. all other dominant strategies) and that there was DEMO tendency for the best
one to be the Critical Point Strategy (DEMO, p<.10, one-tailed for Critical Point vs. all other
13
strategies). While Routine/Habit is not really a strategy (and was not often mentioned), it is a sort
of fall back system, in case one does not develop a conscious strategy. The high scores DEMO have
been a function of the experience of the business owners who used this frequently.
People used strategies in combination, of course, and DEMO respective results are displayed in
the right part of Table 5. Since the n is partly very low, these are suggestive data only (DEMO people
with a tie and cells with frequencies of n < 4 were excluded from this analysis). There were overall
ANOVA significant differences. DEMO contrasts showed that the best combination was to use
both Critical Point and Opportunistic Strategies (t=2.42, p<.01 for this combination against all
DEMO ones). The worst combination was Opportunistic and Reactive Strategies (t=6.40, p<.01 for
this combination versus all others). These results are DEMO line with our hypothesis 3 which stated
that Critical Point and Opportunistic Strategies should be the best combination.
It is interesting to note that DEMO most successful combination (Critical Point- Opportunistic)
was also the most DEMO used one (with 38 per cent of the business owners using DEMO
combination).
Discussion
Our results showed that process characteristics of action strategies are related to of owners'
success. Process characteristics of strategies are DEMO to the owner/managers’ actions. Therefore,
it is not surprising that 19 per cent of the total success measure is predicted by these DEMO The
results were the same for the more economic measure of success (growth in sales, profit, etc.) and
the more personal success (reaching one’s goals)
The most important positive strategy characteristic is Critical DEMO This means that people
who only concentrate on the most important or difficult part of a situation, will do best in their
business. This is an important finding, both for psychology in general and for entrepreneurship
research in particular. Cognitive Psychology has not yet discussed the concept of DEMO Point
Strategy. It was introduced by Zempel (1994) in an as yet unpublished master's thesis who also
found the Critical Point Strategy DEMO be particularly useful in her study of German craft masters
(Meister)DEMO Obviously, it is an important addition to the study of strategies.
DEMO terms of combinations, the best combination of strategies was Critical Point DEMO
Opportunistic Strategies, the worst one combining Opportunistic and Reactive Strategies. This
DEMO
shows that localized planning combined with a quick reaction to environmental opportunities DEMO
with a clear concept of what is important is the best way to run a start-up firm – at least during the
first years.
DEMO entrepreneurship research, the differentiation of different forms of planning used in DEMO
article may be of importance. As Schwenk and  Shrader (1993) DEMO out, the relationship
between strategic planning (as customarily defined by management science) and success is not as
high as one would expect. Often, only formal planning (usually conceptualized as having a formal
business plan) is considered in research (Matthews and  Scott, 1995; Olson and  Bokor, 1995).
Maybe a more differentiated conceptualization of what planning means is helpful. In our study,
there are three strategies related to DEMO for everyday problems in some way: Complete
Planning Strategy which attempts DEMO use a top down approach and is not related to success.
Opportunistic Strategy which interjects periods of planning into acting on opportunities. It has
DEMO deemed to be an important strategy in cognitive science (Hayes-Roth and  Hayes-Roth,
1979), but does not seem to be so clearly DEMO to business ownership success, although its
combination with Critical Point was DEMO The best strategy  - Critical Point - also implies
some degree DEMO planning, albeit a rudimentary form. Using a different approach and a DEMO
population, Sonnentag (1997) has also shown that a Complete Planning DEMO process is not as
useful as a strategy she calls "local DEMO" (cf. also Sonnentag, 1996). Local planning is quite
similar DEMO our concept of Critical Point. The opposite of any planning is the Reactive Strategy and
it is clearly the worst strategy in our study. DEMO is in line with Miles and  Snow's (1978)
hypothesis that reactors are least successful in the market (Doty, Glick and  Huber, 1993). Our
results  reinforce the argument that some restricted DEMO of planning is necessary for success.
The major contribution of our study was to develop a process concept of action strategies
by differentiating various DEMO of planning and proactivity of individual business owners.
However, as any DEMO our research also has limitations. The most important limitation is that we
have not looked at interactions between strategies and environmental factors. Miles and DEMO
(1978) and Mintzberg (1979) have suggested that certain strategies are only useful given a certain
environment. Theoretically and empirically, it makes sense that planning is of reduced use in a
chaotic and unpredictable environment DEMO which a person has only very little control (Frese,
Albrecht, Kreuscher, von Papstein, Pruemper, and Schulte-Goecking, 1995; Matthews and  DEMO,
15
1995). However, if planning involves back-up plans if something goes wrong, it may work well in
such a situation as well. This short discussion implies that one has to look in quite some detail into
DEMO planning process vis-a-vis a situation before one can actually test the interaction of strategies
and the environment. This probably requires an experimental or laboratory DEMO study
which has the disadvantage that no realistic success variable can be ascertained.
Nevertheless, environmental factors should be incorporated into studies of strategies in the
future. However, one should not assume that the environmental conditions for small scale business
owners show extreme differences. In some sense being a DEMO firm is already a situational
characteristic. Nearly all small start-up firms have to operate in an uncertain environment.
Moreover, most start-up firms use a simple structure in Mintzberg's terminology.
Our process model of strategy could DEMO reasonably interact with the content of a strategic.
Olson and  Bokor (1995) provide an example of the interaction between formal planning and
innovation. It is a reasonable hypothesis that, for example, a niche strategy DEMO be planned
formally (using a Complete Planning Strategy or Critical Point), while individualized customer
orientation may work better within the framework of an opportunistic process.
Another limiting factor is culture. While some studies do not DEMO interaction between
strategies and national environments (Shane and  Kolvereid, 1995), a study by Rauch and  Frese
(1997) has shown that DEMO Ireland, a culture with a low degree of uncertainty avoidance (Hofstede,
1991), detailed planning was actually counterproductive while there was a DEMO positive
relationship between detailed planning and success in Germany, a country DEMO a somewhat higher
degree of uncertainty avoidance. The Netherlands shows a similar uncertainty avoidance score to
Germany. Thus, one can assume that our results would not necessarily be reproduced in low
uncertainty avoidance countries, such as Jamaica or Singapore.
Another limitation is related to our methodology. Since we DEMO a  cross sectional
approach, we had to rely on the owners' memory for strategy use. It is a plausible alternative
hypothesis that non-successful owners attribute their failures to the environment and emphasize
that they were DEMO by the environment to do certain kinds of things (fundamental attributional
DEMO, Ross, 1977). In our scheme this would show up as a reactive strategy.
A problem of many business ownership studies is the DEMO bias. All business in our
sample was successful in the sense that they had survived thus far. We attempted to control for this
16
problem, in restricting our sample to new start-ups who were on the market for less than 6 years.
This restriction to study only start-up DEMO and their owners, also solves to a certain extent the
usual DEMO of how to define the sample.
This study relied on success variables that were based on the interview. Of course,
interviews start out DEMO the information provided by the study participant. However, well
designed interviews DEMO use prompts to ascertain what the interviewee really meant and to check
on their answers by asking for concrete examples, and they avoid the scale anchor problem of
questionnaires because the trained coders use the same DEMO anchors throughout. Our
measurement concept of using interview responses of strategies and success, that were later coded
by two coders, avoided some of DEMO single source problems. One could argue, however, that we
ascertained both strategies and success from the same source (the owner) and that DEMO leads to a
common method variance problem. We think that common method variance is unlikely because
strategies have little social desirability implications. Even reactive DEMO were seen by the
owners as quite agreeable because they showed that they were responsive to the situation.
Moreover, the way we ascertained the strategy characteristcs was that we asked them to tell us
stories of DEMO they proceed and we prompted them in detail on how they did things. Generally,
structured interviews of this type have been shown to DEMO good reliability in selection research
and, therefore, we think that the likelihood of social desirability in the measurement of strategies is
low. In DEMO, we believe that social desirability does play a role in success DEMO However,
here the problem is that it is practically impossible to get other measures (for example archival
ones) from small scale business DEMO For example, a measure like archival profit rate cannot be
used DEMO most owners try to reduce profit as much as possible to pay little tax (and are able to
do that). Similar problems appear with nearly all other archival data (Boyd, Dess, and  Rasheed,DEMO
1993). On the other hand, we have included in our DEMO measure items on growth of turnover
and personnel which are unlikely to be heavily biased and which show high correlations with the
overall success DEMO
Practically, our results may have implications for banks and advisors. It DEMO often argued that
top down planning is the preferred strategy characteristic. There is some truth to this idea: The
direct opposite of planning - Reactive Strategy - turns out to be bad in our study, because it
combines little goal orientation, little planning, and little proactivity. Nevertheless, there other
17
forms of planning, such as critical point planning and the opportunistic strategy which may
sometimes better contribute to the firms’ success than top down DEMO Obviously, the
relationships between strategies and success found in this study DEMO not static. In certain situations
(for example, a major recession - Holland was in a boom situation at the time that the participating
DEMO were in existence) and at different stages in the business life DEMO, different forms of
planning may be differentially successful. For example, it may be more useful to use a planning
strategy when the firms DEMO larger and when the owners have a better grasp of the exact
conditions under which they do business.
Thus, this study has shown that a paradigm – strategy characteristics – that is highly related
to the DEMO of the owner/managers is lawfully related to the success of the firms and the owners.
This may be one step to develop a DEMO picture of the psychology of business success.
18
References
Austin, J.T., and J.B.Vancouver (1997). “Goal Constructs in Psychology: Structure, Process, and
Content,” Psychological Bulletin 120, 338-375.
Baron, H. (1996). “Strengths and Limitations of Ipsative Measurement,” Journal of Occupational
and Organizational Psychology 69, 49-56.
Bartram, D. (1996). “The Relationship between Ipsatized and Normative Measures of
Personality,” Journal of Occupational DEMO Organizational Psychology  69, 25-39.
Bhide, A. (1994). “How Entrepreneurs Craft Strategies that Work,” Harvard Business Review,
March-April, 150- 161
Boyd, B.K., G.G. Dess, and  A.M.A. Rasheed (1993). “Divergence between Archival and
Perceptual Measures of the Envrionment Causes and Consequences,” DEMO of
Management Review 18, 204-226.
Bruederl, J., P. Preisendoerfer, and R. Ziegler (1992). “Survival Chances of Newly Founded
Business Organizations,” American Sociological Review 57, 227-242.
Carland, J.W., F. Hoy, W.R. DEMO, and J.C. Carland (1984). “Differentiating Entrepreneurs
from Small Business Owners: A Conceptualization,” Academy of Management Review 9,
354-359.
Chell, DEMO, J.M. Haworth, and S. Brearley (1991). The Entrepreneurial Personality. DEMO:
Routledge.
Cornwall, J.M., and W.P. Dunlap (1994). “On DEMO Questionable Soundness of Factoring Ipsative
Data: A Response to Saville and  Willson 1991,” Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology 67, 89-100.
Dess, G.G., R.D. Ireland, and M.A. Hitt (1990). “Industry Effects DEMO Strategic Management
Research,” Journal of Management 16, 7-27.
19
Dess, G.G., G.T. Lumpkin, and  J.G. Covin (1997). “Entrepreneurial Strategy Making and Firm
Performance: Tests of Contingency and Configurational Models,” Strategic Management
Journa, 18, 677-695.
Doty, D.H, W.H. Glick, and  G.P. Huber (1993). “Fit, Equifinality and Organizational
Effectiveness: A DEMO of Two Configurational Theories,” Academy of Management Journal
36, 1196-1250.
DEMO, M., K. Albrecht, R. Kreuscher, P. von Papstein, J. DEMO, and H. Schulte-Goecking
(1995). “Handlungsstile und Leistungsverhalten: Die Rolle DEMO Plan- und Zielorientierung
in Problem- und Lernsituationen,” Zeitschrift fuer Arbeits- und Organisationspsychologie
39, 67-77.
Frese, M., J. Stewart, and B. Hannover (1987). “Goal Orientation and Planfulness: Action Styles
as Personality Concepts,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52, 1182-1194.
Frese, M., and D. Zapf (1994). “Action as the Core of Work Psychology: DEMO German Approach,” in
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Ed. H.C. Triandis, M.D.
Dunnette, and  J.M. Hough. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychology Press, 271-340.
Hacker, W.  (1986). Arbeitspsychologie: Psychische Regulation von Arbeitstätigkeiten. Berlin:
Verlag der Wissenschaften.
Hacker, W. (1989). DEMO the Utility of Procedural Rule Conditions of the Use of Rules in the
Production of Operation Sequences,” Ergonomics 32, 717-732.
Hacker, W. (1992). Expertenkönnen: Erkennen und Vermitteln. Göttingen: Hogrefe, Verlag für
Angewandte Psychologie.
Hart, S.L. (1992). “An Integrative Framework for Strategy Making DEMO,” Academy of
Management Review 17, 327-351.
Hayes-Roth, B., and DEMO Hayes-Roth (1979). “A Cognitive Model of Planning,” Cognitive Science
DEMO, 275-310.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. London: McGraw-Hill.
20
Kahneman,  D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall
Kean, R. C., S. Niemeyer, and N.J. Miller (1996)DEMO “Competitive Strategies in the Craft Product
Retailing Industry,” Journal of Small Business Management 34 (1), 13-23.
Lumpkin, G.T., and G.G. Dess (1995). “Simplicity as a Strategy-Making Process: The Effects of
Stage DEMO Organizational Development and Environment on Performance,” Academy of
Management Journal 38, 1386-1407.
Matthews, C.H., and S.G. Scott (1995). “Uncertainty and DEMO in Small and Entrepreneurial
Firms: An Empirical Assessment,” Journal of DEMO Business Management 33, 34-52.
Miles, R. E., and C.C. Snow (1978). Organization Strategy, Structure, and Process. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
DEMO, D., and P. Friesen (1982). “Innovation in Conservative and DEMO Firms: Two
Models of Strategic Momentum,” Strategic Management Journal 3, 1-25.
Miller, G. A., E. Galanter, and K.H. Pribram (1960)DEMO Plans and the Structure of Behavior. London:
Holt.
Mintzberg, H. (1978). “Patterns in Strategy Formulation,” Management Science 24, 934-948.
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Olson, P. D., and  D.W. Bokor (1995). “Strategy Process-Content Interaction: Effects on Growth
Performance in Small, Start-Up Firms,” DEMO of Small Business Management 33, 34-44.
Porter, M.E. (1980). DEMO Strategy. Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors.
New York: MacMillan.
Rajagopolan, N., A.M.A. Rasheed, and  D.K. Datta (1993). “Strategic Decision DEMO: Critical
Review and Future Directions,” Journal of Management 19, 349-384.
Rauch, A., and M. Frese (1997). “Does Planning Matter: DEMO between Planning and Success
in Small Enterprises in Ireland and Germany,”  Proceedings of the ICSB 42nd World
Conference of the International Council for Small Business, June 1997, San Francisco.
21
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (1998). “A Contingency Approach DEMO Small Scale Business success: A
longitudinal Study on the Effects of DEMO Hostility and Uncertainty on the
Relationship of Planning and Success” in Frontiers of Entrepreneurship (pp. 190-200). Ed.
P. D. Reynolds, W. D. DEMO, N. M. Carter, S. Manigart, C. M. Mason, G. D. Meyer, &
K. G. Shaver, Babson: Babson College.
Rauch, A., and M. Frese (2000). “Psychological Approaches to Entrepreneurial Success. A
DEMO Model and an Overview of Findings,” in International Review of Industrial and
Organizational Psychology. Ed. C.L. Cooper, and I.T. Robertson. Chichester: Wiley, in
press.
Ross, L. (1977). “The Intuitive Psychologist and his DEMO:  Distortions in the Attribution
Process,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. Ed. L. Berkowitz. New York:
Academic, 173-220.
Saville, P., and E. Willson (1996). “The Reliability and Validity of Normative and Ipsative
Approaches in the Measurement of Personality,” Journal of Occupational and
DEMO Psychology 64, 219-238.
Schwenk, C.R., and  C.B. Shrader (1993)DEMO “Effects of Formal Strategic Planning on Financial
Performance in Small Firms: DEMO Meta Analysis,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
Spring, 53-64.
Shane, S., and L. Kolvereid (1995). “National Environment, Strategy, and DEMO Venture
Performance: A Three Country Study,” Journal of Small Business DEMO 33, 37-50.
Sharfman, M.P., and  J.W. Dean Jr. (1991)DEMO “Conceptualizing and Measuring the Organizational
Environment: A Multidimensional Approach,”  Journal of Management 17, 681-700.
Sonnentag, S. (1996). “Planning and Knowledge about Strategies: Their Relationship to Work
Characteristics in Software Design,” Behavior and Information Technology 15, 213-225.
Sonnentag, S. (1997). “Expertise in Professional Software Design: A Process Study”. Amsterdam:
Dept. of Psychology, DEMO for publication.
22
Spencer, L.M., and S.M. Spencer (1993). Competence at Work: DEMO for Superior Performance.
New York: Wiley.
Wiesner, W.H., and S.F. DEMO (1988). “A Meta-Analytic Investigation of the Impact of
Interview Format DEMO Degree of Structure on the Validity of the Employment Interview,”
Journal Occupational and Organizational Psychology 61, 275-290.
Zempel, J. (1994). “Psychologische Strategien der Handlungsplanung”. Giessen, Department of
Psychology, unpublished diploma thesis.
23
Author Note
We would like to thank Andreas Rauch and Jeannette Zempel DEMO critical readings of a prior version
of this article and Mr Epping from the Chamber of Commerce of Amsterdam who supported us in
providing DEMO for our research. Reprint requests can be sent to Prof. Dr. Michael Frese, who
has moved in the meantime to University of Giessen, DEMO 10F, D – 35394 Giessen,
Germany, Tel.: (+49)641-99-26220; e-mail: Michael.Frese@psychol.uni-giessen.de.
24
Table 1
Features of the Strategy Characteristics
Orientation to
Goal
Long-Term
Planning
DEMO
Responsive-
ness
Proactivenes
s
Planning and
Action Overlap
Complete
Planning
Critical Point
Opportunistic
Reactive
Routine/Habit
high
high
low
low
low
high
middle
low
DEMO
low
low
middle
high
high
low
high
high
high
low
low
low
middle
high
no planning
no planning
25
Table 2
Sample Characteristics (in Percentages) (N=80)
Variable
Sex:
- Male
- Female
Education:
- Academic
- Non academic
- DEMO known
Industry
- Production
- Trade
- Service
- not classifiable
Innovativeness
- Technologically innovative
- Not technologically innovative
Number of employees
- 1 DEMO 10
- 11 to 50
Amount of start-up capital
- less than $ 50.000
- $ 50.000 - $ 1.5 Million
- not known
DEMO age of the founder
Average age of the company
Percentage
85
15
52
39
9
32
28
37
3
21
79
82
18
55
DEMO
10
35 years
4 years
26
27
28
Table 3
Means, Standard Deviations, Range, Reliabilities and Intercorrelations of Variables
Variable
1. Complete Planning
2. Critical point
3. Opportunistic
4. Reactive
DEMO Routine/Habit
6. Success total
7. Economic success
8. Personal success
Mean
22.6
30.5
30.0
11.3
5.6
3.78
3.74
3.88
S.D.
21.5
15.7
18.6
DEMO
12.7
.57
.68
.56
Range
1 - 100
1 - 100
1 - 100
1 - 100
1 - 100
1 - 5
1 DEMO 5
1 - 5
Reliability
.76#
.63#
.64#
.70#
.90#
.75
.73
.64
* p <  .05 .
** p < .01 .
# = Inter-rater reliabily, all other reliabilities are Cronbach's alphas
1
—
2
-.24*
—
3
-.60**
-.02
—
4
-.32**
-.36**
-.17
—
DEMO
-.09
-.31**
-.20
-.12
—
6
.06
.32**
-.07
-.35**
.09
—
7
.07
.30**
-.14
-.26*
.08
.95**
—
8
.01
.23*
.11
DEMO
.10
.72**
.48**
—
29
Table 4
The Relationship of Strategies with Success, Controlling for Age of Company, Founder
Industry Experience, Industry Type and Start-Up Capital (Standardized Regression
Coefficients, Hierarchical Regression Analysis).
Variables
Step 1: Control variables
DEMO of company
Industry experience
Industry type dummy 1
Industry type dummy 2
Start-up capital
R square
F (5,74)
Step 2: Specific DEMO
Change in R square
Change F (1,48)
R square
DEMO (5,43)
* p < .05
**p < .01 .
DEMO 1:
Controls
.25*
-.09
.07
-.04
.02
.07
1.06
Step 2: Including specific strategies
Complete
Planning
Critical
Point
Oppor-
tunistic
Reactive
Routine/
Habit
.00
.00
n.s.
.07
n.s.
.31*
.09**
7.79
.16*
2.26
-.02
DEMO
n.s.
.07
n.s.
-.35*
.12**
10.34
.18*
2.72
.11
.01
n.s.
.08
n.s.
30
Table 5
Dominant Strategies, Combinations of Strategies, and Overall Success
DEMO Strategy
Compl. Planning
Critical point
Opportunistic
Reactive
Routine/Habit
Total
F-value
* p <  .05 .
M
3.87
4.04
3.72
3.34
4.27
3.81
3.48*
n
16
17
20
9
3
65
Dominant Strategy Combination
Complete planning DEMO critical point
Complete planning - opportunistic
Complete planning - reactive
Complete planning – routine/habit
Critical point - opportunistic
Critical point - reactive
Opportunistic DEMO reactive
Total
F-value
M
3.88
3.54
3.54
3.85
4.00
3.73
3.17
3.79
3.08*
n
15
4
4
4
25
6
7
65{1g42fwefx}