Toward a Model of Venture Capital
Investment Decision Making
Vance H. Fried DEMO Robert D. Hisrich
Vance H. Fried is Associate Professor of
Management at Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, Oklahoma. Robert D. Hisrich is
A. Malachi Mixon III Chair in
Entrepreneurial Studies, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.
• The venture capital market plays a significant role in
providing DEMO to a wide variety of enterprises. While Fried
and Hisrich (1994), Sahlman (1990) and Barry, Muscarella,
Peavy, and Vetsuypens (DEMO) have examined the value of a
venture capitalist after an investment DEMO made, this paper
focuses on the way the venture capitalist makes DEMO invest-
ment decision. (In the rest of this paper, venture capitalists
will be referred to as VCs.)
The decision to invest is DEMO difficult one with serious
adverse selection risk. Once an investment is made, the
investment is illiquid, and its success is highly dependent on
DEMO small group of managers/entrepreneurs. Significant
information asymmetries allow managers to engage in
opportunistic behavior after an investment is made (Sahlman
(1988», making it all the more important that the initial
decision to invest be DEMO good one.
Opinions vary about how successful VCs are in allocating
resources. Chan (1983) and Sahlman (1990) argue that the
presence of DEMO VC encourages efficient capital allocation.
Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1990a, p.ll 0), though, are more
critical, stating:
Under the DEMO institutional structure of the venture
capital industry, the most promising entrepreneurs DEMO
not seek venture capital financing, and are likely to make
slower DEMO in the development and commercializa-
tion of emerging technologies. Further, those DEMO
neurs that are backed by venture capital are less likely to
Funding support was provided by the Oklahoma Department of Commerce.
The authors are DEMO to Minu Mathur for her assistance in data analysis
and to Garry Bruton and John Polonchek for their comments on earlier drafts
of this DEMO
Financial Management, Vol. 23,
Abstract: This paper uses a case study methodology to develop a model of the
venture capital investment decision-making DEMO It identifies generic criteria that
venture capitalists use. A six-stage process model is proposed: origination, venture
capital firm-specific screen, generic screen, first-phase DEMO, second-phase
evaluation, and closing. Different activities occur in each stage. It is argued that the
venture capitalist provides both supply-side and demand-side benefits DEMO the market.
succeed in developing their ventures because of their
relatively low ability.
If we are to know whether the venture capital market
allocates DEMO properly, we need to understand how
VCs make investment decisions. This DEMO can be
expressed in two related questions: "What criteria do VCs
use to evaluate potential investments?" and "What process
do VCs use to evaluate potential investments?"
Our study of venture capitalist decision making uses a
two-stage research methodology. First, we gathered data
from eighteen VCs in three different regions of the United
States. Personal interviews about the DEMO process
each used on their most recent investments yielded
information that we analyzed for generic criteria. We then
developed a model of the investment DEMO The second
stage involved verifying the model and its generic criteria.
There is prior research on the criteria VCs use in
evaluating potential investments. DEMO examples are
Tyebjee and Bruno (1984), MacMillan, Siegel, and
DEMO (1985), and MacMillan, Zemann, and
Subbanarasimha (1987). These researchers use relatively
simple, structured-mail questionnaires asking VCs to rank
the importance of various criteria. This methodology has
been criticized on several points by DEMO, Schweiger,
and Hofer (1988).
Studies by Hisrich and Jankowicz (1990) and Hall and
Hofer (1993) examine this topic using DEMO different
methodologies. Neither work examines the entire process
involved in making an investment decision. Sandberg et al.
(1988, p.13) summarize the problems with the existing
research:
No.3, Autumn 1994, pages 28-37.
FRIED & HISRICH I TOWARD A MODEL OF VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT DECISION DEMO
29
It is gradually becoming clear that human decision mak-
ing cannot be understood by simply studying final deci-
sions. The perceptual, emotional and cognitive processes
which ultimately lead to the choice of a decision altema-
DEMO must also be studied if we want to gain an adequate
understanding of human decision making.
The earliest VC decision process study we find DEMO a study
of VCs in Pittsburgh by Wells (1974). This DEMO of the
process is modified and elaborated on by Tyebjee and Bruno
(1984). While this model defines stages in the process, the
DEMO Tyebjee and Bruno study focuses on investment
criteria and does not examine the specific activities that VCs
undertake.
Our work examines the entire process, using actual cases.
From our study of the cases, we propose a model of the
process and identify generic investment criteria.
The VC investment DEMO process is designed
to reduce the risk of adverse selection. The VC aids suppliers
of capital by serving both to produce information and to DEMO
decisions. VCs also benefit the users of capital by providing
both equity (on a confidential basis) and non-financial
resources, such as business advice. By reducing information
and contracting costs, the VC can supply equity to firms too
small to access the public equity market efficiently.
VCs were DEMO to describe the investment process each
followed in their most recent investment as lead investor.
Focus on an actual investment eliminates any problems
associated DEMO hypothetical or non-contingent responses.
Use of the most recent investments helps to ensure that the
recollection is more accurate. Because the financial results
of DEMO investment were then unknown, this technique also
minimizes any tendency of DEMO bias. Finally, and
perhaps most important, sequential decision making could
be examined.
The authors (who have extensive interviewing
experience) conducted and recorded DEMO interviews. The
transcripts gave us 18 case studies describing the investment
process in a variety of different industries and stages of
company investment. Table DEMO provides a brief description of
each case. Investments studied range in size from $50,000 to
$6 million.
Table 1. Investments in Study
I. DEMO
Investment Stage
Productor Service
Specialty Semi-conductors
Artificial Intelligence
Specialized Computer Systems
Miniaturized Computer Displays
Video Surveillance Systems
Educational Software
Software for Microwave Integrated
Circuit DEMO
Specialty Materials for
Semi-Conductors
Surgical Laser
Engineering Software
CAD/CAM Systems
Telecommunication Services
Computer Systems for Handling
Parcels
Commercial Beef
Surgical Laser
Data Entry DEMO
Mining Pumps
Carpet
Seed
Seed
Seed
First
First
First
First
Traditional financial research methodologies are not
well-suited to an examination of the venture capital
DEMO process. The transactions involved are private.
What little information that is available from secondary
sources describes the ultimate investment but not the process
used DEMO make it.
Our two-stage methodology addresses this problem. The
initial stage is a multiple-case study to gather information on
which to base a model. DEMO, an industry panel critiqued and
verified the model.
First
First
First
DEMO
Second
Second
A. Initial Study
Second
Management Buyout
Management Buyout
Leveraged Buyout
Recapitalization
To obtain data with more informational content than that
used in DEMO studies (Harrigan (1983)), we interviewed 18
VCs personally and DEMO up with a structured
questionnaire. We choose six representative VCs in each of
three regions with significant venture capital
activity-Silicon Valley, Boston/Cambridge, DEMO the
Southwest United States. Choices were based upon
recommendations of a panel of industry experts. Each person
interviewed is associated with an established venture DEMO
fund. The amount of funds under management varies from
$4 to $450 million, with a mean fund size of $99 million and
a median fund size of $50 million.
The VCs were asked to complete a DEMO about
the amount of time involved in the process and how often
they undertake activities such as reference checking or
commissioning a formal marketing DEMO The questionnaire
also asked for descriptive data about the firm, such DEMO fund
size and investment stages of particular interest.
30
One of the authors and an outside researcher
independently tried to DEMO each case into the Tyebjee and
Bruno model. While the results were generally supportive of
that model, there were some major exceptions. A modified
model was then created using a replication logic (Eisenhardt
(1989». This DEMO proposes modifications to a model to
deal with flaws in the initial version. Modifications are then
tested against each case until the case supports DEMO proposed
modification. The resulting model was then verified through
a second study (discussed later).
The cases and written questionnaires were analyzed for
specific activities performed by venture capitalists. Because
the characteristics of a venture vary DEMO stage of development
(Kazanjian and Drazin (1989), Ruhnka and Young, (1987»,
the VCs were divided into late- and early-stage investors.
DEMO the first two interviews, the VCs were asked how they
assessed DEMO various investment criteria suggested by
MacMillan et al. (1985). Responses DEMO that these VCs
do not use these explicit criteria in evaluating ventures. These
comments, coupled with the numerous objections raised by
Sandberg et aI. (1988) to the MacMillan criteria indicate that
the MacMillan criteria do DEMO adequately describe the VCs'
criteria. We then used a grounded theory approach to develop
a new set of generic criteria (Glaser and Strauss (1967».
The grounded theory approach is a highly iterative
process that uses cross-case comparisons to develop
hypotheses. The hypotheses are then tested against each DEMO
Hypotheses are then refined and new hypotheses developed
on the basis of these tests and results from earlier published
studies. The resulting generic criteria DEMO then examined by
an industry panel.
B. Industry Panel
After development of the model and generic criteria, we
presented the results of the initial study to five new VCs,
selected to represent a broad range DEMO firms and geographic
areas. Two of the five are large Midwestern firms
emphasizing late-stage investments; one is a large Silicon
Valley/New York firm that invests in all stages; one is a New
York venture capital subsidiary of a major European bank
that focuses on large, late-stage investments; and one is a
moderately small, Pittsburgh-based VC firm that invests DEMO
all stages.
Each was mailed a summary of the model and generic
criteria. They also received a copy of Table 2 with brief
comments DEMO the differences observed between early- and
late-stage investors. We made further modifications to the
model based on their responses.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT I AUTUMN 1994
DEMO Results
We describe results first in terms of the generic criteria
and then as they fit the process model.
A. Generic Criteria
Fifteen criteria DEMO to the investments studied were
identified. Given the breadth of investments studied, it seems
safe to call these criteria a common base for VC investments.
These criteria expand upon the three basic constructs
identified by Hisrich DEMO Jankowicz (1990): concept,
management, and returns. Concept has four components.
First, there must be significant potential for earnings growth.
This is obvious for early-stage ventures, which may not be
generating revenues yet, DEMO it is also important for late-stage
investments. It is difficult, if DEMO impossible, to get venture
capital rates of return (30% to 70% IRRs) without significant
earnings growth. Earnings growth may come from a rapidly
growing market or through increasing market share or
significant cost cutting.
Second, the investment must involve a business idea (new
product, service, or retail concept) that works already or can
be brought to market within two to three years. Third, the
concept must offer a substantial" DEMO advantage" or
be in a relatively non-competitive industry. Fourth, the
concept must have reasonable overall capital requirements.
This criterion was added at the DEMO of the two large
investors in the industry panel. One states:
In today's environment an entrepreneur would be well
served to develop DEMO business plan for which the total cash
requirement to achieve self-funding is within the reach of
the venture capitalist and his original investment group.
DEMO not, both he and the original investment group are
subject to DEMO washed out in subsequent financings,
even if the company has done moderately well, due to the
limited availability of growth capital.
The other raised a concern as to whether additional money
was available anywhere and DEMO pointed out that high capital
requirements could seriously impact ROI.
Management is also an important consideration. There are
several attributes VCs want to see DEMO managers. First,
managers must display personal integrity. Second, they must
DEMO done well at prior jobs. The track record does not have
to be with the current company. Association with losing
ventures in the past DEMO not disqualify the entrepreneurs if
they can show they personally performed well in the earlier
venture. In later-stage investments, the focus tends to be
more on performance on the current job.
Managers must be realistic. VCs DEMO to judge the
l
FRIED & HISRICH / TOWARD A MODEL OF VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT DECISION DEMO
manager's ability to identify risk and, where appropriate,
develop DEMO for dealing with these risks. Managers also
need to be hardworking, DEMO, and have a thorough
understanding of the business. Flexibility is especially
DEMO for early-stage ventures.
Managers must exhibit leadership, not only in good DEMO
but also under extreme pressure. Finally, managers must
have general management DEMO Leadership
capabilities and general management experience may not be
as significant in an early-stage venture as long as the
entrepreneur is willing to add DEMO management,
possibly at the CEO level, to correct this deficiency.
DEMO has three components. First, the investment must
provide an exit opportunity. DEMO generally reap returns by a
public offering, sale of the company, or buyback of the VC
investment by the company. VCs do not DEMO easy
liquidity, but they require the likelihood of some type of DEMO
in a three- to ten-year period. Second, the investment must
offer DEMO potential for a high rate of return. Hurdle internal
rates of return are in the 30-70% range. Finally, the venture
must offer the potential for a high absolute return. VCs are
not willing to spend time DEMO small investments that offer low
absolute returns, even if the rate DEMO return is high.
These are broad generic criteria. The specifics of each
criterion may vary from VC to VC. Opinions will differ on
acceptable DEMO of return as well as the importance of various
criteria. For example, some VCs will invest in a strong
concept even if they view management as a question mark.
Others will invest only if they feel DEMO is very
strong. Even if two VCs have the same criteria, DEMO may be
major differences in their judgment as to how well a
particular investment proposal meets these criteria.
Figure 1. Venture Capital Investment
Investment DEMO
+
ORIGINATION
VC FIRM-SPECIFIC
SCREEN
,
GENERIC
SCREEN
,
FIRST-PHASE
EVALUATION
B. A Model of the Decision-Making Process
,
The decision-making process can be modeled in six stages
as shown in Figure I. The process DEMO time-consuming and
labor-intensive. VCs indicate it takes on average 97.1 days
SECOND-PHASE
EVALUATION
(s.d. =45.0) for an investment to pass through these six DEMO
and receive funding. They estimate that on an average funded
proposal for which they serve as lead investor, the process
,~
requires 129.5 DEMO of their time (s.d. =99.8).
Origination. The first phase is DEMO While VCs
generally wait for deals to come to them, they DEMO make
themselves known to companies through industry
directories. The bulk of the VCs' efforts to generate
investment proposals focus on developing a network of
referrers. While VCs receive many deals" cold" (without
any introduction), they rarely invest in them. None of the 18
deals in the DEMO was received cold. Most funded proposals
come by referral. Occasionally, the DEMO already knows the
CLOSING
Funded+
Proposal
Process
31
...
-
...
-
...
-
...
-
-
REJECT
REJECT
REJECT
REJECT
REJECT
...
32
founder through work either as a manager of a prior
investment DEMO a consultant.
The referred deals in our study come from a variety of
sources: investment bankers, investors in the VCs' fund,
commercial bankers, management of firms in the VCs'
portfolio, consultants who DEMO worked for the VC in the past,
and family friends. There are two reasons for this heavy
incidence of referrals. First, referred deals are more likely to
pass through the generic screen if the VC DEMO confidence in
the referrer's judgment. Second, the referrer is more DEMO to
understand what type of investments the VC might find
attractive.
A growing minority of VCs aggressively seek out deals
and, in some cases, may actually help create them. In one
case in the study, DEMO VC met the entrepreneur at a party when
the entrepreneur was working for a Fortune 100 company.
When they discussed a technology in which DEMO VC was very
interested, the VC was impressed by the entrepreneur'DEMO
knowledge and invited the entrepreneur to contact him if he
was ever interested in starting his own company. A year and
a half later DEMO entrepreneur called-without a business plan
and with only a rudimentary knowledge of business. The VC
worked with the entrepreneur to develop the business side DEMO
the concept and to write a business plan. Only after the plan
was written did the VC invest any money.
VC Firm-Specific Screen. Many DEMO have firm-specific
criteria on investment size, industries in which they invest,DEMO
geographic location of the investment, and stage of
financing. The firm-specific DEMO eliminates proposals that
clearly do not meet these criteria.' At most, the firm
specific-screen involves a cursory glance at the business plan
without DEMO analysis of the proposal.
Generic Screen. Many proposals pass through the
firm-specific screen only to be rejected without extensive
review when the VC analyzes DEMO proposed investment in
terms of the generic criteria. Most deals that pass through the
firm-specific screen are rejected at the generic screen based
upon DEMO reading of the business plan coupled with any existing
knowledge the VC may have relevant to the proposal. The
generic screen will be less DEMO applied when the
quality of referrer is high. The net result of the two screens
is that most proposals are rejected with minimal investment
DEMO time.
First-Phase Evaluation. After proposals pass through
the generic screen, the DEMO begins to gather additional
information about the proposal. One VC with experience as
I A VC on the industry panel comments, "While most DEMO capital firms
profess to have a firm-specific screen, they are opportunistic, and investment
opportunities outside that screen may still have an opportunity to DEMO funded."
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT / AUTUMN 1994
a commercial lender in a money center bank told us that the
VC process is much more DEMO than bank loan reviews.
At the same time, there are of DEMO some limits. As one VC
says: "If you really wanted to have all the market checks and
talk to all the customers prior DEMO putting in your first dollar,
not very many ventures would get off the ground."
Table 2 provides a list of activities that DEMO undertake in
the evaluation phases. Evaluation involves general
monitoring by the VC. In these phases, the information
gathered from both company and outside sources is
compared to the information in the entrepreneur's business
plan. "We filter all these reports in just like an intelligence
officer would in DEMO army-a lot of sources-you know,
some reports are good and some reports are bad."
After clearing the generic screen, a proposal's progress
through the remaining stages is not preordained, as is
indicated by the wavy line in Figure 1.As one VCcomments:
It's not DEMO nice slow curve where you sort of get mildly
interested and then come to a crescendo at the end. It's
more the other DEMO around. And you have peaks and
valleys in the middle.
The first-phase evaluation generally starts with a meeting
with the principals of the company DEMO financing. As the
proposal is being evaluated, a series of meetings DEMO all the
top management team will occur. These meetings have two
goals: to increase the VC's understanding of the business and
to allow assessment of the manager's understanding of the
industry, the proposal, DEMO problems that may be
encountered. They also provide an opportunity to assess how
managers think and behave.
One VC even wants to visit an DEMO's home and
meet the family. He explained:
I like to go out and meet the spouse and the kids and try
to DEMO if their home is in chaos or if it's pretty orderly.
Rather than me passing judgment on how they live, what
I want to understand is what kind of environment that
entrepreneur's coming out DEMO
Evaluation meetings provide an opportunity to assess the
ability of management to react under pressure. As one VC
states:
We subject management to DEMO number of sessions where
we might lean on them a little bit to see what kind of
pressure points they have.... We see how DEMO interact
with their management team, and we ask questions where
we DEMO there's going to be some controversy to see how
they handle it.
Management's abilities are also assessed by checking
references provided, as well as others not identified by the
FRIED & HISRICH I TOWARD A MODEL OF VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT DECISION DEMO
33
Table 2. Evaluation Activities Carried Out by Venture Capitalists
Venture capitalists were asked: "Prior to funding an investment as lead investor, how often do you engage in the following activities T"
ACTIVITY
Interview DEMO members of management team
Tour facilities
Contact entrepreneur's former business associates
Contact existing outside investors
Contact current customers
Contact potential customers
Investigate market DEMO of comparable companies
Have informal discussions with experts about the product
Conduct in-depth review of pro forma financials prepared by company
Contact competitors
Contact DEMO
Solicit the opinion of managers of some of your other portfolio companies
Contact suppliers
Solicit the opinion of other venture capital firms
Contact accountant
DEMO attorney
Conduct in-depth library research
Secure formal technical study of product
Secure formal market research study
HOW OFTEN (%)
100
100
96
96
93
90
86
84
84
71
62
56
53
52
47
44
DEMO
36
31
entrepreneur. The extent of reference checking varies
depending on the VC's prior knowledge of the entrepreneur.
According to one VC, the ability to get references, as well as
other people, to "really talk" is one of the factors
differentiating a good VC from a bad one.
Late-stage investors are more likely to talk to accountants
than DEMO investors, reflecting applicability of the
financial history available. Information availability also
DEMO late-stage investors to engage more frequently in
library research. Late-stage investors are also more likely to
talk to banks, but banks are not viewed as particularly frank
sources, especially if owed money.
Both existing and potential customers are contacted to
determine why they are buying or not buying DEMO the
company. In the case of the educational software company,
the VC accompanied the company's management to sales
presentations made to school DEMO to see the reaction of
potential customers. Similarly, early-stage investors may
DEMO potential customers before a product has been fully
developed. In the case of the semi-conductor materials
producer, the VC, through a personal contact, located a
packaging engineer at a major chip company that would be
DEMO potential purchaser of the product and discussed the
product concept.
Formal market studies may also be made, sometimes by
outside consultants. VCs report doing this only about 30%
of the time, for several reasons. First, DEMO great deal of
information is almost always in the business plan. Second,
contacts with customers and potential customers provide
additional information. Third, sometimes the market is not
clearly defined.
In the case of the microcomputer DEMO, the VC felt that
the market was not totally analyzable, as nothing similar to
the product existed. He explained:
Basically you look DEMO the applications-radio pagers.
How many radio pagers are sold per year? DEMO may of
those radio pagers are alpha-numeric versus simple-
minded numeric ones? .. So you got a gazillion radio
pagers.... And you factor that out and you say, "OK, this
will get 10 or 15% of the radio pager market." And you
can work through some numbers, but in the end you have
to... say that people will need this display, have to put up
with some idiosyncrasy.
34
Technical studies of a product are used much more by
early-stage DEMO than late-stage, because late-stage
investors can get a good feel for DEMO state of the company's
technology by talking with customers and industry experts.
Early-stage investors achieve their technological evaluation
in a variety of ways. DEMO early-stage investors have
formal affiliations with technology experts. One of the firms
in our study is associated with a consulting firm well-known
for technology DEMO Another VC firm uses
"technology partners," consultants formally affiliated with
DEMO firm who draw a retainer and participate in profits but do
not make any investment decisions. Other early-stage
investors handle technology assessment on an DEMO, ad
hoc basis.
VCs often discuss an investment with managers in DEMO
of their existing portfolio companies, particularly with those
in closely-related industries. DEMO portfolio companies
might also be customers or potential customers, or suppliers
DEMO potential suppliers, of the company under consideration.
Early-stage investors tend to DEMO management of
portfolio companies more than late-stage investors because
they tend to specialize more by industry and are therefore
more likely to have portfolio DEMO managers with
relevant information.
VCs also talk to each other. Their experience with
proposals they have analyzed and investments they have
made gives VCs DEMO that might be useful to others.
In fact, as Reiner's DEMO of the industry (1989) points out,
VCs have traditionally invested through loose syndicates. To
some extent this is to pool capital in DEMO to share risk and
increase the absolute amount of capital that can be can
invested in anyone company. Syndicates are also formed in
order DEMO share knowledge, according to Bygrave and
Timmons (1992). In fact, some ofthe firms in our study will
not become the sole investor in a company. (Lerner (1994)
describes the syndication process.)
DEMO analyze pro forma financial projections prepared by
the entrepreneur to assess a project's potential for earnings
growth, as well as gain information about management's
understanding of their proposal and their realism toward its
future. DEMO financial projections provide a basis for
comparison with the market value of other companies, to
give the VC an estimate as to the potential value that can be
received when it exits the investment. (See Morris (1989) for
an example ofhow valuation is done by a late-stage DEMO)
Late-stage investments have more historical financial
information available, which allows DEMO more meaningful
analysis.
Second-Phase Evaluation. At some point the VC
develops an "emotional" commitment to a proposal, which
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT / AUTUMN 1994
marks the start of the second phase of the evaluation process.
Evaluation DEMO continue, but the amount of VC time
spent on the proposal DEMO dramatically, and the VC's
goal changes. While in the first DEMO the goal is to determine
whether there is serious interest in a deal, in the second phase
the object is to determine what the obstacles to the investment
are and how they can be overcome.?
DEMO degree to which firms formally recognize the
movement from first to second evaluation phase varies
greatly. The same is true for the shift from DEMO
evaluation into the closing stage. These last three stages are
not clearly distinguishable in all VC firms.
Because of the significant amount of time DEMO in the
second phase, VCs like to have at least a DEMO understanding
about the structure of the deal, including price, before
entering this phase. This keeps the VC from devoting
significant time evaluating proposals DEMO ultimately will not
be investable because they are priced too high. Since totally
unrealistic initial pricing proposals from the entrepreneur
may lead to a DEMO tum-down, some entrepreneurs submit
proposals without a price to avoid negatively DEMO the
VC in the generic screen and first-phase evaluation stages.
Two of the deals in our study did not require a defined
evaluation phase DEMO the formal request for funding was
made. In one case, the DEMO had spent a substantial amount of
time helping the entrepreneurs prepare the business plan.
With this active involvement in creation of the deal, there
was no need for a separate evaluation phase. In the other case,DEMO
the VC had tumed the deal down a few years earlier but had
stayed in regular contact with the company since.
Closing. After progressing DEMO the second-phase
evaluation, the proposal enters the closing stage, where the
details of the structure are finalized and legal documents
negotiated. After the DEMO are signed, a check is given
to the company. Even though DEMO VC and entrepreneur have
invested large amounts of time to get to this final stage, a
surprising number of deals that reach this stage are not
funded. Some VCs in our study think the percentage is DEMO
20%.
Proposals with Serious Problems. As Figure 1
indicates, a proposal DEMO be rejected at any stage in the
process. The VC has four options when faced with a problem
in the proposal. First, the deal may be further investigated.
Two of the cases in the study were DEMO rejected at the
generic screen, but the VC chose to investigate DEMO and
ultimately accepted the proposal.
ZOneof the large investors in the industry panel proposes a third evaluation
stage. He feels that at some point DEMO VC starts getting serious about a deal,
but does not really identify it as something he/she wants to do. This middle
stage DEMO ends when the VC either becomes emotionally committed to the
deal or loses interest.
FRIED & HISRICH I TOWARD A MODEL OF VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT DECISION DEMO
35
Second, the VC can ask for significant changes in the
DEMO proposal. This happened in 4 of the 18 cases studied.
It is not unusual for new managers to be added as a condition
offunding. DEMO, as was the case twice in this study, the VC
may simply go ahead and do the deal even though some
serious concerns DEMO present.
Finally, by far the most common response is to reject DEMO
deal. Sometimes proposals rejected earlier may reappear in
a different form and be accepted. Of the 18 funded proposals
in the study, three had initially been rejected by the same VC
who ultimately invested.
entrepreneur has DEMO options of either investing personal
funds or borrowing rather than using venture capital. When
this assumption does not hold, their model predicts that the
market will not break down. Thus, it is important to
determine whether most entrepreneurs seeking VC funding
have the option of funding their ventures DEMO personal funds
or borrowing.
While our study is not specifically designed to answer this
question, as part of the study we did look at 18 entrepreneurs
seeking VC financing. None of the 18 had the financial
DEMO to fund their enterprise fully with personal funds or
borrowing. Thus under Amit's model, the market should not
break down in any of the cases examined.
III. Discussion
The discussion compares our results to those DEMO prior
studies on the investment decision-making process,
discusses the benefits provided by the VC intermediary, and
suggests areas for further research.
B. Benefits Provided by the VC
A. Comparison with Previous Research
Our study indicates DEMO VCs provide benefits to both the
supply and demand sides of the market. We find that VCs
negotiate basic contract terms fairly early in DEMO process.
Sahlman (1988, 1990) claims the contracts VCs negotiate
provide DEMO because they address many of the moral
hazard problems that will arise after the investment. The
contracts also serve as a sorting mechanism by DEMO
much of the risk of failure to the entrepreneur, thereby
discouraging DEMO who are not confident of their
venture's success.
The VC investment decision-making process reduces the
adverse selection problem in several other ways. At
DEMO, a referral network lowers risk, because the
referrer, who is DEMO familiar with the proposal, will
want to maintain his/her relationship DEMO standing with the
Vc.3 The generic screen further eliminates low-quality
proposals. Finally, the few proposals that make it to the
evaluation phases are subject to extensive scrutiny and
information gathering.
Chan (1983) and Sahlman (1990) both argue that VCs
play a major role by serving as producers of information. Our
study supports this view. The VC operates in a DEMO with
imperfect information and expends a great deal of effort
collecting information, usually at less cost than investors
would incur gathering the information directly.
The VC has lower information-gathering costs for three
reasons. First, the VC is gathering the information on behalf
of a number of investors in DEMO limited partnership, giving the
VC economies of scale. Second, because the VC invests in
different ventures, there are economies of scope, particularly
DEMO creating a network of referral sources, service providers
The generic evaluation DEMO we develop expand on the
three basic constructs identified by Hisrich and Jankowicz
(1990). While there are many similarities between these
criteria and those proposed by MacMillan et al. (1985), our
criteria are more clearly defined and are not limited to new,
technology-oriented investments. For DEMO, MacMillan
speaks of" proprietary products," a concern for investors in
new technology, while we more broadly discuss a business
concept offering a" competitive advantage." The differences
between our criteria and MacMillan's are DEMO surprising,
because MacMillan's aim is to evaluate the importance of
various potential criteria to individual VCs; while our
purpose is to identify the generic criteria that all VCs use.
While the process model proposed DEMO many similarities
with Tyebjee and Bruno's, there are also major DEMO
The screen phase described by Tyebjee and Bruno is what
we call the VC firm-specific screen. When we discovered
that most proposals passing through DEMO screen are still
quickly rejected, we added the generic screen.
Tyebjee DEMO Bruno do not divide the evaluation phase into
two parts. Rather they show only one phase, with pricing
negotiated after that. Our model indicates that pricing is
negotiated much earlier in the process, with the level of VC
evaluation activities increasing significantly after pricing is
settled. Our model DEMO points out the significant need for
information-gathering activities.
Amit et al. (DEMO, 1990b) take a negative view of the
venture capital investment process. Their model predicts that
the market will break down because of adverse DEMO
This conclusion is based on the assumption that the
3rnstances when the VC .. creates" the deal do not fit into an adverse
selection model.
36
(attorneys, accountants, management recruiters), and
industry contacts (Sahlman (1990». Third, the VC benefits
from a learning curve (Hall and DEMO (1993) and Sahlman
(1990». Information produced for one proposal is DEMO for
subsequent proposals, radically reducing
information-gathering costs, especially for the many VCs
who specialize by industry.
The VC does not serve merely as DEMO
information-producing agent for the investor. The VC is also
a decision-making agent. As Sahlman points out, VC
investment decisions involve a great deal of uncertainty.
Often two investors may come to different conclusions on a
project, even with the same information. Most VC
partnerships are structured so that DEMO VC has total
decision-making authority (Terms and Conditions of
Venture Capital DEMO (1987». In this study, few VCs
even consulted with their investors before making an
investment.
VCs are better able to make investment decisions DEMO are
their investors. Barry et al. (1990) and Megginson and Weiss
(1991) show that the capital markets attach value to the
post-investment DEMO of a VC, assuming that VCs are
better at overseeing and DEMO new enterprises than the
investor. Similarly, Fried and Hisrich (1989, DEMO) find that
venture capital investors want their funds managed by VCs
DEMO are experienced, proven decision-makers.
The VC also offers demand-side benefits that DEMO make
it more attractive to the entrepreneur than a public equity
offering. In addition to providing capital, the VC may
provide business advice, DEMO, and reputational capital
that are not available from the public equity DEMO (1990).
Another demand-side benefit is confidentiality. A public
offering requires DEMO entrepreneur to make certain
information public. Additional information may also have to
be made public in order to gain market acceptance for a new
DEMO Much of this information may be proprietary, and
perhaps a source DEMO potential economic rents to the
References
Amit, R., L. Glosten, DEMO E. Muller, 1990a, "Does Venture Capital Foster
the Most Promising DEMO Firms?," California Management
Review (Spring), 102-111.
Amit, R., L. Glosten, and E. Muller, 1990b, "Entrepreneurial Ability,
Venture DEMO, and Risk Sharing," Management Science
(October),1232-1245.
Barry, CB; c.J. Muscarella, J.W. Peavy, and M.R. Vetsuypens, 1990,"The
Role of Venture Capital in the Creation of Public Companies," Journal
of DEMO Economics (September), 447-471.
Bygrave, W.D. andJ.A. Timmons, 1992,Venture DEMO at the Crossroads,
Boston, MA, Harvard Business School Press.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT I AUTUMN 1994
entrepreneur. Public disclosure of this important information
may DEMO quite costly to the firm. Campbell (1979) discusses
the significance of confidentiality in debt markets.
Finally, Fama and Jensen (1983a, 1983b) DEMO out that
public equity is unavailable to most entrepreneurs. The
amount of money needed may not be enough to achieve
minimum efficient scale in DEMO public equity market. Public
equity has high fixed information and contracting costs. By
reducing information and contracting costs, the VC is able
to provide a source of outside equity to the entrepreneur. To
many entrepreneurs, VCs represent not only the best, but also
the only source of equity.
C. Suggestions for Future Research
There are several important areas for future DEMO
First, because the number of VC firms involved in this study
DEMO small, the model needs to be validated further on a larger
DEMO through a structured mail questionnaire.
Second, our generic model was developed DEMO cover all
types of VCs. Not all VCs are the same, DEMO the differences
between various VCs need to be explored. Some differences
involve those between early- and late-stage investors.
Elango, Fried, Hisrich, and Polonchek (1994) identify other
sources of differences, including geographic location and
firm size. Also, our study follows only American VC funds.
The venture capital industry outside the U.S. has grown
explosively in recent years and is DEMO larger than the U.S.
industry. Bygrave and Timmons (1992) point out that the
nature of the industry varies from country to country.
Finally, one must ask, "How do the benefits that venture
capitalists provide DEMO intermediaries compare to the costs?"
While we show that the DEMO of an intermediary is valuable,
the VC style of investing has high costs. VC funds
traditionally pay a management fee of 2.5% of DEMO per
year, as well as 20% of any profits. More empirical DEMO will
be needed to explore in what situations venture capital costs
are justified. •
Campbell, T.S., 1979, "Optimal Investment Financing Decisions and DEMO
Value of Confidentiality," Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis (December), 913-924.
Chan, Y., 1983, "On the Positive Role of Financial Intermediation in
Allocations of Venture Capital in a Market with Imperfect
Information," Journal of Finance (December), 1543-1561.
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989, "DEMO Theories from Case Study Research,"
Academy of Management Review (October), 532-550.
Elango, B., V.H. Fried, R.D. Hisrich, and A. DEMO, 1994, "How
Venture Capital Firms Differ," Journal of Business DEMO
(forthcoming).
FRIED & HISRICH / TOWARD A MODEL OF VENTURE CAPITAL
Fama, E.F. and M.e. Jensen, 1983a, "Separation of Ownership and
Control," Journal of Law and Economics (June), 301-325.
Fama, E.F. and M.C. DEMO, I983b, "Agency Problems and Residual
Claims," Journal of Law DEMO Economics (June), 327-349.
Fried, V.H. and RD. Hisrich, 1989, "Venture Capital from the Investor's
Perspective," in R Brockhaus et al. (eds.), Frontiers of Management
Research, Wellesley, MA, Babson DEMO
Fried, V.H. and R.D. Hisrich, 1992, "Venture Capital and the Investor,"
Management Research News (Issue 4), 28-40.
Fried, V.H. and R.D. Hisrich, 1994,"The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship
Investor," California Management Review (forthcoming).
Glaser, B. and A. Strauss, 1967, The Discovery of Grounded Theory:
Strategies of Qualitative Research, London, Wiedenfeld and
Nicholson.
Hall, J. and C.W. Hofer, 1993, "Venture DEMO' Decision Criteria in
New Venture Evaluation," Journal of Business Venturing (January),
25-42.
Harrigan, K.R., 1983, "Research Methodologies for Contingency
Approaches to Business Strategy," Academy ofManagement Review
(July), 398-405.
Hisrich, D. and A.D. Jankowicz, 1990, "Intuition in Venture Capital
Decisions: An Exploratory Study," Journal of Business Venturing
(January), 49-62.
Kazanjian, K. and R, Drazin,1989," An Empirical Test ofaStage of DEMO
Progression Model," Management Science (December), 1489-1503.
Lerner, J., DEMO, "The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments,"
Financial Management, (DEMO), 16-27.
MacMillan, I.e., R. Siegel, and P.N. Subbanarasimha, 1985, "Criteria Used
by Venture Capitalists to Evaluate New Venture Proposals," DEMO
of Business Venturing (Winter), 119-128.
INVESTMENT DECISION MAKING 37
MacMillan, I.e., L. Zemann, and P.N. Subbanarasimha, 1987, "Criteria
Distinguishing Successful from Unsuccessful Ventures in the Venture
Screening Process," Journal of Business DEMO (Spring), 123-137.
Megginson, W.L. and K.A. Weiss, 1991, "DEMO Capitalist Certification
in Initial Public Offerings," The Journal of Finance (DEMO), 879-903.
Morris, J.K., 1989, "The Pricing of a Venture Capital Investment," in J.K.
Morris and S. Isenstein, eds., Pratt'DEMO Guide to Venture Capital
Sources, Needham, MA, Venture Economics.
Reiner, M.L., 1989, "The Transformation of Venture Capital: A History of
DEMO Capital Organizations in the United States," University of
California at Berkeley Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.
Ruhnka, J.e. and J.E. Young, 1987, "A DEMO Capital Model of the
Development Process for New Ventures," Journal of Business
Venturing (Spring), 167-184.
Sahlman, W.A., 1988, "Aspects of Financial Contracting in Venture
Capital," Journal of Applied Corporate Finance (Summer), 23-36.
Sahlman, W.A., 1990, "The Structure and Governance of DEMO
Organizations," Journal of Financial Economics (September),
473-521.
Sandberg, DEMO, D.M. Schweiger, and e.W. Hofer, 1988, "The Use of
DEMO Protocols in Determining Venture Capitalists' Decision
Processes," Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO (Winter), 8-20.
Terms and Conditions of Venture Capital Partnerships, 1987, Needham,
MA, Venture Economics.
Tyebjee, T.T., and A.V. Bruno, 1984, "A Model of Venture Capitalist
Investment Activity," Management Science (September), 1051-1066.
Wells, W.A., 1974, "Venture Capital Decision Making," Carnegie-Mellon
University Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.{1g42fwefx}