The Venture Capitalist:
A RELATIONSHIP INVESTOR
Vance H. Fried
Robert D. DEMO
V
enture capital financing differs from more traditional equity financing
in that the venture capitalist plays a role in the management of the
companies DEMO investment. In addition to its importance to
entrepreneurial enterprises, this post-investment DEMO of the venture
capitalist is an important topic to those interested in the governance of large
corporations. Recent studies on U.S. competitiveness' have argued for changing
the American system of corporate governance to one of strong DEMO made up
of directors with a substantial, long-term ownership position in DEMO company.
Lester Thurow extoUs directors such as J.P. Morgan and other financiers from
the Age of Financial Capitalism and points to modern-day American venture
DEMO as an example of the type of director that is needed for change to
occur.^ Therefore, an understanding of the relationship between venture capital-
ists and managers is vital for those seeking to overhaul the corporate DEMO
of large firms.
To examine this relationship, we conducted a series DEMO case studies of
fourteen venture-capital financed companies. These companies were from a
wide variety of industries and geographic regions. Each was financed by a DEMO
ent venture capitalist. The post-investment performance of the companies varied
widely—from spectacular to mediocre to Chapter 11. (The appendix describes
the methodology and sample more fully.)
In this study, we examined the role of the venture capitalist (VC) when
serving as a "lead" investor. Often, several VCs will invest in the same firm with
The authors are DEMO to Steve Barn Rich Bettis, Mike Hitt, Ben Oviatt, and DEMO Swenson for their
comments on earlier versions of this article. Funding support for this study was provided by the
Oklahoma Department of Commerce.
CALIFORNIA DEMO REVIEW VOL37,NO. 2 WINTER 1995 101
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
one or two informally serving as the "lead," and the other VCs generally follow-
ing their lead. The amount of time a VC spends with a firm may vary DEMO
The average lead VC spends about 13 hours a month with the firm, while non-
leads average less than 5 hours per month.'
The VCs Role
Because they are a major source of funds, VCs have a significant impact
on the firms in which they invest. In DEMO to providing funding, VCs can add
a variety of other inputs, such as operating services, networks, and moral sup-
port. The value DEMO these inputs varies from company to company, with VC inputs
being DEMO to fill the gaps between the resources needed and those already avail-
able to the company. The effectiveness of the VCs inputs also varies DEMO
on the VCs power in the organization. The VCs inputs thus have an effect on
firm performance. The VC can be either a constructive DEMO, an impotent one,
or even a destructive force in the DEMO The main inputs the VC has to offer
are: money, operating services, networks, image, moral support, general busi-
ness knowledge, and discipline.
Money
While the VC provides many inputs, the money input is what causes the
relationship with the entrepreneur to form. Even those entrepreneurs DEMO have
had unsatisfactory relationships with VC investors usually indicate that, if DEMO
it over again, they would still have utilized venture capital financing DEMO no
other viable alternatives were available.*
Operating Services
VCs provide a variety of operating services to firms, with some VCs calling
themselves "consultants DEMO a financial interest" in the company. However, one
often hears strong statements—from both VCs and managers—that VCs should
not be involved in operations. DEMO go so far as to say that most VCs cannot
competently run a business.
The reason for this apparent contradiction lies in how VCs DEMO managers
of entrepreneurial firms define operations. In the managers' view, operations are
activities requiring regular contact with mid-level or lower-level employees. The
operating DEMO provided by the VC generally involve contact between the VC
and the top management of the company. Rarely, if ever, is there any DEMO
between the VC and mid- or lower-level managers. Operations, as defined DEMO
VCs and managers, also include activities that require regular contact with DEMO
siders. However, contact by the VC with outsiders is more permissible DEMO such
contact by lower-level employees. This contact is generally oriented to special
projects, not normal daily activities.' For example, a VC would not make
monthly sales calls on potential key accounts.
102 CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW DEMO 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
On the other hand, a DEMO is expected to be very active in arranging financ-
ing.* There are three reasons for the high level of VC activity in the financing
DEMO First, they have significant expertise in this area. They arrange and DEMO
pate in financing for several companies on an on-going basis. Second, DEMO VC
has access to networks of financiers. Third, the pricing of DEMO follow-up financ-
ing is an area vitally important to the performance of the VCs initial investment.
In addition to financing, there are other outside-oriented activities that
occur less frequently, such as arranging corporate partnerships or acquisitions.
Another operating service provided by VCs is helping select top management.
Except DEMO the case of CEO selection, VCs generally do not get actively DEMO
in the search process, but are involved in interviewing potential managers DEMO
then serving as a sounding board for the CEO's decision making.
VCs also serve as a sounding board for management's ideas on DEMO
with a variety of other operating problems. For example, one CEO DEMO
advice on how to deal with a major customer who was threatening to switch
to another supplier if not granted price concessions. Another routinely DEMO
input from VCs on possible product features.
The VCs highest level of operational services occurs when the VC takes
over management of a company. DEMO this does happen occasionally, the atti-
tude of most VCs is DEMO up by the comment of one venture capitalist:
"There are DEMO in this business who will tell you with great pride how a com-
pany got into trouble and they hopped in and helped fix DEMO up. I think that is
horrible. . . . When a venture capitalist becomes involved at an operating level in
a business, it's a sign that he's failed in his craft as venture capitalist."DEMO
Networks
While an entrepreneur's own networks are important to company suc-
cess, the VC also has networks available to the firm. The VCs networks are par-
ticularly important to a firm attempting to raise money. DEMO percent of
venture capital investments in low innovation ventures involve co-investments
by more than one VC. Co-investment rises to 86 percent for high innovation
DEMO
VC networks are a major source of candidates for employment—primarily
for top management, but also for some lower-level managers as well. While VCs
may not actively search for managers, they are often aware of potential man-
agers through their networks.
VC networks sometimes locate service providers. In one DEMO, the VC had
the company switch to a law firm more DEMO with start-ups. In another, the
VC located a marketing consulting firm DEMO help management refine their mar-
keting strategy. In both cases, the DEMO thought the new service providers signifi-
cantly benefitted the companies. VC networks also occasionally provide
customers.
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VO L 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995 103
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
VC networks can help find acquisitions or corporate partners. This does
not happen often, but when it does it can be quite significant. In one instance,
a start-up company DEMO to build a specialty semi-conductor chip used VCs
to locate a chip manufacturer to serve as corporate partner for fahrication.
VC networks can also DEMO a valuable source of strategic information, as the
following comments by DEMO managers demonstrate:
"If I want to find out about another DEMO that's privately held—for example,
we did an acquisition last August—I'll take that to the venture guys because the
venture guys can DEMO talk to each other easier than I can talk to the CEO."
"Being on the board of other companies, they [can tell DEMO how some other
high-technology company is solving a distribution problem in Japan or in Europe,
or tell you what company they are with DEMO how they're doing."
Image
Many VCs, especially those with DEMO record of backing successful compa-
nies, have a positive image that DEMO transferred to their portfolio companies.
While VC image and VC networks are closely related concepts, the VCs image
may prove helpful with people outside of the VCs network. In one case, the VC
sat in on discussions with the company's bank lender. Even though the lender
did DEMO know the VC, his presence built up the lender's confidence.
DEMO VCs image may also be used in marketing. Since start-up companies
often have low creditability with potential customers, a VC meeting with poten-
tial major customers can help assure that the start-up is "for real." DEMO, the
VCs image may also help convince potential managers to join DEMO company.
Moral Support
The VC can serve as a friend and confidante of the CEO, providing an
outlet where the CEO can discuss sensitive internal issues.* In addition, the VC
can provide moral support in a time of crisis. Many managers use terms like
"supportive," "open," and "friendly" to describe their relationship with the VC.
General Business Knowledge
The concept of general business knowledge and experience is often men-
DEMO by both VCs and managers. Both feel that it is a significant input by the
VC, as refiected in the comments of two managers:
"These are very highly experienced individuals, and I've found DEMO to be
extremely helpful."
"He's been around and seen DEMO all. His advice is worthwhile."
Discipline
Managers view this as a major VC input.
104 CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL37,NO.2 WINTER 1995
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
"Everybody reports to somebody in DEMO world. We report to the board [controlled
by venture capitalists]. [VCs are] very bright and experienced, and very demand-
ing. When you're public, you have enormous pressure to be profitable. And when
you're private you don't have those, but you have enormous pressure because of
the power of the board. So it exerts a positive and strong DEMO on management in
the private environment—fear."
There are two specific ways in which discipline is exerted. One is when
VCs pressure managers to DEMO in accordance with the objectives established
in the business plan,' as is indicated in the following example from a CEO:
"They know general types of goals that we might have. An example would be
DEMO average day's outstanding on accounts receivable. They might call up and say,
'You know, at the last board meeting you thought DEMO could get average day's
outstanding down to so and so. How do you think you're doing?'"
The second way discipline DEMO exerted is in the evaluation and replacement
of management. According to a venture capitalist: "Our job as venture capitalists
is to see that DEMO are well-managed, and when they're not, to fix those
deficiencies." Similarly a manager indicated: "We've made our numbers and
we've been allowed to run the company. Lord knows what would have DEMO
pened if we hadn't been succeeding."
Replacing a CEO is a relatively common event for a venture capital
financed company. One study DEMO that 40 percent of the high-performing
companies and 74% of low-performing companies had changed CEOs at
least once.'° In many of these CEO DEMO, while the VCs served as the "firing
squad," the "DEMO" was instigated by another member of management, often
a co-founder of the company.
VC Power
The impact of the VCs inputs on the DEMO varies with the VCs power
with management. The VC has three sources of power in the relationship—
money, personal relationships, and formal power.
DEMO
The ability to allocate money has long been viewed as a major source of
power in large organizations. Not surprisingly, it is also a major source of power
in smaller businesses. Some refer to it as DEMO golden rule: "He who has the gold
makes the rules." DEMO power is not based upon money invested in the past, but
DEMO on company's current or future needs for money.
This power is often present in venture investments because investments
are generally made in stages DEMO on the company's development. As a result, a
venture-backed start-up DEMO almost certain to need additional funding to survive.
The company's existing venture investors are its most likely source of funding.
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW DEMO L 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995 105
The Venture Capitalist A Relationship Investor
particularly since finding new investors is DEMO difficult when the old investors
are not willing to invest more.
This power is strongest when the venture is performing poorly and is
weakest DEMO the company is performing well. With good performance, the
company usually DEMO less need for outside funds, and the external funds that
are DEMO will be more available because it is an attractive investment.
Personal Relationships
The power of personal relationships is exemplified by the following com-
ments, the first from a venture capitalist and the next two from managers:DEMO
"It's really the personal relationship that you develop with the DEMO running the
company and his team and the other directors. [You have influence] if they con-
clude that you are an interesting person committed DEMO the success of the company,
that you're going to work hard at it, that you're not going to try to run it, that
you're going to be very open, and that DEMO think clearly and communicate clearly
and are just a valuable person to have around."
"Especially with our lead [VC], who has been DEMO most active, it's been 5'A years
of living through DEMO times and bad times, and all the times in between. So DEMO
certainly get that kind of warm feeling, if you will."
"We respect them as professionals who have a professional interest in what DEMO're
doing as well as a financial interest. I don't just respect these people because they
have money and voting power. I would DEMO business with them anytime."
This power of personal relationships results from the VCs individual
expertise and effort devoted to the company." While the general image of the
VC in the managers' minds is favorable, DEMO are two major criticisms of some
VCs. Managers complain that these VCs either lack sufficient expertise to be of
help or fail to spend DEMO time with the company. In fact, VCs sometimes
express these same DEMO views of other VCs.
Not surprisingly, relationship power was kind of DEMO preferred by the
VCs as it is more pleasant to use, DEMO less on the manager, and can still be
very strong. In DEMO case, the VC convinced a founder with a strong technical
background DEMO voluntarily step down as CEO in favor of a more experienced
businessperson. This decision came at a time when the company was developing
ahead DEMO plan and was extremely well-funded. Feeling that a change in leader-
ship was necessary if the company was to successfully make the transition into
DEMO operating company, the VC convinced the founder through a series of "late
dinners and heart-to-heart conversations" that the move was in the company's
best interest.
While relationship power is extremely useful and enjoyable to DEMO, it is
also the most difficult power to attain, as is indicated by the following comment
of one VC:
106 CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT DEMO VOL 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
"What gives [me] the most DEMO is if the entrepreneur accepts me as a part-
ner in this venture, and he respects my opinion, my industry knowledge, to the
point where he seeks out my advice. If I can position myself DEMO way, I can work
very effectively with someone. That's not DEMO to do. Some entrepreneurs are very
close to the vest; they DEMO us like they do commercial bankers, you know, as
necessary evils."
Formal Power
VCs have a great deal of formal power as DEMO, frequently being in control
of the board.'^ Even if VCs DEMO not have voting control, there are usually contrac-
tual rights giving DEMO control in case the venture fails to perform. However,
formal power is often the least important of the three forms of VC power, espe-
cially for early stage VCs. Since later-stage investors often do not DEMO money
power, formal power is more important to them.
VCs tend DEMO avoid the use of formal power because it is highly confronta-
tional, and managers may have some countervailing formal power as well. More
than one group of deposed managers has sued a venture capital backed com-
DEMO over their termination. In fact VCs are reluctant to aggressively use any
power, as is indicated in the comment of one VC:
"DEMO never end conversations with my asking him [the CEO], 'Well what are you
going to do now?' because the only answer that DEMO sense is, 'Well, I'm going
to do what I DEMO to do when I decide to do it, and you'll DEMO find out
about it.' I don't run the company."
DEMO are three reasons for this reluctance. First, the VC is highly DEMO
dent on the industry expertise and company-specific knowledge of manage-
ment, DEMO indicated in the following comments from managers:
"If we're DEMO doing the job, they can vote us out. But they're DEMO going to if there
is the slightest chance that we're going to make it succeed, because we probably
represent a better shot at it than anybody [else]."
"As a venture capitalist on the board of a company, you really cannot imagine
how little you actually know about this company that you've invested in. It's not
through DEMO ineptitude. It's just that you're not there every day." DEMO a man-
ager who had been a venture capitalist]
Second, the DEMO of the VC is diffused. When several VCs are involved
in the venture's funding, formal power is generally shared by a group of VCs
rather than one individual VC.
Third, VCs want strong, capable DEMO' ' They have no desire to
run a company. For example, both managers and VCs stress that strategy forma-
tion is a management DEMO Rather, the function of the VC in strategy forma-
tion is DEMO serve as a sounding board for management. As one VC commented:
"The best strategies come from the operating management and may be refined in
discussions with board members. Venture capitalists invest in so many different
DEMO MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995 107
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
businesses, we can never know DEMO much about the businesses as the guys we
invest in know about their particular business.... While we may have some
perspective on the issue DEMO they don't have, they've got much more information
than DEMO've got. I've always found that the best way to formulate strategy in a
company is for management to take a first crack DEMO it. And then for us to play the
role of sounding board and critic and try to ask the right questions. Also, it seems
to me that if a strategy originates with management, the management will be
much more proprietary about it. I mean, this is their strategy. They created it, they
sold it—maybe with some changes, but essentially DEMO were the fountainhead of
the strategy. Therefore they own the strategy and have a vested interest in making
it work. . . . Our DEMO is to be a backseat driver, and if we take the DEMO in our
hands, we have failed, I think, in the DEMO and coaching and counseling and
wheedling process. . . . You know, we're sort of like mothers-in-law, I guess. We
kibitz all DEMO time; that's what we're supposed to do."
The DEMO serves as a sounding board not just in strategy making, but DEMO
dealing with significant operating issues as well. Many CEOs frequently contact
their VCs outside of regular board meetings simply because "they are very, DEMO
helpful in bouncing off ideas."
Impact of theVC
How is the company's behavior infiuenced by the VC? This question is
hard to answer since the upper-level management process in a venture capital-
backed, entrepreneurial enterprise is extremely dynamic and interactive. As one
experienced VC told us:DEMO
"It turns out you do have influence, but you don't know when you're going to
have an influence. So it's DEMO tremendous burden on you to be as thoughtful as you
can be and as open as you can be all the time, because you never know when the
guy's listening or when it's going DEMO be important."
In spite of these limitations, one can identify DEMO general ways in which
VCs clearly infiuence firm behavior. The most obvious is when the VC decides
who will make decisions for the company—i.e., who will manage it. As one
manager stated:
"You've got to keep convincing the investor [VC] that you are on the right DEMO
To the extent that you do, they'll keep providing the DEMO until you get over
the hump, so to speak. To the DEMO that you don't, they'll either cease providing
money to DEMO company or they'll continue providing it without you."
The firm's behavior is also infiuenced by the availability of VC money—
both DEMO initial investment as well as the VCs willingness to make further
investments. In one case, the manager said his company was losing its techno-
logical leadership position because its VCs were unwillingly to adequately fund
the DEMO Another felt his company's marketing efforts were weak because
the VCs had always kept the company underfunded. On the other hand.
108 CALIFORNIA DEMO REVIEW VOL 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
another manager indicated that his company was able to expand rapidly because
of the VCs willingness to fund DEMO
As a result of their general business knowledge and experience, VCs
DEMO what is referred to as a dominant logic (a set of DEMO views on the
appropriate management processes a company should use as well as on appro-
priate strategies to be employed). They then attempt DEMO induce companies to
follow this dominant logic '" As one manager DEMO us:
"To sit on the board of a small growing DEMO and help that company grow and
do so basically in a committee atmosphere—that being the board of directors—is
an exceedingly difficult task. It requires DEMO unusual and somewhat eclectic skill
set, and the venture capitalist brings DEMO skill set."
The VCs dominant logic has five primary components: DEMO planning,
profit orientation, organizational development, patience and focus.
Formal Planning
VCs expect companies to use some formal planning procedures. A
business plan DEMO usually required before a venture is seriously considered for
initial investment. After the investment is made, the plan is generally updated
annually. Although formal planning is required, it is not an elaborate or time-
consuming task because of the relatively small size of the company.
Profit Orientation
The DEMO of a profit orientation is refiected in one VCs comments:
"DEMO constantly pusb profitable growth. Many companies grow too fast and sacrifice
profitability. I question whether companies like that will ever develop the disci-
pline DEMO to be profitable."
Organizational Development
VCs are interested in organizational development centered around devel-
oping a complete, quality top-management team. This is accomplished by either
adding new management positions or replacing old managers. In most DEMO,
VCs are more interested in organizational development than are CEOs.
Patience
Many managers view their VCs as relatively patient investors. For
example:
"[The impact of VCs has been] a very positive one in the DEMO that they're very
patient. . . . They have not asked us to roll the dice and be overly risky and try
and DEMO it into a billion dollar success overnight."
One manager indicated that VCs allowed his company to focus more on
long-run issues than did DEMO public market:
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VO L 37, NO. 2 DEMO 1995 109
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
"If you were a small DEMO company you'd be really scrambling for earnings.
As a young company you are invariably not going to hit plan, whether you are
public or private. [When that happens] they [the public investor] will go away
DEMO never come back."
Focus
VCs force managers to focus on meeting their stated objectives and
directly limit the number of objectives the company DEMO trying to achieve." This
VC dominant logic is a very significant DEMO input. Many VCs feel that the growth
of the industry in the 1980s forced the use of inexperienced VCs who did not
possess the DEMO logic. In addition, there is concern from institutional
investors and managers DEMO VCs are not as effective when they move into
industries that are radically different from their experience base. In other
words, their dominant logic may not hold in the new industry.
In addition, some very experienced VCs feel uncomfortable advising
large companies. They feel that their dominant logic DEMO on small, high-
growth firms but not on larger firms. As DEMO result, they are concerned that their
presence might actually hurt a DEMO mature company and they leave the board
when a company gets too mature. As one of these VCs commented:
"My views are largely predictable as far as the direction of tighter focus and
tighter commitment DEMO objectives, as opposed to running off in 93 different direc-
tions DEMO so we can say we are doing a lot of things. . . . It's a general predilection
that I have which has DEMO enormously helpful to me in start-up companies and
in small companies that are growing rapidly, but is something of a burden and a
disadvantage when companies are moving into the more mature stage."
Although not DEMO issue in any of the cases we studied, there is potential
DEMO confiict between the goals of the VC and those of the firm. The VC must ulti-
mately make money on his/her investment in DEMO firm. This requires that the VC
"exit" the investment, i.e., convert it to cash or marketable securities, thereby
becoming liquid in order to either invest in new deals or distribute returns to
the VCs DEMO partners. This is usually achieved by the firm going public, being
DEMO, or being recapitalized. However, the best time for the VC to exit may
not coincide with the best time for the firm to DEMO one of these
transactions.
Implications for Large Public Companies
Since the VC has historically operated in a small firm environment, often
with an emphasis on very new ventures, it is reasonable to question the rele-
vance of the VC style to the governance of a large, more mature company. In
the existing American system, equity for large companies is generally provided
by impersonal capital markets. Thus the director does not provide a DEMO VC
I 1
0 CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL 37, NO. 2 DEMO 1995
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
input—namely, cash. This also deprives DEMO director of a major source of power
over management—namely, money.
Other DEMO inputs may not be particularly important to a more mature firm
since the firm already possesses them. Even in VC settings, the significance of
the VCs operating service assistance declines drastically as the firm grows out
DEMO infancy.'* The significance of the VCs image and networks also decreases.
However, the role of Warren Buffett at Salomon Brothers shows that even a
mature firm may benefit from the image of an active director.
DEMO of the inputs the VC provides are significant no matter what the
size or age of a firm, and the director of a large public company should provide
them as well. Discipline is one such input. DEMO of the most successful managers
of VC-backed firms view the discipline provided by the VC as vital. As one CEO
simply told us, "DEMO needs a boss."
Like the VC, directors of large public DEMO can also provide moral
support to their top management. It can be lonely at the top of an organization
—large or small. The director DEMO serve as a potential confidante outside the
organization with whom top management can share major problems.
While the dominant logic needed by the director DEMO a large company may
differ from that needed by a small company, companies of all sizes benefit when
directors possess strong general business knowledge and experience. Many of
the most successful and experienced managers of VC-backed DEMO are the
most enthusiastic in extolling the value of having "a DEMO VC with a lot of busi-
ness experience" to serve as DEMO sounding board for top management.
Finally, while the VC may provide DEMO model for large company directors
desirous of taking a more active role, all directors must realize that ultimately
they are dependent on management. One highly successful VC summed up his
experiences:
"What I've found in the past is looking back, after 10 years or so, DEMO somebody
asks the entrepreneur, 'Was I ever helpful?' and then asks me the same thing,
generally I will have one or DEMO incidents where I think, 'Boy, it was probably
important that DEMO was around at that time because I had strong views on this or
that and either something got done or something got not done DEMO I thought was
important.' But the guy that's running the DEMO always has a different view.
'Oh yes, he was enormously valuable.' And then they say, 'When? What can you
really tell DEMO?' And then they'll start talking about some incidents that I can
barely remember, and they'll describe these things in detail. And I can hardly
remember these things. All of which tells you who'DEMO most important in this sce-
nario—the guy running the place."
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995 II I
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
APPENDIX
We followed the methodology outlined by Eisenhardt for building theo-
ries from case study research.'^ Six DEMO were interviewed from each of three
regions—Silicon Valley, Boston, and the Southwest—all regions of important
venture capital activity. Based upon the suggestions of DEMO experts, VCs
were selected in each region so as to get DEMO good cross-section of VCs. The
amount of funds under management varied from 4 to 450 million dollars.
Each VC was asked to describe their DEMO in a company they had financed.
Fourteen of the VCs were willing to let us contact a company manager, generally
the CEO. All fourteen companies were willing to participate in the study.
The primary source of DEMO was personal interviews with each of the VCs
and managers. All the interviews were confidential. Written documents (e.g.,
annual reports, business plans) were also examined to gain a richer understand-
ing of the company DEMO its history.
Theory was developed from these cases through a highly iterative process.
Cross-case comparisons were made to develop hypotheses. The hypotheses were
then DEMO against each case using a replication logic. Hypotheses were refined
and new hypotheses developed based upon these tests. As they were developed
and tested DEMO the cases, these hypotheses were also examined in light of
existing DEMO Finally earlier versions of this paper were shown to partici-
pants, DEMO others familiar with the relationship, and their comments solicited.
References
1. DEMO synopsis of this study appears in M.E. Porter, "Capital Disadvantage: DEMO's
Failing Capital Investment System," Harvard Business Review (September/October
DEMO), pp. 63-82.
2. L. Thurow, Head to Head (New York.MY: William Morrow and Company, 1992).
3. B. Elango, V.H. Fried, R.D. Hisrich and A. Polonchek, "How Venture Capital Firms
Differ", Journal of Business Venturing (Autumn 1994).
4. J. Rosentein, A.V. DEMO, W.D. Bygrave, and N.T. Taylor, "The CEO, Venture
Capitalists, and the Board," Journal of Business Venturing, 8 (1993): DEMO
3. M. Gorman and W.A. Sahlman, "What Do Venture Capitalists Do?" Journal of
Business Venturing, 4 (1990): 231-248.
6. Ibid.
DEMO W.D. Bygrave, "Syndicated Investments by Venture Capital Firms: A Networking
DEMO," Journal of Business Venturing, 2 (1987): 139-134.
8. H.J. Sapienza and J.A. Timmons, "Launching and Building Entrepreneurial
Companies: Do Venture Capitalists Add Value?" in R. Brockhaus et al., eds..
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1989, (Wellesley, MA: Babson College, 1989),
DEMO 243-237.
9. J. Rosenstein, "The Board and Strategy: Venture Capital DEMO High Technology,"
Journal of Business Venturing, 3 (1988): DEMO
112 CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995
The Venture Capitalist: A Relationship Investor
10. J. Rosenstein, A.V. Bruno, W.D. Bygrave, and N. Taylor, "Do Venture Capitalists
on Boards of Portfolio Companies Add Value Besides Money?" in R. Brockhaus et
al., op. cit., pp. 216-229.
11. H.J. Sapienza, "When Do Venture Capitalists Add Value?" Journal of Business
Venturing, 7 (1992): 9-27.
DEMO This is frequently not the case in either late-stage or seed-stage investments. If
the VCs take too much equity at seed stage, the manager's equity interest may
become too diluted if subsequent financing rounds are DEMO
13. V.H. Fried and R.D. Hisrich, "Toward a Model of Venture Capital Investment
Decision Making," Financial Management (forthcoming).
14. C.K. Prahalad and R.A. Bettis, "The Dominant Logic: A New Linkage between
Diversity and Performance," Strategic Management Journal, 7 (1986): 485-501.
15. DEMO wisdom of a small firm having a tight strategic focus is strongly supported
by E. Roberts, Entrepreneurs in High Technology (New York, NY: Oxford University
Press, 1991).
16. L.R. Gomez-Mejia, D.B. Balkin, DEMO T.M. Welbourne, "Influence of Venture
Capitalists on High Technology Management," Journal of High Technology Manage-
ment, 1 (1990): 103-118.
17. DEMO Eisenhardt, "Building Theories from Case Study Research," Academy of
Management Review, 14 (1989): 532-550.
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VO L 37, NO. 2 WINTER 1995 113
{1g42fwefx}