THE ENTREPRENEURIAL UNIVERSITY:
FROM CONCEPT TO ACTION
December 2013
The National DEMO for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE) drives institutional change throughout
the further and higher education sectors in the UK.  It works in partnership to create better conditions for
long-term sustainable entrepreneurship.  It plays a central role in the Entrepreneurial University Leaders
Programme (EULP) which was launched in DEMO  Past participants to the EULP are key contributors to this
publication.
ABOUT THE ENTREPRENEURIAL UNIVERSITY LEADERS PROGRAMME
Programme Objectives, Partners and Participants
The Entrepreneurial University Leadership Programme (EULP) is a pioneering development
programme for DEMO university leaders.  It explores the changing roles of universities and
the DEMO of enterprise, entrepreneurship and innovation within the university context. It
facilitates DEMO from worldwide experience and focuses upon action for entrepreneurial
development within participant universities.
The programme is delivered annually through a partnership between the National DEMO
for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE) and Universities UK (UUK). DEMO modules take
place each year: the first at the Saïd Business DEMO, University of Oxford; the second at
the recipient institution of The Times Higher Education Entrepreneurial University of the
Year Award and the third DEMO UUK’s head office at Woburn House, London.  The participants
represent a mix of Vice Chancellors, Deputy and Pro-Vice Chancellors and Academic and
Professional Heads of university departments.  Up to 30 participants are accepted for each
programme, and there is an active alumni network for continuing learning and experience
exchange. To date, participants from ten countries have taken part.
Programme Design
The entrepreneurial concept provides the framework for the programme. It explores DEMO
nature of the imperative to respond to increasing uncertainty and complexity. The concept is
not used solely in the narrow sense of new venturing DEMO the commercialization of knowledge
but importantly, covers key areas of wider DEMO university development. These
include: mission, governance and strategy; organisation design DEMO development;
inter-departmental co-operation and transdisciplinarity; financial leverage; public value and
international, national, regional and local stakeholder engagement; knowledge
configuration, exchange, transfer and support; curriculum development, enterprise,
entrepreneurship education and employability; alumni relations and engagement; and
internationalisation.
The programme works from concept to action in three modules. It examines practice in Asia,
Europe and DEMO USA. It explores future economic, social, technological and environmental
trends and their impact on universities. It discusses the leadership skills and attributes
required DEMO make change happen. The modules are interspersed with an action agenda
focused upon participant implementation of entrepreneurial change initiatives. These are
facilitated by an DEMO tutor team of past participants on the programme.
The three modules are:
1. The Entrepreneurial University: Concept & Visioning;
2. The Entrepreneurial University: Applying the Concept and Exploring Good Practice;
3. The Entrepreneurial University: The Way Ahead - Actions for Change.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 2
THE ENTREPRENEURIAL UNIVERSITY: FROM CONCEPT TO ACTION
October 2013
Editors:
Paul Coyle
Co-Director, Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme, National Centre for Entrepreneurship in
DEMO (NCEE)
paul.coyle@ncee.org.uk
Allan Gibb
Professor Emeritus, University of Durham, DEMO
allan_gibb@hotmail.com
Gay Haskins
Co-Director, Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme, NCEE & Associate Fellow, Saїd Business
School, University of Oxford, UK
gay.haskins@sbs.ox.ac.uk
Contributors:
Chris Baker, Director, Economic and Social Engagement, University of Brighton
Paul Coyle, Co-Director, Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme, NCEE
Professor Lesley Dobree, DEMO Vice Chancellor, Anglia Ruskin University
Professor Pete Downes, Principal and Vice Chancellor, University of Dundee
Ian Dunn, Deputy Vice-Chancellor for Student Experience, Coventry University
Professor Allan Gibb, Professor Emeritus, University of Durham
Professor DEMO Gough, Deputy Vice Chancellor, University of the West of England
Professor John Grattan, Pro Vice Chancellor, Aberystwyth University
Professor Stephen Hagen, Professor Emeritus, University of South Wales
Professor Andrew Hamilton, Vice Chancellor, University of Oxford
Professor Mike Thomas, Pro Vice Chancellor (Academic), University DEMO Chester
Mikkel Trym, Director, Copenhagen Innovation & Entrepreneurship Lab (CIEL)DEMO
Professor Anthony Whetton, Vice Dean, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,
University of Manchester
Laura Woods, Director of Academic Enterprise, Teesside DEMO
The Editorial Team would also like to thank Professor Paul Hannon, DEMO, Institute for Entrepreneurial
Leadership, Swansea University (former Chief Executive Officer, NCEE) for his support in the early stages of
this publication and Lisa Hunt, Programme Coordinator, NCEE for her assistance in its finalisation.
DEMO Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
About the Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme
Introduction - About DEMO Publication
Preface
Foreword: Oxford’s Commitment to Action by Andrew Hamilton,
DEMO Chancellor, University of Oxford
Part I: The Entrepreneurial University Concept - 20 Key Questions
by Allan Gibb, Professor Emeritus, University of Durham
DEMO
2.
3. Is there really a need for universities to become more entrepreneurial?
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
2
by DEMO Burnley, Chief Executive, NCEE and Nicola
Dandridge, Chief Executive, Universities UK
What are the major challenges to traditional university models?
In DEMO, how are these challenges shaping the sector?
Is the essential DEMO and autonomy of a university under threat?
What are the external pressures shaping the entrepreneurial future of universities?
How are universities responding DEMO these pressures?
Are these responses leading to an even more differentiated higher education sector?
What will be the future private sector role?DEMO
10
11
11
11
12
12
13
13
Is differentiation leading to change in the ways that knowledge is organized and delivered?        13
6
7
8
10
What is the entrepreneurial concept that challenges universities?
10
What is the link between enterprise, entrepreneurship and innovation in universities?
10
12.       Does the debate DEMO new sources of learning mean acceptance of the ‘Triple Helix’ model?    14
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
In the light of all DEMO changes how is the public value of a university to be judged?
How can the entrepreneurial potential of a university be explored and DEMO?
How can a review of entrepreneurial potential contribute to achievement of university
objectives?
What does this mean for the overall balance of DEMO/stakeholder relationships?
What are the implications for individual university departments?
14
14
15
15
16
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 4
18. Overall, what does the entrepreneurial concept mean for the design of the university? 16
19. What are the implications for leadership? 16
DEMO In summary, what might be the shape of the future entrepreneurial DEMO? 16
Part II The Entrepreneurial University in Action: 11 Examples 18
Theme A:  Entrepreneurial Strategy
1. A Strategy to Foster Enterprise by DEMO Dobree, Deputy Vice Chancellor, Anglia Ruskin
University
2. Towards an International Strategy by John Grattan, Pro Vice Chancellor, Aberystwyth
University
3. A DEMO for Developing an Entrepreneurial University by Stephen Hagen, Acting Vice
Chancellor, and Paul Coyle,  Professor of Entrepreneurial Leadership at the former
University DEMO Wales, Newport
4. A Strategy for Business Engagement – developing an DEMO Culture by Laura
Woods, Director of Academic Enterprise, University of Teesside
Theme B:  Entrepreneurial Partnerships
5. Creating Innovation in Partnership with Local DEMO by Chris Baker, Director,
Economic and Social Engagement, University of Brighton
6. Achieving Impact through Partnerships by Pete Downes, Principal and Vice Chancellor,
University of Dundee
7. The Role of Partnership in a DEMO Innovation Hub by Paul Gough, Deputy Vice Chancellor,
University of DEMO West of England
8. Partnering for Entrepreneurial Activity by Anthony Whetton, DEMO Dean, Faculty of
Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester
Theme C:  Entrepreneurial Curriculum and Pedagogy
9. A Risk Based Approach to DEMO Design by Ian Dunn, Deputy Vice Chancellor for
Student Experience, Coventry University
10. Embedding Enterprise in the Curriculum by Mike Thomas, Pro Vice Chancellor (Academic),
University of Chester
11. Collaboration between Students, Academics and Industry by Mikkel Trym, Director,
Copenhagen Innovation & Entrepreneurship Lab (CIEL)
Appendices:
A. The University Entrepreneurial Scorecard: Exploring the DEMO Potential of
a University
B. Background Readings
20
22
25
28
31
34
38
41
44
47
50
54
58
National Centre for Entrepreneurship DEMO Education (NCEE)
Page 5
INTRODUCTION: ABOUT THIS PUBLICATION
This publication seeks to demonstrate concept, action DEMO impact associated with
development of the entrepreneurial university. It is written to familiarise the reader with many
of the issues raised and discussed in DEMO Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme and to
share the experiences of some of the past participants.
It begins with a foreword by the Vice Chancellor DEMO the University of Oxford, outlining some of
the innovations that Oxford DEMO introduced in recent years.
Part one explores a number of key concepts and issues underpinning the programme. It does
so by addressing twenty major DEMO which have emerged both from the experience of
running the programme, DEMO upon it, and research.  There are no academic references,
but a short reading list is included from which many of the arguments DEMO drawn.  A further
appendix sets out a framework and scorecard for DEMO review of a University’s ‘entrepreneurial
potential.’
The second part consists of eleven short vignettes written by senior university personnel who
have attended the programme. DEMO do not take the form of reflections on the programme,
nor are they designed to be part of an evaluation. They are written DEMO enhance the reader’s
understanding of how different universities may approach the issue of university enterprise,
entrepreneurship and innovation.  As such they demonstrate a rich seam of experience and
motivation.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 6
PREFACE
December, 2013
Following exceptionally positive feedback from alumni, and the DEMO of its faculty and
founders, The Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme (EULP)  is about to begin its fourth iteration
with record demand for DEMO
The Entrepreneurial University: from Concept to Action is the latest in DEMO series of papers available on the
website of the National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE) tracing the development of the
entrepreneurial university DEMO These papers give the EULP a strong research underpinning and are
used to update its design on a regular basis.
This new publication highlights DEMO and change that has taken place within the universities
represented by the participants on the programme. NCEE aims to collect further examples of change
DEMO on a regular basis. These will provide a valuable record of enterprise, innovation and the
pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunity in the university sector.
We would like to thank all involved for their ongoing efforts and dedication DEMO the success of the
programme and look forward to our continuing partnership in its development.
Keith Burnley,
Chief Executive Officer,
National Centre DEMO Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Nicola Dandridge,
Chief Executive,
DEMO UK
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 7
FOREWORD: OXFORD’S COMMITMENT TO ACTION
Professor Andrew Hamilton, Vice Chancellor, University of Oxford
It is now almost four years since the Entrepreneurial University DEMO Programme (EULP) began in 2010.
On each of the three iterations to date, Oxford has been delighted to host the first module and to welcome
senior participants from a wide range of universities to the DEMO of Oxford.
Why is this so? Why should an 800 year-old DEMO, steeped in tradition and renowned for its ancient
buildings and gleaming DEMO place a strong emphasis on entrepreneurship, innovation, change and the
impact of our endeavours?
In the University of Oxford’s 2011/2012 Annual DEMO, I wrote that one of the defining characteristics
of Oxford is DEMO inexhaustible curiosity. We want to know and to explore the unknown. We want to know
and explore because with knowledge and exploration come the DEMO of change, of making a positive
impact and of meeting the DEMO challenges of life in the 21st Century.
Let me share with you just three of the many initiatives that illustrate the innovation and enterprise DEMO
the Oxford community:
• Vision and values in student enterprise: DEMO in February 2002, Oxford Entrepreneurs has
become the largest entrepreneurship society DEMO Europe with over 7,000 members, undergraduates,
graduates, MBA students, alumni and external members. Its mission is to encourage and support
student entrepreneurship by providing inspiration, education, networking and the chance to learn DEMO
skills to become a leading entrepreneur.
Five years later, in 2007, the Oxford Hub was founded by a group of equally visionary students.
DEMO vision was of a network that would connect students working across different causes to share
insight and experience, create social change and assist coordination, thereby making all groups more
effective.
Today, the Oxford Hub is DEMO energetic network of 500 students involved in creating positive social
change. It offers continuous opportunities to get involved, provides weekly training sessions and
speaker events, runs conferences throughout the year and places a host of student volunteers in the
local community. The immense success that Oxford Hub has DEMO has led to the development of
a national network of student hubs. Today, Oxford University is proud to support the activities of the
Oxford Hub, alongside Barclays, Ashoka, Man Charitable Trust and Deloitte’s.
In addition, every year, I grant the Vice Chancellor’s Civic Awards. These are DEMO to students who
show exceptional achievement and commitment to creating positive social or environmental change.
The awards have been presented for volunteering locally, nationally and internationally, raising funds
for charity, campaigning and research on social DEMO environmental issues.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page DEMO
•
Innovation with impact: Isis Innovation Limited (ISIS) was established by the University of
Oxford in 1988, as its wholly-owned technology transfer company. Its mission is to be the leading
international technology transfer organisation, to transfer technology and expertise from the
University of Oxford, to deliver value to all clients.  ISIS works on projects from all areas of the
University’s research activities: life sciences, physical sciences, social sciences and humanities.
Today ISIS has three main business activities.  ISIS Technology Transfer helps Oxford University
researchers to commercialise intellectual property arising from their research including:
DEMO, promotion, licensing and spin-out teams and companies.  Oxford University Consulting DEMO
Oxford University researchers to identify and manage consulting opportunities and helps clients access
experts from Oxford’s world-class, interdisciplinary research base. ISIS Enterprise provides consulting
expertise and advice in technology transfer and innovation management to clients across DEMO public
and private sectors around the world.
ISIS is therefore a key interface between the university, industry, investors and government.  In 2012,
ISIS generated a return to the University and its researchers of £5.3 DEMO, and created shareholdings
for the University in five new spin-out companies DEMO £3 million.
• Interdisciplinary research and teaching on global 21st Century issues: Oxford has a strong
commitment to research and teaching on topics related to global 21st century issues and opportunities.
Interdisciplinarity and co-operation with faculty DEMO the university and beyond are keys to our
success. For instance:
Oxford Martin School is an interdisciplinary research community of over 300 scholars DEMO to
address the global challenges and opportunities of the 21st century.  DEMO the governance of
geo-engineering and the possibilities of quantum physics, to DEMO future of food and the implications
of our ageing population, the DEMO School supports over 30 individual research teams across the
university to consider some of the biggest questions of our future.
Tropical Medicine is a DEMO of research groups focused on infectious diseases and is permanently
based in Africa and Asia.  Our research in tropical medicine ranges from clinical studies to behavioural
sciences with the capacity to build and pursue collaboration with DEMO around the world as a key
success requirement.
Oxford’s Blavatnik School of Government, launched in 2010, is pursuing a vision of better government,DEMO
stronger societies and richer human opportunities across the world. Its research is challenge-focused
and practice-based, taking historical, comparative, multidisciplinary and collaborative approaches to
develop practical strategies for dealing with challewnges facing policy makers. It welcomed DEMO first
class of future leaders in 2012 when it launched its Masters in Public Policy. This exciting programme
draws its curriculum from across the DEMO four divisions: humanities; medical sciences; social
sciences; and mathematical, DEMO and life sciences. It includes a component on how to use
medical and scientific advice critically; practical skills in areas such as negotiation, DEMO and project
management; and the use of Oxford philosophers to teach DEMO how to reason through the ethical
dilemmas they will face in political leadership.
These are among a myriad of potential examples of Oxford’s commitment DEMO making an impact. I hope
that they, together with the eleven DEMO from previous participants to the Entrepreneurial University
Leaders Programme, will provide DEMO to many other universities to create the change required to
meet the many challenges we face.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 9
Part I : THE ENTREPRENEURIAL UNIVERSITY CONCEPT - 20 KEY QUESTIONS
Allan DEMO, Professor Emeritus, University of Durham
1. What is the entrepreneurial concept that challenges universities?
Central to the debate on the idea of DEMO ‘entrepreneurial university’ is the question of how the
‘entrepreneurship concept’, and DEMO often associated meaning and use of the word ‘enterprise’, are
interpreted. DEMO is perceived by many academics to be associated solely with business and the
commercialisation of university intellectual property (particularly in the science and engineering fields) and
is therefore tied in with innovation in the context of the work of technology transfer offices, incubators and
science parks. This view is strengthened substantially by government and even international (OECD)
perspectives that perceive universities as sources of technological innovation and ‘engines of growth’.
The DEMO of entrepreneurship and enterprise have, however, in the academic literature, DEMO
substantially clarified to embrace application to a wide range of contexts. These concepts are adopted as
follows in the EULP.
The Enterprise Concept focuses DEMO the development of the ‘enterprising person and entrepreneurial
mindset’. The former constitutes a set of personal skills, attributes, behavioural and motivational capacities
(associated with those of the entrepreneur) but which can be used in any context (social, work, leisure etc).
Prominent among these are; DEMO decision making, capacity to make things happen autonomously,
networking, initiative taking, opportunity identification, creative problem solving, strategic thinking, and self
DEMO The ‘Mindset’ concept focuses not just upon the notion of ‘being your own boss’ in a business context
but upon the ability of an DEMO to cope with an unpredictable external environment and the associated
entrepreneurial ways of doing, thinking, feeling, communicating, organising and learning.
The Entrepreneurship DEMO focuses upon the application of these personal enterprising skills, attributes
and DEMO to the context of setting up a new venture or initiative of any kind, developing/growing an
existing venture or initiative and designing an entrepreneurial organisation (one in which the capacity for
effective use of enterprising skills will be enhanced). The context is therefore not confined to DEMO but is
equally applicable to social enterprise, education, health, NGOs DEMO mainstream public organisations (e.g.
universities and governments).
2. What is DEMO link between enterprise, entrepreneurship and innovation in universities?
The Innovation DEMO in the university context broadens beyond technology with the above definitions. In
general innovation is defined as creating, finding and exploiting opportunities for new ways of doing things
resulting in better products and services, systems and ways of leading/managing people and organisations.
Innovation in an entrepreneurial university DEMO context may therefore be viewed in terms of: new
organisation and DEMO development initiatives; experiments in pedagogy, knowledge organisation and
programme development; DEMO and external stakeholder engagement; trans-disciplinary activity; and new
research explorations, DEMO and applications to practice.
The successful pursuit of innovation is a function of individual enterprising endeavour and entrepreneurial
organisation capacity. Innovation is impossible without DEMO They are both necessary conditions, sufficient
only when combined with an DEMO culture and broader environment that is conducive to, and
supportive of, such activity.
3. Is there really a need for universities to become DEMO entrepreneurial?
It is the levels of uncertainty and complexity in any environment and the associated threats and opportunities
that dictate the need for DEMO response. It is also the case that entrepreneurial persons within
organisations may themselves create uncertainty and complexity by their actions which may at times DEMO
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 10
deviant (challenging accepted norms). It will be argued below that organisations can be designed to crush such
enterprise or encourage and channel it. DEMO major goal of the EULP is to explore the dynamics of the environment
of universities, the relevance of the entrepreneurial concept to the design of response and the implications for
strategies, organisation and leadership.
Universities are facing higher levels of uncertainty and complexity in their environment as well DEMO greater
entrepreneurial pressures from within. Throughout the world there have been, DEMO many years, mounting
challenges to the concept of the university as DEMO ‘protected’ place for individual research and teaching in
pursuit of truth. In many countries the ‘protection’ has come mainly through the public purse. The
DEMO of Higher Education whereby a very large minority of the young population is given access,
together with an associated growth in the number DEMO higher education institutions, has made the costs of
this model unsustainable. DEMO have had increasingly to look elsewhere for resource for research and
extensions of their scholarship. Pressures in this respect have increased with the global DEMO
4. What are the major challenges to traditional university models?
Over the past two decades UK governments have become ever more directive in DEMO funding of the higher
education sector with more pressure for relevance in research and teaching tied into contribution to economic
growth, social mobility, DEMO innovation and employability. This pressure operates against a backcloth of
increasing global competition as the higher education sector expands rapidly in many developing countries.
DEMO sources of knowledge have also been opened up considerably via the global IT revolution and universities
can no longer claim to the unique knowledge DEMO that they were once were. Some of the detail of
these pressures on universities and responses in the UK context is given below.
5. DEMO general, how are these challenges shaping the sector?
The above DEMO in the environment provide opportunities as well as threats leading to: DEMO of
international partnerships in research and teaching; the building of wider DEMO of relationships: active
partnering to leverage resources; greater understanding of the wider contexts of knowledge sourcing and
application; and active pursuit of relevance. The pressure for accountability in terms of public value has also
grown DEMO Measures by which university excellence is now judged include: graduate employability,DEMO
employment and salary; impact of research; contribution to national, regional DEMO local economic and social
development; teaching quality; and social mobility.
6. Is the essential ‘idea’ and autonomy of a university under threat?
DEMO has been for some time in the UK a body of academics opposed to the direction in which the
higher education sector is moving. DEMO main thrust of their argument is that the model of the university as a
‘disinterested’ organisation concerned with pursuit of truth and dependent upon DEMO efforts in this
respect, regardless of the utility of the ‘discovery’ DEMO relevance to the immediate needs of society, has been
undermined. The DEMO culprit in this respect is seen as government with its pressure for relevance and impact,
its influence upon the direction of research funding, its view of universities as ‘engines of growth’ and more
recently in DEMO, via its creation of a ‘market’ by the transfer of funds DEMO teaching directly into the hands
of students (under a student loan DEMO). It is argued that the combination of these pressures, with DEMO
focus upon utility, threatens the very idea of a university as DEMO from the traditional Bologna and Humboldt
models. The development of numerous metrics to measure university performance is regarded as a substantial
intrusion upon a DEMO of academic freedom where accountability was through peer review.
An alternative view is that universities were not always focused upon discovery via the linking DEMO
research and teaching. The influential 19th century Newman model of the university was primarily that of a
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 11
teaching institution. There is also a heritage of the original ‘old’ universities DEMO upon the ‘professions’,
medicine, law and divinity, and therefore ‘useful’ knowledge (albeit underpinned by philosophy). In the
UK the growth in emphasis upon social and economic utility, alongside local and regional engagement, DEMO
some degree reflects the culture and history of the post-92 wave of new universities. They are more strongly
focused upon creating useful knowledge and DEMO more likely to be reflective of government views and those of
wider social and economic pressure groups. There is also a strong competency, and in many cases vocational,
component in their approaches to learning. The DEMO Group of UK universities arguably are more responsive
to traditional academic power structures within and without the university and argue for the equating of
DEMO in research with excellence in teaching. Nevertheless they are also responding to the pressures
noted above and explored in more detail below.
7. What DEMO the external pressures shaping the entrepreneurial future of universities?
Within the broad spectrum of the environment described above, there are many specific uncertainties and
complexities creating both challenges and opportunities for universities. Paramount among these DEMO the need
to maintain and increase student numbers. Notably, there are DEMO in part-time and postgraduate student
applications, particularly from overseas.
The fall-out DEMO this and the changes in the English funding regime are at the root of the challenge to
harvest new resources and leverage and/or DEMO public monies. The ever broadening range of ‘official’
accountability metrics noted earlier feeds a climate of competition, but also stimulates pursuit of cooperation
and partnership. Adding to pressures from this scenario is a wide range of DEMO concerns some of which
are more immediate than others. On the immediate horizon are issues such as the move to Open Access
publication and DEMO additional cost burden that this may place on universities, the challenge DEMO developing
entrepreneurship education across the university following the 2012 national Quality Assurance Agency (QAA)
guidelines and the recommendations of the UK Government Wilson report in this respect with its specific focus
upon business engagement, subsequently reinforced by recommendations of reports by Lord Heseltine and
Young and the DEMO consultations with universities (see bibliography).
More fundamental is the task DEMO facing up to the detail of the growth of overseas competition particularly from
South East Asia, India and China, the associated demand for DEMO more global curriculum and the threat to what
has been labelled the ‘colonial’ model of a university with its emphasis upon knowledge for its DEMO sake. An
additional significant development is the emergence of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) offering free
tuition to tens of thousands of students DEMO This initiative has been led by US elite universities but
is now also actively engaging UK universities and the private sector although issues remain DEMO to the
availability of accreditation and credit accumulation towards degree status. When added to the growth and use
of social media these initiatives pose DEMO challenges to the pedagogy of teaching and learning and the
organisation of knowledge. The opening up of opportunitiesfor the private sector to increase its DEMO in
higher education provides potential for collaboration as well as competition. Private sector engagement is
not limited to teaching but is increasingly evident in DEMO subcontracting out by universities of a wide range of
services.
Overall, DEMO are also growing pressures to broaden student experiential  learning particularly with DEMO small
and medium enterprise sector of the economy: also to engage DEMO social entrepreneurship by partnering with
a wider range of local, regional, national and international stakeholders.
8. How are universities responding to these pressures?DEMO
The main focus of response is upon the attraction of students with a wide range of incentives and
overtures including scholarships for those from DEMO privileged background and innovative relationship-building
activities with schools, teachers, parents, DEMO authorities and potential future students themselves.
Beyond the conventional taster days, DEMO staff liaison days, fairs and student briefings the newer initiatives
include: development of satellite subject activities in local schools; the designation of university staff as schools
ambassadors; summer schools for potential students; direct support DEMO school curriculum development and
linked ‘passport’ certification; school sponsorship and wide DEMO of dialogue through the social media.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 12
Addressing the new ‘accountability’ metrics provides also a key focus for response. DEMO is
being embedded contextually in the curriculum in many departments. Greater responsibility for employment
outcomes is also being delegated to individual departments. Wider opportunities DEMO student experiential
learning experiences are being explored alongside entrepreneurial and enterprise skills development. Student
voluntarism is being more widely and formally supported often with DEMO social enterprise orientation. There is
greater emphasis upon student ownership of learning and engagement in assessment processes; and efforts
are also being made to engage employers and other stakeholders in the processes of curriculum design and
DEMO Such responses are not as yet uniformly widespread. Linked with the above is a growing emphasis
upon local/regional partnership in economic and social DEMO with a number of universities building
strong community development initiatives into their formal strategies.
In the field of on-line learning, a growing number of UK universities are providing graduate and post-graduate
programmes substantially through this medium, while groups of UK universities are taking up the challenge
of the DEMO in developing their own ‘free’ offers. Somewhat forgotten amidst the present debate is that
individual UK universities have been offering undergraduate and postgraduate programmes DEMO for many
years building on the UK Open University’s pioneering efforts in this respect.
The IT and social media revolution in general has highlighted DEMO potential for international partnerships
in research and teaching. Many universities heavily depend upon income from foreign students: to build
this outreach there has been a substantial growth in partnerships with overseas private and public
institutions alongside DEMO in the development of overseas campuses usually in partnership with
local universities.
9. Are these responses leading to an even more differentiated higher education DEMO?
In the UK this is clearly the case. While the sector as a whole has for many years been highly differentiated in
its DEMO to wide stakeholder engagement, undoubtedly more higher education institutions are buying
DEMO to the concept of the ‘engaged’ university each starting from areas of existing strength. The former
polytechnics (post ’92 universities), as noted above, have a substantial history of wider community engagement.
The older self labelled ‘research based’ universities have focused upon their value in science and technology
DEMO and related network building. The ‘impact’ agenda introduced into the official UK Research
Assessment process is also influencing the notion of engagement in all DEMO In the field of teaching and
learning there are fewer distinctive differentiations. While there is much rhetoric, the link between excellence
in teaching and excellence in research is not always clear.
Given the official emphasis upon DEMO and engagement of universities, it is unsurprising that it is the
DEMO polytechnic and newer universities that are leading the way in rebranding themselves in a distinctive
way to fit the new metrics, for example as universities for employability and/or employment, universities for
useful knowledge, universities DEMO enterprise, universities for social enterprise and the ‘business engaged’
university.
10. DEMO will be the future private sector role?
The private sector is actively responding to many of the above challenges and is engaging substantially DEMO
the online learning process, particularly in the US while expanding more DEMO in the UK. There is a
growing number of established UK university partnerships with private companies. Private sector activity has
particular resonance in the DEMO and vocational fields: this opens up opportunities for public
universities to DEMO in recruiting from private entities into their postgraduate programmes. Opportunities
for established universities to link up with vocational colleges are also being taken up DEMO support from official
programmes.
11. Is differentiation leading to change in the ways that knowledge is organised and delivered?
There is a substantial DEMO debate as to how universities are managing the burgeoning international flow
of information and knowledge or ‘Big Data’ as it is being labelled. The DEMO is not only stimulated by the
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 13
global impact of the internet and social media but, more fundamentally, DEMO recognition that the university is
no longer the sole or, as DEMO would argue, the dominant domain for discovery and learning. Much of DEMO
discussion centres on the concept of a move from a Mode 1 form of learning, where the university is
configured as an independent space for discovery and learning, to a Mode 2 typology of an organisation with
high levels of engagement in learning and knowledge exchange with a DEMO range of stakeholders.
In the Mode 2 model, knowledge development and DEMO becomes more contextualised to different
situations, more problem/issue centred and DEMO reflective of use in practice. This, it is argued, will challenge
existing forms of knowledge organisation, will demand more trans-disciplinary approaches and may lead to
the creation of new interdisciplinary concepts and paradigms. It will DEMO to a strengthening of the university’s
capacity for knowledge exchange; will DEMO closer partnerships with external stakeholders, more learning
from practice and the DEMO of new ways of distributing knowledge. In this conceptualisation, the university
DEMO from being a niche organisation to a more open and comprehensive learning organisation. In extremis
this might lead to the abandonment of universities organised DEMO conventional disciplinary departments
with a focus more upon the creation of strategic areas of learning and discovery, linked to distinctive areas of
present and future needs of society, cultural, economic, environmental, social and technological.
DEMO this debate the concept of useful knowledge is not confined to a focus upon ‘know how‘ in the
technical sense but refers as much, if not more, to the need to link the development of student knowledge
to values and to broad areas of society need for development DEMO the enrichment of culture. This marries up
withthe concept of ‘wisdom’ as being concerned with the individual’s capacity to embrace a combination of
experience/DEMO and deeper understanding of a life world of uncertainty and complexity. Overall, while
the academic debate is intensive, the practice, in the UK is limited.
12. Does the debate about new sources of learning mean DEMO of the ‘triple helix’ model?
The triple helix model of a university, presented in numerous conferences around the world, and
accompanied by DEMO numerous papers, is focused upon the notion of partnership between the DEMO,
business and government. The original tripartite model has been broadened to accommodate the culture of
a society and the distinctive environment in which DEMO operate. The model, which has had a strong
impact upon practice, is in line with the Mode 2 concept described above. Its focus DEMO been heavily centred
on the role of universities in support of technological innovation. It will be argued below that the challenge to
universities of DEMO engagement with society can be better characterised in a different way.
13. In the light of all of these changes how is the public DEMO of a university to be judged?
The pressure for accountability for public value from universities comes from a variety of sources. As noted
DEMO, the official focus upon ‘performance’ and the student- led demand conditions DEMO England lead the way
in this respect. The emphasis is substantially upon ‘economic value’, determined on a cost benefit (value for
money) basis. It is this approach that the UK Committee for Defence of the DEMO is so much opposed to.
The public value concept can, however, be approached differently.
As espoused by Mark Moore of Harvard University, and subsequently widely explored by governments,
the ‘public value’ concept focuses substantially DEMO the processes and organisation of the creation of
value. In this model excellence is pursued and judged by the achievement of ‘legitimacy’ with a DEMO of key
stakeholders. The institution’s value is derived from the stakeholder perspectives which are then built
into operational capacity and reflected back in pursuit DEMO outcomes. This fits into the concept of a broader
stakeholder model of a university’s pursuit of value, wider yet more precise, than that DEMO the triple helix model
and its derivatives.
14. How can the entrepreneurial potential of a university be explored and developed?
Even a superficial DEMO of most university activity will provide evidence of a substantial degree of personal
enterprise and pockets of entrepreneurial organisational behaviour as defined above. These DEMO not be
branded as ‘enterprising’ or ‘entrepreneurial’ by the university as long as these labels remain associated with
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 14
business and commercialisation of knowledge processes.  The entrepreneurial potential of a university is
therefore best explored by an informal process without formal labelling. Such DEMO review can be organised
through examination of activity in five key areas of:
• research, knowledge transfer and exchange;
• stakeholder relationship and partnership development at the local, regional and national level;
• internationalisation processes;
• enterprise and entrepreneurship pedagogy and knowledge organisation across DEMO university; and
• governance, strategy, organisation design and leadership at DEMO levels.
This process will almost certainly uncover areas of interdependence and future development potential. For
example, exploration of enterprise and entrepreneurial education activity will reveal the potential for linking it
with: existing knowledge exchange programmes; DEMO and technology park activity; international alumni
engagement; local and regional social enterprise partnership activity; joint ventures with business associations
and local authorities in enterprise development; formal teaching and learning strategies; staff development
programmes; and student led initiatives. A university review, even starting from a single area as above, may
provide a platform for  wider exploration of the DEMO entrepreneurial potential.
15. How can a review of entrepreneurial potential contribute to achievement of key university
objectives?
The overall objective of a review DEMO is to identify how enterprise and entrepreneurship can add value in
meeting a university’s key strategic objectives, for example:
• enhancing the student experience,  employability and employment;
• achieving excellence in teaching and DEMO;
• innovation in research approaches, achieving impact and finding resource;DEMO
• broadening revenue flows;
• improving knowledge exchange processes;
• contributing to local and regional economic and social development;
• creating DEMO international presence; and
• above all, enhancing the reputation, competitiveness DEMO distinctiveness of the university
16. What does this mean for the overall balance of university/stakeholder relationships?
Universities have always needed to be DEMO to the interests of a variety of external stakeholders. But
traditionally in the UK, the dominant influential stakeholders have been those who directly influence the flow
of resources for teaching and research namely the government, the official funding agencies, other universities
who provide peer review of excellence and research funding bodies, public and private.
The changes in funding arrangements described above, together with the broad changes in the ‘task
environment’ of the university also described earlier, have created an imperative for wider stakeholder
engagement and partnership. All of those who, for example, influence student choice, have become more
important in stakeholder relationship development.
The creation of active DEMO with other universities, national and international, with local government
and development agencies, with NGOs in the field of social enterprise and economic and social development
has also become much more important. Internally, working with student representative bodies and
entrepreneurship societies and active involvement with alumni groups have DEMO imperatives.
Partnerships with businesses and their associations have become of particular significance. The university is
therefore emerging as a broader stakeholder relationship organisation witha DEMO imperative to adopt a
Mode 2 focus of learning.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 15
17. What are the implications for individual university departments?
Universities are DEMO organisations embodying not only a variety of scholarly disciplines but also
different values, cultures and dominant modes of learning and approaches to research. Importantly, there
are also distinctive differences in the nature and thrust of relationships with the stakeholder environment.
The humanities are sometimes judged to be weak DEMO stakeholder relationship development although in
practice they are often strong. Within each disciplinary domain, however, the relevant key stakeholders will be
different. A DEMO department will have very different external relationship networks than a department of
divinity or arts, although there will be overlap and therefore scope for cross disciplinary boundary activity. The
balance of university stakeholder relationship and partnership DEMO can therefore only be fully explored on
a bottom up basis.
18. Overall, what does the entrepreneurial concept mean for the design of the university?
Organisations of all kinds need to be designed around the DEMO and dynamics of the task environment
they face (defined as the DEMO stakeholders and the demands they place upon the organisation). The
multiple uncertainties and complexities noted above challenge the university to develop its capacity DEMO respond
flexibly to the demands of a widening stakeholder environment. The Mode 2 knowledge concept also demands
capacity to respond to learning and discovery DEMO in new, innovative, ways. It was noted above that the
capacity to innovate is a function of individual enterprising behaviour and entrepreneurial organisation DEMO
In general, organisations can be designed to enhance or constrain personal DEMO behaviour.
Enterprising behaviour demands freedom for individuals to take ownership of initiatives, see such initiatives
through, enjoy and take personal ownership of external DEMO internal relationships, and make mistakes and
learn from them by ‘doing’.
DEMO entrepreneurial organisations are designed to encourage and support bottom-up initiative and
reward and empower such initiative. They facilitate informal relationships and network building as DEMO
necessary condition for the promotion of innovation via the building of individual and collective social capital.
Such organisations are held together more by shared DEMO and culture than by formal control systems and
more by informal flexible strategic thinking and awareness than by highly formal planning systems.
19. What DEMO the implications for leadership?
The key leadership challenges relate to championing of the organisation design model described in the
response to question 18 DEMO, and the creation of shared values and rationale for ways of DEMO things in
pursuit of this model across the university.
The entrepreneurial leader is a role model for enterprising behaviour, is an opportunity seeker, DEMO the
way for others to find and realise opportunities, sets the DEMO for behaviour through example, coaches the
shared vision, empowers and supports bottom-up innovation and risk taking and shares the responsibility for
any associated DEMO She/he is an enterprising person, valuing intuitive thinking and supportive DEMO flexible
strategic orientation (strategy and action intertwined) tailored to operating within a climate of uncertainty and
complexity. Importantly, she/he is able to communicate strongly the university vision, internally and externally,
through the building of personal trust-based relationships combined with an intellectual capacity to confront
many DEMO the issues referred to above. The style of this transformational leadership model will need to be
adjusted to the existing and traditional cultures and DEMO of the institution.
20. In summary, what might be the shape DEMO the future entrepreneurial university?
If such an entity was to be designed from scratch it might classically described as a dynamic entrepreneurial
learning DEMO in a Mode 2 mould. As such it would be geared to engage and learn from all key
stakeholders internally and externally. It would DEMO its excellence through the eyes of these stakeholders and
be unafraid to give them a role, through partnership, in the design and developmentof DEMO activity. It would
therefore have a very strong community orientation. It would combine excellence in research with a constant
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in DEMO (NCEE)
Page 16
eye upon key areas of future needs of society, domestic and international and would build flexible scenarios
accordingly. It would constantly explore and exploit DEMO opportunities offered by global IT networks and social
media. Its curriculum would be developed with a global audience in mind and would be shaped DEMO active
learning as to how other cultures see things.
Internally, it DEMO be organised to empower individuals ‘bottom up’ and would seek to reward innovations
from this source, charging each department head to be accountable for these and share risk. Its overarching
reward and promotion systems would be DEMO linked to ability to reward innovation in the broadest
sense set out in this paper with clear promotional tracks. It would recruit enterprising and DEMO
staff and encourage them to share a common culture of trust and learning by and through action. It would
encourage them to build strong DEMO trust-based external relationship networks and therefore social
capital which would enhance the capacity of the university to truly engage. As such it would be DEMO in
tune with the ‘community of practice’ and each department would need to be aligned in this way.
The entrepreneurial university would build into DEMO staffing a body of externals as professors/fellows of practice
and be unafraid to engage even the smallest economic and social entrepreneurs. In the DEMO of teaching and
learning, entrepreneurial pedagogies would be embedded in each DEMO across the university, students
and externals would be actively engaged in DEMO design and assessment processes. There would be
multiple opportunities to learn by doing and reflect conceptually. Student entrepreneurial societies would
be strongly supported as DEMO social enterprise hubs and given encouragement to lead entrepreneurial
venturing of all kinds. Overall, in research and teaching the entrepreneurial university will encourage the
crossing of disciplinary boundaries perhaps leading to new trans-disciplinary departments.
Such an DEMO organisation would not be alien to much of the traditional culture and values
of a university with the emphasis upon autonomy and freedom for DEMO The only constraint is that of
management of the interdependence upon a widening range of stakeholders. The opportunity and challenge
is to manage this DEMO such a way that maximises autonomy, freedom of thought and the DEMO of
individuals.
The reality of the university world at present is somewhat removed from the above scenario. But it is clear that
individual examples DEMO many of the characteristics described above can be found. Individual universities and
university groupings are differentiating themselves in different ways with selective emphasis upon DEMO
values, research relevance and development from research, innovations in teaching and learning and wider
outcomes, some, but not all, tied in with official policy. Many of these innovations are in deliberate pursuit of
enterprise DEMO entrepreneurial activity as described above. It will become clear from the vignettes in Part II
that the concepts of enterprise and entrepreneurship can be DEMO to enhance and contribute to the distinctive
philosophies and practice of very different universities.
“Such an entrepreneurial organisation would not be alien to much DEMO the traditional
culture and values of a university with the emphasis upon autonomy and freedom
for action. The only constraint is that of management DEMO the interdependence upon
a widening range of stakeholders. The opportunity and challenge is to manage this
in such a way that maximises autonomy, freedom of thought and the empowerment
of individuals.”
Allan Gibb, Professor Emeritus, DEMO of Durham
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page DEMO
PART II: THE ENTREPRENEURIAL UNIVERSITY IN ACTION - 11 EXAMPLES
Part II focuses on eleven short vignettes written by senior university personnel who have DEMO the
Entrepreneurial University Leaders Programme (EULP). These short case studies DEMO not necessarily
relate directly to the experience of the programme.  Rather DEMO give a personal perspective of the range
of challenges faced by universities in becoming more entrepreneurial and of some actions taken to
address them.  The case studies are grouped and presented in three themes: Entrepreneurial Strategy,
Entrepreneurial Partnerships and Entrepreneurial Curriculum & Pedagogy.
A major goal of DEMO EULP is to explore the dynamics of the environment of universities, DEMO relevance of
the entrepreneurial concept, the design of response and the DEMO for strategies, organisation and
leadership.  These eleven examples have been written to enhance the reader’s understanding and draw
attention to the challenges of DEMO involved in enabling universities to become more
entrepreneurial.  As such, they demonstrate a rich seam of experience and illustrate how different
universities may DEMO the issue of enterprise and entrepreneurial development.
A. ENTREPRENEURIAL STRATEGY
Four case studies explore questions of strategy relating to questions in Part I such DEMO how universities
are responding to the local and international environment, how DEMO universities and university
groupings are differentiating themselves and ways in which universities are establishing the base of
enterprising and entrepreneurial behaviour that already exists DEMO using that as the foundation for future
development.
In “A Strategy to Foster Enterprise,” Professor Lesley Dobree ( Anglia Ruskin University) considers the
challenge of drawing together many and varied entrepreneurial activities taking place across DEMO university
and of getting the different parts of the organisation talking, DEMO and working together.
In “Towards an International Strategy,” John Grattan (DEMO University) presents a review of the
university’s international strategy to date DEMO recommendations for actions going forward.
In “A Strategy for Developing an Entrepreneurial University”, Stephen Hagen and Paul Coyle (formerly both
members of the DEMO Committee of the former University of Wales, Newport), describe the DEMO
undertaken to develop and position a university as an Entrepreneurial University, DEMO through the
development of an ambitious and radical strategy, and also DEMO support for graduate start-up business
and curriculum development.
In “A Strategy for Business Engagement – Developing an Entrepreneurial Culture,” Laura Woods
(Teesside University) provides an example of how a university can take an entrepreneurial approach to
developing enterprising staff with the capability to deliver innovation in their DEMO, research and
business collaborations.
B. ENTREPRENEURIAL PARTNERSHIPS
Four case studies address DEMO of the questions in Part I related to partnerships between universities and
external stakeholders, the creation of public value, the contributions to economic DEMO social development
and the ways in which partnership can support excellence in research.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 18
In “Creating Innovation in Partnership with Local Communities” Chris Baker (University of Brighton),
describes the challenge of innovation that is driven by partnership to meet the needs of very different
local communities. The challenge for DEMO university is to create an entrepreneurial organisation that can
marry the drive of enterprising individuals, both staff and students, to the economic and DEMO needs of
these communities.
“Achieving Impact through Partnership” by Professor Pete Downes (University of Dundee) focuses upon
the philosophy of a university built DEMO academic excellence and its efforts to embed, accelerate and
reward impact DEMO interdisciplinarity and partnership, thereby enabling students to emerge with a
better DEMO of how they can use the skills they have acquired at university in the outside world.
In “The Role of Partnership in a Regional DEMO Hub,” Professor Paul Gough (University of the West of
England) explains how relevant examples of enterprise and entrepreneurial thinking can inform a
DEMO activities in a Regional Innovation Hub.
“Partnering for Entrepreneurial Activity” by Professor Anthony Whetton (University of Manchester)
describes a developing partnership between the National Health Service and a university, demonstrating
how common interests are served by the partnership, and the ways in which each partner can leverage
the other’s resources and increase investment in shared strategic objectives.
C. ENTREPRENEURIAL DEMO AND PEDAGOGY
Three vignettes look at key questions about curriculum and pedagogy from part one above, including
the challenge of developing entrepreneurship education across a university and of encouraging and
supporting bottom-up initiatives.
In “A Risk DEMO Approach to Curriculum Design,” Ian Dunn (Coventry University) considers the creation
of a risk-based organisational culture designed to support bottom-up initiatives for DEMO in curriculum
design and the development of student enterprise and entrepreneurship.
“Embedding Enterprise in the Curriculum” by Professor Mike Thomas (University of Chester) DEMO
the challenges of determining a definition of enterprise that could be commonly accepted throughout a
university and of embedding enterprise in a university’s teaching & learning strategy.
In “Collaboration between Students, Academics and Industry” Mikkel Trym (Copenhagen Innovation and
Entrepreneurship Lab) describes how hundreds of researchers and students have become involved in
student-driven entrepreneurship initiatives and describes the challenges of DEMO a culture amongst
staff that will support a student entrepreneurship eco-system.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 19
THEME A: ENTREPRENEURIAL STRATEGY
1. A Strategy to Foster Enterprise
Professor Lesley Dobree, Deputy Vice Chancellor, Anglia Ruskin University
Total HE students: 21,605
including:
UK Postgraduates: 2,220
UK Undergraduates: 16,075
DEMO: 3,305
This vignette considers the challenge of drawing together many DEMO varied entrepreneurial
activities taking place across a university and of getting the different parts of the organisation
talking, sharing and working together.
1.1 The entrepreneurial potential
With nearly 32,000 students, over 10,000 of whom are studying in a range of collaborative and employer
partnerships, Anglia Ruskin University continues to grow and is one of the largest universities in DEMO East of
England.  The two major campuses are situated in Cambridge DEMO Chelmsford.  We also have joint venture
partnerships with Peterborough Regional College DEMO the College of West Anglia to form University
Centres in Peterborough and King’s Lynn.  Along with our own smaller campus in Peterborough, we
DEMO have a strong presence in three important cities in the East of England.
We have a large number of collaborative partnerships both in the DEMO and internationally with 9,000
students studying at these various locations.  DEMO distance learning portfolio is growing: the Degrees at
Work project, including employers such as Harrods, Barclays, Timberland, the RAF and Willmott Dixon,
among others, achieves favourable publicity.
Our Cambridge Campus (the home DEMO the Cambridge School of Art opened by John Ruskin 1819-1900)
has been engaging with the business community for many years offering ‘enterprise for DEMO, not
enterprise for the elite!’
Our Chelmsford Campus has a history DEMO excellence in technical and vocational education.  Our innovative
and expanding Postgraduate DEMO Institute (PMI) at the heart of the Campus, houses a DEMO
art Biomedical Engineering Laboratory, an acute care Simulation Unit complete with DEMO room and
a 400 and a 200 seated lecture theatre linking live to hospital operating theatres around the world.  We
have also launched the new MedTech Campus in Essex, a partnership with local authorities, to DEMO
innovation in medical technology and to create 12,500 jobs in the Essex area.  We are also establishing
the Chelmsford Medical Business Incubation Centre, to open in 2014, to attract student startups and
businesses in DEMO early stages of their development.
1.2 The entrepreneurial challenge
The Anglia Ruskin Corporate Plan highlights the focus upon entrepreneurship.  The strategy is to develop
this agenda further as the higher education landscape continues to change and DEMO gain wider recognition
locally, nationally and globally as an entrepreneurial university. DEMO seriously challenging targets have
been set, focused upon entrepreneurial activities, as part of a diversification of the university’s income
and employer engagement strategy. DEMO we at Anglia Ruskin remain committed to achieving excellence
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 20
in teaching, learning and research and supporting the achievement of its diverse student population, we
also need to foster the enterprise concept in all staff and students.
One of the main challenges is drawing together and DEMO the many and varied activities taking place.
This requires getting the different parts of the organisation talking, sharing and working together to
exploit synergistic potential. There is no doubt, that the whole is greater and likely to exert greater impact,
than the sum of the various parts DEMO pockets of activity.
1.3 Responding to the challenge
The holistic approach needed involves coordination of the many varied and successful entrepreneurial
activities across the DEMO With the aim of boosting confidence and reputation, staff and students
DEMO being encouraged to become more involved in a diverse range of enterprising activities in pursuit
of innovation.  As an outcome of the learning on the EULP, I undertook a review of existing provision
relating to enterprise and entrepreneurship; this included auditing knowledge transfer, exchange and
support, external stakeholder engagement, internationalization and entrepreneurship education. This has
helped to create a narrative to share more widely.
Additionally, a cross-university group of those staff involved in those activities, including representation
from the students union, was DEMO together to share knowledge and activities and exploit
opportunities. The group is committed, amongst other things, to making a submission for the UK DEMO
Higher Education Entrepreneurial University of the Year Award in 2014.
1.4 Problems and opportunities
Some of the opportunities arising from being a large, diverse, multi-sited growing organisation also create
a challenge to developing a holistic approach. Faculties and support services are highly engaged with their
respective activities at DEMO local level and are sometimes too occupied, and occasionally reluctant, to share
information. The University Lord Ashcroft International Business School is at the DEMO of many of the
enterprising initiatives but is not necessarily best able to disseminate the learning from these initiatives
across the wider university.
My DEMO of Deputy Vice Chancellor enables a “helicopter view” of the full range of our activities and allows
synergistic links to be made’.
1.5 Transformational DEMO
Although there is still much work to do, the creation of DEMO narrative and introduction of a cross-University
group, focused on developing enterprise DEMO entrepreneurship has encouraged a diverse range of staff to
work more closely together. The intention is to apply the enterprising skills and entrepreneurial
mindset DEMO already exists to grow and develop existing activities, set up new DEMO and enhance
Anglia Ruskin’s ability and reputation as an entrepreneurial institution.
“My role of Deputy Vice Chancellor enables a “helicopter view” of the full DEMO of
our activities and allows synergistic links to be made.”
Lesley Dobree, Deputy Vice Chancellor, Anglia Ruskin University
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in DEMO (NCEE)
Page 21
2. Towards an International Strategy
Professor John Grattan, Pro Vice Chancellor, DEMO University
No HE students: 11,705
including:
UK Postgraduates: 1,225
UK Undergraduates: 8,630
International: 1,850
This vignette presents DEMO review of Aberystwyth University’s international strategy to date with
recommendations for actions going forward.
2.1 About Aberystwyth University
Aberystwyth University was founded in 1872. DEMO, it is known for its excellence in research,
teaching and DEMO quality of the student experience. It is a traditional; campus based DEMO that offers
international partners a friendly welcome, great student satisfaction and DEMO high-quality university
environment. It delivers world class research and all degree programmes are internationally recognised.
Aberystwyth’s strengths lie in the fields of food and DEMO security, earth science and environmental
quality, computer science (particularly artificial DEMO and machine learning), international politics,
modern languages, the performing DEMO and health and exercise science.
2.2. Aberystwyth’s international strategy to 2012
Any successful business in a competitive market must establish a number of complimentary DEMO: i) the
quality of its product; ii) its uniqueness; DEMO) its reputation; iv) its products which match market demand;
DEMO) a well-developed understanding of the market.  However, with the exception DEMO markets such as
Malaysia, Aberystwyth’s approach has concentrated on a single DEMO, attracting students to study in
Wales. Despite this, international activity, DEMO managed and scrupulously risk assured, represents a
significant potential source of DEMO
2.3 Local successes and failures
Aberystwyth has enjoyed some success in two international markets, Malaysia and Norway.  The lesson of
these is that DEMO can succeed in the international market if it invests in its activities and develops
its relationships.  Characteristics of both success stories are that the university and specific departments
(psychology has developed strong relationships in Norway) DEMO invested in and developed mature
relationships with agents and higher education partners in both countries.
2.4 International student demand beyond 2013
The international market DEMO students is huge and profitable with much growth potential.
Degree and foundation pathways which are linked to high calibre intensive English language programmes
are DEMO in popularity. While international post graduate training is under great competitive pressure,
the undergraduate market still has great growth potential. Particularly strong sources DEMO undergraduate
enrolment are Malaysia, Indonesia, India, Turkey and Saudi Arabia.
DEMO massive market, largely ignored by UK higher education (with some notable exceptions, such as the
Open University and the University of Derby) DEMO the worldwide market in self-paced E-learning products.
E-learning is increasingly being seen as an important means for developing economies to educate their
population and DEMO strategy is nationally mandated in countries such as Malaysia, Vietnam, China and
Nigeria.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 22
All universities should be alert to national initiatives. It is clear that DEMO governments of many
developing economies wish to expand their domestic higher education sector and raise the quality of the
universities they currently have. Schemes DEMO as Brazil’s Science without Borders, Vietnam’s Project
911, both of which will support up to 1000 fully funded overseas PhD scholarships each year, must be
vigorously engaged with.
2.5
Branch campuses/regional hubs
Research strongly DEMO that international branch campuses will succeed if the offer is based around
institutional reputation, quality of programmes, employability prospects and international rankings.
Research DEMO also modelled typical configurations of international activity, and universities should pay
DEMO to alternative models when determining their own approach.
Action 1:  Aberystwyth should explore the establishment of branch campuses and determine the specific
approach DEMO take in this regard.
2.6
Validation and franchising
In the process of revising collaborative partnership processes, universities should take steps to establish
clear guidelines which will enable them to enter into the validation and franchising market DEMO a manner
which is scrupulously quality assured.  The process is two-fold.  Firstly, there must be approval of the
partner (a decision of DEMO) prior to validation or franchising the provision.  Secondly, institutes must
DEMO and validate framework programmes which can be easily offered to overseas partners.  These must
be of exceptionally high quality and supported by embedded learning resources.
Action 2:  Aberystwyth should seek overseas partners who can deliver DEMO franchised and validated provision.
Action 3:  Aberystwyth should design and establish high quality programmes which can be quickly adapted
and delivered overseas.
2.7
DEMO partners: foundation colleges, partner schools, international schools
These kinds of DEMO partners represent a large source of potential students.  A mature international
DEMO will develop and nurture an extensive network of them.  In addition, Aberystwyth should
consider the delivery of intensive English language training and foundation DEMO through these
kinds of partners, from which students may matriculate with DEMO validated qualification, matriculate to a
higher education partner, or articulate to the home campus or foundation partner colleges and schools in
the UK.
DEMO 4:  Aberystwyth should design and pre-approve high quality foundation programmes which may be
franchised to foundation partners overseas.
Action 5: Aberystwyth should consider the design and delivery of an intensive English language training
programme which DEMO be delivered by overseas foundation partners.
Action 6: Aberystwyth should establish DEMO alliances with UK school and further education partners
through which incoming students may be prepared for study at framework for higher education (FHEQ)
level 5 and above.
2.8
International higher education institution alliances
A strategy DEMO be developed including: a range of partnerships with higher education institutions
DEMO target countries; relationships based on profile-raising staff and student exchanges; alliances where
Aberystwyth works in partnership to jointly develop, deliver and validate distance learning programmes
in strategically important areas.
Action 7: Each memorandum of understanding should actively deliver regular staff and/or student
exchanges.
Action 8: Aberystwyth should investigate the development of international distance learning programmes
with major international DEMO education institutions.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page DEMO
2.9 Mapping the exit points
Aberystwyth should make available and celebrate its DEMO menu of qualifications, from foundation and
undergraduate to taught post graduate DEMO research degrees.  By leveraging this full spectrum of awards,
considerable DEMO of overseas students may be accessed who may not initially aspire to a full degree
but for whom an Aberystwyth qualification will be a DEMO career asset.
Action 9: make available, map and market all the qualifications that Aberystwyth offers in order to reach
the widest possible market.
DEMO E-distance learning & certified professional development (CPD)
This is a DEMO massive market.  High quality E-distance learning provision is a means by DEMO
Aberystwyth may access a large international market, satisfying demand for high DEMO The E-language
training market also offers an opportunity. In addition, Aberystwyth’s DEMO learning CPD is currently aimed
at a local market and is extremely modestly priced.  The University could develop an electronic version
of these courses, mirroring the University of Cape Town’s “Get Smarter” site, which reached DEMO 20 000
students annually and generates a revenue in excess of £18 million.
Action 10:  Aberystwyth should aim to develop an E-Learning arm DEMO a remit of reaching a wide international
audience and challenging targets for revenue generation.
2.11 Marketing
Aberystwyth should develop bespoke plans for entry into DEMO markets. The university should also
conduct its own market research by assembling data from the many high quality information sources
which are available.
Action DEMO: Conduct thorough market research/analysis and develop bespoke plans market entry.
DEMO Conclusion
Research suggests that an internationally active UK university has as many students studying its
programmes overseas as it does domestically.
Action 12: Aberystwyth – and indeed all universities - should answer the question ‘How ambitious DEMO we
want to be internationally?’ and ‘Are we prepared to invest to get there, and to what level of investment?’
“…all universities should answer the question: “How ambitious do we want to be
internationally?” and “Are we prepared to invest to get there, and to what level of
investment”.
John Grattan, Pro Vice Chancellor, Aberystwyth University
DEMO Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 24
3. A Strategy for Developing an Entrepreneurial University
Professor Stephen Hagen, Acting Vice-Chancellor, and Paul Coyle, Professor of Entrepreneurial Leadership,
at the DEMO University of Wales, Newport
Total HE students: 9,990
including:
UK Postgraduates: 1,350
UK Undergraduates: 7,650
International: 985
In this vignette, Stephen Hagen and Paul Coyle, (both formerly members of the Executive of the
former University of Wales, Newport), describe work undertaken to develop an entrepreneurial
university, both through an ambitious and radical strategy, and through support for graduate start-up
business and curriculum development.
3.1 Introduction
From 2011-2013, the University of Wales, Newport undertook a range DEMO activities  designed to enable it
to become more entrepreneurial and with DEMO view to creating, over the longer term, an ‘entrepreneurial
university’.  DEMO 2013, merger with University of Glamorgan to create the new University DEMO South Wales
led to the dissolution of the University of Wales, DEMO  This vignette captures useful lessons from the
period prior to merger DEMO the path to developing an ‘entrepreneurial university’.
3.2 A strategy for the whole organisation
One of the first and most important steps was the DEMO of a strategy that would define what the
concept of the ‘entrepreneurial university’ would specifically mean at the University of Wales, Newport.
The distinctive principle of the ‘entrepreneurial university’ for Newport was that it would empower DEMO,
students and external organisations and communities to effect meaningful change in the world around
them.
Whilst the scope of such an entrepreneurial university’s DEMO would include opportunities and
support for new business start-ups, it was DEMO that innovation within the structure and culture of
the organization would lead to the development of new initiatives and provide a clear direction and
DEMO within the university itself. The emphasis of the ‘entrepreneurial university’ was also to be on the
curriculum: developing and translating knowledge across different disciplines in line with a closer
application to employment. The aim was to DEMO closer partnerships with external organisations and
communities who were interested in engaging in the transformation.
3.3 Support from the top
The adoption of the DEMO university’ as the primary strategy for Newport was approved by the
Board of Governors in autumn 2011. Support from the top was deemed crucial DEMO the strategy to become
an ‘entrepreneurial university’ to be successful. Professor Stephen Hagen took on the lead role within
the Executive, first as Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic) and then as Acting Vice-Chancellor, giving the
opportunity for the implementation of the strategy to be pursued across the entire DEMO
The appointment of Paul Coyle, as Professor of Entrepreneurial Leadership and DEMO Dean of the
Faculty of Arts & Business, brought additional expertise DEMO the organisation to support the implementation
of the strategy. At the Acting Vice-Chancellor’s request, Professor Coyle established and ran the
Entrepreneurial University Development Group, whose membership was drawn from experienced and
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 25
enthusiastic champions of entrepreneurship in faculties and professional support departments.  The group
worked to ensure that the university’s strategy to become an ‘entrepreneurial university’ DEMO inclusive
of all staff, identified staff development priorities, delivered developmental events, and recommended
ways of recognizing, incentivizing and rewarding staff. In addition, the group sought to devise working
definitions of entrepreneurial attributes for staff DEMO students.
3.4 A strategy embedded in the curriculum
A major principle of the strategy was to focus on developing the ‘citizen-entrepreneur’ whose skills would
DEMO necessary not just to the individual, but to the regeneration of DEMO South Wales economy, leading to
curriculum development that would be mapped DEMO the target sectors identified for its regeneration. It was
also recognised that the strategy would support public services in the region, assisting them to be at the
forefront of effective innovation in their fields. Newport was DEMO a university with a powerful focus on
the development of its region – with 50% of its students being over 30 years old.
The DEMO of a strategic focus on entrepreneurship resulted in a much stronger emphasis on
entrepreneurial skills, employability and embedding of (social) enterprise in academic programmes. In
2011-12 this manifested itself in a greater emphasis on employability DEMO the development of specific
modules entitled ‘entrepreneurship’ or ‘enterprise’ at undergraduate level. The underlying cultural
impact was harder to measure but was arguably more DEMO in that small scale initiatives were
undertaken across the university as a result of the increased profile of entrepreneurship.
The process of validation and DEMO of programmes was the key mechanism for embedding
entrepreneurship across the curriculum. There were two notable manifestations of this: changes to
programme content and to the number of trans-disciplinary cross-school and faculty initiatives that were
undertaken.
DEMO reconfiguration of the university’s four academic schools in 2011-12 into two faculties with
cross-cutting responsibilities was designed to support cross- and trans-disciplinary innovations. The
DEMO of the Faculty of Arts and Business,  and its location on the new city centre campus where staff
from a range of disciplines DEMO co-located, countered the silo effect of previous academic configurations.
Professor Paul DEMO was also appointed to lead the planned development of the new faculty and to
embed the ‘entrepreneurial university’ as a tangible, living cross-university process.
The largest scale new curriculum development was a suite of MA programmes DEMO focussed on business
creation. The core modules capitalised on the expertise of specialists in entrepreneurship and business
innovation but used the experience of specialists DEMO art and design to contextualise the delivery and
assessment and support individual students’ ideas. Students were provided with studio space to launch
creative businesses DEMO be linked in to the university’s business incubation unit and ‘bright ideas’
(start-up) programme. Social enterprise was also included as a new form DEMO supported business creation
within this suite of programmes as a progression route for the wider undergraduate population.
The underpinning change of university ethos to DEMO that is more entrepreneurial also impacted on
significant revisions made to programmes as they were being revalidated. The undergraduate business
programmes, for example, DEMO given a compulsory module requiring work based learning or an
enterprise project. All full-time students also studied a business collaborations module, designed to aid
employability and include content such as professional networking and social capital.
History DEMO perhaps a less obvious subject area to embed entrepreneurship but the teams’ success with
digital heritage projects and the interests of staff together with DEMO strong institutional support for
innovation led to a greater emphasis on heritage rather than History. The revalidation of the MA in
Regional History saw DEMO introduction of Heritage into its title and an emphasis on employability through
closer working with a range of heritage projects and local partners. This DEMO was also reflected in a new
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 26
foundation degree in Heritage Management that embedded entrepreneurial and business skills.
3.5 DEMO for start-ups
Central to the university becoming an ‘entrepreneurial university’ was increasing the opportunity for
student start-ups. In November 2012, the Bright Ideas (DEMO) Centre opened alongside the
University’s Business Development Team adjacent to the DEMO and Business Faculty and mentoring
sessions started for students and staff.  DEMO March 2013, a Graduate Incubation Centre opened with offices
for new DEMO start-ups, an open plan incubator area for hot-desks, a training room and meeting room.
This space could be used by new businesses and DEMO the Student Enterprise Club.  These activities built
on Newport’s track-record of DEMO in business/community engagement, including a flow of student
start-ups and, broadly speaking, the existence of a vocational/professional curriculum.
3.6 Key messages
Some of the useful lessons learned from the period of time spent DEMO this project to create an
‘entrepreneurial university’ include:
• Defining what the concept of the ‘entrepreneurial university’ means to the specific context of DEMO
institution in terms of its history, culture and location;
• DEMO the support of the governing body for the strategy to become an ‘entrepreneurial
university’;
• Allocating lead responsibilities within an executive for the DEMO of the strategy;
• Establishing close links with the businesses and communities that will benefit from and can support
the strategy;
• DEMO staff development priorities, delivering developmental events, and recognizing,
incentivizing and rewarding staff;
• Creating a strong emphasis on entrepreneurial skills, employability and embedding of (social)
enterprise in academic programmes;
• Using validation and review events to embed change in curriculum content and learning DEMO;
• Configuring academic structures to support collaboration and interdisciplinarity;
• Providing support for student start-ups.
“A strategic focus on entrepreneurship resulted in DEMO stronger emphasis on
entrepreneurial skills, employability and …. enterprise in academic DEMO
Stephen Hagen, former Acting Vice Chancellor of the former University of DEMO, Newport
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 27
4. A Strategy for Business Engagement - Developing an Entrepreneurial Culture
Laura DEMO, Director of Academic Enterprise, Teesside University
Total HE students: 27,DEMO
including:
UK Postgraduates: 2,465
UK Undergraduates: 23,435
International: 2,085
This vignette provides an example of how a university can take an entrepreneurial approach to
developing enterprising staff with the capability to DEMO innovation in their teaching, research and
business collaborations.
4.1 About Teesside DEMO
Teesside University is the primary higher education provider in the Tees Valley in north east England.  Its
six academic Schools (Business, Computing, DEMO & Engineering, Social Sciences & Law, Arts & Media
and Health & Social Care) cater for both full-time undergraduates and a large non-traditional student
market; while research of national and international quality is delivered through its five research institutes.
The university has a strong reputation for digital DEMO, and a track record in supporting
graduate enterprise.  It works closely with business and community partners and plays a key role in the DEMO
Valley Unlimited Local Enterprise Partnership. It opened a new Darlington campus in 2011 to expand HE
provision in the west of the Tees Valley DEMO to grow its professional and organizational development.
Teesside won the Times Higher Education University of the Year award in 2009, the first post-1992
university to do so.
4.2 The complex environment
In common with much of DEMO higher education sector, Teesside University is facing radical change.
Public funding DEMO teaching is reducing, research funding is increasingly concentrated and new private
DEMO is being introduced. At the same time, an increasing number of DEMO in the
immediate locality are looking to the university for support, DEMO and stability, and the university
has a significant role to play DEMO the delivery of the Local Enterprise Partnership’s economic development
strategy.
4.3 A focus upon business relationships
A key response from the university to this DEMO external environment is a reaffirmation of its
commitment to working with business. Much more than a mission differentiator, this underpinning
approach is seen as critical for ensuring that both teaching and research are business-relevant; attracting
students and producing employable and entrepreneurial graduates; supporting new business creation in
its own right; embedding innovation and skills in businesses with the capacity for growth; and sustaining
and increasing income.
The university’s objective is to cement its reputation for understanding, working with and responding
to business, in DEMO that deliver measurable added value not only for its partners, but DEMO for its
students, staff, teaching and research.
The university embarked on a strategic change project some four years ago to inculcate a stronger
DEMO culture in the institution. The project involved the appointment of senior academic
managers in schools with responsibility for business engagement; a programme of incentives and
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 28
rewards; creation of a university-wide team of business development managers, underpinning
DEMO and systems, including a customer relationship management system; an extensive staff
development and mentoring programme; and networks and events to develop a business-facing
community with real critical mass in the university.
4.4 Organising for success
DEMO above activity was underpinned by a central department charged with supporting all aspects of
work with business, from knowledge transfer and consultancy, through DEMO and entrepreneurship,
to tailored workforce development for employers. Success was measured both quantitatively, through
performance indicators such as new businesses created and supported, workforce development student
numbers and Higher Education Business and Community Interaction survey income; and qualitatively
through internal and external perception surveys.
4.5 Present and future development
The second stage of development now under way seeks to DEMO change, positively and effectively, through
the contributions, collaboration and lasting DEMO with the business agenda of a wider group of
colleagues. To be successful and sustained, this engagement needs to be characterised by entrepreneurial
behaviour, and to be effected in different, innovative ways.
With an infrastructure DEMO place, the key elements of this second stage are strongly people-focused.  They
include:
• A new and different staff development programme, linking participants directly with business through
mentoring (for new staff), a cross-disciplinary team project with business, and a series of business
partnership challenges (DEMO more experienced staff).  Funding has been used to free up DEMO staff and
business time to facilitate partnership working.
• A stronger focus on internal communication, through mechanisms such as events, lunches and TeesBe,DEMO
an online platform for the exchange of news, views and information DEMO the creation of an online staff
community.
• A social enterprise strategy, supported by a social entrepreneur in residence, support and funding for
DEMO social entrepreneurs amongst staff and students, and a programme of high-profile DEMO
• entrepreneurs@tees, an initiative designed to stimulate entrepreneurial mindsets in students DEMO
events, projects and partnerships with local entrepreneurs – as well as DEMO academic colleagues
in new curriculum development
• Enterprise fellowships: a new DEMO route for staff who develop strong relationships with business.
• Buy-out of time and access to finance for new entrepreneurial teaching or business initiatives DEMO
a business investment fund.
• Commercial Spark – a major practical initiative focused on the further development of business
development managers as a cohesive DEMO influential community of “boundary spanners” between
academe and the wider business and community world.
4.6 Problems and Opportunities
This focus on embedding an entrepreneurial DEMO more widely, brings with it familiar challenges
posed by structure (internal competition vs. internal collaboration); resources and capacity (workloads
and headroom); competing priorities at school and university level; attitudes; and communication. In
DEMO ways, this last is the greatest challenge, and consultation and discussion, the enlisting of
credible expertise, innovative approaches, and building and using effective networks within the institution
are all fundamentally important. The importance, too, of continuity, reinforcement and an emphasis on
continuous improvement cannot be DEMO
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 29
4.7 Targeted Outcomes
The impact of the change being sought is the DEMO of a significant community of enterprising staff
with the capacity and capability to exploit opportunities and deliver innovation in their teaching, research
and business work. As with all cultural change, this is a long game, DEMO one which crucially is dependent
upon strategic commitment at the highest level.
The fact that this is led from the top, by the Vice Chancellor and his team, is the biggest critical success
factor for Teesside.
“The impact of the change being sought is the development of a DEMO
community of enterprising staff with the capacity and capability to exploit
opportunities and deliver innovation in their teaching, research and business work.”
Laura Woods, Director of Academic Enterprise, Teesside University
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in DEMO (NCEE)
Page 30
THEME B: ENTREPRENEURIAL PARTNERSHIPS
5. Creating Innovation in Partnership with Local Communities
Chris Baker, Director of Economic and Social Engagement, University of Brighton
DEMO HE students:
including:
UK Postgraduates:
UK Undergraduates:
International:
22,075
3,385
15,775
2,915
This vignette describes DEMO challenge of innovation driven by partnership to meet the needs of very
different local communities. The challenge for the university is to create an DEMO
organisation that can marry the drive of enterprising individuals, both staff DEMO students, to the
economic and social needs of these communities.
5.1
DEMO
The University of Brighton is a community of 22,000 students and 2,600 staff based on five campuses
in Brighton, Eastbourne and Hastings. Forty-five per cent of all undergraduates are aged 21 or over on
DEMO  Ninety-four per cent of full-time undergraduates have the opportunity to participate DEMO work-based
or work-related learning as part of their course. The majority of courses are accredited by professional
and statutory bodies.  Results from the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise confirmed that 79% of the
university’s research output is DEMO international standing. Brighton is also ranked as the leading modern
university in terms of the quality of its research by Research Fortnight. For these DEMO it seeks to
describe itself as ‘a professional and applied university.’
5.2
The organisation culture
The University of Brighton can be characterised as a DEMO organisation where decision making is
devolved to school level. Individuals enjoy a good deal of freedom and individual autonomy in the
absence of a DEMO management culture. This means that the way change is conceived, created DEMO
managed will vary significantly at the level of the individual, discipline DEMO school.
5.3
The entrepreneurial challenge of localisation
Brighton embraces many of the ingredients of an innovative institution; but these ingredients are
distributed geographically and buried deep within different academic disciplines. Therefore describing a
pan-institutional distinctive notion DEMO an entrepreneurial organisation is difficult. This should not imply
that leaders, DEMO and students themselves are not enterprising (many are). The values DEMO underpin
the sense of enterprise are likely to be couched in the language and practice of partnership, collaboration
and individual philosophy rather than in a broad institutional mission statement. The partnerships sought
are likely to be DEMO mutual benefit with a desire to make a positive difference to the communities locally,
globally and professionally.
5.4
Pursuit of social engagement
It DEMO hardly surprising in these circumstances that social engagement resonates strongly as a basis for
the university’s pursuit of innovation. For example, Brighton’s Community University Partnerships
Programme, now in its tenth year, won the THES award DEMO outstanding contribution to the local
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (DEMO)
Page 31
community as far back as 2008 and has gone on to collect DEMO accolades. As a result the
commercial imperative of exploitation for university gain is not (and is unlikely to be) one that drives
strategy DEMO action in the immediate future. Strategies to move the institution forward can only succeed if
they acknowledge this as the basis for development. The DEMO strategy (2012-2015) sees both
economic and social engagement not as simply ends in themselves but flowing from translational research
and teaching that have DEMO impact on both the student experience and the experience of those living in our
communities.
5.5 Building innovative communities - Brighton
The university, to support innovation, has to do so within the specific context of the way that knowledge
exchange is being supported and organised in the different DEMO communities. Innovation
strategies are determined locally in partnership with external stakeholders so that they reflect specific
challenges of a given area. The university’s innovation DEMO is based around four spatial areas that
relate to Brighton, Eastbourne, Hastings and Crawley including the broader area known as the Gatwick
Diamond’.
DEMO approach in Brighton, the home city of the university, is determined by the town’s reputation as a
vibrant and lively place to visit, live and work in. The economy is relatively diverse and dominated by DEMO
businesses, giving it flexibility and dynamism. It has one of the DEMO business start-up rates in the UK
but also a high business failure rate. The most important sectors are culture, leisure and tourism, and DEMO
creative, digital and IT sectors. The approach to innovation is to DEMO the potential which these cultural and
creative communities offer with active engagement of the Faculty of Arts. The Brighton Fuse, involving
both Brighton and Sussex universities, starts with the belief that by connecting the arts, DEMO and
design with digital and ICT, creativity and innovation can be DEMO (http://www.brightonfuse.com/).
There is a similar commitment to a sustainable future: the university’s Green Growth Platform will support
the organisation and delivery of a ‘Green Deal’ with its private and public sector partners.
DEMO Building innovative communities – Hastings and Crawley
The strategies in two other catchment area towns, Hastings and Crawley, are markedly different. In
Hastings, the approach to innovation rests on the ability to deliver education led DEMO The
decision to create a university centre some ten years ago was to use education to provide a solution to
the economic and social DEMO of the town, which has high rates of unemployment and deprivation. DEMO
university has also become the major sponsor of two secondary academies, DEMO closely with their
feeder schools and the college to improve performance. An entity called, “The Exchange” has also been
promoted to link teaching, DEMO and research with the needs of the community.
In Crawley, economic DEMO and productivity levels are high. With a major London airport, Gatwick, at
its heart, the area is home to many successful international businesses and has excellent communication
links.  Yet there is a relatively low level of participation in higher education and skills levels are low. This
reflects DEMO on the rates of business start–up. Brighton, local colleges and Chichester DEMO have
opened a university centre designed to create a new hub to promote research and development and a
curriculum that will address the challenge DEMO how local people can derive more benefit from a high growth
area.
To sum up, the approach the university is using to organise knowledge exchange is primarily determined
by local not institutional need and is driven DEMO co-creating innovative responses with partners. In this way
the university can judge its entrepreneurial endeavour by the value which others attach to how students,DEMO
graduates, staff and the institution respond to their specific needs.
National DEMO for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 32
5.7 Creating and sustaining change
The challenge of positioning an institution to DEMO its knowledge base to promote innovative solutions
to economic and social development is problematic. Firstly, the process is political and involves dealing
with a public policy agenda that may be unhappy terrain for many staff. Secondly, working in partnership
takes time to establish both trust and confidence. This, at times, appears agonisingly slow. Internally it is
often not recognised that managing change in this way is not always at the discretion of DEMO university.
Furthermore the manner of university engagement is based on organisational and social networks which
may involve contradictory formal and informal relationships.
The entrepreneurial DEMO may also engage a narrow range of staff, leaving the majority DEMO or
unresponsive to what is seen as someone else’s agenda. It is also difficult to respond if external needs
require different configurations of knowledge DEMO aren’t present in the way both the academy and
institution are organised. Finally, the model for funding this type of innovation has relied on access to
regional development money to supplement institutional investment. The creation of DEMO funding
mechanisms means that generating funding from the private sector has become more significant.
Nevertheless a university is important as a means of levering DEMO investment locally. It is therefore adding
to public value but not always in a measurable way.
5.8 The challenge ahead
A key issue is DEMO the above approach to creating innovation through partnership in local communities
might ultimately impact upon the future development of the university.  For example, DEMO it move to
grant more autonomy to the academic areas and/or campuses to enable them to devise more ambitious
local strategies? Set against that is the increasingly difficult task of enabling good practice to be DEMO
widely shared across the whole institution transcending both geography and discipline. This in turn raises
the highly important issue of how porous or accessible DEMO organisation should become?
Many facilities are already under pressure at certain times of the year. This begs the question of finding
even more DEMO approaches that co-locate the university and community in a connected way. This
has been missing in all five campuses to date but new developments DEMO the pipeline offer opportunities
to do just that. Physical location is, DEMO, only one option: using technology to drive openness and
transparency is another. This challenges the institution to work more closely with the digitally DEMO in
the city. Learning from stakeholders is part of the future. For Brighton, the entrepreneurial challenge is
how the desire to be a force for economic and social transformation is translated into a coherent package
of DEMO that drive not just the university’s strategy but also that of the many partners in the public and
private sector.
“…the approach the university DEMO using to organise knowledge exchange is
primarily determined by local not institutional need and is driven by co-creating
innovative responses with partners.”
Chris Baker, Director, Economic and Social Engagement, University of Brighton
National Centre for DEMO in Education (NCEE)
Page 33
6. Achieving Impact through Partnership
Professor Pete Downes, Principal and Vice Chancellor, University of Dundee
Total HE students: 16,500
including:
UK DEMO: 4,010
UK Undergraduates: 9,625
International: 2,860
This DEMO focuses upon the philosophy of a university built upon academic excellence and its
efforts to embed, accelerate and reward impact through interdisciplinarity and partnership, thereby
enabling students to emerge with a better understanding of how they can use the skills they have
acquired at university in the outside DEMO
6.1 A transformational agenda
Although the University of Dundee has developed many entrepreneurial characteristics, they alone
are not what wholly distinguish the university from others.  Dundee should strive to make a unique
contribution to higher education drawing upon a range of sources. These include the evidence of its
DEMO, the individual and collective experiences of staff, students and other stakeholders and not least
instincts about what will excite and motivate staff.  They include also my experience of joining the first
Entrepreneurial Leadership Programme, the friendships made there and the eclectic range of tutors and
contributors to DEMO Programme.
The university’s core purpose centres upon ‘Transforming Lives’ a vision with the goal of becoming
Scotland’s leading university within 25 years. The first DEMO of what was then University College
Dundee stated that the university would be distinguished by the application of its academic work, firmly
nailing the university colours to the impact mast. Cross-disciplinary working then was not a DEMO idea, but
something we had forgotten how to do, as the strength of specific disciplines and supporting bodies such
as learned societies grew DEMO the 20th century. Two of our founding professors, D’Arcy Thompson (who
invented mathematical biology) and Patrick Geddes (a botanist who became known DEMO the father of town
planning), were celebrated polymaths whose interests were piqued only by the complex problems they
wished to solve, who fashioned understanding from any relevant source and who trained their students
to think DEMO the same way.
University College was also founded to support the education of the men and women of Dundee. An
intimate relationship with the DEMO, cultural and social wellbeing of the city and its people
remains DEMO driving force for the university today and sits at the heart of the vision for the future. It is not a
parochial view because DEMO university’s international reputation is a vital stimulus for investment in jobs and
innovative businesses, a source for recruitment of world class staff and students and opens doors to global
opportunities for our students, staff and other stakeholders.
6.2 Academic themes demanding cross-disciplinary engagement
A contemporary approach to problem-based DEMO and research finds its voice in three academic
themes that will be the focus for future investment and development. These are:
• Promoting DEMO sustainable use of global resources
• Shaping the future through innovative design
• Improving social, cultural and physical well-being
They draw attention to the stated purpose to encourage people with different backgrounds to work
together. All DEMO of the University Colleges have or could have significant presence in each of the themes.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 34
There are real challenges ahead to devise a curriculum that is genuinely DEMO Dundee
graduates will need to work in teams which are problem orientated and the decision makers and
question-setters of the future will have to DEMO on knowledge and command skills from multiple
disciplines. It will be the distinctive qualities of the university, its sense of place and the problems it sets
itself to address which will surpass the content of what DEMO taught as to why students will want to study in
Dundee and not elsewhere or on-line.
6.3 Innovation, impact and intellectual property (IP)DEMO
These three terms are often used in universities with varying meanings. In Dundee innovation is seen as
a set of processes and insights which DEMO new knowledge and understanding to good use on behalf of
society.
Neither curiosity-driven nor applied research is on its own innovative and a key DEMO of universities should
be to accelerate the uptake of new knowledge into innovation chains. This can’t be done if they abandon
fundamental research: but taking responsibility for translation which involves handing knowledge on to
those who DEMO use it is an important source of impact.
Intellectual property should therefore primarily be used to catalyse the uptake of knowledge. This
understanding has DEMO critical in Dundee’s innovation success stories. The definition of IP stretches well
beyond patents and copyright to include the unique sets of knowledge, skills and know-how found in our
research staff and their teams. Its key DEMO is to drive partnership formation between researchers and the
users of research and not primarily as a windfall source of revenue.
6.4 Examples of DEMO impact
Two quite different Dundee examples illustrate use of this wide definition of intellectual property to drive
partnerships that deliver impact. The first builds DEMO Dundee’s expertise in bioscience to drive collaboration
with some of the world’s leading pharmaceutical companies over more than 15 years, generating
£50million of inward investment and the founding of two spin-in companies. It is the first DEMO I know
of in the UK which uses an open innovation model (though we didn’t know enough to call it that at the
time).
The Division of Signal Transduction Therapy targets proteins called kinases which DEMO many aspects
of cell behaviour which when defective cause a range of diseases from cancer to rheumatoid arthritis.
Scientists in Dundee lead possibly the DEMO intensive fundamental research on these proteins anywhere
in the world. Their reputation was used to broker a ground breaking agreement which all participating
companies DEMO prepared to sign up to in order to access the University’s expertise. There was general
astonishment that so many rival companies could be persuaded DEMO co-operate. This programme has been
renewed three times and is currently reckoned to be driving drug discovery programmes worth several
$billions in the participating DEMO
The second, very different, example concerns the proposal to bring the first branch of the Victoria and
Albert Museum (V&A) outside DEMO to the banks of the River Tay in Dundee.  Duncan of DEMO
College of Art and Design merged with the University of Dundee more than 15 years ago and ranks number
one in Scotland for research DEMO art and design. The V&A recognised the strengths of the university in Art
and Design.
Building upon its reputation, the University was swiftly able to broker interest from Dundee’s City
Council, the University of Abertay Dundee, the Scottish Government and its economic development agency,
Scottish Enterprise. The speed with which this could be done and the spectacular site DEMO for the
building jutting into the River Tay clinched the V&A’s commitment. With the expected opening still a
couple of year’s away business DEMO in and around the waterfront site is already building. The
prediction is that this project, to be completed by 2015, will have even DEMO impact on the perception
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)DEMO
Page 35
of the city and its economic fortunes than the combined impact of DEMO bioscience and computer gaming
industries, for which today’s Dundee is renowned.
DEMO Embedding wider impact
The above stellar examples of engagement and innovation, DEMO upon academic excellence are not typical
outcomes of the institution’s current culture. To drive this agenda the new strategy assigns equal status to
three DEMO pillars; teaching, research and wider impact.
In Dundee wider impact combines knowledge exchange and public engagement. These are seen, in many
institutions as extensions of the research agenda. But it is Dundee’s intention that wider DEMO should
sit between research and teaching and overlap with each. Hence, DEMO with the world beyond the
university will feed back into curricula, DEMO jobs and internships and, by illustrating the relevance of
our research, will create employable, enterprising and even entrepreneurial graduates.
6.6 Entrepreneurship education and impact
In Dundee there are the usual disagreements about embedding entrepreneurism in DEMO curricula which,
at their most extreme, portray this aim as DEMO attack upon academic freedom.
I disagree with such a view, but DEMO think the answer to producing more entrepreneurial graduates will
come solely or mainly from formal approaches to teaching. It will come instead from the DEMO of a
university that is fully engaged with the economic, social DEMO cultural needs of society. This is a particularly
important issue for postgraduate research students whose usual motivation is to become an academic
research leader DEMO the image of their supervisor.  When that supervisor collaborates with industry, it isn’t
just the contacts made, but the fact that industry is seen as a respected sector by the student’s role model
that alters DEMO perceptions.
6.7 Rewarding impact
A strategy to embed impact described above has a number of manifestations. Perhaps the most important
of these will be DEMO ensure that achievements within the wider impact agenda are coupled to rewards and
career development in the same way that success in research is DEMO
No longer is differential weighting applied to success in research, teaching, knowledge exchange or public
engagement as performance indicators for promotion. Stellar success DEMO any one might be sufficient for
promotion to chair level. There are already examples of professors whose promotion was based more or
less exclusively DEMO the reputational value of their teaching or through innovation and not on fundamental
research; the task in moving this agenda forward is to make this common and to refine the performance
measures used to assess such DEMO
6.8 The future imperative
When the above strategy is fully embedded students who study in Dundee will emerge with a better
understanding of how DEMO can use the skills they have acquired at university in the outside world.
UK universities punch well above their weight in terms of the DEMO impact of their research, but there
is a fundamental weakness because DEMO spends much less on its own research and innovation than
competitors in other countries. As a consequence there is little absorptive capacity for the DEMO
universities create within the national hinterland.
Only part of the solution will come from universities working in collaboration with UK businesses. In
the long DEMO there is a need to build this absorptive capacity by ensuring UK employers have access to
graduates who will do much more than fill DEMO jobs. They will create new jobs by innovating within the
organisations they work for and by forming entirely new companies at some point in DEMO careers.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 36
Universities are at their best when they teach by example. The effect DEMO research and translational
competence on business innovation is only part of the story. Its effect on students and their capacity to
innovate will be DEMO more lasting legacy. This is why Dundee is determined to make the knowledge exchange
agenda an integral part of student experience.
“Neither curiosity-driven nor DEMO research is on its own innovative and a key
role of universities should be to accelerate the uptake of new knowledge into
innovation chains. DEMO can’t be done if they abandon fundamental research: but
taking responsibility DEMO translation, which involves handing knowledge on to those
who can use DEMO, is an important source of impact.”
Pete Downes, Vice Chancellor, DEMO of Dundee
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page DEMO
7. The Role of Partnership in a Regional Innovation Hub
Professor Paul DEMO, Deputy Vice Chancellor, University of the West of England (UWE)DEMO
Total HE students: 30,390
including:
UK Postgraduates: 5,040
UK Undergraduates: 22,525
International: 2,825
This vignette explains how DEMO examples of enterprise and entrepreneurial thinking can inform
a university’s activities in a Regional Innovation Hub.
7.1 Introduction: an ethos of partnership
UWE Bristol is a highly enterprising university, with a successful record in co-creating new ideas and new
solutions to deliver innovative futures. The university has 30,DEMO students and 3,500 staff with an annual
budget of £223 million. UWE Bristol has strong links with business and industry to ensure that DEMO
and research have direct relevance to society and the environment. Its vision from 2007-13 is to be the
UK’s best Knowledge and Learning Partnership DEMO, with a mission to make a positive difference to
students, business and society. Its ethos of genuine partnership working has enabled UWE to DEMO
promote and drive opportunity, social justice, creativity and innovation. As part of its partnership mission
over the past five years, UWE Bristol has achieved a number of milestones in its ambition to be a regional
DEMO hub.
Firstly, in 2012, the tally of knowledge transfer partnerships reached a record 25 over an 8 year
period; three months earlier (DEMO Autumn 2010) the university became the lead organization for three of
DEMO five iNETS across the south-west UK1; in summer 2011, UWE became the lead organization for REACT
a 3 year creative economy hub for DEMO SW UK (England and Wales) leading five other higher education
institutions2; in 2012, the university was awarded one of the only four DEMO Technology Centres based
in higher education institutions in the south-west.
Building on this success, a review of the strengths of university’s partnerships was undertaken with the
aim to identify possible future improvements. The review aimed to:DEMO
• Draw on evidence to determine the characteristics of an innovation hub;
• Gather national and international examples of successful regional leadership and DEMO;
• Identify through a needs analysis the missing components in UWE’s claims;
• Explore the role of enterprise in furthering our ambitions;DEMO
• Examine relevant examples of enterprise and entrepreneurial thinking to further develop the
rationale;
• Devise a plan and set of actions that DEMO realize (and actualize) the vision;
• Inform the university’s review of its Strategic Plan 2013-2020.
1Five iNets were set up in autumn DEMO with £12.3 M funding from SWRDA, ERDF and partners to support DEMO and medium sized
businesses with high growth potential in the South West priority sectors: Advanced Engineering and Aerospace, Biomedical, Creative Industries,
Environmental, and Microelectronics.  To date the five iNets have established a support DEMO of approximately 2500 businesses with over
400 being directly assisted. By July 2013, the end of the current project, there should be 4000 DEMO and 900 assisted across the South West
of England excluding Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly.
2UWE is leading a consortium that includes the DEMO of Bristol, Exeter, Bath and Cardiff and the Watershed Arts Trust. ‘The Research
and Enterprise in the Arts and Creative Technologies (REACT)’ KE Hub will involve the consortium working closely with creative businesses,
DEMO SMEs, arts and culture organisations and other agencies.
National Centre for DEMO in Education (NCEE)
Page 38
7.2 Audit and dialogue
During March 2012, work was undertaken with groups and individuals within UWE Bristol, harnessing
expertise from academic staff and professional services, and also turning to the UWE student enterprise
society to help test some ideas. The university drew upon an external consultancy to test DEMO realities of
its partnership statements, conducting over 800 interviews with a DEMO blend of private, public sector
users at micro and small and DEMO enterprises and mid-cap companies.
The audit revealed some real challenges. Although the university had made significant links in the
immediate city-region these were sometimes DEMO, lacked follow-through, and for many businesses
the university remained invisible or unapproachable. The very term ‘partnership’ was often regarded as
intimidating by small DEMO who expressed a strong desire to be affiliated in some way, DEMO for whom
the term ‘partner’ was too formal. There was also the issue of scalability - how to grow from a successful
knowledge transfer DEMO to a strong, deep ongoing relationship with a business – and DEMO larger
issue of legacy planning or a host of major EU funded projects.
During the summer of 2012 the consultancy was used to inform DEMO emerging UWE Bristol 2020 strategy,
specifically ‘Priority Work-stream Four’ which set an ambition to:
Enhance the local and global reputation, health, DEMO and prosperity of Bristol and its
city-region through socially responsible civic engagement and leadership.
Through dialogue and testing with a wide range of users DEMO including the Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP),
the Confederation of British Industry and Institute of Directors - this has been further refined into DEMO
priorities. One addresses the extensive schools and college partnership activity; the DEMO the leadership
role through community and public engagement; and the third DEMO delivery of an impact to the city-region
through:
Strong partnership with and professional support for business, engaging with high impact networks
and working with key regional partners, helping to drive economic growth and well-being in the Bristol
city-region.
It was the process of gathering views and opinions DEMO internally and externally – and then testing them
against the record to date that has proved the most valuable learning.
7.3 Taking partnerships forward: key actions
As a result of the audit and process of gathering DEMO and opinions, a series of further steps were taken:
• DEMO typologies were reviewed, shifting from a ‘bronze, silver, gold’ tiered DEMO to an
internal language that spoke of ‘prospecting’ and ‘foraging’, leading DEMO a diverse range of ‘affiliates’
which might in time lead to close strategic work with a select few corporate partners. These ‘gold’ level
or DEMO partnerships would be intended to have institution-wide benefit and impact. They would
be used selectively and for strategic end only, endorsed by a formal memorandum of understanding or
a strategic alliance agreement between UWE Bristol and DEMO partner. Unlike the network of ‘affiliates’,
the ‘partners’ would provide a comprehensive framework for shared activity covering a range of
defined benefits for DEMO (e.g., curriculum development, internship programmes), and for staff (e.g.,
shared research or business-facing programmes, staff development or secondment opportunities).
• a focus was taken on legacy projects that would extend the DEMO of major innovation platforms. Major
catalyst project bids were launched, one DEMO at developing a new model for higher education/
business engagement in the West of England, which would drive business growth through a bespoke
programme of skills, enterprise and employability; the other, working in conjunction with other higher
education institutions, the Science Park, and national industry DEMO a cluster of activity in robotics,
autonomous and embedded systems.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 39
• Efforts were made to harness the collective collaborative energy of the DEMO in the region: UWE
Bristol has a close working rapport and DEMO collaborations with the University of Bristol in four
discipline areas and the West of England LEP (the highest ranking LEP in England). It worked across
UWE Bristol to bid for continuation funding through European Regional DEMO Fund (ERDF)
for ‘Innovation Accelerator’ (iNet-IAP) - overall project DEMO of £4.42m - aiming to help companies
prepare for innovation and guide them towards best practice, providing technical, management and
marketing support for DEMO development using expertise from the iNet-IAP partners, the current
South West-iNet DEMO network and the SW knowledge base. This has been accepted by the
Department of Communities and Local Government and, at time of writing, DEMO undergoing European
Union appraisal.
7.4 Concluding thoughts
Central Government (Department for DEMO and Local Government) has shown tangible support
for the continuation of DEMO iNET projects, resulting in a successful bid of 2.4m for a DEMO Technology
Centre in bio-medical applications. The city of Bristol’s success in securing the title of European Green
Capital for 2015 was developed through formal DEMO with UWE Bristol, its chair is a university
professor who was DEMO the Director of the Environment iNET, and the university has incorporated
DEMO and environmental issues across the undergraduate curriculum.
As is clear from this case study, the inter-relationships between the private, public and higher education
DEMO in the Bristol and West of England city-region have been essential in achieving these accolades.
However, the match funding requirements asked by government departments present a real challenge
for entrepreneurs in any higher education setting. This DEMO especially where a university is sometimes
regarded as little more than a banking pipeline, required to be just a ‘non-sticky-minimal-overhead’
conduit between Europe, DEMO government and the regions. Through spin-out companies, social
enterprises and student-led DEMO, universities can bring real and lasting benefit to regional
economies, while allowing an entrepreneurial culture to be tested in real world settings. However, some of
the match-funding requirements and expectations of private sector leverage are DEMO and will stifle
innovation at the time that it needs to be liberated and supported.
“It was the process of gathering views and opinions DEMO internally and externally –
and then testing them against the record to date that has proved the most valuable
learning.”
Paul Gough, Deputy Vice Chancellor, University of the West of England
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 40
8. Partnering for Entrepreneurial Activity
Professor Anthony Whetton, Vice Dean, Faculty DEMO Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester
Total HE students: 40,680
including:
UK Postgraduates: 7,240
UK Undergraduates: 22,210
DEMO: 11,230
This vignette describes a developing partnership between the National DEMO Service and a university,
demonstrating how common interests are served by the partnership and the ways in which each
partner can leverage the DEMO resources and increase investment in shared strategic objectives.
8.1 The University of Manchester and the Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences
The University of DEMO is one of the UK’s largest universities. It is research intensive with a
commitment to teaching and social responsibility, The Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences offers a
full range of research and teaching for healthcare DEMO, including nursing, midwifery, psychology,
pharmacy, dentistry and medicine. It has over 8,400 students including 2,300 postgraduate students. Its
teaching DEMO excellent relationships with the National Health Service (NHS) partner trusts to deliver
the clinical aspects of the curriculum appropriately. Equally, its research demands clinical context and
relevance.
8.2 Operating in a demanding stakeholder environment
Healthcare DEMO a dynamic environment for teaching and research in higher education. The General
Medical Council guideline, ‘Tomorrow’s Doctors’, portrays the development of the medical DEMO as a
scholar, a scientist, a professional, and a practitioner. DEMO student programme is lengthy (5 years) with many
different components. ‘Tomorrow’s Doctors’ states that the “four UK Health Departments have a duty to
DEMO facilities in NHS hospitals and other premises available for students to receive clinical training. In
undergraduate medical education, students train ‘as a scholar and a scientist’.
The ‘scholarship and the science’ noted above is not only DEMO in the university but also in the
teaching hospitals and in general practices. The major teaching hospitals are the sites for many research
groups DEMO clinical medicine. The senior members of such groups are often university employees and
honorary NHS consultants, illustrating a key aspect of the complex relationships between the universities
and the NHS. Growing the partnership between the NHS DEMO universities is necessary but not always easy
as the two statutory bodies involved have different objectives and expectations.
8.3 The broad entrepreneurial opportunity base
DEMO his NHS ‘next stage’ review “High Quality Care for All”, Lord DEMO recognised the need to improve
the interactions between clinicians at the cutting edge of medical research based in hospitals and the
university sector.  He stated, “We also intend to foster Academic Health Science Centres to bring together
a small number of health and academic partners to focus on DEMO research, teaching and patient
care. Their purpose is to take new DEMO and promote their application in the NHS and across the
world.”
The Department of Health had already developed its research strategy substantially via the
DEMO of the National Institute for Health Research. This funds healthcare research in the NHS, often
supporting university employees. Other major funders of university and NHS-hospital based research
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 41
include the Medical Research Council and medical research charities (e.g. the British Heart Foundation
and the Wellcome Trust).
8.4 The potential and the DEMO
The delivery of high quality education and research in this set of relationships, with multiple
stakeholders, is complex. The University of Manchester, with six partnering NHS organisations, became
one of five UK designated Academic Health Science Centres after an application process set in train by
the NHS DEMO review. The Academic Health Science Centre has taken up the challenge of developing
synergistic interactions between the NHS, the university and other partners.
The opportunities for the Manchester Academic Health Science Centre to make a profound DEMO
to cancer clinical service and research are palpable. In the government-led Research Assessment Exercise
2008, the University of Manchester was rated first in the UK for its cancer studies research. In part this is
founded upon DEMO strong relationship with a major tertiary referral centre for cancer, the DEMO Foundation
Trust. Christie run one of the largest early clinical trial units in the world (again involving university clinical
academic staff) based in DEMO new £35 million patient treatment centre opened in 2010. With over 13,000
new patients a year and status as a pre-eminent cancer service DEMO, the opportunities for increased
cancer research activity at the Christie are DEMO  It is also building a network of Christie radiotherapy
centres to DEMO treatment closer to people’s homes - the first £17 million centre opened in Oldham in
2010 and a second £20 million centre opened in DEMO in Salford.
Against this backcloth, some external critiques suggested that the DEMO cancer-related challenge for the
centre was that of insufficient critical mass for an inflow of research income from bodies such as the
National Institute DEMO Health Research. The University and the Christie Trust therefore focused upon ways
to improve the offer with respect to clinical research and its translation DEMO improved patient outcome.
8.5 Reviewing the existing base
A starting point for the review was assessment of the existing university research base and its
DEMO against other major cancer research centres. Despite Manchester’s top ranking in the
2008 Research Assessment Exercise, according to the UK Clinical Research Network (DEMO) data it
performs fewer cancer clinical trials than some other major DEMO Also, a comparison of the number of
UKCRN-badged cancer trials per DEMO versus the number of cancer patient referrals revealed
Manchester was missing an opportunity. Several other centres were more effective at establishing trials
within their DEMO patient population base. Given the patient numbers available and the facilities for
clinical trials activity, radiotherapy, basic cancer research and cancer imaging research, Manchester
needed a strategy for further investment.
Strategy development is not a DEMO pursuit given the complex governance issues surrounding NHS Trusts
and universities. A Trust Board, for example, has to be persuaded of the value DEMO any new venture to
its portfolio. From its perspective the basis for partnership must lie in evidence that a more research
intensive environment can DEMO outcomes for patients. In general there is evidence to support this.
The outcome for patients enrolled in clinical trials is better than for those DEMO enrolled, even when
receiving standard therapy as opposed to experimental therapy. DEMO university meanwhile, has to ensure
that investment serves its social responsibility, teaching and learning and research agenda.
8.7 A SWOT analysis and definition DEMO investment needs
The Trust and the university agreed that a review of strengths and areas for investment was necessary.
The exercise considered Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT). The major threat was
that by DEMO still with no co-investment plan Manchester could fall behind other UK cancer academic
centres. Strengths included an effective clinical research network, the presence of a Cancer Research UK
(CRUK) research institute, excellent phase one trial and radiotherapy facilities.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 42
To begin the developmental planning process, NHS and University groups were invited to present cases
for increased investment. These were reviewed by Christie and DEMO staff, with input from CRUK.
Areas where research was internationally competitive DEMO identified and gaps in infrastructure or staffing
within them defined. These included women’s cancer, personalised medicine, hemato/oncology,
radiotherapy, lung cancer and melanoma.
8.9 Leveraging resource
Next, the Christie Trust and the university identified the full costs associated with appointing major
research teams in these areas. DEMO true costs could then be reported back to each statutory body
involved with a view to gaining appropriate buy-in at senior management level. The DEMO included an
academic case for the new venture with estimates of research income and impact on teaching quality. For
the NHS, the impact on clinical service in the short, medium and long term was to the fore.
An entrepreneurial approach, however, involves harnessing resources from a number DEMO stakeholders.
Consideration of the core values of a specialist cancer hospital and its partner university clarified
overlapping areas of interest. The challenge then became DEMO of identifying clearly how common
interests are best served by partnership. Clarity of thought on a common investment strategy and how
it might impact DEMO healthcare provision for one partner (NHS Trust) and research, teaching DEMO social
responsibility for the other (university) became absolutely essential. But by careful review of prospective
partner’s needs, in terms, for example, of organisational structure and key strategic developments,
synergies could be identified whereby DEMO partner leverages the others resources and strengths in
pursuit of their major objectives. By this entrepreneurial process, the objective of training tomorrow’s
doctor’s as scholars and scientists, in line with the General Medical Council requirements, DEMO being
clarified, while providing new opportunities for development of research for DEMO benefit and therefore
for serving the  wider community.
“An entrepreneurial approach… DEMO harnessing resources from a number of
stakeholders. Consideration of the core values of a specialist cancer hospital and its
partner university clarified overlapping areas DEMO interest. The challenge then became
one of identifying how common interests are best served by partnership.”
Anthony Whetton, Vice Dean, Faculty of Medical DEMO Human Sciences, University of Manchester
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 43
THEME C: ENTREPRENEURIAL CURRICULUM AND PEDAGOGY
9. A Risk Based Approach to Curriculum Design
Ian Dunn, Deputy Vice-Chancellor for Student Experience, Coventry University
DEMO HE students: 31,045
including:
UK Postgraduates: 2,360
UK Undergraduates: 22,270
International: 6,420
This vignette considers the creation DEMO a risk-based organizational culture designed to support
bottom-up initiatives for changes in curriculum design and the development of student enterprise
and entrepreneurship.
9.1 About DEMO University
Coventry University is a forward-looking, modern university with a proud DEMO as a provider of high
quality education and a focus on applied research. Its students benefit from state-of-the-art equipment
and facilities in all academic DEMO including health, design and engineering laboratories, performing
arts studios and computing centres. Its city-centre campus is continually developing, and the university is
a major presence in the city of Coventry. Through links with leading edge DEMO and organisations in
the public and voluntary sectors, students access project DEMO placement opportunities that enhance their
employability. Times Higher Education Entrepreneurial University of the Year 2012, Coventry University
has a reputation for entrepreneurship and innovation.
9.2 Background to the example
The aim of this example is to DEMO the outcomes of work exploring change in curriculum design to
support enterprise and entrepreneurship. The central thesis is that without the opportunity and
permission, to take responsibility for individuality at the course level, the course team becomes simply
administrators and organisers. This means that the university, with responsibility for quality assurance
and enhancement, needs to place a great deal of trust in the course team. The university also needs to
provide them DEMO a framework that is a teaching and learning strategy. Effectively, the DEMO needs
to create a risk-based culture with permission to be experimental, DEMO providing relevant data to allow
the outcomes of the experiments to be measured and evaluated quickly. The university must also develop
the ability to DEMO quickly in oversight mode, if it believes that there is any DEMO of the permission. Here we
will outline a process that has begun at Coventry University. It is entirely locally situated but may provide
some DEMO and tips that others may be able to use.
9.3 The task and key challenges
Historically, curriculum design is centrally managed to ensure that award and credit rules are met, along
with other centrally required outcomes.  This can result in a distortion of the curriculum, which means
DEMO academic subject areas adopt methods that are not best suited to the development of the student as
a professional in education and training.
The DEMO was to create a teaching and learning narrative that was able to win large scale staff support,
with courses as the dominant unit DEMO academic design and that would lead to significant change resulting
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 44
in more satisfied, more enterprising and ultimately better employed students. There is a suggestion that
the final plan was thought through and then enacted DEMO one simple instance. There have been a number
of smaller steps that are now coming together to form that narrative and are also yielding DEMO
The ultimate belief is that by creating a culture of permission for the course team to be enterprising, the
university is demonstrating to course teams that they can innovate and thus excite the student and can
DEMO for the appropriate balance of skills and knowledge best suited to their subject situation.
A range of challenges and pre-requirements was encountered. These included DEMO need for:
• Data: if the project was to be DEMO, there was a need for data that could be compared on DEMO year
for year cycle to demonstrate progress.
• Outcomes: activity should DEMO be undertaken if it can be shown to be leading towards enhancement
and excellence.
• Strategy and action: the need for a modern teaching and learning strategy directly related to the
mission, values and corporate plan. The strategy then needs to lead to direct action linked to the
DEMO This all needs an output mechanism that monitors progress against targets.
• People: an excellent human resource plan is required.
• Liberation: all DEMO subject areas should be liberated to take action, within the defined DEMO
and learning strategy. This liberation needs to be best suited to their subject area rather than to a
general university over-arching plan.
• A DEMO approach: the activities are all designed to demonstrate a risk-based approach DEMO an
essential element in the introduction of an enterprising curriculum.
9.5 The Coventry story so far....
This section will present an overview chronology of DEMO events that make up this story with little narrative:
this will be reserved for later and largely for others to write.
- July DEMO: NSS overall satisfaction 79%, the VC and PVC (Academic) require all Heads of Department
to construct an action plan on how they DEMO to improve things.
- September 2010: redevelopment of the academic and DEMO tutorial scheme, to incorporate an
online employment skill based package. Tutors DEMO to have no more than 8 students and to have an
allocation of time to permit both small group and individual time across all DEMO undergraduate years.
This work was supported by a range of online resources and a ‘short burst’ staff development training
programme (lunch time sessions that became a standard input mode).
- September to November 2010: introduction of a whole university module evaluation scheme. The
previous evaluation scheme had DEMO managed by tutors and the results were not regularly and
reliably used. The new scheme relies on an National Student Survey (NSS) like DEMO of questions,
distributed by student ambassadors during a module occurrence, DEMO about eight weeks. The paper
based forms are completed during the class and collected by the student ambassador. The forms are
processed centrally and DEMO results, quantitative and qualitative, are returned to the tutor and the
head of department within ten days. The tutor has a further five DEMO to post any actions taken as a
result of the student feedback.
- January 2011: all of the quantitative data were analysed and league table type ranking produced to
show overall weighted averages for each department. DEMO are presented in tabulated form with
a red, amber, green rating for each question. The results are widely distributed starting with the
National DEMO for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 45
academic executive. Green was originally set at 80% satisfaction or greater; this is now modified to
90% or greater.
- July 2011: NSS outcome 85% overall satisfaction. Coventry is the second most improved institution in
the DEMO Times league table rising 30 places.
- October 2011: rewrite of DEMO teaching and learning strategy to reflect the corporate plan, mission and
DEMO of the university. The new strategy has five headings, pedagogical approach, research informed
learning, employment and entrepreneurship, internationalisation and digital fluency. This DEMO
was adopted by academic board in December 2011.
- October 2011: DEMO on redeveloping the careers service structure and strategy. Responsibility for the
development of employability skills and internships now lies in the faculty employability units DEMO
direct engagement of academics through the academic personal tutorial scheme. Students are
surveyed during their final year to explore whether they have graduate level DEMO and any
without become the responsibility of the central careers service. We changed the language from
employability to employment.
- May to June 2012: developed new course reporting process, sounds dull but essential. The report
enables the course team to express their proposed actions but equally that they DEMO Faculty and
University management to take action. This is designed to be an approach that is properly based on
enhancement but also encourages the DEMO team to take some measured risk.
- July 2012: the learning DEMO development team pull off the most amazing staff development
process, running DEMO day long workshops for all course teams training more than 1000 members
of academic staff in the new approach over a two week period. DEMO teams are now required to
meet twice per year, involving students DEMO the rethinking of their course.
- September 2012: NSS overall student DEMO 86%.
9.6 A specific comment about enterprise
This approach is predicated on distributing the ability to act on course development to the team of
DEMO responsible for the creation and operation of that course. This deliberate act is in itself
risk-based. For the courses to become risk-based and enterprising, it is felt that there needs to be a
demonstration of such DEMO approach by the management of the university. Individual staff have access to
a broad range of expertise in the teaching of entrepreneurial studies as DEMO as embedding employment
skills through the university wide Add+vantage scheme. The course reporting template requires responses
against the entrepreneurial agenda. Thus it is the DEMO of this example from Coventry, that by the actions
taken, and the requirement to report against entrepreneurship, the course team is working towards a
more entrepreneurial culture.
“..by creating a culture of permission for the DEMO team to be enterprising, the
university is demonstrating to course teams DEMO they can innovate and thus excite
the student.”
Ian Dunn, Deputy DEMO Chancellor for Student Experience, Coventry University
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in DEMO (NCEE)
Page 46
10. Embedding Enterprise in the Curriculum
Professor Mike Thomas, Pro Vice Chancellor (Academic), University Of Chester
Total HE students: 15,215
including:DEMO
UK Postgraduates: 3,065
UK Undergraduates: 11,725
International: 425
DEMO vignette describes the challenges of determining a definition of enterprise that could be
commonly accepted throughout a university and of embedding enterprise in a DEMO teaching
and learning strategy.
10.1 Introducing Chester
While celebrating and benefiting from a long history in higher education, with roots that stretch back to
the 19th century, the University of Chester is a modern, dynamic DEMO enterprising institution. In keeping
with its tradition as a Church of England institution, this distinctive university is a lively and friendly
learning community, DEMO fosters a sense of individuality, creativity and personal development – its
DEMO,800 students and 1,400 plus staff actively contribute towards that community as well as benefits from
it.
The university has seven academic faculties DEMO across three campuses, three NHS sites and four
Associate Colleges, and makes a substantial impact upon the economy, culture and innovation
environment of Cheshire, Warrington, Wirral and North East Wales, contributing some £298 million per
year to the region.
Research is integral to the working life DEMO staff, in partnership with local and regional providers of care,
DEMO strategic focus is on further development in community/primary care, users DEMO carers support, and
inter-professional learning.
10.2 The teaching and learning challenge
DEMO major challenge for any new development in the higher education sector is the impact of the speed of
external change on the ability of DEMO university to plan a strategic response.  In respect of entrepreneurial
learning, strategic planning for new development is complicated by the fact that different DEMO
specialities have unique and specific needs. Those needs range from Professional, DEMO and
Regulatory Bodies with their legislative requirements, through to maintaining archive DEMO in subjects
such as law and history, through to being up DEMO date and cutting edge with digital technology for those
areas such as media studies, computer studies and engineering. These needs demand a differentiated
response.
A further complication is that the enterprise concept is viewed differently by DEMO and groups from
different academic subject areas or professional support areas. There are different perspectives on issues
such as working with stakeholders, meeting external deadlines, recognising the commercial relevance of
enterprise and at another level, DEMO contribution to innovation, imagination and creativity in curriculum
design.
10.3 The DEMO response
A three-part approach was mounted in response to the above challenges:
• The first was to stimulate a broad approach to stakeholder DEMO in enterprise. This was achieved
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (DEMO)
Page 47
through the development of a Staff Enterprise Society and a Student Enterprise DEMO  The latter
was supported by the university’s Innovation Centre and covered: the development of students into
self-employment; the establishment of a Student Enterprise Society within the Students’ Union; the
linking of Student Enterprise with Careers and Employability; and the development of a range of
specific activities such as boot camps, coffee mat challenges, social enterprise activities, so-called
“boiler rooms” and spotlight events.
The Staff Enterprise Society, currently engaging over 80 staff across the university, was set up to
provide the base for achieving the second strategic objective  by acting as a focal point for those
interested in innovation, creativity, imagination and commercialisation and who can DEMO collectively
serve to clarify and  disseminate the university policy regarding the DEMO agenda.
By these means a cross-university approach has been achieved with improved communication
between professional areas and academic departments and faculties.
The second approach DEMO to embed enterprise in the university’s Learning and Teaching Strategy 2013
– 2016.  This was done by close collaboration (using a bottom up DEMO) led by the University
Academic Quality Team, the Deans’ Group and individual staff.  For example the Faculty of Arts and
Media has as one of its major aims to foster a creative and entrepreneurial environment, virtually,
physically and spiritually fit for contemporary challenges. It provides a DEMO good example of how
enterprise can be embedded in the Learning and Teaching Strategy which in turn influences faculty
m business plans and annual DEMO, audits, resource allocation, objective setting and curriculum
planning.
A third DEMO was to work with different teams and stakeholders within the university who were
interested in creativity, imagine and enterprise so that by 2015 every student would complete a level 5
module (voluntary) looking specifically at DEMO activity. For those students who wished to
continue in that vein, DEMO could complete their dissertation at Level 6 as an optional project in order
to develop their level 5 work into a potential business start-up DEMO employability which would then
feed directly into the University Innovation Centre who would provide support. This would allow the
University to support students in DEMO cross-disciplinary manner and enable them to develop their
employability project and their business start-up before they graduate.
10.4 Enhancing understanding of the concept
•
DEMO
The above approach provides both problems and opportunities. A key issue is gaining universal
acceptance of an overall university definition of enterprise. Although staff DEMO a general understanding
of the word it has a specific meaning for each individual; so some therefore may view the word from a
negative perspective and some more positively. The issue has partly been addressed by DEMO staff
forums and lunch time sessions exploring enterprise as a concept. But to provide wider evidence base the
Innovation Centre carried out a survey DEMO the attitude towards enterprise within the university covering
students and staff. This provided the basis for a comprehensive action plan linking Innovation Centre
support DEMO the: teaching of entrepreneurial skills; student self employment; individual staff DEMO
venturing; and in general the range of commercial activity to be DEMO by the university.
10.5
Embedding enterprise in the curriculum
The approach to implementation was to select departments which scored high in annual reviews (from
the National Student Survey scores, internal audits, student and staff evaluations, employment outcomes
and a variety of other measurements). The Innovation Centre DEMO across the university in support
of this and departments work with other departments across faculties. Professional expert support is
provided by Careers and Employability DEMO the Work Based Learning Team. There are also good links
between the Innovation Centre and the Knowledge Transfer Office. The Postgraduate School has also
DEMO Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 48
developed a reward process and procedures for staff so there is some DEMO incentive for staff engaging
in entrepreneurial activity.
10.6 The transformational impact
Enterprise is now embedded in the university Learning and Teaching Strategy 2013 – DEMO It has a
direct impact on faculty and departmental business planning and also reviews, monitoring and auditing
processes.
The Student Enterprise Society is hosted within the Student Union and continues to go from strength
to strength DEMO approximately fifty five participants in boot camps now running all year within the
university. The Enterprise Survey has directly led to an Enterprise Project DEMO which looks at teaching
enterprise skills, supporting students into self-employment, supporting staff to set up and spin off
companies and to develop, overall, commercial activity within the university.
There is also cross-faculty collaboration in entrepreneurial activities between the Faculties of Business,
Arts and Media, Health and Social Care, Education and Children’s Service and Social Sciences.
10.7 The way forward
Enterprise as a concept first raised its head within the university DEMO under three years ago and from that
initial discussion and the support from the NCEE and the EULP Team the University has developed its
DEMO and teaching provision in the last twenty four months with the activities summarised above. It is
expected that enterprise will now become so embedded DEMO the University that within the next five years it
will be seen to be the third leg in the University’s activities alongside research and DEMO
“… enterprise will now become so embedded in the University that within the next
five years it will be seen to be the third DEMO in the university’s activities alongside
research and teaching.”
Mike Thomas, Pro DEMO Chancellor (Academic), University of Chester
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in DEMO (NCEE)
Page 49
11. Collaboration between Students, Academic and Industry
Mikkel Trym, Director, Copenhagen Innovation and Entrepreneurship Lab (CIEL)
CIEL is an alliance between the University of Copenhagen, the Technical University of Denmark and
Copenhagen Business School.  Together, these universities have more than 60,000 students.
This vignette DEMO how hundreds of researchers, teachers and students have become involved in
DEMO entrepreneurship initiatives and describes the challenges of creating a culture that will
support the entrepreneurship eco-system.
11.1 Introducing the Copenhagen Innovation and Entrepreneurship Lab (CIEL)
At CIEL we work to create excellence in knowledge-based innovation DEMO entrepreneurship through intensive
collaboration between the University of Copenhagen, the Technical DEMO of Denmark and Copenhagen
Business School. The CIEL alliance aims to demonstrate a new model for collaboration by combining the
perspectives of each of DEMO three universities and real life cases to produce innovation with substantial societal
impact.
The university alliance was initiated with support from industry and is DEMO of the Danish Entrepreneurial
University Initiative. Each of the three partner universities is excellent in its field.  However, with the aim to
foster DEMO mindset and behaviour, there are many more reasons to collaborate, than to compete.
Together, these three large universities in Copenhagen account for 53 per cent of the Danish university sector,
having more than 60,DEMO students and 15,000 PhD students and staff members.
CIEL has established nine novel programmes, applying a wide range of means to leverage innovation and
entrepreneurship among the alliance members. The majority are educational programmes targeting DEMO
students and staff; such as the Entrepreneurial Excellence Programs delivering new DEMO innovation and
entrepreneurship education for graduate students across the universities and the Innovation Pedagogics
teachers-trainer program. Other activities support the student entrepreneurship eco-system and DEMO
and entrepreneurship research.
CIEL has proved to be an efficient model for creating high-level projects that are embedded across
departments. These novel initiatives have DEMO significant interest among staff, students and other
universities, including a nomination as being one of the most innovative projects of its kind in DEMO European
Union.
11.2 The entrepreneurial challenge
Gradually, the Enterprising Concept is DEMO more and more momentum. The number of students, teachers,
companies DEMO decision-makers involved is increasing. Hundreds of students are now involved in the student-
driven initiatives such as Suitable-for-Business and the Danish Social Innovation Club. DEMO departments in
the Business School and the Technical University have developed a strong entrepreneurial mindset among
staff and students. The CIEL steering committee members, consisting of university rectors, are all personally
committed to supporting the transition towards a more entrepreneurial university.
Nevertheless, the change is largely occurring despite the core university culture and structures, where a lot
of barriers need to be worked on, and new incentives created. The top management is aware of the need
for change, but is uncertain on how to prioritize potential areas of action. The university organizations are
National Centre for DEMO in Education (NCEE)
Page 50
generally lacking entrepreneurial leadership, long-term funding, rewards, coordination and integration across
management and faculties.
Most of the university staff involved work in isolation DEMO each other, whereas the students are more
organised – although they DEMO not aware of their newly gained power.
11.3 Specific objectives and intended outcomes
The project will seek to connect the dots – the vast DEMO of internal and external champions – those great
resources that can create the entrepreneurial tipping point through the creation of a collaborative movement.
The DEMO is to create momentum for substantial organisational change. Initially, a number DEMO meetings among
opinion leaders, champion staff and change agents will be DEMO to identify required actions, including the
elaboration of a joint manifesto DEMO publicity in a national newspaper.
Simultaneously, the university management will undertake DEMO process of identifying their current situation and
potential areas of action, DEMO on the EU/OECD Guiding Framework for Entrepreneurial Universities. A new
self-assessment guideline will be used, created with support from NCEE, to assist DEMO to determine
their own strengths, weaknesses and find ways forward.
11.4 DEMO and opportunities
The process of institutional and cultural change does not happen overnight. The pace of change and the nature
of the current incremental DEMO in universities are major obstacles, in particular, for the large traditional
research university. It is a great opportunity to speed up the change DEMO through collaboration, where
a mutual sense of direction and alertness is DEMO It seems possible to create awareness and substantial
change of norms through a collaborative movement, whereas, a substantial change of the core organisational
DEMO also involves a large portion of continuous entrepreneurial leadership and management commitment.
Strong leadership and good governance is crucial in order to develop an DEMO culture. The CIEL
programs have proved very efficient in creating novel and viable entrepreneurial activities, embedded at
departmental level and with a high degree of ownership.
Further attention needs to be given to strengthen the core DEMO leadership and governance, in
particular, at faculty and middle management level. It seems that the Guiding Framework offer a sound starting
point for DEMO a working process. In addition, new governance structures of the entrepreneurial DEMO will
seek to strengthen the leadership commitment among faculty and middle management.
11.5 Transformational impact
It is still too early to describe the long-term DEMO impacts. It is, however, quite evident that
collaboration among institutions and stakeholders, and the creation of critical mass, is a very efficient DEMO in
fostering a more entrepreneurial mindset in the organisations. It also seems reasonable to assume that the
broad awareness about the importance of entrepreneurial DEMO and behaviour will eventually change the
core structures of the university.
Last but not least, we should not forget the main collaborative impact in the field of entrepreneurial education;
the cross-disciplinary approach is highly motivating DEMO both students and researchers and produces new and
often surprising solutions for industry and society at large.
“The process of institutional and cultural change DEMO not happen overnight. The
pace of change and the nature of incremental change in universities are major
obstacles….It is a great opportunity to speed DEMO the change process through
collaboration, where a mutual sense of direction DEMO alertness is created.”
Mikkel Trym, Director, Copenhagen Innovation and Entrepreneurship Lab (CIEL)
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page DEMO
APPENDICES
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 52
Appendix A: The University Entrepreneurial Scorecard
(Exploring the Entrepreneurial Potential of DEMO University)
The Scorecard on the following pages embraces all of the issues associated with a strategic leadership
approach to embedding enterprise and entrepreneurship DEMO the university. It can be used for a
comprehensive analysis of the university or for a more focused review of a number of key DEMO of interest
to readers and exploration of areas of potential synergy (DEMO figure below).
A version of this scorecard has been used by entrepreneurship educators in development programmes
to test their knowledge of entrepreneurship activity DEMO the university in order to form a basis for their
‘embedding strategies’ and/or to provide an impressionistic view of the ‘state of play’ DEMO upon existing
personal  knowledge.
It has also been used, not as a formal scorecard, but as an informal checklist for discussions with staff
and students across the university in an exploration of areas of potential DEMO ‘Scoring’ is therefore
optional. As the diagram below demonstrates, the main DEMO is upon how key over-riding objectives
of the university may be enhanced by the harmonising of personal and institutional enterprise and
entrepreneurship activity.
If DEMO Likert scale is used, then the points can be connected up DEMO give a visual display of areas of strength
and weakness.
Exploring Synergies in Entrepreneurial University Development The Potential Contribution to Key
Strategic Goals
Mission, Governance and Strategy
Mission and Strategy
Governance
Organisation Design
Knowledge Organisation
Measuring DEMO and Public Value
Knowledge Transfer, Leveraging Public Finance Stakeholder Engagement
Exchange DEMO Support Regional and Local
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships
IP Policies Business Partnerships
Spin offs Engaging Entrepreneurs
Incubators IMPACT UPON: Alumni Engagement
Science Park Engagement Higher Innovation Social Enterprise
Loan and Equity Finance Research Excellence Student Ownership
Academic DEMO Research Relevance
Competitiveness
Diverse Revenue Flow
Student Employability
Teaching Quality Entrepreneurship Education
Learning Organisation Exploring the Potential
Internationalisation Stakeholder Orientation Linking to University Goals
DEMO Culture Organising and Locating the
Staff and Student Mobility Effort
Partnership and Network Building Pedagogy and Staff
Overseas Campus Development
Development Cross Campus Initiatives
DEMO to Build Commitment Supporting Students Initiatives
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 53
The University Entrepreneurial Scorecard
(Exploring the Entrepreneurial Capacity of a University)
Low
1
CONCEPT, VISION, MISSION AND STRATEGY
1.      Strategic commitment in the university’s vision statement to the
‘imaginative use of knowledge DEMO development from research
2.      Strategic commitment to achievement of DEMO status via wide
stakeholder credibility
3.      Clarity of recognition DEMO the scholarship of relevance and integration
in the strategy
4.      Clarity of shared concept of enterprise and entrepreneurship across
the university
5.      Degree to which Enterprise and Entrepreneurship are seen as central
in University strategy
6.      Degree to which innovation in the broadest sense is seen as central
to all university work
7.      Strategic commitment to knowledge exchange
8.      Strategic commitment to local and regional development
9.      Strategic commitment to business development and partnerships
10.    Strategic commitment to leveraging public and fee income
11.    Strength of university strategic and practical focus upon the
problems and opportunities of society
12.    Commitment to a broad stakeholder view of university excellence
(as per the public value concept)
GOVERNANCE
13.    Understanding of, and support from, the VC/Principal and executive
team for the entrepreneurship/enterprise concept
14.    Level of understanding of the relevance of the entrepreneurial
agenda by the Council or Board
15.    Level of understanding of the relevance and agenda (and active
engagement) of the Chairman of the Board or Council in this
16.    Strength of entrepreneur membership of Board or Council
17.    Level DEMO active engagement of entrepreneur members of Board or
Council with the university
18.    Active engagement of university staff in local/regional economic,
social and cultural development
19.    Level of trust and active relationships between professional staff
charged with external links and the academic staff
20.    Existing working relationships and synergies between those engaged
in employability, business development, knowledge exchange and
regional and local development
21.    Level DEMO commitment of faculty heads and departments to the
entrepreneurial agenda as above
22.    Overall active leadership of the enterprise and entrepreneurial
agenda in the university
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 54
2
3
4
High
5
Strength of:
Low
Strength of: 1
ORGANISATION DESIGN
23.    Organisation design to DEMO and support bottom-up
entrepreneurial and innovative behaviour
24.    Decentralization in DEMO making
25.    Devolvement of responsibility for the employability, knowledge
exchange, local and regional interface and business and organization
development agendas to departments
26.    Degree to which bottom-up risk taking behavior is rewarded and
protected in general
27.    Reward systems for wider forms of innovation in the university
TRANSDISCIPLINARITY
28.    Levels of active co-operation between faculties and departments in
teaching and research
29.    Numbers of multidisciplinary degrees
30.    Numbers of transdisciplinary research and/or teaching centres
focused upon societal issues
31.    Number of departments engaged in vocational/professional
development areas
32.    Level of commitment across the university to creating opportunities
for students to explore the relevance of their knowledge
33.    Levels of intellectualism (as opposed to scholasticism) in the
university
FINANCIAL LEVERAGE
DEMO    University commitment and capacity to raising revenue from
non-fee and DEMO public sources
35.    Existing ratio of private to fee and DEMO funding
36.    Delegation of revenue raising activity to departments (with targets)
37.    Proactivity of deans and faculty heads in fund and revenue raising
PUBLIC VALUE & STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
38.    Focus across the university on areas of societal and cultural concern
39.    Degree to which university assesses its value on the basis of wide
legitimacy DEMO stakeholders
40.    Active partnerships with key regional stakeholders across the
DEMO
41.    University active engagement with individual SMEs
42.    University active partnerships with SME associations
43.    Level of active engagement of arts and humanities departments in
regional culture initiatives
44.    Level of consultancy activity (and revenue from) across the
university
45.    Relative scale of R&D funded work with business
46.    Strengths of students interface (across faculties) with local business
and civic organisations
2
DEMO
4
High
5
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
DEMO 55
Low
Strength of: 1
47.    Numbers of degrees with active DEMO and professional
engagement
48.    Strength of university extra mural training DEMO with external
organisations excluding business school
49.    Engagement of the DEMO school in SME and local enterprise
development
50.    Active partnerships DEMO local vocational colleges
51.    Level of active engagement with local DEMO in teaching and
research
52.    Status given to local entrepreneurs DEMO ‘associateships’,
‘fellowships’, professorships or teachers of practice
53.    Engagement across the university in Social Enterprise
54.    The university as a learning organization (porous to active learning
from a wide range of sources)
ALUMNI
55.    Alumni office and its related activity across the university
56.    Ability of alumni department to identify and build relationships with
entrepreneurs locally, nationally and internationally
57.    Active engagement of DEMO in the university
KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE AND INCUBATION
58.    University technology DEMO and knowledge exchange activity
59.    Degree to which knowledge transfer DEMO exchange is embedded in
departments
60.    Level of active student DEMO staff engagement with science park
companies
61.    Openness of IP DEMO for staff and students
62.    Support office for IP and DEMO
63.    Numbers of patents and licenses and revenues received
64.    Student engagement in knowledge transfer activity
65.    University rewards for knowledge transfer performance
66.    Doctoral student exposure to the relevance of their research to the
‘real world’
67.    Staff numbers with business ownership stakes or stakes in social
enterprise organisations
68.    Numbers of spin-offs recorded
69.    Support for spin-off activity
70.    Incubator DEMO physical and/or virtual
71.    Clarity in incubator targeting
72.    Clarity in performance indicators
73.    Incubator mentoring and service support
74.    Joint venture funding partnership arrangements – angel connections
75.    Links to and/or provision of, special loan arrangements for graduate/DEMO
staff enterprise
76.    University engagement in public/private seed capital DEMO
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 56
2
DEMO
4
High
5
Low
Strength of: 1
INTERNATIONALISATION
77.    University focus upon internationalisation
DEMO    Level of activity
79.    Levels of international staff
80.    International research and development links
81.    Engagement with local DEMO in international activity
82.    University support system for international activity
DEMO    Impact of internationalism on the curriculum of the university
84.    Revenue from international activity
85.    Numbers of joint ventures with overseas universities
86.    Overseas licenses and joint degrees
87.    DEMO campus initiatives
88.    Overseas alumni relations
89.    Student exchanges
90.    International distance education
91.    International business partnerships
ENTERPRISE DEMO ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATION
92.    Entrepreneurial skills agenda accepted across the university
DEMO    Each department with entrepreneurial curriculum champion
94.    Entrepreneurship education embedded in each department
curriculum
95.    Entrepreneur self-efficacy training embedded across the university
96.    Start up new venture training availability for all staff and students
97.    Enterprise educator training opportunity for all staff
98.    Student entrepreneurship society
99.    Active student engagement and DEMO in the entrepreneurship
field
100.  University personal development contract and related DEMO with
students in general
101.  Central support unit activity for entrepreneurship DEMO enterprise
education
102.  Placement activity in SMEs and small organisations across DEMO
university
103.  Careers services engagement with SMEs and entrepreneurship
training
104.  Employability agenda addressing the self-employment and
entrepreneurship option
105.  Use of external partnerships in enterprise training
106.  Wide use of enterprising pedagogies across the university
(embedded in teaching and learning strategy?)
107.  Capacity for entrepreneurship education beyond the business school
108.  The university as an entrepreneurial organisation
2
3
4
High
5
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 57
Appendix B: Background Readings
Crow, M. M. (2008) ‘Building an DEMO University’ in ‘The Future of the Research University. Meeting the
Challenges of the Global C21st University’. Paper to 2008 Kauffman-Planck Summit on Entrepreneurship Research
DEMO Policy , June 8-11, Bavaria, Germany. Pgs 31-41
Etzkowitz, H. (2008) ‘The Triple Helix. University- Industry- Government, Innovation in Action’. Routledge.
DEMO, A.A. (2005) ‘Towards the Entrepreneurial University. Entrepreneurship education as a DEMO for change’.
National Council for Graduate Entrepreneurship (NCGE) Policy Paper. – see NCEE website
Gibb, A.A., Haskins, G., Hannon, P., DEMO Robertson, I. (2012) ‘Leading the Entrepreneurial University. Meeting the
Entrepreneurial DEMO Needs of Higher Education Institutions’.  A National Council for Entrepreneurship in
DEMO (NCEE) Policy (Updated) Paper – see NCEE website
Gibb, DEMO A. (2012) ‘Exploring the synergistic potential in entrepreneurial university development: DEMO the
building of a strategic framework’. Annals of Innovation & Entrepreneurship 2012, 3: pgs 1-24  - see NCEE website
Gibb, A.A. and DEMO, G.  (2013) ‘The University of the Future. An Entrepreneurial Stakeholder Learning
Organisation’, in Fayolle A.and  Redford D. Edts. ‘Handbook on the DEMO University’, Edward Elgar
Publishing (forthcoming, January 2014) – see NCEE website
Heseltine, M. Rt. Hon., (2012) ‘No Stone Unturned. In DEMO of Growth’ UK Department of Business Innovation
and Skills; Crown Copyright. DEMO
Moore, M. H. (1995) ‘Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in Government’. Harvard University Press
Newman, J. H. (1852) ‘ Knowledge, DEMO and Professional Skill’ in Alden, R.M. (edt) (1917) ‘Readings DEMO English
Prose of the 19th Century’. Cambridge Press. Mass. USA pgs: DEMO
Nowotny, H., Scott, P., Gibbons, M. (2003) ‘Mode DEMO Revisited: The New Production of Knowledge’. Minerva 41:
pgs:. DEMO
Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA) (2012) ‘Enterprise and Entrepreneurship Education.
Guidance for UK Enterprise Education Providers’.  UK Department of Business Innovation and Skills (2011) ‘Higher
Education. Students at the Heart of DEMO System’. Command 8122 June
UK Higher Education International Unit. (2011).  International Pricing Study: A snapshot of UK and Key competitor
country international student fees.  Research Series 9.
Universities UK (2012) ‘Futures for Higher Education: analyzing trends’
Universities UK (2012) ‘Universities enabling social enterprise: DEMO benefits for all’.
Universities UK (2013) ‘Massive open online courses: DEMO education’s digital moment?
Watson, D., Hollister, R.M., Stroud, DEMO and Babcock, E. (2011) ‘The Engaged University. International Perspectives
on DEMO Engagement’. Routledge.
Wilkins, S. & Huisman J. (2012)  The International Branch Campus as transnational strategy in higher education.  Higher
Education 64(5): 627-645
Wilson, T. (2012) ‘A Review of Business-University Collaboration’. Department of Business and Skills UK
Witty, Sir Andrew (2013) ‘Independent Review of Universities in their Local Communities: Enabling Economic
Growth’.
World Educational Services (2012) ‘Not all international students are the same’  & ‘Beyond more of the same’
Research Report 02 and 03
World Educational Services (2013)  ‘International student mobility trends 2013’.  Research Report 04.
Young, Lord, (2013) ‘Growing Your Business.  A Report on Growing Micro Business’.
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (NCEE)
Page 58
THE ENTREPRENEURIAL UNIVERSITY LEADERS PROGRAMME
Other papers in the EULP series available DEMO NCEE
The papers listed below illustrate some of the progressive thinking behind the Entrepreneurial University
Leaders Programme. They can be downloaded from http://DEMO/publications/
1. (2005)  ‘Towards the Entrepreneurial University. Entrepreneurship education DEMO a lever for
change’.
This paper demonstrates a broad model of entrepreneurship and its relationship to personal
enterprise. It defines these concepts and their DEMO to innovations of all kinds. It also sets out a
range of associated personal competencies for development and describes three models of an
entrepreneurial DEMO
2.
3.
4.
(2009) updated (2012) ‘Leading the Entrepreneurial University.  Meeting the entrepreneurial
development needs of higher education institutions’.
By way of a substantial review of the literature, this paper sets out the major challenges to, and
opportunities for, leadership of universities arising from changes DEMO the global environment and
the implications for the entrepreneurial design of the higher education sector. The focus is upon
the impact of a growing DEMO and uncertain environment on key areas of university activity and
the specific leadership challenges involved.
(2012) ‘Exploring the synergistic potential in entrepreneurial university DEMO: towards
the building of a strategic framework’.
This paper develops a DEMO basic framework for reviewing the entrepreneurial development
capacity of a university by exploration of existing and potential enterprising and entrepreneurial
activity in five key DEMO of: Strategy, Governance, Organisation and Leadership; Knowledge
Exchange; Stakeholder DEMO Development and Partnership (local, regional. national and
international); Enterprise and Entrepreneurship Education; and Internationalisation. It describes
the potential benefits of bringing the various activities together and introduces a comprehensive
scorecard.
(2013) ‘The University DEMO the Future. An Entrepreneurial Stakeholder Learning Organisation’.
This paper explores in some detail the ‘specifics’ of turbulence in the Higher Education ‘task
environment’ in DEMO UK and England in particular and the immediate challenges and opportunities
these pose. It describes the responses and demonstrates how universities are adopting a DEMO
entrepreneurial stakeholder model of development.
National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education (DEMO)
Page 59
www.eulp.co.uk
NCEE
The Innovation Centre, Coventry University Technology Park, Puma Way, Coventry, CV1 2TT
+44 (0)2476 158125         DEMO
Registration Number: 5011518
NCEE is the trading name of the National DEMO for Graduate Entrepreneurship{1g42fwefx}