Preemption and Rent Equalization in the Adoption of New Technology
Drew Fudenberg; Jean Tirole
The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 52, No. 3. (Jul., 1985), pp. 383-401.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0034-6527%28198507%2952%3A3%3C383%3APAREIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Y
The Review of Economic Studies is currently published by The Review DEMO Economic Studies Ltd..
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not DEMO an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, DEMO you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/DEMO
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of DEMO transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around DEMO world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in DEMO For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
DEMO Aug 6 14:29:52 2007
Review of Economic Studies (1985)LII, 383-401
@ 1985 The Society DEMO Economic Analysis Limited
Preemption and Rent
Equalization in the Adoption of
New Technology
DREW FUDENBERG
University of California, Berkeley
and
JEAN TIROLE
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
We study the adoption of a new technology to illustrate DEMO effects of preemption in games
of timing. We show that the threat of preemption equalizes rents in a duopoly, but that this result
does not extend to the general oligopoly game. If the gain to preemption DEMO sufficiently small,
then the optimal symmetric outcome, which involves "late" adoption, is an equilibrium. This
contrasts with Reinganum's result that DEMO precommitment equilibria there must be "diffusion".
We develop a new DEMO richer formalism for modeling games of timing, which permits a continuous-
DEMO representation of the limit of discrete-time mixed-strategy equilibria.
1. INTRODUCTION
Research alone is not sufficient for technical progress; technological innovations yield
no benefits until they are employed. Therefore social policy should consider the incentives
for adopting DEMO as well as incentives for their discovery. This paper analyses a
market in which firms are deciding when to adopt a new technology. Adopting DEMO
innovation increases a firm's flow of profits, but adopting it DEMO is more expensive
than adopting it later. A monopolist would not adopt the innovation immediately, but
would wait until the increase in flow profit just equalled the marginal cost of adopting
sooner'. The market is DEMO monopolized, however, which has two related implications.
First, a part DEMO each individual firm's return to adoption comes at the expense of its
rivals, so the individual return exceeds the industry return. Thus we would expect the
adoption times in non-cooperative equilibria to be sooner than DEMO be optimal for the
industry as a whole.
Second, if the DEMO lags are short, so that firms can observe and respond to
DEMO rivals' actions, firms have an incentive for "preemptive adoption". DEMO this we mean
that firms will adopt sooner than they would choose to were their rivals' adoption dates
fixed. Firms adopt preemptively to prevent or delay adoption by their opponents. One
might expect the threat of DEMO to ensure that identical firms have the same
equilibrium payoffs, because DEMO one firm to adopt at time t and do better than a rival
who adopts later, the rival would preempt the first firm by adopting just before t. We
show that this intuition is correct in DEMO duopoly, but that with more than two firms
equilibrium payoffs need DEMO be equal.
Two previous authors have studied the timing of the adoption of new technology.
Scherer (1967) analysed the introduction of a product DEMO in duopoly. He
384
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
concluded that if the firms were required DEMO precommit themselves to introduction times,
then the equilibrium outcome would be for both firms to move simultaneously, at an
earlier time than would maximize joint profits. Reinganum (1981a, b) analysed the
adoption process using different specification of the payoffs, again requiring precommit-
ment to adoption dates. She found that there must be a "diffusion", in that the firms
adopt at different dates, even though the firms are ex-ante identical and there is no
uncertainty.
When firms precommit themselves to adoption dates, preemption is ruled out by
assumption. Precommitment strategies are equivalent to infinite DEMO lags. To
allow for preemption, we consider the alternative extreme case DEMO which firms can respond
immediately to their rivals' decisions; that is, adoption is perfectly observable and is
instantaneous. Our model also covers the case of an adoption process that takes a fixed
amount of time, if firms can observe their rivals' actions. The equilibrium concept we
use is that of Perfect Equilibrium, which rules out empty threats, i.e. DEMO which would
not be carried out.
In Section 2 we briefly review Reinganum's model of technology diffusion. We show
why in precommitment equilibria DEMO early adopter does better than the later one. While
there are as many equilibria as there are permutations of the firms, at any time, each firm
always prefers an equilibrium in which it is the next to adopt.
In Section 3 we consider the duopoly case (Reinganum (DEMO)). We show that if
firms cannot threaten to maintain their DEMO adoption times regardless of what happens
before, then identical firms receive DEMO payoffs in equilibrium. The intuition is simple:
Were one firm to plan on adopting first at a time, t, which gave it DEMO higher payoff than
the second adopter, the second firm could increase DEMO payoff by preempting just before
t. Faced with the preemption, the DEMO firm could then do no better than to adopt when
the second firm would have.
If the best response to early adoption is to DEMO much later, the gain from preemption
is high. The (unique) DEMO times of adoption are then unequal. In this "diffusion"
equilibrium, which prevails for example in a new market, both firms receive lower payoffs
than with precommitment. If, on the other hand, the best DEMO to early adoption is
to quickly follow suit, several equilibria exist, and these equilibria are Pareto-comparable.
In particular, the optimal symmetric adoption time is sustainable as an equilibrium. This
time is later than all other DEMO outcomes. Intuitively, adopting the innovation
yields two types of benefits-it increases DEMO industry profits and increases the adopter's
share. Thus the industry's incentive to adopt is less than any individual competitor's,
and DEMO "late" adoption maximizes total profits. This outcome is enforced by the quick
response to adoption, which provides a credible threat against the temptation of
preemption.
Section 3 gives the economic intuition and the main results DEMO the duopoly case.
Traditional continuous-time strategy spaces are not adequate to capture and verify the
intuitions of Section 3. We therefore develop in Section DEMO a new and richer formalism
for modelling games of timing which permits a continuous-time representation of the
limit of discrete-time mixed-strategy equilibria. This formalism DEMO be of independent
interest to technically-minded readers, since it can be DEMO in more general games of
timing. Those less technically-minded may find Section 4 to be too complicated. They
should be reassured that all the DEMO of the problem are captured in Section 3.
Section 5 considers the model with more than two firms, and shows that rent
equalization need not occur. Section 6 discusses some related work, and Section 7
concludes.
FUDENBERG & TIROLE PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION 385
2. THE MODEL
There DEMO n identical firms, indexed by i = 1,. . . ,n, in the industry. At time 0, a cost
reducing innovation DEMO announced. r,(m) is the net cash flow of firm i when m firm(s)
have adopted the innovation, but firm i has not. r,(m) is firm i's net cash flow DEMO m
firm(s) including i have adopted. Ti is firm i'DEMO adoption date; and c(t) is the present
value of the cost of bringing the innovation on line by time t. Let T-i DEMO the vector
of dates of adoption by firm i's competitors. vi(', T-,) is firm i's payoff. Suppose w.1.o.g.
that firm i is the i-th to adopt. Then:
where T,=O, T,+,= +a,and r is the common interest rate.
We will DEMO Reinganum's assumptions (with minor changes):
Assumption2.9(i)rl(l)- ro(n - 1) 5 -cl(0). (ii) inf, {c(t)er') <[rr,(n) - ro(n- l)DEMO/r.
(iii) Vt, (c(t)er')'< 0, DEMO (c(t)er')"> 0.
Assumption 2. (i) ( DEMO - (n - 1) -c1(0). (ii) inf,{c(t)er') < [r,(n) -
rro(n - l)DEMO/r. (iii) Vt, (c(t)er')'<O, and (c(t)er')"> 0.
Assumption l(ii) states that DEMO are decreasing returns in the rank of adoption.
The increase in profits due to adopting (m - 1)-th exceeds that due to adopting m-th.
Thus from the revenue point of view firms have an incentive DEMO adopt earlier than their
competitors. Assumption 2(i) rules out immediate DEMO, even for purposes of preemp-
tion. Adoption at date 0 gives DEMO firm a cash flow not exceeding rrl(l) whereas not
adopting DEMO it a cash flow at least equal to r,(n - DEMO). Assumption 2(ii) requires that
all firms adopt in finite DEMO It implies that for t sufficiently large it becomes a dominant
strategy to adopt. Thus non-adoption is not an alternative. Assumption 2(iii) says that
the "current cost", er'c(t), is decreasing, DEMO at a decreasing rate. Both conditions are
satisfied by c(t) DEMO e-("")', so that the current cost falls at rate a due to technical progress.
The first part of the assumption is DEMO; the second ensures that the payoffs are
quasiconcave. Reinganum makes somewhat DEMO assumptions on c" to obtain con-
cavity.
Reinganum shows that for DEMO model, there are adoption times 9"= (TT, . . DEMO , T:)
that form a precommitment equilibrium, that every pure-strategy precommitment equili-
brium is given by a permutation of Y*, and that TT # Ti* for i Z j.
Proposition 1. In a precommitment DEMO theJirms' equilibrium payofs decline
monotonically with the order of adoption.
ProoJ: Let 9"be a precommitment equilibrium with TT < Ti* for i <j. Then:
where the first inequality follows from T3eing a best DEMO, the equality from the
symmetry of the payoff functions, and the second inequality from the monotonicity of
V' relative to the other firms' adoption times. 11
386 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
It is easy to see that the DEMO dates (TT < T; <. . . < T:) DEMO given by the
following marginal conditions:
While precommitment equilibria in general fail to capture what is meant by "strategic
behaviour", in this instance, they seem especially suspect. The firm which is able to
precommit itself to adopt first does best, yet any firm can adopt first in equilibrium. The
strategic interactions suppressed by precommitment would resurface in a DEMO to
be the first to precommit.
3. 	STRATEGIC ADOPTION IN A DUOPOLY. THE HEURISTICS AND
THE MAIN RESULTS
We now study the two-firm case DEMO order to highlight some important features of strategic
adoption. The general oligopoly case is considered in Section 5.
The first thing to examine is DEMO happens when one of the two firms has adopted
at some time t. This continuation game is a simple one-player decision problem. The
payoff DEMO the remaining firm is the maximum over t' greater than or DEMO to t of V(tl, t).
From the quasiconcavity of DEMO objective function of the remaining firm, its optimal time
of adoption DEMO either T;, or, if t exceeds T;, t itself.
DEMO pinned down what happens in the continuation game, let:
L(DEMO) =	(the leader's) payoff for the firm that succeeds in preempting the
other firm at time t
F(t) = (the DEMO's) payoff for the firm that is preempted at time t
DEMO(t)
= payoff of both firms if they adopt together at time t
= V(t, t).
The functions L, F DEMO M are pictured in Figure 1. Let us check that we have drawn
them correctly. First consider t < T,*. It is clear DEMO L(t) > M(t) since a firm's payoff
increases with its rival's date of adoption. Second, F(t) > DEMO(t) since the best response
to t is Tt. Next, using Assumption 2(iii) we can show that
(L(t)-F(t))'=O
implies
so L - F is strictly quasi-concave.
We know that L(0) < F(0) (from Assumption 2(i)); DEMO L( T,*) = F(Tz); and that
L(TT) > F(TT) (from Proposition I). Thus there exists a unique TI in (0, TT) such that
L(7-I) = DEMO(7-I).
for simultaneous adoption, i.e. f2 maximizes
Last, let f2 denote the optimal date
M(t). Let us show that f2is DEMO and exceeds Tz. First, M(&) can be shown to be
FUDENBERG &
TIROLE
PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION
387
strictly quasi-concave. Second,
FIGURE1
Case A
Therefore, 6> T$
We will distinguish two cases:DEMO
Case A.
Case B.
L( TT)> M ( f2)
DEMO(TT)5 ~(f~).
Case A is pictured in Figure 1 and Case B in Figure 2.
Figures 1 and 2 suffice to DEMO the economic intuition. The following reasoning is
extremely loose and the reader is referred to Section 4 for further analysis.
Consider first Case A. DEMO firm can obtain more than L(TT). Therefore it is in
each firm's interest to adopt at time TT if the other DEMO does not adopt at exactly the
same time. But if a firm knows that the other will adopt at time TT, it wants to preempt
at (TT - E). Reasoning backwards, at any t DEMO T, and TT, firms want to preempt
to avoid being preempted later on. Thus, as we show in Section 4, there is DEMO at
FIGURE2
Case B
388 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
time TI (and the follower adopts at time T:). Before TI it is a dominant strategy not to
adopt because the follower's payoff exceeds the leader's payoff and DEMO joint-adoption
payoff. We see that the equilibrium must involve difusitn, with DEMO times TI and T:.
Next consider Case B. Let S be defined by S< T2 and L(T7) = M(S). DEMO that
past f2it is a dominant strategy to adopt. We can first exhibit a class of equilibrium
adoption times: choose t E [S, DEMO let the firms wait until t, and adopt in every subgame
DEMO t on. Clearly a firm cannot do better by preempting before t. Thus ye have a
continuum of joint-adoption equilibria indexed by the date DEMO adoption t E [S, T,]. These
late adoption equilibria exhibit DEMO dynamics predicted by Scherer (1980, p. 429), with
"each DEMO member holding back initiating its R & D effort in the fear that rapid
imitation by others will be encouraged, more than wiping out its innovative profits". Are
there other equilibria? Imagine that firms adopt before S. Then the situation is as in
Case A since a DEMO cannot obtain more than L(TT). By the same reasoning, DEMO
must involve diffusion (at dates T, and T:). In DEMO 4 we will prove the following
proposition:
Proposition 2. (A) If L(TT)> M(f2) there exists a unique equilibrium distribution
over outcomes. With probability one-halJ; jirm one adopts at TI andjirm two adopts at T:,
and with probability one-half the roles of thejirms are reversed.' Thus the equilibrium exhibits
difusion; and with probability one DEMO adoption dates are T, and T,*.
(B) If L( TT) 5 M( f2) two classes of equilibria exist. The jirst class is the ( TI, T:)
difusion equilibrium. The second DEMO is a continuum of joint-adoption outcomes indexed
by the date of adoption t E [S, f2].
Thus, depending on the parameters, there will be a unique equilibrium outcome (Case
A) or multiple equilibrium outcomes (Case B). Note that in Case A the equilibrium is
symmetric: each firm has an equal chance of adopting first. Despite this, there is zero
probability of the firms' making a "mistake" and both adopting at TI. In Section 4 we
will explain how the correlation DEMO here arises naturally in the continuous time
limit of shorter and shorter time period. Before introducing the formal analysis we
examine the properties of DEMO equilibria. We have already "demonstrated":
Proposition 3. In a Perfect Equilibrium the payofs of the twojirms are equated. The
Perfect Equilibria are DEMO to the precommitment equilibria (from the jirms'
point of view)DEMO
Proposition 4. All joint-adoption equilibria, if they exist, Pareto-dominate the precom-
mitment outcomes, which Pareto-dominate the difusion equilibrium.
Proof: The first assertion DEMO from the fact that if t E[S, T,*], M(t) 2 L(TT)>
F(TT) (L(TT) and F(TT) are the firms' payoffs in precommitment equilibrium). To
prove DEMO second assertion notice that L(TT) > F(TT) > F(Tl)= L(Tl). 11
More interesting is the fact that DEMO there are multiple equilibria, (Case B), all
equilibria are Pareto-comparable.
Proposition 5. Joint-adoption equilibria are Pareto-ranked by their date of adoption,
DEMO adoption being more ejicient from thejirms' point of view.
11
Proof: This a consequence of the monotonicity of M up to f2.
FUDENBERG & TIROLE
PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION
389
Thus in Case B DEMO late joint-adoption equilibrium at f2Pareto-dominates any other
Perfect Equilibrium. As argued by Harsanyi (1964) and Fudenberg and Tirole (1983), if
one equilibrium Pareto-dominates all others, it is the most reasonable outcome to expect.
Consider for example the diffusion equilibrium in which firms adopt only to avoid
DEMO This situation is comparable to that of two strangers attacking each other
solely for self-defence (see Fudenberg and Tirole (1983) for another example). Such
complete lack of trust is easily avoided by coordination on DEMO Pareto-dominant equili-
brium, which is the natural "focal point" of DEMO game. The case against the equilibria
with simultaneous adoption before T2 is even stronger. In such equilibria each firm
adopts only because the other DEMO No preemption is involved, because after T: there
is immediate response to adoption, so coordination seems particularly easy. We stress
that such coordination requires neither binding contracts (as the equilibrium is by its
nature se1f;enforcing) nor explicit communication. We will call the joint-adoption equili-
brium at T, the Superior Perfect Equilibrium.
Last, we discuss th: parameter values for which each case occurs. The joint-adoption
equilibria require M( T2)L L(TT), or
Relatively large ~~(1)
7r1(l) increases, Tf decreases and D goes up. In such markets the highly competitive
diffusion equilibrium will prevail. In particular, we get the diffusion equilibrium in a
new market, with ~~(1) the monopoly profit and .rrO(DEMO) 0. In this case the follower's
payoff is unaffe$ted by DEMO time at which the leader adopts, so that the optimal joint
DEMO time T2 is the same as the optimal reaction time T:. Thus we cannot have a
joint-adoption equilibrium.
If the innovation is only DEMO when the follower has not yet adopted, so
that ~~(2) is near rO(0), and (~~(1) - ~~(0))is near (~~(2) - .rro(l)), then the equilibrium
is the (Superior) joint-adoption one. This will be the case, for example, if adopting first
simply transfers profit to the adopter from the other firm, but the latter can regain an
equal footing by following suit. Here the gain from preemption is low, as T; is DEMO T:,
while the joint optimum f2is quite late, for the innovation has little joint value. Thus
the firms can postpone adoption without DEMO c~llusion because of the credible threat
of quick response. In this case joint adoption at T2 is greatly preferable to the diffusion
equilibrium.2
4. DEMO ADOPTION IN A DUOPOLY: A FORMAL ANALYSIS
4.A. The issues
To DEMO the intuitions of the last section, we must develop a new DEMO of strategy
spaces and payoffs for continuous-time games of timing, in DEMO a player's only decision
is to choose a (single) time to move. We shall see that the traditional formalization is
not adequate, because it entails a "loss of information" in passing from discrete DEMO
with short periods to the continuous time limit. This loss of information prevents a
continuous-time representation of the limits of discrete-time mixed-strategy equilibria.
We DEMO introduce a richer formalization which does allow a continuous-time rep-
resentation of these limits.
correspond to markets with a large first-mover advantage: as
=
390
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
The usual way to describe a player'DEMO strategy is to choose a function Gi(t) which is
non-decreasing, right-continuous and has range in [0, I] (see for example Pitchik (1982)).
The interpretation of Gi is that the cumulative probability that player i has moved (adopted
in our framework) by time t (conditionally on the other player(s) not having moved
before) is DEMO(t). Then the player's payoff, for example, would be:
where a,(s) = lim,,,[Gi(s) - G,(s- IE~)] the size of the jump in Gi at s.~ This formaliz-
ation allows mixed strategies, but it is not adequate for our purposes for two reasons.
First, it does not specify what happens in all the possible subgames. For example, imagine
that for some player i and for some t, G,(t) = 1. Then the strategies do not specify what
happens if players deviate and at time (t + E)(E> 0) no one has yet moved. The Perfect
Equilibrium concept, in order to rule out empty threats, requires DEMO players optimize
whatever the history (i.e. even for histories which are DEMO reached on the equilibrium
path). In particular strategies must be specified for every contingency. Of course the
remedy to this problem is to "roll over" the cumulative distribution by defining Gf(s) as
the DEMO probability that player i moved by time s 2 t conditional on no one moving
before t and requiring that the family of functions DEMO: satisfy an intertemporal consistency
condition (Bayes rule).
The second drawback of this formalization is that it is not quite the continuous-time
analogue DEMO discrete-time games of timing. To see this, consider the following game,DEMO
dubbed the "grab-the-dollar game".4
Time is discrete: t = 0, 1,2, . . . . There are two players, with common discount factor
6 < 1. At each period t players can DEMO to grab a dollar that lies between them. If at time
t only one of the players tries, he gets 6' and the DEMO player gets zero. If both try, each
loses 6'. In DEMO cases the dollar is gone. If nobody tries the dollar can still be grabbed
in the following period. Mixed strategies are allowed.
In this DEMO there is a unique symmetric equilibrium. At each period, if no DEMO
has tried to grab the dollar yet, each player tries to DEMO it with probability f. In this
equilibrium both players have a zero payoff. If a player tries to grab the dollar at t, he
wins and gets 6' with probability 4,and with probability &,there is a "mistake": both try
at the same time and lose 6'. The fact that there is a positive probability of mistake DEMO
an attractive feature of this equilibrium, because with information lags, coordination is
difficult to achieve.
The formalism of (4.1) is inadequate to DEMO this equilibrium in continuous
time. As the period length converges to zero, the probability that by any positive time a
player has tried to grab the dollar converges to one, and so the strategies should be
represented by a unit mass at time zero, that is, Gy(DEMO) = 1 Vs 2 0. Using equation (4.1)
the probability of mistake would also be equal to one; however, the limiting DEMO of the
probability of mistake is 4. The problem is that many different strategies converge to a
unit mass at time zero, including, DEMO example, the strategies that specify "adopt with
probability one in the first period". There has been a loss of information in passing DEMO
the continuous-time limit; the payoffs cannot be computed using the Gj(DEMO) alone.
We will enlarge the strategy space to avoid this loss DEMO information. In the grab-the-
dollar game, if the probability that player DEMO moves in each period is constant and equal
to ai, we DEMO like the probability that player i wins to be {ai(l - aJ)/[ai+ a;.- a,%])
and the probability of a mistake to be {ajq/[aj + a;..-ajaJ]). We will do DEMO by adding
is
FUDENBERG & TIROLE
PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION
391
an extra function, a,(t), to each player's strategy space, to represent the "intensity" with
which players move at times "just after" G,(DEMO) jumps to one. That is, a,(t) will represent
the "intensity" of an "interval of consecutive atoms". We will define the payoffs to equal
the limits of the payoffs of the corresponding DEMO games. The reader familiar
with the idea of generalized curves in optimal control theory will notice the similarity
between that construction and our own: both are devices meant to allow continuous-time
models to more accurately represent DEMO limits; and both are defined through
their influence on payoffs.
In DEMO adoption game, we will be particularly interested in what happens as DEMO a's
converge to zero with the length of the time-period. Notice that if each a, is of order
(At), then the DEMO of mistake is of order (At)2. In the limit we DEMO the Poisson-like
result that there is zero probability of both moving simultane~usl~.~
Before proceeding, we note that the grab-the-dollar game has asymmetric equilibria.
For example, "player one always grabs the dollar (if he has not yet done so), player two
never grabs".6 There are also DEMO in which players alternate grabbing, for example,
"player one grabs at odd-numbered periods, player two grabs at even-numbered ones".
These "DEMO" equilibria have no continuous-time limit due to precisely the "chatter-
ing problem" to which generalized curves are a response. We have not attempted to
extend our model to allow these chattering equilibria, because the (DEMO) coordination
they require seems highly unreasonable.
Faced with the inadequacy of DEMO usual continuous-time formulation, we chose to
enlarge the strategy spaces. An DEMO would have been to work directly with the
discrete-time equilibria. We chose our approach because we view "continuous time" as
a convenient mathematical DEMO intended to represent the notion of very short
time periods. Thus we do not view our enlarged strategy spaces as more artificial than
the DEMO ones. To the contrary, while the usual continuous-time strategy spaces are
DEMO for some games, in games of preemption they are not correct.
DEMO should point out that using continuous ratherthan discrete time makes a difference
that is unrelated to randomization or to our enlarged strategy spaces. Continuous-time
DEMO have "more" pure-strategy equilibria than discrete-time models do. More pre-
cisely, the set of continuous-time (pure strategy) equilibria is not the set of limit points
of discrete-time equilibria, but rather the set of limit points of discrete-time &-equilibria
with E +0 along with the period length. (Fudenberg and Levine (1984). In an &-equilibria
each player's chosen strategy yields within E of his optimal payoff.) For example,
cooperation can be sustained in a finite-horizon continuous-time prisoner's dilemma, but
not in a discrete-time one. Similarly, the joint adoption outcomes we described in Section
3 are not discrete-time equilibria. To see this, Aet the time interval between periods be
denoted A, and assume that the joint optimum T, belongs to the time grid. Assum: both
firms waited DEMO f, to adopt. Then it is in the interest of any DEMO to adopt at (T2-A)
whatever its opponent play at that DEMO, because adopting at (T,-A) has no effect on
one'DEMO opponent's date of adoption. By backwards induction it is clear that from TT on,
both firms adopt with probability one, so that only the diffusion equilibrium remains.
This is an extreme implication of perfectness, reminiscent of the finitely-repeated prisoner's
dilemma. In both games a large DEMO from cooperation is destroyed by a small payoff to
cheating in the last period.
One way to reconcile perfectness with cooperation in the discrete-time DEMO of
these games is to allow players to &-optimize, as we remarked above. Another way is to
introduce a small amount of incomplete DEMO, which has been shown to allow
finite-horizon resolutions on the prisoner'DEMO dilemma (Kreps et al. (1982)) and the chain
392 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
store paradox (Kreps and Wilson (1982a), Milgrom and Roberts (1982).) Assume that
with probability (1 DEMO v), the payoffs are as before, but with probability 77 DEMO firm is
"incompetent". By this we mean that the firm DEMO to observe the other firm's adoption
for at least one period before adopting itself. Then ye can show (see Fudenberg and
Tirole (DEMO)) that for arbitrarily small 77 > 0, if M(T,) > L(TF) so that we areAin case
B, then in the limit of shorter time periods the adoption date converges to T,DEMO The
incomplete information not only restores joint adoption as an equilibrium but selects it
as the only one. Of course, other kinds of incomplete information would yield other
results. Fudenberg and Maskin (1985) have shown DEMO any equilibrium outcome of an
infinitely repeated game without discounting is an equilibrium outcome of a sufficiently
long finitely repeated game. We conjecture that DEMO is an analogous result relating
continuous- and discrete-time equilibria. This might seem to weaken the case for joint
adoption, but we think not. Our discussion of &-optimization and incomplete information
is not intended as the main argument for joint adoption. Rather, we find joint adoption
plausible a priori and have argued against ruling them out on purely technical grounds.
4.B. DEMO spaces and payoff functions
We now introduce strategy spaces that take into account the two issues we have just
discussed. We first define "simple" continuous time strategies that permit us to distinguish
between "types" of atoms, and define payoffs and Nash equilibrium. We then straightfor-
wardly extend these strategies to "closed-loop" strategies and define perfect equilibrium.
Dejnition 1. DEMO simple strategy for player i in the game starting at t is a pair of
real-valued functions (Gi, a,): [t, a) x[t, a)+ [0, 1] x[O, 11 satisfying:
(a) G, is non-decreasing and right-continuous.
(b) a,(t)>O*Gi(t)= 1.
(c) a, is right-differentiable.
(d) If ai(t) 0 and t = inf (s 2 tl ai(s) > O), then a,(.) has positive right derivative
at t.'DEMO
Condition (a) ensures that G, is a cumulative distribution function. DEMO,(t) will measure
the "intensity" of atoms in the interval [t, t + dt]; thus condition (b) requires that if DEMO(t)
is positive then player i is sure to adopt by t. Conditions (c) and (d) are imposed for
technical convenience.
DEMO define the payoffs resulting to a pair of simple strategies, we DEMO a bit more
notation. Let
r,(t) if ai(s) DEMO 0 VS 2 t,
= inf (s 2 tl ai(DEMO)> 0) otherwise.
r,(t) is the time of the DEMO "interval of atoms" in player i's strategy. Let r(t)=
min (r,(t), r2(t)) In the subgame DEMO at t, there is sure to be an adoption by time
DEMO(t). Finally let G;(t) be the left-hand limit of G,(.) at t, that is G;(t) = lim,,,- ~,(t).'
The game begins at time t 2 0; so impose G;(t) = 0, i = DEMO,2. The payoffs are then
=
FUDENBERG & TIROLE
PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION
where
Wi(~,
(Gi, ail, (G,,a,))= [
q
T
- G;(r)
1 - ai(T))F(T)
+ CY,(DEMO)M(T)]
if
~,(t) > ~~(t), while
if r,(t)
= ~,(t),
Wi(t,
(GI, a,),
((32, ~2))
393
These DEMO are the same as those of equation (4.1) up to r(t). With probability
(1 - Gf(~(t)))(l- DEMO(~(t))), none of the players has moved by ~(t). At least one of the
cumulative distributions Gi(.) then jumps to one. If q(t) > ~,(t)= T, then the payoffs are
computed as the limits of discrete time payoffs DEMO firm i adopts with probability ai(.)
at each period and firm j adopts with probability [(G,(T) - GJ;(r))/(l - GJ;(r))] at the
first instant and with probability zero thereafter. This corresponds to a situation in which
firm DEMO plays an isolated jump (or a density) at r, and DEMO i adopts "continuously" with
intensity ai(7) (we know that firm j does not have an interval of atoms at T because
DEMO,(t)> T). If rl(t) = T2(t)= T, the probabilities of getting L, F, and M are computed from
discrete-time limits with constant probabilities of moves ai(7) and a,(.). If ai(7) = aj(7) =
0, DEMO payoffs are computed by a first-order Taylor expansion.9
Definition 2. A pair of simple strategies (GI, a,) and (G,, a,) is a Nash equilibrium
of the game starting at time t (with neither firm having yet moved) if each player's strategy
maximizes his payoff vl(t, . ,.) holding the other player's strategy fixed.
Definition 3. A closed-loop strategy for players is a collection of DEMO strategies
(Gf(,), a f(. )),,0 satisfying DEMO intertemporal consistency conditions:
(e) Gf(t+u)= Gf(t+u)+(l-Gf(t+u))Gf+"(t+u)for tSuSv
(f) a~(t+~)=af+~(DEMO)=a~(t+u)for tSuSu.
The reason why we need a family of strategies (Gf) is, as we explained, that to test
for DEMO we must define strategies even conditional on zero-probability events.
Condition (e) ensures that the family of strategies is consistent between non-zero-proba-
bility events; that is, if time t is reached, and Gf(.) puts positive weight on times from
(t + u) on, then Gf(s) should be consistent between t and (t+u).I0 Condition (f) is a
similar consistency condition.
Definition 4. A pair of closed-loop strategies {(G:(.), a:( .))I,,, and {(G:(. ),
a:(.))),,, is a DEMO Equilibrium if for every t, the simple strategies (Gi(.), a:(.)),
(G:(.), a:(.)), are a Nash equilibrium.
394 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
4.C. Proof of the existence of the DEMO of Proposition 2
Now that we have developed an adequate formalism we can prove Proposition 2; First
let us prove the existence of the equilibria. Recall the two cases: IfAL(TT) > M(T2) the
unique equilibrium outcome is diffusion at (TI, T;); if L(TT) 5 M(T2) then there is also
a continuum of DEMO outcomes. We will exhibit strategies that support these
two types of equilibria because the nature of the strategies is instructive. The proof
that there DEMO no other equilibrium outcomes is more technical; we have placed it DEMO
Appendix 1.
We begin with the diffusion outcome:
Lemma 1. The following symmetric strategies are a perfect equilibrium:
I
(0 s< DEMO,
a (s) = L(s) - F(s) Ti5 <
M(s) T;,
-
Proof: We will check DEMO these strategies yield a Nash equilibrium starting at any
t €[TI, DEMO;]. (Outside this interval it is obvious.) First consider a subgame starting at
t, TI< 5 T?. If Gf(t) = 0 then firm i receives F(t). If Gf(t) = A, 0 <A 5 1, and firm i
plays an isolated jump, firm i receives A[a(t)M(t)+ (1 - DEMO(t))L(t)]+ (1 - A)F(t) = DEMO(t).
If Gf(t) = 1, and ai(t) DEMO a, firm. i receives
Thus in each subgame in [TI, T;), firms are indifferent between all possible choices, and
we may DEMO whatever strategies we please. At t = TI the payoff to the given strategies
is again F(t) (here we use the formula DEMO payoffs when a,= a, = 0), as is the DEMO to
all other choices. Finally we check that a'(Tl) > 0 and that the strategies are intertem-
porally consistent. I/
Notice DEMO in equilibrium, one firm adopts at TI and the other at DEMO;. Even though
the firms play mixed strategies at TI, the DEMO of mistake is zero. This should seem
intuitive, because the gain DEMO preempting at TI is zero, and so neither firm would adopt
DEMO Ti were there any possibility of mistake.
The coordination involved here may remind some readers of Aumann's (1974) notion
of a correlated DEMO We should therefore stress that we have not introduced a
jointly-observable coordinating device. The zero probability of mistake arises naturally
in continuous time. In DEMO time with short periods, the gain to preempting in the
first DEMO after TI is of order (dt), so in a mixed-strategy DEMO each player must
adopt with probability of order (dt) so that his opponent is willing to randomize. Then,
as we remarked in DEMO 4.a, the probability of mistake converges to zero with the
period DEMO
t
FUDENBERG &
TIROLE
PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION
395
Lemma 2. If L(T;) =M(S)
equilibrium for any t, E [S, DEMO,]:
5 M(f2),
the
following symmetric strategies are DEMO perfect
[GYS) = { 0
1
0 1
1 a(.)DEMO
s < t,,
szt,,
s<t,,
2 DEMO,.
Proof: The given strategies yield each firm M(t,),DEMO
max (L(TT), F(s)). II
while any deviation yields at most
In this case each firm's credible threat to DEMO adopt if the other does (at
times after T;) can DEMO the Pareto-superior joint adoption equilibrium.
5. THE OLIGOPOLY CASE
We now show that the possibility of preemption need not enforce rent equalization when
there DEMO more than two firms. For this purpose we need only consider the three-firm
case. Equilibrium payoffs need not be equal with more than two DEMO for two basic
reasons. First, the payoffs in the "continuation game" after one firm has already adopted
need not be equal, because DEMO two firms payoffs were only equated along the equilibrium
path, and DEMO in all subgames. With unequal continuation payoffs, different firms have
different DEMO to moving first, and so the threat of preemption need not DEMO the
equilibrium payoffs. Asymmetric continuation payoffs can arise in two ways: DEMO, if
multiple continuation equilibria exist, one can specify different continuations depending
on the name of the preempting firm. This kind of asymmetry may DEMO some subgames be
dismissed by the requirement that the firms play the Superior Perfect Equilibrium in every
continuation game, if one exists. Unfortunately, DEMO all of the two-firm continuation
games have a Superior Perfect Equilibrium. Some subgames contain equilibria which
cannot be Pareto-ranked. (See Appendix 2 for an example.)
The second reason that equilibrium payoffs need not be equated DEMO more than two
firms is that the duopoly case is special in that the follower's response is continuous in
the leader's move. DEMO continuity disappears with more than two firms, even if the
continuation DEMO is symmetric and independent of the name of the first adfpter. To
see this, assume that we are in Case A, and let DEMO> TT be such that L(T) = M(T2), where
L and M are the payoffs of the remaining two firms after DEMO firm has adopted. Thus,
T is the first date at which late joint adoption is a continuation equilibrium. Let us
specify that if DEMO first adoption, t, is before i=,the remaining two firms play the "diffusion"
equilibrium, while for t > T the continuation DEMO is joint adoption at p2. Then at
i=, the payoff to DEMO jumps up. If a firm adopts first at i=,the others wait until
p2, while adopting first at T- s prompts immediate adoption by one of the others.
Now even though the two-firm continuation equilibrium is DEMO, and superior
when possible, there is scope for specifying asymmetric three-firm Perfect Equilibria. For
example, "firm three adopts with probability one from DEMO on and the other firms wait".
Firm three makes more profit than its competitors. Nevertheless, firm one, say, cannot
impose rent equalization by preempting firm three, since if it adopted at (T- E) it would
trigger immediate adoption by firms two and three. The discontinuity DEMO the payoffs as
a function of time gives scope for rents to be unequal.
396
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
6. RELATED WORK
We have already mentioned DEMO Reinganum and Scherer work on adoption with precom-
mitment. Scherer himself realized that the precommitment assumption "is vulnerable to
the criticism of myopia in ignoring subsequent rival reactions to one's own decision".
This criticism DEMO addressed in the work of Rao and Rutenberg (1979) on the timing of
capacity expansion. They used a discrete-time sequential-move model, and (DEMO)
employed the perfect equilibrium solution concept. Because of their complicated specifi-
cation of the payoffs (quite similar to that of Scherer) they DEMO forced to use numerical
techniques, and no general conclusions emerged. Gilbert DEMO Harris (1984) analysed
preemptive capacity expansion in a continuous-time model. They concluded that with
two or more identical firms, not only would payoffs be equalized but that all new plants
would earn zero profits. The DEMO equilibrium arises because, in contrast to the
other models cited, each firm may build many plants, so that there is no opportunity cost
to new investment."
To avoid considering mixed strategies, Gilbert and Harris divide each time t into
two "moments", t- and t'. Thus their game, like Rao and Rutenberg's, is one with
DEMO moves-firms are unable to move simultaneously. Our formalism makes this
restriction unnecessary. We feel that this is an improvement because imperfect information
and the DEMO possibility of "mistakes" are an important aspect of games of
timing. While it is true that on the path of the diffusion equilibrium DEMO probability of a
mistake is zero, off the equilibrium path mistakes DEMO occur. In contrast, with the Gilbert
and Harris formalism in no DEMO would both firms adopt before Tf.
7. CONCLUSION
While we have termed our model one of the adoption of new technology, the main insights
extend to more general games of timing. For example, we have seen that the threat of
preemption equalizes rents in a duopoly, but need not do so if there are more than two
firms. The duopoly DEMO is special because under reasonable conditions, the follower's
response is DEMO in the leader's move. This continuity disappears with more than
two firms. The same phenomenon will naturally arise in other games of timing.
DEMO have also seen that when the gain to preemption is sufficiently low, as for an
innovation which simply captures a rival's market share, the optimal symmetric outcome
is to be expected; while if moving DEMO is very profitable, as in a new market, the equilibrium
will involve early adoption and "diffusion". Again, such conclusions should emerge DEMO
more general settings.
One result which might not hold with a different payoff structure is the existence of
a diffusion equilibrium Pareto-inferior to the DEMO with precommitment. This may
depend on the existence of precommitment equilibria with diffusion.
The two key assumptions underlying the preemption argument are that information
DEMO are short and that the payoffs are common knowledge. We have already observed
that relaxing the first assumption makes late adoption less plausible. Relaxing DEMO
assumption that the payoffs are common knowledge means that a firm is no longer sure
that it will be preempted if it waits past DEMO, to adopt. Because the rival's (distributional)
strategy is now "smoothed out", the incentive to play aggressively is lessened. We
conjecture that in this case the time of first adoption would be later DEMO with complete
information; this is an interesting topic for future research.
DEMO paper considered only the case of identical firms. In our survey, DEMO
and Tirole (1984a), we extend the analysis to consider the DEMO of an incumbent and an
FUDENBERG & TIROLE PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION 397
entrant, each of whom can adopt the new technology. We find that if the products are
DEMO substitutes and the flow profits are determined by Bertrand competition then, DEMO
equilibrium the incumbent adopts first at the time where the entrant is just indifferent
between adopting first and adopting second. This strong result is DEMO dynamic version
of Gilbert and Newberry's work on the persistence of monopoly. It heavily relies on the
absence of incomplete and imperfect information, and on the assumption of (zero-profit)
Bertrand competition as discussed in the survey. If the incumbent either is unsure about
the entrant's DEMO cost (or more generally profit function) or observes the entrant's
entry decision only with a lag, it may err and let the entrant adopt. Similarly, changing
the nature of competition in the product market can reverse the persistence result.
APPENDIX I. PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2
In DEMO text we exhibited equilibrium strategies. We now show that there are no other
equilibrium outcomes. Let ri(t) denote firm i's first date of "intervals of atoms", in the
subgame starting at time t, i.e. ri(t)= inf {s2 tl cui(s)> o), and let qi(t)=
inf {s 2 tl Gj(s)> DEMO). Note that if ~~(0) < T~(O),~~(0)is the first time of an isolated jump.
And let ~(0) = min {ri(0), 72(0)) and 77(0) = min {~,(0), 77,(0)}.
Let us first assume DEMO r(0) 5 ~(0).
A
Lemma 2. ~(0)DEMO T,.
ProoJ: Imagine that ~(0) > F2,and consider the subgame starting at f2when none
of the firms has adopted. Since DEMO is no jump in Gi at F2(i = 1,2), there is a positive
probability of adoption strictly after T,. But DEMO is a dominant strategy for both firms to
adopt at f2 and thereafter (both L(t) and M(t) decrease). Therefore the firms yould
not be optimizing. (Note that the same lemma holds if ~(0) > ~(0):then ~(0) 5 T,.) //
Lemma 3. V i, G:( T;) = DEMO
ProoJ: Let us show that a firm does not want to DEMO at t < T,. If it did, its payoff
would DEMO either M(t) or L(t) depending on whether the other firm adopts or not. But
each firm can guarantee itself at least DEMO(t) by waiting until TT, say. Since F(t)>
DEMO {M(t), L(t)}, a firm indeed does not DEMO to adopt before TI. Note that this lemma
holds whether or not ~(0) 5 ~(0).//
Lemma 4. Let t€[T,, TT). If~(t)5 TT, then ~(t) = t.
ProoJ: Assume that t < ~(t)5 TT. Since neither firm's strategy contains an atom
before ~(t), adopting at (~(t) - s) gives either firm a payoff L(r(t) - E). Thus, if ~'(s)
denotes firm i'DEMO valuation at time s, min { vl(r(t)- s), v2(r(t) - E))2 L(r(t)- E) and
v1(7(t)- E)+ v2(r(t)- s) 2 2L(~(t)- E). Now there is adoption with probability one at
~(t). Therefore, using the facts that F and L are increasing, and both exceed M, we have:
DEMO F(T(~)) < L(r(t)) and therefore the last two inequalities are in contradiction
for s small enough. 1)
DEMO us now consider the two cases of Proposition 2.
398
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
(A) L(T7)> ~(f~)DEMO Let us show that ~(0) 5 TT. Imagine that ~(DEMO) > TT. Then
in the subgame starting at TT each firm DEMO obtain payoff L(T7) since no firm has an
atom at DEMO Since both firms cannot guarantee themselves a payoff L(TT), ~(0)
must be
at most TT. Thus from Lemma 4, ~(0) = TI: The only possibility is the diffusion outcome
( DEMO, TT) unless there is a positive probability of mistake at Tl. But since F( Tl) = L( TI) >
M(Tl), this probability must be zero (if ~~(0) TI, say, j would be better off not adopting
at TI if there is a probability of mistake).
To complete our treatment of case (A) we must now show that Prob {firm one moves
first) = DEMO {firm two moves first) = &. From Lemma 4 and the right-continuity of the a's
we know that firm one, say, DEMO al(t)> 0 in some open interval beginning at TI. We
claim that firm two also has > 0 in some open interval DEMO at TI. If 7,(T1) > T1,
then G$(T~) = 0, as adopting at TI is weakly dominated. As G? is right-continuous, for
any 6 > 0, there exists E > DEMO such that G$(Tl + E)< 6. By waiting until (DEMO + E), firm one
increases its profit (L(Tl) = F(Tl)) by at least {(L(Tl + E)- DEMO(Tl))(l- 6)) (since both F
and L are DEMO). So T~(T~) = TI, which means that a2(t) > 0 in some open interval
beginning at Tl. On some such interval we thus have > 0 and > 0. From the
definition DEMO payoffs, this implies that al(t) = a2(t)= [L(t) - F(t)]/[L(t) - M(t)]. DEMO
starting at t slightly bigger than TI, the two firms have DEMO probabilities of adopting
first. This also holds at Tl as the a's are right continuous.
(B) L(TT) = M(S)6 ~(f~). We know from Lemma 2 that if ~(0) 5 T:, the equili-
brium must be diffusion at (TI, DEMO). Let us assume that TT < ~(0) Consider the
DEMO starting at TT. Since there is no atom at TT, both DEMO can guarantee themselves
L(TT). Therefore
But since the game ends with probability one at
~(0) <
S, and L 2 M and F 2 M,
a contradiction. Next assume that S< ~(0)5 f2. Let us assume that no firm ever wants
DEMO adopt between and f2. Indeed since no firm adopts with probability one at any
instant before ~(0) M is increasing, it is DEMO the interest of any firm to wait. Let u 5 TT
denote the supremum of the times such that at least one firm is DEMO to adopt at these
times. There are two possible cases. Either for some E and for some i, < 1 or
for all E and all i, GY-"(u) = 1. Let us consider the former case. Then lim,,, GYP"(u)= 0
since there DEMO no atom before u. Thus i's probability of adoption between (DEMO - E) and u
converges to zero, and j's payoff to not adopting between (u - E) and ~(0) converges to
M(T(~))
not want to adopt. Next assume that for all E, all i, GY-"(u) = 1. Then DEMO any E, the
probability of adoption by time u is one. DEMO
~(0)
and
GYPE(u)
>
L(TT)2
DEMO(t)
Vt. This contradicts the definition of u: close to DEMO, firm j would
But since there is no atom at (u
at (u
- E)
- E), each firm can guarantee itself L(u - E) by adopting
in the subgame starting at (u - E). Therefore:
Clearly (3) and (4) are in contradiction for E small if u <
will check that the left-hand derivative of (L+ F) at TT is
TT. If DEMO = T;, the reader
[(.r1(2)-
+ (~~(DEMO)
.ro(0))]erT~<
0 from Assumption (ii).
~~(1))
-
=
a2(t)
al(t)
a2(t)
<
S.
FUDENBERG & TIROLE PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION 399
Therefore:
{L(t)DEMO F(t)) L(u - E)+
maxrEru-c,ul F(u - E)< 2L(u - E), a contradiction.
=
Therefore DEMO firm adopts before r(0). If r(0) = S, then the same reasoning holds except
that a firm is indifferent between DEMO at TT and waiting until r(0). Since TT < r(0),
almost surely no firm adopts at TT. Therefore almost surely the equilibrium involves
joint adoption at S. Because of the "almost surely" statement we ignored the possible
outcome (TT, S) in the DEMO
Second, assume ~(0) < r(0).
Lemma 5. There are no isolated jumps in (TI, TT).
Proof: Imagine that ~~(0) = ~(0)< TT. Note that firm two does not adopt at time
~(0)if the subgame starting at ~(DEMO) is reached: It can avoid a strictly positive probability
of mistake by waiting a bit. There are two cases. Either there exists an DEMO
(~(o),~(0)+ E] in which firm two does not adopt, or for any E > 0, firm two adopts DEMO
some probability in (~(0), ~(0)+ E]. In DEMO former case, firm one does not optimize when
it adopts at DEMO(0): it could wait without fearing preemption, and adopt a DEMO later; it would
do better because L increases. Therefore consider the DEMO case. Then YE > 0,
where a, > 0 is DEMO conditional jump in the distribution GI at time ~(0). taking the
limit when E tends to zero:
By
Since firm two DEMO guarantee itself L(v(0) - E') in any subgame DEMO at (~(0) - E'),
then firm two adopts with probability one before ~(0) (otherwise:
L(77(0)DEMO ~')5 V2(77(0)-E1)5 F(T(O))+(l -a,)L(77(0)),
a contradiction for E' DEMO). We are back to the proof of Lemma 4:
2L(77(0) - 8') 6 L(T(o))+ F(DEMO(O)),
a contradiction. We have already noticed that Lemma 3 always holds. Therefore
TI. II
~~(~(0)-E')+ ~~(~(0) - E')6
~(0)
=
Lemma 6. There DEMO exist an isolated jump in [TT, T;].
Proof: First assume that TT < ~(0) 5 T;. Let ~~(0) DEMO ~(0),say. Since firm one is
willing to adopt at DEMO(0) if it is not preempted before, its valuation at TT is strictly less
than L(TT). But it can guarantee itself DEMO(TT) by adopting immediately in the subgame
starting at TT, a contradiction. Second, assume that ~(0) = TT. Firm two's DEMO at
T? is at most:
if L(T7) > M(?~) (Case A). Since firm two can guarantee itself L(TT - E) in the subgame
starting at (TT - E) and L(T7 - E)> v2(~T)for E sufficiently small, it must be the case
that firm two adopts with probability one DEMO TT in the subgame starting at (TT - E).
Again DEMO are back to the proof of Lemma 4: Since the probability DEMO adoption before
400 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
TT is one, one has:
E)+ v2(TT- E)5 L(TT) + F(TT),
DEMO(TT - E) 5 V'(T~-
a contradiction.
Next consider Case B: L( TT) = M(S) 5 M( f2). Let t denote the first time after TT
such that firm two DEMO willing to adopt at t conditionally on none of the firms having
adopted yet. We claim that t > S. If not
v'(T:')su,F(TT)+(~ -a,)L(TT)
and the previous reasoning obtains. Let us therefore assume that firm two does not DEMO
in [TT, t) for t > S. Then firm one could do better than L(TT) in the subgame starting
at TT: DEMO could wait until slightly after S to adopt without being preempted. Therefore
in the subgame starting at TT firm one does not optimize. 1)DEMO
Last, consider the case f22 ~(0) TA;. Let ~(0)= ~,(0), say. Notice that
G:(~'(~(O))= 1. Since M is increasing before T,, firm two would not adopt in a neighbour-
hood of ~(0). But DEMO in turn implies that firm one itself should not adopt at ~(0).
Similarly G~'~'(~(O)) = 1: Both DEMO must adopt with probability one at ~(0). But for
the rest of the proof of Proposition 2, it does not matter whether certain adoption by
both firms at a given time corresponds to isolated DEMO non-isolated jumps. This concludes
the proof of Proposition 2. 11
APPENDIX 2
This appendix shows that in some continuation games there is no Superior DEMO
Equilibrium. Let L, F, and M be the payoffs of the remaining two firms; let U satisfy
TT < U < T; DEMO L( U) > M(f2) (so we are in Case A).
There are several undominated equilibria at U: let 7> DEMO be such that L( 7) = M( f2),
and let one and two be the remaining firms.
Let
and after T DEMO equilibrium strategies correspond to late joint-adoption at f2(see Section
4). Then firm one makes more profit than firm two if firm three DEMO at U. It can
be checked that these strategies are indeed an equilibrium of the continuation game and
that the outcome is undominated (firm one gets L(U), which is the maximum it can get
DEMO the continuation game). Naturally, the strategies of firms one and DEMO can be reversed,
yielding a second undominated equilibrium.
First version received October 1983; jnal version accepted December 1984 (Eds.).
We would DEMO to thank Bernard Caillaud, Richard Gilbert, David Kreps, Eric Maskin DEMO Leo Simon
for helpful conversations. Financial support from NSF Grant SES 82-07928 is gratefully acknowledged.
NOTES
1. The equal probability property is proved assuming DEMO firms do not play weakly dominated strategies.
Nothing else in the paper relies on this assumption.
2. Scherer (1967) points out that the DEMO equilibrium may involve adoption even when never
adopting would maximize joint profits.
>
FUDENBERG & TIROLE
PREEMPTION AND RENT EQUALIZATION
3. Pitchik used the equivalent DEMO
401
4. Richard Gilbert suggested this game as a stylized model of preemption. See Gilbert and Stiglitz (1979).
5. Strictly speaking, Poisson DEMO do not exhibit discontinuous cumulative distribution functions.
However, consider two independent DEMO Poisson processes each with intensity A . For any A there is no
probability of mistake, and in the limit {A +m) both DEMO have an atom at time zero yet there is still zero
probability of both events occurring simultaneously.
6. The "always grab" equilibria do DEMO exist if S > 1.
7. This condition is not necessary. We make it to simplify the definition of the payoffs.
8. This limit DEMO for all t because G,(.) is monotone.
9. More generally, we could recover the limiting probability distribution from the nth derivative of a, at
r if the first (n - 1) were zero.
10. This is analogous to condition (5.3) of Kreps-Wilson (1982b).
11. While Gilbert-Harris do not examine the possibility of other equilibria in DEMO new plants do earn
a profit, they conjecture that this cannot DEMO
REFERENCES
AUMANN, R. (1974), "Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized DEMO", Journal of Mathematical
Economics, 67-96.
FUDENBERG, D. and LEVINE, DEMO (1983), "Limit Games and Limit Equilibria" (mimeo, U.C. DEMO).
FUDENBERG, D. and MASKIN, E. (1985), "Folk Theorems for Repeated Games with Discounting or with
Incomplete Information" Econometrica (forthcoming)DEMO
FUDENBERG, D. and TIROLE, J. (19831, "Capital as a DEMO: Strategic Investment to Deter Mobility",
Journal of Economic Theory, DEMO, 227-250.
FUDENBERG, D. and TIROLE, J. (1984a), "Dynamic DEMO of Oligopoly", in Lesourne, J. and Sonnenschein,
H. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Economics (forthcoming).
FUDENBERG, D. and TIROLE, J. (1984b), "Preemption and Rent Equalization in the Adoption of a New
Technology" (Discussion Paper 28, CERAS).
GILBERT, R. and HARRIS, R. (1984), "Competition and Mergers with Lumpy Investments", Rand DEMO
of Economics, 15, 197-212.
GILBERT, R. and STIGLITZ, J. (DEMO), "Entry, Equilibrium, and Welfare" (paper presented at the DEMO
Conference on Theoretical Industrial Organization, Montreal).
HARSANYI, J. (1964), "A General Solution for Finite Noncooperative Games, Based on Risk Dominance",
in Dresher, M. et al. (eds.) Advances in Game DEMO, Annals of Mathematics, Study 52, Princeton, pp.
627-650.
KREPS, DEMO, MILGROM, P., ROBERTS, J. and WILSON, R. (1982), "Rational Cooperation in the Finitely-
Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma", Journal of Economic Theory, 27, 245-252.
KREPS, D. and WILSON, R. (1982a), "Reputation and Imperfect Information", Journal of Economic Theory,
27, 253-279.
KREPS, D. and WILSON, R. (1982b), "Sequential Equilibria", Econometrica, 50, 863-894.
MILGROM, P. and ROBERTS, J. (1982), "Predation, Reputation and Entry Deterrence", Journal of Economic
Theory, 27, 280-312.
PITCHIK, C. (1982), "Equilibria of a Two-Person DEMO Noisy Game of Timing", International Journal
of Game Theory, 10, 207-221.
PRESCOTT, E. and VISSCHER, M. (1977), "Sequential Location DEMO Firms with Foresight", Bell Journal
of Economics, 8, 378-393.
RAO, R. and RUTENBERG, D. (1979), "Preempting an Alert Rival: Strategic Timing of the First Plant by an
Analysis of Sophisticated Rivalry", Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 412-428.
REINGANUM, J. (1981a), "On the Diffusion of New Technology: A Game-Theoretic Approach", Review DEMO
Economic Studies, 153, 395-406.
REINGANUM, J. (1981 b), "DEMO Structure and the Diffusion of New Technology", Bell Journal ofEconomics,
12 (2), 618-624.
SCHERER, F. M. (1967), "Research DEMO Development Resource Allocation Under Rivalry", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 81, 359-394.
SCHERER, F. M. (1980), Industrial Market Structure and Economic DEMO, second edition (Chicago:
Rand MacNally).
YOUNG, L. C. (1980), Lectures on the Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control Theory (New York: Chelsea
Publishing Co.).
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 2 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Preemption and Rent Equalization in the Adoption of New Technology
Drew Fudenberg; Jean Tirole
The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 52, No. 3. (Jul., 1985), pp. 383-401.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0034-6527%28198507%2952%3A3%3C383%3APAREIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Y
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site DEMO access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
Notes
2 Research DEMO Development Resource Allocation Under Rivalry
F. M. Scherer
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 81, No. 3. (Aug., 1967), pp. 359-394.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28196708%2981%3A3%3C359%3ARADRAU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
10 Sequential Equilibria
David M. Kreps; Robert Wilson
Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 4. (Jul., 1982), pp. 863-894.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198207%2950%3A4%3C863%3ASE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
References
DEMO with Lumpy Investment
Richard J. Gilbert; Richard G. Harris
The RAND DEMO of Economics, Vol. 15, No. 2. (Summer, 1984), pp. 197-212.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0741-6261%28198422%2915%3A2%3C197%3ACWLI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 2 -
Sequential DEMO
David M. Kreps; Robert Wilson
Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 4. (Jul., 1982), pp. 863-894.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198207%2950%3A4%3C863%3ASE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
On the Diffusion of New Technology: A Game Theoretic Approach
Jennifer F. Reinganum
The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48, No. 3. (Jul., 1981), pp. 395-405.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0034-6527%28198107%2948%3A3%3C395%3AOTDONT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
Research and Development Resource Allocation Under Rivalry
F. M. Scherer
The DEMO Journal of Economics, Vol. 81, No. 3. (Aug., 1967), pp. 359-394.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28196708%2981%3A3%3C359%3ARADRAU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.{1g42fwefx}