Small Business Economics (2005) 24: 323–334
DOI 10.1007/s11187-005-1998-4
Entrepreneurship,
Agglomeration and
Technological Change
ABSTRACT. A growing body of literature suggests that
DEMO across countries, in entrepreneurial activity and
the spatial structure of economies DEMO potentially be the
source of diﬀerent eﬃciencies in knowledge spillovers, and
DEMO in economic growth. We develop an empirical
model that endogenizes both entrepreneurial activity and
agglomeration eﬀects on knowledge spillovers within a
Romerian framework. The DEMO is tested using the GEM
cross-national data to measure the level of entrepreneurship
in each particular economy. We ﬁnd that after controlling
for the DEMO of knowledge and research and development
expenditures, both entrepreneurial activity and DEMO
tion have a positive and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on
technological change in the European Union.
KEY WORDS: agglomeration, economic geography, eco-
nomic growth; entrepreneurship, knowledge spillovers,
technological change
JEL CLASSIFICATION: O3, R1, J24, M13
1. Introduction
The story of the entrepreneurial process is one
of the entrepreneur recognizing and acting on
unexploited opportunity. Opportunity frequently
Final DEMO accepted on February 9, 2005
Zolta´ nJ.A´ cs
Max-Plank-Institute for Research DEMO Economic Systems
Jena
Germany
and Merrick School of Business
University of Baltimore
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA
E-mail: zacs@ubalt,edu
Attila Varga
Center for Research in Economic Policy (CREP)
and Department of Economics
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Pe´cs
Pe´cs, Ra´ ko´ czi 80, DEMO, Hungary
E-mail: vargaa@ktk.pte.hu
 Springer 2005
Zolta´ nJ.A´ cs
Attila Varga
exists in a crowded space of knowledge creating
institutions, networks and venture capitalists.
This ‘Silicon Valley’ story has been told in the
context of DEMO high technology agglomerations
including Seattle, WA, Austin, TX, Boston, DEMO,
and Washington, D.C. It also has its international
counter parts DEMO Bangalore, India, London, UK
and Baden-Wurtenberg, Germany. While this
suggests that entrepreneurship and agglomera-
tions play an important role in economic growth
DEMO has not been worked out theoretically
(Bresnahan, Gambardella and Saxenian, DEMO).
The seminal contribution of Romer
(1986, 1990) to the DEMO on economic growth
was to endogenize technological change within
an economy in a general equilibrium model with
well-speciﬁed market forms, selﬁsh agents, perfect
DEMO and clearing markets. This provided a
more realistic explanation of economic growth
than the neoclassical theory that focuses on the
role of investment in DEMO capital, increases in
the supply of labor, and an exogenous change in
technology. According to Romer (1996, 204):
New growth theory started on the technology-as-public
good path and worried about where technology came
DEMO, but it soon backed up and reconsidered the ini-
tial split DEMO economists make in the physical world.
New growth theorists now start by dividing the world
into two fundamentally diﬀerent types of productive
inputs that DEMO be called ‘‘ideas’’ and ‘‘things’’. Ideas
are nonrival goods that could be stored in a bit string.
Things are rival goods with mass (or energy). With
ideas and things, one can explain how economic
growth works. Nonrival ideas can be used to rearrange
things, for example, DEMO one follows a recipe that
transforms noxious olives into tasty and healthful olive
oil. Economic growth arises from the discovery of new
recipes and DEMO transformation of things from low to
high value conﬁgurations.
The above view leads to insights that do not fol-
low from the neoclassical model. DEMO emphasizes
324
Zolta´
nJ.A´
cs and Attila Varga
that ideas are goods that DEMO produced and dis-
tributed just as other goods are. If economic
growth arises from the creation of new recipes to
rearrange things, might not entrepreneurship and
geography play some role in this transformation?
However, the theory oﬀers no insight into what
role, if any, entrepreneurship and DEMO
might play in economic growth. In other words,
it does not answer the question, ‘‘What is the
role of entrepreneurship and agglomeration in
technological change?’’
An answer to this question can be pursued
through DEMO lens of the new economic geography
and the modern theory of entrepreneurship. The
distinguishing characteristic of the new economic
geography is that it studies DEMO economy within a
framework that integrates space into general equi-
librium theory (Fujita, et al., 1999; Krugman,
1991). One aspect DEMO economic geography is the
agglomeration of knowledge. Over the past dec-
ade, the new economic geography literature has
tried to explain the development, DEMO the
economic role of geographic structures, and one
of the important DEMO is related to the role of
agglomeration in technological change and
ultimately in macroeconomic growth (Fujita and
Thisse, 2002).
The recent literature DEMO entrepreneurship has
shifted the emphasis in entrepreneurship from cul-
tural and psychological traits to the discovery and
exploitation of new knowledge by proﬁt-seeking
agents (Shane and Venkataraman, 2000). If entre-
preneurs play an important role in the exploita-
tion of technological opportunity the impact of
entrepreneurship on DEMO becomes an impor-
tant research question (Carree and Thurik, 2003).
This relationship is especially important at the
spatial level (Acs and Armington, 2004).
Both the relationship between geography and
technological change, and DEMO entrepreneur-
ship and technological change, is interesting
because these lines of DEMO may prove fruitful
in better explaining economic growth through
knowledge spillovers. However, both approaches
have severe limitations. For example, while there
have been DEMO attempts to model new growth
theory with endogenously generated spatial struc-
tures this work is still in its infancy, until the
very recent attempts by Fujita and Thisse (2002)
and Baldwin et al. (2003)DEMO The purpose of this
paper is to develop an empirical framework that
endogenizes both entrepreneurial activity and
agglomeration eﬀects on knowledge spillovers.
We present DEMO ﬁrst empirical test of the impact
of entrepreneurial activity and agglomeration
eﬀects on the spillover of new knowledge, based
on the Romerian (1990) model of endogenous
technological change, as modiﬁed by Jones
(1995). DEMO model allows us to directly test the
relationship between technological change and
knowledge creation, conditioned by entrepreneur-
ship and agglomeration eﬀects, while controlling
DEMO knowledge spillovers.
We use a new and novel data set from the
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) project
to test the eﬀects of entrepreneurship DEMO knowl-
edge spillovers, and an index is created to mea-
sure DEMO eﬀect of agglomeration on knowledge
spillovers in the European Union. Section 2
examines the relationship between agglomeration,
knowledge spillovers and economic growth and
DEMO relationship between entrepreneurship, knowl-
edge spillovers and economic growth. Section 3
DEMO the basic Romer framework, develops the
empirical speciﬁcation and presents the DEMO,
Section 4 has the results and the ﬁnal section pre-
sents the conclusions. We ﬁnd signiﬁcant empiri-
cal support for the Romer model, where the
coeﬃcient on the stock of knowledge is signiﬁcant
but less DEMO one. We also ﬁnd support for the
hypothesis that both agglomeration eﬀects and
entrepreneurship facilitate the knowledge spill-
over mechanism of new knowledge in DEMO
growth.
2. Entrepreneurship and agglomeration
Technological change is the most important factor
in long-run macroeconomic growth (Solow 1957).
In new growth theory the technological element of
the growth process is directly modeled within the
economic DEMO as a result of proﬁt motivated
choices of economic agents. Recently published
ﬁndings in entrepreneurship, the geography of
innovation and the new economic geography sug-
gest that the extent to which a country is ‘entrepre-
neurial’ DEMO its economic system is ‘agglomerated’
could be a factor that explains technological
change. In this section we outline these literatures
from an economic growth DEMO
Entrepreneurship, Agglomeration and Technological Change
325
2.1. Entrepreneurship and technological change
The origins of the discussion about the existence
of opportunity can be traced DEMO Joseph Schum-
peter (1934). Schumpeter believed that the exis-
tence DEMO opportunity required the introduction of
new knowledge not just diﬀerentiated access to
existing knowledge (Kirzner, 1973). One source
of new knowledge came DEMO changes in technol-
ogy. These technological opportunities are inno-
vative and break away from existing knowledge.
Opportunity therefore comes in part from the
research DEMO development (R&D) process that
takes place in society. Technological change is an
important source of entrepreneurial opportunity
because it makes it possible DEMO people to allocate
resources in diﬀerent and potentially more pro-
ductive ways (Casson, 1995).
However, as was pointed out by Arrow (DEMO)
the link between knowledge and economic
knowledge is not well understood. The central
problem is a gap in our understanding between
technological change DEMO the market that come
into existence based on that innovation – this
gap in our understanding is ﬁlled by the concept
of entrepreneurial opportunity. DEMO entrepreneur-
ial opportunity consists of a set of ideas, beliefs
and DEMO that enable the creation of future
goods and services in the absence of current mar-
kets for them.
If technological opportunity is in part DEMO
by the production of new knowledge how is this
opportunity discovered? DEMO way in which
people discover technological opportunity is
through knowledge spillovers. Entrepreneurial
discovery is in fact a process of knowledge spill-
over where knowledge DEMO a non-rival good. Once
entrepreneurs discover new opportunities, which
are only DEMO excludable, they have the
chance to exploit the opportunity. While most
DEMO&D is carried out in large ﬁrms and universities
it does not mean that the same individuals that
discover the opportunity will carry out DEMO
exploitation. In fact, because knowledge spills
over, one person may discover an opportunity
and another may exploit it.
The uncertainty inherent in new DEMO
knowledge, combined with asymmetries between
the agent possessing that knowledge and DEMO
decision making of the incumbent organization
with respect to its expected value potentially
leads to a gap between the valuations of the
knowledge. This DEMO condition of not just
uncertainty but greater degree of uncertainty
vis-a-vis incumbent enterprises in the industry is
captured in the theory of ﬁrm selection DEMO
industry evolution proposed by Jovanovic (1982).
An implication of the DEMO of ﬁrm selection is
that new ﬁrms may begin at a small scale of out-
put, and then if merited by subsequent perfor-
mance expand. What emerges from the new
evolutionary theories and empirical evidence on
DEMO role of new ﬁrms is that markets are in
motion, with DEMO lot of new ﬁrms entering the
industry and lots of ﬁrms leaving (Audretsch,
1995). The empirical evidence supports such an
evolutionary view of entrepreneurship (Caves,
1998; Sutton, 1997).
The empirical evidence also supports the
argument that technological change is a source
of entrepreneurial DEMO The evidence is
indirect since we cannot measure the existence
of opportunity. Acs and Audretsch (1989) found
that young entrepreneurial ﬁrms play a DEMO
role in generating technological innovations, at
least in some industries. Blau (1987) examined
self-employment rates in the United States over
a two-decade period and found that an increase
in the rate of technological change led DEMO an
increase in the self-employment rate, Shane
(1996) looked at DEMO number of organizations
per capita from 1899 to 1988 found that the
rate of technological change, measured as the
annual number of new patents issued, had a
positive eﬀect on the number of organizations
per capita in the economy in the subsequent
year.
While the relationship between technological
DEMO and opportunity cannot be measured
directly, several authors have tried to DEMO
the relationship between entrepreneurship and
employment growth. Acs and Armington (2004)DEMO
found that diﬀerences in the level of entrepre-
neurial activity, and DEMO extent of human capital
are positively associated with variation in growth
rates. Holtz-Eakin and Kao (2003) using a rich
panel of state-level data DEMO quantify the relation-
ship between productivity growth and entrepre-
neurship found that the eﬀect of new ﬁrm
formation on productivity is quite persistent.
326
Zolta´
nJ.A´
cs and Attila Varga
These results are consistent with DEMO and
Keilbach (2004) who estimate a production func-
tion model for German regions based on start-up
data from the 1990s. The empirical evidence DEMO
gests that entrepreneurship plays an important
role in the discovery and exploitation of techno-
logical opportunity through knowledge spillovers,
lead to higher economic DEMO
Theories of entrepreneurship and economic
growth are still relatively new even though the
entrepreneurship literature does recognize that
R&D is an important source DEMO technological
opportunity. The process by which knowledge
spills over from the ﬁrm producing it for use by
a third-party ﬁrm is exogenous in the DEMO pro-
posed by Romer (1990). The emphasis was on
the DEMO of knowledge spillovers on techno-
logical change without specifying why and how
new knowledge spills over. Yet, the critical issue
in modeling knowledge-based growth rests on the
spillover of knowledge. This was to some extent
remedied DEMO the neo-Schumpeterian models of
endogenous growth (Aghion and Howitt, 1992,
Cheng and Dinopoulos, 1992, Schmitz, 1989,
Segerstrom,1991, Segerstrom, et al.,1990). How-
ever, these neo-Schumpeterian models design
entrepreneurship as an R&D race where a
fraction of R&D will turn DEMO successful innova-
tions.
While this implies a step forward, the essence
DEMO the Schumpeterian entrepreneur is missed. The
innovation process stretches far beyond R&D
races that predominantly involve large incumbent
ﬁrms and concern quality improvements DEMO exist-
ing goods. As pointed out by Schumpeter (1947)
‘‘the DEMO produces ideas, the entrepreneur
‘gets things done’ ... an idea or DEMO princi-
ple is not, by itself, of any importance for eco-
nomic practice.’’ Indeed, the Schumpeterian
entrepreneur, by and large, remains absent in
those models (Acs et al., 2004).
2.2. Agglomeration and DEMO change
As long as the knowledge necessary for techno-
logical change is codiﬁed (i.e., it can be studied
in written forms either in DEMO journals
and books or in patent documentations) the
access to it DEMO essentially not constrained by
spatial distance: among other means libraries or
DEMO Internet can facilitate the ﬂow of that knowl-
edge to the interested user no matter where the
user actually locates.
However, in case knowledge is not codiﬁed,
because it is not yet completely developed, or it
is so practical that it can only be transmitted
while knowledge DEMO actually being applied, the
ﬂow of knowledge can only be facilitated DEMO per-
sonal interactions. Thus, for the transmission of
tacit knowledge spatial DEMO of knowledge
owners and potential users appears to be critical
(Polanyi, 1967). For example, several ﬁrms move
their research facilities to geographic areas where
signiﬁcant amounts of related knowledge has
already been accumulated in DEMO to get easier
access to that knowledge. Knowledge from other
(industrial DEMO academic) research facilities can be
channeled via diﬀerent means, such as, a web of
social connections, the local labor market for
scientists DEMO engineers or by diﬀerent types
of consultancy relations between universities and
private ﬁrms.
A large body of literature exists on the spatial
extent of DEMO spillovers. At diﬀerent levels
of spatial aggregation (such as states, metropoli-
tan areas, countries) in diﬀerent countries (e.g.
the US, France, Germany, Italy, Austria) and
with the application of diﬀerent econometric
methodologies (e.g., various spatial or a-spatial
methods) many of these studies conclude that
geographical proximity to the knowledge source
signiﬁcantly ampliﬁes spillovers between research
DEMO innovating ﬁrms. Strong evidence is provided
both for the US (Acs DEMO al., 2002; Jaﬀe et al.,
1993; Varga 1998) and for Europe (e.g., Autant-
Bernard, 2001, Fischer and Varga, 2003) that
knowledge ﬂows are bounded within a relatively
narrow geographical range. Although certain
industrial diﬀerences exists (such as for innova-
tion in the microelectronics, instruments or
biotechnology sectors proximity is more signiﬁ-
cant than for new technology development in the
chemicals or the machinery industries) the
hypothesis that spatial proximity is an important
factor in innovation is strongly supported in DEMO
literature.
Varga (2000, 2001) provides empirical evidence
that the spillover DEMO in knowledge produc-
tion is positively related to the size of the region.
Diﬀerent types of agglomeration eﬀects are at
Entrepreneurship, Agglomeration and Technological Change
327
work to explain this phenomenon. Larger regions
inhabit more ﬁrms connected by richer network
linkages and as such DEMO same knowledge gener-
ated by research in the area spills over to poten-
tially more applications. Larger regions also oﬀer
a wider selection of DEMO services essential in
technological innovation (e.g., information tech-
nology, legal, marketing services) contributing to
a larger number of new technologies developed
from the same knowledge base generated by
(public and private) research in DEMO area.
The new economic geography literature pro-
vides a general equilibrium framework where
spatial economic structure is endogenously deter-
mined simultaneously with equilibrium in DEMO
and factor markets (Fujita et al., 1999;
Krugman,1991). This is a real breakthrough in
economics given that before the appearance DEMO
the new economic geography no any school of
economics since von Thunen’ Der Isolirte Staat
in the early nineteenth century had been able to
DEMO an economic model where the development
of spatial structure is treated endogenously
within a general equilibrium framework (Samuel-
son, 1983). The most DEMO models in the new
economic geography incorporate the eﬀects of
knowledge spillovers on the formation of spatial
economic structure as well as provide the DEMO
attempts to explicitly integrate the two ‘new’
schools of economics: the DEMO growth theory and
the new economic geography (Baldwin et al.,
DEMO Fujita and Thisse 2002). The need for the
integration of the two schools is clear if one
takes into account that agglomeration facilitates
DEMO spillovers (according to the new eco-
nomic geography) and knowledge spillovers
determine per-capita GDP growth (according to
the new growth theory) then DEMO is not an unrealis-
tic assumption that spatial economic structure
aﬀects macroeconomic growth.
Unfortunately, empirical investigations in the
area of agglomeration and technological change
are still relatively uncommon in the literature.
The very few exceptions include DEMO and
Hall (1996), Ciccone (2002) and Varga and
Schalk (2004). The following section presents
the empirical modeling framework to integrate
DEMO and agglomeration into the
explanation of technological change (and implic-
itly DEMO the explanation of macroeconomic
growth).
3.The empirical modeling framework
Our framework for empirical investigation is
based on the Romer (1990) model of DEMO
knowledge production as extended by Jones
(1995). One of the DEMO original contributions of
Romer (1990) is the separation of economically
useful scientiﬁc technological knowledge into two
parts. The total set of knowledge consists DEMO the
subsets of non-rival, partially excludable knowl-
edge elements that can DEMO be considered
as public goods and the rival, excludable ele-
ments DEMO knowledge. Codiﬁed knowledge pub-
lished in books, scientiﬁc papers or in DEMO
documentations belongs to the ﬁrst group. This
knowledge is non-rival since eventually it can be
used by several actors at the same time and DEMO
times historically. On the other hand it is only
partially excludable since only the right of apply-
ing a technology for the production of DEMO particu-
lar good can be guaranteed by patenting while
the same technology can spill over to further
potential economic applications as others can
study DEMO patent documentation. Rival, exclud-
able knowledge elements include the personalized
(tacit) knowledge including particular experi-
ences, insights developed and owned by the
DEMO themselves.
Equation (1) presents the manner the two
types of knowledge interact in the production of
economically useful new technological knowl-
edge.
A
DEMO
dHAkAu
ð1Þ
where HA stands for the number of researchers
working on knowledge production in the business
sector, A is the total stock of technological
knowledge available at a certain point in time
whereas A˚ is DEMO change in technological knowl-
edge resulting from private eﬀorts to invest in
research and development: d, k and u are parameters.
Equation (1) plays a central role in economic
growth explanation since on the steady state
growth path the rate of per capita GDP growth
equals the DEMO of technological change (A˚ /A).
328
Zolta´
nJ.A´
cs and Attila Varga
Technological change is generated by DEMO
and it depends on the number of researchers
involved in knowledge creation (HA ). However,
their eﬃciency is directly related to the DEMO
stock of already available knowledge (A). Knowl-
edge spillovers are DEMO to the growth process:
the higher A, the larger the DEMO in technology
produced by the same number of researchers.
The same number of researchers with a similar
value of A can raise the level DEMO already existing
technological knowledge with signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences depending on the size of the parameters.
Consider d > 0, which is the research productiv-
ity parameter. The larger is d, the more eﬃcient
is HA in producing economically useful new
knowledge.
The size of u reﬂects the extent DEMO which the
total stock of already established knowledge
impacts knowledge production. Given that A
stands. for the level of codiﬁed knowledge
(available in the academic literature or patent
documentation), u is called the parameter of
DEMO knowledge spillovers. The size of u
reﬂects the portion of A that spills over and as
such its value largely inﬂuences the eﬀectiveness
of DEMO in generating new technologies.
Hence the value of the aggregate codiﬁed
knowledge spillovers parameter u should be
between 0 and 1.
However, not only codiﬁed but also non-
codiﬁed, tacit knowledge can spill over as
detailed in the previous section. The value of k,
in (1) DEMO the extent to which tacit knowledge
spills over within the research sector. The larger
is k in equation (1), the stronger the impact the
same number of researchers plays in technologi-
cal change. In contrast DEMO u and d, which are
determined primarily in the research sector DEMO
as such their values are exogenous to the econ-
omy, k DEMO endogenous because its value depends
on the spatial pattern of economic activities and
the level of entrepreneurial activity in the coun-
try. The size DEMO k in equation (1) relates to spatial
economic structure in two ways. First, the higher
the spatial concentration of research, the higher DEMO
because spatial proximity promotes spillovers to
a large extent. Second, as DEMO empirical studies
suggest, the magnitude of localized knowledge
spillovers from research DEMO also inﬂuenced by
agglomeration.
The value to k is also inﬂuenced by the
amount of entrepreneurial activity because the
value of new economic knowledge DEMO uncertain.
While most R&D is carried out in knowledge
creating institutions (large ﬁrms and universities)
it does not mean that the same individuals that
discover the opportunity will carry out the
exploitation. An implication DEMO the theory of ﬁrm
selection is that new ﬁrms may enter an industry
in large numbers to exploit knowledge spillovers.
The higher the rate DEMO new ﬁrm entry the greater
should be the value of k because of knowledge
spillovers.
Based on the literature we assume that these
spillovers DEMO inﬂuenced largely by agglomeration
as well as by the level of entrepreneurial activity
in the country.To empirically investigate the
extent to which entrepreneurship and DEMO
tion aﬀect knowledge spillovers we develop an
empirical model in which we endogenize the
parameter k in equation (1).
d k log (DEMO) u log (A) e
¼ þ þ þ ð2Þ
log (NK)
k ¼ðb1 þ b3 log (AGGL)Þð3Þ
b2 log (DEMO)
þ
where NK. stands for new knowledge (i.e., the
change in A), ENTR is entrepreneurship, AGGL
is agglomeration, A is DEMO set of publicly avail-
able scientiﬁc-technological knowledge and e is
stochastic error term, Implementation of (3) into
(2) results in the following estimated equation:
log (NK) ¼ d þ b1 log (H)
þ b2 log (ENTR) log ðHÞ
þ b3 log (AGGL) log (HÞ
þ u log (AÞþ e
In (4) the estimated values of the parameters b2
and b3 measure the extent to DEMO research
interacted with entrepreneurship and agglomera-
tion contributes to knowledge creation.
In the estimation of (4) the units of observa-
tion are selected DEMO sectors in European
countries for the year 2001.1 The selection of
countries and sectors is determined by data
availability. The number of patent applications
DEMO NK. Although patents are good
ð4Þ
Entrepreneurship, Agglomeration and Technological Change
329
indicators of new technology creation, DEMO do
not measure the economic value of these technol-
ogies (Hall DEMO al., 2001). According to Griliches
(1979) and Pakes and DEMO (1980, 378) ‘‘pat-
ents are a ﬂawed measure (of innovative output)
particularly since not all new innovations are pat-
ented and DEMO patents diﬀer greatly in their eco-
nomic impact.’’ However, a recent DEMO
study of direct innovation measures and patent
applications evidence that patent applications are
good proxy for innovation in econometric models
(Acs et al, DEMO).
R&D expenditures in Euro measure H. Data
accessibility explains this choice to measure H in
(1). An earlier comparison of R&D expenditures
and employment data conclude that the two
measures are highly DEMO with each other
and the results of regression analyses are not sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent (Varga, 1998). This makes us
conﬁdent to apply DEMO&D expenditures in our
study.
A is operationalized by the total number of
available patents in all the sectors in the country
(i.e., DEMO total number of patents granted by
inventors of the country in the last 20 years).
The source of patent data is the OECD DEMO
database. International patent classiﬁcation (IPC)
classes are assigned to industrial DEMO (ISIC
Rev. 2) by the application of the MERIT concor-
dance table developed by Verspagen, Moergastel
and Slabbers (1994), Eurostat provides DEMO&D
expenditures data.
AGGL is measured by the agglomeration index
that is calculated as the share of employment of
city regions where the number DEMO employees
exceeds 500,000 in country total employment.2
Eurostat provides regional employment data.
ENTR is empirically measured by the total entre-
preneurial activity (TEA) index developed within
the framework of the GEM project.
The intent of GEM is to systematically assess
two things: the level of start-up activity or the
prevalence of nascent ﬁrms and the prevalence
of new or DEMO ﬁrms that have survived the
start-up phase. First, start-up activity is
DEMO by the proportion of the adult popula-
tion (18–64 years of DEMO) in each country that is
currently engaged in the process of DEMO a
nascent business. Second the proportion of adults
in each country who are involved in operating a
business that is less than 42 months DEMO measures
the presence of new ﬁrms. The distinction
between nascent and new ﬁrms is made in order
to determine the relationship of each to DEMO
economic growth. For both measures, the
research focus is on entrepreneurial DEMO in
which the individual involved have a direct but
not necessarily full, ownership interest in the
business. There are numerous ways to measure
entrepreneurial activity. One important distinc-
tion is between opportunity-based entrepreneurial
activity and necessity-based DEMO activ-
ity. Opportunity entrepreneurship represents the
voluntary nature of participation and necessity
reﬂecting the individual’s perception that such
actions presented the best option available DEMO
employment but not necessarily the preferred
option. Opportunity entrepreneurship diﬀers
from necessity by sector of industry and with
respect to growth aspirations. Opportunity entre-
DEMO expect their ventures to produce more
high growth ﬁrms and provide more new jobs.
The 16 European Union countries in 2001 had
an average DEMO rate of about 8 percent
(Reynolds et al., 2001).
To further explore this question of high poten-
tial entrepreneurs the 2002 GEM DEMO
added several new questions to the GEM proto-
col in order to isolate those ventures widely
believed to have the greatest possibility for having
DEMO substantial impact on the economy. These new
items were utilized to locate those ventures with
potential to create new markets. Two additional
criteria were DEMO to further distinguish those
new ventures with the potential to make a major
contribution to the national economy: (1) the
expectation of 20 or more jobs created within ﬁve
years and (2) the intention DEMO export goods or ser-
vices. Of the 9615 star-ups and new ﬁrms identi-
ﬁed in the 37 countries, only 926 met all of these
criteria, about 9.6 percent (Reynolds et al., 2002).
4. Empirical results
In empirically estimating equation (4) two issues
should get particular DEMO: multicollinearity
(because H appears three times in the equation)
and heteroskedasticity (since the expected hetero-
geneity of the country-industry dataset).
330
Zolta´
nJ.A´
cs and Attila Varga
Table I presents empirical estimation DEMO
for equation (4). The equation is estimated by
OLS. Standard DEMO are based on the White
heteroskedasticity consistent covariance matrix
estimator that provides correct estimates of the
coeﬃcient covariances in the presence of heter-
oskedasticity DEMO unknown form (White 1980).
In Model 1 the estimated parameter DEMO log(H)
is highly signiﬁcant. The logarithm of R&D
expenditures explains 75 percent of the variations
in the logarithm of patent applications DEMO the
country-industry level. The additional eﬀect of
log(A) where A DEMO measured by the aggregate
stock of available patents is considerable: it
DEMO regression ﬁt by 24 percent. Both coeﬃ-
cients are highly signiﬁcant indicating that the
original Romer (1990) equation captures well the
main factors DEMO technological change.
In Model 2 ENTR is measured by the high
potential index. Extending Model 1 by the inter-
action terms Log(H)*Log(DEMO) and Log(H)*-
Log(ENTR) improves regression ﬁt only slightly.3
The estimated parameter for Log(H)*log(ENTR)
is signiﬁcant at (p < 0.05) while the agglomera-
tion eﬀect is not signiﬁcant in Model 2. This latter
result might be the outcome of a shortcoming DEMO
the measurement applied (i.e., the agglomeration
index is not sensitive to diﬀerences in the relative
geographical positions of city regions within a
country)DEMO Technical constraints could not make it
possible for us to improve on this agglomeration
measure. However, we also assumed that perhaps
the United Kingdom as an outlier observation of
AGGL might cause the unexpected result.4
To DEMO for this eﬀect in agglomeration a
dummy variable (DUMUK) is included in Model
2a. The parameter of DUMUK is marginally sig-
niﬁcant (p < 0.10) whereas the interaction term’s
parameter becomes signiﬁcant (p < DEMO). This
supports the hypothesis that in Model 2a the
high potential index enters the estimated equa-
tion with a highly signiﬁcant parameter value
(p < 0.01). Regression ﬁt increases only slightly
as compared to DEMO original Romer equation in
TABLE I
Ols regression results for Log(Patent applications) for selected industries in selected European countries (N = 63, 2001)
Model 1
Romer
Model 2
Extended
Romer with
TEA high
DEMO 2a
Extended
Romer with
TEA high
Model 3
Extended
Romer with
TEA
Model 4
Model 5
Extended
Extended
Romer with
Romer with
TEA Necessity DEMO
potential
potential
Opportunity
Constant )3.175a )2.843a )2.966a )3.711a )3.506a )3.513a
(0.346) (0.360) (0.368) (0.467) (0.468) (0.482)
Log (H) 0.298a 0.355a 0.442a 0.204c 0.396a 0.257c
(0.061) (0.074) (0.080) (0.102) (0.079) (0.134)
Log(H) *Log(AGGL) 0.024 0.086b 0.112b 0.100c 0.089c
(0.032) (0.042) (DEMO) (0.054) (0.047)
Log(H)*Log(ENTR) 0.069b 0.079a DEMO 0.038 0.073
(0.028) (0.030) (0.056) (0.048) (0.062)DEMO
Log(A) 0.723a 0.679a 0.698a 0.794a 0.775a 0.773a
(0.063) (0.055) (0.056) (0.072) (0.077) (0.075)
DUMUK )0.740c )DEMO )0.716c )0.711c
(0.378) (0.327) (0.407) (0.407)
DEMO 0.92 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.93
F-statistic 357a 189a 160a 162a 145a 147a
Note: TEA high potential index is available only for year 2002; White heteroscedasticity)consistent estimated standard errors are
in parentheses.
a Denotes signiﬁcance at least at 0.01.
b Denotes signiﬁcance at least at 0.05.
c DEMO signiﬁcance at least 0.10; variables are introduced in the main text.
Entrepreneurship, Agglomeration and Technological Change
331
Model 1. Estimated parameters of the Romer
equation as well as their signiﬁcance patterns are
stable across models DEMO to 2 These observations
suggest that multicollinearity is not a serious
issue in the model.
Table I also shows estimates for the diﬀerent
additional DEMO of entrepreneurship provided
by the GEM project. Model 3 shows results for
opportunity entrepreneurship, Model 4 gives the
results for necessity entrepreneurship and Model
5 is the output with TEA. While in Model 3 the
coeﬃcient DEMO opportunity entrepreneurship is
positive and statistically signiﬁcant, for both
Model 4 DEMO Model 5, the interaction term for
entrepreneurial activity is not signiﬁcant. DEMO
result is consistent with the fact that necessity
entrepreneurship, having to DEMO an entrepre-
neur because you have no better option, will not
DEMO to technological change, although it may
lead to employment growth. The DEMO is true of
entrepreneurial activity in general.
The estimated elasticity of technological
change with respect to available codiﬁed knowl-
edge is less than 1 (0.7) that corresponds to what
is suggested by Jones (1995). DEMO estimated
research spillover eﬀect in Model 2a is related to
high potential entrepreneurship and agglomera-
tion according to the following equation:
k ¼ DEMO:44 þ0:086 Log(AGGL)
þ0:079 Log(ENTR) ð5Þ
DEMO do these results suggest for entrepreneur-
ship and agglomeration? Table II DEMO the coef-
ﬁcients for knowledge spillovers for the nine
countries with and without the eﬀect of entrepre-
neurship and agglomeration. As shown in col-
DEMO two agglomeration varies considerably from
country to country with a high of 0.59 in the UK
to a low of 0.14 in Poland. The DEMO high poten-
tial index also varies from a low of 0.19 percent
in Belgium to a high of 1.52 in Ireland. The elas-
ticity DEMO R&D spillovers with respect to new
knowledge is 0.30 (Model DEMO in Table I), This
number is relatively small with respect to the
0.70 elasticity found for the total stock of knowl-
edge.
One DEMO suspect that entrepreneurship and
agglomeration would be able to signiﬁcantly raise
the eﬀect of R&D spillovers from new knowledge.
This would especially be DEMO if entrepreneurs
played an important role in knowledge spillovers
as suggested by the entrepreneurship literature. In
Table II, column four shows the value of the coef-
ﬁcient of k extended by entrepreneurship and
agglomeration eﬀects. The DEMO varies
between 0.31 and 0.42 and is greater than 0.30 in
all the countries in the sample. How should we
interpret these results? Compared to what? The
only other study we know of that measures the
interaction between entrepreneurship and research
and development is Michelacci (2003) who DEMO
that the value of k for the United States varied
between 0.24 and 0.48 for the post-war period.
These ﬁndings are broadly consistent with DEMO
results. The last column shows the ratio of the
extended coeﬃcient divided by the non-extended
coeﬃcient. The ratio varies from 1.04 to 1.41.
TABLE DEMO
Country coeﬃcients with and without extension for entrepreneurship and agglomeration
AGGL TEA HIGH Coeﬃcient
(Model 2a)
Coeﬃcient
(Model 1)
Coeﬃcient ratio
DEMO 0.31 0.64 0.38 0.30 1.28
France 0.34 0.57 0.38 0.30 1.28
Germany 0.18 1.47 0.39 0.30 1.31
Hungary 0.24 0.76 0.38 0.30 1.27
Ireland DEMO 1.52 0.42 0.30 1.40
Italy 0.18 0.71 0.37 0.30 1.23
Poland 0.14 0.19 0.31 0.30 1.04
Spain 0.43 0.64 0.40 0.30 1.33
United Kingdom DEMO 0.99 0.42 0.30 1.41
332
Zolta´
nJ.A´
cs and Attila Varga
These results suggest that increasing DEMO
and development expenditures, without increas-
ing entrepreneurial activity, and or agglomera-
tion eﬀects, may not achieve the same result as if
it was accompanied by entrepreneurial activity
and agglomeration eﬀects (Acs et al., 2004)DEMO
After taking into account the eﬀect of the stock
of knowledge and research and development
expenditures, both agglomeration and entrepre-
neurship have a weak positive eﬀect on techno-
logical change. It is unlikely that a substantial
DEMO technological entrepreneurial sector will
develop in the absence of broad national partici-
pation in entrepreneurship. If one wanted to
increase technological change in the DEMO
Union more agglomeration of economic activity
and more entrepreneurship may increase the
amount of knowledge spillovers.
5. Conclusion
This paper developed an empirical model DEMO
endogenizes both entrepreneurial activity and
agglomeration eﬀects on knowledge spillovers
within a Romerian framework. We tested a modi-
ﬁed model of technological change to DEMO
the impact of agglomeration eﬀects and entrepre-
neurial activity on endogenous technological
change. Speciﬁcally, we examine the impact of
entrepreneurial activity and agglomeration eﬀects
on the spillover of new knowledge. The eﬀect of
agglomeration on technological DEMO is positive
and statistically signiﬁcant. The eﬀect of entrepre-
neurship on technological change is positive and
highly signiﬁcant. When the interactive terms are
taken DEMO account the regression ﬁt increases
only slightly. Consequently we found signiﬁcant,
but not too strong agglomeration and entrepre-
neurship eﬀects on technological change DEMO
selected European countries. These results are
broadly consistent with a growing body of litera-
ture suggesting that entrepreneurial activity and
agglomeration play a positive DEMO in knowledge
spillovers and therefore in technological change
and economic growth.
We also ﬁnd that the endogenous growth
model developed by Romer (1990) DEMO a good
job of modeling economic growth. We found
support for Jones (1995) that the spillover eﬀects
from codiﬁed knowledge are less then DEMO There
are several caveats that should be kept in mind.
First, DEMO GEM data might not be a good mea-
sure of either opportunity entrepreneurship in
general or high technology entrepreneurship in
particular. However, strong co-occurrence among
these diverse measures indicated that the indices
are reasonable measures of DEMO overall level of
diﬀerent types of entrepreneurial activity. Second,
we only have one year of data at the start of a
recession. A DEMO time period may reveal diﬀer-
ent results. Finally, the inter relationship DEMO
agglomeration eﬀects and entrepreneurial activity
may be important. However, we did DEMO model
this in our paper and is an interesting topic for
further research.
Notes
1 Industrial sectors include Chemistry and
Pharmaceuticals, Computers and Oﬃce Machines, Electri-
cal Machinery, Electronics, Instruments, Other Machinery,
Transportation DEMO The following European coun-
tries are included; Belgium, Germany, France, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Poland, Spain and the United Kingdom.
2 With the exception of Belgium and the UK where the
highest level DEMO data aggregation is NUTS 2 for the rest
of the countries the agglomeration index is calculated
using NUTS 3 level aggregated employment data.
3 DEMO (4) forms the basis of our empirical investi-
gations. This explains why we do not account for the
direct eﬀect of either ENTR DEMO AGGL on technological
changer.
4 A closer investigation of the agglomeration index sug-
gests that economic activities exhibit an exceptionally high
level of spatial DEMO in the UK (relative to the rest
of the countries in DEMO sample). While the agglomeration
index for the UK is 0.59 the corresponding average value
for the rest of the sample countries is 0.27. DEMO to
this the UK economy appears to be more than two times
concentrated geographically than the rest of Europe. This
observation might well be DEMO sign of aggregation bias as
the lowest level of data aggregation for the UK is NUTS 2
while for the rest of the countries (with the exception of
Belgium) data are aggregated at NUTS 3 level. While this
does not seem to distort the value of the index DEMO Belgium
(i.e., the size of NUTS 2 regions are compatible with the
average size of NUTS 3 regions in our sample) it might not
be the case for the UK. Running separate regressions with
and DEMO the UK further supports the presence of regio-
nal data aggregation bias: with the exception of the
‘agglomeration eﬀect’ the UK follow very similar patterns
to the rest of Europe: parameter estimates and their signiﬁ-
cances are similar for log(H), log(A) and log(H)*log
(ENTR) This is not repeated for the geography eﬀect: the
number of patents in the UK exceeds the rest of the sample
Entrepreneurship, Agglomeration and Technological Change
333
average only slightly as it is 632 in the UK and 478 other-
wise while AGGL is more DEMO twice as high in the UK
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Edward Malecki, participants at the
ﬁrst GEM conference in Berlin, Germany and DEMO the
international workshop on ‘‘Regions in Action: The
Nexus of Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Public
Policy’’ at the Tinbergen Institute in Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, two anonymous referees and the editors
of this special issue for valuable comments. The usual
caveat applies.
References
Acs, Zoltan J., Luc Anselin, and Attila Varga, 2002, ‘Pat-
ents and Innovation Counts as Measures DEMO Regional
Production of New Knowledge’, Research Policy 31,
1069–1085.
Acs, Zoltan J. and Catherine Armington, 2004, ‘Employ-
ment Growth and Entrepreneurial DEMO in Cities’,
Regional Studies 38(8), 911–927.
Acs, Zoltan DEMO and David B. Audretsch, 2003, Handbook
of Entrepreneurship Research, Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Acs, Zoltan J., David B, Audretsch, Pontus DEMO
and Bo Carlsson, 2004, The Missing Link: The Knowl-
edge DEMO and Entrepreneurship in Endogenous Growth,
Discussion Paper, No.4783, December, DEMO for Eco-
nomic Policy Research, London, UK.
Aghion, Philip and DEMO Howitt, 1992, ‘A Model of
Growth through Creative Destruction’, Econometrica
DEMO, 323–351.
Arrow, Keneth, 1974, ‘Limited Knowledge and Economic
Analysis’, DEMO Economic Review 64(1), 1–10.
Audretsch, David, 1995, Innovation DEMO Industry Evolu-
tion, Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Audretsch, David and DEMO Keilbach, 2004, ‘Entrepre-
neurship Capital and Economic Performance’, Regio-
nal DEMO 38(8), 949–959.
Autant-Bernard, Corinne, 2001, ‘Science and Knowledge
DEMO: Evidence from the French Case’, Research
Policy 30, 1069–1078.
Baldwin, Richard, Rikard Forslid, Philippe Martin,
Gianmarco Ottaviano, and Frederic Robert-Nicoud,
2003, Economic Geography and Public Policy , Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Blau, David, 1987, ‘A Time-series Analysis of Self-
employment in the United States’, Journal of Political
Economy 95, 445–467.
Bresnahan, Timothy, Alfonso Gambardella and Annalee
Saxenian, 2001, ‘Old Economy’ Inputs for ‘New
Economy’ Outcomes: Cluster Formation in the New
Silicon Valleys’, Industrial and DEMO Change 10,
835–860.
Carree, Martin and Roy Thurik, 2003, DEMO Impact of
Entrepreneurship on Economic Growth’, Handbook of
Entrepreneurship Research, Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Casson, Mark, 1995, Entrepreneurship and Business
Culture, Brookﬁeld: Aldershot, US: Edward Elgar.
Caves, Richard, 1998, ‘Industrial DEMO and New
Findings on the Turnover and Mobility of Firm’,
Journal of Economic Literature 36, 1947–1982.
Cheng, Leonard K. and Elias Dinopoulos, 1992,
‘Schumpeterian Growth and International Business
Cycles’, American Economic Review 82, 409–414.
Ciccone, Antonio, 2002, ‘Agglomeration Eﬀects in
Europe’, European Economic Review 46, 213–227.
Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert Hall, 1996, ‘Productivity
and the Density of Economic Activity’, American Eco-
nomic Review 86, DEMO
Fischer, Manfred and Attila Varga, 2003, ‘Spatial Knowl-
edge Spillovers DEMO University Research: Evidence
from Austria’, Annals of Regional Science 37, DEMO
Fujita, Masahisa and Jacques-Francois Thisse, 2002,
Economics of Agglomeration Cities, Industrial Location,
and Regional Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony J. Ven-
ables, 1999, The Spatial Economy, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Griliches, Zvi, 1979, ‘ Issues in Assessing the Contribution
of R&D to Productivity Growth’, Bell Journal of
Economics 10, 92–116.
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaﬀe, Manuel DEMO, 2001,
The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
Insights and Methodological Tools, WP 8498, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Holtz-Eakin, Doug and Chihwa Kao, 2003, Entrepreneru-
ship and Economic Growth: The Proof is in the Produc-
tivity, Center for Policy Research, Syracuse DEMO
mineo.
Jaﬀe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, Rebecca Henderson,
1993, ‘Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spill-
overs as Evidenced by Patent Citations’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108, 577–598.
Jones, Charles, 1995, ‘R&D Based DEMO of Economic
Growth’, Journal of Political Economy 103, 759–84.
Jovanovic, DEMO, 1982, ‘Selection and Evolution of
Industry’, Econometrica 50, 649–670.
Kirzner, Israel M., 1973, Competition and Entrepreneur-
ship, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Krugman, Paul, 1991, ‘Increasing Returns and Economic
Geography’, DEMO of Political Economy 99(3),
483–499.
Michelacci, Claudio, 2003, ‘Low Returns in R&D due to
the Lack of Entrepreneurial Skills’, The Economic
Journal 113, 207–225.
Pakes, Ariel and Zvi Griliches, 1980, ‘Patents and R&D
at the Firm Level: A First Report’, Economics Letters
5, 377–381.
Polanyi, Michael, 1967, The Tacit Dimension. DEMO York:
Doubleday Anchor.
334
Zolta´
nJ.A´
cs and Attila Varga
Reynolds, Paul D., S. DEMO Camp, William D.
Bygrave, Erkko Autio, and Michael Hay, 2001, Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor, 2001 Executive Report.
Reynolds, Paul. D., William DEMO Bygrave, Erkko Autio,
L. W. Cox, Michael Hay, 2002, Global Entrepreneur-
ship Monitor, 2002 Executive Report.
Romer, Paul, 1986, DEMO Returns and Long-run
Growth ’ , Journal of Political Economy 94, DEMO
Romer, Paul, 1990, ‘Endogenous Technological Change’,
Journal of Political DEMO 98, S71–S102.
Romer, Paul, 1996, ‘Why, Indeed, in America? Theory,
History, and the Origins of Modern Economic Growth’,
DEMO Economic Review 86, 202–207.
Samuelson, Paul, 1983, ‘Thunen at Two Hundred’,
Journal of Economic Literature 21, 1468–1488.
Schmitz, James, 1989, ‘Imitation, Entrepreneurship, and
Long-Run Growth’, Journal of Political Economy 97,DEMO
721–739.
Schumpeter, Joseph, 1934, The Theory of Economic Devel-
opment, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schumpeter, Joseph, 1947, ‘The Creative Response in
Economic History’, Journal of Economic History 7,
149–159.
Segerstrom, Paul, 1991, ‘Innovation, Imitation and Eco-
nomic Growth’, Journal of Political Economy 99,
190–207.
Segerstrom, Paul, T. C. A. Anant DEMO Elias Dinopoulos,
1990, ‘A Schumpeterian Model of the Product Life
DEMO, American Economic Review 80, 1077–1091.
Shane, Scott, 1996, ‘Explaining DEMO in Rates of
Entrepreneurship in the United States 1899–1988’,
Journal of Management 22, 747–781.
Shane, Scott and Sankaran Venkataraman, 2000, ‘The
DEMO of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research’,
Academy of Management Review 25, 217–221.
Solow, Robert, 1957 ‘Technical Change in an Aggregative
Model of Economic Growth’, International Economic
Review 6, 18–31.
Sutton, John, DEMO, ‘Gibrat’s Legacy’, Journal of
Economic Literature 35, 40–59.
Varga, Attila, 1998, University Research and Regional
Innovation: A Spatial Econometric Analysis of
Academic Technology Transfers, Boston : Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Varga, Attila, 2000, ‘Local Academic Knowledge
Spillovers and the Concentration of Economic Activ-
ity’, DEMO of Regional Science 40, 289–309.
Varga, Attila, 2001, ‘Universities and Regional Economic
Development: Does Agglomeration Matter?’, in
Johansson Bent, Karlsson Charlie and Stough Roger
(eds.), Theories of Endogenous Regional Growth –Lessons
for Regional Policies, Berlin: Springer, pp. 345–367.
Varga, Attila and DEMO J. Schalk, 2004, ‘Knowledge
Spillovers, Agglomeration and Macroeconomic Growth:
DEMO Empirical Approach’, Regional Studies 38, 977– 989.
Verspagen, Bart, T. Moergastel and M. Slabbers, 1994,
‘MERIT Concordance Table: IPC ISIC (rev. 2)’,
MERIT Research Memorandum 2/94/004, Maastricht
Economic Research Institute on Innovation and
Technology, University of Limburg.
White, Halbert DEMO, 1980, ‘A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent
Covariance Matrix and a Direct Test for
Heteroskedasticity’, Econometrica 48, 817–838.{1g42fwefx}