Griffith University
Professorial Lecture
Thursday, 18 July 2002
“The Devil is in the Detail – Making Sense of Risk and Trust
in University – DEMO Partnerships”
Professor Liz Fulop
B.A.(Hons), PhD, Cert.Teach.
Head of DEMO
School of Marketing and Management
Faculty of Commerce and Management
Griffith University
THE DEVIL IS IN THE DETAIL - MAKING SENSE OF RISK
AND DEMO IN UNIVERSITY – INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIPS1
Professor Liz Fulop
Abstract
University-industry partnerships (DEMO) are growing exponentially in OECD countries yet surprisingly,
when one DEMO the research on cross-sector collaborations, particularly in R&D, evidence is
inconclusive about what sorts of partnerships are more likely to succeed.  This lecture explores the
nature of UIPs and the risks associated with cross-sector DEMO involving the
commercialization of R&D.  The concept of risk has DEMO a relatively short history in the study of R&D
collaborations in general, and hardly any at all in the context of UIPs.  DEMO modern concept of risk pre-
dates universities and in this lecture I explore three major risks that are now of concern to all
universities DEMO from aggressive technology transfer policies. These include: financial risks,
performance DEMO relational risks, especially the importance of trust in UIPs, and reputation risks
associated with the “public good” role of universities.  There is much hype and “spin-doctoring”
surrounding commercialization in universities.  While it is not suggested that commercialization should
be discouraged – far from it - the lecture DEMO signal the need for universities to be far more risk
oriented in how they go about it.
INTRODUCTION
Commercial activities of universities rarely receive DEMO press, in fact, the opposite is
usually the case, as DEMO sampling of the media soon reveals.  A lead article in
Business DEMO Weekly (BRW) on July 20, 2001 ran with the headline, ‘The ideas
factory: Brains but no gains’ and a by-line referred to Cooperative Research Centres
(CRCs)2 with the words, ‘Great idea, shameful return’ (Gome, 2001: 45-49).  On
Wednesday 29 May, 2002 The Australian went one better with the header: ‘CRCs
urged to change focus or die’, and ‘Suckers with a lemon taste’, referring to DEMO fact
that prestige papers and PhDs were the main contributions made by CRCs to their
host universities, for which the latter were contributing what was referred to as the
“three Rs – resources, resources and resources” (Lawnham, 2002: 24).  Commenting
on one of the reasons DEMO universities are so bad at commercialization, another BRW
article entitled, ‘Big science, little money’, added to the negativity with which the
media DEMO with the whole area of technology transfer between universities and the
private sector (Quinlivan, 2001).  Even if success does come from a spin-off venture,
praise is likely to be mixed, such as was the case when two ex-Macquarie University
academics sold off the successful IT DEMO, Radiata, to the US giant Cisco
corporation in 2000 for $A567 million. Cisco had been a minority equity holder in the
spin-off and DEMO University and CSIRO3 were to receive a healthy royalty
1 This paper is based on joint research and publications between the author and Associate DEMO Paul
Couchman from the University of Wollongong.
2 Cooperative Research Centres were established in Australia in 1990 to encourage partnerships between industry,
research DEMO and universities in research consortia focused on applied research, research training DEMO
publications, though not necessarily commercialization. The emphasis, however, has switched DEMO that direction
over the last few years.  Industry’s role is to DEMO the expertise in commercialization.  The principal funding
body is the federal DEMO though industry and university partners contribute to the program.  CRCs, focused
on public good research in areas such as sustainable tourism, have also been funded.  The CRCs are only funded
for seven years.
3 The Commonwealth Science, Industry and Research Organization is a statutory authority whose primary
functions were to carry out scientific research to assist industry, to further the interest of the Australian community
2
stream.  Nonetheless, their critics were quick to paint it as a DEMO of Australia and
tantamount to “selling off the farm” or Australia’s future Nokia (Needham, 2000: 32).
But all is not lost.  DEMO May 2002, the BRW published what seemed to be a positive
DEMO entitled, ‘Innovation - Professors of Profit’, reporting on the surprising number
of spin-offs launched over the last ten years by the CSIRO, universities and CRCs – in
all, 229 of them (Gome, 2002).
The path to technology transfer is full of dangers and pitfalls, both in terms of
economic returns and potential public relations disasters.  At one time or another,
Harvard, John Hopkins, Chicago and Boston Universities DEMO all been embroiled in
scandals through their commercialization ventures with the media having a feeding
frenzy on them (Matkin, 1994: 372).  DEMO commercialization of knowledge, in
whatever forms it takes, presents particular problems and risks for public sector
agencies, their managers, the community of DEMO/technical practitioners, and staff
employed therein.  In last year’s Sir Robert Menzies Oration on Higher Education,
the Vice-Chancellor of Auckland University, Dr John Hood, (a recruit from industry),
who prefaced an interview with the comment: “industry values are not too dissimilar
to those of the university” (Madden, 2001: 24), cited both risk and complexity as the
two main issues that arise from commercialization, or what he termed
euphemistically, “alternate revenue streams” (Hood, 2001:10-11).  By DEMO, he
said, risk and complexity mean that things will not turn out as planned and this will
cause pain and be expensive too.  The excursion, he said, into the foreign terrains of
business and DEMO markets, requires new managerial responses within universities.
It seems odd to DEMO of university and industry as the same because, when it comes DEMO
commercialization of R&D, there is overwhelming evidence that managing risks
(shifting, spreading or plain avoiding them) is a major preoccupation of DEMO private
sector.  We know a lot more about the economic motives DEMO private sector
research partnerships than we do about cross-sector collaborations such as UIPs.
What we do know is that different industry sectors have differing DEMO and
needs from partnering.  (Hagedoorn, et al., 2000; Cohen DEMO al., 2002; Tidd et al.,
2002). We also know that universities around the world are aggressively seeking UIPs
to raise revenues DEMO non-government sources to fund R&D and diversify revenue
streams.  All DEMO countries have developed policies to make universities part of
national agendas to improve the competitiveness of businesses and the community at
large through technology DEMO, innovation and commercialization to meet national
priorities of social and economic DEMO (Lee, 1994; Rosenberg and Nelson,
1994; Rappert et al., 1999).  Competitiveness, commercialization, cooperation,
collaboration and partnerships have DEMO made synonymous with wealth creation and
the national good. To question such honorific aims seems implausible, though
rumour has it that at least one VC in Australia is known to be anti the “C” words.
Government, and not universities per se, is most responsible for the emphasis placed
today on the value of university intellectual property (IP) as a DEMO, though
academics seem to receive the bulk of the criticisms for DEMO growing emphasis on
commercialization (Rappert, 1999: 882).
and facilitate DEMO transfer to the private sector.  Over the last few years it DEMO embarked on an aggressive
push to commercialize public research and improve its revenue stream.
3
Much is yet to be learned about research partnerships, particularly the
commercialization of R&D in universities and the risks posed by aggressive
technology DEMO policies and practices.  However, the study of risk in collaborative
arrangements is still a developing area (Das and Teng, 2001: 277), and hardly touched
is research on cross-sector collaborations (see Harman, 2001)DEMO  I intend to explore this
further in terms of the major DEMO involved in UIPs, especially from the perspective of
university partners.  I will look at the specific issues associated with
commercialization and technology transfer DEMO the challenges these present for
universities.  This leads to consideration of DEMO financial risks that commercialization
poses for universities that are, in fact, different to those of the private sector.  Third, I
examine factors DEMO with the relational and performance risks arising in UIPs.
Finally, no DEMO of risk in R&D commercialization is complete without looking
at the potential dilution of the “public good” role of universities, and the reputation
risks inherent in the marketization of universities.
There are valuable lessons to DEMO learned from viewing UIPs from the perspective of
managing risk.  By DEMO on risks, I am clearly declaring my hand.  This lecture is
not about the benefits of UIPs because it is my view that DEMO “spin doctoring” coming
out of universities and government circles seems to paint commercialization and UIPs
as the panacea for all the woes facing universities DEMO continuing budgetary
constraints.  My worry is that the risks seem to DEMO pushed into the background or only
mentioned with dutiful note and quite obviously with the subtext being clear – the
devil is going to DEMO in the detail but let’s worry about it later.
Some of the Detail
The concept of “risk” actually emerged during the period of modernity, well after
universities were formed, and has been central to economic and business discourse
since the 18th century.  As Giddens (1990, p. 34) has observed, the notion of risk has
to a large extent DEMO the idea of fate in human affairs and this:
…represents an alteration in the perception of determination and contingency, such that
human moral imperatives, natural causes, and chance reign in place of religious
cosmologies.  The idea of chance, in its modern senses, emerges at the DEMO time as that of
risk.
It was in the new discipline of political economy that the discourse of risk became
associated with profit. The DEMO an entrepreneur took in an investment venture was
seen as the source of any profit obtained, and the higher the risk taken the greater the
potential for profit (e.g. in 1848 John Stuart Mill argued “… the difference between
the interest and the gross profit remunerates the exertions DEMO risks of the
undertaker”).  Consequently, the investing entrepreneur takes a risk (i.e. exposure to
the chance of loss) in the expectation DEMO a return on the investment, but this can be a
“calculated DEMO in that the entrepreneur may be aware of the threats facing a chosen
course of action.  Of course in those days, the entrepreneur DEMO investing his/her own
money.  However, herein lies the fundamental element of risk management in
contemporary managerial discourse: to identify, evaluate and DEMO action to manage
risk is to act “rationally”.  Alternatively, to use more everyday language:
Coming to terms with risk does not mean DEMO risk from our lives, which is clearly
impossible; nor does it mean that we should do nothing about risks and accept consequent
4
losses fatalistically, as if we could have done nothing about them.  DEMO means that we must
manage risk: we must decide what risks DEMO avoid, and how we can avoid them; what risks to
accept, and on what terms to accept them; what new risks to DEMO on, and so on (Dowd,
1998: 3).
In DEMO whole area of risk management, universities are at a considerable disadvantage.
DEMO assessment and management of risk have longer histories in the private sector
(e.g. in insurance and financial management), and it could be argued that many public
sector organizations are novices in this field, as they are often inexperienced in key
areas such as raising venture capital, forming joint ventures, managing equity funding,
a portfolio of shares and many other aspects of R&D commercialization.  Yet this is
now the area into which universities are entering and potentially becoming
competitors with other private DEMO players.
However, it is evident that the risks of commercialization, especially aggressive
technology transfer, have not escaped the attention of some very distinguished
academic leaders.  In 1982, the President of Harvard University, Derek Bok, declared
that the most controversial aspect of the University’s collaborative partnerships was
the decision to either assist or not assist professors to form companies DEMO exploit their
discoveries.  Bok asserted that, on balance, the financial DEMO of these
partnerships appeared more speculative than had been thought, while DEMO dangers to
academic science seemed real and severe (Feller, 1990: DEMO).  Six years later the
headline in the New York Times DEMO: ‘Harvard to Seek Research Profit’, and
reversing Bok’s decision, it DEMO on the strategy to form limited partnerships to
raise $US30million to bring faculty research to market.
A seminal paper, published 1990 on the reversal of Bok’s decision, observed critically
that research universities in the US were moving beyond traditional forms of R&D
partnering, and increasingly engaging in what was termed “active technology
transfer” (Feller, 1990:335), which DEMO referred to later as “full-service technology
transfer”.  This form of transfer DEMO: “…accepting equity in licensing companies,
in addition to cash royalties, funding the development and expansion of nascent
technologies (the ‘funding gap’), and – the last frontier… – starting up companies to
exploit technology DEMO by the university” (Matkin, 1994: 372).  While the
author did not question that academic research contributed significantly to
technological innovations in DEMO through transfer and development of basic
findings or as a basis for spin-offs, he did question the infrequency with which
commercializable products were the end result (Feller, 1990: 337).  He also
questioned the DEMO push by university administrators to reach into laboratories
to extract commercializable knowledge.
There are certainly contradictory findings on the role of university research in
DEMO development and successes with commercialization (Feller, 1990; Cohen et
al., 2002).  In the Introduction to a Symposium on Technology Transfer published in
1994, the observation was made that, despite a decade of DEMO, little was known
about “…what worked and does not work, and under what circumstances, and why”,
in respect of technology transfer.  DEMO, “the jury” was still out on the conflicting
policy agenda of DEMO technology transfer (Lee, 1994: 265).  Again, we might
DEMO that was 1994 and things must surely have improved by now.  DEMO not so,
because in the Introduction to a Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and
Technology Transfer published only this year, the authors lamented that the whole
5
area of university commercialization remains poorly understood in the US (Mowery
and Shane, 2002: ix).  It concluded that there was much more research needed in the
management aspects of university commercialization both in the DEMO and overseas (see
also Prabhu, 1999).  This begs the DEMO of what does commercialization mean in
the context of universities, and DEMO generally, in UIPs.
In this lecture I am using the term DEMO to cover research partnerships involving
cooperative relationships between companies, universities, government agencies,
private research institutes and small businesses that are formed to DEMO resources in
the pursuit of shared goals aimed at innovative outcomes (DEMO, et al., 2000:
568).  Figure 1 shows how DEMO relationships are formed as joint ventures of either
an equity or non-equity kind, and the degree to which they are formal (i.e., have
binding agreements or contracts) or informal (Hagedoorn, et al., 2000; Tidd et al.,
2002).
Figure 1: Research Partnerships
Formal Agreements with Partners
Informal Agreements with
Partners
Equity Joint Ventures
Research
Corporation/Company
DEMO Spin-offs (USOs)
New Start-Ups
Research Joint Ventures
(non-equity)
Consortia (¹) e.g. CRCs in
Australia
Strategic Alliances (e.g. Zeneca
and Universities)
Sub-Contracting /Contracting
Licensing (IP)
Undefined Relations
Informally filling role DEMO sub-
contractor or contract research
Hybrids
Innovation Networks
(e.g. US
biotechnology DEMO)
Adapted from:  Hagedoorn et al. (2000); Tipps et DEMO (2002).
(¹) Can include joint facilities for R & DEMO or conduct R & D in mentor firms or University.
6
COMMERCIALIZATION
Commercialization is the process whereby research outputs and inventions are
commercially DEMO in the form of marketable goods and services or production
processes (DEMO whereby knowledge is translated into commodities).  Research outputs
include formal DEMO knowledge (“know how”) as well as tacit knowledge, and the
DEMO of these outputs as “intellectual property” may be formally protected as
patents, copyright (including computer software), eligible circuits, and registered
designs as well as trade secrets.  The nature of the technology, and the DEMO of
appropriability in which it exists (i.e. basically how hard or DEMO it is to protect IP),
affect the commercialization of R&DEMO  Patents do not work well in process
technologies, for example, DEMO a slight modification (i.e. “invented around”) can
alter the IP, DEMO where IP agreements are hard to enforce and legal remedies are too
costly (Teece, 1986: 287).  Commercialization involves the transfer of DEMO
(e.g. as embodied in a material technology such as a working DEMO) and its
conversion into marketable products and industrial processes.  For university-based
research, this process can be achieved via a number of channels, DEMO most popular
being through contract research and consultancies specifically devoted to commercial
outcomes or through the licensing or assignment of IP resulting from the DEMO  It
can also include equity holdings, through to the creation of university spin-offs
(USOs)4 created specifically to exploit the IP produced.  DEMO forms of partnering are
also popular and the most common being research consortia (Tidd et al., 2002), such
as CRCs in Australia. DEMO commercialize means using IP in conjunction with other
capabilities and assets, DEMO as marketing and sales, manufacturing, after sales
support, specialized facilities, and dissemination through specialist channels, as in the
case of drugs.  DEMO, the critical choice is whether the innovation is developed
by contracting DEMO the IP or being internalized and integrated within the organization
(Teece, 1986).
There is also a narrow and a broader view of DEMO commercialization of research.  The
narrow view, and the one that has tended to dominate in policy debates, focuses on
the protection of new IP and the exploitation of this by way of new products and
DEMO and the creation of USOs.  A broader view of commercialization, is based
on a view of innovation as “ … complex, uncertain, DEMO disorderly and subject
to changes of many sorts …” (Kline and DEMO, 1986: 275), and acknowledges a
wider range of less tangible economic benefits that can arise from research. Thus, in
this view, DEMO is seen as:
…a heterogeneous process that often involves incremental changes in materials, products, or
processes.  It often involves investment in new equipment, facilities, or skills.  Its economic
impact may arise from the production or investment decisions of only a few firms or of
many DEMO producers or users.  The time scale from development to application to
DEMO returns may span a few years or be measured in decades.  DEMO may
include, for example: changes in instruments and data interpretation that lead to the
discovery of new resources or new treatments for diseases; processes that result in a higher
recovery of gold from ore, or higher quality welding on ships and pipelines; improved
product design and quality (Mercer and Stocker, 1998: v).
4  A USO is DEMO firm whose products or services have developed out of technology-based ideas or
scientific technological know-how generated in a university setting by a member(s) of staff or
student(s) who found or co-found the firm.  DEMO involves the individual(s) leaving the university to start
the firm DEMO starting it while still inside the university (Rappert et al., 1999: 874).
7
Some argue that the broad view is going too far.  They suggest that universities should
stick to what they know best, and heed the advice of industry that what they most
want from universities is for DEMO to open up new areas of knowledge and provide
specialist advice and help (Rappert et al., 1999: 888; also Rosenberg and Nelson,DEMO
1994).  There are no wins in these two positions for DEMO given the realities of
government pressures.  What seems more important is DEMO universities to understand
what types of knowledge exchanges matter for particular industry sectors and the
conditions that support these exchanges, such as IP arrangements, informal channels
or other forms of partnering, and work to diversify DEMO they go about
commercialization and partnering.  This means accepting that no DEMO model of
commercialization or technology transfer will fit all (Rappert et DEMO, 1999: 888).  Thus,
in some fields, basic research might be critical and in others not, or in some the
distinction between basic and applied research might be irrelevant.
In specific knowledge-intensive industries, such as biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals, companies have become ever more reliant on public science
(McMillan et al., 2000).  There are two main reasons for pharmaceutical companies
collaborating with universities.  The first is that most of the leading-edge work
continues to be carried out in public sector DEMO and thus they remain a critical
source of new scientific and technical knowledge.  The second is that in
biotechnology the distinction between basic and applied research is somewhat
blurred, so advances in the former can lead directly to products with commercial
potential (Tapon and Thong, 1999).  Another major reason for this trend arises from
the nature of scientific DEMO:
….  [In] biology and chemistry as in other technological fields, abrupt innovations stemming
from serendipitous discoveries arise regularly and will take on DEMO importance in the
future.  Because it is impossible to predict where DEMO will occur, the only way
pharmaceutical firms can take advantage of DEMO is to build a vast network of research
relationships with university and independent laboratories where these serendipitous
discoveries occur (Tapon and Thong, 1999: 220).
Risks in Commercialization
A key question in all forms of DEMO transfer is who should bear the risks of
R&D?  The major risks in R&D are not those associated with basic discovery DEMO the
development phase of turning an invention into a marketable product.  DEMO undertake
technology development effectively requires someone to “de-risk” a new, break-
DEMO scientific discovery and prepare it for commercialization.  To de-risk an
invention DEMO creating a market pull for it and making it technically feasible and
cost efficient (Lee and Gaertner, 1994: 389).  Creating a DEMO pull means making
the invention attractive to the market and to potential investors, i.e., by adding
complementary assets to the process that many DEMO do not have or are only
now acquiring.  In addition, to commercialize an invention requires that it be
meritorious in that it has DEMO potential to create a new market and grab market share
(Lee DEMO Gaertner, 1994: 338).  The gap between conception and commercialization
DEMO often referred to as “pre-commercialization” (or the funding gap mentioned above)DEMO
where investment attractiveness only rises if risks start to fall.  Even DEMO the invention
has been prepared for market, a host of contingency DEMO bedevil all innovations
(Lee, 1994: 396).  These can include: the structure of markets and shifts within them,
sometimes quite dramatic, the behaviour of venture capital markets, availability of
8
entrepreneurial experience and business acumen, and of course, any number of DEMO
changes and constraints provided by governments.  The highest yielding returns, as
well as the highest investment by the private sector, are in specific fields such as
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, where the chances of successful
commercialization are also the lowest (Casper, 2000: 901).
In therapeutic drugs, a ten-year innovation cycle is the norm and involves several
stages of clinical trials before US Federal Drug Administration (FDA) approval is
sought.  On average, 20% of funds are spent on discovery or basic research and the
remaining 80% on development of candidate compounds, as well as pre-clinical and
clinical trials with the likelihood of only 5% of drugs DEMO approved to proceed past
the pre-clinical trial stage (Casper, 2000: DEMO).  The total estimated cost of
developing a new drug is DEMO $US100-200 million with a high rate of failure
amongst new start-up companies who bear the brunt of the development costs.  Given
the high technological uncertainty (i.e. low appropriability) and the “racing” activity
of other firms DEMO alliances to be first to market, technology development is risky
indeed.  A new drug is usually bought to market through alliances with established
DEMO companies who, overtime can appropriate the knowledge and become
a potential DEMO to the alliance or the USO (Casper, 2000: 899-901).  For all
firms, the “golden rule” is that in-house capabilities represent the knowledge base for
innovation and competitiveness and only in a select few DEMO would this not be
the case, such as cutting-edge research (Rappert, et al., 1999: 877).  It is a mistake to
DEMO the world of commercialization through the lenses of biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals, DEMO I think a lot of universities are doing at the moment.
Technology Transfer
Technology transfer happens in a number of different ways, and varies across industry
sectors, regions and even countries.  It occurs via diffusion DEMO adoption and this can
be facilitated by relatively free market exchanges in the form of information
dissemination, in particular conference presentations, journal publications, education
and training and other non-privatized forms of knowledge exchange – all DEMO in
which universities excel (Lee, 1994; Rappert, et al., DEMO).  These observations are
borne out in data from the Carnegie DEMO Survey conducted in 1994, the largest of
its kind, and published only this year on industrial R&D, and the perceived
contribution of public laboratories and universities to industrial innovation in the US.
Table 1 DEMO that the average scores across two factors for channels of technology
transfer showed that publications, informal interaction, public meetings and
conferences loaded the DEMO on the first factor (Cohen et al., 2002: 17-18).  These
are all low cost ways to tap new knowledge through weak DEMO (Rappert et al., 1999:
877).
The study also reveals marked differences between industry sectors (i.e. the
technologies and markets involved), and large and small businesses in how they
appropriate knowledge from university DEMO with pharmaceuticals and small
biotechnology firms being the heaviest users of public R&D.  Biotechnology has
developed, at least in the US, from within universities with strong links to small
biotechnology start-ups and USOs clustered DEMO two major innovation networks in
Boston and San Francisco (Feller, 1990: 338; Rosenberg and Nelson; 1993: 343;
Casper, 2000; DEMO et al., 2002: 21; Hage and Hollingsworth, 2000).
9
Table 1
Industry-Level Factor Analysis of Channels-of-Information
Flow from Public Research to DEMO R&D
Factor Loadings
Channel Factor 1 Factor 2
Publications/reports 0.85 0.04
Informal interaction 0.84 0.09
Public meetings or conferences 0.84 0.16
Contract DEMO 0.79 0.23
Consulting 0.70 0.23
Joint or cooperative ventures 0.63 0.29
Patents 0.34 0.20
Personnel exchange 0.00 0.70
Licenses 0.21 0.69
Recently hired graduates DEMO 0.51
Eigenvalue 3.87 1.49
Adapted from Cohen, W. M. et al. (2002), p. 17.
An earlier study in the US also confirmed DEMO heavy dependence by industry on basic
research generated for new product and process developments.  It also concluded that
the economic payoffs from basic research were higher in the US than other nations
(Mansfield, 1990; Rosenberg and Nelson, 1993; 343; Cohen and Noll, 1994: 61).  A
more recent study conducted in the UK on USOs found that in certain sectors, such as
IT and scientific instruments, universities were DEMO clients and the first market
contact for a new product.  In DEMO fields, such as materials, more direct use of
equipment, feasibility DEMO and exchange of materials were quite important.
Different forms of knowledge, DEMO into fourteen main areas, were
appropriated by the USOs, with IT and scientific instruments, for example, being
most dependent on universities for DEMO product ideas (Rappert et al., 1999: 878- 81).
Under DEMO direct market oriented strategies, as mentioned in Figure 1, technology
transfer is undertaken through various routes such as direct investment, licensing,
10
contract research, R&D consortia and alliances, research companies, such as spin-offs
or USOs, and research parks or networks (Lee, 1994: DEMO; Hagedoorn, 2000; Tidd et
al., 2002).  Universities have DEMO used arms-length relationships, such as
licensing and contracting, and have only, in the last decade, moved to less-than-arms
length relationships.  Table 2 shows findings again from the Carnegie Mellon Study
relating to the role DEMO university R&D in generating new projects in industry.  In
descending DEMO, the largest contributors to developing new projects were customers,
then DEMO firm’s own manufacturing operations followed by joint ventures with
universities, with DEMO and public research laboratories coming second last
(Cohen, et al., DEMO: 5-7).  Competitors ranked higher than university and public
laboratories in generating new projects.  In terms of completing projects, the pattern
was DEMO except that competitors dropped to 11.7%.  The study noted marked
industry DEMO and differences in the types of knowledge being accessed.
Table 2 – Information Sources Suggesting New Projects
Information Sources Suggesting New Projects
Consultants 22.8
DEMO/Cooperative Ventures 49.6
Competitors 40.5
Independent Suppliers 45.6
Own Mfg Operations 73.7
Customers 90.4
Univs ./Gov't R&D Labs 31.6
0 10 DEMO 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
% of Respondents Indicating Source Suggested New R&D Projects
(N=1,239)
Adapted from Cohen, W.M. et al. (2002), p. 6.
Benefits of university research DEMO industry can involve a lag time of twelve years in
undirected research, but reduced to an average of five years through collaborations.
Collaborations increase future industrial research in many cases and speed up
technology transfer to DEMO, so for industry there is an overall gain from
collaborative research.  However, even a five years lag time can be very long in terms
of political and program standards (Berman, 1990: 354), as well as industry
expectations.
We also should not assume that all universities DEMO along a pre-ordained
commercialization trajectory.  There was a period when MIT’s DEMO body made
a decision to cut back on industry focused research and concentrate instead on more
scientific-discovery based research, and this led to an increase in research dollars and
a higher academic standing (Feller, 1990: 342).
11
FINANCIAL RISKS
The reality is that universities cannot efficiently engage in technology DEMO
and commercialization under normal R&D funding because the expenditure for
development work far exceeds normal disciplinary based funding (Lee, 1994: 390),DEMO
and there is no sign that commercialization will become less important.  DEMO
have several choices.  They can: (i) license, assign or DEMO IP and charge royalties or a
high fee; (ii) support DEMO USO and hive it off, or (iii) use equity agreements (based on
how much stock the university receives for the right to DEMO the technology) to take a
stake in an existing business or DEMO a new one (Lee, 1994: 391; Feldman, et al., 2002;
Cripps et al., 1999: 151-2).  They can also use a combination of these strategies in a
single venture.
There are DEMO associated with all of the above.  For example, a recently reported
study of licensing practices in MIT, found that licensing to non-inventors was more
likely to lead to commercialization than back-licensing to the inventor in DEMO
university, and that the type of technology involved played a major DEMO in attracting
investors (Shane, 2002a: 133).  Moreover, returns DEMO universities on royalty payments
have been generally poor because embryonic inventions are often licensed, and
premature licensing can ruin the chances of an invention being commercially
successful, and amounts to a loss in future revenue (DEMO et al., 2002: 67).  As a
“rule of thumb”, for every one hundred disclosures of an invention, only ten patents
emerge of which one leads to a commercially successful product.  Successes are few
and skewed to a few big ones with many more mediocre performers (Feldman et al.,
2002: 108, citing Blake, 1993).
Equity agreements have risks associated with the stock market but have high appeal
DEMO if an initial public listing (IPO) is successful, the rewards DEMO be significant
and ongoing.  They also provide universities with greater control DEMO how the
technology is developed without resorting to protracted contracting and speculative
costing involved in negotiating IP rights and licences (Feldman, et al., 2002). Equity
holdings create enormous potential for all or one of DEMO following to occur: conflicts
of interest and potential unethical behaviour; institution-wide conflict over who
benefits from such commercial ventures and the legitimacy of DEMO activities in
general; disputes over how to raise funds for new DEMO and how to underwrite
them; disputes over who bears the losses DEMO the liability if the company fails or is
sued; and how DEMO manage the bad publicity should it arise (Feldman et al., 2002: 107;
Matkin, 1994).  Finally, there is no clear-cut DEMO, as yet, that university equity
holdings lead to commercial success.  DEMO such holdings are developed in the
absence of commercial interests usually because the latter are not impressed with the
invention’s profitability, making such ventures quite high-risk propositions (Shane,
2000, cited in Feldman et al., 2002: 112).
Technology development and commercialization pose major challenges for
universities in terms of potential financial losses and mismanagement.  Collaborating
companies are also exposed to these possibilities, but the impact for the public sector
partner is far greater on a number of scores.  Any failure or financial loss will usually
be a very public affair because the media, along with politicians, rightly take a special
interest in the use of public funds in terms of accountability and public perceptions.
In May 2002, the fourth inquiry in as many years was established to specifically
12
investigate levels and sources of income, financial management and accountability,
including the use of taxpayer’s money to fund commercial activities within
universities (Illing, 2002: 29; Contractor, 2002: 9).  Again, in December 2000, the
headline read: ‘What’s the big idea?’ reporting a DEMO million loss by Anutech (one of
the Australian National University’s (ANU) spin-offs) that prompted a Senate inquiry
into whether or not taxpayer’s DEMO was being used to underwrite these sorts of
losses (Contractor and DEMO, 2000: 9).  This of course suggests it is easy DEMO
disaggregate where private and public funds begin and end in universities today with
many of them having substantial private revenue.
The article went on DEMO reveal that the portfolios universities had been developing were
usually far more meagre than professional investors would advise.  It pointed to the
limited financial capacities of the university sector to spread risks in a commercially
responsible DEMO  Of course, professional investors see the answer in universities
employing their services and other financial experts, adding more costs to
commercialization strategies, DEMO no firm guarantees things will improve.
Universities were also criticized for being secretive about their joint venture equity
deals and hence, lacking transparency.  DEMO were also reprimanded for being
selective in how they reported revenues, DEMO opting not to disclose surplus of
revenue over costs, which would DEMO a far worse picture (Contractor and Noonan,
2000: 9).  If we go back to the ‘Professors of Profit’ story, it DEMO that universities
with a research budget greater than $A100 million, on DEMO, spent $A131 million
on creating a spin-off and those with smaller DEMO, in the range of $A20-99
million, spent an average of $A333 million on each spin-off.  While these rates
compared favourably with the US (Gome, 2002), they do raise questions about
potential revenue streams.  A number of ventures have been successful, based on
indicators such as net present value or potential market capitalization (Quinlivan,
2001), but some would dispute these assessments.
Hidden Costs
Accounting systems in many Australian DEMO are not geared to the needs of
commercial activities and the methods of costing used in universities involve complex
forms of cross-subsidization and cost DEMO from productive to less productive
units, making transparency and accountability difficult.  It would be well nigh
impossible to get real time financial reports DEMO universities.  Universities focus on
revenue projections because the costs associated with DEMO are difficult
to disaggregate in highly complex accounting systems that are also driven by complex
funding formulas.  Universities cannot easily report in terms of the opportunity costs
of their commericalization activities because of the cross-subsidization regime DEMO
has to operate to provide essential support services and other activities under
legislation and funding agreements.  Any notion of what constitutes a healthy return
on investment, is also a difficult concept to apply in many universities, as illustrated
by one VC, who commenting on the losses in DEMO university’s spin-off, lamented that
it had performed well in the past DEMO it was unfair to focus on a bad year (Contractor
and DEMO, 2000: 9).
One of the key features of R&D is that it has very high fixed costs.  Every activity
involving a scale-up in R&D, especially full-service technology transfer, will add
fixed DEMO that have to be recouped to make the venture profitable and this has to
13
occur over a reasonable time frame (Feller, 1990: 34).  DEMO costs can be associated
with attracting top researchers by providing them with state-of-the-art equipment and
facilities, as well as other “add ons” that increase variable costs.  Harvard’s decision
to reverse Bok’s stance was in large part influenced by the desire to retain top medical
researchers (Feller, 1990)DEMO  Variable costs also rise with commercialization through
increases such as in DEMO patents and having to manage them through the
complicated process of approvals, possibly having to defend them through litigation
in failed ventures, meeting DEMO and reporting requirements, employing the
expertise needed to raise venture capital DEMO managing equity holdings, to name a
few.  Often these costs are not internalized in any particular venture and therefore the
profits and losses DEMO hard to work out.
Commercialization is particularly risky within universities because, DEMO the private
sector that has, in theory, the financial discipline of bottom line profit strictures to
keep them generally altered to bad investments DEMO to activities that have to be
discontinued, universities have largely escaped DEMO market discipline.  As one
observer notes, it is not readily apparent that universities can recognize early enough
their bad investments or be able DEMO easily pull back from the commitments they have
made (Feller, 1990: 346, citing Nelkin and Nelson, 1985: 33).  In part, this flows from
the lack of market signals for universities, the DEMO on efficiency in non-market
organizations instead of on effectiveness of resource utilization, and “…the tendency
to use too many resources relative to output or seek to produce too much relative to
foregone alternatives”, which might explain the surge of interest in commercialization
and revenue streams (Feller, 1990: 346).  This lack of discipline means that
universities are unlikely to extricate themselves easily from financially unprofitable
ventures (Feller, 1990: 346).
Risk Shifting and Costs
We also need to focus on risk and DEMO in partnering from industry’s perspective.
The major motivation for companies to enter into R&D collaboration, in general, is to
minimize the costs DEMO risks associated with the high levels of uncertainty of doing
R&D.  From an investment point of view, this is a “de-risking” strategy; but from the
perspective of UIPs, it represents a transfer of risks from one sector to the other.  On
this score, it is DEMO to consider how pharmaceutical companies view their
partnerships in terms of risk and cost issues.  It is suggested that one reason for
collaborating is to learn new capabilities from partners with a view to transferring in-
DEMO those that become core to the company’s business (Tapon and Thong, 1999:
225).  Another is that external collaborations help a company to gain knowledge about
the costs associated with other forms of R&DEMO and the trade-offs needed to enter a new
field, without having DEMO put the company at risk in a new field because someone is
else is conducting the research.  Still another is that if the resources needed for a
particular technology development are prohibitive in terms of costs, then the
collaboration can be terminated within the provision of the contract, without harming
other parts of the company or sending the wrong signals DEMO customers.  Finally and
most importantly, the risk of failure or pursuing dead-end research can be shared with
another partner while allowing the company DEMO undertake a greater number of research
projects than would be possible with its own resources (Tapon and Thong, 1999:
226).
14
Universities subsidize industry R&D in more indirect ways that are not DEMO into
the costs of UIPs.  A study in the US estimated DEMO to produce cutting-edge
technology would cost about $US240,000 (at 1994 DEMO) but that it would have cost
double that to do the DEMO work in industry.  Not only this, academic scientists build
on their basic research adding significant value in new knowledge (or intellectual
capital) DEMO they bring to projects.  This form of value-adding is not costed DEMO the
basis of what similar expertise would cost in the market place, if it was available (see
also Leyden and Link, 1999: DEMO).  However, the greatest cost advantage identified by
the study was the use of graduate and postdoctoral labour in research projects whose
rate DEMO compensation would be roughly 150% in the private sector compared to a
loading of 42% in universities (Lee, 1994: 395-6).  Our DEMO study on the “SEE3”
contact lens (which had been developed in DEMO cross-sector collaboration involving a
CRC with multi-national partners in Australia, and DEMO if often referred to as the “Eye
CRC”) showed how a DEMO multinational corporation was able to gain access to a
wider range of resources, as well as tap into the latest scientific developments, far
DEMO cost-effectively than if the corporation had conducted the product development
entirely in-house or in collaboration with another company (Couchman and Fulop,
2000; DEMO).
What the media and others usually ignore is that, on DEMO, company resource
allocations to collaborative ventures are often relatively modest, so they represent
fairly insignificant amounts of funding compared to the company’s overall DEMO,
and hence any losses are much more financially manageable (in DEMO regimes, such
losses can even be written off as tax deductions)DEMO  This contrasts markedly with the
situation for public sector organizations.  In times of financial constraint, as is the case
for most public sector research agencies and universities in countries such as
Australia, the UK, DEMO the other European nations (where government funding is
mostly being reduced DEMO where its future levels are uncertain), committing a
substantial body of resources to a venture, which is at risk of financial loss, DEMO lead
to major problems.  The nature of these problems can be DEMO by the recent
experience of the commercial and consulting divisions that have been established by
most Australian universities.  As stated above, a number DEMO these bodies have incurred
large losses in recent times, and these DEMO can require cross-subsidization from the
mainstream of university funding and, in DEMO Anutech case, the university allocated
$A4.7 million from its general budget DEMO help cover some of the loss.  These costs
represent a significant DEMO of a university’s overall budget, and, where the
losses are large, they can have a major impact on other areas of activity (DEMO,
2001: 70).  Some universities have had success with equity holdings but these have so
far been few and are still considered DEMO risky for this sector (Quinlivan, 2001), and
likely to continue to be so given the volatility of the share market.
While financial DEMO will remain a major issue in UIPs and commercialization, we
ought DEMO to forget that, as the great management guru, Peter Drucker reminds us,
only fifty years ago no-one would have imagined a university DEMO and a
private sector company jointly working on commercialization (Drucker, 2001: 15).  It
is only in the last ten years that DEMO industry has moved away from significant
investments in in-house discovery research to concentrate on product development
and design (Buderi, 2000).  Universities are responding to massive commercial
changes and reforms are being made to accommodate DEMO practices.  Industry
has been at this since about the fourteenth century, with the greatest break-through for
15
a number of centuries being double-entry accounting!  Universities need time to gear
up to commercialization and even sometimes to pull back if the risks DEMO too
great.  However, universities are not the commercial pillars of society and nor should
they be judged or treated as such.  They are contributors to it, but also to a whole
range of other services as well.  A lot of what they do still cannot be done on a strict
cost recovery basis and with the discipline of markets DEMO mind, and this might never
change.
PERFORMANCE AND RELATIONAL RISKS
As DEMO by a number of commentators, interorganizational collaboration (IOC) is a
DEMO business”, and there have been high levels of failure and dissatisfaction DEMO
the outcomes across all sectors.  Commenting in 1996 on the state DEMO UIPs in
Australia, Mann observed that “…[t]he benefits of collaboration, as well as the
challenges, may be somewhat different for industry partners….Many collaborations
do not fulfil expectations and some have been major disappointments” (Mann, DEMO;
cited in Cripps et al., 1999:22).  These views have been echoed in other studies (e.g.
Turpin et al., 1993, Cyert and Goodman, 1997) that capture the many negative
stereotypes held DEMO the respective partners in cross-sector collaborations.  Typically,
industry complains about DEMO research relationships with universities as being
“…risk-prone, long-term oriented and insensitive DEMO industry needs” (Lee and
Gaertner, 1994: 395) or too strict and rigid with IP and the use of staff time (Feldman
et al., 2002: 109; Rappert et al., 1999: 888).  DEMO the same token, researchers who have
interacted with industry complain about DEMO to the free flow of ideas and
research results, industry’s unwillingness DEMO take risks and frequent interest in ‘quick-
fix problems’, and industry’s DEMO often in short-term rather than long-term
research” (Harman, 2001: 253)DEMO  Each sees risks in partnering and these are more than
calculated DEMO
Perceived risks play a large part in shaping UIPs and the trust dynamics that develop
over time, including the lack of trust.  Subjective DEMO about a potential loss or
negative outcome (i.e. “downside risk”) in a given partnership are critical to the types
of commitments parties are DEMO to make to a venture (Das and Teng, 2001: 251-
DEMO).  Risk is a multi-faceted concept that entails two major types: performance and
relational risks (also see Das and Teng, 2001; Das and Teng, 1999).  Drawing on the
literature and our initial DEMO study research, a typology of risk, as shown in Figure 2,
has been developed.
Venture Specific Risks
Environmental sources of risk to DEMO venture have already been mentioned and include:
government policy changes, DEMO within national and global economies,
changes in markets, structural changes DEMO relevant industries and changes in the level
of competition, and the DEMO of a venture’s goals by a competitor.  Today we
would have DEMO include terrorist threats in some parts of the world (James, 2002).
These sources of risk occur in the environment (macro and industry environments)
that is external to the venture and its collaborating partners, and as such, are outside
the direct control of the venture partners.  “Sheer bad luck” could be a term that is
applicable to the occurrence of some of these possible events.
16
Figure 2 –   A Typology of Risk Sources in Interorganizational
Collaborations
DEMO –
Specific Risks
Sources of Risk
Relational Risks
(Opportunism)
External DEMO Performance Risks
(Environmental (Sources Internal to
Contingencies) Venture)
Adapted DEMO: Couchman and Fulop (2001)
Performance risks arise from the venture’s goals, organization, management and
resources, and do not result from any opportunistic intentions of the parties or from
external events.  These risks are a particular problem for collaborations which involve
difficult or novel ventures such DEMO R&D projects (Ring and Van de Ven, 1989) and
DEMO from the perceived uncertainties associated with the collaborative venture being
able to accomplish its tasks and achieve its goals despite the best efforts of DEMO
partners.  Such uncertainties arise either from the environment or from within DEMO
venture itself.  An initial listing of internal sources of risk would DEMO the
following:
• scientific-technological (required knowledge may not be produced DEMO a
technology created might fail or under perform),
• product-related (the product might not meet required performance standards
or may be a DEMO of hazards and therefore subject to product liability),
• competence-based (the venture may lack competencies in areas critical to its
success),
• process-related (critical internal and interorganizational processes, such as
lateral communication, may not develop),
17
• resource-related (this may arise from the unavailability of appropriate human
and technical resources),
• financial (budgets might not be adequate or DEMO or are poorly
managed), and
• contingency (these arise from DEMO lack of time, information or control over the
venture).
Risks DEMO with the performance of the venture are shared by all of the partners.
Indeed, this is a major motivation for organizations to enter into strategic alliances to
pursue particular goals:
…  performance risk is part of every strategic decision, because performance can always fall
below one’s expectations.  Whereas relational risk is created and is present only in alliances,
performance risk relating to any undertaking is something that is shared by DEMO partner firms.
For instance, joint bidding enables partner firms to share DEMO costs as well as the performance
risk involved in a contract.  DEMO than pursue projects alone, firms use strategic alliances to
reduce their DEMO risk (Das and Teng, 1999: 53).
However, in cross-sector collaborations, the clashes of cultures mean that
performance risks are even more difficult to manage.  For example, it has been noted
that firms DEMO seek additional commitments from scientists to ensure that research
work is undertaken in a timely manner to avoid losses, such as delays in getting
patents registered (Liebeskind and Oliver (1998: 129).  These commitments DEMO
deemed essential to ensuring that the firm is not beaten to market by competitors or
wastes money on unpromising avenues of inquiry.  Firms are constantly worried that
researchers will be distracted by “interesting problems” or other DEMO demands that
can potentially harm a partnership (see Kreiner and Schultz, 1993; Liebeskind and
Oliver, 1998).
Our own research on CRCs DEMO specifically investigating how performance-related
risks are managed across a range of project-types.  It has been generally observed
that:
Firms typically do not understand how work gets allocated in universities or how university
budgets are created, nor are they familiar with the investments in human and physical capital
DEMO preceded their relationship with the university.  University partners typically do not
DEMO market forces, time demands, and the incentive structure of the firm (Cyert and
Goodman, 1997: 48).
Relational Risks
Relational risks include: the possibility of one partner opportunistically exploiting
other partners to its own advantage (e.g. by breaking confidentiality agreements;
misappropriating proprietary knowledge to engage in unexpected competition;
appropriating all or a disproportionate share of benefits, etc.); a partner not fully
committing to the venture (e.g. by not providing agreed resources or information;
economizing on top management attention; harbouring hidden agendas; delivering
unsatisfactory products and services); spillovers (i.e. DEMO collaborative
relationships a company’s strategic knowledge and core competencies are leaked to
competitors); and cheating and misleading others (Das and Teng, 2001: 253-254).
18
Another approach to the problem of relational risks points to the “vulnerability DEMO
that organizations need to prepare for as “…a premium for the risk involved in joining
the collaboration” (Genefke, 2000: 1).  These DEMO can be identified in terms of two
dimensions: (a) structural DEMO and (b) information asymmetry.  Structural
dependence occurs when, for example, a research partner is used for a long period of
time and the firm becomes dependent on this supplier because the firm has failed DEMO
develop the research capability in-house to do the research on its own.  Hence, they
become a hostage to all the external events that DEMO the research partner, including
unreasonable demands (Tapon and Thong, 1999: 229).  Information asymmetries arise
when one of the partners has less information than the other(s) about the collaborative
venture and hence “… the greater the possibility for making mistakes, and the greater
the potential for being cheated” (Genefke, 2000: 4). Conditions of “information
dominance”, where one partner has more information than the other, so creating DEMO
relationship of dependence, can prove problematic for the partner with the DEMO
information. The latter is vulnerable because there is every possibility of being
cheated on, squeezed for unnecessary resources or even having things stolen from
them (e.g. trade secrets) by the dominant partner (Genefke, 2000: 4).
To Trust or Not to Trust?
The IOC literature DEMO emphasized the importance of building mutual trust to the
success of IOCs in which relational continuity is important, such as in R&D projects
or ventures that can run several years (e.g. Powell, 1990; Ring and Van de Ven, 1992,
1994; de Laat 1997; Ring and Van de Ven, 1989; Häusler et al., 1994).  DEMO
Macdonald et al. (1999: 5 - 6) have put it:DEMO
(Trust) is required to compensate for the deficiency inherent in formal agreements –
basically that, no matter how carefully they are compiled, DEMO cannot cover every
eventuality.  So, an unwritten agreement accompanies every collaboration, by which all
parties understand what else is required of them beyond the formal terms of collaboration.
While a collaboration may be established instantly, the trust, which underlies the success of
the collaboration, cannot.
In DEMO words, where two or more parties trust each other, they accept the risk that
the others may not behave as expected or agreed; this is the risk that the trust may be
misplaced.  For some, trust always carries the probability of risk of betrayal
(Nooteboom, 1999) or simply being a façade of trust, where one can be DEMO into
trusting another (Hardy et al., 1996).  Trust is DEMO slippery concept, but generally entails
positive outcomes that can reduce risks DEMO having to do anything about a partner
(Tapon and Thong, 1999: 227; Das and Teng, 2001: 254).  It is commonly accepted
that in R&D partnerships, trust encourages risk taking and the sharing of proprietary
information as well as countering the problems of having DEMO introduce excessive
controls into what is largely an unpredictable and uncertain area of activity.
Excessive controls, such as contracts, can create distrust or DEMO spiralling distrust
where the game becomes one finding ways to breach a contract (de Laat, 1997).  Trust
dynamics in IOCs are built on two forms of trust - in fact not really trust but DEMO,
trusting, which is based on an expectation of something positive (Das and Teng, 2001:
255).
Goodwill trust is a resilient form of trust associated with having perceived personal
qualities that one can DEMO on, such as: being equitable, fair in one’s dealings, high
19
in integrity and standards of conduct, high in reciprocity, able to DEMO confidences,
and being selfless (Ring 1996, cited in Das and Teng, 2001: 255; Fulop and
Couchman, 2000, 2001).  DEMO trust builds up over time and develops through
successful repeat encounters and if sufficiently strong can lead to “hand-shake”
agreements.  Those firms that develop skills in managing research partnerships can
use the trust dynamic as one DEMO their competitive advantages, especially if the basis of
the relationship is DEMO on goodwill trust that is exceedingly difficult for others to
develop (DEMO and Thong, 1999: 227).
Competence trust is associated with more fragile and calculative forms of behaviour
and is focused on such things DEMO expertise, know-how, and the ability and capacity to
do certain things, as distinct from the intentions of doing them.  Organizations and
individuals DEMO build reputations based on competence trust and, in some
circumstances, the reputation of a partner precedes them and can be a catalyst for
DEMO an alliance (de Laat, (1997; also Das and Teng, DEMO).  This does not mean
that goodwill trust will develop.  The reputation of a collaborating partner can help
attenuate fears of opportunism and DEMO risk-taking behaviour, and over time
resilient trust might or might not DEMO (Ring, 1992; de Laat, 1997).
Erosion of Trust
The pattern in pre-commercialization research in the past has meant that for private
DEMO partners, performance and relational risks were relatively small in probability
and DEMO  Relational risk, and particularly opportunism, is much less of a DEMO
with less market-driven partners and projects.  Given their past history of DEMO non-
profit focused, as well as their missions and modes of DEMO, public sector
organizations are far less likely to engage in calculated DEMO and opportunistic
behaviour, such as free-riding, capturing a disproportionate share of the benefits, or
appropriating and exploiting proprietary knowledge of the other partners.  University
researchers have not been in the past seen as major financial beneficiaries of R&D
and are still not in many cases in DEMO (Harman, 2001: 259).  In fact, a study of
DEMO laboratories in the US found that one reason for research joint venture partners
inviting a federal agency to join was its perceived role as DEMO “honest broker”.  This
role was seen as helping to reduce various DEMO and transaction costs associated
with the potential opportunism of private sector firms (Leyden and Link, 1999: 581).
Commercialization will alter relationships and expectations on both sides.  In
common with each other, large and DEMO businesses seek complementary research
activity with universities such as access to personnel, facilities and government funds
(Hagedoorn, et al., 2000; also EIRMA, 1995; Rappert, et al., 1999; Tidd et al., 2002)DEMO
It is clear that large and small firms also have different capabilities in absorbing the
additional costs and time associated with formal contracting that DEMO arises with
IP and licensing.  Large organizations often see their relationship DEMO on the
basis of “information gifts” being part of the university’s commercial courtship ritual
to get them on board (Zechhauser, 1996, cited in Hagedoorn, 2000: 575).  Once they
are onboard in R&D, large organizations will usually want significant control over IP
with the resources to commit to secure such an outcome.  Small and medium-size
enterprises are, with the exception of areas associated with break through
technologies, not DEMO the game of IP rights protection or enforcement, and are most
DEMO
likely to be the ones turned off partnering with universities in the DEMO and IP
game (Rappert et al., 1999: 884; Shane, DEMO).
Industry has various ways of dealing with IP and relational risks by developing
various forms of credible commitments or ways of arranging partnerships DEMO that
violations affect all members (de Laat, 1997).  Joint-equity DEMO been one of them, and
in the evolution of university commercialization, similar arrangements are emerging
(Gome, 2002).  Nonetheless, the focus DEMO IP protection will remain in many areas of
R&D and will involve excessive focus on controls and performance risks.  Our own
research on CRCs provides evidence of this, particularly the tensions and strains that
emerge over different types of research projects, some not so commercially sensitive
and imbued with goodwill trust, and others more fragile and absorbed by IP conflicts
(Couchman, Fulop, and Batchelor, 2002).
Industry quite often DEMO a different view of IP, regarding the substantial background
knowledge of DEMO university as evidence of competence to enter a collaborative venture,
but of no higher value than the other kinds of background knowledge that DEMO industry
participants bring to the table.  In reality, both parties need to bring their knowledge to
the collaboration in such a way that DEMO can be shared and enhanced.  However, note
that most firms believe in the “golden rule” – if we pay the gold, we make the rules.
Some universities have standard forms of agreement aimed at protecting DEMO
background IP, and making new knowledge from a collaborative venture available DEMO
teaching (some government research organizations have similar views).  A common
outcome is that, even when the parties have jointly won a government grant for a new
program, formulating a contractual agreement can take a very long time, or the
program may be abandoned when agreement cannot be reached.  Another outcome
can be that, whilst some form of DEMO is indeed reached, it may be unworkable,
making knowledge from DEMO collaboration unusable in practical terms.
Collaborating companies also face risks associated with the performance of the
venture, but the resource commitments made are generally much smaller and more
manageable than for in-house development or joint ventures DEMO other companies
(see previous discussion).  In other words, the DEMO of failure or under performance of
a cross-sector venture are not high for the collaborating companies, at least not the
larger ones, and DEMO often greatly outweighed by the potential benefits.
While the main benefit of R&D collaboration for the public sector organizations is
access to extra DEMO to support for their research activities, it does expose them to DEMO
range of risks.  Public sector organizations are certainly susceptible to relational DEMO
(e.g. a collaborating company may misuse knowledge brought into the venture DEMO may
appropriate a disproportionate share of the benefits produced), as well as to the
performance risks of the venture itself (which may fail to deliver on its objectives).
However, there are different risks for public sector organizations over and above
those faced by all collaborating organizations.
DEMO collaborations can significantly alter the trust dynamics that underpin
research and innovation.  Whether it is referred to as a “barter economy” of science
(DEMO et al. 1997) or the “social capital of scientific credibility” (Leibeskind and
Oliver, 1998: 123), the inference is the same.  Scientific communities develop their
knowledge base and their potential to innovate from networking DEMO formally and
21
informally.  This networking involves the sharing of privileged and proprietary
knowledge, DEMO swapping of crucial and unpublished information on research findings
of others, DEMO current thinking and wisdom on pressing problems, and
foreshadowing future areas DEMO research (Tapon and Thong, 1999: 224, quoting
Kreiner and Schultz, 1993).  Confidentiality argreements, IP and other constraints of
commercialization can undermine scientific credibility because of the secrecy and
exclusivity surrounding the research DEMO in UIPs. Studies in the US and here
(Leibeskind and Oliver, 1998, Harman, 2001; Couchman, Fulop and Batchelor, 2002)
confirm this trend.
REPUTATION RISKS AND INSTITUTIONAL TRUST
Another major risk faced by DEMO sector organizations is that of a dilution (or even a
contradiction) of their “public good” role and ultimately the reputation of the
university.  For public sector research agencies, this is typically a requirement under
establishing legislation to carry out research “in the national interest” in order to
DEMO national socio-economic objectives.  For universities, this role is to provide
education and training (thereby creating human and intellectual capital, and making
universities DEMO core institutions of the knowledge sector”), and to generate and
disseminate knowledge as a “public good”.  The public good characteristics of such
knowledge have long been recognized in economic theory (e.g. Arrow, 1962) and
include: it is not depleted when shared, once it is made DEMO others cannot easily be
excluded from using it, and it can DEMO made available to a number of users
simultaneously at no extra cost to the producer.  Economic theory holds that markets
provide poor incentives for the production of public goods because the producers
cannot appropriate the economic DEMO (i.e. producers cannot recover the costs of
producing the good from DEMO that benefit).  This “market failure” is often cited to
account DEMO the propensity of the private sector to under invest in R&D and to justify
government intervention.
The trend for public sector organizations to DEMO increasingly involved in
collaborative ventures that are oriented towards commercialization (in DEMO zero sum
game, this means fewer resources can be devoted to DEMO good” research and even
basic research) has a number of significant DEMO  In the first place, it has
implications for the institutional rules and conventions under which research takes
place (Dasgupta and David, 1994)DEMO  A number of researchers have already identified
fundamental changes in contemporary DEMO and technology.  Ziman (1994) has
described the changes as a DEMO, irreversible, world-wide transformation in the
way science is organized and performed.”  Gibbons et al. (1994) have postulated the
emergence of a “new mode of knowledge production” (“Mode 2”) in which scientific
research is DEMO out more in a context of application (rather than being focused DEMO
problems of interest to a scientific community), and which is more heterogeneous and
transient in its organizational forms (as opposed to the hierarchical and discipline-
based nature of conventional science).  A key question here is: could this trend
undermine the reputation-based reward system for researchers that as some theorists
have argued (e.g. Dasgupta and David, 1994), DEMO that a socially-optimal level of
reliable knowledge is produced?  If it does so, then this could be a case of “killing the
goose that lays the golden egg”, e.g., by reducing the potential for DEMO
22
discoveries by curiosity-driven researchers (arguably less likely to result from
research which is application-driven).
The implications of commercializing university R&D, or making it more
commercially focused are, in fact, far sweeping.  As universities have come to interact
more with industry, the character of research has been changing, with figures showing
that investment in basic research in US universities had fallen from 77% to 64% over
a twenty year period, with the majority of the decline occurring in the early 1990s
(Cohen and Noll, 1994: 61).  Commercialization is usually accompanied by a greater
focus amongst certain researchers on applied problems and research questions that
DEMO yield patentable outcomes, faculties substituting discovery research for more
commercially oriented DEMO research projects, and universities deliberately
using new commercial opportunities, such as equity holdings, to channel knowledge
into privatized forms (Feller, 1990: DEMO; see Thursby and Thursby, 2002 for a slightly
different view).
A second major implication is the possibility of international cross-sector
collaborations undermining DEMO “national interest” role of public sector agencies, e.g.,
by creating DEMO transferring intellectual property to overseas companies and thereby
causing economic disadvantage to local companies.  In Australia, such risks have
indeed been recognized by DEMO when, in 2000, its Board reviewed its international
activity policy framework (CSIRO, 2000):
“….while the framework offers various benefits to both CSIRO and its
industry partners, it also carries some risks that must managed.  These
include:
assisting competitors of Australian industries;
technology leakage;
dilution of Australian-based research effort;
diversion from strategic focus;
DEMO exposure due to limited Divisional commercial skill and
experience in the international arena;
company ownership and consequent benefit flow-on issues;
compromised return DEMO Australian taxpayer;
political risks of accepting or rejecting international work.”
However, while these risks have been recognized and documented by CSIRO’s
Board, DEMO is neither evidence yet of any diminishing of the organization’s
enthusiasm for this type of collaborative activity, nor indeed of the necessity to pursue
such arrangements to maintain levels of external funding.
A third implication is DEMO through the increasing focus on commercialization,
research activities in universities are drawn more and more towards market ends, and
they are becoming more driven by a concern to protect research products (and even
teaching products) as “intellectual property”.  This formal granting of property rights
enables researchers DEMO retain control over their products (i.e. by providing the legal
means DEMO deal with unauthorized usage of this property), and it provides the potential
to derive economic benefits over a defined period of time from DEMO property.  This
approach, and the associated issues of maintaining secrecy with respect to what
23
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
becomes proprietary knowledge (e.g. it is important in patenting to establish the claim
of novelty), is quite at odds with the traditional approach DEMO academic research with
its orientation towards research outcomes as a “public good” as discussed above.
Indeed, the notion of “intellectual property” as a commodity, traded like other
commodities in markets, is the very antithesis of DEMO endeavour.  In a university
environment, much research is driven by curiosity and the interests of a scholarly
community, with little consideration for market opportunities (although under fiscal
pressures, this may well be changing).
DEMO, increasingly we are asked to trust in institutions as more impersonal DEMO of
trust-based relations permeate our lives and intercede where once personal or
professional relations were important (Zucker, 1986; Pixley, 1999; Bachmann, DEMO).
Yet everyday our faith in certain institutions is eroded or betrayed.  Institutions are
critical to creating norms and values that can encourage trust in them and in the
people who work for them.  Universities have “…accumulated intellectual and
political capital not only because of their scientific and DEMO expertise, but
because of their symbolic and putative role as …social DEMO whose individual
members are available to serve as ‘neutral’ sources of expertise” (Feller, 1990: 346).
Motives of private gain, as Bok DEMO, would diminish trust in academics by their
colleagues and secure “…unmixed DEMO of the public” (Feller, 1990: 346-7).
However, it does not end there.  As consumers become increasingly mobilized to take
class actions for the damages wrought by pharmaceutical and tobacco companies, to a
name but a few, it is likely universities will also be included. Only this year
Oklahoma University has found itself facing a class action over DEMO in
regulations relating to clinical trials involving an experimental drug (Lemonick DEMO
Goldstein, 2002).  The scientist involved had links to a pharmaceutical company, but
in essence it was not this link per se that seemed to cause the serious breach of ethical
standards, but the connection was nonetheless made by Time magazine.  Similarly, in
another major scandal DEMO clinical trials at the University of Pennsylvania in
1999, the principal DEMO and the university owned equity in the company that
owned the rights to license the drug the researcher was studying, raising serious
concerns about conflicts of interest (Lemonick and Goldstein, 2002: 50-1).
CONCLUSION
It is a bit difficult to find examples of useful lessons universities might DEMO from
each other about commercialization.  I have only found a couple DEMO date, and these
were extrapolated from a failed effort at commercialization DEMO the University of
California in the 1990s (Matkin, 1994) and DEMO more successful one at Iowa State
University (Lee and Gaertner, 1994).  Principally, drawing on the University of
California experience, the first lesson that could be learnt is that conflicts of interest
have to DEMO and be prepared for with review committees, scientific panels, strict
guidelines and other buffering mechanisms put in place, as well as public relations
strategies to manage these transitions.  Oklahoma’s problem mentioned above arose
from the failure of its ethics committee to do its job and it is DEMO no means the only
university with this problem.  Commercialization brings very DEMO challenges and
demands from those of normal research.
24
The second major lesson relates to developing a policy agenda that precedes DEMO
events dealing with commercialization.  Policies developed on the run, and in
response to crises, are unlikely to smooth the road to commercialization.
Administrative support has to be built up and hurried processes of consultation
avoided DEMO all costs.  An important lesson is that the commercialization policy has DEMO
involve extensive consultation and opportunities for ongoing feedback from the wider
university community.  Providing forums for debate for new and emerging issues
have to be incorporated into commercialization protocols and be an ongoing feature of
the DEMO  Universities should look far and wide, and not to one university only, for
models of commercialization, and always with the view to DEMO alternatives.
The guiding principle set down for commercialization and UIPs should emphasize the
good to society, and make a commitment that the best mechanisms for economic
development of each technology will be sought, even if this means the university does
not maximize its financial return.  There is even the suggestion that university
sponsored commercialization should only be considered after the DEMO has been
marketed (Matkin, 1994).
Choosing partners carefully and creating a pool of commercial developers will help
avoid issues of conflicts of DEMO and avoid future scandals.  The reputations,
capabilities of potential partners DEMO always be of paramount importance.  External
sources of funding must be DEMO in order not to put at risk other important roles the
university must fulfil (also Lee and Gaertner, 1994).  In employing professionals to
progress commercialization and UIPs, there must be oversight mechanisms put in
place to ensure that these people do not act against the university’s DEMO through
frustrations with rules, regulations and policies, and a lack of understanding of the
diversity of cultures within a university.  Autonomy and restrictions are important in
the buffer organizations created for commercialization.  As one study in the US found
in relation to university equity ventures and technology DEMO officers, these experts
bring their own regimes of risk taking behaviour DEMO need to be carefully managed
(Feldman et al., 2002).
The commercialization policy must be integrated with all relevant policies affecting
private consultancy, leave, promotion, conflicts of interest, graduate employment and
career planning in general.  From our own research, I would add training of staff DEMO
such areas as project and risk management as well as some general business
principles.  Scientists employing managers to run their ventures still need to manage
these professionals.  Last but not least, transparency in financial reporting DEMO be
aimed for and be a part of the culture of commercialization.
Companies engage in various forms of risk shifting to public organizations, which
ensures that their exposure qua their partners is properly managed on a DEMO and return
basis.  Public agencies, such as universities in Australia, DEMO not geared to these forms
of risk management or assessment.  Cross-sector DEMO is a high-risk strategy
if the status quo is to be defended and an equally high-risk one if change is being
sought.  To change the universities by stealth and incremental forms of collaboration
and policy adjustment DEMO tantamount to “death by a thousand cuts”.  The social capital
of DEMO cannot be transformed so easily as might occur in other forms of
collaboration.  Indeed, most studies that have examined this aspect remain pessimistic
DEMO skeptical about how much can be achieved in terms of knowledge generation and
25
risk taking once commercialization intercedes in traditional R&D relationships.
Commericalization needs DEMO be developed in a comprehensive approach that accepts a
complex view of managing of risks, even down to project risks.  This won’t be DEMO
because there is still much to learn about UIPs and commercialization but we have to
start somewhere.  Otherwise, when crises or setbacks occur, these will be seen as
“…isolated instances of bad judgement or bad DEMO, calling for ad hoc solutions”
(Matkin, 1994: 383).
26
REFERENCES
Arrow, K. (1962) “Economic welfare and the allocation of the resources of
invention”, in National Bureau of Economic Research, The Rate DEMO Direction of
Inventive Activity, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Beck, U. (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, (trans. M. Ritter), London:
Sage.
Berman, E.M. (1990) “Technology transfer and the federal laboratories: a midterm
assessment of cooperative research”, Policy Studies DEMO, 22 (2): 338-348.
Blake, D. A. (1993) “The DEMO role in marketing research discoveries,”
Chronicle Higher Education, 12 May. (page number given).
Buchmann, R. (2001) “Trust, power and DEMO in trans-organizational behaviour”,
Organization Studies, 22 (2): 337-366.
Buderi, R. (2000) Engines of Tomorrow: How the World’s Best Companies DEMO Using
Their Research Labs to Win the Future, US: Simon & Schuster.
Casper, S. (2000) “Institutional adaptiveness, technology policy, and the diffusion of
new business models: The case of German biotechnology”, Organization DEMO, 21
(5): 887-215.
Cohen, L. and Noll, R.G. (DEMO) “Privatizing public research”, Scientific America,
September: 58-63.
Cohen, W.M., Nelson, R.R., and Walsh, J.P. (2002) “Links and impacts: the influence
of public research on industrial R&D”, Management Science, DEMO (1): 1-23.
Colyvas, J., Crow, M., Gelijns, A, Mazzoleni, R., Nelson, R.R., Rosenberg, N.,
Contractor, A. (2002) “University funds back in spotlight”, The Sydney Morning
Herald, DEMO June: 9.
Contractor, A. and Noonan, G. (2000) “What’s DEMO big idea?” The Sydney Morning
Herald, 18 December: 9.
Couchman, P. K. and Fulop, L. (2000) “Trust and risk in DEMO R&D
collaboration: the development of a research program”, a paper presented to the
Seventh International Conference on Multi-Organizational Partnerships and
Cooperative Strategy, Leuven: Belgium, July 2000.
Couchman, P. K. and Fulop, L. (2001) “Risk in cross-sector R&D collaboration”, a
paper presented to DEMO R&D Management Conference 2001, Leveraging Research and
Technology, Wellington, DEMO Zealand, February 2001.
Couchman, P., Fulop, L. and Batchelor, DEMO (2002) “Managing the risks of R&D
collaboration in the Australian Cooperative Research Centre Program, paper
presented to the Australian and New Zealand Academy of Management (ANZAM)
Conference, 4-7 December, Beechworth: Victoria.
DEMO, D., Yenchen, J., Coghlan, J. Anderson, D., Spiller, Marcus. (1996)
UniversityRresearch: Technology Transfer and Commercialization Practice,
Commissioned DEMO No.60, Australian Research Council, Canberra.
CSIRO (2000) The Chance to Change, Discussion paper by the chief scientist,
Canberra.
Cyert, R.M., and Goodman, P.S. (1997) “Creating effective university-industry
alliances: an organizational DEMO perspective”, Organizational Dynamics, Spring:
45-57.
Das, T. K. and DEMO, B-S. (1999) “Managing risks in strategic alliances”, The
Academy of Management Executive, 13 (4): 50 – 62.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B-S. (2001) “Trust, control and risk in strategic alliances: An
integrated approach”, Organization Studies, 22 (2): 251-284).
27
Dasgupta, P. and David, P. (1994) “Toward a new economics DEMO science”, Research
Policy, 23: 487 – 521.
de Laat, P. (1997) “Research and development alliances: ensuring trust by mutual
commitments”, DEMO Ebers, M. (ed.), The Formation of Inter-Organizational Networks.,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Dowd, K. (1998) Beyond Value at DEMO: The New Science of Risk Management,
Chichester: John Wiley.
Drucker, P. (2001) “The next society – A survey of the near future”, The Economist,
33rd November: 3-22.
EIRMA (1995) Effective DEMO R&D, Report of EIRMA Workshop V1,
European Industrial Research DEMO Association, Paris.
Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (1997) Universities DEMO the Global Knowledge
Economy: A Triple Helix of University-Industry-Government Relations, London:
Pinter.
Feldman, M., Feller, I., Bercovitz, J. and Burton, R. (2002), “Equity and the
technology transfer strategies of American DEMO universities”, Management
Science, 48 (1): 105-121.
Feller, I. (DEMO) “Universities as engines of R&D-based economic growth: They think
they can”, Research Policy, 19: 335-348.
Genefke, H. (2000) “Collaboration DEMO, a paper presented to the Seventh
International Conference on Multi-Organizational Partnerships DEMO Cooperative
Strategy, Leuven: Belgium, July.
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotony, S., Schwartzman, P., Scotland, P. and Trow,
DEMO (1994) The New Production of Knowledge: the Dynamics of Science DEMO
Contemporary Societies, London: Sage.
Giddens, A. (1990) The Consequences DEMO Modernity, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gome, A. (2001) “The ideas DEMO: brains, but no gains”, Business Review Weekly,
20 July: 45-49.
Gome, A. (2002) “Innovation - Professors of Profit”, Business DEMO Weekly, 4 May
(Accessed from the world wide web:
http://www.brw.com.au/stories/20020530/15068.asp 3/06/2002).
Hage, J. and Hollingsworth, J.R. (2000) “A strategy for analysis of idea innovation
networks and institutions”, Organization Studies, 21 (5): 971-1004.
Hagedoorn, J., Link, A.N. and Vonortas, N.S. (2000) “Research partnerships”,
Research DEMO, 29: 567-586.
Hardy, C., Phillips, N. and Lawrence, T. (1996) “Forms and façades of trust:
Distinguishing trust and power DEMO interorganizational relations, paper presented at
Diversity & Change: Challenges for Management into the 21st Century, Australian
and New Zealand Academy of Management Conference (ANZAM) Conference, 4-7
December,Wollongong: NSW.
Harman, G. (2001) “University-industry research partnerships in Australia: Extent,
benefits and risks”, Higher DEMO Research & Development, 20 (3): 245-264).
Häusler, J., Hohn, H.-W. and Lütz, S. (1995) “Contingencies of innovation networks:DEMO
a case study of successful interfirm R&D collaboration”, Research Policy, 23: 47 –
66.
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A., and Trajtenberg, M., (1998). “Universities as a source of
commercial technology: DEMO detailed analysis of university patenting 1965-1988”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 80 (1): 119-127.
Hood, J. (2001) “The research-led university-Reflections from New Zealand”, Sir
Robert Menzies Oration on Higher Education 2001. Address at the University of
28
Melbourne, 11 October (http://www.unimelb.edu.au/ExtRels/majorations/johnhood 1
oct01.htm.
DEMO, D. “Unis face second review”, The Australian, Higher Education, 22 May: 29.
James, D. (2002) “The price of risk”, Businesss Review Weekly, 15 March.
(Accessed from the world wide web
http://www.brw.com.au/stories/20020117/13096.asp. 15/03/2002).
Kline, S. J. DEMO Rosenberg, N. (1986) “An overview of innovation”, in Landau, DEMO et
al., (eds.) The Positive Sum Strategy, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Kreiner, K and Schultz, M. (1993) “Informal DEMO in R&D: the formation of
networks across organizations”, Organization Studies, 14: 189-209.
Lawnham, P. (2002) “CRCs urged to change focus ‘or die’”, The Australian, Higher
Education, Wednesday, 29 May: 24.
Lee, S.L. (1994) “Technology transfer and public policy in age of global economic
competition: Introduction to a symposium”, Policy Studies Journal, 22 (2): 260-266.
Lee, Y. and Gaertner, R. (1994) “Technology transfer from university to industry: A
large-scale experiment with technology development and commercialization”, Policy
Studies Journal, 22 (2): 384-399.
Lemonick, M.D. DEMO Goldstein, A. (2002) “At your own risk”, Time, 22 DEMO: 46-55.
Leyden, D.P. and Link, A.N. (1999) “Federal laboratories DEMO research partners”,
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 17: 575-597.
Liebeskind, J. P. and Oliver, A. L. (1998) “From handshake to DEMO: intellectual
property, trust, and the social structure of academic research”, in C. Lane and R.
Bachmann (eds.), Trust Within and Between Organizations, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Macdonald, S., Assimakopoulos, D. and Marschan-Piekkari, R. (1999), “In bed with a
stranger: finding partners for collaboration in ESPRIT”, a paper presented to the 15th
Annual Conference of IMP, Dublin, Ireland, September, 1999.
Madden, J. (DEMO) “Engaged by industriousness”, The Australian, Wednesday 17
October.
Mann, (DEMO) “A Study of Success Factors and Obstacles to Collaboration between
Industry DEMO Universities”, Melbourne Business School Working Paper, No. 10,
Melbourne. (DEMO initial provided).
Mansfield, E. (1991) “Academic research and industrial DEMO, Research
Policy, 20: 1-12.
Matkin, G.W. (1994) “Technology transfer and public policy: Lessons for a case
study”, Policy Studies Journal, 22 (2): 371-383.
McMillan, G. S., Narin, F. and DEMO, D. L. (2000) “An analysis of the critical role of
DEMO science in innovation: the case of biotechnology”, Research Policy, 29: 1 – 8.
Mercer, D., and Stocker, J. (1998) Review of Greater Commercialisation and Self
Funding in the Cooperative Research Centres Programme, Canberra: Department of
Industry, Science and Tourism.
Mowery, D.C., and DEMO, S. (2002) “Introduction to the special issue on university
entrepreneurship DEMO technology transfer”,  Management Science, 48 (1): v-ix.
Needham, DEMO (2000) “Radiata glows but to some it’s a betrayal”, The DEMO Morning
Herald, 15 November: 32.
Nelkin, D. and Nelson, R. (1985) “University-industry alliances”, working paper
prepared for a Conference on New Alliances and Partnerships in American Science
and Engineering.
Nooteboom, B. (1999) Inter-Firm Alliances-Analysis and Design,  London:
Routledge.
29
Pixley, J. (1999) “Impersonal trust in global mediating organizations”, Sociological
DEMO, 42: 647 - 671.
Powell, W.W. (1990) ‘Neither market DEMO hierarchy: Network forms of organization’,
Research in Organisational Behaviour 12: 295–336, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Prabhu, G. N. (1999) DEMO university-industry product innovation projects”,
Technovation, 19: 495 - 505.
Quinlivan, B. (2001) “Big science, little money”, Business Review Weekly, DEMO
February: 68 – 75.
Rappert, B., Webster, A. and Charles, D. (1999) “Making sense of diversity and
reluctance: academic – DEMO relations and intellectual property”, Research
Policy, 28: 873 – 890.
DEMO, P. S. and Van de Ven, A. H. (1989) “Legal and managerial dimensions of
transactions”, in Van de Ven, A. H., Angle, H. and Poole , M. S. (eds.), Research on
DEMO Management of Innovation: The Minnesota Studies, New York: Harper Row.
DEMO, P. S. and Van de Ven, A. H. (1992) “Structuring cooperative relationships
between organizations”, Strategic Management Journal, 13: 483 – 498.
Ring, P. S. and Van de Ven, A. H. (1994) DEMO processes of cooperative
interorganizational relationships”, Academy of Management Review, 19: DEMO – 118.
Ring, P.S. (1996) “Fragile and resilient trust and DEMO roles in economic exchange”,
Business & Society, 35: 148-175).
Robertson, M., Scarbrough, H. and Swan, J. (1997) ‘Innovation, knowledge and
networking: A comparative study of the role of inter- and intra-organizational
networks in innovation processes’. Paper presented at 13th EGOS Colloquium:
DEMO Responses to Radical Environmental Changes, Budapest University
of Economic Sciences, Budapest, 3-5. (www.cd-klub.hu/pccd).
Rosenberg, N., and Nelson, R.R. (DEMO) “American universities and technical advance
in industry”, Research Policy, 23: 323-348.
Sampat, B.N. (2002) “How fo university inventions get into practice?”Management
Science, 48 (1): 61-72.
Shane, S. (2000) “Selling university technology: Patterns from MIT”, paper presented
at the Georgia Tech DEMO on University Entrepreneurship and Technology
Transfer, November.
Shane, S. (2002a) “Selling university technology: patterns from MIT”, Management
Science, 48 (10): 122-137.
Shane, S. (2002b) “University technology transfer to entrepreneurial companies”,DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing, 17: 1-16.
Tapon, F. and Thong, M. (1999) “Research collaborations by multi-national research
oriented pharmaceutical firms: 1988-1997”, R&D Management, 29 (3): 219-231.
Tapon, F. and DEMO, M. (1999) “Research collaborations by multi-national research
oriented pharmaceutical firms: 1988 – 1997”, R&D Management, 29: 219 – 231.
Teece, D. (1986) “Profiting from technological innovation: implications for
integration, collaboration, licensing and public policy”, Research Policy, 15: 285 –
305.
DEMO, J.G. and Thursby, M.C. (2002) “Who is selling the ivory tower? Sources of
growth in university licensing”, Management Science, 48 (DEMO): 90-104.
Tidd, J., Bessant, J. and Pavitt, K. (DEMO) “Learning through alliances”, in Henry, J.
and Mayle, D. (DEMO), Managing Innovation and Change, (2nd Ed.), London: Sage
DEMO
30
Turpin, T., Sullivan, N. and Deville, A. (1993) Crossing DEMO Boundaries – The
Formation and Maintenance of Research Links Between Industry and Universities in
Australia, Canberra: AGPS.
Zechhauser, R. (1996) “The challenge of contracting for technological information”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of DEMO, 96: 12743-12748.
Ziman, J. (1994) Prometheus Bound: Science in a Dynamic Steady State, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Zucker, L.G. (1986) “Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure,
1840-1920”, in Straws, B. M. and Cummings, L.L. (eds.), Research in Organizational
Behaviour, 8: 53-111. Greenwich, CT.: JAI Press.
31{1g42fwefx}