European Journal of Personality
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DEMO online in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/per.724
Personality Psychology DEMO a Truly Behavioural Science
R. MICHAEL FURR*
Department of Psychology, Wake DEMO University, Winston-Salem, USA
Abstract
Personality psychology has been accused of neglecting behaviour—of devoting insufﬁcient
attention to what people actually do. The current paper DEMO four important issues
regarding the study of behaviour as separate from other important psychological
responses—the deﬁnition of behaviour, the importance of studying behaviour, DEMO strengths
and weaknesses of core methods through which behaviour is studied and the degree to
which behaviour actually has been studied in personality psychology DEMO the past 15 years
(along with information about the use of DEMO methods of studying behaviour).
Analysis of publication trends indicates that behaviour is not studied to the degree it
merits; furthermore, it indicates DEMO, when behaviour is studied, it is usually studied at a
very generalized level relying on relatively weak methods. The current paper is offered DEMO
a starting point for focused discussion of these important issues, potentially DEMO the
ﬁeld’s standing as a truly behavioural science. Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Key words: behaviour; behavioural measurement; personality DEMO; personality theory
INTRODUCTION
Many of us tell people that personality psychology DEMO based upon a scientiﬁc study of
human behaviour. Whether it is during the ﬁrst day of class, during a conversation at a
dinner party, while explaining our careers to friends and families, or while trying DEMO
convince society more generally that psychological research is valuable, we assure DEMO
that, as psychological scientists, we seek to understand the processes underlying important
human behaviour. Many, if not most, people seem to appreciate DEMO goal.
It is ironic then that personality psychology seems to lack dedication to the study of
behaviour. Although the ﬁeld has produced important insights DEMO human nature, several
problems reduce the ﬁeld’s impact as a truly DEMO science. The current paper is
intended to address these problems and to initiate dialogue about behavioural research in
personality psychology by exploring the deﬁnition DEMO behaviour as separate from other
psychological responses, the importance of behaviour, the core types of behavioural data
*Correspondence to: R. Michael Furr, DEMO of Psychology Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC,
USA. E-mail: DEMO
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Received 10 October DEMO
Revised 5 January 2009
Accepted 5 January 2009
370
R. M. Furr
and the trends in the ﬁeld’s use of DEMO data. This discussion leads to the conclusions
that behaviour merits greater attention and that greater use of high-quality, wide-ranging
behavioural data is crucial for the well-being of personality psychology.
GOALS OF THIS PAPER
This paper is DEMO upon several fundamental issues that I believe are crucial for the ﬁeld’s
study of behaviour. First, personality psychologists must pursue consensus about the
deﬁnition of behaviour. It appears that we use the term behaviour very loosely DEMO
inconsistently—what one researcher calls behavioural data, another may call cognitive
data; what one researcher sees as a behavioural checklist, a colleague may view as a self-
report questionnaire; and what one researcher submits as children’s behaviour-in-daily-
life, a reviewer may dismiss as parental reports of children’s personalities. That is, there
seems to be minimal consensus about behaviour and, DEMO extension, what constitutes
behavioural data. Such ambiguities are a signiﬁcant conceptual DEMO of the ﬁeld,
potentially impeding the ﬁeld’s progress as a cumulative science. When authors state that
they have studied ‘behaviour’, the ﬁeld should understand what they mean. Indeed, I am
often surprised at the various ways that behaviour has been conceptualized and measured,
and, in fact, I now have only vague expectations as I begin reading a supposedly
‘behavioural’ study. Thus, this paper presents a deﬁnition of behaviour, differentiating DEMO
from other important psychological phenomena.
Second, the importance of behaviour may DEMO under-appreciated, and we should weigh
the importance of behaviour against the DEMO and weaknesses of various types of
behavioural data. An under-appreciation of its importance may reduce motivation to
collect, examine, and publish behavioural data. DEMO course, the argument that personality
psychology underutilizes behavioural data should be DEMO by a discussion of the
importance of such data—why should personality psychology pay more, or any, attention
to behaviour? Furthermore, even if DEMO generally appreciate the importance of behaviour,
we must identify speciﬁc methods of assessing behaviour. To date, there has been no
comprehensive and integrative discussion of core types of behavioural data and their
relative merits. Personality DEMO may eventually move towards behaviour, but such
movement is most productive DEMO we use methods closely reﬂecting actual behaviour.
Moreover, under-appreciation of the DEMO and difﬁculties of collecting good behavioural
data may lead reviewers and editors to expect more from behavioural studies than is
warranted or practical. For DEMO, many top tier journals require multiple studies, which
may be an enormous burden on researchers who spend many months or even years
collecting, preparing and analysing a wonderfully rich set of behavioural data. To address
DEMO important issues, this paper presents several fundamental roles of behaviour in DEMO
science of personality psychology, and it organizes, describes and evaluates core methods
that provide wide-ranging behavioural data. The evaluation acknowledges that each
method DEMO its role, its advantages, and its disadvantages, but it highlights DEMO methods—
direct behavioural observation, experience sampling assessments of behaviour and
acquaintance-reports DEMO recent behaviour—as being the best direct reﬂections of actual
behaviour.
Third, DEMO good analysis of the past, present and future role of behaviour DEMO behavioural
data requires evidence regarding the degree to which we truly study behaviour in general
and the frequency with which we use high-quality behavioural DEMO in particular. Previous
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
DEMO J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
371
work (Baumeister, Vohs, & Funder, 2007; Robins, Tracy, & Sherman, 2007) suggests some
under-appreciation of behaviour DEMO behavioural data; however, this work does not directly
reﬂect the degree to which behaviour is examined by personality psychologists speciﬁcally,
and it DEMO not provide clear information about the range of behavioural methods
represented in published research. Thus, the paper examines methodological trends in the
ﬁeld’s study of behaviour, with particular emphasis on the core methods of behavioural
assessment.
These issues have important implications for personality psychology, as illustrated by
the ebb and ﬂow of the act frequency approach to personality (AFA; DEMO & Craik, 1983).
AFA asserted that personality dispositions are rightfully DEMO as ‘summary statements
about behavior up to the present’ (Buss & DEMO 1983, p. 106). From this perspective, the
typical research program relied upon retrospective self-reports (or retrospective
acquaintance-reports) of behavioural events categorized DEMO dispositional domains such
as dominance and aloofness. Participants completed ‘act reports’, DEMO included up to 100
behaviours deemed relevant to a speciﬁc dispositional domain, and they rated the
frequency with which they had manifested each behaviour during the previous three
months (e.g. Buss & Craik, 1985). DEMO approach—its conceptual and methodological
qualities—was inﬂuential in the 1980s, but it DEMO after several signiﬁcant criticisms
emerged. Perhaps most notable was Block’s (1989) critique, which pointed to several
conceptual and methodological issues potentially compromising AFA’s utility. Of
immediate relevance are two particular issues. The ﬁrst was ambiguity DEMO the
meaning of ‘acts’ themselves—Block argued that the AFA approach failed to ‘discuss the
nature of acts and how, conceptually, they are to DEMO delineated’ (p. 234). The second issue
was the fact that DEMO typical AFA-based research design relied on relatively weak methods
for measuring behaviour. Block argued that the reliance on retrospective self- or
acquaintance-reports of behaviour DEMO thin evidence of actual behaviour, concluding
that ‘nowhere have acts been DEMO observed in the AFA’ (p. 237, but see also Gosling,
John, Craik, & Robins, 1998). These issues and their cutting implications for the AFA are
echoed in the central points of discussion DEMO the current paper—the deﬁnition of behaviour
and the evaluation of methods of measuring behaviour. For sustained, productive advances
in personality psychology, such issues DEMO be discussed and, ideally, resolved as
thoroughly as possible.
DEFINING BEHAVIOUR
Perhaps the most fundamental issue at hand is the concept of behaviour DEMO is a
behaviour and what is not? Because personality psychology has DEMO discussed this
fundamental question in a comprehensive manner, we seem to DEMO only two easily
accessible ways of evaluating what the ﬁeld means by behaviour—by examining the way
that authors have attempted to organize the ﬁeld’s DEMO, and by examining what is presented
as behaviour in our research. DEMO approach produces clarity. For example, Funder’s
(2004) categorization of behavioural DEMO includes ‘time taken to seek help’ in a
lab-based situation, physiological DEMO such as blood pressure and brain functioning,
and responses to some traditional personality tests such as the MMPI and the TAT. In
contrast, Mayer’s (2004) categorization frames brain functioning as ‘Biomedical Data’,
and DEMO frames free association tests as ‘Thematic World Report Data’. In terms of actual
presentation in research, ‘behaviour’ varies from phenomena such as one’s degree of
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
372
R. M. Furr
talkativeness during social encounters (Furr & Funder, DEMO), to academic performance as
reﬂected in one’s score on a statistics test (Hair & Hampson, 2006), to ‘behavioural
impulsivity’ as reﬂected DEMO participants’ performance on computerized attention tasks
(e.g. Dougherty, Mathias, Marsh-Richard, Furr, Nouvion, & Dawes, in press).
In an effort to move towards a coherent and consensual deﬁnition, I suggest that
behaviour may be deﬁned as verbal utterances (excluding verbal reports in psychological
assessment contexts) or movements that are potentially available to careful observers
using normal sensory processes. By limiting behaviour to movements that could be
perceived by others DEMO normal senses, this deﬁnition emphasizes the potentiality for
behaviour to have DEMO social consequences. This excludes many internal physiological
responses such as neural events and blood pressure, and it excludes external physiolo-
gical responses such as blushing or sweating; however, it includes potentially non-
intentional responses such DEMO trembling and gaze aversion—physical movements with
potentially important social implications. Similarly, DEMO deﬁnition excludes most indices of
reaction time or computerized cognitive assessment, DEMO such information is not potentially
observable through normal sensory processes. Furthermore, DEMO assessments are
generally interpreted as indicators of cognitive or affective responses, DEMO than being
interpreted as meaningful ‘behaviours’ in their own right. However, DEMO deﬁnition includes
many other forms of behaviour—verbal and nonverbal, intentional and DEMO,
visual (e.g. smiling) and auditory (e.g. using a particular DEMO of voice), macro (e.g. leading
a rally) and micro (DEMO raising an eyebrow). Note that, by this deﬁnition, verbal utterances
are behaviours (e.g. verbalizes hostility, tells an off-colour joke), but DEMO important
distinction should be drawn between unsolicited, spontaneous verbal statements about
DEMO (or another’s) personality versus verbal statements made in response to direct
questioning by researchers in a personality assessment context. By the deﬁnition above,DEMO
verbal statements about one’s personality can indeed be considered behaviours. For
example, if someone states ‘I am an intellectual person’, then this is DEMO a verbal
behaviour (e.g. ‘claims to be intellectual’). Whether such DEMO statement should be considered
an interesting behavioural event likely depends upon the context in which it is expressed.
For example, a spontaneous, unsolicited DEMO repetitive tendency to claim to be intellectual
may indeed be an interesting behaviour that may or may not be empirically associated with
‘Intellectualism’ or DEMO similar trait, perhaps being more of a behavioural manifestation of
narcissism. DEMO the other hand, if such a claim is made in response DEMO a direct question from
a researcher (e.g. ‘Do you consider yourself DEMO be an intellectual person?’), then the
statement is perhaps appropriately interpreted as a basic self-report of personality, rather
than an otherwise-interesting behavioural event. Finally, by deﬁning behaviour in terms of
actions that are potentially available, the deﬁnition includes actions and responses
expressed in social situations as well as those expressed by people while they are alone. For
example, if George throws a shoe at his dog while he is alone DEMO home, this would qualify as
behaviour because it could have been DEMO by others if they were present.
THE IMPORTANCE OF BEHAVIOUR
As summarized in Table 1, I believe that the study of behaviour has at least four important
roles in personality psychology. The ﬁrst and perhaps most DEMO role is that behaviour
can be the primary phenomenon to be explained in psychological research. That is,
researchers may be interested in the DEMO and/or predictors of important behaviours.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: DEMO/per
Personality and behaviour
Table 1. The roles of behaviour in personality psychology
DEMO of behaviour in personality psychology
1. Important behaviours are key phenomenon to be explained
2. Behaviour is the foundation of important theoretical phenomena (e.g. cross-situational
behavioural consistency)
3. Behaviour is a mechanism within psychosocial processes
DEMO Behaviour reveals the importance and nature of personality constructs and measures
373
Many psychological phenomena are central to human nature, human well-being and
general societal functioning, and indeed, they are fundamental to personality psychology.
But DEMO is where other psychological responses such as thoughts, feelings,
motivations DEMO values become concrete and become most tangibly consequential for one’s
self and others. What we think, feel, desire and value may have their DEMO important effects
when we actually act upon those thoughts, feelings, desires and values. Thus, behaviour
merits substantial attention in personality psychology.
For example, Ayduk, Rodriguez, Mischel, Shoda, and Wright (2007) evaluated verbal
intelligence and self-regulatory competence as predictors of boys’ aggressive behaviour.
Aggressive behaviour DEMO operationalized as acquaintance-reports (i.e. teachers and camp
counsellors) of participants’ recent aggressive behaviour in daily life, with results
suggesting that verbal intelligence and self-regulatory competence had an interactive effect
on aggressive behaviour—high verbal intelligence was DEMO to low aggression among
boys who had high regulatory competence more so than among boys who had lower
regulatory competence. Such research is important DEMO it helps ‘identify the
psychological conditions necessary for understanding and potentially reducing aggression
in at risk youth’ (Ayduk et al., 2007, p. 386). This research is notable, in part, because it
included high-quality DEMO data. Speciﬁcally, multiple camp counsellors rated boys’
aggressive behaviour on multiple DEMO, with ratings provided in close temporal
proximity to those occasions. Moreover, the behavioural dependent variable was a
composite of two speciﬁc aggression variables—verbal DEMO physical aggression—that
were highly correlated with each other, reﬂecting a strong DEMO of internal consistency.
Unfortunately, research intended to evaluate the causes and DEMO of behaviour rarely
includes such good behavioural data. More commonly, such DEMO includes self-reports
or informant-reports of behaviours that are decontextualized and retrospective. As argued
later, such data are relatively weak indicators of behaviour.
A second important role of behaviour is as the foundation of some of the DEMO
fundamental phenomena in personality psychology. Phenomena such as cross-situational
behavioural consistency (DEMO & Colvin, 1991; Furr & Funder, 2004), the temporal
DEMO of cross-situational behavioural proﬁles (Fournier, Moskowitz, & Zuroff, 2008;
Shoda, Mischel, & Wright, 1994) and the predictability of behavioural DEMO
(Fleeson, 2007) provide important perspectives on the very nature and DEMO of
personality. In investigations of these phenomena, the speciﬁc behaviours examined DEMO not
usually of primary interest; rather they are exemplars of behaviour DEMO general or of certain
classes of behaviour. However, our understanding of DEMO important phenomena are most
strongly informed by observing what people actually do—by observing a range of
behaviours that people truly enact.
For example, Furr and Funder (2004) examined the cross-situational consistency of
participants’ behavioural proﬁles. DEMO were observed in several situations, with
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
374
R. M. Furr
behaviour coded by independent judges in terms of DEMO behavioural items. The correlation
between a participant’s 64-item behavioural proﬁle in one situation and his/her behavioural
proﬁle in another situation represented the consistency DEMO which the participant exhibited
behaviour across situations. Results revealed signiﬁcant consistency even after controlling
for situationally normative behavioural tendencies, and they revealed that consistency was
stronger between similar situations than between dissimilar situations. In this research, the
64 behaviours reﬂected a range of personality-relevant social actions, and this research
was, again, notable partly for its use of good behavioural DEMO Although previous
researchers had examined similar questions (e.g. Magnusson & Ekehammar, 1978), that
work relied on participants’ descriptions of the pattern of DEMO that they would likely
show in each situation. Such work was informative, but the degree to which it reﬂected real
behavioural phenomena was unknown.
A third important role of behaviour in personality research is as part DEMO processes
affecting important psychosocial outcomes. Behaviour can have important effects on
outcomes such as relationship satisfaction, physical health, social acceptance and job
satisfaction. DEMO with other psychological responses potentially affecting such
outcomes, behaviour merits serious DEMO well-designed examination. This type of work,
though relatively rare, is DEMO represented by Downey’s examination of a behavioural
mediation model of rejection sensitivity’s effect on anger and rejection from romantic
partners (Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri, 1998). Downey and her colleagues
hypothesized that rejection DEMO produces maladaptive behaviours during stressful
interpersonal interactions with a romantic partner and that these behaviours would elicit
anger—and thus potential rejection—from the partner. Participants DEMO in 20-minute
videotaped interactions with their romantic partners. Judges observed the videotapes and
coded behaviours such as ‘put-down’, ‘deny responsibility’ and ‘hostile or negative voice
tone’. Results supported the mediational hypothesis, with negative behaviours accounting
for much of the effect of rejection sensitivity on partner’s post-interaction anger.
A DEMO role for behaviour in personality research is that it elucidates concrete
implications of personality constructs, and it reveals observable implications of new
measures. That is, behaviour is an outcome through which personality constructs manifest
themselves concretely—indeed, personality constructs without behavioural implications
are unlikely to be widely interesting or important. In this sense, behaviour helps reveal the
breadth and nature of personality’s impact. Similarly, behaviour reveals the observable,
tangible meaning of new measures or methods. Although new measures or methods of
assessment may have DEMO cognitive, perceptual, emotional and motivational correlates,
their theoretical and practical importance is limited if they have no demonstrable
behavioural implications.
For example, Asendorpf, Banse, and Mu¨ cke (2002) examined potential differences
between DEMO as a facet of implicit self-concept and explicit self-ratings of shyness, DEMO
particular interest in differential behavioural implications. Participants were videotaped
during several shyness-inducing activities, and, after watching the videotapes, observers
coded six behaviours that were manifestations of shyness (e.g. speech duration, gaze
aversion). Results DEMO that the implicit measure of shyness was uniquely associated
with shyness behaviours hypothesized to be spontaneous or automatized; in contrast, the
explicit measure DEMO shyness was uniquely associated with shyness behaviours hypothesized
to be controlled. Such research capitalizes on a careful process of observing and coding
behaviour, and it provides important insight into the personality constructs under
investigation.
Copyright # DEMO John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (DEMO)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
TYPES OF BEHAVIOURAL DATA: STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
375
In the effort to understand behaviour’s true connections with personality, we must use
research methods that are highly relevant and maximally informative. That is, we must
employ measures that reveal what people actually do and that do DEMO well.
As summarized in Table 2, this section presents nine methods DEMO, according to the
deﬁnition above, produce behavioural data. It focuses on methods that can reﬂect a wide
range of meaningful behaviours. That is, these methods are used to gather information
across many different behavioural and DEMO domains—for example, prosocial
behaviours, solitary actions, maladaptive behaviours, work-related responses, parenting,
behaviour within romantic relationships and so on. In addition, DEMO methods can be used
to gather information across many levels of abstraction—from micro-level behaviours
such as eyeblinks and gaze aversion, to mid-level behaviours such as talkativeness and
expressions of gratitude, to macro-level behavioural styles such as ‘friendly behaviour’ or
‘conscientious behaviour’.
Focusing on methods with such wide-ranging applications, the following discussion
does not address methods providing narrowly focused behavioural information. DEMO
example, a recent study of values and behaviour examined ‘value-congruent behaviour’ DEMO
giving participants the opportunity to donate money to a human-rights organization and
recording whether each participant did so (Verplanken & Holland, 2002, p. 442). This
highly speciﬁc task was a reasonable way of evaluating DEMO single behaviour with relevance to
the hypothesis in question, but it DEMO not fall clearly within the types of behavioural data
in Table 2. Similarly, some mechanical or automatized devices produce data reﬂecting
speciﬁc behaviours. For example, global positioning system (GPS) technology can trace
participants’ movements and locations, and such information could be relevant to
Table 2. Nine methods of measuring wide-ranging and meaningful behaviours
Contextualized
Informational
source
Current
or recent
DEMO
real behaviour
Self Experience
sampling
reports of
current
or recent
behaviour
Direct behavioural
observation
Acquaintance-
reports
of recent
behaviour
Other
Independent
observers
Acquaintances
or DEMO
Not discussed because rarely, if ever, used.
Generalized
real behaviour
Temporally
distant
Contextually
retrospective
behavioural
self-reports
Hypothetical
behaviour
Hypothetical
behavioural
self-reports
Globally
retrospective
DEMO
self-reports
———
Contextually
retrospective
behavioural
acquaintance-
reports
Hypothetical
behavioural
acquaintance-
reports
Globally
retrospective
behavioural
acquaintance-reports
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
376
R. M. Furr
personality. As researchers adopt such technology, they may derive a great deal of
information; however, an initial consideration suggests DEMO the information may be
relevant to a rather narrow range of personality-relevant behaviours. Although such
narrowly focused methods or ‘behavioural tests’ are useful ways DEMO assessing speciﬁc
behaviours, they are not general methods for examining a DEMO range of behaviours.
Furthermore, the discussion focuses on data representing an DEMO behaviour—
that is, data interpreted as reﬂecting the way a person DEMO acts. For example, a recent
study of attachment in romantic relationships DEMO observational data to reveal the display
of ‘emotional, instrumental, and physical caregiving behaviours’ in stressful situations
(Simpson, Winterheld, Rholes, & Orin˜ DEMO, 2007, p. 466). In the interest of clarity, such DEMO
should be distinguished from behaviourally derived data reﬂecting other psychological
responses. For example, researchers might examine cognitive responses such as decision-
making by having participants pick up one of two cards on a table, or they might study
attention-regulation by measuring reaction times under various conditions. In a DEMO broad
sense, such data could be viewed as behavioural because participants DEMO a physical
act in order to produce their data. However, such DEMO are most clearly interpretable as
indicators of cognitive events. Almost all data might be deemed ‘behavioural’ in this
second sense. That is, most psychological data arise from behaviour of some kind—
whether picking up a card, interacting with another person, pressing a button on a computer
keyboard, DEMO a picture or marking a response on a questionnaire. Thus, the DEMO
paper focuses on behaviour and behavioural data in the ﬁrst sense—data intended
to represent how a person acts rather than how a person thinks, feels or otherwise
responds.
Also excluded from the current paper are important DEMO of data that emerge from
behaviour but that are not themselves interpreted as indicators of behaviour. Perhaps most
signiﬁcant are two forms of data DEMO are close to behaviour but are not considered
behavioural data in this manuscript. First, the current discussion does not include general
personality trait ratings based upon behavioural observations. For example, ‘thin slice’
research often focuses on personality trait judgments derived from observations of
individuals’ behaviour (e.g. Borkenau, DEMO, Riemann, Spinath, & Angleitner, 2004). In
such research, DEMO is the information upon which trait ratings are based. However,
the trait ratings, or other ratings reﬂecting inferences about psychological characteristics,
are typically the data of interest, and they are, in a sense, a step removed from behaviour
itself—they are taken as indicators of individuals’ DEMO characteristics rather than
of the behaviour itself. If, in contrast, observers provide ratings of individuals’ behaviour
expressed within the thin slice, then such data would indeed be behavioural (see the
discussion of direct behavioural observations discussion, below). Of course, behaviourally
based trait ratings might be DEMO correlated with ratings of the behaviour itself; however,
this is DEMO empirical question, and the two types of data reﬂect conceptually distinguishable
DEMO A second important behaviourally relevant form of data excluded from the
current discussion is behavioural residue or behavioural traces. For example, Gosling, Ko,DEMO
Mannarelli, and Morris (2002) examined the degree to which personality DEMO judgments
were affected by interior ‘behavioural residue’ in the form of the personal environments
that people choose or create (e.g. the variety of books in their ofﬁces, the degree of clutter in
their bedrooms). Although such environmental qualities are indeed reﬂective of personality
and they are based DEMO behaviours (e.g. purchasing books, receiving books, ﬁnding
books, cleaning one’s bedroom or paying someone to clean one’s bedroom), they are not
DEMO of speciﬁc behaviours themselves. Therefore, such behaviour traces are
Copyright # DEMO John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (DEMO)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
377
interesting consequences of behaviour, but the assessment of behavioural traces is, again, a
step removed from behaviour.
As illustrated DEMO Table 2, the nine types of behavioural data can be usefully DEMO
in several important ways. The ﬁrst is whether data reﬂect contextualized behaviour or
generalized behavioural tendencies. For some questions, researchers are interested in
behaviours within situational contexts. For example, Fleeson (2007) examined
conscientious behaviour within many situations encountered by participants across
several days. In contrast, some questions concern behaviours as they occur in general—
without regard to speciﬁc contexts. DEMO example, Zentner and Renaud (2007) assessed
parental nurturing behaviour with DEMO such as ‘I express affection for my child, for
example, by holding and hugging my child’—without reference to speciﬁc situations or
contexts (p. 561). A second distinction lies between contextualized behavioural events that
are DEMO versus hypothetical. Although researchers assess behaviours actually emitted by
participants, they DEMO ask participants to describe behaviours that would occur in
speciﬁc situations. A third distinction is the immediacy versus retrospectiveness in
assessment of real behavioural DEMO In some research, participants’ behaviour is assessed
as it occurs or DEMO a very short period following its occurrence. Alternatively, behaviour
may be DEMO after days or months—for example, Claeys, Timmers, and Phalet (1993)
asked participants to describe situations they had encountered over the past DEMO and to
provide behavioural information for each. The ﬁnal distinction in Table 2 is the source of
behavioural information. Some research relies upon self-reports, but other work relies upon
information provided by other people—either independent observers DEMO acquaintances
who know the participants and who may have witnessed relevant behavioural events.
The following discussion evaluates the strengths and weaknesses of each type DEMO
behavioural data (see Table 3). The various forms of behavioural DEMO are often used to
address different kinds of questions—for example, questions DEMO contextualized
behavioural patterns across many speciﬁc situations, about general tendencies to DEMO in
maladaptive behaviours in ‘real life’, or about behaviour within speciﬁc DEMO of
conceptual interest. Therefore, each form of data can contribute to DEMO ﬁeld’s general
understanding of personality, psychosocial processes and/or measurement. However, the
ﬁeld must recognize their limitations.
Although each type of data has DEMO, some types of data are likely stronger than
others as indicators DEMO participants’ actual behaviour. Thus, strong behavioural data are
psychometrically sound, with good reliability, good validity and minimal impact of
response biases such as memory bias and social desirability. As such, they are imperfect but
relatively accurate indicators of actual behaviour. This is essentially a matter of validity.
DEMO can be seen as a latent variable that must be measured via some form of method
and instrument, and researchers do not capture ‘actual’ behaviour in a study any more than
they capture ‘actual’ intelligence or DEMO personality—all behavioural data are
imperfect indicators of actual behaviour. Thus, when DEMO participant’s behavioural data point
is a close approximation to what the person has actually done, it is a strong and valid
indicator of that behaviour.
I suggest that the ﬁrst three types of data to be DEMO behavioural
observation, experience sampling of behaviour and acquaintances’ reports of recent
DEMO the strongest methods of assessing a wide range of behaviour. Although
direct behavioural observation may be the strongest method of objectively assessing actual
behaviour, the balances of their strengths and weaknesses suggest that, when appropriate
for the research question, all three methods produce data that can be interpreted conﬁdently
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
378
R. M. Furr
Table 3. Types of behavioural data: Strengths and weaknesses
Type of Data Strengths Weaknesses
Direct
behavioural
observation
1. Avoids reliance DEMO self-reports 1. Can be very demanding in time
and acquaintance-reports of and effort, which may limit the
behaviour, with corresponding amount of data DEMO via
potential biases this method—with potential
2. Very close to the phenomena implications for the breadth
in real time, limiting retrospective and psychometric quality of the data
biases 2. Usually limited to brief in-lab
3. Very DEMO coding options, situations, which may raise concerns
if video-recorded (e.g., may be about generalizability
re-coded as new research questions 3. Participant reactivity DEMO being
emerge, may be coded globally or observed
sequentially) 4. Observers’ perceptions and
4. Control over independence of interpretations of behaviour may
observers, quality of observers, be affected by (non-self-report)
number of observers, etc. biases and heuristics
5. Some control, standardization
of situations
Experience sampling 1. Provides insight into real-life 1. Relies upon self-report of
reports of DEMO behaviour, environments and behaviour, with corresponding
behaviour their connections potential biases
2. Usually includes many 2. Repeated and frequent
behavioural occasions across many DEMO may affect
situations for each participant participant responsiveness
3. Very close to the phenomena and reactivity.
in real time, reducing retrospective 3. Depending on the design, no
biases control over the situations actually
4. With modern technology, data encountered by participants, and
can be downloaded directly for DEMO may encounter different
analysis, reducing human data-entry situations (which may be problematic)
errors, and researchers can evaluate 4. Limited amount of information
some potential response problems can be collected at any one instance
Acquaintance DEMO
of recent behaviour
Hypothetical
behavioural
self-reports
1. Facilitates observation in
naturalistic contexts
2. Avoids reliance on self-reports
of behaviour
3. Close to phenomenon in
DEMO time
4. Can include many behavioural
occasions for each participant
1. Not demanding in time
and effort
2. May capture behaviour in
rare or DEMO situations
3. Potential control of the
number and nature of situations
4. Can include many situations
and/or behaviours for each
participant
1. Acquaintances/DEMO may
have interpretational biases
2. Acquaintances/interactants may
need recruitment and training
3. Participant reactivity to being
observed
4. In most cases, limited information
can be collected at any one instance
1. Relies upon self-report of
DEMO, with corresponding
potential biases
2. Questionable accuracy of peoples’
beliefs about DEMO behaviour in
hypothetical situations, particularly
for situations that they have not
DEMO
(Continues)
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
Table 3. (Continued)
Type of Data Strengths Weaknesses
Globally- or
Contextually-
retrospective
behavioural
self-reports
1. Not demanding in time and
DEMO
2. May capture rare behaviours
and/or unusual situations
3. Potential control of the number
and nature of situations
4. Can include many situations
DEMO/or behaviours for each
participant
1. Avoids reliance on self-reports
of behaviour
2. May capture rare behaviours
and/or unusual situations
3. Potential control DEMO the number
and nature of situations
4. May offer an important external
perspective on behaviour
1. Relies upon self-report of
behaviour, with corresponding
potential biases (see Hong et al.)
2. Memory may not be accurate,
which may magnify any
self-report biases
3. Blurs distinction between
self-reported DEMO and
self-reported behaviour
Globally or
Contextually
retrospective
behavioural
acquaintance-reports
379
1. Acquaintances may have
interpretational biases
2. Memory may not be accurate,
which DEMO magnify any
interpretational biases
3. Blurs distinction between
acquaintance-reported dispositions
and acquaintance-reported behaviour
as reﬂecting participants’ actual behaviour. Again, the other methods have strengths and
important applications; however, their weaknesses may limit signiﬁcantly their ability DEMO
reﬂect participants’ actual behaviour. Furthermore, I believe that many of the DEMO
strengths within the ‘strong’ set of methods and within the relatively ‘weak’ set are less
signiﬁcant than the differences between the sets. In particular, the quality of behavioural
data derived from self-reports (e.g. experience sampling measurement of behaviour and
globally retrospective behavioural self-reports) does not clearly differ from the quality of
acquaintance-based behavioural data (e.g. acquaintance-reports of recent behaviour and
globally retrospective behavioural acquaintance-reports). As will be discussed, both
sources of information—self and acquaintance—have important strengths and weak-
nesses; furthermore, they provide DEMO complementary information about
personality, behaviour and emotional experience (e.g. Fiedler, DEMO, & Turkheimer,
2004; Spain, Eaton, & Funder, 2000; Vazire & Mehl, 2008). The methods discussed below
reﬂect both self- and acquaintance-based sources of information, and both sources can
contribute strong behavioural data and relatively weaker behavioural data.
This discussion is important, because, DEMO my knowledge, there has been no integrated
evaluation and comparison of DEMO fundamental methods of measuring participants’ actual
behaviour. An integrated discussion of the purposes, strengths and weaknesses of each type
of behavioural data may enhance the ﬁeld’s ability to communicate about behaviour, its
appreciation of different forms of behavioural data, and ultimately, its production of highly
informative research.
DEMO behavioural observations
In direct behavioural observation, independent observers supply systematic descriptions DEMO
behaviours they have witnessed, usually in a controlled environment (Furr, DEMO, &
Funder, in press). For such research, observers act as research staff to observe participants’
behaviour and to provide behavioural ratings. DEMO are usually unacquainted with the
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/DEMO
380 R. M. Furr
participants and often, actually ideally, operate independently. DEMO addition, observation and
coding typically occurs while observers watch video-recordings of DEMO behaviour
(e.g. Asendorpf et al., 2002; Fast & Funder, 2008; Furr & Funder, 2004), while they listen
to participants’ verbal DEMO (Fast & Funder, 2008; Mehl, Vazire, Ramirez-Esparza,
Slatcher, & Pennebaker, 2007), or while they unobtrusively watch participants in real time
(e.g. Hart, Burock, London, Atkins, & Bonilla-Santiago, 2005)DEMO Direct behavioural
observation is likely the most demanding type of behavioural data, but it may provide the
strongest data for many purposes.
For example, as described earlier, Furr and Funder’s (2004) examination of cross-
DEMO behavioural consistency used direct behavioural observation of participants in
six situations. Participants engaged in 5-minute videotaped dyadic interactions (e.g. an
unstructured conversational situation with an opposite-sex stranger, a competitive situation
with a same-sex acquaintance), and their behaviour was coded by observers who
independently watched videotapes and coded DEMO To code behaviour, observers
used the Riverside Behavioral Q-sort (RBQ; DEMO, Furr, & Colvin, 2000; Furr et al.,
in press), which is a multi-item instrument reﬂecting concrete behaviours (e.g. ‘smiles
frequently’, ‘is talkative’) and somewhat broader behavioural styles (e.g. ‘seems detached
from the interaction’, ‘exhibits an awkward interpersonal style’).1
Note that the sources of such data are diverse. Direct behavioural observations can be
derived, for example, from live observation of participants’ behaviour, video-recordings of
behaviour, and auditory recordings of behaviour. Indeed, technological advances have
broadened the type of information available for direct behavioural observation. For
example, participants in research conducted by Asendorpf and Meier (1993) carried
portable recorders for several days, recording the participants’ verbal behaviour during
their daily life. Recordings were then DEMO by the researchers to reﬂect each participant’s
frequency of speech versus non-speech. Similarly but more recently, Mehl and his
colleagues (Mehl & Pennebaker, 2003; Mehl, Pennebaker, Crow, Dabbs, & Price, 2001;
DEMO et al., 2007) have used the electronically activated recorder (EAR) to record verbal
behaviour and environmental sounds in participants’ daily lives. Their DEMO reveals, for
example, that there is no gender difference in talkativeness (as measured by the number of
words recorded by the EAR) DEMO that participants’ language use (as measure by the types of
words DEMO in verbal behaviour as recorded by the EAR) was consistent across
DEMO
Strengths
As summarized in Table 3, there are important advantages to DEMO behavioural
observation. First, because this method is based on independent observations DEMO a target
person’s behaviour, it avoids biases or inaccuracies arising from DEMO behaviour or
acquaintance-reported behaviour. Although both self-reported behaviour and acquain-
tance-reported behaviour may be quite valid, they can be affected by tendencies such as
self-enhancement or self-veriﬁcation or by expectations about a person’s behaviour based
upon DEMO experience. Thus, if one or more independent, unacquainted observers
1The newly revised RBQ-3.0 now includes 67 items that are applicable to a wider DEMO of social contexts than
previous versions of the RBQ (Furr et DEMO, in press). Much of the items’ content and behavioural domains DEMO
the same as previous versions, but may items have been reworded, some have been dropped and some have been
added. In addition, the Riverside Accuracy Project has developed a ‘Q-sorter’ computer program that is available
DEMO free download at http://rap.ucr.edu/qsorter, allowing Q-sorts (including the RBQ-3.0) to be completed and
recorded on a computer (details are DEMO in Furr et al., in press).
Copyright # 2009 John DEMO & Sons, Ltd. Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DEMO: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
381
describe a target person’s behaviour as friendly and DEMO, then we can have fairly
strong conﬁdence that the evaluation was DEMO inﬂated by self-enhancement biases; we
might have less conﬁdence in an DEMO self-reported friendly and charming
behaviour, or in descriptions provided by spouses DEMO parents. Potential biases are reduced
further if data are reliably aggregated across multiple independent observers, if those
observers share no biases. Second and similarly, direct behaviour observation avoids
potential errors arising when trying to recall behaviour across time. That is, behavioural
coding is usually done in a very immediate manner, almost always done during or
immediately after observing the behaviour itself.
Third, when behaviour is recorded in some way, coding options DEMO ﬂexible and
powerful. For example, recorded stimuli—whether available on videotapes, DVDs or
through audio ﬁles (e.g. Mehl et al., 2001)—may be DEMO repeatedly using different
behavioural codes. That is, as new questions emerge, researchers can return to old (but still
useful) stimuli and re-code DEMO behaviour to address those questions. For example, Furr and
Funder (2007) reported analyses of new data obtained from new observers of videotapes
that produced data used earlier by Furr and Funder (2004). Similarly, DEMO stimuli can
be coded either globally or sequentially. In global coding, DEMO produce codes
representing an individual’s behaviour during an entire interaction—for example,
indicating a participant’s talkativeness or nervous behaviour across a 5-minute interaction
with DEMO stranger. In contrast, observers doing sequential coding produce codes for discrete
DEMO of the interaction—for example, indicating a participant’s talkativeness or
nervousness during DEMO 30-second segment of an interaction (Bakeman & Gottman,
1997). DEMO coding can provide insight into the unfolding of social interactions, but
DEMO intensive nature essentially restricts it to observers who can pause and rewind behaviour.
Indeed, the potential ability to pause, rewind and study behavioural DEMO repeatedly is an
important and unique strength of direct behavioural observation based on video-recorded
behaviours. When observers have the ability to review behaviours that DEMO otherwise fast
and ﬂeeting, their ability to produce strong behavioural data DEMO enhanced dramatically.
Fourth, when using direct behaviour observation, researchers can control, to some
degree, several important characteristics of the observers. Speciﬁcally, they can screen
potential observers to evaluate their motivation and ability, they can train observers
extensively, they can monitor observers over the course of a study, they can ensure
independence of observers when necessary and they can specify the precise number of
observers coding each participant. Such capabilities allow DEMO to maximize the
quality of behavioural data and to tailor the research design to important speciﬁcations.
Fifth, researchers using direct behaviour observation may be able to manage
environmental conditions and create speciﬁc situations or situational themes. DEMO
example, Asendorpf et al.’s (2002) behavioural examination of shyness required DEMO
participants interact in ‘a shyness-inducing situation’, in which participants interacted with
DEMO attractive stranger of the opposite sex who was ostensibly going to provide likeability
judgments of the participant. Thus, researchers can create highly speciﬁc situations and
hold those situations constant across participants.
Computer-generated ‘immersive virtual environments’ are DEMO recent development with
potential relevance for direct behavioural coding. Such environments are deﬁned as states
in which individuals perceive themselves to be ‘enveloped by, included in, and interacting
with’ an environment that may include human-like agents (Blascovich, Loomis, Beall,
Swinth, Hoyt, & Bailenson, 2002, p. 105). Modern technology allows investigators to
administer the experience of DEMO with such speed and quality that, it has been argued, it
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
382 R. M. Furr
creates ‘a compelling sense of personal, social, DEMO environmental presence for users ....
while allowing the investigator near-perfect control over the experimental environment and
actions within it’ (Blascovich et al., 2002, p. 106). Of particular relevance is the possibility
that researchers might DEMO environments—social and nonsocial, common and novel—
that may be of great DEMO but that may be difﬁcult to create in the typical laboratory
environment. Of course, this potential beneﬁt comes with potential costs—some of the
weaknesses associated with direct behavioural observation (see below) are relevant and
perhaps DEMO pronounced for observation conducted within computer-generated
immersive virtual environments (e.g. artiﬁciality)DEMO Nevertheless, the technology raises
interesting possibilities for behavioural observation.
Weaknesses
Although DEMO behavioural observation has important strengths, it has several weaknesses
as well. DEMO, as others have noted (Furr et al., in press; Gosling et al., 1998) it can be
demanding, in terms of time, effort and money. A common implementation of behavioural
coding will require: (a) Recruiting participants to engage in the behavioural tasks,
(b) planning and preparing the observational context and the recording strategy,
(c) purchase of recording equipment, (d) initial collection of raw behavioural DEMO,
(e) preparation of the recorded behaviour (e.g. organizing, labelling and backing-up DVDs),
(f) recruitment and training of observers, (g) design or selection of a coding scheme (i.e.
precisely which DEMO will be coded and how), (h) organizing an assignment strategy
of target participants to observers, (i) collection of behavioural codings, (j) entry of coded
data and (k) a manager to coordinate tasks. Each of these elements can be signiﬁcantly
demanding it its own DEMO, and many researchers may be forgiven for viewing their
combined effect DEMO prohibitively difﬁcult or costly. Thus, the signiﬁcant demands of direct
behavioural DEMO may inhibit willingness to collect such data, and they may reduce
DEMO amount of data collected when direct behavioural observations are conducted.
Limitations upon the amount of data may manifest itself in several ways—limiting the
number DEMO behaviours being coded, limiting the number of observers contributing data, and
limiting the number of conditions under which participants are observed. Not only DEMO
these limitations affect the psychometric quality of some direct observational data
(DEMO reliance on few observers may reduce reliability), but they may generate datasets
narrowly focused on a few speciﬁc behaviours and a few speciﬁc DEMO, rather than a
wide range of potentially important behaviours and contexts. DEMO, several recent
sources guide researchers through the ins-and-outs of direct behavioural DEMO (Bakeman,
2000; Bakeman & Gottman, 1997; Cairns, 1979; Funder et al., 2000; Furr & Funder, 2007;
Furr et al., in press; Margolin et al., 1998; Thompson, Felce, & Symons, 2000),
Second, direct behavioural observation is usually limited DEMO brief in-lab contexts (though
not always, e.g. Hart et al., DEMO; Smith, Shoda, Cumming, & Smoll, in press). To DEMO
participants’ behaviour available to independent observers or to recording devices and to
ensure participants’ informed consent, researchers typically invite participants into
laboratory settings that facilitate observation. This strategy, while having advantages
described above, comes with DEMO potential cost common to all lab-based observational
work—questionable ecological validity. Some might wonder whether behaviours
exhibited in brief and often-artiﬁcial laboratory environments, based on tasks that may
be rather unusual, are representative of participants’ natural behavioural tendencies.
Third, when participants know that their behaviour is being observed and/or recorded,
unusual or intense self-presentational concerns might be activated. Although DEMO
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. DEMO: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
383
concerns likely affect any social interaction, interactions observed and monitored by
psychologists may raise concerns or motivations that are particularly DEMO or that do
not emerge in normal interactions. Consequently, researchers may DEMO whether
participants’ behaviour is fully representative of behaviour exhibited under more typical
motivational, affective and cognitive circumstances. Thus, although observers’ data might
accurately DEMO the behaviour in the observational situation, the behaviour itself may be
DEMO unrepresentative of participants’ ‘normal’ behavioural tendencies. This may,
for instance, DEMO correlations between self-reported personality traits (presumably
reﬂecting ‘normal’ cognitive, affective and behavioural tendencies) and behaviour
obtained from saliently observational contexts.
Fourth, although DEMO behavioural observation avoids some biases potentially
associated with behavioural self-reports or acquaintance-reports, they may be affected
by other biases or heuristics. For example, DEMO perceptions and interpretations of
behaviour might be affected by common stereotypes—for example, perceiving a male as
exhibiting assertive behaviour but perceiving a similarly-behaving woman as exhibiting
aggressive behaviour. Such biases may be less problematic for coding DEMO focusing on
relatively concrete behaviours requiring little psychological inference (e.g. corners DEMO
the mouth lift upwards vs. exhibits a friendly smile, or speaks DEMO 3.5 minutes vs. acts
assertively). However, they might be exacerbated DEMO observers are not strongly interested in
the behavioural event. That is, DEMO upon the length and nature of the behavioural
event, observers’ interest DEMO attention may wane, opening the door for biases that weaken
behavioural DEMO Fortunately, the use of multiple coders may mitigate such problems, as
long as the coders do not share biases.
Experience sampling reports of DEMO behaviour
A second strong type of behavioural data is behavioural information obtained via
experience sampling methods (ESM; Bolger, Davis, & Rafaeli, 2003; Conner, Barrett,
Tugade, & Tennen, 2007; Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 2007). There are many
forms of ESM research, DEMO beeper studies, daily diary studies, web-based diary
studies and social interaction diary studies (Fournier et al., 2008; Gosling et al., 1998; Wu
& Clark, 2003).
However, the strongest form of ESM DEMO may be the ‘palm pilot’ study, which has
increased as hand-held DEMO technology has advanced. In a typical behavioural palm-
pilot ESM study, DEMO carry hand-held computers for several days, sometimes for
2 weeks or DEMO Several times each day, the computer signals participants to describe their
DEMO at that moment or within a period immediately preceding the signal. This
produces data reﬂecting the ebb and ﬂow of behaviour across an ostensibly DEMO
set of situations in participant’s real lives (e.g. Fleeson, 2001; DEMO, 2007).
For example, Fleeson (2007) conducted a behavioural ESM study examining the
predictability of cross-situational behavioural contingencies. Participants carried hand-
held DEMO for several days and were signalled multiple times per day. Each time, they
responded to questions about their experience within the past 30 minutes, including nine
questions reﬂecting three behavioural domains (e.g. ‘During the last DEMO hour, how
hardworking have you been?’). Results revealed, for example, that conscientious behaviour
was generally associated with perceived task orientation—when a person perceived a
situation as being task-oriented, he or she enacted a high level of conscientious behaviour.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
384
R. M. Furr
Strengths
First, ESM data provide a fairly clear window onto participants’ behaviour and experiences
in everyday life (Conner et al., 2007; Scollon, Kim-Prieto, & Diener, 2003). By asking
participants to report their current or very recent behaviour at multiple times across
DEMO days, researchers obtain a rich perspective upon the tendencies, variabilities and
contingencies characterizing each participant’s ‘real life’ behaviour. Furthermore,
participants often provide DEMO about environments in which their behaviour
occurs. Along with providing insight into participants’ environments in their own right,
these data also facilitate the DEMO of situation-behaviour contingencies or conditionalities
(Conner et al., 2007; Scollon DEMO al., 2003). That is, such data allow researchers to examine,
on a person-by-person basis, the nature and degree of association between speciﬁc
environmental factors and speciﬁc behaviours. Some important contemporary perspectives
in personality DEMO are well informed by such data (Furr, in press).
Second, ESM procedures can generate a large amount of behavioural data from each
participant. By asking participants to report behaviour at multiple points across multiple
DEMO, researchers obtain extensive information about speciﬁc behaviours and situational
factors, or more generally, about processes and patterns of psychological responses within
each participant (Bolger et al., 2003; Conner et al., 2007; Scollon et al., 2003). This allows
researchers to examine important behavioural questions with a level of statistical precision
and power that may not be possible DEMO other strong types of behavioural data.
Third, because ESM-based behavioural reports DEMO usually provided during,
immediately after, or shortly after behavioural events, they reduce retrospective biases
likely affecting other forms of behavioural data (Bolger et al., 2003; Conner et al., 2007;
Scollon et al., 2003). Of course, the further removed a report is from DEMO behavioural event
itself, the more susceptible it is to retrospective biases.
DEMO, the technology often used in ESM studies offers important practical beneﬁts. DEMO
example, many computerized forms of ESM record the time at which DEMO report was
completed, allowing researchers to identify reports occurring long after DEMO intended
reporting occasion. Thus, researchers can detect and eliminate reports potentially DEMO
from retrospective biases. In addition, data collected with hand-held computers can DEMO
downloaded directly into secured databases, thereby enhancing security and reducing
problems DEMO from human data entry.
Weaknesses
First, researchers may be concerned about DEMO potentially affecting self-reports of
behaviour (Conner et al., 2007; Gosling DEMO al., 1998; Scollon et al., 2003). Although ESM
data DEMO retrospective biases, other biases can affect participants’ reports of their
behaviour. DEMO arising though motivational factors, cognitive factors or factors
reﬂecting one’s unique DEMO of one’s own behaviour, a variety of biases can shade
participants’ DEMO reports. Thus, the accuracy of ESM behavioural data depends
upon participants’ DEMO and motivation to provide valid behavioural reports. Researchers
should consider carefully the potential effect of stable individual differences in particular
response biases upon participants’ DEMO reports across multiple assessments. For
example, stable individual differences in a DEMO to self-enhance might inﬂate some
participants’ reports of a generally desirable behaviour such as ‘acting friendly’ across
reporting occasions. This bias could create differences DEMO participants’ mean levels of
reported-friendliness across occasions. However, it would not DEMO differences among
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. DEMO Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
385
participants’ patterns of responses across occasions or the DEMO associations
between friendliness and a speciﬁc environmental variable (unless self-enhancement
manifested DEMO systematically in speciﬁc kinds of occasions but not others). In contrast,
stable individual differences in an extremity response bias might affect differences DEMO
participants’ patterns of responses—creating more dramatic variability in some
participants’ patterns than in others’.
A second potential weakness is that the repetitive and frequent DEMO required in
ESM research may affect participants’ responsiveness and reactivity (Bolger DEMO al., 2003;
Conner et al., 2007; Scollon et al., 2003; Wheeler & Reis, 1991). Many ESM studies,
particularly DEMO requiring multiple responses per day, demand hundreds of responses
across days DEMO weeks. Although participants typically learn the process and importance of
the research, their responsiveness may wane during the study. Consequently, fatigue, loss
of interest and even irritation may affect participants feeling burdened by the relatively
DEMO and long-lasting demands of ESM research. Eventually, such feelings may
decrease DEMO accuracy in some participants and may increase attrition. In addition, the
DEMO intensive nature of ESM research enhances concern about participant reactivity,
raising the possibility that ‘the self-reporting of experience changes the very experience
being DEMO (Conner et al., 2007, p. 90). For example, participants may be asked
repeatedly about the friendliness of their behaviour and about DEMO they
experience, and repeated reﬂection may lead them to change their DEMO or to seek
speciﬁc environments. In sum, one of the key DEMO of an ESM approach—the intensive
study of participants’ behaviours in real life—is related to potential problems with fatigue,
attrition and reactivity.
A third DEMO limitation of ESM-based daily life behavioural research is that
researchers typically do not control environments that participants encounter. On one hand,
this is DEMO potential strength providing insight into the environments that different kinds of
people naturally encounter, which may reveal important facets of personality. On the other
hand, the lack of situational control is a potential weakness. The fact that participants likely
encounter different situations, combined with the fact that behaviour is affected by
situational stimuli, produces thorny complexities. For example, differences DEMO participants’
behavioural reports may arise from differences in the situations they encounter rather than
differences in stable personality characteristics. Whether such non-constancy of situational
DEMO across people should be considered a source of measurement error (e.g. DEMO
comparing average levels of behaviour across people) may depend upon one’s DEMO
inclinations. In addition, non-constancy of situations across people reduces or eliminates
DEMO ability to account for normativeness in analyses of individuals’ behavioural
proﬁles (DEMO, in press, 2008; Shoda et al., 1994). Although a full description of beha-
vioural normativeness is beyond the scope of the DEMO paper, researchers studying
behavioural proﬁles are encouraged to consider the potential DEMO of accounting for
the degree to which each person’s behavioural proﬁle reﬂects the average behavioural
proﬁle (Furr, in press). Unfortunately, this cannot be done easily if participants’ behaviour
proﬁles reﬂect different situations.
One ﬁnal DEMO limitation of most ESM behavioural data is that limited information is
collected at any single assessment occasion (Bolger et al., 2003). To DEMO the
intrusiveness and burden of the procedures, researchers usually present a DEMO small
set of questions at each measurement occasion. Because each construct should be assessed
with multiple items in order to enhance reliability and content DEMO, relatively few
constructs can be assessed via the typical ESM procedure.
DEMO # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
386 R. M. Furr
Acquaintance-reports of recent behaviour
By relying on participants’ DEMO or interaction partners to report recent behaviour
that they have witnessed, DEMO can obtain a third strong type of behavioural data. For
example, DEMO and his colleagues (e.g. Ayduk et al., 2007; Shoda et DEMO, 1994; Wright &
Mischel, 1987) recruited counsellors to provide DEMO reports of adolescents at
summer camp. Counsellors and campers interacted in various activities, and, at the end of
each activity period, counsellors rated campers’ behaviours in several domains (e.g. ‘was
verbally aggressive...’, ‘was untalkative...’)DEMO Thus, the counsellors’ ratings reﬂected
behaviour very recently expressed by the DEMO
This form of behavioural data differs from direct behavioural observation in an
important way. Acquaintance-reports of recent behaviour (ARRB) are provided by people
DEMO have been involved with the participants and perhaps who were even involved in the
behavioural interactions. In contrast, direct behavioural observations are provided by
independent observers who do not know the participants and who were not DEMO
involved in the interaction.
Strengths
Generally speaking, ARRB shares several strengths DEMO ESM. First, ARRB facilitates
observation in natural contexts, providing information about participants’ behaviour in
‘real life’ environments. Consequently, researchers obtain information that is quite
representative of participants’ behaviour in naturally occurring situations, including
situations that might not be easily replicable in a laboratory context. Second, ARRB data is
temporally close to the behavioural event. If acquaintances report on recent DEMO, then
the reports may avoid signiﬁcant retrospective biases potentially affecting weaker DEMO of
behavioural data. Third, ARRB data can produce many behavioural occasions DEMO each
participant—if acquaintances agree to provide behavioural reports over a series of
interactions, then researchers can obtain in-depth information about each participant’s
behavioural trends across time and, perhaps, situations. For example, Shoda et al.’s (DEMO)
camp-based behavioural data included multiple situations in which each participant was
observed on multiple occasions. This depth of information allowed the researchers to
DEMO cross-situational behavioural proﬁles with psychometric conﬁdence.
Finally, like direct behavioural observation, ARRB avoids reliance on participants’ self-
reports. As described earlier, self-reported behaviour may be susceptible to various biases;
because ARRB does not rely DEMO self-reports, such biases are reduced.
Weaknesses
Although ARRB data may avoid DEMO biases associated with self-ratings of behaviour,
it may be susceptible to inaccuracies emerging from acquaintances’ or interactants’
perspectives. Acquaintances such as friends, parents, roommates, spouses, counsellors and
coworkers may provide ratings affected by prior experience with target participants,
expectancies about participants’ behavioural tendencies, and various motivational
inﬂuences on perception and interpretation of behaviour (e.g. social desirability, DEMO
protection, etc.). For example, based on previous encounters, a DEMO may view a
camper as generally temperamental. This impression could then colour the counsellor’s
interpretation of the camper’s behaviour in various situations, perhaps increasing the
likelihood that the counsellor describes the camper’s behaviour as more aggressive DEMO it
merits. Even when relying upon interactants not previously acquainted with a participant,
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
387
researchers should consider potential inaccuracies. For example, previously unacquainted
pairs might be asked to interact for 10 minute and then DEMO behaviour exhibited by their
interaction partner. Such ratings are not affected by previous experiences with the partner,
but they may be affected by DEMO motivational or attentional biases (e.g. self-presentational
concerns may direct attention away DEMO the partner’s behaviour, producing inaccurate
ratings).
A second potential difﬁculty DEMO ARRB data is that, as with ESM, limited behavioural
information can be collected at any single occasion. Particularly if researchers examine
participants in DEMO contexts, they may avoid demanding that acquaintances
complete an extensive set DEMO ratings.
ARRB data share at least two weaknesses with direct behavioural observations. One is
that acquaintances and/or interactants need to be recruited and DEMO training on the
observational process. Like direct behavioural coding, ARRB requires DEMO additional
people—beyond the participants themselves—be recruited and compensated, and it
hinges DEMO their continued involvement. In addition, reliance on others to provide
behavioural DEMO requires that those others understand the observational process as
accurately as possible. Although this may be accomplished without great expense, it does
add time, people and potential difﬁculty to the research design. A second weakness shared
with direct behavioural observation is participant reactivity to being observed. As
described DEMO, awareness of being observed may create unusual or intense self-
presentational DEMO that could generate behaviours unlike those expressed under more
normal circumstances.
In sum, direct behavioural observations, experience sampling reports of current or recent
DEMO and acquaintance- (or interactant-) reports of recent behaviour are relatively
strong forms of behavioural data. Although no data perfectly reﬂect ‘actual behaviour’,
DEMO methods provide relatively good approximations of participants’ actual behaviour in
speciﬁc contexts. Indeed, the accurate understanding of connections between personality
and behaviour (see DEMO 1) requires strong behavioural data—by having relatively clear
insight into what DEMO actually do, we can more fully understand the factors truly
affecting DEMO behaviours, the true role of behaviour in psychosocial processes, the
true behavioural implications of new constructs and measures and the true nature of
DEMO phenomena such as behavioural consistency. The ﬁrst three forms of behavioural
data are crucial for achieving such understanding. Next, ﬁve additional forms of
behavioural data are brieﬂy reviewed. These methods provide information relevant to some
important DEMO, and they are generally less difﬁcult and less expensive to collect DEMO
those previously reviewed. However, beneﬁts of ease and convenience may come DEMO the
expense of relatively lower strength as reﬂections of participants’ actual behaviour.
Hypothetical behavioural self-reports
One convenient method of gauging behaviour across a variety DEMO situations is to ask
participants to describe their likely behaviour in speciﬁc contexts (e.g. Hirschberger,
Florian, Mikulincer, Goldenberg, & Pyszczynski, 2002; Magnusson & Ekehammar, 1978;
Perkins & Corr, 2006). For example, in an interesting examination of attachment style,
participants described ‘what they would say or do’ in response to several negative
relationship events (Collins, 1996, p. 815). In this research, participants’ open-ended
descriptions were coded by trained coders rating their punitiveness and likelihood of
producing DEMO Similarly, in a recent study of behavioural inhibition and approach,
DEMO # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
388 R. M. Furr
participants read descriptions of scenarios likely to induce DEMO, and they were asked to
‘imagine themselves in each scenario, and then rate how they would be likely to react in
that situation’, including ratings of ‘their actual behavioural and cognitive responses’
(Cooper, Gomez, & Buck, 2008, p. 407).
Strengths
Self-reported hypothetical behaviour has DEMO appealing qualities. First and most
practically, such data are inexpensive and DEMO to collect—there is no need for special
technology, there is usually DEMO need for additional people to observe and code behaviour,
there is no need to spend months or years coding video-recordings and there is DEMO need for
specially prepared lab space. For researchers without large budgets, DEMO access to many
students or assistants and without a wide time frame, such methods are appealing.
Second and more conceptually, self-reported hypothetical behaviour DEMO offer insights
into behaviours in unusual or rare situations. For example, DEMO the previously described
study of behavioural inhibition and approach, participants indicated DEMO likely behaviour
across more than 20 situations potentially inducing anger (Cooper DEMO al., 2008). The
situations probably would not be reﬂected heavily DEMO studies relying on methods such as
direct behavioural observation and ESM. The demands of observing participants in
23 different situations in a direct behavioural DEMO study may be prohibitive, and
most participants in an ESM or DEMO study are unlikely to experience many, if any, of the
anger-inducing situations during the relatively brief course of such studies.
Third and relatedly, researchers studying self-reported hypothetical behaviour can exert
relatively great ‘control’ over the DEMO to which participants respond. They can control
the number of situations, DEMO they can create descriptions reﬂecting the precise nature of
situations in a way that matches their goals. Moreover, by exposing all participants to the
same situations, researchers can maximize situational constancy, which has potential
beneﬁts DEMO described earlier.
Fourth, the use of self-reported behaviour in hypothetical situations DEMO researchers to
‘observe’ participants in many situations and/or to ‘observe’ many behaviours. As
described above (see the ‘ESM’ section), the ability to obtain behavioural information
across many situations provides a level of precision that DEMO not be possible through other
strong methods of obtaining behavioural data, DEMO it allows researchers to examine
important ‘within-person’ questions such as situation–behaviour contingencies. Similarly,
the ability to capture many behaviours facilitates the wide-ranging examination DEMO
behaviour, with a variety of conceptual and psychometric advantages.
Weaknesses
There DEMO several crucial problems with hypothetical behavioural self-reports. First, as
outlined for DEMO data, reliance on self-reported behaviour is potentially problematic—a
variety of potential DEMO may affect participants’ responses. This problem likely interacts
with the second problem, which is the potentially questionable ability of participants to
know how they would truly respond in speciﬁc situations, particularly situations they might
have never encountered. Participants may not be able to anticipate all relevant stimuli in DEMO
supposed situations. In most research with hypothetical scenarios, the scenarios provide
DEMO detail (e.g. ‘how would you respond if someone cut in front DEMO you in line at the
movies?’). Obviously, one’s actual DEMO depends upon a many factors, few of which
are speciﬁed in DEMO scenarios presented to participants. Even if participants were aware of
all relevant stimuli, they still may not be able to predict their responses—how they would
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
389
actually feel, think and ultimately behave when faced with real situational stimuli. In sum,
researchers may reasonably worry about DEMO degree to which hypothetical behavioural self-
reports reﬂect actual behaviour.
A third problem is ambiguity in the interpretation of these data. In such studies—and
DEMO within a given study—the data are variously described as reﬂecting behaviour,
behavioural intentions or willingness to behave (or other similar terms). These differences,
though perhaps subtle, are conceptually important—‘behaviour’ is not the same thing as
‘behavioural intentions’. Authors should be encouraged to label their data (e.g. as
behaviour or behavioural intentions) in a way that most accurately reﬂects the message that
they wish to convey. Furthermore, they should maintain that label or a label with highly
similar meaning throughout a paper.
DEMO retrospective or globally retrospective behavioural self-reports
Two additional types of behavioural data are participants’ self-report of past behaviour or
of general behavioural tendencies. In DEMO using these methods, participants are often
asked to rate behaviour as DEMO occurred in speciﬁc contexts they have actually encountered,
or they are asked to rate behaviour as it generally occurs (e.g. Claeys et al., 1993; Dekeyser,
Raes, Leijssen, Leysen, & Dewulf, 2008; Lo¨ nnqvist, Leikas, Paunonen, Nissinen, &
Verkasalo, 2006; Paunonen, Haddock, Forsterling, & Keinonen, 2003; Westmaas, Moeller,
& DEMO, 2007). Although the distinction between contextually retrospective and
generalized behavioural DEMO has potentially important implications, it is not always
clear—thus, the two types of data will be discussed together.
For example, in an examination of cross-situational behavioural variability, participants
were asked to consider several situations they had experienced during the past year, to write
descriptions of each and to rate the degree they expressed four behavioural domains in each
(Claeys et al., 1993). Reﬂecting a more generalized approach, participants in DEMO recent study
completed several self-report trait measures along with a self-report survey of behaviour
(Hong, Paunonen, & Slade, 2008). Intended to DEMO ‘complex behaviours of some social
signiﬁcance’, the behavioural survey included ‘overt DEMO such as grade point
average, tobacco use, alcohol consumption, participation DEMO organized sports, and number
of parties attended per month’ (Hong et al., 2008, p. 162).
Strengths
Retrospective self-reports of behaviour share DEMO advantages of self-reported
hypothetical behaviour. First, it is easier, cheaper and faster than some other ways of
assessing behaviour. Second, it allows researchers to inquire about behaviours and
situations that occur rarely in daily life DEMO that may be difﬁcult to capture in a laboratory.
For example, DEMO et al. (2007) examined personality correlates of behaviours related
to alcohol intoxication, including drunk driving, publicly exposing one’s body, giving
alcohol to one’s pets and having sexual contact with a stranger. Such behaviours are DEMO
potentially important, but are either impossible or unethical to examine in DEMO laboratory or
are unlikely to occur frequently during a time-limited ESM study. Third, for studies using
contextualized behavioural reports, the number and nature DEMO situations can be controlled
to some degree. Fourth, given its relative DEMO and affordability, it allows researchers to
capture many behaviours and/or DEMO situations for each participant.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
390 R. M. Furr
A ﬁfth advantage of this type of data, as compared to self-reported hypothetical
behaviour, is that it may be based upon more accurate self-knowledge. Ostensibly based
upon behaviours actually expressed by participants, it may avoid pitfalls affecting
participants’ attempts to predict their behaviour in DEMO situations that they may
have never encountered.
Weaknesses
Paralleling its shared advantages with self-reported hypothetical behaviour, retrospective
self-reported behaviour shares an important disadvantage. First and speciﬁcally, because it
relies upon self-reports, it potentially suffers from DEMO that may affect behavioural self-
reports.
Second and relatedly, the retrospective DEMO global nature of these methods may exacerbate
potential biases associated with self-report. Because they are based upon participants’
recollections of temporally distal behavioural events DEMO upon their judgments of their
generalized behavioural tendencies, the ratings are DEMO upon relatively abstract cognitive
phenomena as compared to the immediate behavioural self-reports obtained via ESM. As
such, their validity may be more seriously compromised by motivational and cognitive
response biases, along with simple inaccuracies in recollection.
Third, these methods can blur distinctions between behavioural data and self-reported
dispositions. That is, researchers may worry that retrospective behavioural self-report is
simply a slight variation on other kinds of trait-level or dispositional reports. As others DEMO
noted (e.g. Cervone, Shadel, & Jencius, 2001) many personality DEMO include items
referring to behaviour (along with items referring to other DEMO and physiological
responses). In addition, some ‘behavioural’ self-reports include content DEMO may not truly
reﬂect behaviour. For example, the behavioural report used DEMO Paunonen et al. (2003)
includes ratings of important attributes such DEMO attractiveness, popularity, honesty and
intelligence, and it includes items referring DEMO grade point average and obesity. As
Paunonen et al. acknowledge, such DEMO do not reﬂect behaviour, strictly deﬁned. The
inclusion of such items, though they reﬂect important phenomena, somewhat obscures the
distinction between ‘behavioural criteria’, ‘consequences of behaviour’ and ‘personality
attributes’. For researchers wishing to focus directly on behaviour, this is a signiﬁcant
problem.
Contextually retrospective or globally retrospective behavioural
acquaintance-reports
The ﬁnal methods to be discussed are contextually retrospective or DEMO retrospective
reports of behaviour provided by knowledgeable acquaintances (e.g. Lo¨ nnqvist DEMO al.,
2006; Manders, Scholte, Janssens, & De Bruyn, DEMO; Pursell, Laursen, Rubin, Booth-
LaForce, & Rose-Krasnor, 2008). Perhaps used most often with younger participants, these
methods rely on informants such as parents, teachers or peers to provide behavioural
information about target participants. For example, in a recent examination of personality,
prosocial behaviour and externalizing behaviour problems among adolescents, behavioural
data were obtained both from peer and self nominations and from maternal ratings (Pursell
et al., DEMO). Prosocial behaviour was assessed by asking students to nominate six
classmates—potentially including themselves—who exhibited various prosocial
tendencies (e.g. ‘someone who helps others, DEMO who plays fair, someone who is
polite’). In addition, externalizing behaviours (or externalizing ‘problems’ as they were
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour 391
also described, e.g. ﬁghting, stealing) were assessed through the aggression and
delinquency scales of the Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach, 1991a,b) as completed by
participants and mothers. Investigators concluded that DEMO and prosocial behavior
are distinct predictors of externalizing problems for boys and overlapping predictors of
externalizing problems for girls’ (p. 479).
Strengths
Retrospective acquaintance-reports of behaviour share some advantages with retrospective
self-reported behaviour. Speciﬁcally, they may capture rare behaviours or behaviours in
unusual situations, and they allow some control over the nature and number of situations to
which participants DEMO (in terms of retrospective reports of behaviour in speciﬁc
situation). DEMO addition, acquaintance-reports of behaviour avoid reliance on self-reports of
behaviour, limiting potential biases associated with such data.
Finally, retrospective acquaintance-reports of behaviour may provide important external
perspectives on behaviour—perspectives that may be particularly important for DEMO
kinds of participants. For example, researchers studying children’s behaviour may rely DEMO
parents or teachers to report the children’s maladaptive behavioural tendencies (e.g.
DEMO, Barbaranelli, Pastorelli, & Cervone, 2004). Such information may otherwise be
difﬁcult to collect with young participants.
Weaknesses
Although self-report biases are DEMO, acquaintances (e.g. parents, teachers) may have
other biases creating inaccuracies in behavioural reports. In addition, the retrospective or
global nature of these data requires respondents to rely on potentially inaccurate memory
of participants’ behaviour, magnifying the impact of cognitive and motivational biases
possibly affecting acquaintance-reports of DEMO Finally, the retrospective nature of
these data, and particularly the generalized form, may blur the distinction between
acquaintance-reports of participants’ personality dispositions and acquaintance-reports of
behaviour. For example, if a teacher rates a child as being aggressive, we might wonder
whether the rating reﬂects an aggregation of aggressive behavioural instances or the
teachers’ judgment of the child’s dispositional tendency—or DEMO Again, this should be a
signiﬁcant concern for researchers wishing to DEMO directly on behaviour.
HOW AND HOW OFTEN IS BEHAVIOUR ACTUALLY STUDIED IN
PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY?
Recently, researchers have argued that the ﬁeld has demonstrated meager commitment to
the study of behaviour (Baumeister et al., 2007); however, there appear to be only two
studies supporting these arguments. DEMO and his colleagues examined trends in
behaviourally oriented research in personality and social psychology, concluding that ‘the
study of behavior has been in a steady decline since the early 1980s’ (p. 399). Their
analysis indicates that less than 20% of the studies published in the Journal of DEMO
and Social Psychology in 2006 included ‘any direct observation of behavior’ (DEMO 398)—in
terms of either the dependent variable or as a vehicle for manipulating an independent
variable. Somewhat similarly, Robins et al. (2007) queried editorial boards of three
personality journals, asking members to rate the frequency with which they used various
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd. Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
392
R. M. Furr
assessment strategies. Of 17 assessment strategies, ‘behavioural observation’ and
‘behavioural responses’ were generally rated as being used slightly less than DEMO
frequently, with experience sampling being used even less frequently.
These analyses DEMO revealing, but important questions remain unanswered. The analysis
by Baumeister et DEMO included research from both personality and social psychology, and
the analysis DEMO Robins et al. rely on self-reported frequencies rather than examination of
actual publication trends. In addition, the previous analyses were not intended to
differentiate ﬁnely among types of behavioural data. Thus, the current paper will explore
actual publication trends in personality psychology, with special emphasis on the
fundamental types of data used to measure behaviour. This will provide insight into
DEMO frequency with which behaviour is examined in personality psychology and into the
frequency with which speciﬁc types of behavioural data are used. The latter DEMO is
particularly important because it will reveal the degree to which the ﬁeld relies upon strong
measures of immediate or recent behaviour versus retrospective DEMO hypothetical methods of
assessing behaviour.
Two leading personality journals were examined—the Journal of Personality (JP) and
the Personality Processes and Individual Differences section DEMO Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology (JPSP). Volumes from 2007, 2002 and 1997 were examined to reveal
potential trends in the use DEMO behavioural data across the past 10 to 15 years. For each year,
all issues of JP and the odd-numbered issues of JPSP were DEMO As shown in Table 4,
the sample included more than 350 quantitative studies in more than 170 papers presenting
original research (i.e. not including conceptual papers, meta-analyses and case studies).
Table 4. Usage of basic types of behavioural data: Percentages of published papers (studies)
DEMO year
N
1997 2002 2007 Total
57 (103) 58 (123) 58 (130) 173 (356)
Total of all papers (studies) claiming 15.8 (21.4) 19 (17.9) 17.2 (18.5) 17.3 (19.1)
or implying behaviour
Total of all papers (studies) with some DEMO (26.2) 25.9 (18.7) 31 (20.8) 29.5 (21.6)
DEMO of behavioural data
Types of behavioural data
Direct behavioural observation 3.5 (DEMO) 3.4 (1.6) 8.6 (3.8) 5.2 (2.5)
Experience sampling reports of current 0 (0) 1.7 (.8) 1.7 (1.5) DEMO (.8)
or recent behaviour
Acquaintance-reports of recent behaviour 0 (0) 1.7 (.8) 0 (0) .6 (.3)
Contextually retrospective DEMO 3.5 (1.9) 5.2 (2.4) 5.2 (2.3) 4.6 (2.2)DEMO
self-reports
Contextually retrospective behavioural 0 (0) 1.7 (.8) 0 (DEMO) .6 (.3)
acquaintance-reports
Hypothetical behavioural self-reports 3.5 (1.9) 1.7 (3.3) 3.4 (1.5) 2.9 (2.2)
Hypothetical behavioural 0 (DEMO) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0)
acquaintance-reports
Globally retrospective behavioral
self-reports 15.8 (14.6) 12.1 (6.5) 10.3 (5.4) DEMO (8.4)
Globally retrospective behavioural 8.8 (4.9) 12.1 (6.5) DEMO (4.6) 9.2 (5.3)
acquaintance-reports
Narrowly focused behavioural tests 10.5 (7.8) 8.6 (4.9) 5.2 (3.8) 8.1 (5.3)
Copyright DEMO 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
393
Coding was conducted for each paper and each DEMO First, to evaluate the degree to
which researchers claim to investigate DEMO, the title and abstract or each paper
were examined to identify DEMO in which the study of behaviour was explicitly claimed
or heavily implied. If an paper’s title or abstract explicitly suggested that it included
the DEMO of behaviour, it was coded as ‘claiming or implying the study DEMO behaviour’.
In contrast, if an paper’s title or abstract referenced only DEMO that were either
clearly non-behavioural (e.g. self-concept) or that could be interpreted in many non-
behavioural ways (e.g. decision-making, creativity), then DEMO was coded as ‘not claiming or
implying the study of behaviour’. Similarly, each study’s conceptual presentation of its
variables was examined to identify studies in which one or more variables were described
as behavioural—this produced, at the level of individual studies, information regarding
the degree to which researchers claim to study behaviour. Second, coding was conducted
to evaluate the degree to which researchers actually engage in behavioural measurement
and to evaluate the DEMO to which researchers employ the various behavioural
measurement strategies outlined above. Thus, the methods of each study were examined
to identify those in which the measurement strategy for any variable matched one of the
nine types DEMO behavioural data outlined in Table 2 or could be considered a narrowly
focused ‘behavioural test’ of some kind. If a behavioural measurement strategy was
DEMO in a study, then the study was coded as ‘includes some DEMO of behavioural data’
and the type of data was coded (see DEMO 4). As shown in Table 4, this information is
presented DEMO the level of individual studies, and it was aggregated to the DEMO of separate
papers.
Results reveal that the study of behaviour was relatively uncommon. In terms of the
general study of behaviour, approximately only 17% of the papers claimed or implied that
behaviour would be studied, and approximately 19% of the studies claimed to include one
or more behavioural DEMO There appears to be no dramatic change in these values
across time. Somewhat more encouraging, according to the methods outlined in the current
paper, approximately 30% of the papers (22% of the studies) included one or more forms of
behavioural data. Again, data reveal no clear systematic trend in these values, although
there may be some trend toward fewer studies including behavioural data since 1997. This
may reﬂect a trend toward DEMO increasing number of studies per paper (from about 1.8 in
1997 DEMO 2.2 in 2007).
Importantly, papers claiming to study behaviour generally DEMO so—the vast majority of
ostensibly ‘behavioural’ papers included one or more of the methods in Table 4. In fact,
some papers included data DEMO could be considered behavioural, even though the data were
not explicitly DEMO as ‘behavioural’. For example, Holtgraves (1997, Study 3) conducted
a study ‘to assess how directly [participants] would phrase their remarks in various
DEMO, and participants had to ‘choose which of several remarks (varying in directness)
they would be most likely to use in different situations’ (p. 629). According to Table 2, this
qualiﬁes as hypothetical behavioural self-reports.
Although most papers claiming to examine behaviour did in fact include DEMO
data, a small number did not. Those four papers were interesting DEMO valuable contributions
in their own right, but their status as being DEMO was clouded by relying upon
questionnaires (either self-report or informant-report) that included a few behavioural
items along with items referring to cognitive, affective, or other responses. Such data
reﬂect a blend of important psychological phenomena, rather than focusing sharply on
behaviour itself.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
394 R. M. Furr
Results also revealed that, when behaviour was studied, relatively weak behavioural data
were often employed.2 As shown in Table 4, globally retrospective behavioural reports
(obtained either from the self or acquaintances) were used most frequently, followed by
narrowly forced behavioural tests of various kinds. Somewhat surprisingly, direct
behavioural observation was the next most frequently used form of behavioural data
(though it was used in only 5% of all papers), followed by contextually retrospective
behavioural self-reports and hypothetical behavioural DEMO Note that, although
experience sampling has gained popularity over the years, it is not often used to assess
behaviour—more often reﬂecting phenomena such DEMO emotion or cognition. Finally, the
current sample of studies, though large, included almost no examples of ARRB,
contextually retrospective behavioural acquaintance-reports or (not surprisingly)
hypothetical behavioural acquaintance reports. Although not reﬂected in Table 4, analysis
revealed that direct behavioural observation was used almost exclusively in single-study
papers. Of nine papers reporting direct behavioural observation, eight included only one
study, and the ninth included two studies. No robust temporal trends appear in Table 4;
however, results may indicate a recent increase in direct behavioural observation and a
steady decrease in globally retrospective behavioural DEMO
In sum, these results provide important insight into the general use DEMO behavioural data
and into the use of speciﬁc types of behavioural data. These analyses, along with those
reported by Baumeister et al. (2007) suggest that approximately 16–24% of the studies
published between 1996 and 2007 DEMO behavioural data. Furthermore, the current
study revealed that globally retrospective reports DEMO behaviour are the most common type
of behavioural data.3 These forms of behavioural data are important for answering certain
types of questions—indeed, the current ﬁndings may indicate that personality
psychologists are more interested in generalized behavioural DEMO than in
contextualized behaviour, though this may be changing. However, as discussed earlier,
these forms of data can suffer from potentially important DEMO raising concerns about
their strength as indictors of actual behaviour (see DEMO 3).
IMPLICATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
For an ostensibly behavioural science, personality psychology has been accused of rarely
examining behaviour. More fundamentally, personality psychologists may not even agree
on what behaviour is, what qualiﬁes as behavioural data or what differentiates strong
behavioural data from weaker data. The DEMO paper examines the actual study of
behaviour and the use of behavioural data in personality research, and it argues for greater
attention to behaviour and for increased use of strong, wide-ranging behavioural data.
Conceptual and methodological implications
By addressing these problems, the current paper is intended to initiate conversation that
will ultimately improve the ﬁeld both conceptually and methodologically. Readers DEMO
2Note that some paper/studies included more than one type of behavioural data.
3Unlike the current study, the study by Baumeister et al. did not count ‘self-reports of past behaviour or of
hypothetical behaviours’ in their DEMO of behavioural data (p. 399). However, they did count a study as
behavioural if it included ‘any manipulation’ or if it ‘used DEMO as the conduit for manipulating the
independent variable’, whereas the current DEMO focus on the types of behavioural measurement excluded
behavioural manipulations from the coding process (p. 399).
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/DEMO
Personality and behaviour
395
invited to evaluate this discussion—for example, is the proposed deﬁnition of behaviour
sufﬁciently (or overly) inclusive, is the list of core forms of behavioural data appropriately
inclusive, does it reﬂect accurately the strengths and weaknesses of each and is it
appropriate in its DEMO evaluation of one or more types of data? The discussion is
DEMO to motivate serious conversation with important conceptual and methodological
implications for personality psychology.
By deﬁning behaviour as verbal utterances (excluding verbal reports in psychological
assessment contexts) or movements that are potentially available to careful observers
using normal sensory processes, the paper begins to articulate what should be considered a
behaviour and what should not. This is an important conceptual issue DEMO its own right, and it
has implications for the methods that DEMO be viewed as producing truly ‘behavioural’
data. Furthermore, the current paper DEMO that behaviour is fundamental to personality
psychology in several key respects—as a core phenomenon to be explained, as the
foundation of important phenomena, DEMO revealing the importance and nature of personality
constructs and measures and as an important mechanism within psychosocial processes.
Although other psychological responses may be DEMO for similar reasons (e.g. affect is
an important phenomenon to be DEMO and can be a key part of psychosocial processes),
the DEMO of strong behavioural research suggests that the importance of behaviour may be
under-appreciated.
The current paper also articulated and evaluated core methods of measuring DEMO
Many of us may have considered some advantages and disadvantages of some forms of
behavioural data, but there has been no comprehensive conversation and integration of
these issues. A review of the strengths and weaknesses of DEMO core methods of obtaining
wide-ranging behavioural data leads me to believe that three methods are particularly
strong as ways of reﬂecting participants’ actual behaviour. DEMO, direct behavioural
observation, experience sampling of behaviour and acquaintances’ reports of recent
behaviour are strong ways to reﬂect participants’ contextualized behaviour. To be DEMO,
these methods have limitations and other methods have roles and strengths; however, these
three methods likely offer the greatest insight into real DEMO of real people.
Note that the methods summarized in the current paper can be used to measure
behaviour at a broad range of speciﬁcity DEMO generality. Indeed, according to the
discussion above, behaviour can be perceived and measured at very speciﬁc or micro levels
(e.g. subtle facial movements, Ekman, Friesen, & Hager, 2002) and at very general or
macro levels (e.g. managerial-autocratic behavioural style, Alden & Phillips, 1990). Such
differences have important links to the nature of one’s research questions DEMO hypotheses,
but data from all levels qualify as behavioural data, DEMO speciﬁc limits. On one end of the
continuum, behaviour is potentially DEMO to careful observers using normal sensory
processes, according to the deﬁnition DEMO This places a lower limit on the potential
subtleness or speciﬁcity of micro-level codings. On the other end of the continuum,
behaviour is DEMO utterances or movements, which allows for broad behavioural styles
but which DEMO trait judgments. That is, behavioural coding can be done at a DEMO
general or macro level (e.g. ‘behaved in a friendly manner’) but once the codings/ratings
are made in reference to more stable, general dispositional qualities (e.g. ‘is a friendly
person’) they no longer qualify DEMO behaviour according to the present perspective.
Finally, the current paper provided DEMO support for assertions that behaviour is
under-studied in personality psychology and that, when it is studied, it is studied via
relatively weak methods. DEMO more than 350 studies in 173 papert, only 22% included
behavioural DEMO It becomes difﬁcult to consider personality psychology a truly
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
396
R. M. Furr
behavioural science and to achieve important advances if DEMO than a quarter of our studies
include any measurement of behaviour. Moreover, the methods through which we observe
behaviour are only rarely ‘strong’ in terms of having conﬁdence that they reﬂect actual
behaviour in real situations. DEMO three years examined in the current analysis, only 7%
of all DEMO included direct behavioural observation, experience sampling of behaviour or
ARRB, and another 8% included narrowly focused behavioural tests. More common were
relatively weak DEMO such as globally retrospective behavioural self-reports.
Practical implications and recommendations
The current examination has several important implications and leads to practical
recommendations. First, researchers should devote more attention to strong behavioural
data. As argued earlier, behaviour plays important roles in personality psychology;
however, strong behavioural data are obtained only rarely. Thus, what we think we learn
about personality and behaviour is largely based upon data with important limitations as
indicators of DEMO behaviour. Again, relatively weak behavioural strategies such as
retrospective/generalized self-reported DEMO or hypothetical behavioural reports can
be useful for addressing some issues in personality psychology. But stronger behavioural
strategies such as direct behavioural observation or DEMO sampling of behaviour can
provide more direct insight into what people actually do. Thus, they provide more
compelling information about the links between personality and behaviour.
Second, researchers should restrict use of the term ‘behaviour’ to only those forms of
data consensually viewed as behaviour. Table 2 provides DEMO starting point for a discussion
that may ultimately produce good consensus about this issue. This is important because the
ﬁeld should be able to DEMO reasonable consensus on such a fundamental issue, and we
should communicate DEMO ways that adhere to this consensus. This will limit potential
confusion and disagreement arising from loose or imprecise use of the term behaviour.
Relatedly DEMO somewhat more narrowly, researchers studying behaviour should clarify
their measurement strategy DEMO in their reports. More speciﬁcally, papers’ abstracts
should identify which type DEMO behavioural data is to be reported. Currently, abstracts often
vaguely refer DEMO ‘behaviour’ with minimal information about the nature of the ostensibly
behavioural data. Given the strengths and weaknesses of the types of behavioural data, this
information may affect readers’ desire to devote time and energy to an DEMO paper.
Fourth, editors, reviewers and funding agencies should exercise appropriate appreciation
for strong behavioural data. They should evaluate research according to the relative
DEMO and weaknesses of the forms of behavioural data. My impression is that editors
and reviewers generally do this well. For example, as mentioned earlier, eight of the nine
paper reporting direct behavioural observation were one-study papers, but most papers
summarized in Table 4 included multiple studies. Thus, DEMO and editors seem to
recognize the importance and costs of direct behavioural observation, and they therefore
accepted one-study papers in which this type of data was used.
Fifth, as a ﬁeld, we should ensure that DEMO constructs, phenomena or methods are tied to
strong behavioural data. As DEMO earlier, behaviour reveals concrete implications of
constructs and measures. The lack DEMO strong behavioural data means that few constructs and
measures may have strong demonstrable links to what people actually do. True, many
constructs and measures are linked to important cognitive and affective phenomena.
Despite the importance of DEMO links, the greatest social and practical impact occurs
through peoples’ actual DEMO is where cognitive, affective and
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
397
motivational events and tendencies directly affect the individual’s DEMO outcomes and social
context. Without strong information about participants’ behaviour, we DEMO understand
the full and perhaps most practically important implications of new personality variables
and measures. This is an accusation that I have heard levelled DEMO much of the emerging
neuroscience measurements in personality psychology. Such research will merit greater
attention and interest when it is tied to strong behavioural DEMO
Sixth, going beyond the current analysis, the ﬁeld would beneﬁt from using methods
revealing a wide range of important behaviours. Indeed, the methods highlighted in the
current paper (see Table 2) can be applied DEMO many behavioural domains at many levels of
abstraction. When such methods are used to gather information about a wide range of
behaviours, they can address important issues in personality psychology. One might argue
that psychology has DEMO dedicated itself strongly to a comprehensive and coherent
examination of basic social behaviours (Baumeister et al., 2007; Furr et al., in press)DEMO True,
classic studies in experimental social psychology examined behaviour; however, each
study usually included one and only one behaviour—e.g. how much time DEMO taken to help
someone ostensibly in need, how intensely a participant DEMO shocked someone,
whether people on the street stopped to join a group that was ostensibly watching
something interesting. Such work is important, and the single behaviours included in each
study were carefully chosen for their DEMO to the speciﬁc hypothesis being tested. But
the focus on various single behaviours provides scattered perspective on the fundamentally
multidimensional nature of behaviour. For DEMO, did people express anxiety,
compassion or confusion as they helped DEMO, do different types of people express
concern versus apathy while harming DEMO, and are people who are willing to harm
someone also hesitant DEMO help another person? A greater dedication to wide-ranging,
multidimensional examinations DEMO behaviour could provide greater breadth, depth and
integration to our understanding DEMO personality, social forces and human behaviour. Funder
has recently (2006) DEMO that among the three elements of the ‘personality triad’—
personality, situations DEMO behaviour—behaviour is the most poorly understood. Although
studies of single or few behaviours are important, studies that include many behaviours will
allow researchers to understand more thoroughly the nature of behaviour in general, the
fundamental differences among types of behaviours and the potential structure of a
complex sets DEMO behaviours.
In sum, personality psychology includes many important phenomena such as DEMO,
affect, motivation, self-concept, social perceptions and trait structure. Attention DEMO such
phenomena has revealed core psychological structures and processes that are fundamental
to human personality. The current paper echoes and extends a growing chorus DEMO
researchers suggesting that our attention should be broadened to include more widespread
examination of behaviour in general, and greater use of strong behavioural data in
particular. That is, the ﬁeld must pay at least as much attention to what people do as it does
to what people think, feel and see. By clarifying the meaning of ‘behaviour’, the
importance of behaviour, the strengths and weaknesses of core types of behavioural data
and the lack of attention to strong behavioural data, the ﬁeld will solidify its conceptual and
methodological foundation.
REFERENCES
Achenbach, T. M. (1991a). DEMO for the child behavior checklist and 1991 proﬁle. Burlington:
University of Vermont.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
398
R. M. Furr
Achenbach, T. M. (1991b). Manual for DEMO youth self-report and 1991 proﬁle. Burlington: University
of Vermont.
Alden, L. E., & Phillips, N. (1990). An interpersonal analysis of social anxiety and depression.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 499–513.
Asendorpf, J. B., Banse, R., & Mu¨ cke, D. (2002). Double dissociation between implicit and explicit
personality self-concept: The case of shy behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83, 380–393.
Asendorpf, J. DEMO, & Meier, G. H. (1993). Personality effects on children’s DEMO in everyday life:
Sociability-mediated exposure and shyness-mediated reactivity to social situations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 1072–1083.
Ayduk, O., DEMO, M. L., Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Wright, DEMO (2007). Verbal intelligence and
self-regulatory competencies: Joint predictors of boys’ aggression. Journal of Research in
Personality, 41, 374–388.
Bakeman, R. (DEMO). Behavioral observations and coding. In H. T. Reis, & C. DEMO Judd (Eds.),
Handbook of research methods in social psychology (DEMO 138–159). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. M. (1997). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., & Funder, D. C. (2007). Psychology as the science of self-reports and
ﬁnger movements. Whatever happened to actual behavior? Perspectives on Psychological Science,
2, 396–403.
DEMO, J., Loomis, J., Beall, A. C., Swinth, K. DEMO, Hoyt, C. L., & Bailenson, J. N. (2002).
DEMO virtual environment technology as a methodological tool for social psychology.
Psychological Inquiry, 13, 103–124.
Block, J. (1989). Critique of the act DEMO approach to personality. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 56, 234–245.
Buss, D. M., & Craik, K. H. (1983). The DEMO frequency approach to personality. Psychological Review,
90, 105–126.
Buss, D. M., & Craik, K. H. (1985). Why not measure that trait? Alternative criteria for identifying
important dispositions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 934–946.
Bolger, N., Davis, A., & Rafaeli, E. (2003). Diary methods: Capturing life as it is lived. DEMO
Review of Psychology, 54, 579–616.
Borkenau, P., Mauer, N., Riemann, R., Spinath, F. M., & Angleitner, A. (2004)DEMO Thin slices of
behavior as cues of personality and intelligence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86,
599–614.
Cairns, R. B. (Ed.). (1979). The analysis of social interactions: Methods, issues and illustrations.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Caprara, G. V., Barbaranelli, C., DEMO, C., & Cervone, D. (2004). The contribution of self-
referent beliefs to personality development: Perceived self-efﬁcacy and bnig ﬁve constructs as
predictors of psychosocial outcomes. Personality and Individual Differences, 37, 751–763.
Cervone, D., Shadel, W. G., & Jencius, S. (2001). Social-cognitive theory of personality assessment.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5, 33–51.
DEMO, W., Timmers, L., & Phalet, K. (1993). Stable individual differences in situation-behaviour,
construct-behaviour, and goal-behaviour relations. European Journal of Personality, 7, 139–158.
Collins, N. L. (1996). Working models DEMO attachment: Implications for explanation, emotion and
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 810–832.
Conner, T., Barrett, L. F., DEMO, M. M., & Tennen, H. (2007). Idiographic personality: DEMO theory
and practice of experience sampling. In R. W. Robins, R. DEMO Fraley, & R. Kreuger (Eds.), Handbook
of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 79–96). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Cooper, A., Gomez, R., & Buck, E. (2008). The DEMO between the BIS and BAS, anger and
responses to anger. Personality DEMO Individual Differences, 44, 403–413.
Dekeyser, M., Raes, F., Leijssen, M., Leysen, S., & Dewulf, D. (2008). Mindfulness DEMO and
interpersonal behaviour. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 1235–1245.
Downey, DEMO, Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., & Khouri, H. (DEMO). The self-fulﬁlling prophecy in close
relationships: Rejection sensitivity and rejection DEMO romantic partners. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 75, 545–560.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: DEMO (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
399
Dougherty, D. M., Mathias, C. W., DEMO, D. M., Furr, R. M., Nouvion, S. O., & Dawes,
M. A. (in press). Distinctions in behavioral impulsivity: DEMO for substance abuse research.
Addictive Disorders and Their Treatment.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Hager, J. C. (2002). The DEMO action coding system (2nd ed.). Salt Lake
City: Research Nexus eBook. (Retrieved from) http://face-and-emotion.com/dataface/facs/
description.jsp
Fast, L., & Funder, D. (2008). Personality as manifest in word use: Correlations with self-report,
acquaintance-report, and behavior. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 94, 334–346.
Fiedler, E. R., Oltmanns, T. DEMO, & Turkheimer, E. (2004). Traits associated with personality disorders
DEMO adjustment to military life: Predictive validity of self and peer reports. DEMO Medicine, 169,
207–211.
Fleeson, W. (2001). Towards a DEMO and process-integrated view of personality: Traits as density
distributions of states. DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 1011–1027.
Fleeson, W. (2007). Situation-based contingencies underlying trait-content manifestation in beha-
vior. Journal of Personality, 75, 825–862.
Fournier, M. A., Moskowitz, D. S., & Zuroff, D. C. (2008). Integrating dispositions, signatures, and
the interpersonal DEMO Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 531–545.
Funder, D. DEMO (2004). The personality puzzle (3rd ed.). New York, DEMO: Norton.
Funder, D. C. (2006). Towards a resolution of DEMO personality triad: Persons, situations, and behaviors.
Journal of Research in DEMO, 40, 21–34.
Funder, D. C., & Colvin, C. R. (1991). Explorations in behavioral consistency: Properties of persons,
situations, DEMO behaviors. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 773–794.
Funder, DEMO C., Furr, R. M., & Colvin, C. R. (2000)DEMO The Riverside behavioral Q-sort: A tool for the
description of social DEMO Journal of Personality, 68, 451–489.
Furr, R. M. (in press). Proﬁle analysis in person-situation integration. Journal of Research in
Personality.
Furr, R. M. (2008). A framework for proﬁle similarity: Integrating similarity, normativeness, and
distinctiveness. Journal of Personality, 76, 1276–1316.
Furr, R. DEMO, & Funder, D. C. (1998). A multi-modal analysis of DEMO negativity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1580–1591.
Furr, DEMO M., & Funder, D. C. (2004). Situational similarity and DEMO consistency: Subjective,
objective, variable-centered, and person-centered approaches. Journal of DEMO in Personality,
38, 421–447.
Furr, R. M., & Funder, D. C. (2007). Behavioral observation. In R. Robins, C. Fraley, & R. Krueger
(Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 273–291). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Furr, R. M., Wagerman, S. A., & Funder, D. C. (in press) Personality as manifest in behavior: Direct
behavioral observation using the revised DEMO Behavioral Q-sort (RBQ-3.0). In C. R. Agnew,
D. E. DEMO, W. G. Graziano, & J. R. Kelly (Eds.), Then DEMO miracle occurs: Focusing on behavior
in social psychological theory and research. DEMO York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gosling, S. D., John, DEMO P., Craik, K. H., & Robins, R. W. (1998)DEMO Do people know how they behave?
Self-reported act frequencies compared with on-line codings by observers. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74, DEMO
Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M. E. (2002). A room with a cue: Judgments of
personality based on ofﬁces and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 82, 379–
398.
Hair, P., & Hampson, S. E. (2006). The role of impulsivity in predicting maladaptive behaviour
among female DEMO Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 943–952.
Hart, D., Burock, DEMO, London, B., Atkins, R., & Bonilla-Santiago, G. (2005)DEMO The relation of
personality types to physiological, behavioural, and cognitive processes. European Journal of
Personality, 19, 391–407.
Hektner, J. M., Schmidt, J. A., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007). Experience sampling method:
Measuring the quality of everyday life. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hirschberger, G., Florian, V., Mikulincer, M., Goldenberg, J. L., & Pyszczynski, T. (2002). Gender
differences in the willingness to engage DEMO risky behavior: A terror management perspective. Death
Studies, 26, 117–141.
DEMO # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
400
R. M. Furr
Holtgraves, T. M. (1997). Styles of DEMO use: Individual and cultural variability in conversational
indirectness. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 73, 624–637.
Hong, R. Y., Paunonen, S. DEMO, & Slade, H. P. (2008). Big Five personality factors DEMO the prediction of
behavior: A multitrait-multimethod approach. Personality and Individual Differences, 45, 160–
166.
Lo¨ nnqvist, J.-E., Leikas, S., Paunonen, DEMO V., Nissinen, V., & Verkasalo, M. (2006). Conformism
DEMO the relations between values, anticipated regret, and behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1469–1481.
Magnusson, D., & Ekehammar, B. (DEMO). Similar situations–similar behaviors? A study of the
intraindividual congruence between DEMO perception and situation reactions. Journal of
Research in Personality, 12, 41–48.
Manders, W. A., Scholte, R. H. J., Janssens, J. M. A. M., & De Bruyn, E. E. J. (2006). Adolescent
personality, problem behaviour and the quality of the parent-adolescent relationship. European
Journal of Personality, 20, 237–254.
Margolin, G., Oliver, P. H., DEMO, E. B., O’Hearn, H. G., Medina, A. M., Ghosh, C. M., et al. (1998).
The nuts and bolts of behavioral observation of marital and family interaction. Clinical Child and
Family Psychology DEMO, 4, 195–213.
Mayer, J. D. (2004). A classiﬁcation system for the data of personality psychology and adjoining
ﬁelds. Review of General DEMO, 8, 208–219.
Mehl, M. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2003). The sounds of social life: A psychometric analysis of
students’ daily social environments and natural conversations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 857–870.
Mehl, M. R., Pennebaker, J. W., Crow, DEMO D., Dabbs, J., & Price, J. H. (2001). DEMO electronically
activated recorder (EAR): A device for sampling naturalistic daily DEMO and conversations.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 33, 517–523.
Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Ramirez-Esparza, N., Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). Are
women really more talkative than men? Science, 317, 82.
Paunonen, S. V., Haddock, G., Forsterling, F., & Keinonen, M. (2003). Broad DEMO narrow
personality measures and the prediction of behavior across cultures. European Journal of
Personality, 17, 413–433.
Perkins, A. M., & Corr, P. J. (2006). Reactions to threat and personality: psychometric differentiation
of DEMO and direction dimensions of human defensive behaviour. Behavioural Brain Research,
169, 21–28.
Pursell, G., Laursen, B., Rubin, K. H., Booth-LaForce, C., & Rose-Krasnor, L. (2008). Gender
differences in patterns DEMO association between prosocial behavior, personality, and externalizing
problems. Journal of Research in Personality, 42, 472–481.
Robins, R. W., Tracy, J. L., & Sherman, J. W. (2007). What kinds of methods do personality
psychologists use? A survey of journal editors and editorial board members. In R. W. Robins, R. C.
Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 673–
678). New York, NY: Guilford.
Scollon, C. N., Kim-Prieto, C., & Diener, E. (2003). Experience sampling: Promises and pitfalls,DEMO
strengths and weaknesses. Journal of Happiness Studies, 4, 5–34.
Shoda, DEMO, Mischel, W., & Wright, J. C. (1994). Intra-individual DEMO in the organization and
patterning of behavior: Incorporating psychological situations into DEMO idiographic analysis of
personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 674–687.
Simpson, J. A., Winterheld, H. A., Rholes, W. S., & Orina, M. M. (2007). Working models of
attachment and reactions to different forms of caregiving from romantic partners. Journal of
Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 93, 466–477.
Smith, R. E., Shoda, Y., Cumming, S. P., & Smoll, F. L. (in press). DEMO signatures at the
ballpark: Intraindividual consistency of adults’ situation-behavior patterns and DEMO interpersonal
consequences. Journal of Research in Personality.
Spain, J. S., Eaton, L. G., & Funder, D. C. (2000). Perspectives on DEMO: The relative accuracy
of self vs. others for the prediction of DEMO and emotion. Journal of Personality, 68, 837–867.
Thompson, T., Felce, D., & Symons, F. J. (Eds.). (2000). Behavioral observation: Technology and
applications in developmental disabilities. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: DEMO (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/per
Personality and behaviour
401
Vazire, S., & Mehl, M. R. (DEMO). Knowing me, knowing you: The accuracy and unique predictive
validity of self and other ratings of daily behavior. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychology,
95, 1202–1216.
Verplanken, B., & Holland, R. W. (2002). Motivated decision making: Effects of activation and self-
centrality DEMO values on choices and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO,
434–447.
Westmaas, J., Moeller, S., & Woicik, P. DEMO (2007). Validation of a measure of college students’
intoxicated behaviors: Associations with alcohol outcome expectancies, drinking motives, and
personality. Journal of DEMO College Health, 55, 227–237.
Wheeler, L., & Reis, H. DEMO (1991). Self-recording of events in everyday life: Origins, types, and uses.
Journal of Personality, 59, 339–354.
Wright, C., & DEMO, W. (1987). A conditional approach to dispositional constructs: The DEMO
predictability of social behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1159–1177.
Wu, K. D., & Clark, L. A. (2003). DEMO between personality traits and self-reports of daily
behavior. Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 231–256.
Zentner, M., & Renaud, O. (2007)DEMO Origins of adolescents’ ideal self: An intergenerational perspect-
ive. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 92, 557–574.
Copyright # 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eur. J. Pers. 23: 369–401 (2009)
DOI: DEMO/per{1g42fwefx}