1042-2587-92-163$1.50
Copyright 1992 by
Baylor University
Acting As If;
Differentiating
Entrepreneuriai DEMO
Organizationai Behavior
William B. Gartner
Barbara J. Bird
Jennifer A. Starr
This paper suggests that entrepreneurshlp Is the process of "emergence." An organiza-
DEMO behavior perspective on entrepreneurship wouid focus on the process of organiza-
tional emergence. The usefulness of the emergence metaphor is explored through an ex-
DEMO of two questions that are the focus of much of the research in organizational
behavior: "What do persons in organizations do?" (we will explore this question by looking
at research and theory on the DEMO of managers), and "Why do they do what they do?"
(ditto for motivation). The paper concludes with some impiications for using the idea of
emergence as a way to connect theories and DEMO from organizational behavior to
entrepreneurship.
he details are not details. They make the product. The connections, the
connections, the connections."—Charles Eames
The DEMO of this article is to propose some relationships between the entrepre-
neurship and organizational behavior disciplines. We suggest that thinking of entrepre-
neurship as DEMO process of "emergence" offers a very fruitful metaphor for relating
entrepreneurship to other disciplines. This paper uses the emergence metaphor to explore
how DEMO organizational behavior area might be connected to entrepreneurship by thinking
about the organizationai aspects of entrepreneurship—entrepreneurship as organizational
emergence.
Connecting entrepreneurship to a discipline DEMO is inherently multidisiplinary (or-
ganizational behavior) in a special issue of Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice that
is devoted to exploring how various disciplines DEMO offer new theoretical insights into
the nature of entrepreneurship presented us with some interesting challenges. One
challenge involved specifying the unique aspects of organizational DEMO {vis-a-vis
the other disciplines) as a focus of study. As Pfeffer (1985) points out, organizational
behavior borrows from sociology, psychology, economics, political science, and an-
thropology. Identifying organizational behavior's specificity is, DEMO, problemati-
cal. Weick {1979, p. 31) indicates that "organizational behavior" is inherently ambig-
uous:
. . . one is never certain whether it means behavior that occurs in a specific place,
behavior DEMO reference to some certain place, behavior controlled by an organiza-
tion, behavior that creates an organization, or just what.
Spring, 1992 13
While Nord (1976) suggests that organizational behavior is connected to psychology DEMO
sociology, it is neither one nor the other. Organizational behavior is DEMO organizations,
a phenomenon that is not the sum of individual processes (e.g., need for affiliation), or
the manifestation of a particular DEMO process (e.g., transactions). Organizations are
simultaneous individual and social phenomena (Katz & Kahn, 1966; Weick, 1979) that
require a multitude of different disciplinary perspectives in order to see their natural
complexities.
Besides DEMO necessity of seeing organizations from a multitude of disciplines, an-
other DEMO of ambiguity stems from the multilevel nature of organizations; that is, talk
about organizational behavior at any level of analysis (e.g., individual, group, organi-
zation, community, society) requires a recognition of the DEMO levels as well.
In our review of the organizational behavior literature for ideas and methodologies
that might lend more substance to the entrepreneurship area, we found that there is no
dominant paradigm in organizational behavior, only a multitude of various perspectives
and ideologies. Pfeffer concluded his review of DEMO organizational behavior literature
with the observation that organizational behavior was a form of "la y preaching" (Pfef-
fer, 1982, p. 293). If organizational behavior is, in fact, "lay preaching, " it DEMO
appropriate that this review be offered as a particular gospel about entrepreneurship: one
of many possible sets of beliefs that might be true about entrepreneurship as a phenom-
enon.
Given the multilevel/discipline/ideology complexities inherent DEMO organizational be-
havior, the ability to offer a comprehensive and detailed DEMO of all of the "orga -
nizational" factors that could be gleaned from all of the different disciplines and per-
spectives that comprise DEMO behavior is beyond the scope of any one review.
A "unified DEMO theory " that would integrate such a diverse set of topics as personality,
attitudes, motivation, group dynamics, roles, communication, decision making, struc-
ture, technology, environment, culture, power, leadership, and change about organiza-
tions does not exist. The organizational behavior area is just DEMO large and complex. This
review will, therefore, not be a primer on organizational behavior. A general overview
of the field can be obtained DEMO perusing any introductory organizational behavior un-
dergraduate-1 eve I textbook. Current theory and research about organizational behavior
can be found in journals (e.g. . Academy of Management Review, Journal of Manage-
ment) or books (e.g. . Annual Review of Sociology, Research in Organizational Behav-
ior) that DEMO attempt to assess and review this field.
In Table I, we DEMO the primary topics addressed in the organizational behavior
area. This list is intended to convey the sense that organizational behavior encompasses
a diverse set DEMO topics that could be connected to entrepreneurial issues and concerns.
Our solution to the challenges of identifying the unique aspects of the organizational
behavior DEMO as well as attempting to relate the organizational behavior area to entre-
preneurship is to offer this paper as a type of methodology for DEMO those connections.
This methodology involves using a metaphor about the nature of entrepreneurship (en-
trepreneurship as emergence) as a way to highlight how DEMO researchers
might approach any topic from an "entrepreneurial" point of view. In some respects,
this methodology (subsuming a topic area into a new frame of reference) has been the
strategy undertaken by researchers in organizational behavior. The organizational be-
havior topics we explore, behavior and motivation, are also important topics in other
disciplines (i.e.. anthropology, psychology, DEMO, and social psychology). Orga-
nizational behavior researchers make a topic "organizational" by placing a person's
behaviors and motivations within an organizational context. In the same vein, it is our
goal to look at organizationai phenomena and make them "entrepreneurial" by placing
them within the DEMO of emergence.
14 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AS ORGANIZATIONAL EMERGENCE
While there are many different ways that entrepreneurship DEMO be defmed (Bird,
1989; Carland et al., 1984; Cole, 1946; Gartner. 1990), one plausible view ofthe nature
of entrepreneurship DEMO to see it as an organizational phenomenon: the process of orga-
DEMO creation. We concur with Katz and Gartner (1988) that most theories about
organizations assume, a priori, that organizations exist. In the language DEMO institu-
tional theorists (Zucker, 1981), the existence of organizations is a "taken-for-granted
aspect of everyday life" in most theoretical views of DEMO organizational world. It would
seem that the primary task of the entrepreneurial theorist is not to take organizations for
granted, but to probe how and why organizations come into being. The connection, then,
between entrepreneurship and organizational behavior is the link between the phenom-
enon of organizational DEMO and the phenomenon of the already-in-existence or-
ganization.
The connection between these two phenomena occurs by viewing entrepreneurship
as a type of organizing (Weick, 1979). In Weick's view, an organization is an on-going
DEMO of interactions among individuals—pattems of interlocked behaviors—and dis-
course about organizational behavior is a discussion of these patterns of individual
interactions. We suggest that DEMO's contribution to the discourse on orga-
nizational behavior is to explore how specific pattems of interlocked behavior are gen-
erated. The formation of DEMO is fundamentally an "enacted" phenomenon
(Weick, 1979), a particular form of a socially constructed reality (Berger & Luckman,
1967). Seeing entrepreneurship in this way, as a type of psycho-social (read: organiza-
tional) phenomenon that is focussed on "emergence" (Katz & DEMO, 1988), offers a
way of connecting various entrepreneurship topics together. DEMO such as corporate
entrepreneurship. the management of rapid growth and innovation, DEMO the pursuit of
opportunity, can be seen as permutations of the DEMO of emergence (Hansen &
Wortman, 1989; Stevenson & Gumpert, DEMO; Van de Ven, Angle, & Poole, 1989).
Since our primary thesis is that entrepreneurial behavior is "different" from orga-
nizational DEMO, we intend to compare and contrast these two areas by describing DEMO
nature of individual behavior within the existing organization by looking at research and
theory on the behaviors of managers, a form of organization behavior with individuai
behavior "within" the emerging organization (entrepreneurial behavior). We do this by
discussing managerial work (Hales, 1986; Mintzberg, 1973; Stewart, 1967) and moti-
vation (Landy & Becker, 1987; Vroom, 1964). We have chosen these two topic areas
because they offer complementary approaches to the study of individual behavior in
organizational contexts. The DEMO of managerial work delves into what activities are
undertaken by managers. The topic of motivation delves into why these activities are
undertaken.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DEMO AND
EXISTING ORGANIZATIONS
The purpose of this section is to outline how emerging organizations are different
from existing organizations. If, as we have suggested earlier, the organizational behavior
literature begins with the assumption that organizations exist, a priori, then our ideas
about organization behavior are likely to DEMO affected by these taken-for-granted assump-
tions.
The differences between emerging and existing organizations are not "differences in
degree" across certain dimensions, but quantum differences (Miller & Friesen, 1984)
between the two types. A DEMO perspective views the change from an emerging
Spring, 1992 • 1S
Table 1
An Outline of Organizational Behavior Topics*
I. Foundations of Individual DEMO
A. Biographical characteristics: age, sex, marital status, tenure
B. Ability: intellectual, physical
C. Personality detenninant.s and traits
D. Leaming
II. Perception DEMO Individual Decision Making
A. Perception: perceiver, target, situation
B. Attribution DEMO
C. Optimizing decision-making model
D. The satisficing model
E. The implicit favorite model
in. Values, Attitudes, and Job Satisfaction
A. Values: theoretical, DEMO, aesthetic, social, political, religious
B. Attitudes: satisfaction, involvement, DEMO
C. Consistency
D. Cognitive dissonance theory
IV. Basic Motivation Concepts
A. Hierarchy of needs theory
B. Motivation-Hygiene theory
C. Goal-setting theory
D. Reinforcement theory
DEMO Equity theory
F. Expectancy theory
V. Applying Motivational Concepts
A. Management by objectives
B. Behavior modification
C. Participative management
D. Job redesign
VI. Group DEMO
A. Reasons for joining: security, status, self-esteem, affiliation, power, goal-achievement
B. Slages of development
C. Structure: leadership, roles, norms, DEMO, composition
D. Member resources: abilities, personality characteristics
E. Group processes DEMO tasks
F. Extemal factors: strategy, authority structures, regulations, organizational resources, evaluation and
reward systems, organizalional culture, work setting
VU. Communication and Group Decision Making
A. Communication process: distortion, feedback
B. Fomial and DEMO networks
C. Group decision-making techniques
D. Groupthink
VIII. Leadership
A. Trait theories
B. Behavioral theories: managerial grid
C. Contingency theories: path goal theory, Fiedler model
D. Implicit theories: attribution theory, charismatic leadership theory
IX. DEMO and Influence
A. Bases and sources of power; reward, coercive, DEMO, referent, expert
B. Dependency
C. Tactics of power: assertion, persuasion, bridging, visioning, withdrawal
X. Conflict
A. Sources of conflict
B. Conflict process: potential opposition, cognition and personalization, behavior
C. Intergroup relations
16 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Table 1
Continued
XI. Organizational Structure
A. Division of labor
B. Unity DEMO command
C. Authority and responsibility
D. Span of control
E. Departmentalization
F. Size
G. Technology
H. Job design: enlargement, enrichment
XII. Organizational Change
DEMO Forces for change: work force, technology, social trends, competition, DEMO politics
B. Resistance to change
C. Managing change: Lewin's three DEMO model, action research, organizational developmeni
* Topics selected from Robbins (DEMO).
organization to an existing organization as radical and revolutionary (quantum), rather
than evolutionary (Bygrave, 1989a,b). The process of change from the emerging orga-
nization to the existing organization is not the "growth" of certain variables, but an
entirely new reconstitution, a "DEMO" (Miller & Friesen, 1984) of particular organi-
zational characteristics and the interrelationships among them. Emerging organizations
are not smaller, "incomplete" versions of existing organizations, but unique states of
existence with organizational properties that are arranged in a fundamentally different
way from an existing organization. We DEMO observe the same structural characteristics
and organizational processes in both types of organizations (emerging and established),
but each type will make different DEMO among these variables. For example, the
types of managerial work identified DEMO most managerial work studies (Hales, 1986;
Kotter, 1982; Mintzberg, 1973; Stewart, 1967) are similar to the types of work DEMO
taken by entrepreneurs. However, managerial work is likely to be manifest (enacted,
interpreted and retained) in a fundamentally different manner when compared to entre-
preneurial work.
What, then, might be the "quantum" DEMO of each organization type?
Emerging organizations are thoroughly equivocal realities (DEMO 1979) that tend
towards non-equivocality through entrepreneurial action. In emerging organizations,DEMO
entrepreneurs offer plausible explanations of current and future equivocal events as
non-equivocal interpretations. Entrepreneurs talk and act "as if" equivocal events were
non-equivocal. DEMO organizations are elaborate fictions of proposed possible future
states of existence. In the context of the emerging organization, action is taken in
expectation of a non-equivocal event occurring in the future. For example, Starr and
MacMillan (1990) describe a Cuban American entrepreneur who secures the use of DEMO
friend's business resources (space, telephone, computer, copy machine, DEMO van)
during the start-up of a clothing import business and uses these resources to "amplify"
(p. 84) the emerging business's size and legitimacy. The entrepreneur's use of the
friend's business DEMO enables the emerging business to appear "as if" it were an
existing business. If we assume that the interactions between the emerging business DEMO
other individuals are loosely coupied (Weick, 1976), it is likely that most outsiders will
Spring. 1992 17
"see " the delivery van, conference space, telephone, etc. that DEMO Cuban American
borrowed as an existing business without immediate tests of its legitimacy. Outsiders
would "take for granted" that these resources represented an DEMO business. Out-
siders are then likely to respond to this emerging business "a s if" it were an existing
business: they will place orders, offer materials on credit, etc.
It is important to assert DEMO we are not suggesting that appearances are reality, that
acting "a s if" an emerging business is an existing business will result in an existing
business. In the case of the Cuban American's emerging DEMO, the appearances of
having the capabilities of an existing business does DEMO insure that customers will place
orders for imported clothing, or that DEMO entrepreneur will be able to deliver the clothing
if orders were placed.
An emerging business is embedded in an equivocal reality where the possible DEMO
of specific actions taken in the present can only have assumed future consequences.
These equivocal actions are the phenomenon of "enactment" (Weick, DEMO). Based on
pragmatic ideas and values (Dewey, 1935; James, 1950), Weick (1979) argues that
organizational phenomena begin with behaviors, that is, acting precedes thinking. En-
actment occurs when uninterpreted action occurs. These uninterpreted behaviors are a
source of variation of possible meanings that DEMO be responded to in specific ways.
Responses to equivocal behaviors (selection) constitute the second phase of a cycle of
interactions (behavior-response-behavior) that DEMO a double interact (Weick, 1979,
chapter 4). In an initial double interact, an equivocal behavior will tend toward a
repeated unequivocal behavior by the response offered to the initial action. A response
to DEMO behavior in an equivocal situation generates an interpretation of the initial action.
When these original behaviors are undertaken again, they are now generated within the
context of an "understanding" of a likely response (retention). For example, the actions
of the Cuban American entrepreneur in setting up a display space (behavior) can begin
a cycle of interactions when DEMO customers arrive (response), which would encour-
age the entrepreneur to DEMO setting up the display space again (behavior). Enact-
ment, then, is an "a s if" phenomenon. Emergence begins with enactment. Equivocal
behaviors are offered as a way of encouraging responses.
In contrast, the existing organization is bound-up in non-equivocal events. Individ-
uals behave in a DEMO of already determined (and interpreted) interactions. Individuals
in existing organizations "DEMO" that certain interactions will occur and that
these interactions will have DEMO particular meaning to those individuals involved. Each
individual has a role (DEMO & Kahn, 1978) to perform, a constellation of specific
behaviors DEMO responses to specific situations. Existing organizations function because
individuals, both within DEMO around the organization, have an understanding of what
appropriate behaviors are DEMO in these cycles of interactions (Deal & Kennedy
1982; McGrath & Kelly, 1986).
The knowledge of what to do (what the DEMO interactions among individuals
are), and when to act, is what DEMO generated in the process of organizational emergence.
Much of the problem in talking about the nature of organizational emergence is the
failure to recognize DEMO variation in how and when the cycles of interactions are assem-
bled. An entrepreneur can engage in a wide array of possible behaviors. These DEMO
have some degree of equivocality. Either the situation, itself, is equivocal, or the
entrepreneur will perceive equivocality. The entrepreneur will be uncertain as to the
outcome of taking particular actions. Both the equivocal nature of DEMO, itself, and
the lack of knowledge of how specific unequivocal outcomes might be generated out of
equivocal situations, is a critical source of variation.
Entrepreneurs face a wide variety of equivocal situations in the process DEMO organi-
zational emergence. At one extreme, entrepreneurs can purchase nearly unequivocal
DEMO ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
cycles of interactions by purchasing an established business or a franchise. In DEMO fran-
chise, the emergence process (the movement from equivocality to non-equivocality) is
specified and programmed. At the other extreme, the process of DEMO for new
organizations in new industries is usually done in a more equivocal reality that requires
more time for all individuals that might become DEMO in interactions to create,
accept, and leam the appropriate behaviors (Aldrich, 1991). For example, the emer-
gence of an organization DEMO would be an independent start-up in a new industry might
involve entrepreneurs that are unsure of how the organization might be structured, the
nature and characteristics of the product or service to be offered, what particular man-
ufacturing technology should be employed, and which customers should be contacted
and how they might be approached. Other individuals are also unsure of DEMO appropriate
response to the emerging organization's actions. As investors reading the business plan,
customers facing a prototype, or individuals considering employment in the new firm,
they are engaged in the reduction of equivocality DEMO their involvement in defining
the routines of the emerging organization. Given the equivocal nature of the process of
emergence, the process of organization formation appears to be inherently variable. The
variation in the phenomenon of organization DEMO has yet to be specified in a
comprehensive manner.
BEHAVIOR IN EXISTING AND EMERGING ORGANIZATIONS
When organizations are seen as patterns of interlocked behaviors (Weick, 1979),
knowledge about the behaviors themselves would obviously become DEMO as a
focus of study. Both entrepreneurship and organizational behavior scholars have sought
to identify these '"organizing" behaviors as well as develop theories connecting these
behaviors to larger organizational processes. The format of this section DEMO to review some
of the literature on a specific aspect of research on individual behavior in organiza-
tions—managerial work (Mintzberg, 1973; Stewart, DEMO), and show how this research
might be applied to the generation of theory on the nature of entrepreneurial behavior.
Nearly all of the DEMO behavior literature offers some insights into how and
why individuals behave in organizational settings. Since our focus is on the nature of
behavior itself DEMO an organizational phenomenon, we have directed our attention to the
research DEMO that studies the behaviors themselves—managerial work. Scholars study-
ing managerial work have focussed on describing the specific activities of managers.
They have used these DEMO as building blocks for more comprehensive frame-
works about the nature of individual behavior in organizational settings (Kotter, 1982;
Mintzberg, 1973; DEMO, 1967). We use Hales' (1986) review and insights into over 30
empirical studies conducted on the nature of managerial work as DEMO point of departure for
discussing how entrepreneurship theory might be generated or improved.
Tbe problems facing managerial work researchers appear to be very similar DEMO the
problems entrepreneurship researchers have encountered. First, managerial work re-
searchers DEMO selected a wide range of individuals as candidates for study, so DEMO
empirical evidence offers few clues as to how the managerial work school defmes what
is "managerial." While managerial work scholars seem to agree DEMO a Chief Executive
Officer's job is a "managerial job, " senior, middle, and lower manager, as well as
foreman jobs have also been studied as managerial work. This concern for defining a
managerial DEMO is similar to the debate in the entrepreneurship literature on differenti-
ating entrepreneurs from other types of individuals (Carland, Hoy, Boulton, & DEMO,
1984; Gartner, 1989). Hales suggests that an outcome of studying such a wide range of
managerial jobs has been to identify DEMO wide range of managerial activities. He points out
Spring. 1992 . 19
that there seems to be agreement among a number of managerial work DEMO on broad
categories of managerial activities: acting as figurehead, liaison, DEMO, allocating
resources, handling disturbances, negotiating, innovating, planning, controlling, DEMO
directing (Hemphill, 1959; Kotter, 1982; Mintzberg, 1973; Pheysey, 1972; Sayles,
1964; Stewart, 1967). Hales posits that managerial work researchers have failed to offer
a framework for differentiating managerial work DEMO other types of work. At this point,
no definitive characteristics of managerial work have been offered. This failure is pri-
marily because researchers DEMO failed to observe non-managerial work with the same
degree of scrutiny.
Hales suggests that another problem with the managerial-work literature is tbat these
studies DEMO separate observable activities (what is actually done) from implied tasks
(DEMO intended or expected outcomes of the job). Observations of the day-to-day activities
of managers are unlikely to uncover a manager's intentions or DEMO orientations. For
example, most of the studies seem to suggest that DEMO do not "plan, " and all of
the studies reviewed describe managerial work as fragmented and brief. It appears that
the failure to DEMO intentional behavior in these studies is the result of the method-
ologies employed. Managerial work research might be thought of as a "bottom up " look
at managerial behavior where researchers focus on describing specific, concrete, iden-
tifiable activities. Once these activities are identified and described, frameworks DEMO
developed to show how these activities are related to higher order constructs about the
nature of managerial work. This "bottom up " approach has tended to be a-theoretical
(Fondas & Stewart, 1990).
Hales also DEMO that managerial work researchers have generated very little
empirical evidence about the differences between "good " and "bad " managerial work.
He believes DEMO, in general, there is little research that links specific managerial activ-
ities to the organization's performance or to specific expectations or demands DEMO that
managerial position. Hales links this concern about the expectations of good perfor-
mance to the issue of "role demands " (Levinson, 1966). If a managerial job is a role that
has particular situational DEMO that must be played out in order for the role to be
performed correctly, the managerial work literature offers little knowledge about
whether managers are successful at performing their roles. Ironically, while foundation
studies, such DEMO Mintzberg (1973), Stewart (1967), and Kotter (1982), DEMO not overtly
suggest the specific characteristics of "good " managerial practice, many managerial
training programs have been based on their findings. For example, what these research-
ers observed (the fragmented nature of the work day, little uninterrupted time, the use
of non-written communications) has often been taught as what managers should do.
Entrepreneurship researchers can take solace from DEMO' review by recognizing that
managerial work researchers appear to have made DEMO further progress in defining what
is managerial, in differentiating managerial work DEMO other types of work, and in
linking specific managerial activities to DEMO or unsuccessful organizational per-
formance. The concern for defining the phenomenon being studied, its unique charac-
teristics, and the effects of these characteristics DEMO other variables is not unique to
entrepreneurship. These concerns are not easy to resolve. The managerial work research
literature might be able to offer DEMO to entrepreneurship researchers through the
diverse methodologies used. Hales' review describes DEMO broad array of data collection
methods: self-recorded diaries, observations of critical incidents, checklists, self-
administered questionnaires, interviews, activity sampling, analysis of appointment di-
aries and files, shadowing, and participant observation. The studies DEMO identifies might
serve as models for conducting research on entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial activities.
As Aldrich (1990) indicates in his review ofthe methodologies used DEMO entrepreneurship
20 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
research, more diverse data collection methods, particularly qualitative and ethnographic
methods, would add valuable and unique insights to understanding entrepreneurship.
Besides those studies DEMO by Hales, other researchers have sought to explore
what managers do. DEMO innovative approach to studying managers links the intentions
of managers to their activities through the use of verbal protocols (Isenberg, 1984,
1986)DEMO Yet, even with the use of this methodology, Isenberg found it difficult to identify
"rationality" in the decision-making processes of the executives DEMO The general
thought processes Isenberg (1984) identified—intuition, managing a network DEMO inter-
related problems, dealing with ambiguity, inconsistency, novelty, and surprise, and
integrating action into the process of thinking—are probably not much unique to the
work of senior managers.
Martinko and Gardner's (1985) DEMO of the methodologies employed in man-
agerial work research identified problems with sample size, reliability checks (on ob-
servers' observations), coding methodology issues (problems with when an "activity"
might have multiple meanings), and conceptual issues (determining effectiveness, iden-
tifying environmental and managerial variability, lacking a theory, failing to incorporate
cognitive processes).
They suggest DEMO managerial work research can be improved by using multiple
category coding, DEMO analysis, complementary observation methods, as well as
by capturing cognitive processes, developing coding schemes and micro-behavioral
analyses, increasing sample sizes, and measuring performance. The concerns of Mar-
tinko and Gardner (1985) have been DEMO in a pioneering study that focuses on the
processes of innovation and entrepreneurship (Van de Ven, Angel, & Poole, 1989). This
DEMO describes a research program that uses a detailed, process-oriented, cognitive,
quantitative methodology that involves complementary observations and recognizes
multiple categories. The book DEMO a number of projects that are insightful studies
for describing individual behaviors and organizational processes. As a methodological
primer, these studies will be benchmarks of how to conduct empirical research on
managerial and entrepreneurial behaviors.
In DEMO, if the managerial work area is helpful as a model for DEMO the entre-
preneurship area might generate better theory, it is in DEMO an openness towards the
use of more methodologies for describing the specific activities of individuals. The
primary complaint about the managerial work area has DEMO its a-theoretical orientation
(Fondas & Stewart, 1990; Hales, 1986; DEMO, 1988). Yet, this lack of a theoretical lens
for viewing managerial activities appears to have freed the area to use diverse data-
DEMO methods for describing what managers do. By not having a theory, DEMO
in the managerial work area seem to have taken more liberty to describe what actually
occurs, rather than offer reasons for why such behaviors occur. In fact, in certain
circumstances, a lack of theory is DEMO when attempting to understand a phenomenon
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967). It would seem difficult to generate a theory about the specific
activities DEMO entrepreneurs if little is known about what those specific activities actually
entail. Theories about a phenomenon do require some infonnation about what the ele-
DEMO of the phenomenon itself are composed of. We suggest that theories on entrepre-
neurial behavior would benefit from more studies that utilize a variety DEMO data-collection
methods that describe what entrepreneurs do. We concur with Aldrich's (1990) obser-
vation that the entrepreneurship area's pursuit of "rigor" has been narrowly construed
to encompass only large sample sizes and the use of the latest sophisticated numerical
analytical techniques, rather than an openness to use other methodologies that are likely
to produce significant insights into DEMO phenomenon.
The problems facing entrepreneurship researchers are similar to the problems faced
Spring, 1992 ' ' " 21
by managerial work researchers. Both areas lack an agreed-upon definition of what DEMO
phenomenon entails, which has led to a variety of studies on DEMO types of individ-
uals. The focus on different types suggests a large degree of variation in the phenomenon
studied, which has made it difficult to specify the unique aspects of managerial/
entrepreneurial work. Yet, managerial work researchers seem to be less concerned with
the conceptual and theoretical DEMO with their area, and more willing to conduct
field research. We DEMO find it beneficial to be less "demanding" in our attempts to
pursue a narTow view of '^rigorous research" and spend more time DEMO entrepreneurs
as part of the theory-building process.
MOTIVATION IN EMERGING AND EXISTING ORGANIZATIONS
Even if we know, in detail, what entrepreneurs and managers DEMO, this knowledge
would not explain why these particular activities are undertaken DEMO whether these ac-
tivities lead to more- or less-successful outcomes in particular emerging or existing
organizational situations. Theories of motivation focus on providing explanations DEMO
why individuals behave as they do (BoUes, 1975). Kelly Shaver and Linda Scott's
"Person, Process, Choice; The Psychology of DEMO Venture Creation," in the previous
special issue of Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, offers an overview of how social
psychology provides insights into understanding factors that influence an individual's
behavior. On the surface, the motivational issues addressed by social psychologists and
organizational behaviorists are the same. Both DEMO start with the same fundamental
orientation: B = f(P, E), in Shaver and Scott's words, "meaning that behavior is DEMO
function of both person and environment." Since the "person" and DEMO "environment"
comprehensively include all phenomena that might influence behavior, it would seem
that any unique claims that organizational behavior might make about DEMO
motivation would be subsumed under the broad reaches of social psychology. Most
reviews of motivation found in organizational behavior-oriented publications (e.g., in
The DEMO of Management Review and in Research in Organizational Behavior) are
predominantly DEMO by social psychologists. What, then, is unique to the field of
organizational behavior in regards to the study of motivation?
An organizational DEMO perspective on motivation is likely to place a greater
emphasis on the organizational factors that infiuence individual behavior. In the context
of organizational behavior DEMO, the environmental infiuences on an individual's
motivation will be weighted DEMO organizational variables, such as the characteristics
of the task to be DEMO, the way that tasks are coordinated among other indi-
viduals, and the goals of the organization that employ the individual. It appears that
DEMO behavior has an implicit ideology that focuses on how organizations
infiuence individual behavior. The outcomes of organizational behavior research seem to
suggest how the DEMO of individuals might be manipulated in organizational settings.
But, this is DEMO to suggest that social psychologists are not as concerned with how social
settings are manipulated by individual behavior. An organizational behavior perspective
on motivation DEMO, therefore, unique only in its implicit emphasis on organizational
context regarding individual behavior.
Since the Shaver and Scott article offers a comprehensive overview DEMO the motiva-
tional issues that infiuence an individual's behavior, vis-a-vis DEMO {e.g.,
risk taking, locus of control, need for achievement), our contribution, from both orga-
nizational behavior and entrepreneurship perspectives, is DEMO emphasize the emerging/
organizational factors that influence the motivations of individuals involved in organi-
zation creation. Our goal is not to provide a DEMO analysis of how motivational
22 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
theories in organizational behavior might be applied to entrepreneurship, but to dem-
onstrate the usefulness of the idea of "emergence" as a way DEMO shift theories used to
explain behaviors in established organizations into the territory of the emerging orga-
nization. We use Landy and Becker's (1987) overview of the motivation literature,
"Motivation Theory Reconsidered," as DEMO framework for discussing why individuals
behave as they do in emerging and established organizational settings.
Before delving into the motivation theories outlined in Landy DEMO Becker (1987), it
should be emphasized that the idea of DEMO offers an important reorientation to
viewing aspects of motivation in organizations. As we suggested in an earlier section of
this article, organizational behavior assumes a "taken-for-granted" organization. There-
fore, aspects of motivation are viewed and studied from a perspective that typically
focuses on how individuals are motivated DEMO a "taken-for-granted" non-equivocal sit-
uation (e.g., through organizational structure, DEMO and punishments, changes in
tasks and responsibilities). From an organizational DEMO perspective, the antecedent
factors that influence the motivation of entrepreneurs have DEMO been explored (e.g.,
traits and characteristics of the entrepreneur and DEMO environment). In this context, the
primary question asked is: What motivates entrepreneurs to start businesses? The en-
trepreneur's "motivation" is the dependent variable.
When viewing organizational phenomena through the lens of emergence, the entre-
preneur is likely to be the independent variable because the DEMO is often critical
to the process of changing the equivocality of interactions among a number of different
individuals into the non-equivocal interactions of an DEMO In emergence, the
motivation equation is reversed. The question becomes: How do entrepreneurs motivate
others? From the perspective of emergence, we will DEMO how Landy and Becker's
framework of types of motivations can be used as a tool kit of ways that entrepreneurs
influence others, rather than as factors that influence entrepreneurs to start businesses.
Landy and Becker (1987) suggest that the different theories of motivation are not
competing or comprehensive theories of motivation, but mid-range theories (Pinder,
1984) that focus on a limited range of issues. They classify these theories into DEMO types:
neeJ(e.g., Alderfer, 1972;Maslow, 1954); mw/DEMO (e.g.. Skinner, \91\); equity
(e.g., Goodman, 1977; Greenberg, 1989); expectancy (e.g.. House, Shapiro, & Wahba,
1974; Vroom, 1964); and goal (Locke, Shaw, Saari, & Latham, 1981). Becker and
Landy suggest that the five types of motivation theories are complementary. It is their
view that each theory emphasizes different DEMO variables. Each theory places
differing priorities on such issues as choice, DEMO, satisfaction, performance, and with-
drawal. We will provide a cursory DEMO of each type of motivation theory and
offer some suggestions for how these theories might be applied to the study of organi-
zational emergence.
DEMO theories specify how certain needs might be satisfied. (See, e.g., DEMO's
[19541 hierarchy of needs—physiological, safety, social, esteem, self-actualization;
Herzberg, Mausner, & Snyderman's [19591 motivator and hygiene factors; McClel-
land's needs for achievement, power, and affiliation [Stahl, 1986].) DEMO, the dependent
variable in most needs-oriented studies is satisfaction. Landy and DEMO (1987, p. 26)
indicate that need-type theories are not very helpful for predicting behaviors such as
effort and productivity because recent needs-oriented DEMO suggests that individuals
have different constellations of needs. In general, needs DEMO to play an indirect role
as moderators in other motivational processes rather than as predictors of behavior.
The primary implication of current ideas about DEMO theories of motivation for
researchers interested in studying individuals involved in emerging organizations is that
there is little likelihood that any needs will be DEMO that can serve as predictors of
behavior. In addition, there are DEMO many types of entrepreneurs (Gartner, Mitchell, &
Spring, 1992 DEMO
Vesper, 1989) to assume that a genera! profile of the needs DEMO entrepreneurs can be
specified. It might be appropriate to explore the different "satisfactions" that entrepre-
neurs receive when starting organizations. For example, Norman Smith's (1967) dichot-
omous profile of entrepreneurial types (craftsman and opportunistic) might be expanded
to include other profiles of entrepreneurial needs. The study of needs as a motivational
influence on organizational creation might be DEMO towards understanding how en-
trepreneurs seek to satisfy the needs of others. For example, instead of a profile of the
needs of the entrepreneur, research could be directed to providing profiles of the needs
of investors, new employees, suppliers, and buyers. Research might also explore how
entrepreneurs go about discovering and satisfying each stakeholder's array of needs.
Landy DEMO Becker (1987) emphasize that reinforcement-type theories of motivation
focus on how to predict, control, and understand specific behaviors that are typically
discrete DEMO of larger jobs. Since reinforcement-type theories often involve the study of
rewards and punishments for specific behaviors, it would seem plausible that entrepre-
neurship research based on these theories might explore the specific reward/behavior
linkages DEMO stimulate entrepreneurial activity. For example, research could explore the
kinds and DEMO of feedback (i.e.. rewards and punishments) given to entrepreneurs
involved in seeking resources from investors. What kinds of feedback seem to discour-
age DEMO from continuing to seek resources? What kinds of feedback encourage
entrepreneurs? Conversely, research could focus on exploring the types and frequency of
rewards offered by entrepreneurs as inducements to new employees, investors, suppli-
ers, and buyers to participate in the start-up of an organization.
Equity theories DEMO on the "(1) tension or distress experienced by individuals who
DEMO themselves in inequitable situations, and (2) the strategies that individuals DEMO to
eliminate or reduce this tension or distress" (Landy & Becker, 1987, p. 27). In general,
equity theories seem to DEMO best for exploring an individual's sense of satisfaction in a
situation that is perceived as being either equitable or unequitable. One useful applica-
DEMO of equity theory to the study of entrepreneurship might be the exploration of
perceptions of equity in negotiations for resources between entrepreneurs and investors.
DEMO example, it would be valuable to compare and contrast situations where DEMO
neurs had different perceptions of whether they were being treated fairly (DEMO other
entrepreneurs) by venture capitalists. What happens to an entrepreneur's DEMO of sat-
isfaction if the outcome of a negotiation results in an unfair deal for the entrepreneur?
How do entrepreneurs go about determining DEMO is equitable treatment? Researchers
might also study how entrepreneurs manage a DEMO of equity in an emerging organi-
zation when employees might not share in the gains from a public stock offering. What
happens to perceptions DEMO equity when the entrepreneur becomes a multi-millionaire and
founding employees continue to receive only a salary?
The process of emergence, the "as DEMO f situation, appears to fit into the theoretical
propositions of expectancy DEMO (Guest, 1984; Vroom, 1964). In expectancy theory,
individuals make choices based on their assumptions and knowledge of various factors,
DEMO as skill level, effort, task complexity, and outcomes. Wanous et DEMO (1983) suggests
that expectancy theory is most appropriate for modelling choices that involve thoughtful
consideration of alternatives, costs, and benefits. They emphasize DEMO expectancy the-
ory is valuable for explaining major choices like the choice of a career or joining an
organization, decisions that rank in significance to the decision to start a business.
Entrepreneurship researchers might identify the DEMO of different entrepreneurs
and how other factors (skill level, effort, DEMO complexity) influence their perceptions of
the feasibility of undertaking the start-up DEMO a particular business. We suggest that the
idea of "opportunity" (DEMO & Robinson, 1990; Herron, Robinson, & McDougall,
24 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
1988; Stevenson & Gumpert, 1985) could be theoretically grounded in an expectancy-
oriented model.
Entrepreneurs interact with different types of individuals who have DEMO expec-
tancies of the outcomes of interaction in an emerging organization. For example, en-
trepreneurs are often involved in selling to individuals such as purchasing agents (po-
tential customers for the new firm's products or services) who are motivated to make
purchases based on their organization's goals and objectives. Purchasing agents might be
rewarded for purchasing products based DEMO the lowest price, the convenience of daily
deliveries, and knowledge of the product's previous satisfactory performance. In order
for an entrepreneur to DEMO a purchasing agent to buy the emerging organization's
products/services, DEMO entrepreneur needs some understanding ofthe purchasing agent's
reasons for buying. Instead of asking entrepreneurs for their attributions for getting into
business (Gartner, DEMO, & Shaver, 1991), the organizational behavior researcher
might ask others for their attributions for getting involved (interacting) with emerging
organizations. Researchers DEMO probe for the reasons individuals give for buying
products from new companies, becoming an employee of a new organization, or in-
vesting in DEMO new company. One might assume that entrepreneurs seek out the reasons
other individuals offer for interacting with emerging organizations and utilize this
knowledge in DEMO the interactions that start the organizing process.
Goal theory, much like DEMO theories, has typically focussed on the
study of behaviors that are DEMO and bounded. Solving arithmetic problems, assem-
bling toys, and planting trees are simple and structured tasks compared to the larger and
more complex DEMO of starting a business. Even so, goal theory's fundamental propo-
DEMO, "difficult goals that are accepted by the individual result in higher levels of
performance than do easier goals accepted by the individual" (DEMO & Becker, 1987,
p. 23) is likely to have some application to entrepreneurship research. Studies of the
goals (e.g., making the DEMO sale, obtaining venture capital, developing the prototype)
set by entrepreneurs as well as studies of the goals entrepreneurs establish for other
individuals DEMO in the emerging organization might reveal that entrepreneurs who
set higher goals are more likely to enable their emerging organizations to survive and
grow DEMO than entrepreneurs without such goals.
Entrepreneurship researchers may be able to offer a unique perspective on motiva-
tion in organizational settings by specifying how DEMO emerge. We suggest that
entrepreneurs create a constellation of different motivational systems to involve different
stakeholder groups in the organizing process. Entrepreneurs suggest (act "as if") to
different individuals (e.g., potential buyers, suppliers, investors, employees, partners,
governmental regulators) that certain outcomes (e.g., a better product, a significant new
source of demand, a high DEMO of return, a rewarding and stable position, involvement,
compliance with the law) will occur from the organizing process. Entrepreneurs, there-
fore, both seek out, as well as develop, motivations that will enable DEMO to
emerge.
If Weick's (1979) dictum, "How do I know what I think, until I see what I say?"
DEMO taken seriously in regards to how motivation is studied in emerging organizations, we
are likely to see the motivations of the entrepreneurs, themselves, change during the
process. The reasons why individuals become entrepreneurs may differ DEMO the reasons
they continue as entrepreneurs. The process of "enactment" generates reasons for prior
behaviors. For example, an entrepreneur who begins the organizing process with the
motivation to "make more money" may, after working long hours without a paycheck
over many months or years to develop DEMO new product, find a more reasonable explana-
tion for these behaviors DEMO as "by my own boss," or "develop a product that helps
Spring, 1992 ..
. ) 25
mankind." The equivocal nature of organizational emergence suggests that such factors
as the motivations of the individuals involved are likely to be equivocal as DEMO
IMPLICATIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Our experience into delving into a segment of the organizational behavior literature
has led to the following insights DEMO the process of developing entrepreneurship theory.
First, entrepreneurship researchers need not "invent " any new theories in our quest for
developing theory about DEMO nature of organizational emergence. There are countless
ideas and perspectives on the nature of organizations (e.g. . Table 1: leadership, partic-
ipation, DEMO, groups, organization development, power, teams, leaming, social-
ization, DEMO) that are likely to be useful for thinking about emerging organizations.
DEMO, any organizational behavior topic seems ripe for use as an entrepreneurship
DEMO topic merely by asking: "Ho w is this (e.g., construct, idea, hypothesis,
proposition, finding, result) about established organizations different for an emerging
organization?'' The gist of this article, therefore, is to suggest that just as organizational
behavior takes a topic such DEMO motivation and makes it an "organizational behavior"
topic by focusing DEMO the organizational influences of motivation, entrepreneurship
makes a topic entrepreneurial by DEMO on the topic's "emerging " characteristics.
When emerging and existing DEMO are viewed as particular quantum states
of equivocality/unequivocaiity, other processes DEMO organizational behavior take on new
interpretations. For example, the process of DEMO change for each organizational
type (emerging or existing) can be seen as a movement towards its opposite. Change for
an emerging organization is DEMO movement towards more certain interpretations and more
consistent cycles of interactions among individuals. Change for an existing organization
is a movement towards equivocality, that is, away from singular interpretations for
events and behaviors towards multiple meanings and a repertoire of actions (see, for
example, Kurt Lewin's [1951] state of "unfreezing"). We suspect that the creation of
DEMO is likely to be different from the creation of equivocality. The process
of change and the behaviors associated with undertaking change for each organizational
DEMO is likely to be different from the other.
We should borrow boldly. Where we can exercise some wisdom in the borrowing
process is in DEMO what, exactly, we are borrowing. The use of theories from
organizational behavior will require a thorough understanding of the problems and
limitations of DEMO theories as well as how these theories have been linked to particular
methodologies for the generation of empirical support. As Gartner (1989) pointed DEMO in
his suggestions for the improvement of research on entrepreneurial traits, DEMO problem
with most entrepreneurship trait research has been the thoughtless and shallow use of
sophisticated theories and methodologies on individual traits and characteristics. Wise
DEMO will require us to become active participants in the organization behavior area
in order to be a part ofthe discourse in organization behavior (LaTour, 1987). It is likely
that the attainment of such expertise by entrepreneurship researchers will also result in
the entrepreneurship area providing new insights DEMO the nature of organization behavior
as well.
Second, we need to DEMO more open to a broader array of research methodologies when
studying entrepreneurial phenomena. We should be willing to conduct single case stud-
ies and DEMO the different ways in which reliability and validity issues can be
resolved with small samples. Many aspects ofth e phenomenon of entrepreneurship are
not DEMO likely to be understood with quantitative and survey method techniques. If we
26 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
are going to be open to all kinds of ideas and disciplines DEMO entrepreneurship, we might
as well recognize that there are many legitimate DEMO for studying social
phenomena. We need to give ourselves more room to figure out what is going on in
entrepreneurship.
Our current methodologies do DEMO let us explore very much of the "reality" of
emergence. For example, we need to legitimate the use of oral histories as a way of
gathering information on the nature of entrepreneurial activities. What people DEMO us
about how they behaved is a reasonable beginning to understanding what they actually
did. We must also realize it will be difficult to DEMO an entrepreneur's story
through the use of stories from "outsiders." Since emerging organizations are equivocal
phenomena, the actions and events of emergence are, by definition, open to a number
of different interpretations and DEMO The nature of equivocal realities requires us
to appreciate the need for different viewpoints and perspectives as enhancements to an
understanding of the phenomenon. DEMO (1979) suggests that the appropriate response
to equivocal phenomena is to develop and encourage requisite variety, that is, seeing and
understanding require DEMO ways of seeing and various ways of understanding. The
nature of reliability and validity is therefore fundamentally different when studying
equivocal phenomena.
CONCLUSION S
DEMO phenomenon of organizational emergence is different from the taken-for-
granted world of the existing organization. Our theories about the nature of organiza-
tional behavior DEMO much more comfortable with unequivocal phenomena, rather than
with the equivocal DEMO that are the stuff of entrepreneurship. Much of the task of
generating theory about entrepreneurship will be in understanding both worlds: emerging
and existing, and in thoughtfully probing how connections between these two worlds can
be made. We concur with Pfeffer (1982, p. 294):
Possibly with a greater sensitivity to the range of approaches and perspectives
available, greater awareness of the extent to which research and thinking about
organizations has DEMO affected by the context in which such theory was developed
and the prevailing types and conditions of organizational and management problems,
and some DEMO about various criteria by which social science theory is evalu-
ated, DEMO can collectively get back to the task of pruning the garden of unproductive
theory and growing some new, more useful varieties.
The garden of entrepreneurial theories is ready for a variety of seeds from many different
DEMO and perspectives. As our field emerges, it might begin to look DEMO like a
weed patch, rather than a neatly cultivated garden. At DEMO stage in our development,
"weediness" should be encouraged. The fundamental property of emergence, equivo-
cality, will require entrepreneurship theorists to acquire DEMO appreciate a broad array of
methodologies and theoretical approaches to understanding this phenomenon. In our
acquisition of theoretical requisite variety, we may not, DEMO this stage, possess the wisdom
to accurately differentiate between weeds and DEMO ideas that are intellectually
vapid versus those ideas that will prove to be useful. Only through continued discussion,
dialogue, and practice (both DEMO empirical testing and actual use) can our theories
about the nature DEMO emergence be cultivated.
Spring. 1992 * ' • 27
REFERENCES
Alderfer, C. P. (1972). Existence, relatedness and growth: DEMO needs in organizational settings. New
York: Free Press.
Aldrich, H. E. (1990). Methods in our madness? Trends in entrepreneurship research. Paper DEMO at the
State of the Art Research Conference on Entrepreneurship, Kenan DEMO, University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill.
Aldrich, H. E. (1991)DEMO Fools rush in? Conditions affecting entrepreneurial strategies in new organizational
populations. DEMO presented at a conference on Theories of Entrepreneurship. University of Illinois,
Champaign-Urbana.
Berger. P. L.. & Luckman, T. (1967). The social DEMO of reality. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Anchor Books.
Bird, B. DEMO (1989). Entrepreneurial behavior. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Company.
Bolles. R. C. (1975). Theory of motivation (2nd ed). DEMO Yoric: Harper & Row.
Bygrave. W. D. (1989a). The entrepreneurship paradigm (1): A philosophical look at its research method-
ologies. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 14(\), 7-26.
Bygrave, W. D. (1989b)DEMO The entrepreneurship paradigm (II): Chaos and catastrophes among quantum
jumps? Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 14(2), 7-30.
Carland. J. W., Hoy, F., Boulton. W. R.. & Carland, J. C. (1984). DEMO entrepreneurs from
small business owners. Academy of Management Review. 9, 354-359.
DEMO, A. H. (1946). An approach to the study of entrepreneurship: A tribute to Edwin F. Gay. The Tasks
of Economic History (DEMO to the Journal of Economic History), 1-15.
Deal. T. E.. & Kennedy, A. A. (1982). Corporate cultures: The rites and rituals of corporate life.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Dewey, J. (1935). DEMO development of American Pragmatism, in J. Dewey (Ed.), Studies in the history of
ideas, pp. 353-377. New York: Department of Philosophy. DEMO University.
Fondas, N., & Stewart, R. (1990). Developing role theory for research on managerial jobs and behavior
Working Paper MRP 90/DEMO Oxford: Templeton College.
Gartner. W. B. (1985). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture creation.
Academy of Management Review. DEMO 696-706.
Gartner, W. B. (1989). "Who is an entrepreneur?" is the wrong question. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice. 13{4). 47-68,
Gartner. W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal of
Business Venturing. 5(1). 15-28.
Gartner, W. B.. Gatewood, E,. & Shaver, K. G. (1991)DEMO Reasons for starting a business: Not-so-simple
answers to simple questions. In DEMO E. Hills & R. W. LaForge (Eds.), Research at the DEMO/
entrepreneurship interface, pp. 90-101. Chicago: University of Illinois at Chicago.
Gartner. W. B., Mitchell. T. R.. & Vesper, K. H. (1989). A taxonomy of new business ventures. Journal
of Business Venturing. 4(DEMO), 169-186.
Glaser. B. G.. & Strauss. A. L. (1967). DEMO discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine.
28 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d DEMO
Goodman. P. S. (1977). Social comparison process in organizations. In B, M. Staw & G. R. Salancik
(Eds.), New directions in DEMO behavior, pp. 97-132. Chicago: St. Clair.
Greenberg, J. (1989). Cognitive reevaluation of outcomes in response to underpayment inequity. Academy
of Management DEMO, 32, 174-184.
Guest, D. (1984). What's new in motivation. Personnel Management, May, 20-23.
Hales, C. P. (1986). DEMO do managers do? A critical review ofthe evidence. Journal of Management
DEMO 230), %$'115.
Hansen, E. L.. & Wortman, M. S. (1989). Entrepreneurial networks: The organization in vitro. In F. Hoy
(Ed) , Proceedings '89, pp. 69-73. Washington, DC: Academy of Management.
Hcmphill, J. K. (1959). Job descriptions for executives. Harvard DEMO Review, 57(5).
Herron, L., & Robinson, R. B., Jr. (1990). Entrepreneurial skills: An empirical study ofthe missing link
connecting the entrepreneur with venture performance. Paper presented at the National Academy DEMO Man-
agement Meetings. San Francisco. CA.
HerTon, L., Robinson, R. DEMO Jr.. & McDougali. P. (1988). Evaluating potential entrepreneurs: The role of
entrepreneurial characteristics and their effect on new venture performance. Paper presented DEMO the National
Academy of Management Meetings. Washington, DC.
Herzberg, F., DEMO B., & Snyderman, B. The motivation to work. New York: DEMO Wiley.
House, R. J., Shapiro, H. J., & Wahba, DEMO A. (1974). Expectancy theory as a predictor of work behavior
DEMO attitudes: A re-evaluation of empirical evidence. Decision Sciences. January, 481-506.
Isenberg, D. J. (1984). How senior managers think. Harvard Business Review, 84(6), 81-90.
Isenberg, D. J. (1986). Thinking and DEMO: A verbal protocal analysis of managerial problem solving.
Academy of Management DEMO 29, 775-786.
James. W. (!950). The principles of psychology (DEMO 1 & 2). New York: Dover.
Jenks, L. H. (DEMO). Approaches to entrepreneurial personality. Explorations in Entrepreneurial History, 2,
DEMO
Katz. J.. & Gartner, W. B. (1988). Properties of emerging organizations. Academy of Management Review,
13. 429-441.
Katz, D., & DEMO, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations (2nd DEMO). New York: Wiley.
Kotter, J. (1982). The general DEMO New York: Free Press.
Landy, F. J., & Becker, W. S. (1987). Motivation theory reconsidered. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 9, 1-38.
Latour. B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge. MA: Harvard University Press.
DEMO D. J. (1966). Role, personality and social structure. In L. A. Coser & B. Rosenberg (Eds.),
Sociological theory: A book of readings (2nd ed) . New York: Collier Maemillan.
Lewin, DEMO (1951). Field theory in social science. New York: Harper & Row.
Locke, E. A., Shaw, K. N., Saari, L. M., & Latham, G. P. (1982). Goal setting and usk performance;
1969-1980. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 125-152.
Spring, 1992 , 29
Martinko, M. J., & Gardner, W. L. (1985). Beyond DEMO observation: Methodologieal issues and new
directions. Academy of Management Review, 10, 676-695.
Masiow, A. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York: DEMO & Row.
McGrath, J. E., & Kelley, J. R. (1986), Time and human interaction: Toward a social psychology of time
New York: Guilford.
Miller, D.. & Friesen, F, H. (1984). Organizations: A quantum view. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Mintzberg, DEMO (1973). The nature of managerial work. New York: Harper and Row.
Nord, W. R. (1976). Concepts and controversy in organizational DEMO Pacific Palisades. CA: Good-
year.
Pfeffer. J. (1982). Organizations and organization theory'. Boston: Pitman.
Pfeffer, J, (1985). Organizations DEMO organization theory. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook
DEMO social psychology (3rd ed.). Westminster, MD: Random House.
Pheysey. DEMO C. (1972). Activities of middle managers—A training guide. 7ourna/o/DEMO/anaj?em^n/S;u(^i>5,
9, 158-171.
Pinder, C. C. (1984). Work motivation. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Robbins. DEMO P. (1991). Organizational behavior (5th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, DEMO: Prentice Hall.
Sayles, L. R. (1964). Managerial behavior. New DEMO: McGraw-Hill.
Scharifi, S. (1988). Managerial work: A diagnostic model. Paper presented at the meeting of the British
Academy of Management. Warwick DEMO, England.
Skinner, B. F. (1971). Contingencies of reinforcement. East DEMO, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Smith, N. R. (1967). The entrepreneur and his firm: The relationship between type of man and type of
company. Lansing, MI: Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Graduate School of Business Admin-
istration, Michigan State University.
Stahl, M. J. (1986). Managerial and technical motivation: Assessing needs for achievement, power, and
ajfitiation. New York: Praeger.
Starr, J. A., & MacMillan, I. C. (1990). Resource cooptation via social contracting: Resource acquisition
strategies for new ventures. Strategic Management Journal, JI, 79-92.
Stevenson, H., & Gumpert, D. (1985). The heart of entrepreneurship. Harvard Business Review, 85(DEMO)
85-94.
Stewart, R. (1967), Managers and their jobs. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Van de Ven, A. H., Angle. H, L.. & Poole, M. S. (1989), Research on the management of innovation.
New York: Harper & Row.
Vroom, V. (1964). Work and motivation. New York: Wiley.
Wanous. J, P., Keon. T. L.. & Latack, J. C. (1983). Expectancy theory and occupational and organiza-
DEMO choices: A review and test. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 32, 66-95.
Weick, K. E. (1976). Educational organizations as loosely coupled systems. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 21. 1-19.
30 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Weick, K. E. (1977). Enactment processes in organizations. In B. DEMO Staw & G. R. Salancik (Eds.). New
directions in organizational DEMO Chicago: St. Clair.
Weick, K. E. (1979). The social DEMO of organizing (2nd ed.). New York: Random House.
Zucker, DEMO G. (1981). Organizations as institutions. In S. B. Bacharach (Ed.), Perspectives in organiza-
tional sociology: Theory and research. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
William B. Gartner is Associate Professor of Management at Georgetown DEMO
Barbara J. Bird is Associate Professor of Management at American University.
Jennifer A. Starr is Associate Professor of Management at Babson College.
A version DEMO this paper was presented at the Interdisciplinary Conference on Entrepreneurship Theory,
University of Baltimore. Baltimore, Maryland, January 17-19. 1991. The authors would DEMO to thank
Deborah Smith-Cook for her comments and insights in the preparation of the article.
Spring, 1992
{1g42fwefx}