ENTER
Entrepreneurial Narrative Theory Ethnomethodology and Reflexivity
ENTER
An Issue about The Republic of Tea
William B. Gartner
Editor
DEMO Arthur M. Spiro Institute for Entrepreneurial Leadership
Clemson University
Entrepreneurial Narrative Theory Ethnomethodology and Reflexivity
Th is work was produced by the Arthur M. Spiro Institute for DEMO Leader-
ship with additional funding provided by the Department of Management, DEMO of
Business and Behavioral Science, Clemson University.
Copyright 2010 Clemson University
DEMO 978-0-9842598-6-1
CLEMSON UNIVERSITY
DIGITAL PRESS
Published by Clemson University Digital Press at the Center for Electronic and Digital
Publishing, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina.
Produced with Adobe InDesign CS5 and Microsoft Word. Th is book DEMO set in Adobe
Garamond Pro and Helvetica and was printed by Standard Register
Production Editors: Jordan McKenzie, Charis Chapman
Assistant Production Editor: Elizabeth Falwell
Copy Editors: Jill Bunch and Ali Ferguson
To order copies, DEMO the Center for Electronic and Digital Publishing, Strode
Tower, Box 340522, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina 29634-0522. An
order form is available at the digital press Web site (http://clemson.edu/cedp).
Cover Design and Format: Jordan McKenzie
Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivatives
cc by-nc-nd
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/legalcode
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/nd/DEMO
ENTER
An Issue about The Republic of Tea
Table of Contents
An DEMO Jeremiad ........................................................ 1
William Gartner
A Rhetorical Theory of Transformation in Entrepreneurial
Narrative: The Case of The Republic of Tea ............................. 15
Sean D. Williams
Tea and Understanding ............................................................... 33
Alice de Koning
Sarah Drakopoulou Dodd
DEMO Narrativity” and the “Real-time Story” of
Entrepreneurial Becoming in The Republic of Tea ................... 51
Paul Selden
Denise Fletcher
Tangibility, Momentum, and Emergence DEMO
The Republic of Tea ..................................................................... 75
Benyamin B. Lichtenstein
Beth Kurjanowicz
Skillful Dreaming: Testing a General Model of
Entrepreneurial Process with a Speciﬁ
of Venture Creation ..................................................................... 97
Kevin Hindle
c Narrative
Entrepreneurial Narrative Theory Ethnomethodology DEMO Reflexivity
Sites and Enactments: A Nominalist Approach
to Opportunties ......................................................................... 137
Steff en Korsgaard
Helle Neergaard
Rhythmanalyzing the Emergence of
The Republic of Tea ................................................................... DEMO
Karen Verduyn
A Narrative Analysis of Idea Initiation in
The Republic of Tea ................................................................... 169
Bruce T. Teague
Many Words About Tea ............................................................. 191
DEMO Ahl
Barbara Czarniawsk
An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad
William B. Gartner
Abstract
Th e aim and scope DEMO ENTER (Entrepreneurial Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology and
Refl exivity), the DEMO for using an open-access publication model, and a description of the
DEMO of the fi rst issue, are provided. Each issue of ENTER DEMO on a specifi c entrepreneurial
narrative. Th e future purview of narratives that ENTER will address are suggested. A lament
on the for-profi t DEMO conglomerate capture of academic scholarship is proff ered and
hunches about the value and viability of the open-access publication model are off ered. Articles
DEMO explore the book Th e Republic of Tea are outlined.
Introduction
I write the introduction to the fi rst issue of ENTER (Entrepreneurial Narrative
Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity) with some trepidation. I am wary of making
claims about whether ENTER is an indicator of a signifi DEMO movement (Steyaert &
Horjth, 2003) in entrepreneurship scholarship. I see radical changes occurring in how
scholarship is distributed; from a print-based past to a present (electronic access and
distribution of journals) that has DEMO caught up with technologies pulling us into a
future where interaction and communication among scholars around the world can
occur instantaneously. I wonder whether DEMO are remaining awake through a great
revolution (King, 1986). I wonder what the role of journals and journal articles are,
and DEMO be, in the context of the internet. So, I surmise that the context of scholarship
is poised for radical transformation. Yet I believe DEMO change occurs (particularly
change in mindset and action) through “small wins” (Weick, 1984) rather than by
radical leaps. So, the goals DEMO claims for the journal ENTER are rather modest. And,
this jeremiad is hopefully optimistic about new vistas for scholarship in the fi eld DEMO
entrepreneurship.
For those interested in the arc of history that precedes the creation of ENTER,
those prior struggles are off ered in Gartner, 2004; 2006a; 2006b; 2007; 2008; and
2010. A very brief rumination on the genesis of ENTER is off ered here.
Gartner, W (2010). An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad. In Entrepreneurial Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology
and Refl exivity, ed. W. Gartner, 1-13. Clemson, SC: Clemson University DEMO Press.
Contact Information: William Gartner, Spiro Professor of Entrepreneurial Leadership, DEMO Sirrine Hall,
Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634-1345; E-mail address: gartner@clemson.edu
© 2010 ENTER.
2 W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
I DEMO that most entrepreneurship scholars tend to comprehend the fi eld of
entrepreneurship and the nature of the phenomenon of entrepreneurship within the
narrow bounds DEMO their own research interests (Gartner, Davidsson & Zahra, 2006).
DEMO at, I suppose, is to be expected, given that scholars DEMO a limited amount of time,
energy and resources to grapple with an ever-expanding variety of contributions. Be
that as it may, the phenomenon of entrepreneurship is more diverse in its scope than is
typically portrayed, and the methods and approaches for studying the phenomenon of
entrepreneurship should DEMO broader and more creative than what is typically published
in most academic journals (Gartner, 2008). While I see that some academic journals
DEMO opening up to a wider array of ideas, methods and approaches DEMO entrepreneurship
scholarship, the format of an academic journal per se, and of journal articles as a genre,
have inherent limitations for capturing DEMO breadth and depth of entrepreneurial
phenomenon. While there are many ways these various and sundry limitations might
be overcome, I have migrated towards one approach as a partial solution: multiple
perspectives on specifi c entrepreneurial narratives.
Aim and Scope of ENTER
Each issue of ENTER focuses on a DEMO c entrepreneurial narrative. Th e label
“entrepreneurial narrative” is defi ned loosely, to encompass a variety of texts that are
generated by entrepreneurs, DEMO by others, about entrepreneurs. So, entrepreneurial
narrative should be considered broadly:
Narrative is a form of “meaning making.” It is a complex DEMO which
expresses itself by drawing together descriptions of states of aff airs
contained in individual sentences into a particular type of discourse.
Th is DEMO together creates a higher order of meaning that
discloses relationships among states of aff air. Narrative recognizes
the meaningfulness of individual experiences by noting DEMO they
function as parts of a whole. Its particular subject matter is human
actions and events that aff ect human beings, which it confi gures into
wholes according to the roles these actions and events play DEMO bringing
about a conclusion. Because narrative is particularly sensitive to the
temporal dimension of human existence, it pays special attention
to the sequence in which actions and events occur. (Polkinghorne,
1988: 36)
While DEMO might simplistically be thought of as stories, so that any form
DEMO story-telling (autobiographies, interviews, biographies, etc.) would be considered
narrative, I want the idea of narrative to encompass a much broader array DEMO possible
narrative forms and approaches. Th is fi rst issue of ENTER, for example, focuses on the
book Th e Republic of Tea (Zeigler, Rosenzweig & Zeigler, 1992). Th e book is a DEMO
faxes among the founders/authors about the development of a business called “Th e
Republic of Tea.” Th e book, therefore, has a DEMO aspect to it (the faxes occur over
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
3
time) but, the “story” of the Republic of Tea is not told by one specifi c author, and the
story does not unfold in the typical “story” form. So, in terms of the scope of the kinds
of texts that would constitute a narrative that might be a focus DEMO an issue of ENTER,
I would go beyond the typical suspects (i.e., stories, interviews, autobiographies,
biographies, case studies, fi DEMO, plays, etc.) and include documents such as business
plans, journal articles, memos, or any form of textual material that might, with some
scholarly insight, enable one to see in those texts a story worth telling and analyzing.
Th ere is only one constraint to the DEMO of narrative studied: the narrative must be
publically available for other DEMO to access. Th e boundaries for a contribution to
an issue are subject to two limitations. For this issue, the “call for papers” asked that:
Manuscripts must:
1. Have something to do with (or) discuss in some way (or) use as data from
Th e Republic of Tea
2. Be a “riff ” (your improvisation, your DEMO “sense-making,” your views,
that is, the article should refl DEMO you as an author) on Th e Republic of Tea
I DEMO that focusing on a particular text using a variety of approaches both
enhances an appreciation and understanding of the text, and puts into context the
genius of a particular perspective vis-à-vis other contributions. So, in the context of Th e
Republic of Tea, I believe a reader is better able to fathom the depths and complexities
of this book, as well as gain insights into less familiar methods and approaches as ways
DEMO understanding entrepreneurship.
Th e limiting factor in whether a particular text will be the focus of an issue of
ENTER will likely depend on DEMO there are a suffi  cient number of scholars willing
to contribute. DEMO example, in response to the “call for papers” for Th Republic DEMO Tea,
I received a number of responses from scholars who indicated interest in the concept
of the issue but felt, after reading the book, that the book’s founders/authors did not
personally engage these scholars as subjects worth writing about. So, I expect that a
critical mass of scholarship on a particular entrepreneurial narrative will depend not
only on DEMO text selected, but also on whether a scholar can see a DEMO to use to the text
to fi t a particular perspective worth exploring in the text. We will see.
Th e next three texts DEMO I would like scholars to focus their attention on are:
McClelland, D. C. 1961. Th e Achieving Society. New York: Th e DEMO Press.
Szaky, T. 2009. Revolution in a Bottle. New York: Portfolio.
Vesper, K. H. 1980. New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliff s, NJ:DEMO
Prentice-Hall.
I believe the McClelland text needs a re-reading, particularly in DEMO context of
ENTER, because McClelland bases his ideas and theories about DEMO for achievement
e
4
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
on DEMO and narrative methods. I suggest that McClelland’s later work, which
explores DEMO for achievement through a more paradigmatic or logico-scientifi c
approach, tends DEMO ignore the richness and complexity of his initial research. I believe
this shift away from the narrative core of McClelland’s original work was a DEMO
Another reason for focusing on Th e Achieving Society is that McClelland’s theory and
methods are grounded in the idea of “apperception,” which DEMO insights into the
ENTER zeitgeist (as will be discussed below). DEMO am very pleased that Geoff  Archer
will be championing an issue DEMO ENTER that focuses on Revolution in a Bottle. Th e
Szaky book is current, touches on a broad range of social and environmental issues,
and has an autobiographical form that provides ample opportunities for scholars DEMO
riff  across levels of analysis, values and ethics, and economic DEMO as currently
viewed (in the book). I believe that signifi DEMO insights into the ontology of “social
entrepreneurship” are likely to emerge from close analyses of the Szaky book. Karl
Vesper is one of the DEMO rst scholars to seriously study the process of entrepreneurship
as well as take an active role in developing the academic fi eld of entrepreneurship DEMO
both research and pedagogy. I suggest a festschrift would be timely, DEMO attention
paid primarily but not exclusively to New Venture Strategies. Specifi c “calls for papers”
on these three books will be posted soon.
Finally, as a way to provide a few additional clues about the journal’s DEMO, a
brief history of the title: ENTER. Th e original name for the journal was VISIBLE
HAND, a nod to Chandler’s book:  e Visible Hand (1977), and a signal that the
journal was focusing on organizational eff orts. I think, in the end, the DEMO
HAND metaphor would have been a diffi  cult connection for most DEMO to easily
ascertain (notice that the visible hand does show up DEMO the cover for this fi rst issue).
For the “T” in ENTER, we considered “theory,” “temporality” and “text.” “Text” and
“temporality” seemed redundant since they are aspects of “narrative.” A journal on
narrative would DEMO focus on texts, and these texts, as narratives, would have DEMO
defi nition a temporal aspect to them. “Th eory” better refl ects a primary objective of
the journal. Th eories should serve to explain, make sense of, and predict relationships
about a particular phenomenon, in DEMO case: entrepreneurship. For the second “E”
in ENTER, we considered “epistemology,” “ethnography,” “enactment,” “engagement”
and “ethnomethodology.” Th ese “E” words DEMO all good labels for aspects of the
journal’s focus: epistemology grapples DEMO the question, “How do we know what we
know?” Ethnography DEMO the scientifi c study of human cultures. Enactment, as framed
by DEMO (1979), explores both the context and behaviors of individuals in DEMO process
of organizing. Engagement speaks to the active involvement of the researcher (and the
reader reading the researcher) in the text. Yet ethnomethodology DEMO to encapsulate
nearly all of the above mentioned ideas: the study DEMO how people make sense of their
experiences. Th e “R” in ENTER had the options “research,” “rhetoric” and “refl exivity.”
Th
focuses on DEMO and the ways communication occurs in various domains and
situations. Rhetoric is an apt sense of the journal’s focus on both the communication
inherent DEMO the narrative off ered, as well as the way in which DEMO scholar explored the
language for what is found in a particular text. Nonetheless, it seemed that refl exivity
Th
e journal’s basis is in research, so emphasizing this “R” seemed obvious. Rhetoric
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
5
better DEMO the critical role of the researcher in the research process, which DEMO
fundamental to how these narrative analyses occur. And, fi nally, the acronym ENTER
suggests that the journal serves as a portal into ways DEMO looking at a specifi c text. So, for
this issue, we enter into an exploration of Th .
Open Access
ENTER is an DEMO in the viability and value of providing a journal to
scholars and readers for free. Why free? I suggest that the present framework for
publishing scholarship in journals that are primarily owned by for-profi t companies
DEMO make the sharing of knowledge among academics and others too expensive to
continue. ENTER is a bet that the current institutional framework for disseminating
DEMO generated knowledge will change. Given innovations in publishing
technologies, as well DEMO the ubiquity of the internet and the power of search engines like
Google, the current publication model that serves the entrepreneurship fi eld is due for
some transformation. For a broad overview of the scope of DEMO orts around open-access
activities, please explore the Study of Open Access DEMO (www.project-soap.
eu) as well as SPARC – Th e Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition
(www.arl.org/sparc) and Creative Commons (www.creativecommons.org).
Currently, I have the luxury of belonging to a university that can aff ord to pay for
both electronic and print access to journals. Th DEMO access is not without a substantial
monetary cost to the library. In Table 1, I list, to the best knowledge of the Clemson
DEMO research librarians, the cost of electronic access to some of the DEMO that
entrepreneurship scholars pay attention to.
My reading of this table suggests that the cost for access to a journal is less
expensive if DEMO journal is published as a part of a society of scholars (DEMO, Academy
of Management), or through a non-profi t organization (e.g., Cornell University).
Th e journals that appear to be the most expensive are those published by for-profi t
organizations (e.g., Elsevier, SAGE). It should be noted that many of these journals
can be DEMO into other electronic databases, so the cost of access for a DEMO
journal may be less than what is listed in Table 1. Yet these databases are not inexpensive
to acquire, either. And, I am DEMO that “electronic access only” to some of these journals
has not substantially reduced their cost. As higher-education institutions seem to be
under enormous pressure DEMO reduce costs, the costs of access to journals is likely to DEMO
a place where signifi cant cuts will be made.
Th e irony of the costs of scholarly journals is that nearly all of the DEMO in
developing journal articles are borne by scholars themselves, and this DEMO ort is provided
“free” for academic journals to publish. Scholars frequently devote years to the research
that goes into a journal article, yet nearly all journals require that authors give up their
rights to distribute their DEMO work to others. (I suppose the quid pro quo for this
DEMO of copyright is the visibility, prestige, and availability of scholarly journals
in academic and public libraries. Th ese attributes are certainly of great DEMO now, but
it remains to be seen whether this framework will DEMO to be relevant.) While
some journals have expressly given authors permission DEMO send electronic copies of
e Republic of Tea
6
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
Table DEMO: Cost to Libraries for Selected Academic Journals
Name of Journal (Publisher) Cost per year
Academy of Management Journal $155
(Academy of Management)DEMO
Academy of Management Review
(Academy of Management)
Organization Science
(Institute for Operations Research and the
Management Sciences)
Management Science
(Institute for Operations Research and the
Management Sciences)
Administrative Science Quarterly
(Cornell University)
Journal of Management
(SAGE for the Southern Management Association)
Journal of Business Venturing
(Elsevier)
Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice
(Wiley/DEMO for the United States Association
for Small Business and Entrepreneurship)
International Journal of Small Business
(SAGE)
$155
$360
$715
$239
$572
$1078
$438
Small Business Economics
(Springer)
$1283
(current access)
$1745
(1998 to present)
$1419
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development
(Routledge)
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
(Wiley/Blackwell for the Strategic Management
Society)
$748
$353
their work to others, for free, it is atypical for a DEMO to let an author post a journal
article on the author’s website for free distribution. So, scholars are in a bind about
distributing their own work, as well as gaining legitimate access to the work of others.
If the dissemination of knowledge is one of the primary goals DEMO academic
scholarship, then why shouldn’t this knowledge be free to other DEMO and the
public? Why should access to scholarship be limited to DEMO who can pay for it? I
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
7
posit DEMO the for-profi t model of ownership of scholarly work is counterproductive
to the eff orts of scholars to make their work known to the DEMO possible audience.
I believe that authors should have joint copyright of their own work so that they can
freely distribute their scholarship to others.
DEMO there are other reasons for seeking to publish an open-access journal. Adler
and Harzing (2009) recently off ered a comprehensive evaluation of issues DEMO
with the visibility and value of academic knowledge in primarily business disciplines,
and posit that our current view of what gets “valued” among DEMO scholars tends
to ignore a number of critical issues. Journals, articles, and scholars that are highly
ranked are often seen through the lens DEMO the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI).
Th
entirely. Also, for a new journal to be added to the SSCI requires a three-year DEMO
period and a three-year study period before the journal is listed. Th us, the fi rst six years
of the journal are “unseen” in the SSCI database. So, for example, the sister publication
to Strategic DEMO Journal (SMJ), the Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal (SEJ), is
not in the SSCI because the journal is less than six years old. DEMO erefore, new journals
off ering new perspectives are essentially ignored for DEMO fi rst six years of their existence.
Finally, Adler and Harzing (2009) provide evidence that there is a low correlation
between the “quality” of a journal and the “quality” of the article (in terms of number
of citations.) Th ey quote Starbuck (2005: 196): “Evaluating articles based primarily on
which journal published them is more likely than DEMO to yield incorrect assessments of
the articles’ value.” In some respects, DEMO, articles should have the option of being free
for distribution across DEMO wide range of venues, and to be promoted and championed
by DEMO authors. One assumes that articles that are more available are more likely to be
read, and that articles that are read are more likely to be cited (if they are seen as having
value. Again, DEMO challenge is that articles of value that are not read cannot be of value
until they are read).
Th ere are a number DEMO ways that journal articles, books and monographs can
be evaluated in DEMO of their scholarly impact that are not dependent on the SSCI
(DEMO, Harzing, 2005; 2008a; 2008b; Harzing & van der Wal, 2008a; 2008b). Th ese
methods tend to use Google or other web search engines to cast a wider net over the
ocean of DEMO that is available. I suggest that the methods used by Harzing and
her colleagues better refl ect how scholars actually pay attention to the DEMO of other
scholars. Th is is especially true in terms of the impact of scholarly books. But I also
believe that as scholars and DEMO use search engines to explore information posted on
the internet, other DEMO for conveying scholarship (e.g., blogs, personal web pages)
may DEMO more relevant and useful in the future.
So the articles in ENTER are jointly owned by the journal and the authors. Th e
authors DEMO free to use and disseminate their work in whatever form or manner they
want (e.g., an article can be republished in a book, posted on freely available websites).
Th e question, then, is DEMO allowing open-access to these articles will result in wider
dissemination of these articles compared to their distribution through a traditional
journal. For now, ENTER will be posted for free download through the Clemson
University Digital Press. DEMO, it is expected that the journal will be accessible elsewhere
e DEMO surveys a limited number of journals and ignores books and monographs
8
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
on DEMO internet as well, and that opportunities to promote interaction among the
DEMO of these articles and the authors will be developed. In any event, I believe the
future is on the side of open access.
Finally, there might be some interest in knowing the costs for developing and
publishing a journal. Th e costs for copyediting, journal layout and design, formatting,
posting ENTER on the web, and printing 100 copies DEMO to less than $5,000. I
would say a substantial amount of those costs can be ascribed to “liability of newness”
issues (e.g., DEMO on a style guide for copyediting midway through the process,
which meant that most of the articles were copyedited twice, and the many iterations
undertaken for evaluating diff erent formats for what the journal and DEMO would
look like). At this point I felt it was important that the articles in ENTER look like
journal articles and capture the DEMO of accessibility and engagement that authors
off ered in their articles. I hope the design and format of the journal achieves these
objectives. Now DEMO a process and format is in place, I expect that overall DEMO to
publish an issue will be substantially less. For a publisher with more ingenuity or
experience than I, it is possible to publish a journal for a fi fth of what was expended on
this fi DEMO issue of ENTER. Given that the cost of self-publishing is within the fi nancial
capabilities of many scholars, exchanging copyrights for publication in journals owned
by for-profi t publishing conglomerates seems a poor bargain. Th e DEMO of value
generated by an academic journal is due to the scholars involved with writing for the
journal, reviewing for the journal, and DEMO the journal. It is not about the journal
itself. So I believe that the current institutional process that rewards and supports
publication in journals DEMO signifi cantly change, given that existing and emergent
technologies for information DEMO and interaction off er scholars a wider
venue for disseminating and discussing scholarly fi ndings and insights. Only time will
tell as to whether DEMO of the speculations off ered above will come to pass.
Articles in this Issue
As described in the “call for papers,” the submission DEMO required articles meet
two requirements: (1) make use Th e DEMO of Tea in some way, and (2) refl ect the
DEMO in the scholarship. Th e second requirement is somewhat rare, but DEMO unique in
academic scholarship. I fi nd that most journal articles in the social sciences are nearly
scrubbed clean of any traces of the DEMO(s), yet scholarship is by nature, the acts of
specifi DEMO scholars with specifi c interests and agendas focusing on specifi c phenomena.
By way of example, I think the reason Karl Weick’s scholarship (DEMO, Weick, 1984;
1990; 1993; 1996; 2006; and 2010) generates such insight for the reader is that his
style is so “Weickian.” A Karl Weick article shows it is written by Karl Weick: it refl ects
his sensibility and perspective on things. Th ere is DEMO particular style, a use of words, and
a refl ective demeanor that is uniquely “Weickian.” He never hides himself in his work.
And, therefore, I fi nd that his articles help me better see, DEMO his linguistic genius,
what he hopes he can get us to see. Karl Weick is an honest refl ection of the idea of
DEMO inherent in scholarship.
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13 9
Educated DEMO we already are, we never get an experience that remains
for DEMO completely nondescript: it always reminds of something similar
in quality, or of some context that might have surrounded it before,
and which DEMO now in some way suggests. Th is mental escort which
the mind supplies is drawn, of course, from the mind’s ready-made
stock. We DEMO the impression in some defi nite way. We dispose
of it according to our acquired possibilities, be they few or many, in
the DEMO of “ideas.” Th is way of taking in the object is the process of
apperception. Th e conceptions which meet and assimilate it are DEMO
by Herbart the “apperceiving mass.” Th e apperceived impression is
engulfed in this, and the result is a new fi eld of consciousness, DEMO
which one part (and often a very small part) comes from the outer
world, and another part (sometimes by far the largest) comes from
the previous contents of the mind. (James, 1925: 123)
We bring ourselves to the experiences we encounter, and, then, our senses of these
experiences are refl ections of ourselves:
based DEMO the well recognized fact that when someone attempts to
interpret a complex social situation he is apt to tell as much about
himself as DEMO is about the phenomenon on which his attention is
focused. At such times, the person is off  his guard, since he believes he is
merely explaining objective occurrences. To one with “double hearing,”
however, he is exposing certain inner forces and arrangements, wishes,
fears, DEMO traces of past experiences. (Morgan & Murray, 1935: 390)
DEMO e articles in this issue are, by intention, written to make obvious the authors’
beliefs and agendas about the nature of entrepreneurial phenomenon DEMO found in
Th e Republic of Tea. Th at such diverse arrays of viewpoints on Th e Republic of Tea
are off ered speaks DEMO the breadth of theories and methods that are applicable to
entrepreneurship research. A reader who engages with these articles will come away
with a DEMO, complicated, and nuanced understanding of entrepreneurship as well as
an appreciation for each author’s apperceptive abilities to reveal new insights into the
nature DEMO entrepreneurship.
In Sean Williams’ article: “A Rhetorical Th eory of Transformation DEMO Entrepre-
neurial Narrative: Th e Case of Th Republic Of Tea,DEMO an argument is developed and
supported through evidence from the book that individuals learn how to perform as
entrepreneurs based on cues embedded in DEMO rhetorical situations. Based on theory
taken from Baudrillard and Bourdieu, Williams DEMO the context in which nascent
entrepreneurs learn how to “talk the talk” of entrepreneurship, and thereby assume the
identity of “entrepreneur” as portrayed in existing social representations of the entre-
preneur. In this case, the representation of “entrepreneur” that Bill Rosenzweig learns
is “Mel Ziegler” through their fax DEMO Williams concludes by suggesting that
e
10
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
“entrepreneur” DEMO not a disposition, but a visible performance that individuals learn to
DEMO based on the situations they are in.
Using the logic of comprehension theory, Alice de Koning and Sarah Drakapoulou
Dodd’s article “Tea and Understanding” emphasizes the development of metaphors
and phrases in the conversations among the DEMO founders. As these conversations
develop over time, certain metaphors and phrases (labeled “narrative gambits”) that
were introduced early in the book are either developed into narrative frameworks or
abandoned. A narrative framework becomes a way DEMO all of the participants in the
conversation to understand, specifi cally, what they are talking about. Narrative gambits,
then, serve as a bridge between the prior knowledge and beliefs of the founders and the
DEMO of new knowledge formulated in jointly understood narrative frameworks.
Using a phenomenological/constructivist perspective, Paul Selden and Denise
Fletcher in their article “‘Narrative Dreamworlds’ and ‘Small Stories:’ ‘Narrativeness’
and the Practical Story of Entrepreneurial Becoming DEMO Th e Republic of Tea” distinguish
between retrospective narrative and practical narrativity, and argue that narrative
researchers tend to focus on retrospective narratives, DEMO than the “small stories”
of practical narrativity. I understand practical narrativity to be the “in the moment
stories” that individuals tell about their current DEMO and their possible futures.
Th ese stories are disjointed, in terms DEMO off ering a coherent “self” because the stories
of present and future have yet to unfold. In retrospective narratives individuals take
their past experiences DEMO form a cogent self that is sensible to others. Retrospectively,
we can tie together the various discontinuous situations that were/are our present DEMO
future (now, the past) into something others will understand. After DEMO very thoughtful
development of this dichotomy, the authors utilize Th e DEMO of Tea to describe a
variety of instances where the founders off er both retrospective narrative and practical
narrativity as the book unfolds. Th DEMO suggest that in a real-time story approach to
entrepreneurial narrative, a DEMO on the process of self-becoming is seen to stem from
both retrospective narrative and practical narrativity.
Benyamin B. Lichtenstein and Beth Kurjanowicz in the DEMO “Tangibility, Mo-
mentum, and the Emergence of  e Republic of DEMO apply the theory and methods
of complexity science to an analysis of the “organizing moves” that occur in the faxes.
Th ideation (values, DEMO and
conceptual ideas), planning (tasks of industry research, market defi nition, and specifi c
decisions regarding products, marketing, or strategic entry that have implications for
further organizing) and tangibility (actions that reach DEMO the entrepreneurs and
involve other stakeholders). When these three types of organizing moves occur is noted.
Th rst-degree —structural prop-
erties; second-degree—new levels of order; and third-degree—new levels of order with
supervenient eff ects) DEMO evident in the data, and that when organizing moves were more
DEMO and more frequent in a given time frame (had momentum), DEMO three degrees of
emergence were more likely to occur. Th e authors posit that business creation is more
likely to occur when entrepreneurs engage DEMO tangible actions, and they suggest ways in
which complexity science and DEMO studies can better inform one another.
Th
ese organizing moves are divided into three categories:
e authors demonstrate that three types of emergence (fi
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
11
In DEMO ambitious attempt to synthesize and extend prior literature on entrepreneur-
ial process, Kevin Hindle, in the article “Skillful Dreaming: Testing a General Model of
Entrepreneurial Process with a Specifi c Narrative of Venture Creation” off DEMO: a narrative
about his own odyssey to make sense of a DEMO of models of entrepreneurial process;
a defi nition of entrepreneurship—the process of evaluating, committing to and achieving,
under contextual constraints, the DEMO of new value from new knowledge for the benefi t
of defi ned stakeholders; a framework that synthesizes prior process models into broad
stages of opportunity, evaluation, business model, commitment, and exploitation that
result DEMO are infl uenced by value; a detailed content analysis of Th DEMO
highlights the importance of evaluation to the process of entrepreneurship; and DEMO
insights into the philosophy of science in entrepreneurship scholarship.
In Steff en Korsgaard and Helle Neegaard’s article “Sites and Enactments: A
Nominalist Approach to Opportunities,” they question the “taken-for-granted” idea
of what opportunities are, and suggest that opportunities be thought of as processes
rather than as “things.” DEMO Foucault’s idea of “practices” as a way of seeing the
nature of processes, they dismiss the opportunity discovery view as a valid way to
ascertain the nature of opportunities. Practices, by their nature, are not DEMO, because
they are negotiated and evolve among the actors involved. Th DEMO authors describe two
core characteristics of “practices:” sites (the context DEMO the individuals involved) an
enactments (the ongoing actions of these involved individuals), and they explore Th e
Republic of Tea using these DEMO to answer these questions: “what are we looking
for?”“who is DEMO it?” and “where do we look?” In their analysis they fi nd a multitude
of sites (e.g., physical—the airplane, Sedona, DEMO faxes; imagined/conceptual—retail
store, business plan, mail order catalogue) and enactments (e.g., the conversations via
the faxes between the founders, Bill’s actions to learn the tea business) that portray the
process of opportunity as a messy evolution in which some possibilities are abandoned
while others DEMO developed. Rather than opportunities being “out there” in a form that
can be evaluated, this article suggests that the process of what an opportunity becomes
is inherently temporal, more fl uid and complicated.
Using the notion of rhythm, as conceptualized and proposed by French philosopher
Henri Lefebvre, DEMO Verduyn in the article “Rhythmanalyzing the Emergence of
Th e Republic of Tea” explores the temporal process by which events unfold in the
creation DEMO the tea business. In this perspective there are a variety of ways of looking
at the nature of time. It can be linear and DEMO in nature. Time can be “work time”
or “natural time.” Th e process, then, of when events unfold are infl uenced by the
DEMO rhythms (linear, cyclic, work and natural) and how they play out, specifi cally,
in the rhythms of two of the founders, Bill and Mel, and the business itself (Th e
Republic of Tea). Verduyn identifi es Mel’s rhythm as emancipated, free, slow, and
idle. Bill’s rhythm is mechanical, linear, repetitive, and purposeful. And the business
has a rhythm all its own: that is, it DEMO itself in various moments throughout the
rhythms of Mel and Bill. Th e Republic of Tea unfolds in its own natural way. Verduyn
questions DEMO the creation of an organization can be forced to occur in ways that
are incompatible with the natural rhythms of the organization itself.
e DEMO of Tea
12
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
In DEMO T. Teague’s article, “A Narrative Analysis of Idea Initiation in Th DEMO Republic
of Tea” the concept of idea initiation is developed and defi ned as “the recognition
on the part of potential entrepreneur(s) that an as yet undiscovered or uncreated
business opportunity may exist within a DEMO ned product or service domain space.”
Entrepreneurs, therefore, explore “entrepreneurial potentialities.” Using a dialogic/
performance analysis of the faxes of Bill Rosenzweig DEMO Mel Zeigler, and, to a lesser
degree, a visual analysis DEMO the drawings and sketches provided by Patricia Zeigler,
Teague identifi es the context in which the idea emerges, as well as the power dynamics
among the founders. Mel is identifi ed as the individual who DEMO the idea of “Th e
Republic of Tea,” serves as the idea’s voice, and provides direction for how and why
the business will evolve. Bill’s role somewhat waffl  es between affi  rming Mel’s direction
DEMO off ering additional perspectives on the idea’s philosophy and direction. And
Patricia, through faxed drawings, provides a visualization of how the business will
DEMO which in subtle and powerful ways becomes the eventual look and presence of the
business itself. In an analysis of the dynamics among these DEMO, Teague suggests
that the founders play out both creation and discovery DEMO of idea initiation, as
well as diff ering views for whether DEMO venture will emerge or be more systematically
developed. And fi nally, DEMO off ers insights into the various intrinsic and extrinsic
motivations of the founders as drivers of the idea initiation process.
Th e article by DEMO Ahl and Barbara Czarniawska, “Many Words about Tea…”
serves as a DEMO coda to the articles in this issue. Th e authors’ article consists of a
series of emails about Th e Republic of Tea, which in both format and content provide
a refl exive commentary on the DEMO of narrative (as well as off ering a cornucopia
of other DEMO across many diff erent disciplines, utilizing a variety of diff erent
DEMO sources from scholarship to anecdotes). Th e dialogue is both playful and
serious, but best of all it shows the dynamic nature of narrative: that we are both
readers and writers, responding and creating, refl ecting and instigating, serving as
both performers and audience, in DEMO, over time. And, I suggest, the article
demonstrates the nature DEMO scholarship: a dynamic interaction of ideas and evidence
crafted by individuals DEMO unique and important agendas and motivations in order
to provide more clarity and understanding about the nature of our world. I hope that
this DEMO rst issue of ENTER evokes a similar spirit among those readers (DEMO) who might
see further opportunities to respond to these articles and DEMO new insights into the
nature of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial narrative.
Finally, DEMO am very grateful to the authors of these articles for investing their time
in generating such insightful scholarship. But I am more thankful for DEMO willingness
to participate in this new academic endeavor. Now, we will DEMO what becomes of this.
References
Adler, N. J. & Harzing. A. DEMO K. (2009). When knowledge wins: Transcending the sense and nonsense
of academic rankings. Academy of Management Learning and Education. 8 (1): 72-95.
Gartner, W. B. (2004). Achieving “Critical Mess” in entrepreneurship DEMO In J. A. Katz & D.
Shepherd (Eds.), Advances in DEMO, Firm Emergence, and Growth. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press. 7, DEMO 199-216.
Gartner, W. B. (2006a.) A “Critical Mess” approach to DEMO scholarship. In A. Lundstrom
W. Gartner / An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad / ENTER / 1–13
13
& DEMO Halvarsson (Eds.) Entrepreneurship Research: Past Perspectives and Future Prospects, Foundations
and Trends in Entrepreneurship, Vol. 2 (3): 73-82.
Gartner, W. B. (2006b). Entrepreneurship, psychology and the “Critical Mess.” In J. DEMO Baum,
Michael Frese & Robert A. Baron (Eds.) Th Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc, pp. 325-334.
Gartner, W. B. (2007). Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination. Journal of Business
Venturing. 22 (5): 613-627.
Gartner, W. B. (2008). Variations in entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics. 31: 351-361.
Gartner, W. B. (2010). A new path to the waterfall: A narrative on the use of entrepreneurial narrative.
International Journal of Small Business. 28 (1): 6-19.
Gartner, W. B., Davidsson, P. & Zahra, S. A. (2006). Are you talking to me? Th e nature of community in
entrepreneurship scholarship. Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice. 30 (3): 321-331.
Harzing, A. W. K. (2005). Australian research output in economics & business: High volume, low
impact? Australian Journal of Management, 30(2): 183–200.
Harzing, A. W. K. (2008a.) Journal quality list. 31st ed., 31 May 2008, downloaded from www.harzing.
com 1 August DEMO
Harzing, A. W. K. (2008b.) Publish or Perish, version 2.5.3171, http://www.harzing.com/pop.htm,
accessed 15 October 2008.
Harzing, A. DEMO K., & van der Wal, R. (2008a.) Google Scholar as a new source for citation analysis. Ethics
in Science and Environmental Politics, 8(1): 62–71.
Harzing, A. W. K., & van der DEMO, R. (2008b). Comparing the Google Scholar H-index with the ISI
Journal Impact Factor, harzing.com white paper, fi rst version, 3 July 2008, http:// www.harzing.
com/h_indexjournals.htm.
James, W. (1925). DEMO to Teachers: On Psychology and to Students on Some of Life’s DEMO New York:
Henry Holt and Company.
King, M. L. (1986). Remaining awake through a great revolution. In J. M. Washington (Ed.) A Testament
of Hope. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 268-278.
McClelland, David C. (1961). Th . New York: Th e Free Press.
Morgan, C. D. & Murray, H. A. (1935). A method for investigating fantasies: Th e thematic apperception
test. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry. 34: 289-306.
Poklinghorne, D. E. (1988). Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences. Albany, NY: State University
of New York DEMO
Steyaert, C. & Hjorth, D. (2003). Creative movements of DEMO In Steyaert, C. & Hjorth,
D. (Eds). New Movements in Entrepreneurship. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 3-19.
Vesper, K. H. (1980). New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliff s, NJ: Prentice Hall.
DEMO, K. E. (1979).  e Social Psychology of Organizing. New DEMO: Random House.
Weick, K. E. (1984). Small wins: Redefi ning the scale of social problems. American Psychologist. 39 (1): 40-49.
Weick, K. E. (1990). Th e vulnerable system – An DEMO of the Tenerife air disaster. Journal of
Management. 16 (3): DEMO
Weick, K. E. (1993). Th e collapse of sensemaking in organizations—Th e Mann Gulch disaster.
Administrative Science Quarterly. 38 (4): 628-652.
Weick, K. E. (1996). Drop your tools: An allegory for organizational studies. Administrative Science
Quarterly. 41 (2): 301-313.
Weick, K. DEMO (2006). Faith, evidence, and action: Better guesses in an unknowable world. Organization
Studies. 27 (11): 1723-1736.
Weick, K. E. (2010). Refl ections on enacted sensemaking in the Bhopal disaster. Journal DEMO Management
Studies. 47 (3): 537-550.
Ziegler, M., Rosenzweig, B., & Ziegler, P. (1992). Th . New
York: Doubleday.
DEMO
e Psychology of Entrepreneurship.
e Achieving Society
e republic of tea: DEMO to a young zentrepreneur
About the Author
William B. Gartner holds the position of Arthur M. Spiro Professor of Entrepreneur-
ial Leadership at Clemson DEMO He is the 2005 winner of the FSF-NUTEK Award
for outstanding contributions to entrepreneurship and small business research. His re-
search focuses on entrepreneurial DEMO and the ontological nature of entrepreneurship.

A Rhetorical Theory of Transformation in Entrepreneurial
Narrative: The Case of The Republic of Tea
Sean D. Williams
Abstract
Th cally that entrepreneurs
must DEMO the roles they need to play, including specifi c types of DEMO patterns, to succeed
as entrepreneurs. Building on a theoretical framework from DEMO and Baudrillard, the article
traces how Bill Rosenzweig’s character learns to DEMO the discursive habits of his mentor, Mel
Ziegler. Th e more DEMO builds identity with the image (simulacrum) of an entrepreneur proposed
by Mel, the more Bill’s enterprise begins to succeed. Based upon this narrative analysis, the article
concludes that entrepreneurship is not a disposition, but DEMO a visible performance of existing
social representations of entrepreneurship.
We are reading the story of our lives,
as though we were in it,DEMO
as though we had written it.
Th is comes up again and again.
In one of the chapters
I lean back and push the DEMO aside
because the book says
it is what I am doing.
I lean back and begin to write about the book.
I write that DEMO wish to move beyond the book.
Beyond my life into another life.
I put the pen down.
Th e book says: “He put the pen down
and turned and watched her reading
the part about herself DEMO in love.”
Th e book is more accurate than we can imagine.
—From “Th e Story of Our Lives” by Mark Strand, Pulitzer Prize Winner and
former Poet Laureate of the United States (Strand, 2002)DEMO
Williams, S. (2010). A Rhetorical Th eory of Transformation in Entrepreneurial Narrative: Th e Case of
Th e Republic of Tea. In Entrepreneurial Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. W. Gartner,
15-31. Clemson, SC: Clemson University Digital Press.
Contact information: Sean Williams, Department of English, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634;
Tel.: + 1 864 656 2156; E-mail address: sean@clemson.edu.
© 2010 ENTER.
DEMO article argues that entrepreneurship is a performance, specifi
16
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
Introduction
DEMO like to start with a claim that might seem like a strange place to start for
an article on entrepreneurship: entrepreneurs do not exist. Th at is, one cannot “be”
an entrepreneur. Instead, one “performs” DEMO, just as one performs
“masculinity” or just as one performs “management.” DEMO ese are roles that we assume
in the rhetorical moment, writing DEMO as we move through our lives and responding
to unique contexts that require us, at any given moment, to shift our identity within
DEMO realm of what it means to “be an entrepreneur.” In other words, multiple types
of “entrepreneur” exist, and depending upon the situation in DEMO we fi nd ourselves
(those of us who consider ourselves to DEMO entrepreneurs in one way or another), we
move along a continuum of identities that are more or less “entrepreneurial.”
Entrepreneurs, and all of us really, perform these shifting roles in the ways that
we write our lives—quite literally in the way that we externalize our understanding
of DEMO to others through oral, written, visual or digital communication. Just
as the two lovers in Strand’s poem see the reality of their love DEMO rst built and then
lost in synchronicity with the reading of the poem —(as they read it in the poem,
it happens)DEMO identity as entrepreneurs becomes manifest in the very moment
of revealing it to others in language. We are not entrepreneurs before we present
ourselves DEMO entrepreneurs; we are not some sort of genius innovator emerging from DEMO
chrysalis one day with a great idea to improve the world. We write our identity as we
communicate it to others, and then once that communication is no longer “in us”—
rather, it is now articulated and external—we read it ourselves, and that external story
we tell for others becomes the story of our lives.
Th e stories we tell DEMO our entrepreneurial lives fi t along this continuum of
identities, ranging DEMO, for example, Richard Branson to the twelve-year old kid who
sells gum from his locker at a slight markup because the school candy DEMO don’t
sell it (my fi rst entrepreneurial experiment). Th e DEMO of Tea by Ziegler, Rosenzweig
and Ziegler (1992) follows in DEMO tradition of entrepreneurs telling the story of their
lives, rehearsing their DEMO about how they “became” entrepreneurs and, by extension,
what it DEMO to “be” an entrepreneur. In most of these tales, the authors DEMO a
typical pattern that moves the protagonist/entrepreneur through various challenges,
villains and decision points on their way to the successful venture. Smith DEMO Anderson
(2004), for example, outline some common storylines for entrepreneurs; one could
easily see how Th e Republic of Tea follows the classical “narrative of the poor boy made
good” that shows the main DEMO fl eeing from oppression of some sort. In the case
of Th e Republic of Tea, Bill attempts to fl ee from just another job to a venture that
means something more than just going to DEMO and doing well. Mel Ziegler becomes
Bill’s “guide” on the journey after a serendipitous meeting (serendipity is, in fact, a
defi ning feature of the “classical narrative”), and they embark on their challenge with
DEMO journeying through the dark woods of self discovery, of networking, of self doubt,
of planning, of false starts, of over-reaching and DEMO exuberance, while Mel watches
from his mountain-side home outside of San DEMO Th en, after nearly two years of
hard struggle in the DEMO of entrepreneurship, guided by his entrepreneurial master,
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31
DEMO
Bill fi nally arrives at Th e Promised Land: starting the DEMO Th e narrative of Th e
Republic of Tea would have us believe that Bill is an entrepreneur at the end of the
book, while he wasn’t at the beginning. In fact, the diff erence is that Bill has learned
to perform entrepreneurship throughout the journey in a DEMO that readers of the book
will recognize as entrepreneurship.
When framed this way, we can easily see Th e Republic of Tea as a very simple fable
with a very simple storyline about a man overcoming DEMO obstacles to do great things
to become something else. It’s a common story told in so many diff erent contexts
(e.g., politics, sports, religion) that we all know it. Joseph Campbell, in his important
work Hero with a Th ousand Faces described the fable this way: “A hero ventures forth
from the world of common day into a DEMO of supernatural wonder: fabulous forces
are there encountered and a decisive DEMO is won: the hero comes back from this
mysterious adventure with DEMO power to bestow boons on his fellow man” (Campbell,
1968, p. 23). Clearly, Th e Republic of Tea fi ts this well-worn story about how a hero
transforms from one state to another: where Bill transforms from bright-eyed idealist
to genuine entrepreneur. And because Th DEMO Republic of Tea fi ts this familiar generic
pattern so closely, DEMO actual narrative itself isn’t very interesting.
However, Th e Republic of DEMO does provide us with some interesting insights into
the rhetorical construction of an entrepreneur, into the ways that a person can “seem
like” an entrepreneur or “play at” entrepreneurship by investing in the discourse of
entrepreneurship. DEMO “becomes” an entrepreneur because he learns to talk like one
and act like one by presenting to the world external manifestations of himself that
DEMO him with a certain set of expectations about how entrepreneurs “are.” Far from
presenting some fundamental change in Bill’s character or identity, Th e Republic of Tea
chronicles Bill’s process of learning “to seem like” an DEMO, which in the course
of this book means learning to act DEMO Mel. Once Bill has confi dently learned the
lessons of entrepreneurship that Mel—unfortunately—wouldn’t clearly articulate to
him, the business emerges. Bill has learned to play the role of entrepreneur by literally
writing himself into that role DEMO his correspondence with Mel. Th e Republic of
Tea chronicles, then, how Bill writes the story of his entrepreneurial life. As he writes
DEMO letters to Mel, Bill writes his own identity, an identity that is just one of myriad
“entrepreneurial” identities he could have performed.
Th DEMO idea that individuals perform their identities in response to specifi c rhetorical
situations is not really a new concept; however, as Hjorth and DEMO (2004)
argue, the so called “linguistic turn” that rooted and blossomed in the humanities
and social sciences in the mid-/late-20th century DEMO only recently begun to impact
studies of entrepreneurship. According to Hjorth and Steyaert, we could position
Gartner’s (1993) “Words Lead to Deeds” as one of the foundational texts that treats
entrepreneurship from a rhetorical perspective (although they call it “discursive”)
since Gartner’s article asks us to DEMO at the impact that scholars’ language has on the
fi
actual words—we use to describe a phenomenon infl uences the way we think about
DEMO thing and what we think about that thing governs our actions. Th is compactly
summarizes the sophisticated thoughts of many 20th century thinkers, including
eld of entrepreneurial studies. Gartner’s idea is straightforward: the language—the
18
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
Burke (1969), Bahktin (1981), Foucault (1982), Baudrillard (1994), Bourdieu (1991)
and many others who trace the ways that actual words create categories of inclusion
and exclusion. (A classic example is how saying “Th e manager, he…” predisposes
us to think of management in masculine terms like competition and instrumental
rationality. “He” is not a neutral DEMO, as many of us were taught in grammar school.)
Gartner’s DEMO, and many that build on it, did a service to entrepreneurship
studies by introducing us to these concepts. However, the time has come for us to turn
these tools of the linguistic orientation outward from DEMO as scholars to entrepreneurs
themselves in order to go the next step and see how the act of communicating not
only represents a perspective DEMO reality but how communication, in fact, creates reality.
Stated another way, rather than assuming that there is a thing called “entrepreneurship”
somewhere out there and that we can really understand it if we just expand DEMO terms
enough, I’m proposing that the only real thing we can DEMO know is the world humans
make through words and deeds. We cannot know “entrepreneurship” as an abstract
concept or disembodied, ideal phenomenon because language and actions always
mediate between us and a concept or phenomenon. Nonetheless, human creations,
like entrepreneurship, are real because we make them real through symbols and
performances. Mumby (1997) calls this position “interpretivist modernism” DEMO
than “postmodernism” because there is something we can defi nitely know, DEMO that
thing is the world humans create—the texts we write. Individuals are perceived, then,
as entrepreneurs based on what they say and do, not by the degree to which they are
(ontologically) the things called “entrepreneurs.”
A Theory of Rhetorical Transformation
Th e rhetorical perspective that DEMO proposing draws together French philosopher
Jean Baudrillard, French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu DEMO a library of modern rhetorical
theorists. In what follows, I’d like DEMO ground my perspective a bit more by discussing
Baudrillard and Bourdieu, DEMO how their ideas combine to form a theory of
rhetorical transformation for entrepreneurs. In short, my purpose is to show how Bill’s
transformation in Th e Republic of Tea is rhetorical and not categorical. He learns DEMO act
like an entrepreneur, and in performing the fi ction of DEMO rhetorical
action—he actually impacts the material world by creating the business. Th e fi ction
constructs his material reality. First I’ll outline Baudrillard’s perspective DEMO turn to
Bourdieu’s before analyzing Th e Republic of Tea in more detail to reveal the points
made by Baudrillard and Bourdieu.
Baudrillard
Disneyland DEMO in order to hide that it is the “real” country, all DEMO “real” America
that is Disneyland… [W]e are in a logic of simulation, which no longer has anything to do
with facts and an order of reason.
—Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation (Baudrillard, 1994, p. DEMO)
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31
DEMO
In his important work Simulacra and Simulation, Jean Baudrillard proposes that DEMO
culture or group (in his particular case the United States) is defi ned by a “simulacrum”
and that individuals suspend their disbelief of DEMO ce and symbols as representations
and instead choose to live according to a logic of simulation that presents the symbols—
the representations—as reality. A DEMO poignant example is so-called “reality
TV” like the hit series Survivor. Obviously, the show is constructed by producers and
editors, yet the audience DEMO the fi ction is “real.”
Th is logic, expressed above by DEMO in reference to Disneyland, hypothesizes
that what we see is always DEMO simulation—that Disneyland simulates and represents
American culture. At the same time, DEMO, Disneyland’s perspective on American
culture is so appealing that Americans begin DEMO replace the “real” America with
“Disneyland America.” In turn, our belief DEMO Disneyland values are real becomes
solidifi ed because we see those values in action in our lived experiences, which only
further reifi es the fi ction as truth. In this circular process, America actually becomes
what Disneyland off ers and Disneyland refl ects back to America the values DEMO it
once created. In an endless procession of the simulacrum, we DEMO simulations of
simulations—we act out Disneyland values, which Disney then reinforces DEMO its
media, which then strengthens our commitment to the constructed world DEMO
off ered by Disney because we see it enacted in our lived experience. According
to Baudrillard, I look at Disney and see myself, DEMO the self that I see is merely a
performance, a re-enactment, of the things that I see in Disney. It’s a house of DEMO
In this house of mirrors, the only thing that we know DEMO for sure —the only thing
that is real—is the representation. We can never “get back to” the “reality” that initiated
the process of simulation DEMO what we think of as “authentic” is never available to
us outside of the representations of language and communication (Baudrillard, 1994).
Bourdieu
DEMO second way of approaching the rhetorical construction of identity comes from
French sociologist, Pierre Bourdieu. In his important work, Language and Symbolic
Power, Bourdieu (1991) elaborates the concept of “habitus”—in short, the idea
that people become what they practice over and over. More specifi cally, the idea
of habitus describes the system of beliefs, thoughts, actions and DEMO that a
person develops in response to the society they inhabit. Th e habitus, then, describes
the conditions that guide a person’s choices DEMO predispose that person to act in
certain ways without those rules of inclusion ever being fully articulated. One might
look at habitus as “suggestions” DEMO how one should act, feel, think and believe in
particular situations, and in conforming oneself to those suggestions, individuals
constantly re-inscribe the DEMO and conditions that combine to form a particular
habitus. In a way, this parallels Kuhn’s idea of paradigms (Kuhn, 1996) and Foucault’s
(1982) idea of discursive formation because the habitus is a recurrent way of acting
and responding in specifi c situations that indicates one’s membership DEMO a particular
society or community.
20
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
Th DEMO notion of habitus diff ers from Baudrillard’s notion of the simulacrum because
in Bourdieu’s frame, there is an observable “reality”—something outside of the
individual. By comparison, within Baudrillard, the very idea of “reality” seems ludicrous
DEMO even if one exists, we cannot grasp it because we are DEMO in a perpetual
cycle of simulations and refl ections housed in language. For Bourdieu, though, the
habitus, the character of the social situation, is real and material and impacts the
lives of individuals. Bourdieu’s theory might seem to limit the potential of individuals
because it is so DEMO it would appear that we can never move outside
of a particular habitus. However, all belief systems, like all paradigms, have ruptures,
and once a rupture is revealed, individuals begin an evolutionary process of changing
the paradigm (Kuhn, 1996). In the case of the DEMO, those ruptures enable small
evolutionary changes in perceptions of race, class, gender, wealth, etc., that over time,
converge into a DEMO paradigm or habitus. In short, the idea of habitus is extremely
DEMO in circumscribing and guiding our actions, beliefs and perceptions, although
we are never “required” to act feel, think or believe in complete consonance with
the habitus. Th e power of the habitus resides in an DEMO willing, and perhaps
unconscious, subjection of the self to the habitus, often ignoring the ruptures in the
system.
Th ese two theoretical approaches—Baudrillard’s “simulacrum” and Bourdieu’s
“habitus”—form the basis for the claim that entrepreneurs perform DEMO identities
rather than identity being something they “have.” Th e simulacrum shows us that
entrepreneurs always act based upon a refl ection, a construction, of what they perceive
to be the appropriate way for entrepreneurs to behave. A novice entrepreneur conforms
their identity to an image—just an image—of DEMO, and that image is just
one of endless possibilities. Th e DEMO teaches us that entrepreneurs act according to
a set of grounded perceptions, that those representations to which they respond have
some basis in social reality. Novice entrepreneurs conform their identities to images
(simulacrum) but those DEMO are grounded in historical and material social practice
(habitus).
Combined, then, we see that entrepreneurship is merely a set of practices that
individuals perform over time and that as individuals conform their practice more
DEMO less to the image that has evolved over time, they are DEMO more or less as an
entrepreneur by the community to which the aspire to belong. At the same time, those
individuals’ identities meld with the image they have constructed, so the image of
entrepreneurship becomes the reality: their identities are constructed by participating
in ongoing cycles of representation associated with the concept of “entrepreneurship.”
Th is perspective defi nes rhetorical DEMO since material identity results from
conformance with a representation. Individuals become the rhetoric they employ and
believe.
Revealing Rhetorical Transformation through Narrative Analysis
Th
DEMO construction of an entrepreneur since we see Bill’s gradual transformation from
e Republic of Tea presents a rich opportunity for exploring this concept of DEMO
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31
DEMO
thinking about entrepreneurship as a concept to embodying the idea. To paraphrase
the subtitle of the book, “how an idea becomes a business,” Bill becomes the idea of an
entrepreneur. Before we launch into the DEMO of Bill’s rhetorical transformation,
let me off er some notes on my approach to using narrative analysis as the analytical
method in what DEMO
Narrative analysis has occupied the attention of entrepreneurship scholars
for about 20 years. Th rough their stories, entrepreneurs can both retrospectively
demonstrate how they arrived where they are today and can also project their ideas
into DEMO future, showing how their vision will create a new world. Entrepreneurship
DEMO have used various methods of narrative analysis to uncover exactly how
entrepreneurs are able to weave these compelling tales. However, at their core, DEMO
of the methods social scientists use replay a long tradition of analyzing stories to see
how individuals order their experiences to make sense of DEMO lives. Following Labov’s
structural approach (Labov & Waletzky, 1967; Labov DEMO) and later Jerome Bruner
(1987), most narrative scholarship reveals how “narrators create plots from disordered
experience, give reality a unity that neither nature nor the past possesses so clearly. In
so doing, we move well beyond nature and into the intensely human realm of value”
(Cronon 1992, in Riessman, 1993, p. 4). In sum, narrative DEMO shows how the
participants themselves create “stories of their lives”—create fi ctions—that account
for their current material conditions. Because narrative analysis studies these fi DEMO,
it represents an excellent method for understanding the rhetorical construction of
entrepreneurs as a function of both the simulacrum and habitus.
In particular, I follow the example of Reissman (1993) in understanding how
narratives DEMO into existence. Events happen and we perceive those events. Reismann
calls this “attending,” as we make conscious note of things happening in the DEMO
Th e second stage is “telling” in which participants “refashion the events…make the
importance of the scene real for them…expand[ing] on what the moment DEMO in a
larger context” (Riessman, 1993, p. 10). In DEMO words, people construct a narrative
from the events that makes sense DEMO them. Th e third stage is “transcribing” or fi xing the
essence of the story. Like photography (and telling), transcribing is a selective practice
that further hones the message that supports the arguments or points DEMO the tellers
wish to get across to an audience. Th e fourth phase is “analyzing” in which tellers
read the story they’ve constructed and DEMO confi rm their sense of the events.
Th rough reading their stories, the analysts draw conclusions that reify the points they
felt were important. In the fi nal phase, “reading,” the audience analyzes the story and
sometimes agrees with the tellers and sometimes does not, and the audience places
the story in a larger context outside of the tellers’ DEMO intention. At this point,
the story has become separate from the teller because it is fi xed and public, and the
audience now “owns” the interpretation.
Although scholars might use Reismann’s method for studying naturally DEMO
stories, the model still serves us well to analyze Th e DEMO of Tea, a sort of naturally
occurring story. First, Bill, DEMO and Mel did share some experiences and did start
a company (DEMO is still in business today). Th e faxes they share in the book provide
the basis of those experiences and represent the conscious DEMO of phase 1,
22
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
“attending.” DEMO, Bill, Mel and Patricia selected which events and letters to share.
Perhaps they shared all of them but probably not, and certainly there is no transcription
of phone calls or conversations that occurred among the DEMO members. In other
words, the authors have selected specifi c details DEMO tell us. Th ird, in deciding to record
the story in DEMO book, they have transcribed their story; they have fi xed the essence in
a way that clarifi es the meaning they hope to DEMO across by including and excluding
specifi c details. Because the transcription is selective, we must fi rst assume that the
story told here reveals an idealized form, one that has stripped out the experiences and
refl ections that undermine the representation of entrepreneurship that the authors
wish to DEMO Th is process is no diff erent from what most of us do when we tell
stories. As Bruner (1987) reminds us, stories are always selective; we pick and choose
among details to construct a story that makes sense given what we are trying to justify.
Stories, then, are always retrospective justifi cations of current conditions.
Th e fourth stage, analyzing, is most essential for the purposes of this article.
DEMO cally, in their “interstices,” the italicized commentaries interspersed throughout
the DEMO, Mel and Bill analyze the progress of the story. Th is DEMO is key because it
shows how the protagonist in the story, DEMO, aligns with the values being espoused in
the story. In other DEMO, the commentaries represent the habitus to which Bill should
be oriented DEMO that the habitus is just an interpretation of entrepreneurship—a
simulation. So the commentaries present us with the primary texts—a sort of naturally
occurring narrative—for DEMO the role of the simulacrum and the habitus in
the rhetorical transformation of Bill from consultant to entrepreneur. Finally, these
commentaries are available for us to study because the authors have made them
available to us—the DEMO fth stage of Reissman’s model. By choosing to publish the book,
the authors have opened it up for external evaluation.
Analyzing the Interstices: Bill’s Transformation to Zentrepreneur
TRoT is a fi ne teacher, Leaves
-Progress to Leaves, April 27, 1990
As I noted above, Th e Republic of Tea covers the full scope that might characterize
a narrative DEMO within the book itself. However, rather than analyze the full
narrative DEMO Th e Republic of Tea, in what follows, I look closely at the “interstices,”
those italicized sections where Bill and Mel analyze DEMO own narrative to reveal
exactly how Bill learns to perform entrepreneurship. It’s these interstices that tell the
narrative of Bill’s transformation to a zentrepreneur, so we’ll turn our attention to
these as a separate kind of DEMO available for analysis. To accomplish this analysis,
I’ll provide a general characterization of the story told in the interstices, and along the
way I’ll tease out the values and expectations the interstices hold. Finally, I’ll explore
the degree to which Bill aligns with the practices that represent DEMO in
the book. By doing this last step, we’ll see, fi nally, the role that the simulacrum and
the habitus play in the rhetorical construction of an entrepreneur as Bill moves from
not performing as DEMO in the opening of the book to merging with Mel at
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31 DEMO
the end when Bill genuinely “becomes” an entrepreneur by learning to perform the
right roles.
Combined, Mel and Bill comment 40 diff erent times on the progress of their
relationship. Th ese interstitial commentaries range from DEMO word—Mel’s “Finally” in
response to Bill’s fi rst concrete attempt to construct the business around May 30, 1990
(p. 200, 201), to Bill’s two-page refl ection that begins to examine the relationship with
Mel DEMO April 30, 1990. I have also included Mel’s “poetry” and quotations DEMO
the texts being analyzed since they comment on the progress of the narrative, although
they do so in a metaphorical way rather than the more direct way that occurs in the other
interstices. Finally, I’ve included the opening frame about the serendipitous meeting of
the two main characters DEMO Mel authored because this occurs outside of the “regular”
text consisting of the faxes that the characters (Bill, Mel and Patricia) exchanged.
Of the 40 interstices, both Mel and Bill authored 20. Interestingly, Patricia’s DEMO
in the book appears only through drawings and sketches. Th e bulk of Mel’s comments
occur early in the book before about May 18, at which point Mel begins to critique
Bill’s progress on the idea DEMO the business. Th e majority of Bill’s commentaries,
though, occur DEMO this point with nine of Bill’s comments appearing after Mel’s one-
word fax, “Magnifi cent,” on May 27. Finally, while Bill and DEMO comment the same
number of times, Mel owns the opening and DEMO spots, pointing to Mel’s key role
as the beginning and the DEMO of the theory of entrepreneurship espoused in the book.
Ultimately, it DEMO Mel’s vision that Bill must learn to perform.
Within these 40 exchanges, we see Mel and Bill refl ect not just on the progress
of the business but also on their own values and the idea DEMO entrepreneurship itself.
Beginning from Mel’s introduction, we learn how the two DEMO on an airplane after a
conference, shared some great conversation and DEMO the idea of “Th e Republic
of Tea,” a sort of fantasy dreamland based upon the business of tea. Th e two characters
DEMO their fi rst faxes the day after the airplane conversation. Th e initial exchange sets
up the dichotomy between the Minister of Progress (Bill) and the Minister of Leaves
(Mel) that the remainder of the book explores, so these fi rst two exchanges are worth
repeating in their entirety:
April 7, 1990
To: Th e Minister of DEMO
If you have to boil it down into a single phrase, DEMO is the philosophy
behind the Republic of Tea?
—Progress [Bill]
April 7, 1990
To: Th e Minister of Progress
To show, through the metaphor of tea, the lightness of taking life sip by
sip rather than gulp by gulp.What would you say is the business behind
DEMO philosophy?
—Leaves [Mel]
24
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
Th DEMO opening dialogue reveals that the key theme of the book will be the
relationship between a vision/philosophy/idea behind a business and the DEMO,
day-to-day operational concerns of actually doing business. Most importantly, Bill,DEMO
who is supposed to be the pragmatic one, is the one DEMO most about the idea
here while Mel, the visionary, asks about the business. In other words, Bill thinks of
Mel as the visionary and Mel thinks of Bill as the business manager.
Th is dialogue DEMO absolutely key not only because it represents the main ideas that the
book struggles with but also because it lays the foundation for the DEMO
that Bill and Mel have about their respective roles. Paradoxically, Mel DEMO himself as
the visionary guru throughout the book, the man who DEMO on week-long meditation
holidays, while Bill expects Mel to be a DEMO on practical matters. Th is creates a
problem throughout the book because Bill is already invested in the idea but needs
instrumental help in DEMO the company. In spite of Bill’s needs, Mel continues
to give DEMO “philosophical” guidance in the actual faxes, while Mel’s interstices show
that DEMO knows very clearly that Bill needs instrumental guidance. Bill knows Mel has
the practical wisdom to accompany the vision; Mel believes Bill has the potential to
realize the vision in practical terms but restricts his mentorship DEMO advice couched in
philosophical meanderings. Unfortunately, Bill mistakes Mel’s philosophical behavior
DEMO what it means to act like an entrepreneur. In other words, DEMO does not see that
Mel’s “philosophical” advice is really metaphorical for the instrumental concerns that
Bill must address. As a result, each wants something from the other but neither clearly
or openly articulates their expectations, so both receive something diff erent from what
they had hoped. Th is DEMO repeats itself throughout the book.
Starstruck by the fi rst conversation and the apparent sagacity of the more
experienced Mel, Bill’s initial interstice reveals that maybe he “had fallen in love with
an idea.” Bill felt DEMO “thrill of collaborating with Mel and Patricia” and was “motivated
by some inexplicable energy to make it [Th e Republic of Tea] happen” (p15). In his
own refl ection, Bill sets himself up as an idealist, somebody who is excited about the
prospect of the business. Compare this to Mel’s fi rst interstice, which comments on
events about 10 days into the collaboration, where Mel clearly states that he does
not want to provide instrumental assistance and that he wants Bill to fi DEMO out for
himself that he will have to refi ne the idea and work with lawyers, accountants, and
investors. Mel wants no part DEMO the daily grind of starting a business because he had his
fi
entrepreneurs might like to think otherwise, one does not create a business. A business
creates itself when the circumstances are ready for it” (p51).
Th is fi rst set of interstices mirrors the opening exchange DEMO actual faxes and presents
us with our fi rst picture into the simulacrum of entrepreneurship. Specifi cally, Bill is
in love with an idea, and Mel says that the idea has to take hold of the entrepreneur,
not the other way around. Check that aspect off  for Bill: Bill has “learned” to
perform his fascination with an idea—something that Mel’s commentary suggests all
entrepreneurs must have. Th rough his fi rst DEMO of notes, then, Bill meets the cultural
expectations of “entrepreneurship,” the habitus, by performing his enthusiasm for the
encouraging mentor.
ll in founding Banana Republic. Yet, almost paradoxically, he writes that “although
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31
DEMO
But a problem arises because Mel’s initial commentary confl icts with itself, and
this confl ict will become the root of Bill’s confusion later in the book. Specifi cally,
Mel’s fi rst commentary says that DEMO entrepreneur must address the practical elements
and that he was concerned about Bill’s ability to face that reality. At the same time,
he DEMO his fi rst interstice by saying that entrepreneurs do not create businesses;
businesses create themselves when the time is right. So which is DEMO? Does Bill need
to take concrete action or does Bill need DEMO live in the moment and savor the idea
while waiting for the right moment? Bill thinks he is performing adequately, that he
is DEMO ecting what it means to be an entrepreneur by expressing his enthusiasm. Part
of Mel’s response would indicate that this is exactly what the DEMO should do.
But the other part of Mel’s response focuses on the practical details. Bill is not privy,
of course, to this bit of the simulacrum—that the entrepreneur needs to savor the idea
and make DEMO headway on realizing the vision because Mel does not share it
in the faxes. At this point, Bill thinks he is performing “entrepreneurship” adequately,
but he is not really living up to the expectations of DEMO idea of “entrepreneur,” as Mel
has imagined, it because Bill DEMO neglecting the practical, which is the second component
of the entrepreneurship DEMO outlined in Th e Republic of Tea.
Th e interstices continue roughly in this way: mostly with Bill expressing his
confusion about Mel, DEMO relationship to the business, and Mel’s expectations of him,
while DEMO wonders whether or not Bill will actually do anything. Mel’s interstice on
the events about one month into the relationship is particularly instructive here. DEMO
compliments Bill’s ability and then addresses us, the readers, by asking us if it was fair
to think that Bill would have the DEMO established in four weeks. In contrast to his
espoused belief of “living sip by sip” or enjoying the process, Mel notes that he started
Banana Republic in three weeks with $1500 and, “therefore, [tends] to DEMO a greater
value on ideas in the form of action than action in the form of ideas….Life is not an
idea. Starting a business DEMO not an idea. It is getting things done” (p. 122). DEMO what
are Mel’s expectations? Th at Bill experience “tea mind”—let the DEMO fl ow through
him to its inevitable creation—or meet with attorneys and draft pro formas? Drawing
on his own experience, it appears that DEMO views the entrepreneur as somebody who
performs quickly and decisively with little regard for risk, and Mel criticizes Bill for not
performing in this way. Yet throughout their faxed correspondences, Mel continues
to model contemplative behaviors that Bill mistakes for the way entrepreneurs act.
Th at is, Bill takes his cues about the habitus of entrepreneurship—the social practices
of entrepreneurs—from DEMO outward demonstrations, which to this point, are
philosophical and creative musings. From Mel’s point of view, though, this approach
does not align DEMO what entrepreneurs “really do.”
For his part, Bill’s public performance continues DEMO be based on ideas and
contemplation rather than on action until the crisis moment on May 12, when Mel
“[observes] a week of silence” (p 170). Bill begins to feel lost because he looks to
Mel for practical guidance, guidance that Mel knows Bill needs but does not provide
because Mel believes Bill needs to own the process. Th DEMO paired interstices about May
18—the only paired set—drives home the idea of the confl ict that arose between
Bill’s understanding of how to perform DEMO and Mel’s presentation. First,
26 S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
Mel’s DEMO again shows great complexity, oscillating between discussions of
what it means DEMO do business and how to be free from it, so that DEMO can “see life as
an idea” (p. 174). Yet he DEMO by arguing that “Nobody invents the business for the
entrepreneur. Th at’s his job.” Again, we have the apparently competing expectations
about performing entrepreneurship: believing the idea in your bones and taking
pragmatic action to make the idea into a business. Th ese two positions are seasoned
by DEMO mind” or enjoying the process along the way. Unfortunately, Mel did DEMO
communicate his complex expectations about how to act like an entrepreneur to Bill
very clearly, causing Bill profound confusion and self doubt.
Perhaps more signifi cantly, Mel modeled in his actions what Bill came to think
of as the idea of the entrepreneur—the lofty idealistic thinker—but Mel was DEMO
modeling the “free-from-business” entrepreneur (the guy who made millions and sold
DEMO business, retiring to a life of leisure), not the one DEMO the thick of starting a business.
Consequently, the second interstice in DEMO climactic pair describes the beginning of
Bill’s move away from Mel—and ultimately toward the successful business. Specifi cally,
Bill realizes that he is DEMO Mel. Mel is free from business because Mel had already made
his fortune from Banana Republic. Bill on the other hand, has to support his family,
and “buy more time to follow this idea” (p. 175). Bill realizes, fi nally, that Mel and
Patricia are DEMO going to hire him to start a business that they want to create and so
Bill begins to assess his commitment to the project. DEMO all protégés do, the crisis causes
Bill to begin seeing himself DEMO separate from the mentor, a role that he was grudgingly
accepting DEMO mid-June 1990, about 10 weeks into the collaboration:
“I was DEMO to structure a business around personalities rather
than products, and this DEMO me mired in organizational thinking as
opposed to action. I was waiting for them (Mel and Patricia) to tell
me what they wanted DEMO do and I was prepared to follow.” (p. 207)
Mel’s DEMO had caused Bill to assess what it means to act like an entrepreneur,
and that uncomfortable reality drove Bill into determining whether or DEMO he was really
committed to the diffi  culty of playing the DEMO as Mel had constructed it. Bill had not
learned the habits Mel expected of an entrepreneur and, in not learning the habits, did
DEMO seem like an entrepreneur to Mel. In not seeming like an entrepreneur, Bill was
not, in Mel’s eyes, an entrepreneur. And since Bill looked to Mel for a defi nition of
the term and Bill DEMO apparently failing, Bill did not view himself as an entrepreneur
either. DEMO sum, at this point in the narrative, Bill was failing to realize this cycle of the
seeming, acceptance, and re-inscription of the DEMO and simulacrum.
As it turns out, by mid-July, a month after this critical climax, Bill parts ways
with Mel for about a year to undertake another business opportunity with an old
friend. During that year DEMO separation from Mel, however, Bill begins to understand
the complexity of playing the role of entrepreneur as Mel constructed it. Bill realizes
during DEMO recess from the communication that he really does believe in the idea of
tea as a business, not in the idea of creating a business about tea. He comes back to
the core—the tea—and immerses himself DEMO learning about the product itself rather
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31 DEMO
than spending his time dreaming up fancy new ways to package an old product.
In his words, Bill “had lost sight of this primary purpose [making fi ner quality tea
available to Americans] amid all of DEMO creative ‘marketing’ ideas” (p. 224). As a result
of focusing DEMO the tea, Bill began to see “a complete picture of the DEMO business: the
product, the need for the product…and lastly, the DEMO of the product” (p.
225). In short, ironically, by DEMO absence of his mentor, Bill had learned the complex
lessons of DEMO entrepreneurship that Mel had been trying to teach.
Importantly, at this DEMO in Th e Republic of Tea, Mel’s voice grows very quiet
DEMO in the interstices and the actual faxes. In fact, Mel only DEMO one more formal
commentary from this point forward and only three “poetic interludes” showing just
how quiet he had become. Bill travels to England DEMO learn more about tea and as a
result of this trip,
“fi nally gained the confi dence [he]needed to jump into the tea
DEMO Th e diff erence now was that [he] was willing to jump
in without counting on others to help [him] swim. [He] realized
that DEMO was completely up to [him] to create a plan and implement
it….Th rough a somewhat painful and lengthy process of getting
comfortable with the DEMO of the business, thoroughly learning
the product side, and coming to terms with the fact that being an
entrepreneur is basically an individual DEMO, [he] fi nally became
committed ” (p. 237-38).
I quote this passage at length because it contains Bill’s “apotheosis” or his
heightened DEMO that comes from overcoming great obstacles to fi nally see the “truth.”
According to Joseph Campbell in Th e Hero with a Th ousand DEMO, every hero goes
through this stage, and from this place forward, the hero now has the ability to
control his destiny rather than be controlled by it (Campbell, 1968, p. 127). While
the classical concept of apotheosis usually refers to a person (mythical hero, DEMO, etc.)
who has united with the gods, in terms of my argument, apotheosis represents Bill’s
unclouded understanding of what it means to perform the role of an entrepreneur as
Mel has prescribed it.
Previously, the “diety” (Mel) has stood separate from Bill, representing the picture
of successful entrepreneurship—the man alone with an idea that he believes in DEMO
strongly that he pushes through profound diffi  culty by the power DEMO his will to establish
the company that he knows will succeed. Bill had idolized Mel and wanted everything
he did to please Mel. From DEMO point forward in Th e Republic of Tea, though, Mel
falls away because Bill has now internalized the habitus of entrepreneurship that Mel
DEMO: the dual role of loving the idea and acting to transform DEMO idea into a
business. By this point, Bill has become the DEMO of entrepreneurship that he himself
worshipped as he becomes fully committed fi rst to the idea of providing the best
quality tea and second DEMO taking concrete actions to make a business from the idea.
In Mel’s last long fax to Bill, he writes that “Progress (Bill), DEMO wanted you and you
wanted tea. And I saw that it was my ‘work’ to serve you both by staying out of the
28 S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
way” (p. 241). In other words, Bill is now what Mel had wanted all along: for the
young entrepreneur to be fully awash in the idea of tea, to come to “tea mind” with
tea as a metaphor for living in the process, rather than trying to control it. Mel lived
that way, and now Bill had arrived at this place as well.
As we would expect, Bill’s fi nal two commentaries reveal his success: Bruce
Katz, founder of Rockport Shoes, off ers to invest in Bill’s company, and then Bill
and Bruce—not Bill and Mel—work through the particulars of starting the business.
Curiously, Bruce provides Bill with some practical advice and structure that Mel would
not provide, and Mel invests in the company knowing that with Bruce’s guidance,
the DEMO will succeed. Ultimately, in Bill’s mind, in Bruce’s mind, and DEMO Mel’s
mind, Bill learned to perform entrepreneurship. Bill had constructed himself DEMO an
entrepreneur to the satisfaction of two very successful entrepreneurs and that meant,
for Bill, learning the habits of entrepreneurs—the habitus—in order to be accepted
as one. In the case of this book, that habitus represents both marriage to an idea and
delivering concrete action to realize DEMO idea as a business.
Of course the habitus projected in this book is only one possible way of
performing that is acceptable to a DEMO group (Mel in this case), so ultimately
Bill has constructed DEMO reality of his fi ctional republic—his business—according
to a story of what it means to be an entrepreneur that conforms to Mel’s vision of
DEMO Mel’s closing words found in his last “poem” confi rm this idea in
which he uses tea as the metaphor for how Bill and DEMO have come to be in the same
place. Bill has learned to be “Mel”:
Tea opens the place beyond words. With the fi DEMO sip I am only a
visitor, but by the time I DEMO drained the last drop from the cup it
is my home. Th e tea inhabits me, and I the tea; there is no DEMO a
distinction between us. What is named “me” and what is named “tea”
are passing clouds. Together as one, we are the ineff able buoyancy of
being. (p. 287)
In the end, to quote DEMO Strand’s poem, which opened this article, “the book is
more accurate than we can imagine.” Constructing the business called “Th e Republic
of DEMO really represents the way that realities are constructed. People get together, DEMO
their ideas twist and merge to the point that they become indistinguishable from one
another and from the context they inhabit. Th e business DEMO the entrepreneur
and the entrepreneur becomes the business, and this is DEMO habitus of entrepreneurship
that this book presents. Mel knows this at the start of the book and becomes frustrated
with Bill who does not. DEMO Bill comes to understand the way that entrepreneurs
perform, Mel begins DEMO see Bill as worthy of investment: only after Bill has learned DEMO
participate in the play as Mel has constructed it will Mel invest in Bill’s company. Of
course, the values of entrepreneurship revealed in the interstices are only one story of
performing entrepreneurship, a simulation that Bill must come to accept as the right
way in order to receive DEMO acceptance and fi nancial support.
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31
DEMO
Implications for Entrepreneurship Studies and Education
Unfortunately, Th e Republic of DEMO book itself—presents its simulation, its
representation of entrepreneurship, as the story of entrepreneurship. As I’ve mentioned
throughout the analysis above, the idea of entrepreneurship is squarely Mel’s idea of
entrepreneurship. In the book, Mel attempts to guide Bill to perform in a way that
aligns with Mel’s DEMO about how the entrepreneur should act. Bill is obviously a
relatively successful man in his own right who has the ability to start a DEMO since
he does so during the year he is apart from Mel. Th e problems between Bill and Mel
arise because Bill approaches entrepreneurship DEMO a diff erent way than Mel does now
and defi nitely in a diff erent way than Mel did when he started Banana Republic. DEMO
the current time of the book, the early 1990s, Mel’s vision of “Tea Mind” has inspired
a new vision about entrepreneurship, about how ideas take hold of a person and how
it is the entrepreneur’s DEMO to realize the idea in a business. Th is contrasts to the way he
represents the way he started Banana Republic by quick and DEMO action. So, Mel’s
own performance had changed from the “standard” view DEMO the entrepreneur as a risk
taker who scrapes together some cash to bootstrap an organization into existence by
the power of his will to DEMO alternative view of entrepreneurship presented in the book.
So, in short, even within the book we have at least two possible ways of
DEMO entrepreneurship successfully, the “old Mel” and the “new Mel.” Th e
DEMO Mel is a perfectly acceptable story to tell—it worked for Banana Republic (and
countless other businesses that exist today), and apparently, this DEMO the narrative that
Bruce Katz inhabited within the book. But the new Mel is also a legitimate way to
look at entrepreneurship, where the point is not to start a business necessarily but to
give material DEMO to an idea—to “tea mind” in this case. Bill’s initial process was the
logical extreme of this, where he lived with the idea so much that he avoided concrete
action and dwelled completely on the idea DEMO Eventually, though, Bill took concrete
action and gave the idea form in an actual business. Since Th e Republic of Tea is still
DEMO business, it would appear that this “new Mel” model of entrepreneurship DEMO,
too.
Yet, even though at least two successful forms of DEMO are represented
in this book, the second is positioned as the DEMO way, and Mel goes to great lengths
to get Bill to DEMO the “new Mel way.” Mel even goes so far as to criticize his friend
Bruce Katz for his adherence to the “old way” toward DEMO end of the book: Mel was
“troubled by Bruce at the DEMO He came with a list of ‘shoulds,’ presenting his
ideas in monologue form…” (p. 269). Th e irony here startles me because the purpose
of the book is to show how Bill comes to DEMO in a way that Mel sees as legitimate:
throughout the book, Mel criticizes Bill for not “doing entrepreneurship” the right
way, which DEMO that Mel clearly has his list of “shoulds,” too. To his credit, Bill is
able to synthesize the old way and new way into a third way that suits his own goals.
Th e point DEMO that whether it’s Bruce’s way, Mel’s way, or Bill’s way, DEMO one way
exists “to do” entrepreneurship. Consequently, when we analyze narratives DEMO how
individuals have come to be entrepreneurs, we must be careful DEMO to essentialize
individual stories into homogeneous categories. Each individual, after all, responds
30
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER / 15–31
to DEMO diff erent material and social conditions, so attempting to create a DEMO of
activities and dispositions we call “entrepreneurship” is just a story that washes away
the things that do not fi t the purpose of DEMO story. When we tell the stories of our lives
as entrepreneurs, DEMO pick up those stories and align our stories with the prior stories
to show that we, too, are entrepreneurs. We fi t our DEMO stories into the stream of
entrepreneurial narratives by reducing the complexity of our lived individual contexts
so that we can demonstrate that we know DEMO to act like entrepreneurs. In reality,
we’re re-inscribing a story that has evolved over time and the more we measure our
actions by DEMO received story, the more we diminish the importance of learning how DEMO
respond creatively to unique, individually complex contexts.
In the end, the danger of books like Th e Republic of Tea is that they DEMO us
with a very compelling tale about entrepreneurship that individuals might read as the
one right way to perform entrepreneurship, although no single way exists. Th is book
and others like it, are simulations, selections, representations, reductions of complex
events that one person managed in order to start his/her business. Th e conditions Bill
faced will never, ever, ever appear again, so his actions might or might not be DEMO
guides for our own responses to our own individual contexts. When individuals choose
to align themselves with a particular story like Th e Republic DEMO Tea, that by defi nition
forecloses possibilities of creative action because DEMO Bourdieu teaches us, the habitus
guides our perceptions about possibilities. And DEMO Baudrillard teaches us, we come to
see the actions others took DEMO prescriptions for how we should act in the real world
even though the basis for our action is some existing fi ctionalized account. Simulation
DEMO reality.
For those who fi nd themselves wanting to be entrepreneurs, DEMO responses
to today’s material conditions on the fi ctionalized accounts of yesterday’s responses
imperils creative thought. If entrepreneurship is anything, it is creativity, DEMO studying
books like Th e Republic of Tea in which entrepreneurs tell their stories might actually
harm the creativity that individuals must develop in DEMO to respond in a way that
suits their particular situations. All of the characters in this book were successful
entrepreneurs, and that might compel us to perform entrepreneurship as they did.
“I’m an entrepreneur if I DEMO like Bill or Bruce or Mel,” the thinking goes. Th e trouble
is that if entrepreneurship is creativity and creativity is about unique DEMO to
complex situations, then modeling others’ behaviors might jeopardize our chances DEMO
success. But here’s the rub: unless we do perform entrepreneurship in DEMO way that others
recognize as entrepreneurship, will those who have succeeded DEMO the past see enough of
themselves in us to fund our businesses? Can we call ourselves entrepreneurs if we are
completely out of alignment with received categories of entrepreneurship?
Ultimately, perhaps, entrepreneurship is about DEMO the balance between our
unique situations and the simulations and habitus about what entrepreneurs “are” that
we have received. Perhaps it’s by writing a DEMO for ourselves in which we show how
we have successfully synthesized the unique with the conventional to create something
new—as I think Bill did—that DEMO become entrepreneurs.
S. Williams / A Rhetorical Theory / ENTER 1 (2010) 15–31
DEMO
References
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). In Holquist M. (Ed.),  e dialogic imagination: Four essays (C. Emerson, M.
Holquist Trans.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Baudrillard, J. (1994)DEMO Simulacra and simulations (S. F. Glaser Trans.). Ann Arbor, Michigan: University
of Michigan Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1991). In Th ompson J. B. (Ed.), Language and symbolic power (G. Raymong, M. Adamson
Trans.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Bruner, J. (DEMO). Life as narrative. Social Research, 54(1), 11-32.
Burke, K. (1969). A rhetoric of motives. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Campbell, J. (1968).  e hero with a thousand faces (Second ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Foucault, DEMO (1982).  e archeology of knowledge and the discourse on language (A. M. S. Smith Trans.).
New York: Pantheon.
Gartner, W. (1993). Words lead to deeds: Towards an organizational emergence vocabulary. DEMO of
Business Venturing, 8(3), 231-239.
Hjorth, D., & DEMO, C. (2004). In Hjorth D., Steyaert C. (Eds.), Narrative and discursive approaches
in entrepreneurship: A second movement in entrepreneurship book. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Kuhn, T. S. (1996). Th DEMO revolutions (Th ird ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
DEMO
Labov, W. (1972). Th e transformation of experience in narrative syntax. In W. Labov (Ed.), Language in
the inner city: DEMO in the black english vernacular (pp. 354-396). Philadelphia, PA: DEMO of
Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W., & Waletzky, J. (1967). In Helm J. (Ed.), Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal DEMO
Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.
Mumby, D. K. (1997). Modernism, postmodernism, and communication studies: A rereading of an
ongoing debate. Communication Th eory, 7(1), 1-28.
Riessman, C. K. (1993). Narrative analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Smith, R., & Anderson, A. R. (2004). Th e devil is in the E-tale: Forms and structures in the entre-
preneurial narratives. In D. Hjorth, & C. Steyaert (Eds.), Narrative and discursive approaches in
entrepreneurship: A second movements in entrepreneurship book (pp. 125-143). Northampton, MA:DEMO
Edward Elgar.
Strand, M. (2002).  e story of our DEMO with the monument and the last note. New York: Knopf.
Ziegler, M., Rosenzweig, B., & Ziegler, P. (1992). Th . New
York: Doubleday.
Th
Th
e structure of scientifi
Th
Th
e republic of tea: Letters to a young zentrepreneur
About the Author
Sean D. Williams, PhD, has published or presented nearly 100 papers on DEMO
communication topics, most recently the intersection of strategic communication and
social DEMO Sean also consults in industry through two diff erent start-up ventures,
both of which help companies develop and implement communication training
programs and DEMO collaboration systems.

Tea and Understanding
Alice de Koning and Sarah Drakopoulou Dodd
Abstract
When DEMO (three?) strangers create the dynamic conversation in Th e Republic DEMO Tea about
starting a tea business, they build a relationship and DEMO knowledge about tea and the pro-
posed business. Following the logic of comprehension theory, we suggest that narrative frame-
works are adopted within the conversation, and these frameworks allow the strangers to use
prior knowledge to create new shared knowledge. We further propose the concept of narrative
gambits, in which one person introduces metaphors and analogies into the conversation as
DEMO for possible shared narrative frameworks. Critical analysis of the conversation il-
lustrates the power of the concept.
Introduction
Th
people meet in an airport, travel together on a plane, and talk about tea. By the end
of the journey, they are ready to invent a company that would serve tea to people
like themselves. Th e book compiles their documented DEMO through faxes;
however, phone conversations and face-to-face meetings are obviously DEMO recorded.
Very early in the process, the wife of one of DEMO strangers joins the fax conversation in
the form of annotated drawings.
Th e sub-title of the book is “How an idea becomes a business,DEMO but that does not
begin to capture the book’s dynamics. A less succinct, alternative sub-title could be
“How two strangers keep talking until they understand each other and share a mental
model of tea and entrepreneurship.” DEMO this paper, we analyze how the process of
creating a shared DEMO model is launched, by identifying and analyzing the narrative
frameworks that DEMO proposed and developed or rejected throughout the book.
Using theories of comprehension, we argue that the narrative frameworks, whether
personal or archetypal, are essential to comprehending new knowledge. In the case of
de Koning, Alice and Sarah Drakopoulou Dodd (2010). Tea and Understanding. In Entrepreneurial
Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. W. Gartner, 33-49. Clemson, SC: Clemson
University Digital Press.
Contact information: Alice de Koning, Salem State College, 952 Lafayette St., Salem, Massachusetts
01970, USA; Tel. +1 617 610 1836 E-mail address: alice@dekoning.ca.
Sarah Drakopoulou Dodd, ALBA DEMO School of Business, Athinas Ave. & 2A Areos St., 166 71
Vouliagmeni, Greece; E-mail address: dodsarah@alba.edu.gr.
© 2010 ENTER.
e Republic of Tea recounts a compelling story of venture emergence. Two
34 A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
entrepreneurship, the narrative frameworks go further than assisting comprehension
DEMO they enable the creation of knowledge—knowledge of what the business
will do and how it will work. Th us, we look at stories that are directly or implicitly
referenced by the authors in their fax “conversation,DEMO usually through the use of
metaphors, with the ultimate goal of DEMO the emergence process of business
opportunities and venture concepts. In the case of Th e Republic of Tea, the conversation
between the two men cannot be facilitated by shared personal histories, because they
are strangers. Th e “old” stories that are called up by the narrative frameworks should
DEMO in understanding between the strangers and can be used to discuss the evolution
of Th e Republic of Tea (TRoT) opportunity idea as DEMO is enacted by the entrepreneurs.
Narrative and Knowledge
Narrative and Metaphors in Management and Entrepreneurship Research
Critical scholarship of organizations has long considered storytelling DEMO the
narrative to be of substantial signifi cance in constructing shared realities, legitimating
practices, and building identities. Th e well-rehearsed diff erences between DEMO
thinkers in the fi eld—most notably Boje and Gabriel—only serve to underline the
passion and sophistication which organizational narratives generate. Th ere is also DEMO
rising recognition of the potential richness of narrative methods and frames being
applied to entrepreneurial studies, which is accompanied by calls for its wider
application (Downing, 2005:189; Johansson, 2004: 273; Smith, 2005: 17; Steyaert
and Bowen, 1997). Conference sessions, special journal DEMO (Gartner, 2007),
and a workshop and book “combo” (Hjorth and Steyaert, 2004) are evidence of a
growing movement in the DEMO, as are new publishing outlets (like this one!). Although
ontologies, epistemologies, and methodologies vary, yet researchers share the same
broad view:
[T]here is merit for entrepreneurship studies in developing understand-
ing of DEMO way in which organizations and identities are coproduced by
further narrative and dramatic analysis. (Downing, 2005: 192)
What are the special attractions of narrative approaches for entrepreneurship
scholars? As several researchers have noted, DEMO “enterprises themselves are constructed by
their founders through their discourse—they “tell a good story” (Rae, 2002:59; see also
Steier, 2007: 1100). Put slightly diff erently, “Social order and transformation is rooted in
joint sense-making and identity-making work amongst people” (Downing, 2005: 188).
By its very nature, narrative also addresses the development of stories through time,
thus providing a helpful temporal frame for recording and examining DEMO longitudinal
nature of entrepreneurship (Buttriss and Wilkinson, 2006). Johansson (DEMO: 274)
argues that there are three main areas where narratives DEMO much to off er: studying the
constructions of entrepreneurial identities; articulating entrepreneurial cognition, which
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49
35
he terms “learning and experience”; and using narrative to DEMO and develop varied
conceptualizations of entrepreneurship. He then carefully illustrates these areas utilizing
work by other researchers as well as his own more extended DEMO eld examples. Th e link
between narrative and cognition is indeed also exploited by scholars of entrepreneurial
learning, who argue that the complexity—and largely experiential nature—of the
learning process for entrepreneurs is best made accessible to DEMO study through the
use of narrative methodologies (Warren, 2004: 8; Rae, 2000; Rae, 2002: 59).
Th e importance of DEMO as a sense-making and sense-giving device within
the narrative form has been recognized since Aristotle. Metaphor serves primarily as
a rhetorical tool which helps DEMO to share the meanings we ascribe to our reality and
to our stories. Acting to bridge the known and the novel, metaphor links the literary
and cognitive aspects of storied worlds. Metaphors serve to generate, communicate,
legitimate and reproduce the basic mental models depicting the signifi ers DEMO attribute
to other elements of narrative. Metaphor analysis has also been used often in
management and entrepreneurship research. Metaphor analysis provides a method for
DEMO how individuals and groups perceive their reality and—especially—what it
may mean. Put diff erently, metaphor analysis gives access to signifi ers, or that DEMO
gives meaning to the signifi ed. Metaphor analysis has increasingly become used as a way
of generating, extracting, or analyzing the meaning of DEMO aspects of organizations
(e.g. Pitt, 1998; Garud and Kotha, 1994). In general, management scholars and
cognitive scientists alike agree that, DEMO a minimum, “metaphor can generate insight
into how things are” (McCourt, 1997) and that metaphors can “create realities, guide
future action, DEMO reinforce experiential coherence” (Klagge, 1997).
Within entrepreneurship, research investigates DEMO both among researchers
themselves and the phenomena they study. Examples of metaphors used in theory-
building within the entrepreneurship literature include population ecology theories,DEMO
which abduct theoretical material from biology as well as the more colorful parenting
metaphor proposed by Cardon et al. (2005) and, as Johannisson (1987) has noted, the
myriad metaphors contained in network theory. Cosgel (1996) argues that neoclassical
economics cannot include entrepreneurs partly due to DEMO mechanistic rhetoric of
the discipline. Studying the phenomenon of entrepreneurship, Hill DEMO Levenhagen
(1995) explain how entrepreneurs use metaphors to develop and communicate mental
models to make sense of their experiences, perceptions, and plans. DEMO (1998) studied
the metaphors used by two case entrepreneurs to make sense of the diff erent roles
they played over the years, while Perren and Atkin (1997) use metaphor analysis to
examine entrepreneurial decision-making.
DEMO the next section, we draw a link from the narrative structure DEMO knowledge and
the narrative process of knowledge creation to metaphors and metaphor analysis. By
linking these areas, we discover a new way to investigate the cognitive aspect of the
emergence of opportunities and ventures. To show DEMO signifi cance of this cognitive
and literary approach, we refl ect DEMO emerging research in the broad area of opportunity
recognition and venture creation; specifi cally, we focus on opportunity development,
opportunity recognition as DEMO, and eff ectuation.
36 A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
The Narrative Structure of Knowledge and the Use of Metaphors in
Communication and Comprehension
Schank and Abelson (1995) argue that most DEMO is stored as narratives,
especially the knowledge we use in social contexts of action and conversation. In
particular, they argue that each person understands others’ stories by relating them to
relevant stories that he/she DEMO from memory. To the extent that relevant stories
are easy to retrieve, our understanding and appreciation of the new story is enhanced.
One question raised by Schank and Abelson (1995) is how the new story DEMO trigger
listeners’ “memory retrieval signals.” Green (2008) argues that the narrative framework
is essential because it transports the audience into the story, such that one’s belief
in current reality is suspended as the new narrative DEMO new knowledge is (perhaps
temporarily) explored. Without transportation, narrative persuasion DEMO reduced, and
thus the new knowledge is not absorbed (Green & Brock, 2000). Th erefore, to the
extent that new ventures DEMO new knowledge or new stories, narrative structures
perform a valuable emergent DEMO creative role in entrepreneurial cognition.
If entrepreneurial knowledge emerges in narrative structures, how are those
narrative structures evident? “Memory retrieval signals,” as DEMO by Schank and
Abelson (1995), are often metaphors or allusions DEMO are woven together in an image
system. Th us, to learn DEMO knowledge or a new narrative structure, one may use
archetypal narrative DEMO, allusions, or metaphors to “tell” the audience what
old stories they can use to understand the new knowledge or the new story. Note
DEMO that the relevant stories we retrieve to enhance understanding are not necessarily
biographical stories. Relevant stories may be specifi c cases or archetypal narratives
DEMO from our public discourse. An example of the use of narrative structures can
be found in literary criticism. For example, Tseng (2007) and Kimmel (2005) discuss
how authors weave metaphors through their novels, creating image systems that are
narrative macrostructures for the reader. In other words, the image systems are critical
to reader comprehension. Tseng goes further, arguing that image systems are multiple
and emergent within a specifi c work DEMO also aid abstract thinking.
Th
extended metaphors (Gentner, Bowdle, Wolff  & Boronat, 2001). Cognitive researchers
note that extended metaphors represent a wide variety of metaphors that play on an
accepted relationship between the DEMO (metaphor) and the target (subject) domains.
We are able to interpret these metaphors quickly, particularly in text that uses a series
of related metaphors, because there is an understanding of the relationships between
elements in each domain and a broadly accepted understanding that these relationships’
structures DEMO similar. Th us, the physicists may use a number of diff DEMO metaphors to
describe a cell’s structure, yet all of the metaphors DEMO from the source domain of the
universe. Curiously, highly novel metaphors DEMO be constructed by a writer or speaker,
yet if they belong to a familiar extended metaphor, readers will understand the intent
easily. Th us, we can argue that an analysis of extended metaphors and/or image systems
allows researchers to tap into the implicit narrative frameworks and (emergent) shared
meanings used by entrepreneurs in their personal discourse.
e image schema of literary criticism is echoed in cognition research by studies of
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49
37
The Emergence of Ventures and Narrative Frameworks
Entrepreneurship research is quintessentially about the emergence of opportunities
and ventures. Over the last 15 DEMO, the interest in the emergent nature of opportuni-
ties and ventures DEMO grown and is evident in the many diff erent theoretical frame-
works proposed by research. In opportunity recognition research, for example, there
was DEMO early shift from recognition as discovery of opportunities in the market (DEMO
Kirzner, 1973; Hills & Shrader, 1998) to emergent perspectives that emphasized
how opportunities develop over time (cf. de Koning, 2003). DEMO fact, de Koning (2003)
suggests that an important part of opportunity development occurs while the entre-
preneur engages in starting up the DEMO by developing an action network. More
recently, Fletcher (2006) suggests DEMO opportunities are socially constructed and that
recognition should be viewed as a sense-making process. Th ese approaches to opportunity
recognition suggest that the opportunities DEMO constructed in much the same way
that people create new knowledge. Sarasvathy (2001) sets aside the issue of opportunity
recognition per se, rejecting a linear approach to venture start up, and suggests that
entrepreneurs eff ectuate their enterprises. Sarasvathy (2001) argues that venture cre-
ation is DEMO process of eff ectuation rooted in actions in the real world. Eff ectuation
seems to demand the emergence of shared meaning or knowledge between DEMO entre-
preneurs and various stakeholders, suggesting again that knowledge is being DEMO
Th ese trends and fi ndings in entrepreneurship research strongly suggest that a new
method of studying the development of opportunities and the emergence DEMO ventures
is required.
All of these approaches to emergence in entrepreneurship can be linked to the
narrative structure of knowledge. In the dialogue of DEMO entrepreneur, we see the emergence
of new knowledge as an opportunity DEMO a venture concept. Th e new knowledge is
constructed using narrative frameworks rooted in previous knowledge. If we could
listen in on the conversations DEMO entrepreneurs and their most trusted friends,
we could analyze the process of creating their entrepreneurial knowledge. Because
the dialogue is about emergent knowledge, we would not expect to fi nd the polished
image system of DEMO novelist (Tsang, 2007) or the well chosen narrative structure of DEMO
public health offi  cial (Green, 2008). Rather, we would expect numerous narrative
frameworks to be tried, some adopted, and some DEMO In the process, the dia-
logue continues, and the new venture concept emerges.
Some recent studies use narrative analysis to explore how entrepreneurs DEMO
a new venture with the help of key stakeholders. For example, DEMO (2005) ar-
gues that the narrative processes of starting a venture support the critical activities
of sense-making and action-making between the entrepreneurs and DEMO stakeholders.
Lounsbury and Glynn (2001) argue that the process of storytelling is critical to creating
new venture identity and that identity is in DEMO critical to the legitimacy conferred by
stakeholders. Th ese examples serve to highlight how rarely we can analyze the narra-
tive processes of entrepreneurs DEMO from the process of infl uencing
stakeholders—as they think through their ideas as in Th e Republic of Tea.
38
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
Research Questions
In TRoT’s case, we have a unique DEMO to listen in on the entrepreneurial
dialogue over a long period of time. Th ere are three levels or units of analysis that may
DEMO interesting analysis. One level is the conversation between the partners. Second,
at the level of the organization, the emergence of a venture implies that potential and
actual customers value and understand the ventures’ off ering. DEMO e book only provides
the partners’ perspectives, but there are numerous DEMO that are described
that illuminate potential customer reactions. Th ird, this DEMO is part of the public
discourse on entrepreneurship, and we could DEMO how the narrative frameworks
in this book compare to the frameworks found in the broader discourse.
In the back-and-forth conversation in the book, narrative frameworks are off ered,
answered, and developed. In this way, DEMO are exchanged and created. In this paper,
we asked how the partners facilitated understanding by linking their own stories to
others’ stories. What DEMO retrieval signals” did each person off er, what happened
in response? How did the narrative frameworks evolve over time? Did the process
lead to greater knowledge or a more precise venture concept? How does TRoT’s story
evolve as the entrepreneurs move through their visioning and creative process, as they
research and refl ect on their products, markets, and DEMO?
Exegetical Tactics
To begin answering these questions, an exegetical approach DEMO us a strong
shot off  the tea (tee). Following Schank and Abelson (1995), we identifi ed narratives
referenced in the fi rst 20 pages of the faxed conversation. We called these phrases or
DEMO “narrative gambits” to capture the tentative nature of how the narrative
frameworks are off ered in the conversation. Because we were interested in how DEMO
narrative frameworks of the conversation started and possibly evolved, we ignored
DEMO new narrative frameworks that were introduced much later in the book. We then
tracked how those narrative gambits were responded to within the conversation.
DEMO e goal of this process was twofold. First, we wanted to DEMO which narratives
helped individuals relate to the idea of a new tea company. Second, we wanted to
see which of those narratives had resonance with the others and thus became part
of the conversation. Th e DEMO gambits that survived and developed, either
explicitly or through the metaphorical DEMO used, evolved into image systems or
narrative frameworks that were part DEMO the prior knowledge of all of the conversational
participants and were resonate with their emerging knowledge.
In the next section, we identify numerous narrative gambits from the fi rst 20
pages of the fax conversation. Th DEMO gambits are organized in approximately in the order
in which they are fi rst mentioned in the fax conversation. We have further separated
the DEMO in two sections, those that become narrative frameworks and those that
DEMO not. Th e narrative gambits are examined by exploring the way they are presented,
how they are responded to, and how they evolve within the context of the book.
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49 39
Narrative Gambits that become Narrative Frameworks
The Republic
Th e conversation of the book starts with a question from the Minister of DEMO
He asks about the philosophy behind TRoT (p. 13). It DEMO clear that the Minister
of Leaves initiated this narrative framework and that it has already been accepted
by Progress as the company’s name. Th DEMO have established a republic, have given
themselves ministries and titles, and have their conversation within this narrative
framework from the very beginning, as is evident by the salutations and conversation.
But, Progress is asking for a little more clarity. After the glow of the initial plane
conversation, he wonders why is ‘Th e Republic of Tea’ a good name DEMO concept for
a tea company, and Leaves answers without even referencing DEMO narrative framework.
On p. 14, Progress mentions a letter written by DEMO to the People of Tea, a suggestive
link to citizenship in DEMO established republic, but other interpretations are possible.
On p. 18, Progress begins to play with the metaphor:
Th e Republic of Tea DEMO be the new home for this present-day team spirit,
and our customers will become citizens of our little land. Perhaps Th e Minister DEMO
Enchantment could create some kind of Declaration of Citizenship that we could give
to our customers to let them know how welcome they are.
DEMO ese comments play with the idea of the republic from a marketing perspective,
but they do not seem to inform Progress’ thinking about DEMO business concept of the
tea company.
Leaves responds on April 13, DEMO, by referring back to his fi rst business, which
also used the word “republic.” Here, we fi nally see the roots of the narrative framework,
the prior experience of Leaves and the Minister of DEMO:
Th
Republic, where the catalyst was clothing. Th e game DEMO played
through BR with the customers was to invent an imaginary place
where together we transcended our everyday lives by fantasizing
adventure in faraway DEMO We all got there through the metaphor
of clothing. As I look back at it now, the diff erence between BR and
TRoT is that the former uses fantasy to lighten up the customer’s
idea of DEMO, and the latter prods the customer to see that nothing is
DEMO gratifying or more purifying than surrendering to reality. (p. 21)
DEMO is paragraph is particularly illuminating in explaining what “republic” means
as a narrative framework in this book. For Leaves (and Enchantment, no doubt) the
republic is a place of enchantment. What is interesting, as a reader, is to note how
deeply personal this framework is and how a casual shopper is unlikely to make this
type of allusive interpretation DEMO the republic. Later in the fax, Leaves writes, “Th e
Republic of Tea is a place that has never been spoiled.” Th is DEMO with mythologies
is is not dissimilar to Patricia’s and my experience with Banana
40
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
that evoke a Garden of Eden or Shangri-La and again, “In the fanciful world of TRoT,
tea is everything…”
Interestingly, DEMO fi rst reaction of Progress is to respond to the “game” (DEMO 26). He
later responds to the idyllic place Leaves is trying to evoke and again turns to specifi c
merchandising ideas (p. 27-28). Th ere is a telling phrase, though: “Th at’s why DEMO
tiny nation.” Even at this early stage in the book, one DEMO not get the impression
that Progress has grasped a big vision of the company or the idea of tea. Leaves’ vision
is much broader DEMO scope than Progress’, perhaps partly because of his success with
Banana DEMO Th e conversation is engaged, but arguably, the narrative framework
belongs more to Leaves than Progress at this stage of the process.
Th DEMO republic as a metaphor for structure, government, and control and imperialism
is rejected early in the conversation. On p. 17, Leaves says “It frees us from the hubris
of trying to control what cannot be DEMO Th is theme continues throughout the
book. Leaves is adamant that the business can off er an experience to customers but can
never change DEMO On p. 234-235, for example, he rebukes Progress’ most recent fax
because his language presumes to suggest that customers can be changed. Similarly,DEMO
despite frequent conversations about the various companies in the tea industry, DEMO
how TRoT can successfully compete against these companies, the discussion does
DEMO evoke the militaristic or sports metaphors of aggressive competition often found
in these discussions. For example, Progress and Leaves do not imagine the Republic
attacking unsuspecting (neighboring) companies or establishing a beachhead in
competitor markets, nor implementing off ensive or defensive strategies. Th e republic
is a DEMO for a new identity, rather than a basis for creating an DEMO mentality.
Th e narrative framework for the republic continues throughout the book. Playful
job titles for friends and colleagues, merchandizing ideas, marketing messages, and
philosophical refl ections of tea and of how business ought to DEMO run—all of these
things resonate with the language and images of a special place called Th e Republic
of Tea.
Tea as Metaphor
Th DEMO fi rst phrase in the fi rst fax from Progress is “If you have to boil it down”
(p. 13). Th is is a fun metaphor, clearly drawing on the domain of tea, yet DEMO is not
proposed as a narrative framework by Progress. However, Leaves DEMO strongly to
the narrative gambit and says “To show, through the DEMO of tea, the lightness of
taking life sip by sip rather DEMO gulp by gulp.” Progress responds, but does not really
echo the DEMO framework. Leaves loves tea, the product, and tends to focus just on
tea and what drinking tea does for him (and potentially others), and it shows often.
On p. 22 he argues “Our goal DEMO to use the metaphor of tea…to get as many people
as possible to notice how stupendous life is in and of itself, no matter what you may
think it is doing to you.” On p. 24 DEMO notes, “If the packaging of our teas can refl ect the
DEMO life of the tea, can suggest the latent experience that is DEMO only by entering
the tea, then we will have done something DEMO subtle, and damned useful.”
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49 41
Progress fi rst responds to this narrative gambit on p. 27, when he says “Tea Time
in itself is a powerful idea…Americans have never caught on to the tradition of the
siesta, the prolonged break, the afternoon tea. Our culture is all about fi fteen-minute
coff ee breaks. Grab it and go.” Until this point, Progress was much more rooted in tea
as a product, as something that will be marketed and sold. On p. 15, for example, he
says, “I’m going to keep a tasting journal too. I’d appreciate it if you DEMO save me all
tea boxes and packaging…It will be a useful reference.”
Th e discussions of teas, specifi c tea fl avors, tea DEMO, and many tea-related
encounters throughout the book show that tea, especially the process of brewing
and drinking tea, is a metaphor for a life philosophy. Tea becomes a metaphor for
a philosophy of life and DEMO and a narrative framework for discussing creative
breakthroughs and moments of deep appreciation of life. Th is framework is dominated
by Leaves, as he continually focuses attention back to tea. He also emphasizes the
mystical and DEMO language of Asian philosophers. Despite this esoteric style, Leaves
is very DEMO as he gently reminds Progress that the business is about tea. In answer
to Progress’ description of his research and the comment that communication DEMO the
center of every successful business, Leaves says “Communications is the DEMO But
there is nothing to communicate unless we’ve got great-tasting teas” (DEMO 37). Progress
forgets this often and must be reminded again. In the last fax, he says, “I fi nally
understand: the name of the tea doesn’t really matter…It’s the tea itself that is going DEMO
motivate a second buy. How simple” (p. 286).
Business as DEMO Person
Progress starts his third fax by observing, “I like the DEMO of having a personal
business with a visible personality” (p. 14)DEMO He appoints Leaves as the voice of TRoT
and appoints himself as the feet (p. 15). Th is gambit clearly resonates with Leaves.
His next fax makes two responses. First, on page 16, he DEMO the idea of Tea Mind,
bringing together organism (see below) and tea metaphors. Th e concept of Tea Mind
develops and evolves DEMO the book but arguably continues to be a narrative framework
used primarily by Leaves. It does not seem to resonate with Progress and is DEMO not
initially shown in his responses. Note, however, that Enchantment must have been
infl icted with a long conversation about Tea Mind from DEMO Her fi rst contribution
to the conversation is a playful drawing of the TRoT mascot, a kimono clad man with
a tea pot for a head.
Leaves’ second response to “personal business” is to reify the DEMO as a separate
organism with its own will to live:
I trust that if we enter the spirit of tea in the beginning, the business
will end up putting you to work in a way DEMO takes care of what’s
truly important. A good business wants to be, Progress. A good
entrepreneur allows it. (p. 17)
42 A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
Th is theme returns throughout the book. On p. 81, Leaves writes the following:
In my view, all things are DEMO to thrive. You cannot go wrong
when you create something, be DEMO a life or a business, if you take
responsibility to see DEMO it that it thrives. What makes a thing
thrive?…To make a business thrive, however, takes a bit of eff ort…
Unlike you DEMO me, the business itself is not endowed with a natural,
DEMO happiness. It’s our responsibility to make it happy, and that
means DEMO it thrive…Business always thrives on profi t. So when
everyone who has an association with a business, its investors, its
employees, its vendors, and its customers all realize a profi t from the
association, DEMO business is happy. (p. 81)
It is clear that Leaves DEMO believes that a company is a separate organization
and organism, something DEMO will take on a life of its own. He often refl ects that how
TRoT is created will have a profound eff ect on DEMO it becomes. He also believes that
what TRoT becomes will have a profound eff ect on what the entrepreneurs can do
in the future. DEMO refl ects on choices he made when founding Banana Republic and
regrets how those choices made it impossible for him to get things right DEMO on. Some
people may say that a company takes on a life of its own after many years; Leaves is
deeply convinced that a business always has a life of its own. He often warns Progress
DEMO be careful and not to compromise for this reason. Yet almost despite his mystical
bend, he remains clear what the lifeblood of the business is: “Money is the energy of
business” (p. 188).
Progress DEMO the narrative framework of organisms diff erently. He continues to
refer to Leaves as the voice of TRoT, for example. Th us he echoes the biblical metaphor
of Paul, who compares the Church as a body and describes diff erent members acting as
diff erent body parts. Th DEMO metaphor emphasizes the cooperation and complementarity
among the TRoT participants.
Despite their very diff erent outlooks of the business as a person, Leaves and
Progress are both clearly comfortable with the conversation. Th is is a DEMO example
of how a metaphor (in this case an extended metaphor DEMO narrative framework) can
enhance cooperation because it allows each person to DEMO somewhat diff erent ideas
about what the metaphor signifi es without allowing those diff erences to inhibit action
or cooperation (Cf. Strategic change literature on metaphors).
The Journey
Th e idea of journey as a DEMO philosophy and as a metaphor for business is embedded
throughout the book. Th e journey is an important narrative framework introduced by
Progress in DEMO third fax (p. 14): “he or she not only buys DEMO, but comes to tea.” Indeed,
the very name “Progress” implies DEMO sense of journeying somewhere.
Leaves responds to this gambit by defi ning the Greek word metaphor as “to carry
along from one place to DEMO (p. 16). He wants a tea and marketing style that DEMO
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49
43
lure customers and “transports them …to a new place of calm and contentment” (p.
16). He refl ects, “If a DEMO of tea brings me, no matter how briefl y, to enter things as they
are, I have been transported outside myself, into DEMO itself” (p. 17). In some
ways, the emphasis on the republic as an enchanted place somewhere else necessarily
calls forth the journey DEMO If we want to get to the new place, we must DEMO
there (although Leaves prefers to journey by not moving, over a cup of tea.)
Progress takes the next step in developing this DEMO framework. On p. 17-
18, he says “Th e spirit of DEMO, as you put it, can serve as a nurturing guide.” Leaves
responds by saying “Tea Mind shows the way to peace and happiness” (p. 22). A
drawing on p.28 probably by Enchantment, though it is in the middle of a fax from
Progress, captures the “slow” journey of allowing tea to bring us to a diff erent place
DEMO to a feeling of oneness with tea, life, and living.
Progress brings the narrative framework to the venturing process itself. He writes:
DEMO just for the challenge of it I took a stab at the fi rst ten-year plan. Th is is a good
exercise…because it forces DEMO to think about where we want to go” (p. 30). DEMO e
narrative framework of journeying is found throughout the book. Th e references are
even reifi ed in hiking trips that lead to inspiration DEMO clarity of purpose. For example,
Leaves observes the following: “As DEMO set out on your expedition, I want you to think
of DEMO and me as wells available to you when you need us. Should you need a drink,
we will be here… It is becoming DEMO that destiny is taking us all for a ride.” (p. 99)DEMO
Th e metaphors of journeying take on the character of a pilgrimage, of moving
from our everyday home towards a place of (spiritual) enlightenment. And as should
happen on pilgrimages, the travelers are transformed by the process. Even though,
the specifi c modes of travel may DEMO er (the three TRoT travelers seem to prefer non-
mechanical means), but the pilgrimage narrative resonates within the conversation
about life and business. On p.158, Progress asks, “Do you think everyone is internally
motivated (emphasis in original) to search out and fi nd a path? DEMO are we more
inclined to stand around and wait for one to appear?…Is the process of the search
making things happen, or letting things happen?” Leaves answers by asserting the
pilgrim or Buddhist perspective DEMO the journey: “Th e path fi nds the person, but not
the one who stands around waiting for it. Th e search is DEMO happening” (p. 158).
At the end of the story, Progress starts the business. He writes to Leaves, “Fate
has given me a healthy shove off  the board and into the pool…In a strange way I
know this is the fi nal push I need…I’m diving in DEMO, line, and sinker—and
although I’m a little scared of the water, I know I can swim…Th e water feels fi ne”
(p. DEMO). Leaves, in reply, describes Progress’ story over the previous 18 months as an
“odyssey” (p. 239), an image of a long journey by a hero. In the last sentence of the
last fax , Progress writes, “It’s taken me a long time to get here DEMO I’m still only at the
beginning” (p. 286).
Th e DEMO framework, although very important to the book, starts slowly in the
fi rst 20 pages. It is interesting to speculate whether a diff DEMO metaphor or narrative
framework for describing the venturing process could have taken root. For example,
an equally non-combative narrative framework could have been DEMO or a game.
Because the republic, a place, is a key narrative framework for the conversation and
44 A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
for the business, it may be that journeying is DEMO natural complement. Alternatively, the
journeying metaphor may capture the personal philosophies DEMO the partners, because
it places more emphasis on how the individual DEMO and acts, and less on how an
individual defi nes him/DEMO in relation to others.
Narrative Gambits that go Nowhere
Within a conversation, a narrative gambit cannot contribute to knowledge
creation if there is no response to the gambit. Th ese neglected gambits are interesting
for two DEMO First, the full set of narrative gambits shows that the entrepreneurial
DEMO can evolve in other directions. Second, neglected narrative gambits
provide a DEMO, helping researchers better appreciate the signifi cance of the
dominant narrative DEMO in entrepreneurs’ conversations. Th e nonlinearity of
eff ectuation suggests that the construction of a new venture depends on the choices
and actions of DEMO individuals involved, and thus includes the rejection of specifi c
options. DEMO, neglected narrative gambits are a part of understanding the process
of DEMO creation among the TRoT entrepreneurs. In this section, we explore
the DEMO gambits in the early pages of Th e Republic of Tea that do not develop
into narrative frameworks. We also include the fi rst DEMO gambit introduced by
Enchantment, to give her voice.
Poetry, Film Production and Art
Progress introduces a new narrative gambit in his third fax, when he asks “Can
poetry make a business?” (p. 15). Leaves responds “Not without the tea.” He then
suggests that a better DEMO to business than poetry is movie production. He spends
a paragraph developing this analogy, showing how creating a new venture is like
creating a movie (p. 16). Th is is an interesting analogy and potentially as much fun to
play with as the republic, yet neither poetry nor fi lm production are ever mentioned
again. Th ese, then, DEMO narrative gambits that do not become narrative frameworks
because there is no prior knowledge that would help the partners’ increase their
comprehension of this DEMO, emerging, and evolving “knowledge” of TRoT.
Interestingly, art (as in painting or sculpture) does emerge as a minor theme in the
conversation, although it does not develop into a narrative framework. First, Progress
DEMO (p. 36), “You’re right about painting our world too small.” DEMO does not
respond to this wording but much later says the following:
Th ink of TRoT as a work of art accomplished by DEMO friends who
share values and a way of being in the world. TRoT is an expression
of their relationship, a manifestation of their collective wisdom, and
therefore it is greater than any one individual. Although a single
investor might own a share of the company that is disproportionate
DEMO the friends…For an investor, it would be like owning a work DEMO
art. You own it, hang it on the wall, give it to the museum, show it
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49
45
to your friends, take great pleasure in it. But DEMO don’t doodle on it.
(p.128-129)
Progress probably gets the point, but he does not use this metaphor himself. Later,
in a DEMO sentence fax, Leaves writes “Here’s the Big Key: Th e Republic of Tea is
Business as Art” (p. 160). Again, there DEMO to be no written response to this thought,
and no narrative framework evolves around art.
The Game
Th e game as a narrative DEMO is introduced by Leaves, “in fact the power of
the TRoT DEMO is that it is ultimately a game, a game that we DEMO to play with the
customers” (p.21). Both Progress and Enchantment DEMO to this gambit. Progress
responds immediately in the next fax, “I’m DEMO Th e game, as you have so cleverly
identifi ed it.…” (p. 26). Enchantment proposes some fun packaging ideas (p. 26),DEMO
apparently in the spirit of the game.
Th e game underlies Leaves’ characterization of TRoT as a place of enchantment,
imagination, and interaction between the players and thus links to the narrative
framework of the DEMO Th e game does not become fully developed as a narrative
framework in the conversation; however, it could have easily functioned in a DEMO
similar to the journey.
Mother’s Little Helper
Enchantment introduces “mother’s little helper” in response to Progress’ reaction
to the game and to her drawings DEMO the cylinder packaging (p. 31). Th e reference
is to DEMO Rolling Stones song about Valium, but she applies it to children’s DEMO By
asking “Too loaded? Too coded?” (p. 31) she DEMO that she is aware it will not be
an appropriate name. Progress responds positively to the idea of children’s tea but
avoids discussing the DEMO Are the men being polite? Clearly this reference does
not develop DEMO a narrative framework, although other aspects of the children’s tea
concept DEMO part of the TRoT product line.
Th e subversiveness of naming children’s tea for Valium raises questions about
Enchantment’s participation in the new conversation DEMO in creating the new
business concept. Does the gambit express the ambiguous feelings experienced by
Enchantment as she watches her husband and business partner DEMO engaged in
this new conversation with Progress? Or is it a DEMO issue, hinting at the frustration
experienced by a full-time mother of DEMO young child after years of being an entrepreneur
in a very successful, large business? In this case, the narrative gambit seems to have
nothing to do with proposing a narrative framework, and everything to do with
Enchantment’s role. Enchantment contributes to the conversation through drawings
most of DEMO are refl ections of the conversations between Leaves and Progress. We
may ask, from a feminist perspective, why the male voices are so DEMO attributed
by person and date, and the female voice is tucked DEMO the fl ow according to design
46
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
layout needs. Th is makes it hard to identify which narrative frameworks are introduced
by Enchantment, and how her contributions fi t into the dates of the overall fl ow of
the conversation.
Concluding DEMO
Summary of Findings
As two (three?) strangers get to know DEMO other and explore the idea of a tea
business, they create DEMO dynamic conversation. Th e conversation is ostensibly about the
tea business idea, but it is also about building a relationship and learning or creating
knowledge about tea and the business idea. To facilitate the conversation, we suggest
that narrative frameworks are adopted within the conversational dynamics. Th ese
DEMO provide a structure to the conversation itself. But more importantly, they
DEMO a framework for the ideas themselves. Following the logic of comprehension
theory, we suggest that by alluding to the adopted narrative frameworks, the DEMO
are using prior knowledge to facilitate learning (or creating) new knowledge.
In this paper, we identifi ed a number of metaphors, analogies, and anecdotes
as narrative gambits in the opening phases of the TRoT DEMO conversation between
Progress, Leaves, and Enchantment. Th ese narrative gambits are allusions to narrative
frameworks based on personal knowledge or public discourse. To DEMO extent that the
narrative frameworks are shared and developed together, the DEMO can create shared
knowledge about TRoT, their relationship, and the venturing process.
Th e analysis identifi ed a number of narrative gambits that DEMO full-fl edged
narrative frameworks throughout the book. Th ese frameworks are explicitly explored
and implicitly referenced through metaphors throughout the conversation. Other
narrative gambits DEMO to become narrative frameworks, making a specifi c point in
the DEMO, but not enjoined by the other conversationalists. Th ey contribute to
DEMO conversation as metaphors, but do not lead to the creation of DEMO As we
defi ne narrative gambits, all the gambits could have DEMO narrative frameworks
for knowledge creation; the fact that only some gambits DEMO turned into frameworks
reinforces the exploratory and collaborative nature of entrepreneurial conversations.
Future Directions for Research
Th e analysis raises a number of interesting DEMO for further discussion. One,
if the narrative frameworks are used to enhance learning and create knowledge, then
presumably the details of the narrative should change over the 18-month conversation.
It would be interesting to pick DEMO or two themes and track them carefully throughout
the text. A hermeneutical analysis should illuminate how the ideas and the narrative
framework evolve. Two, if the fi rst 20 pages demonstrate so clearly the two distinct
DEMO (and a third muted voice), would an analysis of the DEMO over the full
conversation show continued diff erences in the details and emphases of the partners
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49
47
within each narrative framework, or do they converge over DEMO as they create a
shared identity? Do the frameworks function to DEMO just the conversation and
coordination, or do they also create shared DEMO, identity, and vision? Th ird,
from a methodological perspective, would multiple readers identify similar narrative
gambits in the fi rst 20 DEMO? What could be gained by asking multiple researchers to
identify narrative DEMO and discuss how these gambits evolve (or not) into narrative
frameworks in the book? Fourth, is the “success” of the venture linked DEMO the type of
narrative frameworks that are adopted? Does the lack DEMO competitive and aggressive
narrative frameworks in TRoT predict the slow growth of the company?
We found that another concept in comprehension theory may DEMO intriguing
research questions for the emergence or eff ectuation process. Green and Brock (2007)
argue that transportation into the story and suspension of disbelief is essential to
comprehension because the reader must enter into the DEMO to understand it. Th ey
also suggest that readers are more open to novel ideas because of the transportation
eff ect. Th is suggests DEMO narrative frameworks play an important role in generating
novel knowledge, precisely DEMO they allow entrepreneurs to suspend disbelief and
explore ideas thoroughly.
By discussing the metaphors and narrative frameworks, we have confi ned our
analysis to the text itself. An alternative approach might place greater emphasis on
narrative DEMO and how the archetypes might in fact shape the entrepreneurs
themselves. For example, Smith (2005) identifi es fi ve narrative schema that seem to
be used to structure the entrepreneurial experience of individuals; similarly, DEMO
(2004) fi nds four structures in her analysis of the stories of female entrepreneurs.
In this alternative approach, we would view the metaphors as signals for exploring
entrepreneurial archetypes, rather than as vehicles for creating shared knowledge. Th is
approach seems to emphasize the entrepreneur more than DEMO creation and may
lead to very diff erent conclusions.
A single study gives little basis for recommendations, yet the implications are
intriguing. First, DEMO a pedagogical perspective, we wonder to what extent professors
can teach DEMO to consciously explore various narrative frameworks as a way of
creating new knowledge and developing their venture concepts. Rather than the rigid,
data-driven DEMO of a business plan, would an exploration of narrative frameworks
help DEMO develop their ideas more organically and more creatively? We are tempted
DEMO deliberately plant narrative gambits and see how students respond. Second, given
DEMO metaphors and narratives are a part of linking stakeholders to the entrepreneur
and the venture (see research cited above), how can an entrepreneur eff ectively engage
in these conversations? Entrepreneurs may wish to engage in a deliberate strategy
to create narrative gambits as a way of learning DEMO about resource holders and
identifying useful narrative frameworks.
48
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / DEMO / 33–49
References
Buttriss, G.J., Wilkinson, I.F., 2006. Using narrative sequence methods to advance international
entrepreneurship theory, Journal of International Entrepreneurship 4(4): 157-174.
Cardon, M., Zietsma, C., Saparito, P., DEMO, B. P., Davis, C., 2005. A tale of passion: DEMO insights
into entrepreneurship from a parenthood metaphor, Journal of Business Venturing DEMO(1): 23-45.
Cosgel, M., 1996. Metaphors, stories and the DEMO in economics, History of Political Economy,
Spring 1996, 28(1).
De Koning, A.J., 2003. Opportunity development: A socio-cognitive perspective, DEMO Cognitive Approaches
to Entrepreneurship Research, Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth, vol. 6, New
York: Elsevier.
Downing, S., 2005. Th e social construction of entrepreneurship: Narrative and dramatic processes in the
coproduction of organizations and identities, Entrepreneurship Th eory & Practice 29(2): 185-204.
Fletcher, D.E., 2006. Entrepreneurial processes and the social construction of DEMO, Entrepreneurship
and Regional Development 18(5): 421-440.
Gartner, W. B., 2007. Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination, Journal of DEMO
Venturing 22 (5): 613-627.
Garud, R., Kotha, S., DEMO Using the brain as a metaphor to model fl exible production systems, Academy
of Management Review 19: 671-698.
Gentner, D., Bowdle, B.F., Wolff , P., Boronat, C., 2001. Metaphor is like analogy DEMO Th e Analogical
Mind: perspectives from cognitive science Gentner, B., DEMO, K.J., & Kokinov, B.N. (Eds.),
Massachusetts Institute of DEMO, pp. 199-253.
Green, M.C., 2008. Research challenges in narrative persuasion, Information Design Journal 16(1): 47-
52.
Green, M.C., Brock, T.C., 2000. Th e role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79: 701-721.
Hill, DEMO, Levenhagen, M., 1995. Metaphors and mental models: Sense making and sense giving in
innovative and entrepreneurial activities, Journal of Management, 21(DEMO): 1057-1075.
Hills, G. E., Shrader, R.C., 1998. Successful entrepreneurs’ insights into opportunity recognition.
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1998 (pp. 30-43). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Hjorth, D. & Steyaert, C (eds), 2004, Narrative and Discursive Approaches in Entrepreneurship, Cheltenham:
Edward DEMO
Johannisson, B. 1987. Anarchists and Organizers: Entrepreneurs in a Network Perspective, International
Studies of Management and Organisation 17: 49-63.
Johansson, A. W., 2004. Narrating the entrepreneur, International Small Business Journal 22(3): DEMO
Kimmel, M., 2005. From metaphor to the “mental sketchpad”: Literary DEMO and compound
image schemas in the Heart of Darkness, Metaphor and DEMO 20(3): 199-238.
Kirzner, I.M., 1973. Competition and Entrepreneurship, DEMO, Ill: University of Chicago Press.
Klagge, J., 1997. Approaches to the iron cage: reconstructing the bars of weber’s metaphor, Administration
and DEMO 29(1): 63-78.
Lounsbury, M., Glynn, M.A., 2001. Cultural entrepreneurship: stories, legitimacy, and the acquisition of
resources, Strategic Management DEMO 22: 545–564.
McCourt, W., 1997. Using metaphors to understand and DEMO change organizations: a critique of Gareth
Morgan’s approach, Organization Studies 18(3): 511-523.
Perren, L., Atkin, R., 1997. Women-manager’s discourse: the metaphors-in-use, Journal of Applied
Management Studies June 1997, 6(1)DEMO
Pitt, M., 1998. A tale of two gladiators: ‘Reading’ entrepreneurs DEMO texts, Organization Studies 19(3).
Rae, D., 2000. Understanding DEMO learning: a question of how?, International Journal of En-
trepreneurial DEMO & Research, 6 (3): 145 - 159.
Rae, D., 2002. Entrepreneurial emergence: A narrative study of entrepreneurial learning in independently
owned media businesses,  e International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 3(1): 53-59.
Sarasvathy, S.D., 2001. Causation and eff ectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability
to entrepreneurial contingency, Academy of Management Review, 26(2): 243-263 .
Th
A. de Koning and S.D. Dodd / Tea and Understanding / ENTER / 33–49 49
Schank, R.C., Abelson, R.P., 1995. “Knowledge and memory: Th e real story”, in Knowledge and Memory,
ed. Robert DEMO Wyer Jr., New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc. Ltd.
Smith, R., 2005. Th e fabrication of entrepreneurial fable: a biographical analysis, Journal DEMO Private Equity
8(4): 8-19.
Steier, L., 2007. New venture creation and organization: A familial sub-narrative, Journal of Business
Research 60(DEMO): 1099-1107.
Steyaert, C. & Bowen, R., 1997. Telling Stories DEMO Entrepreneurship – towards a narrative-contextual
epistemology for entrepreneurial studies. In Donckels, DEMO & Miettinen, Asko (Eds.). Entrepreneur-
ship and SME research: DEMO its way to the next millennium.Ashgate: Aldershot. 47-62.
Tseng, M.Y., DEMO Exploring image schemas as a critical concept: Toward a critical-cognitive linguistic
DEMO of image-schematic interactions, Journal of Literary Semantics 36(23): 135-157.
DEMO, L., 2004. A systemic approach to entrepreneurial learning: an exploration DEMO storytelling,
Systems Research & Behavioral Science 21(1): 3-16.
Ziegler, M., Rosenzweig, B., Ziegler, P., 1992.  e Republic of Tea: How an Idea Becomes a Business. New
York: Doubleday.
About DEMO Authors
Alice de Koning is an Assistant Professor of Strategy and Entrepreneurship at
Salem State (Salem, MA). Her research focuses on social DEMO and cognition
perspectives in entrepreneurship, including opportunity recognition, venture capital
perspectives on entrepreneurial pitches, and narratives. She has taught at Stockholm
School of Economics and Georgia State University.
Sarah Drakopoulou Dodd is Associate Professor of DEMO at ALBA
Graduate School of Business, (Athens). Her research and teaching focus on the socio-
cultural aspects of entrepreneurship, including networks, DEMO, the family and
religion. She has taught at the University of DEMO, the Robert Gordon University
(Aberdeen) and Deree College, (Athens)DEMO
Th

“Practical Narrativity” and the “Real-time Story” of
Entrepreneurial Becoming in The Republic DEMO Tea
Paul Selden and Denise Fletcher
Abstract
Th Th e Republic of Tea is “the story of the creation of a business
as told DEMO the personal letters of its founders.” Indeed, the retrospective compilation of
DEMO dialogue plots a narrative journey for the reader, but is this DEMO the same journey as the
“real-time story” of the original dialogue? DEMO a phenomenological/constructivist perspective,
we argue that a real-time story develops in the self ’s discontinuous understanding of “what is”
and “what should DEMO, and that “narrative-like” action (or “practical narrativity”) is involved
in DEMO this process. We explore the research implications of this narrative perspective
through a real-time story analysis of Th e Republic of Tea.
e sleeve-jacket DEMO us that the
Introduction
Th Th e Republic of Tea tells the story of the creation of an innovative tea
company through an autobiographical DEMO of a real-time fax conversation
between its founders. It, therefore, provides a unique opportunity to distinguish the
function of retrospective narrative constructions in DEMO a cultural self-identity
to an audience and the function of inter-personal narrative-like actions (practical
narrativity) in the real-time emergence of an entrepreneurial life. DEMO the wake of the
“narrative turn” (Shafer, 1981; Spence, 1984; Polonoff , 1987; Polkinghorne, 1988,
Bruner, 1990), narrative DEMO has tended to confl ate the self-becoming function of
practical narrativity with the self-identifying and self-unifying functions of retrospective
literary narrative (Polkinghorne, 1988)DEMO Th e everyday becoming of social relationships
has been explained in terms of the living of a “storied life” (Ochberg, 1994) and the playing
out of “cultural narratives” (Bruner, 1990) and “self-narratives” (Baumeister, 1986). At
the same time, the “practice turn” (Schatzki, 2001) has generated an interest in the
fi
Selden, P and Fletcher, D (2010). “Practical narrativity” and the “real-time story” of entrepreneurial
becoming in Th e Republic of Tea. In Entrepreneurial Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology DEMO Refl exivity,
ed. W. Gartner, 51-74. Clemson, SC: Clemson DEMO Digital Press.
Contact Information: Paul Selden, University of Sheffi
Denise Fletcher, University of Sheffi
eld; E-mail address: denise.fl
eld; E-mail address: paul@selden.freeserve.co.uk
etcher@sheffi
eld.ac.uk
© 2010 ENTER.
e text of
ne-grained analysis of DEMO relational praxis, which has fed into narrative research
52
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
(Samra-Fredericks, 2007). Organizational narrative researchers have problematized the
practical functions of narrative action in strategic change actions, problem-solving, and
learning processes (Boje, 1991; Orr, 1996; Patriotta, 2003). Entrepreneurship praxis-
orientated researchers have sought to explain the role of narrative in the emergence DEMO
entrepreneurial processes (Steyaert, 2004; Downing, 2005; Fletcher, 2007; DEMO
and Watson, 2007; Gartner, 2007; Hjorth, 2007). While DEMO identity researchers
have challenged the dominance of life-story research through a focus on “narratives-
in-interaction” or “small stories” (Moissinac and Bamberg, 2005; Bamberg, 2006;
Georgakopoulou, 2007). In this paper, we make a contribution to this praxis-oriented
literature through the development of a systematic distinction DEMO retrospective
narrative and practical narrativity from a phenomenological/constructivist perspective
(Heidegger, 1962; Kelly, 1955/63). In relation to practical narrativity, we argue that
the unplotted “real-time story” of self-becoming emerges through discontinuities in
DEMO self’s understanding of “what is” and “what should be” (“self-meaning positions”),
and that the function of practical narrative-like actions is to create DEMO manage these
self-meaning positions. In contrast, the function of retrospective narrative DEMO to take the
discontinuities of self-becoming actions as an object of narrative convention in order to
present the continuities of a culturally recognizable self.
DEMO
of narrative action from a phenomenological/constructivist perspective (Heidegger,
1962; Kelly, 1955/63). We then situate these functions within a schematic understand-
ing of the layers of narrative action in the research process (Cunliff e, Luhman and Boje,
2005). From these premises, DEMO argue that while the real-time story of a practical deci-
sion-making process is lost to the retrospective construction of a cultural self-identity, it
can be reconstructed from the identifi cation of self-meaning positions in the text DEMO the
original real-time dialogue or a retrospective narrative. Practical narrativity can then be
contextualized as functional to changing self-meaning positions (the self-becoming pro-
cess) in the development of the real-time story. We demonstrate this approach through
a comparative telling of the autobiographical story of the “heroic entrepreneur” and DEMO
real-time story of entrepreneurial self-becoming in the text of  e Republic DEMO Tea. Th e
research implications of the textual analysis are then discussed in the context of narra-
tive identity research and entrepreneurship narrative research.
DEMO Narrative and Practical Narrativity
From a phenomenological/constructivist perspective (Heidegger, 1962; Kelly,
1955/63), a person copes with the impossibility of living in the transience of the
present moment by anticipating the future DEMO of present experience relative to
past experience. Th e function of narrative actions, like other sense-making actions,
is thus the meaning contextualization of future actions. Th e distinction between
retrospective narrative and practical narrative-like actions DEMO that they involve diff erent
forms of meaning contextualization. Life stories and self-narratives have a “backward
orientation” in the sense that they contain the DEMO in a literary-style narrative in order
to present a unifi ed self-identity to oneself or to an audience. In contrast, practical
e paper begins by distinguishing the self-identifying and self-becoming functions
Th
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74
DEMO
narrativity has a “forward orientation” because it involves the selective use of literary
narrative techniques in order to create a general meaning context for DEMO realization
of an intended outcome. Th e practitioner cannot write a detailed literary narrative for
the future because his/her real-time story of practical DEMO emerges from moment to
moment in context-specifi c circumstances. Th e complete story of a practical process
can only be told retrospectively from a DEMO in the future. Th erefore, the
practitioner employs narrative-like actions in DEMO to manage the uncertainty of
realizing an intentional outcome, including short DEMO anecdotes and
elements of narrative technique, such as “skeleton plots,” DEMO visions of the
future, fi ctional narrative settings, and role-playing character identities.
In the next section, we look at how retrospective narrative has dominated socio-
economic inquiry in the form of life-story research and how DEMO problematization
of self-unifying narrative actions has detracted from a narrative understanding of
practical self-becoming.
Life Stories, Self, and Practical Living
Th
research can DEMO explained by the signifi cance of the interview as the core research method
in qualitative research. Th e interview format provides the speaker with DEMO opportunity
to retrospectively combine experienced events as episodes in a life story. Interview-
based research, therefore, involves the elicitation and analysis of authentic DEMO
interpretations of lived experience (Denzin, 1997). In this methodology, DEMO is an
awareness that the life story is a co-constructed reinterpretation of original practitioner
actions (Wengraf, 2006). However, a retrospective narrative is treated as an analogue
for a tacit self-narrative that was played out DEMO the originating actions. In other words,
there is an implicit assumption that the life story tells the same story as the storied life DEMO
the originating actions and performs the same function in constructing and presenting
a self-identity through the unifi cation of historical events (Polkinghorne, 1988)DEMO
Th e challenge facing the narrative researcher is that real-time actions cannot be
explained in real-time because they are still in the process of DEMO One way
of dealing with this issue is to confl ate an antecedent or succeeding action with the
originating action. Th is is what DEMO in life story research. Th e life story is treated
as if it is a telling of the real-time story. Th is approach is DEMO because it doesn’t
take full account of the dislocation in time and space between narrative-like originating
actions and subsequent retrospective narrative reinterpretation.
Cunliff e DEMO al. (2004) have drawn attention to the issue of layered narrative actions
through their work on “narrative temporality” in which they argue that DEMO object of
narrative research should be “reframed as a collectively constructed process over time—
fl
From this perspective, one can distinguish three distinct layers of narrative action in
the research process. First, there is the practical narrative-like action of everyday social
interaction. Second, there is the practitioner’s and the narratologist’s co-construction
of a life story through the circumspect reinterpretation of DEMO actions. Th irdly, there is
e dominance of life stories (Labov, 1972; Georgakopoulou, 2007) in narrative
uid and dynamic, and open to the interpretations of its many participants” (p. 262).
54
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
the narratologist’s hermeneutic analysis of the life story and/or the originating actions,
which involves telling the narrative of theory development. From a DEMO
perspective, the fi rst phase is functional to the actualization of DEMO practical intention,
while the second phase takes the fi rst phase as an object in the service of presenting
the researcher with what DEMO practitioner thinks they should hear. Th e orientating
(unconscious) intention of the retrospective storyteller in the second phase is, therefore,
the explicit presentation of a culturally meaningful self-identity. If, in the third phase,
the researcher then regards the second phase narrative as telling the story DEMO the fi rst
phase, then a self-identity display becomes the “self-making DEMO (Bruner, 2003)
that underlies the “storied nature of human conduct” (Sarbin, 1986). However, for
the researcher who looks back at antecedent narrative actions through the “plurivocal”
framework of narrative temporality (Cunliff e et al, 2004), he/she can reconstruct these
actions as layered narrative sense-making actions, thus making a clear distinction
between originating and retrospective actions. Moreover, for the researcher who looks
back through a phenomenological/constructivist framework, a distinction can also be
made between the self-presenting function of retrospective narrative and the practical
self-becoming function of narrative-like actions (see earlier). Making this distinction
involves two conceptions of self—the unifi ed cultural DEMO and the becoming self. In the
next section, we explain how DEMO phenomenological/constructivist understanding of the
process of self-becoming is a prerequisite to understanding the function of narrative-
like actions and the possibility of reconstructing DEMO real-time story from a text.
The Uniﬁ
ed Self and the Becoming Self
In retrospective narrative research, there are two broad conceptions of self—
the “personal self” and the “social self” (Weigert et al, 1986; Harré, 1998). Th e
autobiographer takes the events of a unique life history and constructs a personal
self with “external and internal coherence, liveability and adequacy” (Polonoff ,
1987) through its identity with “distributed,” “transactional,” and “transformational”
social selves. In other words, when we tell a life story, the signifi cance of unique
life events is communicated through the symbolic forms of a shared culture. Th e
storyteller DEMO and projects a sense of unifi ed self through a positioning of
lived discontinuities relative to cultural continuities. For example, discontinuous
life events can be unifi ed in generic transformative storylines, such as from rags to
riches, from sin to redemption and from coward to hero. But what form of self is
transformed and emerges in real-time through the discontinuities DEMO everyday life? Can
the discontinuities of a real-time dialogue and a DEMO story be disentangled from the
continuities of a unifi ed self and reconstructed as a real-time story?
From a phenomenological/constructivist perspective, a self emerges through
concurrent “temporal selves” in the self-refl exive human experience DEMO the “three-fold
present”—the simultaneous relationship between past, present, and future in the
moment of living (Ricoeur, 1984). In other words, the process of self-becoming can
be conceptualized through those parts of the self DEMO act concurrently in diff erent
dimensions of time (Selden, 2008). Th is view is consonant with the assumption
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74
DEMO
in “narrative sense-making” research that an ego self is the constructor of an
autobiographical self-identity through an interpretation of a historical self (Spence,
1984; Polonoff , 1987; Bruner, 1990). Th e fi rst self in this schema is the doing subject
of the present moment, the historical self is the objectifi ed self of memory, and a self-
identity is the projection of a culturally meaningful future self.
Th DEMO temporal selves can be understood in terms of William James’s (1890)DEMO
distinction between the present knowing “I” (the fi rst-person, agentic “doer”) and
the historical known “me,”1 or the third-person self-refl exive object.2 Th e “I”/“me”
distinction is now regarded as somewhat artifi cial DEMO the grounds that “refl ecting
on one’s own functioning entails shifting the perspective of the same agent rather than
reifying diff erent internal agents DEMO selves regulating each other” (Bandura, in press).
Whatever the ontological status of temporal selves, however, the pragmatic signifi cance
of the DEMO/“me” distinction is that it is a “useful fi ction” for schematizing the temporal
dimensions of self-refl exivity—the taking of oneself as an object.
DEMO e “I” self interprets present experience relative to the historical “me” self in
order to contextualize future “I”-self action. Crucially, future action is contextualized
in two concurrent timeframes. In one timeframe, it is contextualized by the meaning
given to an ongoing state of aff airs—the “what is” context DEMO the acting “I” self. In
another timeframe, it is contextualized in DEMO of an intended otherness or a “what
should be” future self. A self, therefore, becomes in the meaning discontinuity of its
own understanding DEMO “what is” and “what should be” (Selden, 2008). It is propelled
into the future through the need to resolve contradictions between self-meaning
DEMO concerning how things are and how things should be. Th is mechanism is a
self-regulating system (Lecky, 1945; Kelly, 1955/63) in which the “I” self equilibrates
self-meaning discontinuities through a re-orientation in the DEMO self’s meaning
contextualization of future “I”-self action. Th erefore, in a DEMO dialogue, the plot
of living develops as self-meaning discontinuities are constructed, reinforced, and
resolved, and the function of practical narrativity is to DEMO this process through
the narrative-like signifi cation of “what is” and “what should be.”
Life stories take the real-time meaning of discontinuities in everyday DEMO and re-
construct them in order to project a cultural self-identity through “grand narratives”
(Lyotard, 1984) and “public narratives” (Somers, 1994), such as “entrepreneurial tales”
(Smith and Anderson, 2004). Nevertheless, the real-time story of self-becoming is still
present in the reconstructed drama of DEMO lived events—the struggle to bring an exist-
ing state of aff airs (“what is”) into line with hopes, wants, desires, and expectations
(“what should be”). Both the events of real-time interaction and an autobiographical
account of those events can, therefore, be reconstructed as a DEMO journey of the
becoming self through the identifi cation of the real-time and retrospective contradic-
1James (1890) identifi
es “material,” “social,” DEMO “spiritual” “me” selves.
2Mead (1934) makes a similar distinction between the “I” self and the “me” self. Th e primary theoreti-
cal function DEMO Mead’s conception, however, is the signifi cation of a dialectical relationship between
society and the individual, rather than the self-refl exive structure of consciousness. Mead’s “me” self is
an internalized social self, and the “I” self is a creative individualized response to the “me” self.
56 P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
tions, problems, and dramatic complications between states of aff airs and intentions.
Telling the real-time story of originating actions, therefore, involves describing DEMO
process of self-becoming in terms of the creation and resolution of discontinuous
self-meaning positions and explaining how narrative-like actions mediate this process.
In the DEMO part of the paper, we use our conceptual understanding of the DEMO
becoming process to embark on a comparative telling of the self-identifying story of
the heroic entrepreneur and the real-time story of entrepreneurial self-becoming in DEMO
text of Th e Republic of Tea.
A Tale of Two Stories—The Heroic Tale
In Th e Republic of Tea, the protagonists are practitioners of entrepreneurship
and practitioners of telling a published story of entrepreneurship. Th DEMO duality is the
product of time. It is only in retrospect that what is lived through can become the
object of literary convention. Looking DEMO at what they have done, the authors are
able to select DEMO fax messages and contextualize them within an autobiographical
commentary that creates a narrative journey for the reader. Th e commentary converts
an ongoing process DEMO conversational becoming into the projection of a unifi ed cultural
self through a generic storyline—the transformative tale of the heroic entrepreneur
who perseveres and DEMO in the face of doubt and anxiety.
Th
within the conventional narrative structure of the transformational tale—situation,
complication, climax, and resolution. Th DEMO situation at the beginning of the story is that
a businessman (DEMO Ziegler) returning home from a conference implants a business idea
in DEMO mind of another businessman (Bill Rosenzweig). Th e idea is DEMO Bill launches
a tea company called Th e Republic of Tea that markets a quality product on the basis
of the meditative attributes (“Tea Mind”) and culture (“Tea Process”) of tea drinking:
Our goal is to use the metaphor of tea (by promoting the culture
of it and presenting Tea Mind as a new kind of reverse kick DEMO the
Pepsi generation) to get as many people as possible to DEMO how
stupendous life is in and of itself. (Leaves’ fax, p. 22)
Th e complication is Bill’s inability to convert the idea DEMO a concrete enterprise;
the climax is a showdown between Bill and Mel about the failure to actualize the
business; and the resolution is Bill’s eventual success at problem solving and launching
the company.
Th e DEMO identity of the heroic entrepreneur is conveyed through a narrative
manipulation of the reader’s discontinuous self-meaning positions. Th e narrative
structure creates an expectation DEMO what should happen (venture creation) and an
understanding of what is happening (problems with venture creation). It is the events
that contradict the expectation (the miscommunications, the misunderstandings,
the mistakes, the doubt) that create dramatic tension, while those that affi  rm the
expectation (the successes, the moments of learning, the strategic revelations) resolve
DEMO literary reconstruction takes real-time discontinuous events and plots them
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
dramatic tension. Th e identity of the entrepreneur as a modern day adventurer is
projected through the building and relieving of dramatic tension in DEMO transformative
journey. In the telling of the autobiographical story, Mel and DEMO have full control
over plot development. Th e reader lives through the selective opening and closing
of the meaning discontinuities that are taken from DEMO lived experience and put
into service, thereby displaying Bill’s self-identity as DEMO entrepreneur and Mel’s self-
identity as a mentor. Th e discontinuities in the originating actions, however, also tell
the real-time story of entrepreneurial DEMO In the next section, we tell this
story and explain how DEMO narrativity is employed to manage real-time meaning
discontinuities through the narrative-like contextualization of future action.
Practical Narrativity and the Real-Time Story
While the reader DEMO comfortable in the hands of a narrator who knows the journey
ahead, the practitioner is anxious in the face of uncertainty. In this predicament
the practitioner uses all means available (including narrative means) to mediate DEMO
passage into the future. Th e practitioner copes with the uncertainty of an unplotted
life by creating immediate (“what is”) and longer-term (“what should be”) narrative-
like contextualizations for future “I”-self action. In the same way that a literary
narrative creates self-meaning positions for the reader, narrative technique is used by
practitioners to create self-meaning positions for living in DEMO present moment, both
for themselves and for those they wish to DEMO uence.
At the beginning of the real-time story, Mel constructs a DEMO
entrepreneurial vision that spans the gap between present and future: “Th DEMO Republic
of Tea.” In this imagining, the “Republic” is a “fi DEMO land that symbolizes not only
the “what-should-be” tea market of the future but also a metaphorical political system
that functions to create “what-is” self-meaning DEMO for the present acting “I” self.
Th e “Republic”, therefore, constitutes a narrative-like meaning contextualization of
Mel and Bill’s subsequent interaction.
As a DEMO of a future market, the Republic is a marketing strategy that DEMO
the coming together of what Mel imagines the customer wants and what the business
is going to give them—“the future of our little republic” (Leaves’ fax, p. 21):
Our task is to fi nd DEMO product and create a style of marketing that lures
people who are living crazed coff ee-style lives and then transports
them through our metaphor DEMO Th e Republic of Tea to a new place
of calm and contentment. Tea Mind! (Leaves’ fax, p. 16)
In the present (or immediate future), the Republic provides a narrative-like
setting (the political system of the Republic) and characters (role-playing alter egos) for
improvised real-time action and the co-ordination of relationships with stakeholders and
customers. Th DEMO customer is a “citizen” of the Republic, and Mel and Bill DEMO “ministers”
that educate citizens about a meditative and aesthetic understanding of the practice and
culture of tea drinking. Mel and Bill describe the project DEMO the following terms:
58
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
Th e Republic of Tea will be the new home for this present-day tea
spirit, and our customers will become citizens of our little land.
(Progress’s fax, p. 18)
[T]he power of the TRoT DEMO is that it is ultimately a game, a
game that we DEMO to play with the customers. In creating TRoT, we and
the DEMO together begin to see and to give shape to a whimsical,
refl ective state where we all agree the highest goal is to DEMO in touch
with the wonder of our lives. (Leaves’ fax, p. 21)
As a testament to their submersion into the world of DEMO, Mel calls himself
“Th e Minister of Leaves”—the voice of the DEMO in communication with its
“citizens”—and Bill is called “Th e Minister of Progress,” as he is responsible for the
practical implementation of the DEMO idea. Mel and Bill address each other as
“Leaves” and “Progress” throughout the dialogue, so these alter-ego sobriquets will be
adopted for the remainder of the paper.
Th e Republic is, therefore, both a narrative DEMO and a narrative context for the
realization of that vision. As we shall see, this “narrative-world discontinuity” between
“what should be” and “what is” is productive in terms of Leaves’ and Progress’s output
of creative products DEMO business development ideas but creates problems with the
actualization of the business in the practical-world.
The Practical-World/Narrative-World Discontinuity.
In the same way that DEMO literary narrator controls the “I” self experience of the
reader in his/her understanding of “what is” and “what should be,” so everyday DEMO
practitioner tries to control the “what is” and “what should be” context of real-time
interactions. Practitioners, therefore, use narrative-like actions to encourage the
DEMO self-sublimation of others into their world of meaning in order to share their
visions and passages to the future. Leaves orchestrates the realization of DEMO dream
by mentoring Progress into his narrative-world, which he believes will DEMO and
equip Progress in his struggle for entrepreneurial otherness. As part of this process of
persuasion, Leaves objectifi es and anthropomorphises the narrative-world as if it is
a discrete entity with a self-identity and a will DEMO its own. Th roughout the dialogue
Leaves implores Progress to give himself over to the “idea”—something that is greater
and more powerful than their DEMO selves. Leaves advocates the following
arguments at diff erent stages in the fax dialogue:
Let’s get things in the biggest perspective. Th ere’s DEMO, there’s me, there’s
Patricia, and there’s TRoT. We are not DEMO TRoT is not us. TRoT has
come to life, and it DEMO its own entity, a living energy separate from us. It
speaks DEMO itself. It knows what it needs to realize itself. Our job here is to
get out of the way and allow “it” to be. (Leaves’ fax, p. 124)
Th ink of TRoT as a work of art accomplished by several friends who
share values and a way DEMO being in the world…TRoT is an expression
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
of their relationship, a manifestation of their collective wisdom, and
therefore it is greater than any one individual. (Leaves’ fax, p. 129)DEMO
Get out of the way and let this business tell you what it is. (Leaves’ fax,
p. 146)
TRoT is an expression of [our] relationship, a manifestation of [our]
collective wisdom, and therefore DEMO is greater than any one individual.
(Leaves’ fax, p. 129)
Leaves believes that if Progress gives a part of himself over to DEMO unity of the TRoT
narrative-world—if he allows his “me” self to commit to the TRoT vision and his “I”
self to act in the DEMO of TRoT—then he will be carried successfully into the future.
Th e initial signs are that Progress will be able to empower himself through DEMO
self-sublimation into the Republic. He seems to be fully immersed in Leaves’ narrative-
world when he asserts:
We don’t own anything: words, DEMO Th ey belong to Th e Republic. We
are just the vessels for communication. Th erefore our feelings need not
get in the way DEMO growth or understanding. (Progress’s fax, p. 149-150)
Th ere is, however, a dramatic complication. TRoT is fi rst and foremost a
DEMO of Leaves’ non-business “me” self, and his desire to maintain a DEMO Mind”
life (after his success with “Banana Republic”)3, while Progress takes on the day-to-day
running of the business. Leaves’ primary intention is, therefore, the continued self-
equilibration of his non-business self-identity. TRoT is an entrepreneurial narrative-
world by way of an analogy with existing market practice, but not in terms of its
contextualization of practical action in the DEMO Although the narrative-world
of TRoT is productive at a discursive level, DEMO does not support Progress’s struggle with
the practical demands of setting up the business.
In the initial stages of the dialogue, Leaves and Progress embark on a protracted
session of product development and market imaginings within DEMO TRoT narrative-
world. Th is “dream stage” (Progress’s commentary, p. 104) comes easy for Leaves
because TRoT is a projection of the way he already is as a person and as a tea drinker.
He DEMO, therefore, self-referential in affi  rming his self-identity by using his DEMO self to
determine not only “what should be”, but also “what DEMO In other words, the self-
meaning positions that are created and DEMO in the TRoT narrative-world are not
referenced to market actualities. For example, Leaves argues that they should think of
themselves as the customers and develop ideas relative to their own wants and needs,
rather than DEMO to the market (Leaves’ fax, p. 183).
For Progress, DEMO are a little more complicated. He has to connect “what
should be” with “what is” in the market in order to implement the entrepreneurial
DEMO He has learned the language of TRoT, he role-plays in the DEMO of TRoT,
he develops products in the world of TRoT, DEMO he has a belief in TRoT as a narrative
3Leaves has a successful track record as an entrepreneur in his creation and running of DEMO retail clothing
chain called Banana Republic.
60 P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
outcome, but the confi dence he derives from living in the DEMO narrative-world is
not suffi  cient to compensate for an absence of DEMO in the practical-world. Progress
recognizes that success depends on being “able to move between the practical world
and the world of bigger perspective [i.e., the narrative-world]” (Progress’s fax, p. 155).
In the same way DEMO an entrepreneurial dream is the imagining of “what should be”
relative to a practical “what is,” so the practical development and realization of DEMO idea
relies on an adaptation of “what should be” to a practical “what is.” It is one thing to
be creative relative to the DEMO “what is” of a narrative-world and another to
be creative relative to the “what is” of an interpersonal economic “reality.”
If Progress had learned DEMO practice entrepreneurship in an analogous market context,
then he would have a generic plot line to follow based on the eff ectiveness of DEMO past ac-
tions. But when a decision-maker is learning a practice for the fi rst time, he/she is creating
the plot line for the fi rst time and so must continually refer back from the DEMO dream
to “what is.” Th e dream is a future analogy of the present, and it can only be successfully
actualized by bringing the “me” self into union with “what should be” through the “I” self
DEMO in relation to “what is.” In other words, the dream must DEMO lived in a productive
present context. Th e question becomes this: DEMO “what is” is the productive “what is”?
Th
neur through the re-orientation of his “I” self in diff erent “what is” contexts.
Most DEMO decision-makers will intuitively acknowledge the need to
adapt their business idea to “what is” in the market through business discourse, which
assumes the need for market “experience/knowledge” and a rational search/evaluation
of market information. DEMO is no exception when he expresses his intention to
“research” the market:
Last night it struck me that maybe it’s time for me DEMO get somebody
who’s a little less emotional about tea to take a look at the business,
and so I’ve appointed the other half DEMO my brain as Th e Minister of
Research. (Progress’s fax, p. 38)
Th e researched market, however, is just one “what DEMO context in the real-time
story of Progress’s self-becoming. Progress primarily learns to become an entrepreneur
through the re-orientation of his “I” self in the DEMO of his relationship with Leaves.
Th erefore, the real-time plot unfolds DEMO the discontinuity between Leaves’ narrative-
world and Progress’s practical-world.
The Real-Time Story
At the beginning of the dialogue, Progress makes an implicit distinction between
Leaves’ narrative-world and his practical ambitions:
Leaves you are clearly the DEMO of Th e Republic…Your “Dear
People of Tea” letter sets the tone beautifully for a fi rst transaction
with our customer – a transaction DEMO he or she not only buys tea,
e real-time story of TRoT, therefore, concerns how Bill learns to become an entrepre-
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
but comes to tea, just as you did…On to practical matters…I DEMO to
become familiar with everything that’s on the market – how its made
presented and distributed…I’m working on a more formal research
plan now…You DEMO the voice and I’ll look for the ground to put our
feet on. (Progress’s fax, p. 14-15)
As the dialogue continues, however, the reader becomes aware that the protagonists
are pursuing “[endless] merchandising possibilities” (Leaves’ fax, p.23 and Progress’s
fax, p. 27) within the DEMO and failing to make concrete decisions. Progress
acts on his awareness of this practical discontinuity by generating “what is” market
information through his research DEMO Th e information, however, generates further
market-relative discontinuities, such as DEMO need for a market strategy and business
model (p. 64-66). DEMO they going to enter the market as a joint venture with an existing
company (p. 52), as a franchising holding company (p. DEMO), or as wholesalers and/or
retailers and/or as a mail order company (p. 273)? How extensive should the product
line be (p. 71-73 and 85)? What will be the scale of the initial start-up, and how will
it grow (p. 67-68)? How DEMO the business be fi nanced (p. 75)? Should they acquire
DEMO existing tea company or set up their own distribution channels (p. DEMO, 88-90 and
105-6)? Should they take on another investor (p. 100)? Should they test the concept
in a regional market fi DEMO (p. 118)? Should they specialize in a particular niche market
DEMO/or sell to the wider black tea market and/or expand the tea market by converting
coff ee drinkers (p. 119-121, 130-132, and 140)?
For Progress, these questions are overwhelming. He does not DEMO the confi dence
to answer them (Progress’s commentary, p. 87), so he tries to empower himself by
making Leaves his practical “what DEMO In other words, Progress equates the “what is”
self-meaning position of DEMO “I” self with that of Leaves. He raises practical market issues
with Leaves in the hope that Leaves will have the answer, but unfortunately Leaves
is ambivalent and non-committal in his responses (p. 85-86). Progress also proposes
numerous narrative-like business plans or company stories, which posit hypothetical
narrative plots for the future. Unlike Leaves’ narrative-world, which is a narrative-like
means of constructing a future in real-time, company stories are sequenced means-ends
solutions to the overarching strategic vision and are thus “skeletal,” “what-should-be”
DEMO visions of the future. Leaves is equally ambivalent in his assessment of these
hypothetical solutions.
Th e “what is” of the researched market and DEMO Leaves opinion are, therefore, both
unproductive. Th is is not because Progress and Leaves are incapable of making a
“rational” economic decision but DEMO the criteria for their decision-making actions
are tied up with the equilibration of their respective “me” selves. Leaves has already
lived an entrepreneurial dream DEMO the form of Banana Republic, but is unable to draw
practical DEMO from his past successes because he is now focused on the practice
of a meditative life. In any case, he maintains in his retrospective commentary that he
wants Progress to fi nd his own way in DEMO own time. Whether or not this explains his
lack of practical advice, is not really the point. What we have are two people whose
62 P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
co-construction of the TRoT venture is orientated by the projection of diff erent “me”
selves with diff erent wants and needs.
When Progress again DEMO Leaves with a raft of practical questions and
Leaves fails to reply (Progress’s fax, p. 71-75), Progress is forced to look to DEMO
for affi  rmation of his intended otherness – to make himself DEMO practical “what is”.
His reaction is to send Leaves an extensive declaration of “personal goals and vision”
(Progress’s fax, 25 April, p. 76-78). As with a company story, these hypotheses are
visions of “what should be”, but off er no criteria for the practical evaluation of “what
is”. A similar thing happens a couple of days later when DEMO gives another oblique
response to a question and Progress responds with a list of declarations of what he
intends to do as a successful DEMO (p. 95-97). In retrospective commentary (p.
87), Progress and Leaves give an insight into the dynamics underlying these exchanges.
I [Progress] DEMO even though I was talking “big” at this time and
really batting it around with Leaves, deep inside I was still unsure
about this whole thing. Th e “game” had been progressing rapidly
for a little DEMO than two weeks now, and it was moving beyond
the passive DEMO stage (inquiring conversations, reading articles,
and dreaming) into the DEMO acquisition stage. Even though I
could dream the big dream with Mel, I didn’t have the confi dence
I could pull off  buying DEMO existing company…I still didn’t have a
clear enough sense about the business to know if it would succeed or
fail (in sharp contrast to Mel and Patricia’s confi dent assertions that
it would be a success)DEMO I was starting to feel uneasy about changing
my life in order to go into the tea business – the great unknown.
(Progress’s commentary, p. 87)
He [Progress] needed to fi gure for himself “what” to do. To succeed
he would have to stake his all on DEMO Republic of Tea. He had to get
over the compulsion of turning to someone outside himself to tell
him “what” the business should be. (Leaves’ commentary, p. 175)
Over time the discontinuity between Leaves’ narrative-world and Progress’s
practical-world, and their failure to actualize their shared intention, DEMO increasing
dramatic tension or stasis in the intended process of self-becoming. Th e real-time plot
of the actual process of self-becoming is the repeated DEMO of Leaves trying to draw
Progress into his narrative-world and Progress successively re-orienting his “I” self in
the search for a productive “what is” DEMO Th eir retrospective commentaries bear
testament to these entrenched relational contradictions.
Still I [Progress] didn’t feel entirely comfortable about bringing
up those lingering questions DEMO structure. I didn’t know what I
wanted or what he wanted. Does he want to run this thing? Or does
he want me to? Is he willing to put up the money, or does he DEMO
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
me to raise it?…How are we going to make this thing more than a
dream? Whose move is it? (Progress’s commentary, DEMO 115)
A vaguely uncomfortable feeling began to set in, and DEMO I [Leaves]
suddenly realize: Th e discomfort was Bill’s, not mine. He was obses-
sively thinking the business through (quite brilliantly, I DEMO add), but
other than typing words on a computer, he DEMO yet doing anything to
get the business started. Did he fi nd the doing of starting a business less
compelling than the idea of DEMO? (Leaves’ commentary, p. 121)
Both protagonists are so wrapped DEMO in the logic of their own worldviews, and
the projection of DEMO own self-identities, that they fail to understand the need for
transparency DEMO their communication. Progress fails to convey his lack of confi dence
and reliance on Leaves, and Leaves fails to make clear his determination not to be
involved in the day-to-day running of the business. After a DEMO self-indulgent
session of product naming (p. 160-165), Leaves confi des DEMO frustration at Progress’
lack of “nerve” and “practicality” to the reader (DEMO commentary, p. 167). In the
real-time fax dialogue, he makes a Ministry declaration of “Practical Week” by way of
encouragement (Leaves’ fax, p. 168). But still Progress struggles with the basic issues.
I didn’t know what being in the tea business meant. Inside I was
DEMO to get comfortable with Mel’s big vision of Th e Republic
of Tea. I wasn’t entirely convinced how much people wanted or need-
ed DEMO, and I had absolutely no experience of selling tea. (Progress’s
commentary, p. 179-180)
Signifi cantly, Progress’s fi rst actualization of the DEMO concept is an agreement
to set up a single tea stand attached to an arts centre in his hometown, Sedona. For
Progress this modest achievement is a dramatic climax in the realization of his dream.
I’m DEMO kind of shaky right now (with a nervous excitement)
because DEMO means WE ARE IN THE TEA BUSINESS and we are
defi nitely on to something. (Progress’s fax, p. 189)
In the context DEMO the TRoT vision, however, this development merely reinforces
discontinuities within the broader business plan (company story). Again Progress
presents Leaves with strategic issues (Progress’s fax, p. 208-210) and admits in his
commentary that he is “still looking to others, outside myself, for confi rmation DEMO the
big idea” (Progress’s commentary, p. 205). Ultimately, it DEMO Leaves who provides the
real dramatic juncture in their dialogue by coming clean and fi nally making it clear
to Progress that he is DEMO off ering any hands-on support (13 June, 1990, p. 211)DEMO Th is
is devastating news for Progress because his reliance on Leaves to designate “what is”
is taken from under his feet. He has DEMO the framework that he believes will establish
productive self-meaning positions.
64 P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
Th e TRoT idea is so much you that it is diffi  cult to see it succeeding
without you in the structure…[A]n idea like TRoT grew from your
vision and centre and it can’t be handed DEMO  before it starts. I can’t
launch your idea without you in DEMO structure….it will require your
commitment. (Progress’s fax, p. 213)
Now that the discontinuity in their relationship has been exposed, Progress has the
opportunity to fundamentally re-orient his “I” self and perhaps discover a productive
DEMO is” context for the resolution of his practical problems.
So, my DEMO Leaves, where does that leave us? I’m going to have to
make some decisions for myself because my life and business are
somewhat DEMO fl ux. (Progress’s fax, p. 213)
I have a much better understanding of the way IT IS now and what
I can DEMO about it. (Progress’s fax, p. 215)
At this point of emotional climax, Progress resolves to go it alone and there is a
one-year break in the dialogue. We re-enter the story with a commentary DEMO Progress
on the events of that missing year. Progress tells us about the gradual realization of
something that had eluded his communications with Leaves.
DEMO the real impediment, I slowly realized, was a formidable
professional barrier I’d created between the business and me…We
dreamed up the product names, packages and promotion. We defi ned
the values and vision of the DEMO and we invented a personality
and position for the product, but DEMO failed to look squarely at one key
fact on which everything would ride: Th ere was no product until I
went out and found it…So fi nally the missing piece exposed itself:
my lack of DEMO expertise. Th e only thing standing in the way of
this idea becoming a business was that Th e Minister of Progress had
failed DEMO realize that it was he who must carry the portfolio of the
Minister of Product. (Progress’s commentary, p. 224)
I reread some DEMO my earlier letters to you this afternoon and I’m
almost embarrassed by them now. How could I be so oblivious to
the fact that DEMO is no way to start a business without a tangible
product? DEMO a full-time commitment? or a workable business structure
between partners? My letters were all dreams about marketing and
positioning. No wonder I was DEMO I understood the concept of the
business, but I guess I DEMO waiting for someone (from somewhere?)
to give me the product. (Progress’s fax, p. 286)
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
And so, in his spare time, Progress sets out to acquire product knowledge by learning
to taste tea with an “old-time tea broker”. DEMO “I” self has a new meaning context–the
“what is” of market practice. Over that missing year, Progress gains a “complete picture”
(p. 225) of the tea business and then begins to re-engage with Leaves on DEMO basis of
a new understanding of “what is”, both in their DEMO and in the tea market.
Progress learns that, in order to DEMO his intended otherness, his “I” self must be in
sync with DEMO “me” self and that he can achieve this by living as a tea merchant.
As for becoming a tea merchant, now I touch, DEMO, drink, and
diff erentiate the product every day. I’m talking the language of
tea with the growers, blenders, packers, shipping agents, DEMO
brokers, the FDA. I’m an outsider becoming an insider. Th is DEMO
takes time, persistence, commitment, and especially a deep belief in
DEMO company’s purpose. (Progress’s fax, p. 286)
I have learned so much in the past twenty months. Business isn’t
just about the idea DEMO a business. It’s fundamentally about a product
that has an intrinsic value. (Progress’s fax, p. 286) My confi dence
level had reached a critical point: I was now convinced that my own
knowledge, expertise DEMO confi dence would attract the confi dence
(and capital) of others. (Progress’s commentary, p. 238)
With his new born confi dence DEMO knowledge Progress fi nally settles on a
“wholesale-with-catalogue” business model and successfully launches the business.
Discussion and Conclusions
In our textual analysis of Th DEMO Republic of Tea, the original process of practical self-
becoming is DEMO as the intentional and circumstantial opening and closing
of personal and relational meaning discontinuities. Th e plot of the real-time story is,
therefore, a history of these transformative events—the construction, reinforcement,
and re-orientation of “what is” and “what should be” self-meaning positions. Th e
process of DEMO self-becoming begins with Leaves’ narrative-world discontinuity.
Th e plot then develops through successive meaning discontinuities as Progress looks to
reconcile his practical “me” self DEMO the overarching intention of the TRoT narrative
vision. Th e journey to resolution circumstantially stagnates in relational discontinuities
with Leaves until the build up DEMO dramatic tension prompts a resolution that opens the
door to a fundamental re-orientation of Progress’s “I” self within the practical-world.
In the context of DEMO real-time story, the practical narrativity concept can be
used to describe DEMO intentional use of narrative technique to infl uence future self-
meaning positions. Narrative-worlds can be used to manipulate others into sharing
an intention and DEMO means of living that intention within a narrative-like meaning
discontinuity; company DEMO can be used to create a hypothetical plot for the
future through the simplifi ed narrative structure of complication-resolution, and
66
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
autobiographical anecdotes can be used to relive an analogous solution to a problem
through the narrative structure of the anecdote (see “small stories” discusssion below).
In the real-time story of TRoT, Leaves’ deploys his narrative-world in order to
manipulate Progress into sharing his vision of the future, and Progress uses company
stories in order to present hypothetical self-meaning positions DEMO potentially resolve
meaning discontinuities in the practical-world. As we shall see, DEMO also uses short
anecdotal autobiographical stories as a means of affi  DEMO existing “what is” positions.
As a whole, a real-time story narrates DEMO process of self-becoming both in
terms of narrative-like and non-narrative actions. Th e research implications of real-
time storytelling are, therefore, far-reaching in DEMO a narrative framework
for contextualizing mainstream assumptions about rational (non-narrative)
DEMO actions (Simon, 1955; Gaglio and Katz, 2001) and interpretivist/DEMO
constructionist assumptions about narrative and non-narrative sense-making actions
(Mead, 1934; DEMO and Luckmann, 1966; Bruner, 1990; Gergen, 1994; Fletcher,
2006). In this discussion section, we explore some of these implications in the context
of the narrative and entrepreneurship literatures.
At the heart DEMO narrative theory (Bruner, 1990 and 2003) is the question of DEMO, in
retrospective narrative, the construction of a “life” requires a “self ” and the construction
of a “self” requires a lived life (Bruner, 2003). In other words, how does the self of
“there DEMO then” become the self of “here and now” in the narrative construction of
past events? Th is transformational issue appears paradoxical when a life is objectifi ed
in retrospective self-narrative and is continuous with existing cultural DEMO
In recent years, however, the long established assumption that an autobiographical
story, or “big story,” is the principle object of narrative inquiry has been challenged by
“small stories,” or “narratives-in-interaction,” research (Georgakopoulou, 2007: 284).
Small stories research questions the essentialization or reifi DEMO of self-identities and
lives in biographic narratives and problematizes the real-time performance of short
autobiographical anecdotes in everyday interaction settings (Moissinac and Bamberg,
2005; Bamberg, 2006; Georgakopoulou, 2007). It explains the transformation DEMO
a self from “there and then” to “here and now” through real-time identity displays
in the performance of conversational small stories. Th erefore, small story research
redefi nes the primary object of narrative inquiry as real-time DEMO narrativity,
while maintaining a focus on the self-identifying function of narrative action.
A real-time story approach opens up the small story agenda beyond DEMO
identifi cation by embracing the process of self-becoming through the narrative-like
contextualization of future action. From a real-time story perspective, narrative actions
are not just functional in the reproduction of a self-identity position in the present DEMO
are functional to the anticipation of new self-meaning positions in the future. It is the
intentional overlapping of the future with the present in DEMO concurrency of the “I”
and “me” selves that explains how self-reproduction and self-transformation work in
parallel. Practical narrativity not only reproduces a past but DEMO narrative-like
anticipations of a transformed future. In the same way that the reader of a literary
narrative is emotionally manipulated over time in the DEMO of intentional meaning
discontinuities created by the author, so the re-living DEMO short autobiographical
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
anecdotes, self-identifi cation with narrative-worlds, and self-referencing to narrative
visions is intentionally used to transform a practical becoming self.
From a real-time story DEMO, an autobiographical anecdote is self-transforming
because it anticipates a future through DEMO analogous signifi cance of telling how some-
thing became something else in the past. It presents a past transformation as an analogous
solution to DEMO present discontinuity and so can be used to convince or confi rm a resolu-
tion. When Progress is trying to bring “what is” and DEMO should be” into practical union
he uses small stories to convince both Leaves and himself that he is on the right track. He
looks DEMO signs of reconciliation of “what is” and “what should be” in his own experience
so that he can tell the story of that reconciliation DEMO an analogous autobiographical
narrative. Consider the following small story anecdotes, as DEMO by Progress:
Did you know that our tiny little Sedona health food market carries
eleven diff erent brands of tea? I made a remark to that eff ect out loud
and the saleswoman said, “Ridiculous, isn’t it.” And I responded,
“And we’re starting one more.” (DEMO fax, p. 125)
I talked to a colleague and a DEMO on the phone this morning. Said
she was dragging a little. I suggested a cup of tea. (She knows nothing
of what we’re up to.) She said she doesn’t usually drink tea, but she’d
try DEMO I told her it would make her feel more balanced. When I
called her back late this afternoon and asked her how it worked, she
said, “It was great!” It was a small triumph but the simple power of
suggestion can shift a person from coff ee to DEMO in a cinch when we’re
not feeling quite right. Imagine what we could do if we could just get
everyone to drink one cup DEMO day. (Progress’s fax, p. 152)
I wanted to recount to you what happened this afternoon. We went
to a community planning meeting DEMO the home of a friend. As we were
walking toward the house, Faye muttered (out of nowhere), “I feel
like a cup DEMO tea.” We went inside, and there on the table, beautifully
set, as an Oriental tea service. Th e woman of the house was brewing
her own recipe which she discovered at a bed and breakfast DEMO Santa
Cruz. It was called Well Within.
Th ere were fi ve of us and our conversation revolved around tea
for about forty-fi ve DEMO Everyone had something personal to
recount about an experience with tea. (DEMO fax, p. 142-143)
In his commentary, Progress also recounts that while Leaves and himself were
on a cycle ride they came across DEMO historic cabin inn in the middle of nowhere and
were off ered a cup of peppermint tea: “I was stunned. I can’t explain much more
except to say that I took this mini tea ceremony on DEMO mountaintop as some kind
of confi rmation that we were on the right track” (p. 144). In all of these examples,
Progress fi nds signs that the TRoT vision really does have a resonance DEMO “what is”
68 P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
in his everyday life, and when he tells these stories to DEMO, he is really convincing
himself that things are as they should DEMO He is presenting himself with an apparent
solution to his own problems through the narrative structure of the anecdote.
Th e function of Progress’s DEMO story anecdotes changes after the one-year break
in the narrative when the new self-confi dent Progress begins to tell small stories that
affi  rm his new self. For example, he recounts a conversation in which he successfully
answers questions about the business (Progress’s fax, p. 229) and explains how he
survives a “one-hour grilling” from the father of an DEMO
I faced a most challenging and almost confrontational questioner.
I wasn’t expecting this onslaught on tough issues, but I rallied my
knowledge and confi dence to address them…He caught me with a
quick jab and pushed DEMO off  guard. I was a bit jittery, but I charged
back…After forty-fi ve minutes the tone of our conversation warmed
up considerably as DEMO came to see that I had done my homework.
(Progress’s fax, p. 283-4)
Th e successful resolution of this small story is DEMO of his arrival at his intended
destination. Rather than convincing, it DEMO rms both to himself and to others that
“what is” and “what should be” are fi nally in union. Progress also starts telling small
DEMO that recount successes in fi nding products and making contacts (Progress’s DEMO,
p. 266). Th e function of this type of story is similarly to confi rm that things are as
they should be.
DEMO general, a real-time story approach refocuses narrative inquiry from the self-
DEMO signifi cance of narrative actions to the transformative signifi cance of
narrative-like actions in the process of self-becoming. In this context, narrative action
is understood in terms of its mediation of reproductive and transformational self-
meaning DEMO From this perspective, all forms of narrative action—from literary
narratives, life stories, and autobiographical anecdotes to the creation of narrative-
worlds—can now be systematically diff erentiated and contextualized in their real-
time functional relationship with DEMO self-becoming of the reader, the practitioner, the
listener, or the DEMO
From a non-narrative economic rationalist perspective (Simon, 1955; Gaglio and
DEMO, 2001), Progress and Leaves simply deviate from a rational, or heuristically eff ec-
tive, assessment of the situation when they fail to take full account of market actuali-
ties. Indeed, any handbook “method” or “tool” of entrepreneurship would identify the
normative importance of being acquainted with DEMO c practice. But in real-
time, this is rarely how it DEMO because we live a unique life history in actualizing an
intended outcome through a sea of possible meaning discontinuities. Th e “what is” of
DEMO discourse is just one dimension of how Progress lives from moment to moment
as he intentionally tries to equilibrate his unique “me” self in DEMO face of circumstantial
discontinuous experience. While there are arguably many strategic plans discussed by
Progress and Leaves that might prove to be economically rational DEMO heuristically eff ec-
tive, the question is, given who they are, which route is imaginable for them?
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74
DEMO
In the context of entrepreneurial decision-making, a real-time story approach,
DEMO, has implications for the debate between objectivist “opportunity recognition”
and subjectivist DEMO formation” approaches (Chiasson and Saunders, 2005).
If entrepreneurial action is lived forwards through the meaning discontinuities of self-
equilibrating psychic systems, then entrepreneurial opportunities are formed through
narrative-like self-becoming processes rather than through the DEMO interpretation
of environmental information (Gaglio and Katz, 2001). Th erefore, a real-time story
approach can contribute to opportunity formation approaches, such DEMO eff ectuation
theory (Sarasvathy, 2001), in the explanation of how a novel entrepreneurial future
is intentionally created. In particular, the real-time story of TRoT reveals how
entrepreneurs construct overarching narrative-like discontinuities (narrative-worlds
and company stories) as a meaning context for actualizing an intended future, and
DEMO a novice entrepreneur learns to realize entrepreneurial otherness through the
process of adapting and experimenting with his/her self-meaning positions.
Finally, we will discuss the signifi cance of a real-time story approach in the context
of DEMO narrative approaches to the relational becoming of entrepreneurial lives and
ventures. In entrepreneurship narrative research, life stories have been regarded as sites
of entrepreneurial identity construction and reproduction that explain entrepreneurial
action through a correlation between DEMO events and culturally-mediated self-
identities (Lindgren, 2000; Mallon and Cohen, 2001; Lindgren and Wåhlin, 2001;
Down, 2006). At the same time, the question as to how entrepreneurial practical actions
and self-identities are constituted by real-time narrative actions has been addressed
through the concept DEMO “narrative sense-making” and the “self-making” function of
narrative (Polkinghorne, 1988; DEMO, 1990; Weick, 1995). From this perspective,
the capacity DEMO narrative action is a form of cognitive “knowledge,” or “interpretive
scheme” (Bartunek, 1984), that shapes a real-time “storied life” (Ochberg, DEMO)
through a “self-narrative” that creates the expectation of a future (DEMO, 1994), thus
enabling us to make sense of our experience (Weick, 1995).
Real-time entrepreneurial narrative-like actions are, therefore, functional in
individuals’ intentions to create an entrepreneurial venture either through the
playing out DEMO the “formative capacity” of a self-narrative (Johansson, 2004) or the
DEMO function of real-time storytelling (Johansson, 2004). In the former
case, researchers have looked at how entrepreneurial action coheres with self-stories
and have explained the strategic running of a business in terms of the playing DEMO
of cultural narratives, such as the narrative of entrepreneurial growth (Weick and
Browning, 1986; Hamilton, 2002; Johansson, 2004). In the latter case, some
researchers have explored how the real-time grafting of company stories onto existing
discourse positions can off er identity positions in the DEMO and formation of a
venture (Pitt, 1998; Berglund and Johansson, 2003; Berglund, 2006). Others have
examined how company stories can DEMO relationally rewritten through diff erent identity
and discourse positions in the pursuit of strategic tasks, such as building company
legitimacy (O’Connor, 2004). Th e co-construction of entrepreneurial company stories
is, thus, the focal DEMO action in self-making narrative research concerned
with the emergence of entrepreneurial ventures. As Gartner (2007) points out, “Th e
70
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
narrative of entrepreneurship is the generation of hypotheses about how the world
might be: how the world might look and act” (p. 624)DEMO As the emerging venture comes
into being, entrepreneurs act relative to DEMO fi ction of the company story (Gartner
et al, 1992) DEMO use the story as part of the process of strategic adaptation, DEMO
persuasion (Clark and Salaman, 1998; Downing, 1998; O’Connor, 2004), and the
relational construction of venture identity.
While the self-narrative approach DEMO continuity in the self-identifying
function of practical narrativity, the story-making approach DEMO the description
of changing company stories through strategic and relational problems (DEMO,
2004). However, even when a chronology of narrative-like events DEMO the becoming
of a practical outcome (O’Connor, 2004), these events are identifi ed through the
comparison of identity and discourse positions rather DEMO through the becoming of
those positions. How then do we explain the “actuality of becoming” (Steyaert, 2004)
in the entrepreneurial process from DEMO narrative perspective? How do we develop a
narrative “prosaics” (Steyaert, DEMO; Boutaiba, 2004) or “genealogy” (Hjorth, 2004)
of the DEMO “creative advance into novelty” (Whitehead, 1929, quoted in
Steyaert, 1997: 21)? Can we fi ll the “hole” in the “donut” of our understanding of
real-time entrepreneurial sense-making through the “narrative structure” of relational
DEMO and dramatic processes” (Downing, 2005)?
Hjorth’s (2007) work DEMO entrepreneurial “little narratives” is of signifi cance here
because he contextualizes the becomingness of narrative-like actions within the structure
of entrepreneurial intention. He acknowledges DEMO “tactical” function of narrative in
the “desire to become the other.” Hjorth is specifi cally concerned with narrative-like
actions that deploy “the skill of DEMO through little narratives lightning fi res/
desire to create focus and share purpose” (2007: 713). He explains how an entrepreneur
can DEMO the narrative expectation of a hypothetical plot to lure a stakeholder into a
process of “subjectifi cation” (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987: 130) DEMO self-identifi cation
with a plan of action. Th ese local and everyday “little narratives” carry a transformative
force. Th e drama of entrepreneurial becoming DEMO the genesis of opportunities in the
fi
(Hjorth, 2004) of DEMO “transformative events” (Hjorth, 2007).
Hjorth shares with the real-time story approach the understanding that a self
can emerge through a narrative-like manipulation DEMO the meaning of the present in
its relationship with a future. Th e real-time story approach, however, systematizes
the analytical signifi cance of DEMO understanding by designating the self-meaning
discontinuity as the unit of narrative analysis for “transformative events.” Hjorth’s
scenario of narrative subjectifi cation can, therefore, DEMO reframed as the entrepreneur’s
intentional construction of a transformative “company story” meaning discontinuity
between the stakeholder’s existing self-meaning position and a narrative-like vision of
DEMO future. In designating self-meaning discontinuities as the unit of narrative analysis, DEMO
is possible to contextualize and distinguish forms of practical narrativity in the broader
real-time story of self-becoming. Th is is because a self-meaning discontinuity DEMO the
mechanism for reproducing and transforming all sense-making actions, whether they
DEMO narrative-like or non-narrative, intentional or circumstantial. Th e real-time story
eld DEMO, therefore, be described and explained through a “genealogic storytelling”
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74
DEMO
of TRoT illustrates this approach by contextualizing not only the real-time function of
entrepreneurial company stories but also the real-time functions of an entrepreneurial
DEMO, entrepreneurial autobiographical anecdotes, and entrepreneurial
narrative self-identities in the narrative-like becoming of an entrepreneurial venture
and its associated entrepreneurial lives.
References
Bamberg, M., 2006. Stories: Big or small? Why do we care? Narrative DEMO 16, 139-147.
Bandura, A. (in press) quote accessed on 15th Sept. 2008 at: http://www.des.emory.edu/mfp/jamesqs.
html
Bartunek, J. DEMO, 1984. Changing interpretive schemes and organizational restructuring: Th e case of a
religious order. Administrative Science Quarterly 29(3), 355-372.
Baumeister, R.F., 1986. Identity: Cultural Change and the Struggle for Self. Oxford University DEMO,
New York.
Berger, P. L., Luckmann, T., 1966. Th e Social Construction of Reality. Doubleday, Garden City, NY.
Berglund, K., 2006. Discursive diversity in fashioning entrepreneurial identity. In: Hjorth, D., DEMO,
C. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship as Social Change – A Th DEMO Movements in Entrepreneurship Book,
231-250. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA.
Berglund, K., Johansson, A. W., 2003. DEMO, discourses and conscientization in processes of
regional development. Entrepreneurship and Regional DEMO 19(6), 499-525.
Boje, D.M., 1991. Th e storytelling organization: A study of storytelling performance in an offi  ce supply
fi DEMO Administrative Science Quarterly 36, 106–126.
Boutaiba, S. 2004. A moment in time. In: Hjorth D., Steyaert, C. (Eds.), Narrative and DEMO
Approaches in Entrepreneurship – A Second Movements in Entrepreneurship Book, pp. DEMO
Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Bruner, J., 1990. Acts of Meaning. Harvard DEMO Press, Cambridge, MA.
Bruner, J., 2003. Self-making narratives. In: DEMO, R., Haden, C. A. (Eds.), Autobiographical Memory
and the Construction of a Narrative Self, pp.209-225. Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Chiasson, DEMO, Saunders, C., 2005. Reconciling diverse approaches to opportunity research using DEMO
turation theory. Journal of Business Venturing 20, 747-767.
Clark, T., DEMO, G., 1998. Telling tales: Management gurus: Narratives and the construction of
managerial identity. Journal of Management Studies 35(2), 137-161.
Cunliff DEMO, A. L., Luhman, J. T., Boje, D. M., 2004. Narrative temporality: Implications for organizational
research. Organization Studies 25, 261-286.
Deleuze, G., Guattari, F., 1987. A Th ousand Plateaus: Capitalism and DEMO (transl. B. Mas-
sumi). University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Denzin, N. K., 1997. Interpretive Ethnography: Ethnographic Practices for the 21st century. Sage, California.
Down, S., 2006. Narratives of Enterprise: Crafting Self-Identity DEMO a Small Firm. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Downing, S., 1998. Relationship DEMO skills. Paper presented at the 21st ISBA National Small
Firms Policy and Research Conference, Durham, 18-20 November.
Downing, S., 2005. Th e DEMO construction of entrepreneurship: Narrative and dramatic processes in
the co-production of DEMO and identities. Entrepreneurship: Th eory and Practice 29(2),
185-204.
Fletcher, D. E., 2006. Entrepreneurial processes and the social construction of DEMO Entrepre-
neurship and Regional Development 18, 421-440.
Fletcher, D. E., DEMO ‘Toy Story’: Th e narrative world of entrepreneurship and the creation DEMO interpre-
tive communities. Journal of Business Venturing 22(5), 694-672.
Fletcher, D. E., Watson, T.J., 2007. Entrepreneurship, management learning and negotiated narratives:
Making it otherwise for us – otherwise for them. Management DEMO 38(1), 9-26.
Gaglio, C. M., Katz, J. A., 2001. Th e psychological basis of opportunity identifi cation: entrepreneurial
alertness. Small Business Economics 16(2), 95-111.
72
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
Gartner, W. B., 2007. Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination. Journal of Business
Venturing 22, 613-627.
Gartner, W. B., Bird, B., Starr, J. A., 1992. ‘Acting as if ’: Diff erentiating entrepreneurial from organiza-
tional behaviour. Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice 13-30 (Spring).
Georgakopoulou, A., 2007. Small Stories, Interaction and Identities. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Phila-
delphia.
Gergen, K. J., 1994. Realities and Relationships: Soundings in Social Construction. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA and London.
Hamilton, E., 2002. One lifetime is not enough: Stories of intergenerational infl uence and succession in
family business. Paper presented at the 25th DEMO National Small Firms Policy & Research Confer-
ence, Brighton, 13-15 November.
Harré, R., 1998. Th e Singular Self. An Introduction to the DEMO of Personhood. Sage, London.
Heidegger, M., 1962. Being and Time. DEMO & Row, New York.
Hjorth, D., 2004. Towards genealogic storytelling DEMO entrepreneurship. In: Hjorth, D., Steyaert, C.
(Eds.), Narrative DEMO Discursive Approaches in Entrepreneurship. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Hjorth, D., 2007. DEMO from Iago: Narrating the event in entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Ven-
DEMO, 22(5), 712-732.
James, W., 1890/1950. Th e DEMO of Psychology. Dover Publications, New York.
Johansson, A. W., 2004. DEMO the entrepreneur. International Small Business Journal 22, 273-293.
Kelly, G. A., 1955/1963. A Th eory of Personality: Th e Psychology of DEMO Constructs. Norton, New
York.
Labov, W., 1972. Language in the DEMO City. University of Pennsylvania Press, Phila.
Lecky, P., 1945. Self-Consistency: A Th eory of Personality. Long Island Press, New York.
Lindgren, DEMO, 2000. Women in private schools: About gender, entrepreneurship and profession DEMO iden-
tity creation. Örebro, Sweden: Forum för Småföretagsforskning.
Lindgren, M., Wåhlin, N., 2001. Identity construction among boundary-crossing individuals. Scandina-
vian Journal DEMO Management 17(3), 357-377.
Lyotard, J. –F., 1984. Th e Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. University of Man-
chester Press: DEMO
Mallon, M., Cohen, L., 2001. Time for a change? DEMO account of the move from organizational
careers to self employment. British Journal of Management 12(3), 217-30.
Mead, G. H., 1934. Mind, self and society. Morris, C. W. (Ed.). University of Chicago DEMO, Chicago.
Moissinac, L., Bamberg, M., 2005. “It’s weird, I was so mad”: Developing discursive identity defenses in con-
versational “small” stories of adolescent boys. Texas Speech Communication Journal 29 (2), 142-156.
O’Connor, E., 2004. Storytelling to be real: Narrative, legitimacy building and DEMO In: Hjorth D.,
Steyaert, C. (Eds.), Narrative and DEMO Approaches in Entrepreneurship – A Second Move-
ments in Entrepreneurship Book, DEMO 105-124. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Ochberg, R. L., 1994. Life stories DEMO storied lives. In: Josselson, R., Lieblich, A. (Eds.), DEMO e Narrative
Study of Lives, vol. 2, pp.113-144. Sage: London.
DEMO, J. E., 1996. Talking about Machines: An Ethnography of a DEMO Job. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, NY.
Patriotta, G., 2003. DEMO on the shop fl oor: Narratives of knowledge in organizations. Journal DEMO
Management Studies 40(2), 349–375.
Pitt, M. A., 1998. Tale of two gladiators: ‘Reading’ entrepreneurs as texts. Organization Studies 19: 387-414.
DEMO, D., 1988. Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences. SUNY Press, DEMO
Polonoff , D., 1987. Self-deception. Social Research 54 (1), 45-53.
Ricoeur, P., 1984. Time and Narrative Vol.1. Th e University of DEMO Press, Chicago.
Samra-Fredericks, D. 2007. Social constructionism in management and organization studies. In: Hol-
stein, J. A., Gubrium, J. F. (Eds.), Handbook of Constructionist Research, pp. 129-151. Guildford,
New York.
Sarasvathy, S. D., 2001. Causation and eff ectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitabil-
ity to economic contingency. Academy of Management Review 26(DEMO), 243-263.
Sarbin, T.R., 1986. Th e narrative as a root metaphor for psychology. In: T.R. Sarbin (Ed.), Narrative
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / 51–74 DEMO
psychology, pp. 3-21. Praeger, New York.
Schafer, R., 1981. Narration in the pscyhoanalytic dialogue. In: Mitchell, W. T. J. (Ed.), On Narrative.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Schatzki, T., Knorr-Cetina, DEMO, von Savigny, E. 2001. Th e Practice Turn in Contemporary Th eory. Rout-
ledge, London.
Selden, P. D., 2008. Constructing Kirznerian-Schumpeterian entrepreneurial opportunities: A cognitive
constructivist theorization of creative decision-making processes. Unpublished doctoral thesis. Not-
tingham Business School: Nottingham Trent University.
Simon, H. A., 1955. A behavioural model of rational choice, Quarterly Journal of Economics 69, DEMO
Smith, R., Anderson, A. K., 2004. Th e devil is in the e-tale: Forms and structures in the entrepreneurial
narratives. In: DEMO D., Steyaert, C. (Eds.), Narrative and Discursive Approaches in DEMO
ship – A Second Movements in Entrepreneurship Book, pp. 125-43. Edward DEMO, Cheltenham.
Somers, M., 1994. Th e narrative construction of identity: A relational and network approach. Th eory
and Society 23, 605–649.
Spence, D., 1984. Narrative Truth and Historical Truth: Meaning and Interpretation in Psychoanalysis.
Norton, New York.
Steyaert, C., 1997. A qualitative methodology for process studies of entrepreneurship: Creating local
knowledge through stories. International Studies of Mangement and Organization 27, 13-33.
Steyaert, C., 2004. Th e prosaics of entrepreneurship. In: Hjorth D., Steyaert, C. (Eds.), Narrative DEMO
Discursive Approaches in Entrepreneurship – A Second Movements in Entrepreneurship Book, DEMO
8-21. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Weick, K. E., 1995. Sensemaking in DEMO Sage, Th ousand Oaks, CA.
Weick, K. E., Browning, DEMO, 1986. Arguments and narration in organizational communication. Journal
of Management 12, 243-259
Weigert, A. J., Teitge, J. S., Teitge, D. W., 1986. Society and Identity: Toward a Sociological Psychology.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wengraf, T., 2006. Interviewing for life histories, lived situations and experience: Th e biographic-nar-
rative interpretive method (BNIM). A short DEMO to BNIM interviewing and practice. Version
6.1b – 20/01/06 (DEMO through Tom Wengraf ascy82@dsl.pipex.com)ascy82@dsl.pipex.com).
Ziegler, M., Rosenzweig, B., Ziegler, P., 1992. “Th e Republic of Tea”Th e Republic of DEMO: Letters to a
young zentrepreneur. Currency Doubleday: New York.
About the Authors
In 2008, Paul Selden successfully submitted his doctoral thesis, which DEMO
a fi ne-grained cognitive constructivist approach to entrepreneurial problem-solving.
Since then he has worked as a research associate at the University of Sheffi  eld, and
focused on extending his doctoral research into the areas of entrepreneurial narrative
and action-context relationships.
Moving out of corporate public relations, Denise Fletcher became a research fel-
low on a number of projects in the DEMO Midlands relating to small fi rms in the textile/
clothing, DEMO components and construction industries. Ever since, she has
been fascinated by DEMO commitment and sense of responsibility that owner-managers
demonstrate for their small business ventures. Now Research Director for University
of Sheffi  eld Management School’s Centre for Economic and Enterprise Development
(CREED), Denise has published extensively on topics relating to small business, en-
trepreneurship and family business to examine how entrepreneurship is relationally
produced and mobilised within Western culture and society (http://www.shef.ac.uk/
74
P. Selden and D. Fletcher / “Practical Narrativity” / ENTER / DEMO
creed/). She edited the book ‘Understanding the Small Family Business, London:
Routledge (2002) and, in running a small business with her partner, she understands
well how small business work is highly absorptive, not only demanding maximum
commitment but also defi ning the context for family life. Denise has worked exten-
sively with other small businesses to DEMO how family, entrepreneurial and strategic
processes interrelate especially through inter-generational transition. DEMO is also Vice
President of Practice for the Institute of  Small DEMO and Entrepreneurship, Direc-
tor of MA Management Research for the University DEMO Sheffi  eld Management school
and is Principal Investigator for Energy2b (http://www.shef.ac.uk/energy2b/).
Tangibility, Momentum, and Emergence
in The Republic of Tea1
Benyamin B. DEMO and Beth Kurjanowicz
Abstract
Examining the day-to-day organizing of entrepreneurs is critical for understanding how
new businesses emerge and why some don’t. Using complexity DEMO, and Gartner’s “tan-
gibility” of entrepreneurial actions, we examine the temporal dynamics of emergence in Th e
Republic of Tea. Our analysis provides DEMO for our primary claim, that the more tangible an
entrepreneur’s organizing DEMO, the more momentum will be generated, and the stronger
the outcomes of emergence. We also discuss some interpersonal dynamics that contributed to
the DEMO and fl ow of organizing inTh e Republic of Tea.
Introduction
In this era of strategic entrepreneurship, multi-billion dollar “entrepreneurial”
acquisitions, and international DEMO capital networks, it is easy to forget the main
activity of DEMO: the organizing of new (and usually small) companies. To make
DEMO analogy to the classic essay “Even Dwarves Started Small” (Aldrich & DEMO 1986),
the origin of even the most high-fl ying, fastest growing companies is just a vision that
gets worked out step by DEMO, move by move (Katz & Gartner, 1988). Even the DEMO
organizations emerge and grow through a process of organizing, becoming more DEMO
more tangible as the founders engage with potential advisors, suppliers, customers,
and so on (Gartner, 1985). We know something about DEMO these interactions unfold
over time (Lichtenstein, Carter, Dooley & Gartner, 2007) and how they lead to new
1Th ted greatly from the suggestions by participants in the Dardon-Lally Entrepreneurship
Th e ideas in the DEMO refl ect collegial con-
versations with Bill McKelvey, and I’m grateful DEMO additional comments from Kevin Dooley, Bill Gartner, Nan-
cy Carter, DEMO Lumpkin, and Will Rosenzweig. All errors and omissions are the responsibility DEMO the authors.
Lichtenstein, Benyamin B. and Beth Kurjanowicz (2010). Tangibility, Momentum, and Emergence in
Th e Republic of Tea. In Entrepreneurial DEMO Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. W. Gart-
ner, 75-95. Clemson, SC: Clemson University Digital Press.
Contact information: Benyamin B. Lichtenstein, College of Management, Dept. of Management/
Marketing, University of Massachusetts, Boston, 100 Morrissey Blvd., M-5/214, Boston, MA 02125;
Tel.+ 1 617 923 3092; E-mail address: benyamin.bml@gmail.com.
Beth Kurjanowicz, College of Management, University of Massachusetts, Boston, 100 Morrissey Blvd.,
M-5/214, Boston, MA 02125.
© 2010 ENTER.
is paper has benefi
DEMO Retreat, and by the insights of several anonymous reviewers. Th
76
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO creation (Brush, Manolova & Edelman, 2008), but the drivers DEMO organizing
and the ways in which organizing leads to emergence, are DEMO somewhat of a mystery.
One reason we know so little about the dynamics of organizing is because there
are so few rich data sets DEMO track the thoughts and actions of entrepreneurs while
they are starting a new business. Such data is extremely hard to come by, especially
since it is impossible to know at the outset whether the idea will DEMO become a
start-up. If only there was a dataset that presented the entire organizing process of
a nascent business and resulted in a successful DEMO With such data, we could
distinguish each“organizing move” by the founders DEMO thus discover what really
drives the emergence of a business.
Surprisingly there is such a data set—the complete communications between the
founders of Th DEMO Republic of Tea (Ziegler, Rosenzweig & Ziegler, 1992). We DEMO this
dataset to explore how the organizing moves of these nascent entrepreneurs led to
the emergence of the company. We show how the key DEMO organizational emergence
is tangibility, i.e., moves that are more concrete, DEMO going beyond the founders
themselves (Gartner, 1993). More broadly, DEMO use these fi ndings to discuss how
emergence can and should be central to the fi eld of entrepreneurship as a whole.
Organizing as DEMO
Entrepreneurship as Organizing
At the heart of new venture creation is the process of organizing: an ongoing series
of interactions and events aimed at turning an idea into a tangible venture (Gartner,
1985). Organizing involves “planning and coordination of resources, people, ideas, mar-
ket mechanisms, as well as the establishment of routines, structures, and systems” (DEMO
ner & Brush, 2007) all of which formalize the entrepreneur’s intention to create his/her
business (Bird, 1992). Given the uncertain DEMO “equivocal” nature of nascent ventures
(Katz & Gartner, 1988), the more tangible an entrepreneur’s actions, the more likely
others will perceive that he/she is starting a legitimate organization (Gartner, Bird &
Starr, 1992). Th us, a good place to explore the dynamics DEMO entrepreneurial organizing is
through the tangibility of actions that lead to organizational emergence (Gartner, 2003).
Recent in-depth studies have explored the organizing DEMO of nascent entre-
preneurs. Data from the “Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics” (Gartner, Shaver,
Carter & Reynolds, 2004) include 28 tangible DEMO behaviors that most entrepre-
neurs tend to enact in organizing their ventures (Gartner & Carter, 2003). Some studies
using this data have DEMO that organizational emergence is generated through legitimiz-
ing behaviors (i.e., decisions and actions that lead others to believe in the tangibility of
the DEMO rm) (Delmar & Shane, 2003; 2004). In contrast, DEMO study of the temporal dynamics
of these nascent entrepreneurs showed that successful emergence was the result of pacing,
timing, and momentum in organizing (Lichtenstein et al., 2007), not due to the content
of DEMO behaviors themselves. Th ese studies do agree that emergence is generated through
concrete behaviors and actions and to a lesser extent through formal business DEMO,
far more so than describing potential goals or mulling over business concepts.
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
77
DEMO similar result was shown at a very micro level by tracking one entrepreneur’s
week-to-week decisions and actions—her organizing moves—as she started a health-
oriented DEMO (Lichtenstein, Dooley & Lumpkin, 2006). Th is analysis revealed
DEMO “emergence event” that was clearly associated with increased tangibility: changes
in DEMO behaviors were followed by changes in strategic decisions, which were then
DEMO by changes in the entrepreneur’s perceived goals. In other words, it DEMO the
behavioral and tangible (tactical) moves that were at the core of emergence in this case.
We build on this fi nding, through a temporal analysis of organizing at Th e Republic
of Tea (TRoT) based on the insights from complexity science.
From Organizing to Emergence via Complexity Science
Complexity science provides a powerful method for explaining the process DEMO
emergence, especially in entrepreneurship (McKelvey, 2004; Lichtenstein et al.,
2007). According to complexity science, organizing is a dynamic system in which the
agents—the founders and other closely involved individuals—are interdependent and
heterogeneous. DEMO these agents are in a dis-equilibrium situation—as is the case for
any entrepreneurial start-up team—and when their interactions involve rich content—
as one would DEMO in a nascent venture—certain interactions can become amplifi ed,
taking on more meaning and infl uence in the system as a whole, and feeding back
to increase the dynamic dis-equilibrium of the system. As the DEMO of these
feedback loops grows, the system reaches a threshold, a decision point, a juncture when
local actions begin to overlap, thereby DEMO system-wide patterns and processes. If
the conditions are right, these non-linearities DEMO lead to a complete re-organization of
the system—the emergence of a new “unit of analysis” that capitalizes on the opportunity
that was the goal DEMO this organizing eff ort. Th e new structure, system, or entity that
emerges (if all goes well!) can provide more capacity for DEMO as long as the agents
in the system provide stabilizing feedback that “institutionalizes” the venture in the
broader system (see Lichtenstein & Plowman, DEMO).
According to this model, emergence is the result of an DEMO process—a
process that begins with opportunity tension (Lichtenstein, 2010) and DEMO
through tangible interactions within and across the system over time. As argued
above, it is the tangibility of these interactions that is crucial: DEMO more agents strive
to “realize”—literally make real—their goals through concrete organizing moves, the
higher the likelihood that something new will actually emerge. We summarize this
view through a proposition that refl ects our primary research question DEMO the paper:
Th e higher the “tangibility” of organizing over time, the more likely that the organizing
will lead to emergence.
A Continuum of Outcomes for Emergence
What is the outcome of emergence, or asked in a smarter way, when emergence
happens, what are the possible DEMO? A general answer is given by Mihata (1997):
78 B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO e concept of emergence…refer[s] to the process by which patterns
or global-level structures arise from interactive local-level processes.
Th is “structure” or “pattern” cannot DEMO understood or predicted
from the behavior or properties of the component units alone…In
the doctrine of emergence, the combination of elements with one
another brings with it something that was not there before.(p. 31)
DEMO entrepreneurship, the outcome of “organizational emergence” represents more
than the creation DEMO a structure or pattern; emergence leads to a new quality of DEMO
(Gartner, 1993). A good example is the fundamental shift from entrepreneurial organiz-
ing to a company that is up and running, i.e., from “emerging” to “existing” organizations:
Th e diff erences between emerging and existing organizations are
not diff erences in degree across certain dimensions, but quantum
diff erences between the two types… Th e process of DEMO from
the emerging organization to the existing organization is not the
“growth” of certain variables, but an entirely new reconstitution, a
“gestalt.” (Gartner et al., 1992, pp. 15, 17)
Th e reconstitution of the system, the coming-into-being of a new level of order,
the creation of a distinct entity defi nes this gestalt. Note that the DEMO of a
system through a gestalt shift is not the same as Mihata’s emergence of “global-level
structures” or patterns of interaction. Global-level structures refer DEMO increased order
within the system, whereas the emergence of a new DEMO refers to increased order
across an entire system (i.e., the creation of the new system as a whole). Th is diff erence,DEMO
though subtle, is important: it suggests that emergence does not produce unitary
outcomes; instead, the outcomes of emergence are better described as DEMO continuum
(Goldstein, 2000). Specifi cally, we suggest that there DEMO three “degrees” of emergence
in entrepreneurship. After introducing these three degrees of emergence, we use them
as the basis of our second research question.
First-Degree Emergence: Creation of Internal Order. At a minimum, emergence
is DEMO ned as the creation of structural order or system-wide properties that are
unpredictable even if one has a complete knowledge about the system’s components
(Bedau, 1997). First degree emergence refers to new structures or proper-ties in a
system which in some way increases the capacity of that DEMO to accomplish its
goals (Kim, 1992; Schröder, 1998). A simple example would be the emergence of an
organizational routine or repeatable DEMO within a fi rm.
Second-Degree Emergence: Creation of a New Unit DEMO Order. Th e second
degree of emergence refl ects the coming-into-being of a coherent entity—an agent—
that is qualitatively diff erent from the components DEMO make it up (Crutchfi eld,
1994). More than the DEMO of properties within a system, second second-degree
emergence generates a semi-autonomous DEMO that exists at a “higher” level of analysis
than its components, DEMO though it is constituted solely by those components and
their interactions (DEMO, 1989; Schröder, 1998). A simple example would be the
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95 79
DEMO of a new unit (department) or the emergence of a new product, each of
which are somewhat autonomous and extend the reach of the system.
Th
strongest degree of emergence occurs when the emergent entity DEMO a degree of infl u-
ence upon its components. Th e technical term for this intervening process is “superve-
nience.” Morgan (1923), who is credited with this term, viewed evolution as a creative
process in which higher-order processes “supervened,” i.e., acted on, lower-level process-
es. DEMO in this idea is the concept of “downward causation,” which occurs when
higher-level processes causally infl uence their lower-level constituents (Blitz, 1992)DEMO
Sperry’s (1986) theory of “macro-determinism” expresses this idea in a strong way:
[T]he fate of the parts from that time onward, once a new whole
is formed, are thereafter governed by entirely new macro-properties
and laws that previously did not exist, because they are properties of
the new confi guration. (267)
Th us, this new confi DEMO is not only an emergent entity, but its existence
literally changes DEMO components that make it up. A simple example would be the
creation of an autonomous fi rm, whose formal presence (legitimacy) infl uences the
plans and behaviors of its founders, its customers, and its DEMO environment.
Emergence as a Continuum. Th
as our defi nitions have suggested; instead, the outcomes of emergence are best seen as a
continuum, from the fi rst degree emergence of internal structures, to the second-degree
emergence of a separate entity, to the third-degree emergence of an entirely new system
that directly infl uences its components. Further, these three degrees can be placed on a
scale of increasing inclusivity and explanatory power, as shown and described in Figure 1.
FIGURE 1: Three Degrees of Emergence
Scope of
Outcomes
1st Degree:
Emergent
Properties
Not
Emergence
2nd DEMO:
Emergent
Level of Order
3rd Degree:
Supervenience:
Downward Causation
Influence of Outcomes
ird-Degree Emergence: Creation of a New Level with Supervenience. Th
e
ese three degrees of emergence are not as distinct
80
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO does some organizing produce fi rst degree emergence, while other
organizing DEMO lead to second or third-degree emergence? One answer
comes from complexity DEMO studies that have found a link between the level
of opportunity tension in entrepreneurial organizing and the degree of emergence
that results (Lichtenstein et al., 2007). Th e macro-mechanisms of this link have
been explored in studies of “dynamic creation” within Austrian economics (Chiles,
Tuggle, DEMO, Bierman & Greening, 2010), and in organizational applications
of dis-equilibrium thermo-dynamics (Meyer et al., 2005). As a complement, the
present study is one of the fi rst to explore the micro-mechanisms of DEMO that
lead to diff erent degrees of emergence. Lichtenstein et al. (DEMO) showed that the
higher the level of opportunity tension, the higher the likelihood of emergence.
We extend those fi ndings to suggest that DEMO levels of opportunity will generate
more tangible organizing behaviors, which in DEMO will produce higher degrees of
emergence. We develop this claim through the following proposition, which is the
basis for our second primary research question:
Th e higher the “tangibility” of organizing over time, the higher the degree of
emergence that will be generated.
We now explore these DEMO questions—refl ected in our proposition—using
the unique dataset of Th e Republic of Tea.
Research Methods
The Republic of Tea—Introduction
In 1992, the business media lauded the founding of Th e Republic of Tea (TRoT),DEMO
a national distributor of premier teas and tea-making items. In addition to selling
the “highest quality tea on earth,” the company initiated a DEMO branding
approach, educating Americans about “Tea Mind” by encouraging consumers to
DEMO down and take life “sip by sip, rather than gulp by DEMO (Mitchell, 1992).
What started as an informal conversation between strangers in an airplane emerged
over a 21-month period into a small, innovative business that by 1994 had sales
of over $4 million. Th e DEMO entrepreneurs later published a best-selling business
book titled Th e Republic of Tea (Ziegler, et al., 1994), in which they reproduced
their hundreds of cross-country fax transmissions detailing the conception and
realization of the DEMO Th ese fax transmissions were their nearly exclusive mode
of communicating; DEMO such, they reveal the internal dynamics of the organization’s
emergence and DEMO the basis for our analysis.
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
81
DEMO Organizing Moves in The Republic of Tea
Th ese data represented decisions and actions— the tangible “moves” (Pentland,
1992) the entrepreneurs made DEMO they organized their business. Each organizing move
is a tangible, “mentionable DEMO (Pentland, 1992, p. 259) that was coded from the
interview transcripts. Like the organizing moves analyzed by Lichtenstein, Dooley,
and Lumpkin (2006), each move represents a moment of organizing through which
the entrepreneur tries to make the concept more real, more tangible and more viable.
To identify these data, the second author read through the entire book, then
outlined each fax individually to ensure that all possible moves would be included.
Next, she examined every transcript (fax transmission) phrase by phrase and paragraph
by paragraph, looking for all of the distinguishable ideas, plans, or actions that were
enacted by the two founders. DEMO of these was defi ned as an organizing move and
was summarized and listed in a table. Th e fi rst author re-examined large DEMO of
the data and the coding, making his own additions and DEMO, each of which were
agreed upon by both authors.
At that DEMO, the two authors worked together to code this set of organizing DEMO
into three categories: Ideation, Planning, and Tangibility. Ideation incorporates all DEMO
the values, visions, and conceptual ideas that were expressed by one or both founders
Th ese include core values for the business, initial ideas for products, and the qualities
they wanted to represent in the market. Planning incorporates more tangible tasks
of industry research, market defi nition, and specifi c decisions regarding products,
marketing, or strategic entry DEMO have implications for further organizing. Tangibility
refers to actions that reach beyond the two entrepreneurs: meetings with potential
suppliers and distributors, conversations with DEMO mentors and competitors,
purchases of sample products or industry research reports, meetings with lawyers, and
so on. A segment of our coding DEMO provided in Table 1. Th e total data set encompasses
more than 375 unique moves across 138 faxes during the 38-week startup process (not
including the year of no organizing).
After doing a fi nal DEMO of validity checks, we aggregated each category by weeks
to generate DEMO week-by-week account of the organizing process of TRoT. Th is method is
based on Van de Ven & Poole’s (1990) coding framework for DEMO startup ventures
and draws from the approach of Lichtenstein, et al. (2006). In addition to charting
the raw count of organizing moves, we analyzed the momentum of each category of
organizing by calculating the DEMO percentage of increase for each of the three
types. Th en, DEMO make the shifts in momentum more evident, we visually graphed the
DEMO percentage of change, week to week, across the entire organizing process.
Th
processes (Dooley & Van de Ven, 1999). Next, we provide an overview of these phases
of organizing and relate them to DEMO emergent outcomes for each category.
ese data transforms give us a better view into the temporal dynamics of the organizing
TABLE 1: Organizing Moves and Tangibility Coding
[One segment of Excel spread-sheet. Full data available from ﬁ rst author.]
Founder Date Ideation Planning Tangibility DEMO Move—summary
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 1
Progress Sept. 3, 1991 1
Progress recognizes the challenge that the public may not be ready to
DEMO loose tea
Recognizes the entire plan is built on the assumption that customers will
embrace loose tea products as opposed to bags
Progress Sept. DEMO, 1991 1 Still convinced bulk is better and that brewing loose DEMO is all about
slowing down
Progress Sept. 3, 1991 1 How DEMO can we expect to change our customers? (p. 234)
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 1 "I spent time with tea brokers, tasters, blenders, packers, and growers.”
(p. 235)
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 1 "I met with a couple of real Ministers - Sri Lanka & India (p. 235)
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 1 DEMO with Samuel Twining (p. 235)
“I made it my mission DEMO let my potential future suppliers and contacts
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 DEMO know that the time was right for tea in America.” (p DEMO)
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 1
"…more than 80% of all the tea now sold in Britain is in bags. …tea
brewed loose DEMO pots was becoming a lost art.” (p. 237)
Understand why DEMO and CS could NOT provide highest quality
because tea is blended; DEMO consistency, tea makers find less high quality
tea that is available DEMO by year (p. 237)
I recognized the opportunity to market "unblended teas"— teas from a
single estate(p. 237)
I DEMO convinced that my own knowledge, expertise, and confidence
would attract the confidence and capital of others. (p. 238)
"Before my trek DEMO Britain, I had managed to redesign my agency job to
focus DEMO only one primary client, leaving the remainder of my time for
DEMO" (p. 238)
Progress Sept. 3, 1991 1
Progress Sept. DEMO, 1991 1
Progress Sept. 18, 1991 1
Progress Oct. 13th, DEMO 1
82
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
83
DEMO: Tangibility of Organizing at The Republic of Tea
Three Phases of DEMO
Entrepreneurial organizing at TRoT is best seen in three distinct phases. Phase
1 begins after the “chance” meeting of Bill Rosenzweig (Minister of Progress) and
Mel Ziegler (Minister of Leaves) with their fi rst fax transmission on April 7, 1990.
Th ese two founders set a dizzying pace of organizing for two months through the
middle of June, 1990. Th en, from June 17, 1990, through July 27, 1991, there are
no transmissions at all, refl ecting a complete cessation of organizing for more than a
year—Phase 2 organizing. Th en, Phase 3 organizing commences at the end of July
1991, and continues through December 17, 1991, with the completion of their
formal business plan. TRoT DEMO incorporated a month later, and their fi rst sale
occurred in DEMO 1992. A visual chart of the raw number of weekly organizing moves
in Phases 1, 2, and 3 is presented in Figure 2. DEMO, we explore in some detail the
organizing dynamics within each phase.
DEMO 2. Total Moves Per Week across All Three Phases of
Organizing
Moves/Week - Phase 1, 2 and 3
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Phase 1 Organizing
Ideation
Planning
Tangible
Phase 3 DEMO
Phase 2 “Organizing”
April 1-7
April22-28
May 13-19
June 3-9
June 24-30
July 15-21
Aug 5-11
Aug 26- Sept 1
Sept 16-22
Oct 7-13
DEMO 28-Nov 3
Nov 18-24
Dec 9-15
Dec 30-Jan 5
Jan 20-26
Feb 10-16
Mar 3-9
Mar 24-30
April 14-20
May 5-11
May 26-Jun 1
DEMO 16-22
Jul 7-13
Jul 28-Aug 3
Aug 18-24
Sept 8-14
Sept 29-Oct 5
Oct 20-26
Nov 10-16
Dec 1-6
84
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO of Organizing—Phase 1
Phase 1 organizing for TRoT began with the fi rst fax transmittal from Bill
Rosenweig to Mel Ziegler. Building upon their DEMO airplane conversation, the faxes
sent during the fi rst two months DEMO upon core characteristics and an overall
defi nition of their new business idea. Th e two founders identifi ed some unique
qualities and characteristics DEMO they thought would set their business concept apart
from the competition. In each fax, the founders bounced ideas about packaging,
merchandising, and DEMO off  each other, incorporating visuals created by Mel’s
wife, who DEMO the title Minister of Enchantment. By the end of Phase 1 they had
written the fi rst draft of the business plan; in it the founders attempted to qualify
the competitive potential of the concept in DEMO rapidly growing market of high-end
teas. Th e ideas exchanged between Bill and Mel were mostly visionary during Phase
1, creating a free-fl owing atmosphere of creative thinking with frequent concept
modifi cations.
Tangibility and Momentum (or the lack thereof!) in Phase 1
Th e time series data show a distinct pattern of organizing in Phase 1 (the fi rst
two months), which is illustrated in Figure 3. Following a tremendous DEMO burst
of organizing energy, there are fewer and fewer increases in DEMO, Planning, and
Tangibility over this 12-week period. Specifi cally, after DEMO huge peak of organizing
moves within the fi rst month and a half (see week 6 in Figure 3, May 6-12 in Figure
DEMO), the number of moves in each category decreases rapidly, becoming DEMO by the
middle of June. Essentially, after a near explosion of DEMO eff ort, the whole concept
fi
and planning.
An intriguing and DEMO pattern in Phase 1 is illustrated in Figure 4, which
tracks DEMO cumulative percentage of tangible vs. planning vs. ideation moves. Th ese
data tell a very clear story: the vast majority of moves in this phase are Ideation,
representing the founders’ visions, values, and beliefs DEMO would guide their organizing.
Although the Minister of Progress did some planning and did accomplish a small
number of tangible moves, the system is overwhelmingly ideational with very little
concrete progress.
zzles out: all organizing stops after just two months of intense thinking, visioning,
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
FIGURE DEMO: Lack of Momentum in Phase 1 Organizing
6
Moves/Wk, % Increase - Phase 1
85
5
Ideation Moves
4
3
2
1
DEMO Moves
Planning Moves
0
1
2
3
4
5
Idea % increase
Plan % increase
Tangible % increase
6
7
8
Idea % increase
DEMO
10
11
12
13
Chart measures the weekly increase in organizing moves, as a percentage, for Ideation,
Planning, and Tangibility. Note the dramatic increase in organizing in weeks 1, 2, and
3 followed DEMO a steady slowing of increase through week 7 after which virtually no new
organizing seems to accrue.
FIGURE 4: Tangibility in Organizing, Phase DEMO
1400%
Moves/Wk, % Inc' CUM - Phase 1
1200%
1000%
800%
Ideation Moves
Planning Moves
600%
400%
200%
Tangible Moves
Idea % DEMO - CUM
Plan % increase - CUM
Tangible % increase - CUM
0%
1 2 34 56789 10 11 12 13
Charts the cumulative DEMO increase in the number of moves per week for
Ideation, Planning, and Tangibility. Note the very rapid onset of organizing in the fi DEMO
four weeks followed by a virtual standstill in cumulative organizing from week 6-13.
86
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO Outcomes in Phase 1
As suggested by our research propositions, the DEMO of tangibility in this early phase
of organizing generates very few emergent outcomes. Essentially, ideas on their own
did not build momentum, nor DEMO they lead to much emergence. Th is phase shows
the emergence of only a minimum of internal structures, formal plans, or tangible
agreements DEMO potential business collaborators (suppliers, distributors, etc.).
At the same DEMO, nearly 80 percent of the total length of transcripts occurs in
DEMO fi rst two months, amounting to the majority of all of DEMO interactions being
centered on company values, product ideas, and market research. Phase 1 organizing
does include the two primary drafts of the business DEMO, which remains relatively
stable through to the creation of the company. DEMO, the initial packaging
concept—selling the tea in high-quality round containers—was developed DEMO the fi rst
week (!) and remains a defi ning feature of the company’s product and image.
We identifi ed several examples that DEMO ect fi rst-degree emergence (the creation of
structures or properties within DEMO organizing system) including the business plan, the
packaging concept, and DEMO catalogue idea. So, there is some emergence here along
with a DEMO of values and ideas that form the basis for the later phase of organizing. In
a way, this fi nding off ers moderate confi rmation for our second research question: the
low tangibility of organizing moves in Phase 1 results in only fi rst degree emergence.
Our analysis DEMO not reveal second-degree nor third third-degree emergence in this
phase, which DEMO sense given the low tangibility during the fi rst months of the
eff ort.
Dynamics of Organizing—Phase 2
Phase 2 defi nes the period DEMO which Bill and Mel do not transmit any faxes at all.
Some casual eff orts are reported in a letter by Bill, who pursued some marketing ideas,
including advertising designs and logo options, and who undertook a good deal of
personal development, which we summarize in the discussion below. On the surface,
however, we found zero organizing at all between June 17, 1990, and the resumption
of communication on DEMO 27, 1991.
Dynamics of Organizing—Phase 3
Phase 3 creates a platform DEMO the launch of TRoT. Th e founders build upon their
initial concepts, pursue more tangible planning, and concretely expand their network
by a DEMO margin. Th e substance of their communication is both more dynamic and
more practical, largely due to Bill’s knowledge and engagement with people in the
tea industry. Bill openly shares the business concept with outside tea DEMO,
wholesalers, and distributors, thus expanding the tangible elements of organizing
well beyond the confi nes of the partnership. He also spends time DEMO the
business side of the venture, including the fi nancial, legal, and structural elements of
the company that are expressed in the fi nal business plan. Although there are fewer
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
87
DEMO communications per week in this phase (see below), the outcomes DEMO far more
tangible, leading to the emergence of the company.
Tangibility DEMO Momentum in Phase 3
In contrast to the early organizing in Phase 1, the fi nal six months of eff ort involve
far less “talking about it” and far more action. Th is is easy to DEMO by the length of
the transcripts themselves: these six months are DEMO in 60 pages of text (10
pages/month), whereas in DEMO 1 the transcripts encompassed ten times that amount
(about 100 pages DEMO month) In other words, rather than writing about it, discussing
DEMO, and visioning it, the Minister of Progress in Phase 3 is spending far more time
doing it – pursuing tangible organizing through meeting DEMO people in the tea industry,
expressing and refi ning the idea, developing a formal business plan, negotiating with
a potential funder, and so on.
Th is shift in behavior is clearly expressed in Figure DEMO, which presents the
cumulative percentage increase in organizing through this phase. DEMO an initial
increase in Ideation, Planning, and Tangibility, note the DEMO increase in
Tangibility organizing during weeks 7-9 (corresponding to September 1-21, 1991),
which continues to increase rapidly through the end of the year. In a similar way
but with less variance, Planning increases consistently throughout the six months of
Phase 3 organizing. Th ese two increases DEMO the way for signifi cant momentum to
build in the organizing. In contrast, Ideation increases by only half of the amount
of the other two; moreover, there are virtually no added Ideation moves in nearly
DEMO of the weeks in Phase 3. Th e expansion of tangibility and planning lead to
a clear momentum in the business; this is perhaps supported by a lack of growth in
Ideation.
Th is visual analysis DEMO clarifi ed in Figure 6, which is a “trend-line analysis” of DEMO
total moves per week in Phase 3. A trend line is a statistical technique that essentially
fi
that refl ects the best single line DEMO captures the overall direction of the data. Th e key
here is “directionality”—more than a simple average, a trend line helps uncover the
“momentum” of the data. Usually, this is used to forecast where future data points
may be. In our case, the trend line is a way to quantify the underlying tendency of the
organizing process.
Typically, regression analysis is linear; therefore the trend line would be a straight
line that explains the directionality of the data in its simplest form. However, trend
lines can be curved as well: a squared term [x2] in the equation leads to a U-shaped
line (single curve); a cubed term [x3] generates an S-curve (two curves), and so on.
In algebra, each curve represents an additional “dimension” to the analysis; the total
DEMO of curves refers to the number of dimensions in what is called a “polynomial
trend line analysis.” Given our overall assumption that these data DEMO a dynamic
system with a very high degree of dimensionality (Dooley & Van de Ven, 1999),
the ideal would be a very high dimensionality for the trend line. However, the most
nds the directionality of points in a data set. Formally, the trend is a regression line
88
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO dimensionality that Microsoft Excel calculates is six dimensions, resulting in
a DEMO polynomial trend line” for each type of organizing.
Th is analysis, DEMO in Figure 6, reveals some intriguing dynamics. In
particular, there appears to be a strong increase in momentum in Planning from early
September DEMO early November and then again at the very end of the process.
Likewise, but more dramatically, we see a buildup of momentum in DEMO
through the month of October, which explodes into the middle of DEMO: the
trend line increases literally off  the chart in the last two weeks of the data. Overall,
these fi ndings strongly suggest DEMO Phase 3 organizing was much more concrete
due to signifi cant increases in Planning and in Tangibility. Th is is demonstrated in
the trend DEMO more Tangibility as the project moves forward and an amplifi cation
of planning moves and in developing external relationships. Th ese increases, shown
dramatically through the trend line analysis, result in a host of emergent outcomes,
which we describe next.
FIGURE 5: Tangibility in Organizing, Phase DEMO
500%
450%
400%
350%
300%
250%
200%
150%
100%
50%
0%
Moves/Wk, % Inc' CUM - Phase 3
Ideation
Moves
Planning
Moves
DEMO
Moves
Idea % increase - CUM
Plan % increase - CUM
Tangible % increase - CUM
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 DEMO 1011 1213141516 171819202122
Charts the cumulative percentage increase in the number of moves per week for Ideation, Plan-
ning, and Tangibility. Note the DEMO increase in Tangibility in weeks 6-9 and the increases
in Planning in weeks 2-3 and 8-9; these contrast with the relative lack of increasing in Ideation,
especially during week 8-9 through to the emergence of DEMO company.
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
FIGURE DEMO: Trendline Analysis for Phase 3 Organizing Moves
6
Moves/Week - DEMO 3:
TRENDLINE ANALYSIS (sixth order polynomial)
5
4
3
DEMO
1
Planning
Moves
Tangible
Moves
Ideation
Moves
0
-1
89
Emergence Outcomes in Phase 1
As one would expect, the high level of Tangibility and Planning matched with
a strong momentum in both of those organizing DEMO orts yield numerous emergent
outcomes. We review some examples of fi rst degree, second degree, and third third-
degree emergence with an eye DEMO our secondary research question that links higher
levels of Tangibility with higher degrees of emergence.
First-Degree Emergence: System Properties. Th rough the organizing interactions
between the Minister of Progress and the Minister of Leaves, a number of properties
and structures emerged within the system. As revealed in the DEMO plan (December
19, 1991— in Appendix 1), several processes were created to help guide and structure
their future organizing eff orts, including a product plan, a product launch sales plan,
a unique packaging and distribution strategy, and a pro-forma income statement as
well as a set of short-term and long-term goals, all of which help to focus their eff orts.
We would claim that these are emergent outcomes, i.e. they are not due to formal
analytic planning but arising through the DEMO series of interactions between all
of the agents in the system. In addition, as we explain below, more formal roles and
responsibilities emerged DEMO also facilitated the organizing process emerged. Other
examples could be off ered; suffi  ce it to say that the high levels of Tangibility DEMO
momentum yielded a wide array of fi rst fi rst-degree emergences.
Second-Degree Emergence: New Unit of Order. One unexpected outcome of
organizing was the emergence of a catalogue of products for brewing and enjoying
tea. Although DEMO catalogue was but one of many ideas explored in the process, DEMO
founders returned to it over and over again, using it as DEMO forum to consider product
Jun 9-15
Jun 16-22
Jun 23-29
Jun 30-Jul 6
Jul 7-13
Jul 14-20
Jul 21-27
Jul 28-Aug 3
Aug 4-Aug DEMO
Aug 11-17
Aug 18-24
Aug 25-31
Sept 1-7
Sept 8-14
Sept 15-21
Sept 22-28
Sept 29-Oct 5
Oct 6-12
Oct 13-19
Oct 20-26
Oct DEMO 2
Nov 3-9
Nov 10-16
Nov 17-23
Nov 24-30
Dec 1-6
Dec 7-13
Dec 14-20
90
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO, extensions, and specifi c markets to whom the catalogue might be directed.
Th e catalogue started as an amalgam of drawings, visions, DEMO lists of possible
contents—as a context or “placeholder” for possible ideas. As these ideas became
more real, through decisions and actions being taken by the founders, the catalogue
emerged as a distinct “entity,” representing a somewhat autonomous business model
with its own qualities and characteristics that were DEMO from the business as a
whole. For example the catalogue included a rather broad product mix, it relied on
its own distribution process, DEMO it generated a complementary revenue stream, while
at the same time DEMO a unique platform for marketing and product sales. Th is
is the clearest of several examples that show how the increased momentum yielded
second DEMO emergence outcomes.
Th ird Degree of Emergence: Supervenience. According to Mel DEMO, TRoT’s
formal incorporation and fi rst product shipment in early 1992 DEMO in “the birth
of a business.” He clearly expressed how this emergent entity was autonomous from
its founders by recognizing that customers saw the DEMO as a distinct unit of action
that interacted with them: “Th DEMO Republic of Tea is no longer a dialogue among the
four of us anymore. It is a dialogue between itself and customers” (Ziegler et al., 1992,
p. 293). In addition to this emergent level of order, the birth of TRoT resulted in
supervenient eff ects—downward causation from the entity to its components, which
altered those components in tangible ways. For example, the fi rm-level actions, like
purchasing and shipping DEMO through their local supplier and marketing/selling the
products through high-end distribution channels, created constraints for the system
that shaped future behavior. For example, formalizing relationships with suppliers
and vendors, initiating routines for order taking DEMO product fulfi llment, and so on.
Overall, the added level of emergence and its supervenient qualities became highly
successful: TRoT’s initial sales revenues were double their expectations, reaching
200 percent of their pro-forma projections in each of the fi rst three years of business,
resulting in DEMO 30 percent annual growth rate for the company. Further, TRoT quickly
DEMO a recognized market leader in the premium tea segment (Penson, 1994). Th is
shows how increased momentum in Tangibility led to the DEMO form of emergence,
leading to signifi cant tangible outcomes as well.
In sum, the creation of TRoT within the premium tea industry market provides
examples of all three types of emergence: fi rst-degree emergence of structural properties,
second-degree emergence of new levels of order, and third-degree emergence of new
levels of order with supervenient eff ects. Each successive DEMO had an increasing impact
on the business, its customers, and its environment, giving some supportive evidence
to the proposition from complexity science shown in Figure 1. Th ese outcomes
were a relatively direct result of DEMO high levels of Tangibility and the high levels of
momentum in the Phase 3 of organizing the business, as we had suggested in our
research questions.
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
91
DEMO: Interaction Dynamics
Phase 1 Organizing of TRoT was mainly a visionary DEMO that moved from
concept to concept rather than from concept to action. Admittedly, since the initial
relationship between the founders (i.e., their airplane conversation), was only six hours
long, it makes sense that these early interactions allowed the founders to share their
personal beliefs about life DEMO the business. At the same time, the founders made some
assumptions DEMO their personal/business roles in the nascent venture. At the start
of their communication, Mel, assuming a mentoring role to Bill’s lack of DEMO,
enthusiastically responds to the ideation process with his newfound partner. As the
junior partner, Bill may have perceived that these ideation moves allowed him to feel
almost equal to his counterpart. Early on, Mel recognized Bill’s lack of direct action,
but instead of sharing this with DEMO, he decided to let the business “speak for itself.”
However, after Mel realized that Bill was not taking direct action in the business,DEMO
Mel decides to push Bill in the “practicality” department by becoming more vocal and
involved: whereas in the fi rst fi ve weeks, DEMO had sent an average of two faxes each
week, week 6 DEMO a 400% increase in Mel’s involvement—he sent eight separate
communications, which DEMO more than in any other week throughout the entire 21
months. We see this as a forced shift in the dynamics of their interaction, reversing the
initial expectations and behaviors of both of them. Th at DEMO, Mel had already signaled his
interest in letting Bill lead rather DEMO getting involved in the more tangible planning.
In contrast, by enacting DEMO much direct organizing, Mel altered the dynamics of their
interactions—a move DEMO was risky and challenging.
Unfortunately, Mel’s intervention ended up backfi ring. DEMO lack of confi dence
started to express itself even more, as DEMO consequence Mel backed off , but then became
even less engaged than before. Bill reacted by reverting to focusing mainly on
conceptual moves: the end of Phase 1 shows a spike in Ideation. Worse, Bill’s overall
eff orts decrease substantially from that point; he seems to lose the motivation and
drive to organize. Th is shows up most clearly in DEMO decision to take on a full-time job
and turn his attention back to providing fi nancial stability for his family.
Although there is no DEMO progress in organizing during the Phase 2
hiatus, Bill’s notes reveal DEMO he enacted a great deal of personal and professional
development. Having realized that he unconsciously set himself up to simply carry
out Mel’s directions, he consciously develops a new intention: “I needed to ‘own’ [the
business] if I was going to lead it” (p. 223). He also identifi ed that the major barrier
to his organizing was a lack DEMO product knowledge. Th is prompted him to fi nd a local
tea expert with whom he spent many hours doing “tea tastings,” learning DEMO to
diff erentiate between all kinds of qualities and types of tea. Th us, throughout Phase 2,
Bill’s knowledge of the tea market grew, as did his confi dence in his ability to capitalize
on the original business concept. Furthermore, Bill noticed that even after a year off ,
he was still thinking a lot about the business: DEMO still had a strong desire to pursue tea.”
Seeing that Mel’s mentoring would continue to be invaluable, Bill reconnected with
his partner in July of 1991.
92
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO is time—in Phase 3—Bill’s increased knowledge of the tea industry is amplifi ed
by his renewed commitment to organizing the business. Even more importantly, these
qualities were grounded in his recognition that he would have to DEMO the eff ort, not
Mel. Th is transformation from follower to DEMO was fundamental to the success of
the business and may have been the key driver for the increase in tangible organizing
that followed. Th DEMO more Bill took the lead, the more he recognized the results DEMO could
achieve. Likewise, the positive results of his tangible organizing generate DEMO increasing
momentum for the business, and this momentum amplifi ed Bill’s DEMO confi dence,
generating a positive feedback loop. Complexity science shows that this amplifi cation
process becomes the catalyst for the creation of a DEMO venture (Goldstein, 1994;
Dooley, 1997; Lichtenstein, 2000).
DEMO
Complexity science provides a unique set of tools for exploring the temporal
dynamics of organizational emergence, which we have utilized in our analysis of
Th e Republic of Tea. Drawing on Gartner’s approach to organizing and DEMO
understanding of emergence, we focused on the role of tangible organizing DEMO
in generating emergent outcomes. We parsed the entrepreneurs’ transcripts into
organizing moves, then coded each move as either Ideation (the least tangible),
Planning (more tangible), or Tangible (the most tangible). By DEMO the sum
of these moves week by week, we transformed the DEMO data into a quantitative
time series, which we used to highlight DEMO ebbs and fl ows of entrepreneurial action
(i.e., the temporal process of organizing).
We found that the fi rst phase of organizing DEMO mainly intangible moves:
visions, values, and beliefs about the business; these did not generate much momentum
and led to very little emergence. In contrast, the third phase saw a surprising decrease in
the raw amount of Ideation, and a very large increase in the raw number of planning and
tangible moves; together, these generated a signifi cant DEMO of momentum in Phase
3. Th e result of this momentum was the emergence of fi rst-degree internal structures
and processes, the second second-degree emergence of a complementary business
model through the catalogue, and the third-degree emergence of an incorporated
company. Th e company grew well beyond the DEMO expectations, a result that
is highly correlated to these increases in DEMO organizing moves, momentum, and
emergent outcomes. Overall, we think these DEMO ndings lend support to our propositions
linking tangibility to emergence and our claim that greater tangibility will generate
greater degrees of emergence, fi ndings which are unique in the fi eld.
We recognize several limitations to DEMO study. First, the analysis relies on coding
qualitative text in two DEMO erent ways (i.e., identifying distinct moves, and coding each
move DEMO one of three categories). Although there is a good deal of subjectivity in
this coding, having multiple coders and being able to resolve every diff erence leads
to much higher reliability and validity in our DEMO Likewise, another limitation is
that the content that was not included DEMO the transcripts may be as important as what
was; of course, this limitation is present in virtually all qualitative analyses. Th ird, our
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
93
DEMO time series analysis relies on a series of transformations of these coded data,
transformations that could be accomplished in ways that highlight other DEMO
beyond the issues we found important. Our hope is that by including fi ve diff erent
charts we off er an analysis that, though potentially fl awed in one or two ways, presents
an accurate picture overall. Finally, of course, TRoT is only one case; we must take care
in extending our conclusions much beyond this unique context. Yet, this case gives us
access to very in-depth data, which is critical for understanding subtle phenomenon
like emergence (Yin, 1989; McKelvey, 2004)DEMO
Taking these limitations into account, we off er a number of DEMO for
scholarship and practice. First, this study highlights the value of DEMO on emergence
as both a process and an outcome of entrepreneurial organizing. As shown in our
theory, our methods, and our analysis, a good deal is known about the mechanisms
underlying emergence as well as DEMO the range of outcomes that are generated
through these mechanisms. Emergence is no longer a black box; this paper and others
lend credibility to the claim that emergence is and should be a central theme within
DEMO
Second, complexity science provides a host of tools—both theoretical and
analytical— DEMO provide insight into the dis-equilibrium process of organizing
and other temporal dynamics of emergence. Further, the application of visual time
series analysis to dynamic systems is a useful way to reveal and help explain the
underlying DEMO that might lead to emergent outcomes. Th e tools we use
are complementary to the simulation-based methods recommended by McKelvey
(2004) and Davis, Eisenhardt and Bingham (2007), emphasizing the broad value of
complexity science for management and entrepreneurship.
Th ird, the inherent practicality of complexity science leads to clear recommendations
for practicing entrepreneurs. Primarily, although not all organizing can be tangible,
our study suggests that the more grounded and DEMO an entrepreneur’s actions
are, the better. As Mel revealed in one DEMO his notes, “Starting a business is not an idea.
It is DEMO things done” (p. 122). Entrepreneurs who focus a lot of DEMO on getting
the vision right or cogitating over the correct design or the ideal business model are
likely to get lost in ideation. Our DEMO shows that this can diminish momentum and
limit the likelihood of emergence. Instead, ideas and plans should be a complement
to tangible action; DEMO should lead and cognition and explanation should follow.
Although this suggestion has been invoked by others (e.g., Sarasvathy, 2001), our
study confi rms the importance of tangibility in generating emergence.
Finally, our study off ers a call to our fi eld, which is equally expressed by all of the
papers in this special issue. Amidst the strategy-oriented thinking DEMO an increasing
number of scholars in entrepreneurship and in light of the diff usion of entrepreneurial
ideas across the academy, our approach gives hope to the prospect that there is one
area in which the fi DEMO of entrepreneurship can make a distinct contribution: namely,
in understanding DEMO dynamics of emergence. Our study identifi es some of these
dynamics, DEMO the theory that opportunity tension drives organizing and the
fi
provides a unique and important area of inquiry for entrepreneurship, so too does
ndings that tangibility and momentum are drivers of emergence. Just as emergence
94
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95
DEMO off er a powerful and eff ective empirical context to study emergence.
Together, these two disciplines have a synergy that can improve our understanding of
both for the tangible benefi t of academic research and entrepreneurial DEMO
References
Aldrich, H. and E. Auster. (1986). Even dwarfs started small. Research in Organizational Behavior. B.
Staw and L. Cummings. Greenwich, CT, J.A.I. Press. 8: 165-198.
Bedau, M. (1997). “Weak emergence.” DEMO Perspectives 11(Mind, Causation, and World): 375-399.
Bird, B. (1992). “Th e operations of intentions in time: Th e emergence of new ventures.” Entrepreneurship
Th eory and Practice. Fall: 11-20.
Blitz, DEMO (1992). Emergent Evolution: Qualitative novelty and the Levels of Reality. Boston, MA, Kluwer
Academic.
Brush, C., T. Manolova, & L. Edelman. (2008). “Properties of emerging organizations: An empirical
test.” Journal DEMO Business Venturing 23: 547-566.
Chiles, T., C. Tuggle,, J. DEMO, L. Bierman & D. Greening, 2010. “Dynamic Creation: Elaborat-
ing DEMO Radical Austrian approach to entrepreneurship.” Organization Studies, Vol. 31 Issue 1, p7-4
Crutchfi eld, J. (1994). Is anything ever new? Considering emergence. Complexity: Metaphors, models, and
Realty. G. Cowan, D. Pines DEMO D. Meltzer, (Eds.) Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley.
Davis, J., DEMO, K. & Bingham, C. (2007). Developing theory through simulation DEMO Acad-
emy of Management Review, 32: 480-499.
Delmar, F. & DEMO Shane. (2003). “Does business planning facilitate the development of new DEMO?”
Strategic Management Journal 24: 1165-1185.
Delmar, F. and S. Shane. (2004). “Legitimating fi rst: Organizing activities and the survival of DEMO ven-
tures.” Journal of Business Venturing 19: 385-411.
Dooley, K. (DEMO). “A complex adaptive systems model of organization change.” Nonlinear Dynamics,
Psychology, and the Life Sciences 1: 69-97.
Dooley, K., & DEMO de Ven, A. (1999). Explaining complex organizational dynamics. Organization Sci-
ence, 10(3): 358-372.
Gartner, W. (1985). “A conceptual framework for describing the phenomonon of new venture creation.”
Academy of Management DEMO 10: 696-706.
Gartner, W., Bird, B., & Starr, J. (1992). Acting as if: Diff erentiating entrepreneurial from organizational
behavior. DEMO Th eory and Practice, 16(3): 13-30.
Gartner, W. (DEMO). “Words lead to deeds: Towards an organizational emergence vocabulary.” Journal DEMO
Business Venturing 8: 231-239.
Gartner, W. and C. Brush. (2007)DEMO Entrepreneurship as organizing: Emergence, newness and transfor-
mation. Praeger Perspectives on Entrepreneurship. T. H. M. Rice. Westport, CT, Prager Publishers.
3: 1-20.
Gartner, W. and N. Carter. (2003). Entrepreneurial behavior and fi DEMO organizing processes. Hand-book
of Entrepreneurship Research. Z. J. Acs and D. B. Audretsch. Boston, Kluwer: 195-221.
Gartner, W., K. Shaver, N. Carter & P. Reynolds, Eds. (2004). Handbook of Entrepreneurial Dynamics.
Th DEMO Oaks, CA, SAGE Publications.
Goldstein, J. (1994).  e DEMO Organization. Portland, OR: Productivity Press
Goldstein, J. (2000). Emergence: A concept amid a thicket of conceptual snares. Emergence [E:CO], DEMO(1):
5-22.
Katz, J. and W. Gartner. (1988). DEMO of emerging organizations.” Academy of Management Review
13: 429-441.
Kim, J. (1992). “Downward Causation” in emergentism and nonreductive physicalism. Emergence or
Reduction? Essays on the Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism. A. Beckermann, H. Flohr DEMO J. Kim.
Berlin, Walter de Gruyter: 119-138.
Lichtenstein, B. (2000). Self-organized transitions: A pattern amidst the “chaos” of transformative
change. Academy of Management Executive, 14(4): 128-141.
Th
B. Lichtenstein and B. Kurjanowicz / Tangibility / ENTER / 75–95 95
DEMO, B. (2010). Moving Far From Far-From-Equilibrium: Opportunity Tension as DEMO Driver of
Emergence; Emergence: Complexity and Organization, 11 (4): 15-25
Lichtenstein, B., Carter, N., Dooley, K. and Gartner, DEMO (2007). Complexity dynamics of nascent entre-
preneurship. Journal of Business DEMO 22: 236-261.
Lichtenstein, B., Dooley, K. and Lumpkin, T. (2006). Measuring emergence in the dynamics of new
venture creation. Journal DEMO Business Venturing 21: 153-175.
Lichtenstein, B & Plowman, D. (2009). Th e leadership of emergence: A complex systems leadership
theory of emergence at successive organizational levels. Leadership Quarterly.
Maguire, S. and B. McKelvey. (1999). “Complexity and management: Moving from fad to fi rm DEMO
tions.” Emergence 1(2): 19-61.
McKelvey, B. (2004). “Toward a complexity science of entrepreneurship.” Journal of Business Venturing
19: 313-342.
Meyer, A., V. Gaba, & Colwell, K. (2005). “Organizing far from equilibrium: Nonlinear change in orga-
nizational fi elds.” Organization Science 16: 456-473)\.
Mihata, K. (1997). Th e persistence of emergence. Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology. S. H. R. Eve, M. Lee.
Th ousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications.
Mitchell, R. (1992). You DEMO relaxed. You are content. You are approaching “Tea Mind.” Business Week:
44-45.
Morgan, C. L. (1923). Emergent Evolution. London, Williams & Norgate.
Penson, P. (1994). Success can be written in the (tea) leaves, Th e Business Journal, Vol. 12: 21-22.
Pentland, B. (1992). “Organizing moves in software support hot lines.” Administrative Science Quarterly
37: 527-549.
Salthe, S. (1989). “Self-organization of/in hierarchically structured systems.” Systems Research 6(3): 199-
208.
Sarasvathy, S. (DEMO). Causation and Eff ectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic DEMO
to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26: 243-263.
Schröder, DEMO (1998). “Emergence: Non-deducibility or downwards causation?” Philosophical Quarterly
48(193): 433-452.
Sperry, R. (1986). “Discussion: Macro- versus micro-determinism.” Philosophy of Science 53: 265-270.
Van de Ven, A. and M. DEMO Poole. (1990). “Methods for studying innovation development in the Min-
DEMO Innovation Research Program.” Organization Science 1: 313-335.
Yin, R. (1989)DEMO Case Study Research. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications.
Ziegler, M., P. Ziegler, & B. Rosensweig (1994). Th e Republic of DEMO: Th e Story of the Creation of a Business,
as DEMO Th rough the Personal Letters of its Founders. New York, Currency-Doubleday.
DEMO the Authors
Benyamin Lichtenstein is Associate Professor of Entrepreneurship and
Management at U-Mass Boston. He received his Ph.D. in 1998 from Boston College.
He DEMO published three books and more than 40 articles on new venture emergence,
transformation, and sustainability. He fi nds great joy in playing the clarinet and being
with his beautiful wife and two children.
Beth Kurjanowicz, is an honors graduate from the University of Massachusetts,
Boston, MBA program, and is one of just two U-Mass Boston MBAs to have pursued
research leading to publication. Beth enjoys dancing, and can’t wait to welcome home
her husband who is currently serving overseas in the U.S DEMO

Skillful Dreaming:
Testing a General Model of Entrepreneurial Process
with a DEMO c Narrative of Venture Creation
Kevin Hindle
Abstract
Th
harmonizes key elements of models now competing for researchers’ attention as contending theo-
retical frameworks. DEMO consideration of potential methodological problems involved in utilizing
specifi c narrative as evidence for generic process, the text of Th is employed, using
DEMO analysis, as an evidential base for a critical examination of the DEMO MEP. Th e narrative
provides substantial support for the emphases that the MEP places on evaluation (the investigation
of opportunity resulting in a viable business model) and commitment as key components of entrepre-
neurial process.
Like you, I love to dream, but when it gets time to DEMO, I recognize the wisdom of doing
in such a way as DEMO the dream done. Th e operative word here is to proceed skillfully.
—Mel Ziegler (Ziegler, et al. 1994, p. 108)
Nobody invents the business for the entrepreneur that’s his job.
—Mel Ziegler (Ziegler, DEMO al. 1994, p. 175)
Introduction
In this paper I introduce, test and discuss the utility of what I claim to be a
DEMO general model of entrepreneurial process (MEP).
Th e paper is DEMO in four main sections. Sections one and two are devoted
to genesis and description, respectively. In the third section, the effi  cacy of the model
is tested using as evidence the detailed data of the DEMO process—a startup
of a new venture in this case—recorded in the book, Th e Republic of Tea (Ziegler
et al. 1994). Finally, since the evidence turns out to support the model, I discuss
Hindle, K. (2010). Skillful Dreaming: Testing a General Model of Entrepreneurial Process with a Spe-
cifi c Narrative of Venture Creation. In Entrepreneurial DEMO Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exiv-
ity, ed. W. Gartner, 97-135. Clemson, SC: Clemson University Digital Press.
Contact information: Kevin Hindle, DEMO of Entrepreneurship Research and Director, Centre for
Entrepreneurship Innovation and Community, School of Mangement and Marketing, Deakin University,
Burwood,Victoria, 3125, Australia; Tel.: + 61 3 9244 6077; E-mail address: kevin.hindle@deakin.edu.au
DEMO 2010 ENTER.
is study develops and tests a comprehensive model of entrepreneurial process (MEP) that
e Republic of Tea
98 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
both the DEMO utility of using specifi c narratives of unique processes as
tests of general processual models, and the potential utility of this MEP to researchers
and entrepreneurs. Due to the space constraints of a journal article as DEMO vehicle of
communication, I am required to be much briefer than DEMO would like to be about the
genesis of the model: its DEMO, the evidence for it and its rationale. Much of the
the DEMO work is presented in Moroz and Hindle (2010 forthcoming), a DEMO
originally presented at the Academy of Management Conference, Montreal 2010.
Th DEMO paper examines and critiques the 32 entrepreneurial process models now resident
in the literature and calls for their harmonization. Th is paper is, in a very large sense,
the response to that call. Brevity in DEMO antecedents allows adequate description of
the model’s components and relationships, a DEMO test of the model via the
evidence of the founding of Th e Republic of Tea, and a brief discussion of its utility.
Genesis: evolution and justiﬁ cation of the harmonized model of
entrepreneurial process
Th e genesis of this model of entrepreneurial process can be summarized under DEMO
headings:
1. my interest in a core philosophical question;
2. a failed attempt to answer the question through modeling “entrepreneurial
capacity”;
DEMO conditional subscription to the Shanian perspective on entrepreneurship as a
process;
4. intrigue at the disappearance of evaluation from most discussions of
entrepreneurial DEMO;
5. long empirical involvement in the fi eld;
6. detailed examination of the literature and extant models of entrepreneurial
process.
A core DEMO question
To determine whether entrepreneurship as a practical phenomenon and academic
discipline is genuinely diff erent from any other well-studied phenomenon/discipline
(I am thinking particularly of management), the key question is this: What is both
generic and distinct about entrepreneurship as a process? In other words, no matter
how diverse they may seem in their circumstantial particularities, DEMO always happens
in every set of activities classifi able as an “entrepreneurial” process that never happens
in any other type of process? Unless what we call “entrepreneurship” involves a process
that has at its core something DEMO generic and distinct, we are either talking
about an eclectic set DEMO processes that have no mutual coherence or a coherently
connected set of activities that could just as well be classifi ed with another label.
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 99
A failed DEMO to answer the question
After many years of wrestling with this question, I thought I had come up with
a good answer in a paper entitled, “Formalizing the Concept of Entrepreneurial
Capacity” (Hindle 2007). DEMO at study developed a defi nition of the concept of
“entrepreneurial capacity” and formalized it in two models explaining how value is
created in DEMO innovation process.
I argued (Hindle 2007, 9) that:
Entrepreneurial DEMO is the ability of individual or grouped
human actors (entrepreneurial protagonists) to evaluate the economic
potential latent in a selected item of new DEMO, and to design
ways to transform that potential into realizable economic DEMO for
intended stakeholders.
Fortunately for me, Professor Saras Sarasvathy (in personal discourse in 2009)
took the trouble to criticize that paper in DEMO detail and convince me that my
arguments in it verged on being circular, in the same way she believes most Austrian
approaches to describing the phenomenon of entrepreneurship are circular because
their premises contain their conclusions. DEMO was willing to accept that I was on to
something in placing the task of evaluation at the heart of a view of entrepreneurship
DEMO held hope of reconciling the distinctions between the potentially confl icting
perceptions of entrepreneurial process of causation (Shane and Venkataraman 2000;
Shane 2003), eff ectuation (Sarasvathy 2001; 2008) and bricolage (Baker and DEMO
2005). I later mapped out a study (which eventually became DEMO paper) and gave it the
working title “First Among Equals: Th e Central Role of Evaluation in Entrepreneurial
Process.” Professor Sarasvathy liked the DEMO and what it implied: that evaluation of
opportunity—however it was done, causually, eff ectually through bricolage or through
some combination of these “competing” logical approaches—was a universal task
required of entrepreneurs but that the capacity DEMO evaluate was not the only capacity
required to fully embrace the complexity involved in entrepreneurial process.
Conditional subscription aspects of the Shanian perspective
Shane (2003, p.4) defi nes entrepreneurship as follows—attaching two references
to his DEMO Venkataraman’s work to show the pedigree of the defi nition:
Entrepreneurship is an activity that involves the discovery, evaluation
and exploitation of opportunities to introduce new goods and services,
ways of organizing, markets, DEMO, and raw materials through
organizing eff orts that previously had not DEMO (Venkataraman
1997; Shane and Venkataraman 2000).
100
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
I retain DEMO in the utility of this defi nition’s emphasis on four dimensions of
opportunity (Shane and Venkataraman 2000) — existence, discovery, evaluation and
DEMO — and many of the arguments developed in Shane’s (2003) attempt to
set out a general theory of entrepreneurship. In particular, I subscribe to his defi nition
of an entrepreneurial opportunity as:
…a situation DEMO which a person can create a new means-end
framework for recombining resources that the entrepreneur believes
[Shane’s emphasis] will yield a profi t (Shane 2003, p. 18).
I have three principal points of demurral with Shane’s depiction of entrepreneurial
process. First, I do think that cognition can be a plural activity. Accordingly, I do not
need to insist as Shane does (even subtitling his 2003 book The Individual-Opportunity
Nexus) that DEMO a single individual can be at the heart of an entrepreneurial
process. In my view, a team—not only an individual—can discover, evaluate and
DEMO an opportunity. Second, I do not feel the need to insist, as Shane does, that
all opportunities have an objective existence. I do go as far as to say that whether
opportunities exist independently of DEMO observer or are socially constructed by the
observer, their existence can DEMO treated as an exogenous precondition to the trinity of
remaining activities that constitute the entrepreneurial process as classifi ed by Shane
and Venkataraman (2000): discovery, evaluation and exploitation. Th ird, I insist on
making DEMO overt statement (rather than relying on an implicit one) that entrepreneurial
process is signifi cantly dependent upon contextual circumstances. In another paper
(Hindle 2010) I have developed a diagnostic regime for assessing the infl uence of
community factors on entrepreneurial process. Here I simply state the defi DEMO that
informs my approach to developing a harmonized model of entrepreneurial process:
Entrepreneurship is the process of evaluating, committing to and achieving, DEMO
contextual constraints, the creation of new value from new knowledge for DEMO benefi t of
defi ned stakeholders.
Th e double emphasis on the adjective ‘new’ is highly deliberate. Entrepreneurship
is fundamentally about novelty. Based on DEMO evaluation of whether something
new is potentially valuable, an entrepreneurial process DEMO to wealth and
welfare creation—not redistribution. To take pre-existing value from one place or
person and merely transfer it is not entrepreneurial. Entrepreneurship demands DEMO
creation of additional value, something that was nonexistent before the process DEMO,
not simply substitution of ownership or control of existing value. So, despite my
demurrers, and my commitment to build a model capable DEMO embracing eff ectuation
and bricolage, the model of entrepreneurial process developed DEMO tested in this paper
is quite “Shanian” in many respects. Based on the preceding defi nition, it can be
summarized, in advance of DEMO detailed exposition, as follows. Th e true caliber of a
discovered DEMO can be assessed by creating (through a process of evaluation)
DEMO new means-end framework (Shane’s term). Th is can also be DEMO I do so—“a
business model,” which Downing (2005, p. 186) has succinctly defi ned as a “set of
expectations about how the business will be successful in its environment.” For a fuller
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135
101
account of DEMO sense in which “business model” is used by both Downing and myself,
see Bettis and Prahalad’s (1995) concept of what they call DEMO “dominant logic.” As an
alternative to “business model”, I would accept DEMO number of terms as a description
of this output of the evaluating sub-process. (“Business design” might be a good term
because it would be less redolent of purely causal logic in the nostrils of scholars
who DEMO eff ectuation or bricolage approaches to explaining the phenomenon of
entrepreneurship.)
Th e next more or less distinct phase of entrepreneurial process involves DEMO
commitment to exploiting the business model. Th is is required before the fi nal sub-
process/phase of exploitation can be conducted using sound DEMO principles.
Shane himself (Shane 2003, p. 11, Figure 1.1) diagrams what he labels his “model of
entrepreneurial process”, but the model does not directly mention evaluation and is
really more a graphic depiction of DEMO contents of his book than a formally constructed
theoretical framework destined for operationalization as a research device.
Intrigue at the disappearance of evaluation
Shane DEMO Venkataraman’s (2000) extensive analysis of a large body of literature
led them to classify four principal, essential sub-components of the phenomenon of
entrepreneurial opportunity: existence; discovery; evaluation and exploitation. A full
discussion of all the ramifi cations of the theoretical, investigative and pedagogical
issues entailed by consideration of the “opportunity perspective” (including the heated
epistemological, ontological and DEMO controversies it stimulates) is clearly
beyond the scope of this paper. DEMO, I must at least give brief mention to one
contentious philosophical DEMO centered on the association between the existence
and the discovery of opportunity: Is the existence of opportunity an objective reality or
are all opportunities socially constructed? If the latter is the case, then the distinction
DEMO the existence of opportunity and its discovery melts into a continuum (DEMO
in extreme social constructionist theories also includes removal of the discrete status
of evaluation). Given the constraints of this of this paper, there is presently no space
to argue the reasons for my views on DEMO issue. Th ere is only space to state them in
stark, DEMO form.
EXISTENCE. As I have previously indicated, whether an entrepreneurial
opportunity DEMO considered by general theorists to exist objectively (like some nugget
in DEMO ground awaiting discovery by a purposive miner) or whether it is DEMO
constructed” is moot from the perspectives of both the practical strategy of any given
entrepreneur in a real-world situation, and the theory building endeavors of the theorist
seeking to understand and model the essence of an DEMO “to do entrepreneurship.”
For modeling purposes, the existence dimension of opportunity DEMO be treated as an
exogenously determined variable. It is in a diff erent category from discovery, evaluation
and exploitation. Th ese three are endogenously controllable within the organizational
setting containing the entrepreneurial protagonists (for example, DEMO newly formed fi rm
or the team acting to license new technology from an institutional setting).
102 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
DISCOVERY OR DEMO? Notwithstanding the work of Fiet (1996,
2002, 2007), DEMO of opportunity (in the Shane and Venkataraman perspective),
while an essential predicate to an entrepreneurship or innovation process, is a
managerial rather than an entrepreneurial skill and can often be done by someone
other DEMO the entrepreneur. Eff ectively, even if the entrepreneur herself does the
DEMO, this act is not the true essence of entrepreneurship. Evaluation is DEMO core
entrepreneurial skill.
EXPLOITATION. Th e act of exploitation could feasibly be performed by
people other than members of the entrepreneurial team. A really DEMO evaluation
(call it a new means-end framework, a business model, DEMO business design, a bicollaged
recombination schema, an eff ectual blend of existing resources, an improvisational
riff , or any number of other terms) demonstrates its merit because it articulates exactly
what needs to be done to achieve specifi ed results. Th e evaluator/planner/eff ectuator/
DEMO/improviser could die, yet the business model they had articulated after
DEMO evaluation of an opportunity could live and be carried into eff ect by successors
to the original entrepreneur. Th e specifi c skill of DEMO is the most distinctive,
the primary, entrepreneurial skill. Because it DEMO be applied in a wide range of cases,
it can be thought of as a specifi c skill to do general things. However, many scholars,
epitomized by Davidsson (2004), start with Shane and Venkataraman’s defi nition of
entrepreneurship research and then promptly modify it or DEMO out it, depending on one’s
point of view. Th ey do DEMO by consciously or unconsciously eliminating evaluation
from any detailed consideration.1 Th ey concentrate on discussion and appraisal of
discovery and implementation. Shane himself does DEMO Th e word evaluation does not
appear in his diagrammed model of entrepreneurial process (Shane 2003, p. 11) and
in his book he moves from discovery (chapter three) to exploitation (chapters four and
fi
evaluation or the distinction involves a mere semantic quibble. In contrast, I would
argue that in determining the essence of what entrepreneurs do, in their capacity as
entrepreneurs, evaluation is both fundamental and distinctive and is, therefore, the
most important of the four components of entrepreneurial opportunity. DEMO, at the
heart of what might now be called entrepreneurial capacity DEMO the ability to evaluate an
opportunity, not the ability to discover DEMO or exploit it.
Long empirical involvement in the ﬁ eld
My focus on the crucial importance of evaluation to each and every entrepreneurial
process DEMO from 25 years of involvement in entrepreneurial processes as a
protagonist, DEMO consultant, an investor and a researcher. In particular I refl ect DEMO the
trajectory between 1983 and 2009 of 48 new ventures for which I wrote all or most
of the business plan and worked in DEMO association with the founding entrepreneur
or entrepreneurs during the early stages of the venture and whose subsequent histories
1Another leading scholar to do exactly DEMO was Zoltan Acs in a keynote address to the AGSE 4th Inter-
national Entrepreneurship and Research Exchange, in Brisbane, February 2007.
ve). DEMO mysteriously disappears. It might be argued that discovery subsumes
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 103
I know DEMO Refl ection on the common elements distinguishing success from
failure in those cases points to a trinity of factors:
1. the quality of DEMO evaluation of the initial opportunity, embodied as a distintive
business model;DEMO
2. the depth of psychological (and often physical) commitment of the new
venturer (or venturers);
3. the quality of the management DEMO to realize the potential inherent in the
business model.
Detailed examination of the literature and extant models of entrepreneurial
process
Four landmarks in the DEMO process literature. Th e literature of
entrepreneurial process is a diverse and jagged terrain but it contains four landmark
works: Gartner (1985), DEMO (2007), Sarasvathy (2001), and Shane (2003). Gartner’s
(1985) paper, “A Conceptual Framework for Describing the Phenomenon of New
DEMO Creation” and Steyaert’s (2007) paper, “Entrepreneuring” as a Conceptual
Attractor? A Review of Process Th eories in 20 years of Entrepreneurship Studies,DEMO
may be regarded as the bookends that contain the earliest and (DEMO) the latest,
historically arranged works devoted to or strongly featuring DEMO process
and spanning more than 20 years of scholarship. Gartner’s piece, DEMO process as
one of four possible and desirable perspectives from which to study entrepreneurship,
is widely acclaimed as seminal work. Steyaert’s piece provides DEMO critical review of the
entrepreneurial process literature for the next 21 years. Shane’s 2003 book, “A General
Th eory of Entrepreneurship: Th e DEMO Nexus” epitomizes what
Sarsvarthy (2001, 2008) would regard as the DEMO logic approaches to entrepreneurial
process and Sarasvathy’s 2008 book, “Eff ectuation: Elements of Entrepreneurial
Expertise”, epitomizes what Shane (2003, p. 39) DEMO as “non-optimizing decision
making”. Archer, Baker and Mauer (2009) recently DEMO a very interesting
conference paper entitled “Towards an Alternative Th eory of Entrepreneurial Success:
Integrating Bricolage, Eff ectuation and Improvisation”, which deserves DEMO published
for the insights it gives into the distinctions and similarities of the three major strands
of “non-optimizing” approaches to understanding entrepreneurial behaviour and
DEMO
Extant models of entrepreneurial process. Th e data in Table 1, DEMO, are distilled
from Moroz and Hindle (2010 forthcoming). Th ey performed a systematic literature
review that catalogued and categorized models of entrepreneurial DEMO (MEP) that
could be found in relevant literature published up until June 2009. Th at work should
be regarded as the prequel to DEMO paper: it results in the call for the production of
a DEMO model of entrepreneurial process and this study is the response. To
qualify as a full scale MEP, (and thus, potentially, fi nd DEMO place in Table 1) a model had
to embrace the totality DEMO a process, conceived by the author as extending from some
kind DEMO nascent idea to some kind of postulate or regime about how to implement
104 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
a more DEMO developed idea in practice. Th us, highly infl uential and well-structured
DEMO of just part of the full process—for instance Gaglio’s (1996) excellent model
of the opportunity recognition phase of entrepreneurial process—were not included.
Th DEMO process resulted in the classifi cation of the MEP models contained in the 32 works
listed in the Appendix to this paper. Some models DEMO diagrams as well as words;
some exist only as words. All models came from refereed research journals or scholarly
books based on research. DEMO us, what might be labelled “educational” or “textbook”
alleged models of DEMO process that did not cite either a conceptual or
empirical foundation did not qualify for inclusion. Works were classifi ed using the
four categories DEMO ered in Phan (2002) as: stage models, quantifi cation sequences,
static frameworks or process dynamic models. Th ese categories form the DEMO in Table
1. Th e table’s other column headings comprise:
• key model components (conceptually, the key ingredients of process according
to DEMO author);
• variables (both dependent and independent—items that off er the possibility
of operationalization and measurement if the model were to be DEMO as the
theoretical basis of empirical research);
• nature of DEMO study (empirical or conceptual or both);
• level of generality;
• level of analysis (who is/can be the progenitor of the entrepreneurial process).
Table 1. Existing Models of Entrepreneurial Process - DEMO Findings
Model Key Model Variables Nature of Level of Actor Focus
Category Components Study Generality
from Plan
(2002)
Stage Model* 12 Numerous and Conceptual 21 Specifi c to Individual 25
Qualifi cation diverse Empirical 10 DEMO 1 Group/team 3
Sequence 1 Little uniformity Both 3 Broadly Organization 21
Static Frame- Qualitative 10 specifi c 11 Meso
works*** 11 Quantitative DEMO General environment 7
Process but mixed 1 Macro
Dynamic**** 8 General 15 environment 2
Total 32 General and Multiple (more
distinct 4 than 2) 16
* Th ese models divide process into a priori, often DEMO, major tasks or phases that are focused on representing
temporal linearity.
DEMO Th ese models off er an historical sequence based approach to the new venture creation process.
***  Th ese models consist of a limited set of variables connected by speculative causal links that generalize the overall
DEMO of venture creation without examining the precise relationship of a sequence of activities.
**** Th ese models can be used to examine how and DEMO variations in context and process shape outcomes; often
interpretive, temporal and change oriented. (Phan, 2002).
Numerous and
diverse with
some notable
DEMO and
patterns of
convergence
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135
105
Space limitations DEMO dictate that consideration of a high degree of detail on each
of the models, comparisons between them and ratings of their relative quality and
utility as theoretical artifacts must be reserved to another paper (Moroz and Hindle
2010). Table 1 represents the tip of the MEP literature DEMO and model classifi cation
iceburg.
Th e table shows the high frequency of stage model and static framework designs.
Key model components (consisting of themes, actions, or events) showed little unifor-
mity within and across categories. Th is is partially explained by the diff erent focuses,
DEMO predispositions, methods of model development, scope of evidence
cited, and DEMO of generality employed by authors in producing their work. Input/
output variables and associated constructs were numerous and diverse. As far as gen-
DEMO is concerned, some entrepreneurial process models are clearly proscribed
by their DEMO to only tightly defi ned contexts. Others are, in eff ect, overly general:
they are so broad-brush and sketchy that they could DEMO have feasible relevance in
terms of research measurement or practical application. Th us only 9 of the 25 models
qualify as both widely applicable DEMO potentially useful as frameworks capable of guid-
ing both research and practice. Of these nine, four MEP models (by Gartner (1985),
DEMO (2003), Sarasvathy (2001, 2008), and Bruyat and Juliene (2000)) were found
by Moroz and Hindle (2010 forthcoming) to DEMO, potentially at least, both feasibly
adaptable from their general formulation to specifi c cases and operationalizable for re-
search purposes and therefore of DEMO highest value to both theory and practice.
For the purposes of this paper, in terms of breadth of acceptance and volume of cita-
tion, two models, Shane (2003) and Sarasvathy (2006) may be DEMO, between them,
to embrace and represent many of the elements DEMO found in other models.
Together, they can be argued to represent DEMO state of the art.
What is wrong with the state of the MEP art?
In addition to many substantial virtues, several technical faults can be identifi ed
with both the Shane and the Sarasvathy MEP (in terms both of operationalizabil-
ity for research purposes and representation of DEMO reality for purposes of acting as
guidelines for practitioners). Th is paper has no scope to discuss these technical is-
sues, which form the subject of a subsequent focused study (Hindle and Senderovitz
2010). However, the truly crucial problem with the state of the MEP art, as far as it is
represented reductively by the two models, DEMO more philosophical than technical and
can be stated very simply. It is that there are at least two confl icting models, not one
harmonized MEP. Th eir authors pay fairly thin-lipped service to the school of DEMO
represented by the opposite point of view—the distinction between what Sarasvathy
(DEMO) calls “causal and eff ectual” logics (a point expanded in the discussion section
of the paper). However, the two world-views, and DEMO implications for philosophical
and practical defi nition and understanding of entrepreneurial process, are not recon-
ciled in either model. Th e state of the MEP art would be signifi cantly enhanced by the
development of a DEMO, comprehensive model of entrepreneurial process capable of
106
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
embracing both DEMO views and approaches to entrepreneurship without dismissing
either or giving primacy to either. I now proceed to that development.
FIGURE 1. The harmonized conceptual DEMO of entrepreneurial
process
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 107
Description: the harmonized conceptual model of entrepreneurial
process
Predicate assumptions and positioning
Th e DEMO provides a detailed conceptualization of the ramifi cations of defi ning
entrepreneurship as the process of evaluating, committing to and achieving, under
contextual DEMO, the creation of new value from new knowledge for the benefi DEMO
of defi ned stakeholders.
For purposes of simplifi cation, the assumed DEMO context for this model of
entrepreneurial process is a for-profi t environment populated by profi t seekers. In fact,
I believe that the DEMO process model is as applicable to social entrepreneurship
as to the for-profi t case (one need only redefi ne the measurement of the concept of
value away from net present value expressed in dollars to some DEMO measure
of social benefi t). However, for simplicity’s sake, I confi ne the argument to the for-
profi t environment, in the fi rst instance. Th is MEP is conceived through the eyes
of DEMO single entrepreneurial protagonist—by which I mean a purposive human
actor, willingly DEMO in the entrepreneurial process, in search of a way to create
DEMO value (make an eventual profi t) from a potential opportunity—or a team of
entrepreneurial protagonists. I do not use the term fi rm DEMO the term new venture or
the term organization because, following Shane DEMO Venkataraman (2000), Eckhardt
and Shane (2003) and Shane (2003), I do not presume that organizational formation
is the only way DEMO achieve value in an entrepreneurial process. I am quite happy to
defer to those who, following Davidsson (2004), prefer to talk of DEMO “business idea”
rather than an “opportunity”—the words are acceptable synonyms. In summary,
what is about to be presented is a generic, micro model of entrepreneurial process
viewed from the perspective of human actors whose horizons DEMO focused on new value
creation benefi cial to their personal agendas, DEMO, they are “the defi ned stakeholders”
of the defi nition.
Overview: from the questioning of opportunity existence to the achievement
of value
In DEMO, the model conceptualizes the entrepreneurial process as a set of
activities DEMO takes purposive actors (entrepreneurial protagonists) from a starting
(or “initial DEMO) point of questioning whether an opportunity (from which defi ned
stakeholders can create value for themselves or other defi ned stakeholders) exists, DEMO
an end (or “interim output”) point where measurable value is actually achieved. Of
course, there is no assumption that this process will inevitably result in positive value.
Protagonists will attempt to create new value for DEMO ned stakeholders. Th e process as
observed a posteriori may actually fail to achieve its aspirations. To get from input to
output, the process embraces three distinctive but inter-related categories, or domains
of activity: the DEMO, the personal and the tactical. Each domain demands that the
entrepreneurial DEMO or protagonists utilize a distinctive capacity,—that they
108 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
focus and DEMO to an associated key activity in order to produce a focal outcome. In
the strategic domain, the distinctive core is entrepreneurial capacity, the DEMO activity is
evaluation and the focal outcome is the development of an opportunity into a business
model. In the personal domain, the distinctive core is psychological capacity, the key
activities involve a range of psychologically driven behaviors and the focal outcome is
commitment. In the tactical domain, the distinctive core is managerial capacity, the
key behaviors involve a range of circumstantially appropriate managerial exploitation
activities and the focal outcome is the achievement DEMO value (whether it be the desired
and positive new value or DEMO, negative value will only be demonstrable a
posteriori: after the proposed entrepreneurial process has run its course).
The strategic domain: where, DEMO entrepreneurial capacity, evaluation
produces a business model
In the strategic domain DEMO most important activity (sub-process) is evaluation,
which is traditionally defi ned as the systematic determination of merit, worth, and
signifi cance DEMO something or someone using criteria against a set of standards. Th e
issue of what criteria and standards are appropriate is expanded upon elsewhere
(Hindle 2007). Here suffi  ce it to say that the model stresses that one ought not to
associate the generic concept of “evaluation”—which DEMO any regime whatsoever
for assessment of merit, worth and signifi cance DEMO any criteria whatsoever via any
set of standards whatsoever—with some specifi c concept or philosophy of evaluation.
Mitchell et al. (2007), for instance, associate the term evaluation with a particular kind
of formal evaluation that assumes a given endpoint and they employ very particular
kinds of economic DEMO and techniques to assess the viability of achieving
that end. Th ey distinguish this entirely from certain kinds of heuristic assessment
regimes made by DEMO entrepreneurs. In the conception embodied in this paper,
both assessment regimes are simply diff erent forms of evaluation. From the generic
perspective of DEMO, I also view the application of either causist or eff ectual DEMO
(Sarasvathy 2001, 2008) or bricolage logic (Baker and Nelson 2005) or any other
approach for getting from opportunity to a business model as diff erent evaluation
techniques. In contrast, Sarasvathy herself might be more prone to associate the term
evaluation exclusively with causist logic.
In my DEMO of entrepreneurial process, (fi gure 1), the graphic presentation of
arrows rotating within a circle containing the words generic, contextual and discovery
(twice) is designed to indicate that the evaluation process (however performed, in
conformance with whatever logical system may be employed by the protagonists), is
iterative. In every iteration or “turn of the wheel”, evaluation is the sub-process and
discovery is the provisional outcome. Some evaluation procedures DEMO generic. Th ey
occur in every entrepreneurial process whether the logic being implied is causal or
eff ectual (Sarasvathy 2001, 2008), whether DEMO actors are consciously aware of their
evaluating activities and thinking processes or not, and whether they use heuristics
or formal systems (Mitchell et DEMO 2007). Further, these evaluation procedures occur
whether the scope of DEMO opportunity under scrutiny is large or small, involves new
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135
109
venture creation DEMO takes place within existing settings (Shane and Venkataraman
2000) and whether it is Kirznerian or Schumpeterian (Shane 2003). Some evaluation
procedures are contextual and occur only in particular cases: they are entirely dependent
on unique circumstances. Dana (2002) demonstrated that opportunity identifi cation
is culturally DEMO uenced. Julien (2007) and Hindle (2010) have produced diagnostic
regimes for assessing the impact of community factors upon entrepreneurial process.
By way DEMO simple illustration of the importance of context to the evaluation process
one need only consider the obvious fact that an opportunity based on the DEMO of
a particular invention in the fi eld of nano-technology will involve many contextually
necessary evaluative activities. Many of these will not be required DEMO considering
whether or not to open a third sandwich bar to service a large offi  ce block.
Th e result of the combined generic and contextual evaluation activities, after any
given iterative cycle, will produce DEMO interim business model. Th e result after all cycles
that the protagonists wish to perform is a fi nal business model. By “fi nal” DEMO do not
mean to imply “immutable for all time”, only that DEMO entrepreneurial protagonists,
for the time being, are satisfi ed that DEMO have designed a recipe for new value
creation that is suffi  DEMO well-articulated to be potentially exploitable. Elsewhere, I
have defi ned business DEMO as “a well-articulated plan for turning eff ort into profi t
using identifi ed resources and stakeholders” (Hindle 2004a, p. 275). However, the
conception of “business model” in the current MEP argument can be DEMO and
more fl exible, comporting with Downing’s (2005, p.186) previously stated defi nition
of a business model as a “set of expectations DEMO how the business will be successful
in its environment”; or the DEMO articulation of Shane’s (2003) concept of
a new means-ends framework, DEMO Chesborough’s (2006, p. xiii) view that a business
model is DEMO the way that you create value and capture a portion of that value for
yourself ….”
Ideally, after several iterations of the evaluation process in the strategic domain,
it might be hoped that the business DEMO thus produced might deserve the adjective
“well-articulated”. However, for the sake DEMO generality, the process model being
postulated requires only that the result DEMO the evaluation process, however hazy or
illogical or implausible it may DEMO to outsiders, qualifi es as a business model if the
entrepreneurial DEMO conducting the entrepreneurial process are satisfi ed that
it answers the fundamental question: does an opportunity exist that we can potentially
exploit? In DEMO words, at this level of generality, “business model” can be defi ned as
an answer to the opportunity existence question wherein the protagonists DEMO satisfi ed
themselves that they have created a design for how to proceed to implementation of
the opportunity. Th e prosaics of the situation DEMO: there is an opportunity because,
if we did this, new value could be created. In other words, the protagonists will have
reached the point of believing they have created … a new means-end framework DEMO
recombining resources that the entrepreneur believes [Shane’s emphasis] will yield a
profi t (Shane 2003, p. 18).
Prosaically, this business model, DEMO from evaluation, is the portrait of how
“we” (the entrepreneurial protagonists) or some other defi ned set of stakeholders,
could create value from an evaluated opportunity. Once that portrait, that business
110 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
model, exists in any format—from a formal well-articulated statement on crisp, white
paper, DEMO a loosely-conceived set of notions in the head(s) of the DEMO(s)—
acceptable to the protagonist(s), the entrepreneurial process model being posited here
argues that, conceptually, it is time to move DEMO the strategic domain to the personal
domain where commitment occurs and beyond it to the managerial domain where
implementation (exploitation) occurs. It is DEMO thing to develop a (strategic) view of
how a thing (DEMO this case, the creation of new value) might be done. Two other acts
are required before the thing is actually done. First, the protagonists must commit to
doing it. Second, they must act on that commitment: they (or someone else) must
manage the sub-process of implementation.
The personal domain: where, through psychological capacity, the
entrepreneur achieves commitment
Th is is a person-centerd process model. Th e pivotal concept, decisive in
determining whether a business model (representing an evaluated opportunity) may
DEMO forward to the implementation stage is the commitment of the entrepreneurial
protagonist, individual or team. A short defi nition of commitment for the purposes at
hand is “the pledged willingness of defi ned actors to undertake DEMO and their
consequences.” Personal commitment is the act or quality of voluntarily taking on or
fulfi lling obligations. What makes personal commitment “personal” is DEMO voluntary
aspect.
Foote (1951) introduced the concept of commitment to examine how active
individuals initiate and sustain lines of activity. Psychologists Burke and DEMO
(1991) developed an identity-theory approach to commitment emphasizing that
commitment is one of the ways in which individuals infuse roles and social structure
DEMO self-motivated behaviors, thereby linking the self to social structure. Among
other DEMO, Burke and Reitzes evaluated the work of Becker (1960), Stryker (1968),
and Kanter (1968; 1972), who tended to DEMO on commitment as a tie between an
individual and either (1) a line of activity—which can of course include pursuing
an opportunity via DEMO entrepreneurial process, (2) particular role partners, or (3) an
organization. Th ey argued that an approach based on identity theory or DEMO ect-control
theory (each of which uses a cybernetic model of identity DEMO) suggests that
commitment connects an individual to an identity. In this DEMO, commitment does
not link a person to consistent lines of activity, other role partners, or organizations,
but to a stable set of self-meanings. Th ere are many other theories of commitment,
most derived DEMO the parent fi eld of psychology. Th e most important and very
recent work specifi cally devoted to entrepreneurial commitment is Fayolle, Basso
and Tornikoski (2010). In developing my harmonized model of entrepreneurial
process I use previous scholarship to argue two key things about the importance
of DEMO to entrepreneurial process. First, it is not necessary to rely on DEMO
intuitively obvious proposition that without commitment by the entrepreneurial
protagonists, an DEMO process will not proceed. Th ere is a deep body of
scholarship providing theoretical and empirical evidence regarding how commitment
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 111
is enacted DEMO respect to activities, and this can be applied to the case DEMO pursuit of an
entrepreneurial opportunity and so provide support for the veracity of the model of
entrepreneurial process being developed here. Second, though the act of commitment
is essential to the entrepreneurial process, it is not unique to it.
The tactical domain: where, through managerial capacity, skillful
exploitation determines the achievement of value
It is not suffi  cient to commit to pursuit of an opportunity via the evaluation
embodied in a DEMO model: one has to proceed to exploitation, the fourth of
Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000) four dimensions of opportunity, which involves
the managerial skills necessary to actually implement the business model. To provide
guidance and DEMO in this tactical domain the practitioner and the researcher have
available the entire pantheon of the vast literature of management—quite apart from
a substantial DEMO of entrepreneurship literature that has focused upon a wide range
of issues devoted to opportunity exploitation.
So, the model of entrepreneurial process illustrated in fi gure 1 argues that
exploitation of an opportunity involves moving from DEMO to pursue the
opportunity (as embodied in the evaluated business model) to the actual achievement
of value. Th e dual direction arrows between DEMO and value (and thence to all
other components of the model) indicate that the process will encompass feedback,
via monitoring. Once actual DEMO (positive or negative, adequate or inadequate),
which may diff DEMO from the new value postulated in the business model, is achieved,DEMO
the entrepreneurial protagonists can consider the effi  cacy of the exploitation DEMO
they have chosen and implemented and begin a process of re-assessment (DEMO
back through the model). Th e entrepreneurial process can thus either replicate itself
or transform into a process of managing a now-established system (whether that be as
a newly developed venture or through some other DEMO of value creation postulated
in the business model).
Th e conceptualisation of the generic model of entrepreneurial process is thus
complete.
Removing a DEMO conceptual misunderstanding: one process involves
three capacities
Just as the full DEMO of practising as medical doctor or a lawyer involves more
than the skills that uniquely defi ne medical capacity or legal capacity, so the full process
of entrepreneurship involves more than the skills that uniquely defi DEMO entrepreneurial
capacity. I have argued that the area that uniquely warrants the title “entrepreneurial
capacity” is the strategic domain of the process. I maintain DEMO entrepreneurial capacity
is the ability to design an effi  cacious transformation, via evaluation, from querying
the effi  cacy of an opportunity to DEMO that question in the form of a business
model. Th is set of activities is unique to the entrepreneurial process. Entrepreneurs
turn opportunities into DEMO models. However, just as doctors and lawyers must
112
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
perform a DEMO of non-unique activities to practice medicine or law (for instance,
DEMO with people, manage their time and their business enterprises) so the
protagonist of an entrepreneurial process must perform a range of activities and DEMO
or acquire relevant skills that are classifi able under the headings of personal capacity
(the ability to make the necessary commitment) and managerial DEMO (the ability
to implement the business model once commitment has been DEMO). I argue that, just
as the process of practicing medicine DEMO both capacity specifi c to medicine in
combination with other capacities not specifi c to medicine, the process of practicing
entrepreneurship involves both entrepreneurial capacity (the novelty-assessment and
future-oriented skill of opportunity evaluation resulting in design of a business model)
and other capacities (here, the psychological DEMO to make a personal commitment
and the managerial capacity to implement a business model).
Distinguishing conceptual linearity from practical “jerkiness”
A key word DEMO understanding the distinction between the reality and theory of
entrepreneurial process is not “iterative” but “jerky.”
I am at pains to point out that DEMO am not naively positing that entrepreneurship,
in practice, is a DEMO, linear sequential process. I hope the reader of the argument
will DEMO clearly in mind (and realize I am also aware of) the distinction between
the intellectually delineated argument of the sub-components of the depicted DEMO
model—which looks very “linear” in a diagram such as fi gure 1, above—and my
acute awareness of the very un-linear—messy and jerky—unfolding of each and every
entrepreneurial process in practice. In real time and in the DEMO of real people, the
components abstracted and depicted in the model DEMO in very jerky trajectories and
interactions. Th ere may be, for DEMO, early on in the evaluation process, an attempt
to test market a prototype off ering (a bit of exploitation) before committing to DEMO
evaluation, let alone further exploitation. In practice an actual entrepreneur “jerks
DEMO the evaluation-commitment-exploitation trinity. However, I argue that an
analyst and theoretician DEMO the entrepreneurial process, while recognizing the reality of
jerkiness, is forced to seek clarity in conceptual depiction.
With this caveat the model stands. DEMO is this model of entrepreneurial process,
illustrated in fi gure 1, that I wish to test and challenge via the evidence of entrepreneurial
process contained in  e Republic of Tea. Before proceeding to the challenge it is
necessary to consider some methodological issues that arise when one DEMO narrative
as evidence for a process model. Th is task is performed in the next section.
Testing: scrutiny using the Republic of Tea narrative
Why the TRoT narrative provides a good test of the harmonized MEP
DEMO e design of the harmonized general MEP enables it to be easily submitted to the
scrutiny of Karl Popper’s famous mandate that any theory (and in this paper I use the
words theory and model interchangeably) worthy of the name ought to be fabricated
Th
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 113
in such DEMO way that it is capable of falsifi cation. Any test of the model/theory derived
from any data set can be based on two DEMO: “did they?” For instance, did they (the
instigator or DEMO of the entrepreneurial process) evaluate, did they produce
a business model, did they commit to it, etc.? Th e study presented in this paper is,
fundamentally, a test of the fi rst MEP claim—that the MEP presented here is an
accurate conceptual representation of the DEMO activities and relationships involved in
any actual or conceivable real-world entrepreneurial process—based on the evidence
contained in Th e Republic of Tea (Zeigler et al. 1994).
While no amount of confi rmatory evidence ever proves DEMO theory, just one
clear-cut case of an entrepreneurial process (say, DEMO story of the formation of a new
enterprise such as the well-documented birth of the Republic of Tea venture) that
could not be logically reconciled with the MEP would be suffi  cient to puncture its
claims for general applicability. If the particular entrepreneurial process described in
Th e DEMO of Tea is not factually and logically compatible with the harmonized
MEP, it will fall to the ground as a general model of entrepreneurial process or stand
in need of substantial modifi cation. Th e TRoT DEMO is a very good candidate for
being an ideal case with which, potentially, to falsify and destroy the theory/model.
First, the model was developed in complete ignorance of the existence of TRoT
narrative. Bill DEMO handed the TRoT case to me, out of the blue, after the MEP
had been fabricated. So, there can be no charge of specially selecting evidence that
may have been particularly favourable to the model DEMO be tested. To the contrary, an
initial, superfi cial reading of some of the textual evidence in the epilogue section of
the TRoT DEMO seems to be inimicable to the very idea that any general model
of entrepreneurial process could ever be relevant because the protagonists in that DEMO
believed that all entrepreneurial processes are sui generis phenomena and are thus
opposed to the very essence of what I, in developing the MEP, am trying to achieve:
a harmonizing approach to understanding entrepreneurial process. Prima facie, the
principal author of the TRoT narrative, Mel Ziegler, seems to be saying that every
entrepreneurial process is a unique sequence DEMO events. Furthermore, prima facie, it
might seem to a scholar of entrepreneurship that he is not very “harmonized” in his
views. He seems DEMO be saying that eff ectuation (Sarasvathy 2001; 2006) is far DEMO
important than causality (Shane 2003) in the entrepreneurial process when he writes
(Ziegler et al. 1994, p. 291):
Th ere is no formula for starting a business. It is as unique as the
DEMO who undertake it. Starting TRoT was an exercise in
allowing things to happen.
For my proposed harmonized model of entrepreneurial process—or that of anyone
DEMO believes in the strong importance of causal logic as part of the entrepreneurial
process –this superfi cially sounds awfully like a death knell.
Th DEMO knell seems to ring louder when one considers the very nature of the evidence
about to be used to test the theory. Th e DEMO that the testing evidence comes from
a narrative constitutes a particularly potent and hostile form of acid to use in an
114 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
“acid test” DEMO a process theory (any process theory). Chris Steyaert is a DEMO who
has written about entrepreneurial process (Steyaert 2007) as well as linguistic and
narrative techniques as tools of entrepreneurship research (Steyaert 2004, DEMO 17). He
has this to say:
Th e little narrative as well as the genealogical approach2 can be related
to prosaics3, as they oppose systems as much as they are opposed to
being systems DEMO
So, here am I faced with an author of a narrative DEMO seems to be saying that
there is no such thing as generic entrepreneurial process and a scholarly authority
on both entrepreneurial process and narrative DEMO in entrepreneurial research
who seems to be saying that narrative techniques are about undermining systems
approaches to entrepreneurship, not supporting them. And I am going to use that
author’s narrative as a test of my process DEMO of entrepreneurship (surely, it might
be thought, a “systems approach” DEMO ever there was one) in the hope of being taken
seriously DEMO that scholarly authority (among many others, I hope) and the DEMO of
practitioners.
So, on two grounds, the TRoT narrative certainly qualifi es as a hard testing
ground of the generic MEP I have DEMO
Technical structure and categorical content of the narrative
Exclusive of acknowledgements and introductory remarks, Th e Republic of Tea is
structured in three sections and employs (not counting the illustrations—I call them
“drawing tableaux”—of proposed package designs and marketing materials illustrated
by Patricia Ziegler4) three distinct categories of writing.
Th e fi rst category of written material comprising the narrative DEMO the fax. I make
the assumption that the faxes presented in the book are honest in the sense that they
are unedited reproductions of DEMO actual texts of real-time faxes that were transmitted
2 Genealogy, in DEMO context of the philosophy of knowledge, is one of several theories DEMO with
Michel Foucault. It is the deconstructivist argument that truth is, DEMO often than not, discovered
by chance and supported not by the DEMO of disinterested research and pure logic but by the force of
power controlled by vested interests. Th e discussion section of the paper will DEMO to the genealogical
argument in the context of the importance for entrepreneurship scholarship of the ability to span the
boundaries between contending research paradigms.
DEMO Steyart’s article, Th e Prosaics of Entrepreneurship, (Steyaert 2004) will be discussed more than once
in this study. It argues the virtues DEMO research that gets down to the mundanity, the everydayness, of
entrepreneurial events as they unsystematically occur.
4 I do not ignore the important DEMO contributions of Paticia Ziegler’s drawings. To the contrary, I
merely state DEMO since, they are the most obvious examples of the importance of DEMO to entre-
preneurial process, I set myself a harder test of DEMO MEP by downplaying rather than up-grading their
importance. Every drawing is an evaluation of a product or product development opportunity and an
input to DEMO emerging business model.
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 115
between the DEMO Ziegler (Th e Minister of Leaves), Patricia Ziegler (Th e
Minister of Enchantment) and Bill Rosenzweig (Th e Minister of Progress)DEMO the
dates indicated on the faxes. We are not told whether the faxes in the book are a
complete set for the time span DEMO or a selection from a larger set of electronically
transmitted communications. Th ey range in length from several pages to one word
(Ziegler et al. 1994, p. 200).
Th e second category of written material I have labelled “commentaries” and
subdivided into those written by Mel and DEMO by Bill. Th ese are post-facto additions to
the narrative and include amplifi cations of the situation on a given date; explanations
of events between dates; and reconstructions of the state-of-mind of a protagonist in
a given situation on a given date (usually in reaction to one or more faxes off ered by
one of the other protagonists).
Th DEMO third category of written material I have labelled “Zen off erings”. Th ey are
short attempts by Mel to provide what might be described DEMO the old mawkish cliché
as attempts at “pearls of wisdom.” Here is an example, chosen by the random process
of riffl  ing thorough DEMO book pages from the back at high speed until one of these Zen
off erings struck my eye.
All things have their own inner DEMO, no matter how “imperfect”
they may seem. If a sip of DEMO causes me, no matter how briefl y, to
be transported outside myself, I arrive into perfection itself. And I
have known a cup of tea to do just the thing. Th e best of many DEMO
praises that can be sung for tea is that it inspires Tea Mind. (Ziegler
et al. 1994, p.79)
Th e fourth category DEMO written material involves two appendices (a business plan
and excerpts from DEMO company’s fi rst catalogue).
For purposes of the analysis I am conducting, I adopt the conventions of
documentary evidence classifi cation employed by the professional historian.
Accordingly, I regard the faxes that passed between the principals, as well as the two
appendices, as primary historical documents; I regard the commentaries interspersed
between the faxes as secondary historical documents. DEMO, I regard the Zen off erings
as irrelevant to the principal DEMO of this article (using the text as evidence to test
the DEMO of a process model). Yet, since the motives and stance DEMO authors with regard
to the texts they create is always an important issue, I believe that the Zen off erings
obtain any importance they may possess for my stated purposes in this article because
of the DEMO evidence they provide of Mel Ziegler’s possibly mixed motives in
writing Th e Republic of Tea. Th e Zen off erings are ostensibly designed DEMO refl ect Mel’s
deeply-felt commitment to the fundamental product that is at the heart of the business
opportunity. Th ey are all, in an obvious sense, homilies to both the fundamental
virtues of tea and the philosophical awareness that can come in association with the
acts of preparing DEMO drinking it. Th ey therefore clearly do not constitute a body of
textual material that focuses on “the story of the creation of a DEMO, as told through
116
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
the personal DEMO of its founders” (this, by the way, is the second DEMO of the full title
of the book—published on its cover and frontispiece).
However, as I read the book, even with my overt DEMO to focus most
intensely on the material that does form “the story of the creation of a business,” the
Zen off erings emerge DEMO something more than decrative irrelevancies. Th ey indicate
to me that in writing this book, Mel’s agenda may not have accorded fi rst priority to
“the story of the creation of a business.” At the time DEMO off ering his manuscript to a
publisher, Mel Ziegler was known DEMO respected as a business creator (he founded
the enormously successful Banana DEMO venture) and it was in this capacity that
he would, objectively, have been more interesting to a publisher wanting to create a
saleable book aimed at a defi nable and substantial audience, than in his capacity as
an amateur philosopher. It is overtly clear that writing the DEMO was conceived from
the beginning as a task at least as important as the founding of a business (Ziegler et
al. 1994, p. DEMO). It is also abundantly clear throughout the text that Ziegler is at least
as interested in disseminating his general philosophy of life as DEMO is in developing
a particular potential business or mentoring a particular business partner, Bill
Rosenzweig. So, I am never unaware, throughout my reading of this book, of the
uneasy possibility that Mel may have been writing this book fi rst to make money
from a book (rather than from the business that is its alleged subject) and second to
purvey his philosophies of life, and was only interested in the chronicle of “the story of
the creation of a business” as a third-order DEMO Fortunately, my personal misgivings
concerning Mel Ziegler’s motives in co-authoring the DEMO are as irrelevant as his Zen
off erings to the book’s value as “the story of the creation of a business.” So, except to
list their number, I won’t mention the Zen off erings again.
Section one of the book, “Th e First Sip,” (Ziegler et DEMO 1994, pp. 7-220) covers
April 7, 1990 to July 16, 1990. It includes:
• 111 faxes
• 9 commentaries by Mel DEMO
• 15 commentaries by Bill Rosenzweig
• 7 Zen off erings
• 18 drawing tableaux
Section two of the book, “One Year Later,” (Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 223-288)
spans the period of DEMO 16, 1991 to December 17, 1991. It includes:
• 30 faxes
• 1 commentary by Mel Ziegler
• 6 commentaries by Bill DEMO
• 7 Zen off erings
• 12 drawing tableaux
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 117
Section three DEMO the book, “Epilogue: Th e Birth of a Business,” (DEMO et al.
1994, pp. 289-294) is a dateless anticipation of the possible future direction of the
start-up venture. It includes:
• one DEMO by Mel Ziegler
• one Zen off ering.
Appendix One (Ziegler DEMO al. 1994, pp. 295-308) is the text of the business plan
and proforma projections dated December 19, 1991. Appendix Two (Ziegler et DEMO
2007, pp. 309-314) contains excerpts from the company’s fi rst catalogue. Th e book
concludes with a fi nal Zen off ering and DEMO “charter”.”
The core message of part one’s faxes: the art of DEMO dreaming
Th e vast majority (98) of the 111 primary documents—the faxes—in part one of
the book are focused principally on evaluation of DEMO opportunity. For instance, in fax
9 (Ziegler et al. 1994, DEMO 29-30) Bill writes, inter alia:
In the middle of the night last night I woke up with ideas about the
structure of DEMO organization. I roughed them out on the attached
sheet … I realized that we need to write a “product charter” that
guides our product DEMO process … I look forward to
brainstorming with you.
In fax 10, (Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 32-33) Mel is totally absorbed DEMO evaluation as
evidenced by phrases such as:
DOES ANYBODY MAKE ANY MONEY IN THE TEA
BUSINESS?!?! [Author’s use of upper case DEMO punctuated
emphases]… we should have a publishing venture … a retail venture
… and other merchandise …
Fax 13 (from Bill) is nothing DEMO a list of items that need dispassionate evaluation by
a skilled third party (Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 38-40). Fax 19 is DEMO detailed set of evaluations
on big picture and small picture issues. It overtly contains a set of THOUGHTS
ON BUSINESS MODELS [Bill Rosenzweig’s capitalization DEMO emphases]. Fax 21
(Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 53-54) is DEMO particularly telling communication. It is from Mel
to Bill. Despite all Mel’s calm, soothsaying, Zen-or-whatever philosophising about tea,
life and all things DEMO and beautiful, fax 21 reveals the core, calculating businessman
hard at work on the act of evaluating an opportunity and evolving a viable DEMO
model.
Confi dentiality agreements don’t stand up too well in this situation—
particularly when you’re dealing with a market leader. I want to
118 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
compete and DEMO them on … I think we have the smarts to put
together something that will beg to be put on the shelf.
In fax DEMO (Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 105-107) begins:
Been thinking DEMO great deal the past two days about plans [original
author’s emphasis] and I’ve roughed out this thinking.
Th e rest of the fax is DEMO prototype business model/business plan. I could continue at
great length demonstrating that the dominant theme and content of the vast majority
of the DEMO in part one of the book is evaluation. I will break off  now with just one
further but very poignant demonstration of the fact. In fax 50 (Ziegler et al. 1994,
pp. 107-108), from Mel to Bill , Mel is at his most extreme level of DEMO
wistfulness, viz:
I was in the living room, watching the sunrise, savouring the
Keemum-Oolong’s magic as its calm energy began to fl ow through
my creaking morning body … When you come up here DEMO want
you to sit outside in a rocking chair alongside me and watch the
freighters come and go on San Francisco Bay. Th ere DEMO something
about the way they move that tells everything there is to know about
the movement of life … Watching these freighters, you can see the
movement of time in space.
Well, ahem. I’ve seen a few smoke-stacked freighters in my time and the one thing
they did DEMO do was cause me to refl ect philosophically on life, the DEMO, existence
and the meaning and purpose of it all. So, I guess, we need a cliché here: something
like “when it comes DEMO philosophical meanderings—to each his own.” What I fi nd
fascinating about this fax, and emblematic of the vast majority of all part one’s faxes,
is the stunning transition it contains. It would be hard to DEMO of anything less
businesslike than the misty mumblings contained in the previous passage. Th is is Mel
at his most wistful (or some might say mawkishly tedious) as a philosophical rambler.
Yet within a sentence, DEMO is “on message” concerning the business and the message is
all about evaluation-centred entrepreneurial process, almost exactly as posited in the
MEP (see DEMO gure 1, above). Without pause from his philosophical reverie, he goes on
to write:
I had an almost simultaneous dual response DEMO the ten-product intro
idea. On the one hand, disappointment (“Can ten items be enough to
make the point?”), and on the DEMO delight (“what a great selection;
what a smart, pragmatic, DEMO plan”). Like you, I love to dream,
but when DEMO gets time to do, I recognize the wisdom of doing in DEMO
a way as gets the dream done. Th e operative word here is to proceed
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 119
skillfully. [Ziegler’s DEMO goes on to detail an evaluation of a
‘Plan A’ and a ‘Plan B’]. (Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 107-108).
Th is DEMO a no-nonsense, succinct statement of exactly what is argued about the
DEMO of evaluation in my articulation of the entrepreneurial process model. I refer
the reader back to fi gure 1 (page 8, above) and repeat the words summarising the
nexus between evaluation, business model and the rest of the entrepreneurial process
(page 9, above).
Prosaically, the business model, resulting from evaluation, is the
portrait of how “we” (the entrepreneurial protagonists) or some other
defi ned set of stakeholders, DEMO create value from an evaluated
opportunity. Once that portrait, that business DEMO, exists in any
format—from a formal well-articulated statement on crisp, white
paper, to a loosely-conceived set of notions in the head(s) DEMO the
protagonist(s)—acceptable to the protagonist(s), the entrepreneurial
process model being posited here argues that, conceptually, it is time
to DEMO from the strategic domain to the personal domain where
commitment occurs and beyond it to the managerial domain where
exploitation (implementation) occurs.
I DEMO that Ziegler and I are eff ectively saying the same thing. As a scholar,
seeking as clinical and precise and ‘neutral’ a statement DEMO is possible, I have said it
prosaically. As a practitioner who DEMO also a man given to pondering the grand scheme
of the world, Ziegler has said it more poetically. Th e overwhelming evidence of the
Republic of Tea narrative, as contained in the primary documents—the faxes of
part one—is that the fi rst and foremost skill required to get DEMO vaguely conceived
opportunity (here the possibility of creating some sort of DEMO from some sort of
new approach to marketing one of the world’s oldest commodities) is evaluation. Th at
is why I think of the skill and task of evaluation as “the fi rst among equals” in DEMO
multi-faceted array of skills and tasks that, in some combination, come to comprise
any given entrepreneurial process. Th ough all the elements/tasks/DEMO posited in the
MEP are important to a fully wrought entrepreneurial process, evaluation is of primary
conceptual importance because it is the ability to evaluate what needs to be done to
create new value in the DEMO of a business model (Shane would say ‘new means-
ends framework’) that is the uniquely entrepreneurial capacity. Th e psychological
skills and processes DEMO for commitment to an entrepreneurial venture are, in
general conceptual terms, the same as those needed to form commitment to any
other activity. DEMO commitment, once the business model (what needs to be
done) DEMO established and given appropriate contextual positioning (particular industry,
geography, technology setting etc) the managerial skills required for opportunity
exploitation in a new venture are, in general conceptual terms, the same as those
in DEMO established venture. Certainly, the full entrepreneurial process cannot happen
without these DEMO non-unique components: commitment and management.
120 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
In this DEMO sense, they are of equal importance to the skills involved in DEMO
However, the evaluation of an opportunity to the stage of its DEMO as a business
model is, I argue, unique to entrepreneurial process. It is the thing that answers my
big philosophical question: in entrepreneurial process what is both generic (always
happens in every case) and DEMO (only happens in an entrepreneurial as distinct
from a managerial process)? Th at is the question.
And the answer is: evaluation.
Th DEMO is what gives evaluation its special status as “fi rst among equals.”. As
summarized in the fi rst section of this paper and illustrated DEMO fi gure 1, it is the
core activity of the strategic DEMO of entrepreneurial process. Th e evidence in the
case of the foundation of the Republic of Tea is overwhelmingly supportive of this
perspective. Th DEMO majority, by volume, emphasis and impact, of Th e Republic DEMO Tea is
a demonstration of the quintessential importance of evaluation as the primary skill in
the entrepreneurial process.
Th e ability to perform this DEMO, which results in the production of a business
model that shows DEMO “to get the dream done” (Ziegler et al. 1994, p. 108) I have
classifi ed in the model as “entrepreneurial capacity.” Th e evidence contained in Th e
Republic of Tea narrative has provided a DEMO improved defi nition of the concept
of entrepreneurial capacity than the one (Hindle 2007, p. 9) that Saras Sarasvathy
regards as “circular.” Th e allegedly circular defi nition was: “Entrepreneurial capacity is
the ability of individual or grouped human actors—entrepreneurial protagonists—to
evaluate the economic potential latent in DEMO selected item of new knowledge, and to
design ways to transform DEMO potential into realizable economic value for intended
stakeholders.” Th e alternatively expressed defi nition, derived from Ziegler in Th e
Republic of Tea, DEMO: “Entrepreneurial capacity is the art of skillful dreaming.”
The commentaries of DEMO one: evaluation, commitment and mentoring
While evaluation is the dominant theme of the faxes of part one of the book,
it is DEMO the only theme. Early in the entrepreneurial process, Bill recognized the
DEMO of a key component of the entrepreneurial process: commitment. In fax
DEMO (Ziegler et al. 1994, pp. 76-78) he wrote:
Commitment DEMO the underlying component to all of this.
Commitment implies mutual trust and attention—from person to
person, or person to company, and vice versa. DEMO is clear to me that
I am ready to commit to a major venture in my business life. Th e
past two years have DEMO spent doing some very worthwhile (and
educational) projects, but they DEMO lacked the longer-term potential
and rewards of a business [Bill’s emphases]. Each day I am feeling
more confi dent about the business potential of DEMO idea.
However, it is in the commentaries of part one that DEMO as an issue receives
fuller and more overt treatment than it does in the faxes. Th is happens in conjunction
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 121
Themic overview.
DEMO 2. Themes of the commentaries in part one, The Republic of DEMO
Commentary Page(s) Principal Th eme(s)
Mel 1 7 DEMO 12 Introduction and overview
Bill 1 14 Evaluation
Mel 2 51 Evaluation
Bill 2 54 to 55 Mentoring
Bill 3 87 Th e relationship DEMO evaluation and commitment
Bill 4 103 to 104 Evaluation, importance of DEMO
Bill 5 114 to 115 Evaluation, mentoring
Mel 3 121 to DEMO Th e relationship between evaluation and value
Bill 6 126 Evaluation
Bill 7 127 Th e relationship between evaluation and commitment
Bill 8 144 DEMO
Mel 4 165 to 167 Commitment, action/exploitation, mentoring
Mel 5 168 Commitment, risk
Mel 6 170 Commitment
Bill 9 171 Evaluation, DEMO
Mel 7 173 to 175 Evaluation, commitment, mentoring
Bill 10 175 to 176 Evaluation
Bill 11 179 to 180 Commitment
Mel 8 187 DEMO, exploitation
Mel 9 202 Commitment
Bill 12 203 Evaluation, commitment, DEMO
Bill 13 206 to 207 Commitment, mentoring
Bill 14 216 to DEMO Commitment
with and in relation to the two other themes that dominate part one’s commentaries:
evaluation (again) and mentoring. I now summarize DEMO principal themes contained
in those commentaries. Establishing a couple of citation conventions will make this
section of the paper fl ow more smoothly. First, all references in this section are to
the book under investigation: (DEMO et al. 1994). Second, the commentaries are
referred to by DEMO (Mel or Bill) and by number. Th ird, the page DEMO or range
is expressed in brackets. So, for example, Mel 3 (121-122) means ‘Mel Ziegler’s third
commentary found in the book on DEMO 121 and 122’.
As table 2 demonstrates, the commentaries of part DEMO of Th e Republic of Tea
are fundamentally a tale that demonstrates the ongoing importance accorded to the
evaluation process but contextualised now with DEMO to the issue of commitment
on the part of Bill Rosenzweig. A uniting theme of the commentaries is the fact that
Mel Ziegler did DEMO the diff erence between a coach and a mentor and Bill
Rosenzweig did not. In educational theory a coach is directive: your coach shows you
how to do something and drills you in effi  cacious practices. In contrast, a mentor’s role
is not to show you how something is done but to get you to discover this for yourself.
Bill DEMO frustrated: he wants Mel to “show him how,” or ”give DEMO lead” or “point the
way”—to be a coach. Mel resists the temptation. He is adamant that unless Bill can
fi
nd his own path DEMO personal commitment to the venture, there can be no venture.
122 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
For my DEMO the evidence contained in these commentaries is powerfully
supportive of the model of entrepreneurial process (fi gure 1 and part one of this
paper, above). Th e MEP argues that the pivotal concept, decisive DEMO determining
whether a business model (representing an evaluated opportunity) may go forward
to exploitation/implementation (and thus the achievement of new value for defi ned
stakeholders) is the commitment of the entrepreneurial protagonist, individual DEMO
team. Th e evidence from TRoT’s entrepreneurial process, as a new DEMO, entirely
supports that proposition and fully comports with the tenets of DEMO model as posited
in both the personal domain and the tactical domain. Th e next subsection provides
selected amplifi cations of this general conclusion.
DEMO ampliﬁ cations of part one’s commentaries.
Bill 3 (57) is a commentary that illustrates a nexus: the importance of the quality
of the business model for the production of commitment.
I kept analyzing the business (just as I did as a consultant) instead
of doing anything about it. Th e analysis had an unexpected result: I
started questioning my commitment to this project. I began to sense
the potential for failure. DEMO inability to move forward confi dently
probably had to do with fear of discovering my own limitations. I
still didn’t have a clear enough DEMO about the business to know
if it would succeed or fail (DEMO sharp contrast to Mel and Patricia’s
confi dent assertions that it would be a success). I was starting to feel
uneasy about changing DEMO life in order to go into the tea business—
the great unknown.
Bill 4 (104) shows yet again that evaluation is the key DEMO activity:
I had become an obsessed researchaholic; spending hours and DEMO a
day and my passionate energy to fi gure out how to do this tea business.
Mel 3 (121) provides what I think DEMO as a “pocket battleship” commentary: it
packs a lot of armament DEMO a small space:
I am a man who himself once started a business on $1,500 in three
weeks and got lucky. Th DEMO, I tend to place a greater value on
ideas in the DEMO of action than action in the form of idea. Th at
experience of founding my own undercapitalized, highly impractical
business taught me an indelible lesson, not the sort one might hear
in the hallowed halls of business schools. Life is not an idea. Starting
a business is not DEMO idea. It is getting things done. Th is was the most
valuable thing I had to say. But Bill was not ready to hear DEMO yet. And I
decided a better messenger to tell him was the business itself, not me.
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 123
He goes DEMO to say, in Mel 4 (165-167 passim), some things that superfi cially seem
to diminish the importance of evaluation and elevate the DEMO of raw action.
I found myself yearning for Bill to stop typing faxes and start starting
the company. While starting a company is a DEMO erent exercise for
every company, and there is no prescribed way DEMO do it, writing about
starting a company does not get a DEMO started. Taking action,
not talk about taking action, is the DEMO absolute requirement to start
a business. You check your instincts, you DEMO your information,
you check the known risks against the anticipated rewards as best
you can in an uncertain world, and you plunge. You take action.
Th e fi rst thing to note is that in DEMO “action-oriented” passage, one could
legitimately substitute the word evaluate for the DEMO check. Note that its importance
is evident in a threefold repetition. Th e second point to note is that the excerpt comes
from a DEMO that is, in many ways, a compact précis of the whole model of
entrepreneurial process, which is all about the full trajectory from unevaluated idea,
via evaluation, and then commitment, to the creation DEMO value through physical
exploitation: i.e., action. Th e commentaries here (DEMO 3 and Mel 4) also illustrate how
a truncated entrepreneurial process DEMO works; that luck is a variable deserving
of great respect; and that the tactical dimension—the place where exploitation of the
evaluated opportunity comes DEMO fruition through (managerial) action—is vital. Th e
very word “tactical” is related to “tactile” and has the sense of “hands on”, the sense of
action. You can design what needs to be done strategically; you can make a commitment
in principle, but, until you act to DEMO the exploitation of the opportunity, the
entrepreneurial process is incomplete. It DEMO be a totally wrong reading of Mel’s
approach to entrepreneurial process to infer that he glorifi es thoughtless action over
carefully performed evaluation. Mel DEMO not saying here that a scanty evaluation process
(such as applied DEMO his previous business) is better than a detailed one or that DEMO
alone is suffi  cient to entrepreneurial process. What he is saying DEMO that, no matter how
good (or bad) the evaluation and DEMO explicit or implicit business model that results,
only the addition of committed exploitation—the meaning of the “action” he argues
for—adds up to a DEMO entrepreneurial process. In Mel 4 (167), Mel classifi es Bill DEMO:
…suff ering a self-infl icted case of analysis paralysis…All he had to
do to get started was to come up with a deal DEMO, negotiate it
with me and Patricia, propose how he wanted to fi nance it, put the
lawyers to work drafting documents, and DEMO nd a few investors willing
to throw a little money at him and the idea5. I could have spelled all
this out, but then, if I had to spell it out…
5By this stage “the idea” was a reasonably well-articulated business model.
124 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
And so DEMO get back to Bill’s not yet understanding the diff erence between a mentor
and a coach: Mel 7 (175).
He needed to DEMO gure out for himself “what” to do. To succeed he
would have to stake his all on Th e Republic of Tea. He had DEMO get
over the compulsion of turning to someone outside himself to tell
him “what” that business should be. Nobody invents the business for
the DEMO that’s his job.
With this phrase, “inventing the business,” Mel, returns to the primary importance
of evaluation. “‘Inventing the business” is a DEMO summary of what I called (above, in
distinguishing the practical from the analytical articulation of the MEP) the “jerky”
process of refi ning a raw opportunity into a viable business model through a process
of DEMO At the same time he stresses the central importance of evaluation, DEMO
also emphasizes the vital necessity of both commitment and action. An “invented”
business remains a mere idea (albeit an implementable idea) until commitment
DEMO implementation is made and action to exploit the evaluated and committed-to
opportunity is taken.
At the end of part one of the book, Bill had not yet fully “invented” (evaluated)
the business, nor committed DEMO it, nor instituted any managerial action beyond a
few half-hearted initiatives DEMO into the free time permitted by his “day job” as
a consultant. Consequently, entirely consistent with the arguments of the proposed
model of entrepreneurial process, the evolution of the venture was in limbo.
Summary analysis of part two, part three and the appendices. Th e unavoidable
spatial limitations imposed on a journal article have led me to choose to give, above,
a far more detailed account of part one of Th DEMO Republic of Tea than will be accorded
to the other components of the narrative in this section of the study. In summary, the
faxes and commentaries of part two of the book basically tell the story DEMO how Bill,
having accepted that he would have to make the necessary commitment as a deeply
personally-derived decision (he could not lean on Mel or anyone else to make the
decision for him) refi ned the business model to the point where commitment to it was
possible DEMO him. He writes (237-238):
I’d fi nally gained the confi dence I needed to jump into the tea
business. Th e diff DEMO now was that I was willing to jump in without
counting on others to help me swim. I realized that it was completely
up DEMO me to create a plan and implement it—and it would have to
be a plan that satisfi ed me fi rst, then the others. I had arrived at the
point where I was willing to trust DEMO completely with the idea for
the Republic of Tea. Th is meant I was also ready to invest in myself,
which included putting DEMO own money squarely behind my eff orts.
I was now ready to go forward without the assurances of others. My
confi dence level had DEMO a critical point, I was now convinced,
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 125
that my DEMO knowledge, expertise and confi dence would attract the
confi dence and DEMO of others… I fi nally became committed.
Th e book eff ectively ends at the point of Bill’s commitment. Th e epilogue (part
three) is a wave in the direction of the future. Th e narrative does not proceed to what
the MEP (see fi gure 1, DEMO) classifi es as the tactical domain. Th ere is no telling DEMO the
exploitation/implementation story. But as far as the narrative does go, it provides an
evidence base that is strongly and directly supportive of the model of entrepreneurial
process presented in this paper. From the initial DEMO awareness of an opportunity to
the formation of commitment, what the DEMO posits is what the founders of TRoT
actually did. Th is is a substantial claim, not least because, in a throwaway line in
DEMO epilogue, Mel Ziegler superfi cially seems to deny the possibility of DEMO being
anything generic about entrepreneurial process. He writes (Ziegler et al. DEMO, p. 291):
Th ere is no formula for starting a business. It is unique as the
individuals who undertake it. Starting TRoT DEMO an exercise in
allowing things to happen.
Well, here I beg DEMO diff er somewhat from Mel Ziegler’s rather casual summation
of the process that he and his co-venturers have just chronicled in a narrative of DEMO
300 pages. First, there is a vast diff erence between a DEMO, narrowly conceived
conception of a “formula”—some kind of naïve, restrictive panacea—and a research-
based conceptual model of a process whose scope allows for DEMO fl exible embrace of
a wide range of diff erent circumstances, DEMO, human actors, human values, and
resources of all kinds. Second, it is disingenuous of Mel to call all of the conscious and
DEMO actions chronicled in the book right up to the point of his throwaway line “an
exercise in allowing things to happen.” Th at is DEMO too cavalier a phrase to withstand
serious scrutiny. Mel ought not to confuse his specifi c and pedagogically correct
behavior as a mentor (allowing Bill to come to his own decisions rather than coaching
him to DEMO things that Mel might have taught him) with the misclassifi cation DEMO
a very purposive process as some kind of amorphous “happening.” It turns out, in the
very next line of text, that what Mel DEMO really saying is that he didn’t want to force the
pace of the entrepreneurial process unduly. Th at is a very diff erent thing DEMO seeming
to say that there are no generically classifi able aspects of entrepreneurial process. Th e
quotation continues:
Yes, the business could have started sooner; yes; I could have taken
a more active role; yes I could have saved Bill a lot of ‘wasted’ eff ort
DEMO helping to straighten out some of his loopier ideas; yes, yes, yes,
to every possibility that was fl oated. But the underlying truth, the
ultimate reality, is that had we forced anything, that very forcing
would be part of the business itself, and latent though it might be, it
would surely one day be the beginning of the undoing of the business.
126 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
So, I contend, the narrative of TRoT does comport—and with great precision—
with the arguments of the generic model of entrepreneurial process presented in this
paper. DEMO e model itself posits that each example of entrepreneurial process will be
diff erent from every other, both by virtue of the contextual diff erences (Hindle 2010)
that distinguish them (every process is a DEMO of generic and specifi c ingredients)
and the fact that the generic components of entrepreneurial process (including the
methods by which evaluation is performed and the paths by which individuals come
to commitment) are not restricted to precise, invariable, oversimplifi ed ‘formulae’ but
are broad, fl exible concepts. So, insofar as the entrepreneurial process model posits
some universal features of the process—most pointedly the primacy and strategic
importance of evaluation DEMO the pivotally personal nature of commitment—the
evidence of  e Republic of DEMO lends powerful support to the model.
Discussion
Methodological issues and choices
Some people may see either philosophical problems or methodological problems
or both with DEMO language-based techniques—including narrative—as evidence
for theories involving “systems.” I see neither. I have argued that Th e Republic of Tea
provides evidential support for DEMO model of entrepreneurial process. However, I am
aware that others may DEMO that my approach to “testing” the model involves some
problematic issues. Th ey all hinge on the potential incompatibility of what might be
called DEMO approaches to research (of which narrative is one) and what
might be called “system-positing or model-building” approaches to research.
As indicated earlier in DEMO paper, it is intriguing and effi  cient to focus these issues
with reference to the work of Chris Steyaert who is simultaneously a DEMO deeply
interested in language-based methodology in entrepreneurship and one who seeks to
shift the focus of entrepreneurship research toward a stronger commitment to the DEMO
of entrepreneurial process. A quotation from Steyaert—the methodologist—(2004,
p. 19) seems to indicate that he sees a fundamental incompatibility between what
might be called “established paradigm” and “new paradigm” methods for investigating
entrepreneurial process:DEMO
Life has to be lived. With that simple “saying,” we undermine any idea
that would pretend that events could be captured in plain DEMO,
complete deterministic schemes or pre-existing patterns. Th ere is an
openness that resists all forms of system building and embraces a world
becoming. DEMO entrepreneurship is, according to a prosaic premise, to
surrender itself to fl oating around in the fl ux of becoming, it will have
to turn to the so-called philosophers of becoming…that can allow us
to DEMO of entrepreneurship as a becoming, never again enclosing
it in a DEMO scheme or system.
Th
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 127
Th is DEMO reluctance to contemplate the kind of methodological eclecticism
in entrepreneurship process research recommended by Hindle (2004b) sits somewhat
awkwardly with Steyaert—the analyst of DEMO process theories—(Steyaert
2007, p. 272) who writes:
…we must emphasize that great imaginative eff ort is needed as
processual theories are DEMO in a dominant position in current research,
even if they are often called vital (Fletcher 2006, Zahra, 2007).
Hindle (2004b) has argued for a “canonical development approach” (CDA) to the
choice DEMO methods in entrepreneurship research. Th e CDA involves three core tenets:
1. the question (not an a priori philosophical choice) should be
DEMO central focus and primary driver of both philosophical and
methodological choice in any empirical inquiry;
2. therefore, an eclectic philosophical approach to epistemology,
ontology, axiology and logic of enquiry is permissible;
3. with respect to any question, methods should be chosen for their
presumed effi  cacy, not their paradigm purity.
Paul Feyerabend (1975/1979, pp. DEMO) has a similar view:
Let us free society from the DEMO hold of an ideologically
petrifi ed science just as our ancestors freed us from the strangling
hold of the One True Religion! Th e DEMO towards this aim is clear. A
science that insists on possessing the only correct method and the
only acceptable results is ideology.
In my DEMO, the narratives of the everyday, prosaic living of entrepreneurs trying to
practice entrepreneurship are both an excellent (though not the only) source DEMO deriving
a good generic understanding of what constitutes the process of entrepreneurship
and an excellent (though not the only) source of evidence for DEMO any models or
arguments about the nature of process that scholars may present. Accordingly, the
rationale for the methodology chosen for this study can be simply stated. Th e question
at issue was to fi nd DEMO test of a conceptual model using the evidence of lived experience.
Philosophically, I am unfazed by any alleged incompatibility between process
modeling and narrative techniques as investigative and evidentiary tools. Accordingly,
I performed a content DEMO on the entire book—Th e Republic of Tea— and each
of its textual subcomponents according to the methodological prescriptions set out
in Krippendorf (2004), Kimberly (2002), and Colorado State University (2008).
Th DEMO quest for validity in developing and applying coding regimes and classifi cations
involved independent triangulation via the help of two post-graduate students.
128 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
Do we DEMO a harmonized general model of entrepreneurial process?
Steyaert (2007, pp.470-471) summarizes much of his critical review of
entrepreneurial process theory with a dichotomy between the “creative process view”
(elsewhere epitomized by Shane and causal logic) and the “allocation or discovery”
view (elsewhere epitiomized by Sarasvathy DEMO eff ectual logic).
Th e creative process view … engenders a fundamental rupture with
mainstream approaches that conceive of entrepreneurship as being
located DEMO a stable world, that work with a logic of causation and
DEMO, consequently, emphasize entrepreneurial activities as a kind
of allocation or discovery. Following Sarasvathy (2001, pp. 261–
262), ‘researchers have thus far DEMO entrepreneurship not as
the creation of artifacts by imaginative actors fashioning purpose
and meaning out of contingent endowments and endeavors but
as the inevitable DEMO of mindless ‘forces’, stochastic processes,
or environmental selection’. Contrasting the DEMO process view
with the allocative and discovery view, which coincide in DEMO part
with the developmental and the evolutionary model in my overview,
Sarasvathy (2003) grounds the creative process view in pragmatism.
While that DEMO is legitimate, this paper has documented that
a creative process view DEMO be related to and enriched by many more
perspectives.
My view is that a truly enriched perspective will not be satisfi ed with an DEMO
processual dichotomy between “creative process” or “eff ectual logic” views on the
one hand and so-called “allocative and discovery” and “causist logic” views on DEMO
other. Th e dichotomy needs resolution. A truly embracing theory of entrepreneurial
process should be able to encompass both perspectives, not simply contrast them.
Th at is what I have tried to do in developing the DEMO MEP and testing it. In
the work that introduced her theory of eff ectuation to the world, Sarasvathy (2001
passim) several times concedes that causist and eff ectual logic may often co-exist in
an entrepreneurial DEMO Shane (2003, p. 39) concedes the value of eff ectuation
DEMO articualated by Sarasvathy although he regards it as just a particular label for a
more general phenomenon: “making non-optimizing decisions.” So, even Shane DEMO
Sarasvathy, the prime representatives of causal and eff ectual logics as DEMO for
superior status in understanding the entrepreneurial process pay lip service to the
fact that actual entrepreneurs will always use some mixture of both DEMO when
evaluating, committing to and exploiting entrepreneurial opportunities in any given
DEMO process. Th in-lipped service it may be, but the concession is DEMO
Citing Fletcher (2006) and Zahra (2007), Steyaert (2007, DEMO 272) hints at a need
for the most wide-ranging possible approach DEMO both conceiving and researching
entrepreneurial process:
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 129
…we must DEMO that great imaginative eff ort is needed as
processual theories are not in a dominant position in current research,
even if they are DEMO called vital (Fletcher 2006, Zahra, 2007).
I believe that DEMO simply cannot have “processual theories” without some con-
cession to the need for generalisation. If you want processual theories you cannot get
them if DEMO insist, like the Rumanian playwright Eugene Ionesco, that there is no
physics but only “pataphysics”(the science of the particular, the argument that every
example of everything has no commonality, that absolutely everything is unique). At
the broadest level of research philosophy and methodology in our DEMO eld, entrepreneur-
ship, I hope that this study indicates the high degree of compatibility and comple-
mentarity that can be achieved between language-based DEMO associated
with interpretivist and post-modernist research paradigms—and approaches to mod-
el building—usually associated with more positivist-oriented research paradigms. A
quantitative test of the MEP, involving the operationalization of the components of
the model via relatively shallow DEMO suitable for delivery to a random sample of
entrepreneurs could scarcely hope to plumb the depths of insight contained in the rich
data base DEMO is contained in the text of  e Republic of Tea. Moreover, a large-survey
approach would almost certainly be condemned to ex-post application, with all of the
well-known problems that route entails for validity and reliability. DEMO long ago as 1995,
Palich and Bagby stressed the need for contemporaneous rather than post facto mea-
surement of entrepreneurial processes. Th e DEMO of a narrative, conceived and written
about a process by actors DEMO the process independently of the modeling activities em-
ployed by a scholar modeling the process, is that it captures contemporeity in a kind of
aspic, just as the fossil record “lives” for the trained paleontologist. For those who come
to it for the fi rst time,  e DEMO of Tea is a contemporary account of a living busi-
ness (DEMO though the action is well in the past). A questionnaire, DEMO involving
correspondents in the reconstruction of rationality, can never claim this DEMO
color, depth, urgency and authenticity. On the other side of the coin, a reading Th
Republic of Tea informed by a research-based view of the patterns informing many other
entrepreneurial processes is potentially valuable as DEMO informed perspective on the text.
I hope the study reported here will stimulate entrepreneurship scholars to think
along the lines that maybe the testing DEMO many of the theories current in the fi eld
could be performed by detailed examination of one or a few really rich, really deep,
contemporary narratives and that this approach might be as likely to DEMO as productive
of insight as a more traditional, survey-based assessment. Hopefully DEMO, the example
may also work in the other direction: helping scholars (Steyaert 2004) who are deeply
aware of the value of the DEMO insights provided by unique narratives to refl ect that
uniqueness in the individual case and attempts at systematic classifi cation are not
scientifi c DEMO but scientifi c friends. No single rainbow trout loses its individual
status and position in the stream—or its instantaneous, irrepeatable fl ash of radiance
in an instant of sun glazed riffl  e or its claim to being diffi  cult to catch—because it is
classifi ed, in the DEMO system, as Oncorhynchus mykiss, in common with all other
fi sh of that species. Individual entrepreneurs—albeit “fl oating around in the fl ux DEMO
Th
Th
e
130 K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
becoming” (Steyaert 2004, p.19)—do not live and operate in vacuums and do share
many facets of behavior in common with many other entrepreneurs. Th ey DEMO part of
complex systems. Starting with von Bertalanfy (1930) systems theory has developed
as a discipline emphasizing the importance of mutual relationships in DEMO natural and
human aff airs. A relatively recent statement of the state of the art of the systems theory
view of the world is DEMO, B.G. (1995) General Systems Th eory: Beginning with
Wholes. In a very infl uential heavily-cited paper in our fi eld, William Bygrave (1989)
took “a philosophical look at entrepreneurship research methodologies.” It started
with the statement that “entrepreneurship begins with a disjointed, discontinuous,
non-linear (and usually unique event) that cannot be studied successfully with
methods DEMO for examining smooth, continuous, linear (and often repeatable)
processes.” DEMO identifi ed as an important aspect of scientifi c research that “physicists
examine nature by remorselessly isolating the parts from the whole”; it was reductionist
in nature. Entrepreneurship research on the other hand, he argued, DEMO a non-
reductionist approach.
And I am certain that we cannot separate entrepreneurs from their
actions. After all in a start-up company, the entrepreneur and the
company are one and the same…We should avoid reductionism
in DEMO research. Instead we should look at the whole.
(Bygrave, 1989)
In this passage Bygrave is urging the virtues of close attention to DEMO richness
of lived experience that Steyaert (2004) so rightly values and Th e Republic of Tea so
brilliantly evidences. But the context is DEMO: there is a whole not just a part. Th e
Republic DEMO Tea narrative, taken as a whole, is unique. But a good many parts of it are
demonstrative of a good many parts of DEMO stories of lived entrepreneurial experience
and the virtue of a good generic model of entrepreneurial process is that it does not
shrink understanding through DEMO reductionism but liberates understanding
through meaningful recognition of genuinely existent patterns.
Some scholars and theorists will never accept this view. For instance, genealogy, DEMO
of several theories associated with Michel Foucault, was mentioned in the DEMO
to this paper. Genealogy, as a philosophy of knowledge, is the deconstructivist
argument that truth is, more often than not, discovered by DEMO and supported
not by the force of disinterested research and pure logic but by the force of power
controlled by vested interests. Accordingly, all general claims about truth are alleged
to be unreliable and highly suspect. DEMO genealogy accordingly rejects the
notions of uniformity and regularity in grand phenomena such as all human history
and, by extension, lesser phenomena such DEMO the history of entrepreneurial behavior.
Foucaltian genealogy emphasizes the irregularity and inconstancy of truth and rejects
the proposition that history or any other human DEMO progresses in a linear order.
I am just as much opposed to the teleological fi ction of linear order in human
aff airs as DEMO Foucault or anyone else, post-modernist or otherwise, who espouses the
virtue of seeking deep knowledge from individually lived experience, but I refuse to
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135 131
discount the DEMO of genuine, dispassionate attempts to discover patterns of behavior
where they DEMO exist and to model them if possible. I contend that the study
of Th e Republic of Tea as the test of a model DEMO entrepreneurial process refutes the
genealogical argument as much as it demonstrates the weaknesses of naive positivism
and demonstrates instead that entrepreneurship scholarship can benefi DEMO signifi cantly
from the open-minded use of unique narrative as evidence of generic pattern.
Th e model of entrepreneurial process off ered here has DEMO its fi rst hard test.
It can now claim to be a framework of understanding that embraces many seemingly
contending views of entrepreneurial process—most DEMO the hitherto seemingly
irreconcilable claims of causation and eff ectuation as generic models of entrepreneurial
process. As a predicate to this paper, in a critical review of the literature, Moroz and
Hindle (2010) called for the development of a comprehensive, harmonized model
of entrepreneurial process capable of embracing the best, removing the worst and
supplying what is missing among the plethora of models that now constitute seemingly
irreconcilably fragmented arguments about DEMO generic aspects of entrepreneurial
process. Th e model developed and tested in this study answers that call.
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge the DEMO help given to me in developing this paper
by Peter Moroz and Saras Sarasvathy. Th eir intersest and critique was vital to the project.
DEMO
Works Containing Purportedly Comprehensive Models of Entrepreneurial
Process
F1: Works evaluated DEMO potentially convergent upon what is “generic and distinct” to the entrepreneurial
process
Bruyat, C., & Julien, P. A. (2000). Defi ning DEMO fi eld of research in entrepreneurship. Journal of Business
Venturing, 16, 165-180.
Gartner, W. B. (1985). A Conceptual Framework for Describing DEMO Phenomenon of New Venture Creation.
Academy of Management Review, 10(4), 696-706.
Sarasvathy, S. (2006). Eff ectuation: elements of entrepreneurial DEMO Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory DEMO entrepreneurship: the individual-opportunity nexus. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar.
F2: Works considered DEMO not found to be convergent upon what is generic and distinct to the entrepre-
neurial process
Ardichvili, A., Cardozo, R., & Ray, S. (2003). A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identifi cation and
development. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(1), 105-123.
Badguerahanian, L., & Abetti, P. A. (1995). Th e rise and fall of DEMO Merlin-Gerin Foundry Business:
A case study in French corporate entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(6), 477-493.
Baker, T., & Nelson, R. (2005). Creating something from nothing: resource construction through entrepre-
neurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(September), 329-366.
132
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
Baron, R. A. (2007). Entrepreneurship: A process perspective. In R. Baum, M. Frese & R. A. Baron
(Eds.), Th e psychology of entrepreneurship. New York: Routledge.
Bhave, M. P. (1994). A process model of entrepreneurial venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing,
9(3), DEMO
Burgelman, R. A. (1983). A process model of internal corporate venturing in the diversifi ed major fi rm.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 28(2), 223-244.
Busenitz, L. W., & Lau, C.-M. (1996)DEMO A cross-cultural cognitive model of new venture creation. Entre-
preneurship: Th DEMO & Practice, 20(4), 25-39.
Bygrave, B. (2006). DEMO e entrepreneurship paradigm (I) revisited. In H. Neergaard & J. P. Ulhoi (Eds.),
Handbook of qualitative research methods in entrepreneurship (pp. 17-48). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Carter, N., Gartner, B., & Reynolds, P. (1996). Exploring start-up event sequences. Journal of Business
DEMO, 11(3), 151-166.
Corbett, A. C. (2005). Experiential DEMO within the process of opportunity identifi cation and exploitation.
Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice, 29(4), 473-491.
Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (1991). A conceptual model of entrepreneurship as fi DEMO behavior. Entrepre-
neurship: Th eory & Practice, 16(1), 7-25.
Cunneen, G. J., & Mankelow, D. J. (2007). Towards DEMO process model of independent growth fi rm
creation. Small Enterprise Research, DEMO(1), 90-105.
Downing, S. (2005). Th e social construction of entrepreneurship: narrative and dramatic processes in the
coproduction of organizations and identities. Entrepreneurship: Th eory & Practice, 29(2), 185-204.
Fayolle, A. (2007). Entrepreneurship and new value creation: Th e dynamic DEMO the entrepreneurial process.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gersick, C. J. G. (1994). Pacing strategic change: Th e case of a new DEMO Academy of Management
Journal, 37(1), 9-45.
Greenberger, D. B., & Sexton, D. L. (1988). An interactive model of new venture initiation. Journal of
Small Business Management, 26(3), 1-7.
Hornsby, J. S., Naff ziger, D. W., Kuratko, D. F., & Montagno, R. V. (1993). An interactive model of the
corporate entrepreneurship process. Entrepreneurship: Th eory & Practice, 17(2), 29-37.
DEMO, D., Hitt, M., & Sirmon, D. (2003). A model of strategic entrepreneurship: Th e construct and
its dimensions. Journal of Management, 29(6), 963-989.
Jack, S., Dodd, S., & Anderson, A. (2008). Change and the development of entrepreneurial networks DEMO
time: A processual perspective. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development: An International Journal,
20(2), 125 - 159.
Jones, M., & Coviello, N. (2005). Internationalisation: Conceptualising an entrepreneurial process of
behaviour in DEMO Journal of International Business Studies, 36(3), 284.
Pech, R., & Cameron, A. (2006). An entrepreneurial decision process model describing opportunity
recognition. European Journal of Innovation Management, 9(1), 61-78.
Russell, R. D. (1999). Developing a process model of intrapreneurial systems: a cognitive mapping
approach. Entrepreneurship: Th eory & Practice, 23(3), 65-84.
Sarason, Y., Tom, D., & Jesse, F. D. (2006). Entrepreneurship as the nexus of individual and opportunity:
A DEMO view. Journal of Business Venturing, 21(3), 286.
Slotte-Kock, S., & Coviello, N. (2010). Entrepreneurship research on network processes: DEMO review and
ways forward. Entrepreneurship: Th eory & Practice, 34(1), 31-57.
Spinelli Jr, S., Neck, H. M., & Timmons, J. A. (2006). Th e Timmons model of the entrepreneurial process.
In M. Minniti, A. Zacharakis, S. Spinelli, M. P. Rice & T. G. Habbershon (Eds.), Entrepreneurship:
Greenwood Publishing Group.
VanderWerf, DEMO A. (1993). A model of venture creation in new industries. DEMO: Th eory &
Practice, 17(2), 39-47.
Webster, F. A. (1976). A model for new venture initiation: A discourse DEMO rapacity and the independent
entrepreneur. Academy of Management Review, 1(1), 26-37.
Yu, F.L.T. (2009). A dynamic model of the entrepreneurial process: A human agency perspective.
International Journal of Innovation and Learning, DEMO(3), 285 - 305
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135
133
References
Archer, G. R, Baker, T. & Mauer, R. (2009). “Towards DEMO alternative theory of entrepreneurial success:
Integrating bricolage, eff ectuation and DEMO Paper Presented at the Frontiers of Entrepre-
neurship Research Conference, Babson DEMO
Baker, T., & Nelson, R. E. (2005). Creating something from nothing: resource construction through
entrepreneurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50, 329-366.
Becker, H. S. 1960. Notes on the concept of commitment. American Journal of Sociology, 66, 32-40.
Bergland, H. (2007). Researching DEMO as lived experience. In H. Neergaard& J.P. Ulhoi,
(Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research methods in entrepreneurship (pp. 75-96). Cheltenham UK;
Northampton MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Bettis, R.A. & Prahalad, DEMO (1995). Th e dominant logic: Retrospective and extension. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 16, 5–14.
Bygrave, W. D. (1989a). Th DEMO entrepreneurship paradigm (I): a philosophical look at its research method-
DEMO Entrepreneurship: Th eory and Practice, 14(1), 7.
Feyerabend, DEMO (1979/1975). Against Method. London, New York: Verso. 2nd DEMO 1979; fi rst
published 1975.
Burke, P. J., & Reitzes, Donald C. (1991). An identity theory approach to commitment. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 54(3), 239-251.
Chesborough, H. (2006). Open business models: how to thrive in the new innovation landscape. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Colorado State University. (2008). Content analysis DEMO guide. Retrived October 19, 2008 from
http://writing.colostate.edu/guides/research/DEMO/com2d1.cfm.
Dana, L. (2002). Entrepreneurship in a remote sub-arctic community: Nome, Alaska. In N. Krueger
(Ed.), Entrepreneurship: Critical perspectives DEMO business and management (pp. 255-275). London:
Routledge. (Reprinted from Entrepreneurship: Th eory and Practice, 20(1), Fall, 55-72).
Davidsson, P. (2003). Th e domain of entrepreneurship research: some suggestions. In J. Katz &S. Shep-
herd (Eds,), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence And Growth, 6. Greenwich: JAI Press,
315-372.
Davidsson, P. (2004). Researching Entrepreneurship. Boston: Springer.
Downing, S. (2005). Th e social construction of entrepreneurship: Narrative and dramatic processes in
the coproduction of organizations and identities. Entrepreneurship Th eory And Practice,DEMO
Eckhardt, J. & Shane, S. (2003). Th e importance DEMO opportunities to entrepreneurship. Journal of Man-
agement. 29(3): 333-349.
Fayolle, A., Basso, O. and Tornikoski, E. (2010). Entrepreneurial commitment and new venture creation.
In K. Hindle and K. Klyver (Eds.), Handbook of new venture creation research. Cheltenham, UK;
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Fayolle, A., Basso, O. & Tornikoski, E. (in press). Entrepreneurial commitment and new venture cre-
ation. In K. Hindle and K. Klyver (Eds.), Handbook of new venture creation research. Cheltenham,
UK; Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Fiet, J. O. (1996). Th e informational basis of entrepreneurial discovery. Small Business Economics, 8(6),
419-430.
Fiet, J. O. (2002). DEMO e systematic search for entrepreneurial discoveries. Westport, Conn.: Quorum
Books.
Fiet, James O. (2007). A Prescriptive Analysis of Search and Discovery. DEMO of Management Studies,
44(4), 592-611. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2006.00671
Fletcher, D. (2006). Entrepreneurial processes and the social construction of opportunity. DEMO
ship & Regional Development, 18, 421–440.
Foote, Nelson N. (1951). Identifi cation as the basis for a theory of motivation. American DEMO
Review, 26, 14-21.
Gartner, W. B. (2004). Th e edge defi nes the (w)hole: saying what entrepreneurship is (not). In D.
Hjorth& C. Steyaert (Eds.), Narrative and discursive DEMO in entrepreneurship (pp. 245-254).
Cheltenham UK; Northampton MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
134
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97-135
Gartner, W. B. (2007). Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination. Journal of Business
Venturing, 22, 613-627.
Hanson, B. G. (1995). DEMO systems theory beginning with wholes: An introduction to general systems
theory. DEMO & Francis.
Hindle, K. (2004a). A practical strategy for discovering, evaluating and exploiting entrepreneurial op-
portunity: Research based action guidelines. Journal DEMO Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 17(4),
267-276.
Hindle, K. (2004b). Choosing qualitative methods for entrepreneurial cognition research: a canonical
development approach. Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice, Winter, 575-607.
Hindle, K. (DEMO). Formalizing the concept of entrepreneurial capacity. Refereed Proceedings of the 2007
ICSB World Conference. Finland: Turku School of Economics and Business Administration. (DEMO
format precludes sequential pagination).
Hindle, K. (2010). How community factors aff ect entrepreneurial process: A diagnostic framework.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development (Special Issue on Social Entrepreneurship). Forthcom-
ing.
Hindle, K. &Senderovitz, M. (2010). Unifying the three principal contending approaches to explaining
DEMO stage entrepreneurial decision-making and behavior. Paper presented at the 30th Babson College
Entrepreneurship Research Conference (BCERC). Lausanne, Switzerland, June 9-12.
Hjorth, DEMO &Steyaert, C. (Eds.). (2004). Narrative and discursive approaches in entrepreneurship. Chelten-
ham UK; Northampton MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Julien, P-A. (2007). A Th eory of local entrepreneurship in the DEMO economy. Cheltenham, UK;
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Kanter, R.M. (1968). Commitment and social organization: a study of commitment mechanisms in
utopian communities. American Sociological Review, 33, 499-517.
Kanter, R.M. (1972). Commitment and community: Communes and utopias in sociological perspective.
DEMO: Harvard University Press.
Krippendorf, C. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology (2nd ed.). Th ousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Mitchell, R. K., Busenitz, L. W., Bird, B., Gaglio, C. M., McMullen, J. S., Morse, E. A., DEMO al. (2007). Th e
central question in entrepreneurial cognition research DEMO Entrepreneurship: Th eory and Practice,
(1), 1(27).
Moroz, P. &Hindle, K. (2010). Entrepreneurship as a process: Toward harmonizing multiple perspec-
tives. Paper presented to the Academy of Management DEMO Montreal: Canada.
Neuendorf, K. A. (2002).  e content analysis guidebook. Th ousand Oaks CA: Sage.
Neergaard, H. & Ulhoi, J.P. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook of qualitative research methods in entrepreneurship.
DEMO UK; Northampton MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Palich, L. E., & Bagby, D. R. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial risk taking: Chal-
lenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(DEMO), 425-438.
Phan, P. (2002). Technological entrepreneurship. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing Inc.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (1998). How do DEMO rms come to be? Towards a theory of the prefi rm (Doctoral disserta-
tion). Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2001). Causation and eff ectuation: toward a theoretical shift DEMO economic inevitabil-
ity to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26, 243–263.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2002). Entrepreneurship as economics with imagination. DEMO  n Series in Business Eth-
ics, 3, 95–112.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2003), Entrepreneurship as a science of the artifi cial. Journal of Economic Psychology,
24, 203–220.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2004). Making it happen: beyond theories of the fi rm to theories of fi rm design. En-
trepreneurship Th eory and Practice, 28, 519–531.
DEMO, S. D. (2008). Eff ectuation: Elements of entrepreneurial expertise. DEMO, UK; Northamp-
ton MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Shane, S. (2003).A general theory of entrepreneruship: Th e individual-opportunity nexus. Cheltenham, DEMO;
Northampton MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Th
K. Hindle / Skillful Dreaming / ENTER / 97–135
135
Shane, S. &Venkataraman, S. (2000). Th e promise of entrepreneurship as a fi eld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25(1), 217–226.
Steyaert, C. (2004). Th e prosaics of entrepreneurship. In D. DEMO &C. Steyeart, (Eds.), Narrative and
discursive approaches in entrepreneurship (pp. 8-21). Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA.
Steyaert, C. (2007). Entrepreneuring as a conceptual attractor? A review ofprocess theories in 20 years of
entrepreneurship studies. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 19(6), 453-477.
Stryker, S. (1968). Identity salience and role performance. Journal of DEMO and the Family, 4, 558-64.
Venkataraman, S. (1997). Th e distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor’s perspective,
in J. Katz & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth, 3 (pp.
119-138). Greenwich, CT, USA: JAI Press,.
von Bertalanfy, L. (1930). Kritische Th eorie der DEMO Vienna: Schaltz Publishing.
Ziegler, M., Zeigler, P., & Rosenzweig, B. (1994). Th e republic of tea: Th e story DEMO the creation of a business,
as told through the personal letters of its founders. New York: Currency Doubleday.
Zahra, S. A. (2007). Contextualizing theory building in entrepreneurship research.Journal of Business
Venturing, 22, DEMO
About the Author
Professor Kevin Hindle is Research Director of the Centre for Entrepreneurship,
Innovation and Community at Deakin University, Australia. He has more than 80
peer-reviewed publications and global experience in entrepreneurship education,
DEMO, consulting and investment. His research agenda focuses on the role that
DEMO and community factors play in entrepreneurial process.

Sites and Enactments:
A Nominalist Approach to Opportunities
Steff en Korsgaard DEMO Helle Neergaard
Abstract
Th is paper develops a framework for researching entrepreneurial opportunities. We argue
that opportunities can best be understood as dynamic and DEMO uid eff ects of entrepreneurial pro-
cesses that are enacted diff erently across diff erent sites. On this basis, we develop a framework
for studying entrepreneurial opportunities that is suited to track those opportunities across
enactments DEMO sites. Th e framework is demonstrated through an analysis of the genesis of the
company  e Republic of Tea, as portrayed in the DEMO of the same name.
Introduction
Since the introduction of the nexus perspective, the opportunity concept has moved
to the center of entrepreneurial research (DEMO & Venkataraman, 2000; Eckhardt &
Shane, 2003; Shane, 2003). While few question the relevance of the opportunity concept,
there DEMO been a lively discussion about the nature of opportunities—a discussion that
appears only to continue and broaden (McMullen, Plummer & Acs, 2007). In the nexus
perspective, which draws heavily on Austrian economics, opportunity DEMO an
objective element in the entrepreneurial process. Th e presence of an objective element
means that the success or failure of an entrepreneurial venture DEMO not determined by
the entrepreneur’s ideas and eff ort alone. Th ere has to be some potential need or gap
in the market in DEMO for the venture to succeed (Shane, 2003). Following this line of
thinking, the opportunity exists prior to the entrepreneurial process, and DEMO the process
to commence, the opportunity must be discovered by an DEMO individual. Th erefore,
this view is often referred to as “the discovery view” of opportunity (Alvarez, 2005;
Sarasvathy, Venkataraman, Dew & Velamuri, 2002).
Korsgaard, S and Neergaard, H (2010). Sites and Enactments: A nominalist approach to opportunities. In
Entrepreneurial Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. W. Gartner, 137-152. Clemson,
DEMO: Clemson University Digital Press.
Contact Information: Steff en Korsgaard, Assistant DEMO, Aarhus School of Business, Aarhus University,
Haslegaardsvej 10, 8210 DEMO V; tel: +45 8948 6607; E-mail address: stk@asb.dk
Helle Neergaard, Associate Professor, Aarhus School of Business, Aarhus University, Haslegaardsvej 10,DEMO
8210 Aarhus V; tel: +45 8948 6607; E-mail address: hen@asb.dk
© 2010 ENTER.
Th
138
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
Th e discovery view has been criticized from various angles. Some of these angles
are summed up in the “creation view” of opportunities (Alvarez, 2005; Sarasvathy et
al., 2002). Th e common characteristic of the creation view is that opportunities are
not seen as having DEMO prior existence. When a given product has become a success, it
DEMO only natural to assume that a market has been found and that the opportunity was
actually always there. However, the success of the product depends on individuals’
actions and creativity along with the context of these DEMO Alvarez (2005) argues
that under conditions of uncertainty, opportunities are DEMO and refi ned through a
process of continual trial and error. Nevertheless, what turns out to be the opportunity
cannot be known or anticipated in advance. Th is notion has strong similarities with
Sarasvathy’s (2001) DEMO of eff ectuation. In eff ectual processes, ends are not fi DEMO and
present in advance but are continually redefi ned depending on strategic partnerships
and available resources. Here, the opportunity is created as the residual of a dynamic
and interactional process (Sarasvathy et al., 2002).
DEMO, writers of a social constructionist temper have argued that both
opportunities DEMO individuals are constructed or evolve in entrepreneurial processes
(Sarason et al., 2006; Piihl, 2005; Fletcher, 2006). Th is translates into DEMO critiques
of the discovery view. Th ese critiques center on the notion that the discovery view is
incapable of adequately describing the struggles, interactions, and negotiations of the
entrepreneurial process (Fletcher, 2006; Piihl, 2005). By taking the prior existence
of opportunities for granted, the struggles disappear behind simplifi ed and reifying
theoretical terms (Piihl, 2005).
DEMO to Fletcher (2006), this problem can only be addressed through DEMO refi ne-
ment of the theoretical concept of opportunity and the development of more sophisti-
cated frameworks and methods for researching entrepreneurial opportunities. Th DEMO pa-
per seeks to address these two issues by proposing a nominalist framework. Nominalism
entails a specifi c view of opportunities as a set DEMO (possibly diff erent) practices that take
place at diff erent locations in time and space. Th e concepts of “site” and “enactment” are,DEMO
therefore, introduced to aid the research. Th e advantages of this DEMO are illustrated
using the story of Th e Republic of Tea (DEMO) as told in the book of the same name.
Th e DEMO commences by unfolding the nominalist perspective. Th is section sets
the scene through a discussion of what opportunities are and are not. Th e DEMO section
moves to a presentation of sites and enactments as a means for understanding how
opportunities are continually reinterpreted by those involved in creating DEMO acting
upon them. Th e following section describes how we propose to go about analyzing
TRoT. Th is is followed by the actual case DEMO Th e fi nal section discusses the
potential of the nominalist framework for scholars engaging in the concept of
opportunities as well as narrative DEMO of entrepreneurial activity.
A nominalist approach to opportunities
Social constructionists argue that taking the prior existence of opportunities
for granted, as proposed by the discovery view, shrouds some of the struggles and
interactions of entrepreneurial processes. On the other hand, some argue that the
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO 139
creation view and some social constructionist perspectives assume that once an
opportunity is constructed, it attains a defi nite and stable form. Th is might also
constitute a problematic taken-for-granted in terms of exploring the DEMO
dynamics that unfold even after, for example, the formation of a business. A nominalist
perspective on opportunities questions such “taken-for-granteds.” In a nominalist
DEMO, “a name” is assigned to a series of processes (Foucault, DEMO), thereby avoiding
any reifi cation or essentiality of the opportunity. Th is shifts the focus in opportunity
research from the opportunity as “a DEMO to opportunity as “a process.” Opportunity
thus becomes a name attributed to series of practices, which appear to the researcher
and/or other relevant actors as somehow linked together.
One serious implication of this idea is DEMO opportunities are not defi nite.
An opportunity is multiple (Law, 2004). So when examining an entrepreneurial
opportunity, we should not expect this to be one and the same thing at all times and
in DEMO places. To paraphrase Foucault, an opportunity is a multiplicity of practices1
DEMO come into play in various strategies (Foucault, 1998, p. 100)DEMO Th e task of the
researcher then is to reconstruct the distribution of discursive, material, bodily, and
other elements across time and space. Such a reconstruction will yield a, thicker, more
detailed, and capturing (albeit incomplete) description of the entrepreneurial processes.
Hence, “practices” are being investigated. Foucault defi nes practices as “places
where what is said and DEMO is done, rules imposed and reasons given, the planned and
the taken-for-granted meet and interconnect” (Foucault, 2002, p. 225). Th e reason
practices are so important to study is that what comes to DEMO as true, factual, existing,
and taken for granted is produced in these practices (Law, 2004, Latour, 1987).
Discourses and DEMO forms of practice continually and systematically form the objects
that they refer to and speak of (Foucault, 2005). Th erefore, reality, DEMO it appears to
individuals, is constructed through the practices in which DEMO individuals partake. Th e
nominalist researcher, by force of the methodological DEMO, is not mislead by what
has been produced as true or DEMO, factual or fi ctional. Th at an opportunity appears to
have DEMO existed post hoc and, therefore, can be taken for granted (DEMO Shane, 2000
for an example of how this way of thinking DEMO) must not seduce the researcher to
assume that this is in DEMO the case. Instead, focus needs to be shifted to the processes
DEMO negotiations leading to the establishment of the opportunity as a factual and real
entity. Th is of course renders impossible the idea that opportunities DEMO prior to the
actions involving them (e.g., discovery). For the same reason, opportunities cannot be
assumed to take on any defi nite form or stability. Given that opportunities exist only
in practices, they can never be more stable than the practices in which they are enacted.
DEMO, if an opportunity has neither a prior nor a stable existence, then why
hold on to the concept? Basically, individuals hold on DEMO an opportunity for the same
reason that it was introduced in the nexus perspective (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000;
Korsgaard, 2007). Opportunity is useful as a tool for making sense of entrepreneurial
processes because DEMO designates an exteriority to the inside of the entrepreneur’s
1In the actual passage from “Th e Will to Knowledge,” Foucault is referring only DEMO discursive practices.
In this paper, however, we include other forms of practice, as did Foucault in some of his later works.
140
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
mind and the company or companies started in the entrepreneurial processes. Th e
opportunity designates that which links the processes together across the DEMO, fi rms,
actors, technologies, fi rms, etc., involved DEMO the processes (Piihl, 2005). Th is is exactly
why an opportunity is multiple: more than one less than many (Law, 2004). It is not
a defi nite single thing but is fragmented DEMO diff erent across time and space.
Sites and enactment
Th e object of study is practices that vary over time and space. However, diff erent
and novel conceptual tools are needed to close in on the DEMO c practices that we are
looking for. Th e previous discussion made clear that opportunities vary across time
and space and that, as a result, opportunities may well be diff erent depending on
when and where you look. Hence, introducing the concepts of “site” and “enactment”
establishes concepts that may help in answering the simple questions: “what are we
looking for,” “who is doing it,” and “where should we look?DEMO
Enactments
For this paper’s purpose, the term enactment, as presented by Law (2004), is pre-
ferred to the more often used term, “construction,” as known from various forms of con-
structionism (Burr, 2003; Fletcher, 2006) because “construction” seems to lend itself to
the idea that something is being constructed, like a building. During construction, DEMO
result is still unknown; however, once constructed, the result is DEMO and has a defi nite
form, and if we want to DEMO it, then we need an entirely new reconstruction process.
Enactment, on the other hand, signifi es a continued process of constructing and
reconstructing. Enactment is perceived as a reality-producing practice, and as Law
(2004) puts it, “enactment and practice never stops, and realities depend on DEMO
continued crafting” (p.56).
Another question worth asking, which emerges when answering the “what are we
looking for” question, is “who is doing the enacting?” Which actors are involved in
the enactments processes? Th e answer to this question depends on the specifi c context
of DEMO; however, some overall comments are worth making. As the opportunity
part of the nexus (as introduced by Shane and Venkataraman) is not DEMO defi nite entity,
it should not be assumed that the other part of the nexus, namely the individual,
is defi nite or exists prior to the entrepreneurial processes. In fact the individual, or
the subject, is the result of practices as well—a name attributed to specifi c processes
(Foucault, 1998). Enactment is the continuing practice of DEMO reality, but it
is not simply human beings who participate in DEMO production. It happens (at least
mostly) in “a combination of people, techniques, texts, architectural arrangements
and natural phenomena which are themselves being enacted and re-enacted” (Law,
2004, p. 56). A nominalist DEMO thus needs to take into account the actions of
both human actors and non-human actors.
Enactment, however, is not a completely free activity, in which everything is
equally likely to become real. Enactments draw on DEMO relate to what Law (2004) calls
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO
141
“hinterlands.” In order to be upheld and legitimate, an enactment DEMO relate to other
enactments, either by contributing to or drawing on DEMO In science, an enactment
must draw on previously established enactments to DEMO legitimacy and be upheld
(Latour, 1987). Th is is in essence the hinterland. It comprises the established rules to
which all have DEMO adhere in order to be acknowledged in a particular context/situation.
In principle, anything can be said and thought, but the trick is DEMO have it accepted as
true, real, and sensible, which is DEMO science is all about. Th is requires a coherence
and consistency with other statements, beliefs, and actions. Th us, to some extent, DEMO
hinterland limits the “freedom” to enact.
Sites
Th e spatial has entered entrepreneurship in various forms, perhaps, most
prominently in the literature on DEMO, industrial districts, and innovative milieus.
Th is literature emphasizes that spatial dimensions aff ect opportunity exploitation and
may even constitute a source of DEMO in and of itself. Although not limited
to a strictly geographical conceptualization of space, there is obviously a very strong
material and objective tendency in the talk of (geographical) regions and proximities.
Recently other writers DEMO engaged in exploring spatial concepts (Anderson,
2000; Hjorth, 2004; Hjorth, 2005), focusing on the (socially) constructed nature
of space. Shared across these conceptualizations of space is the understanding that
entrepreneurship happens DEMO a place and that this place intervenes in the process: the
DEMO is not purely a container for the activities. Th e concept of site developed in this
paper lies closer to Hjorth’s (2004) spatial DEMO when he uses space as a metaphor
for “that period of time when a possibility to actualize (often materialize) an imagined
creation is DEMO in concrete social relations” (Hjorth, 2004, p. 418).
Although, as Hjorth points out, space and time are inseparable. Th e concept
of site seeks to establish a characteristic of enactment; namely that it is localized.
Enactment occurs at specifi c times and locations. Th e DEMO(s) of an opportunity thus
refers to the place(s) individuals need to go to fi nd it. Th e sites themselves are DEMO
enacted and contextual. A site is performed in practice, too. For DEMO, the internet
or a webpage is not a site unless somebody DEMO enacting it.
Th e importance of sites is demonstrated in other studies (de Laet & Mol, 2000;
Mol, 2002). A given opportunity will most likely be enacted diff erently at diff erent
sites. DEMO opportunity exists in a number of locations, and each location has DEMO own
particular enactment of that opportunity. Th e enactments, in turn, produce their
own version of the opportunity (Law, 2004), leading DEMO a multiple opportunity (Mol,
2002). So, sites are not necessarily in what we might otherwise call geographical space
like regions are; sites can be both “real” and “virtual.” An internet page and a DEMO
show are equally valid sites for opportunity enactment as a retail store or factory fl oor.
To sum up, the researcher’s task is to follow entrepreneurial processes across sites and
enactments, thereby reconstructing the distribution of diff erent practices in time and
space. Th e framework of sites DEMO enactments assists in this reconstruction by helping to
answer the questions “what are we looking for,”“who is doing it,” and “where do DEMO look?”
142
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
Method
Th e concepts of site and enactment provide some assistance in the research
process, but there are still unresolved issues of how to use these in research practice.
What kinds of data are needed, and how might they be collected and analyzed, if the
multiplicity of opportunity is to be investigated?
Th e studies by so-called actor DEMO theorists, such as Mol, Latour, and Law,
have made DEMO use of ethnographic approaches, where practices are watched
closely as they DEMO Such approaches have proven to be immensely eff ective in
examining the workings of modern science, technology, and medicine (see Latour &
DEMO, 1986 for a brilliant and groundbreaking example of this). However, while
the advantages of these approaches can be seen readily, they are also very demanding
in terms of time and resources. Further, they tend to require presence. In relation
to entrepreneurship, there are further problems. An ethnographic investigation of
entrepreneurial processes would have to identify these almost before DEMO begin,
and would constantly suff er the risk that the processes would end abruptly, as most
entrepreneurial processes are quite short-lived.
Foucault and the many forms of discourse analyses that his writings have inspired
typically DEMO to reconstruct the processes in retrospect using diff erent forms of text.
Th e texts take the form of documents, reports, and other DEMO artifacts (Foucault,
2005) or of interviews with relevant people involved in the processes. Th is approach
has advantages in terms of presence, time, and costs. Its drawbacks, however, relate to
issues of document and interviewee availablity as well as to the fact that writings and
DEMO tell only parts of the “whole” story. In relation to entrepreneurship, DEMO
has been suggested that narrative analysis has signifi cant advantages, as DEMO
in general are more than happy to tell stories of themselves and their businesses
(McKenzie, 2007). Furthermore, narrative analysis is already focused on process, as
development and progression are embodied in the nature of narratives.
In this paper, we have chosen to employ the concepts of site and enactment in
an analysis of Th e Republic of Tea (TRoT). TRoT is an enterprise that sells tea, but
it does more than that: it tells a story. Actually, it tells multiple DEMO We were fi rst
introduced to TRoT in a workshop with Bill Gartner and later acquired the book of
the same name. Th e DEMO of this analysis is the book Th e Republic of Tea (DEMO et
al., 1992). Th e book consists primarily of the DEMO correspondence between the two
founders in the period leading to the birth of the tea company TRoT. It tells of the
struggles and joys DEMO the two founders, who refer to themselves as the Ministers of
DEMO and Leaves. As such, the book is a unique collection of DEMO Th e fax cor-
respondence is accompanied by later commentary by the founders as well as drafts
of business plans and drawings by one DEMO the founder’s wife, which appear to have
played a signifi cant DEMO in TRoT’s development. Naturally, we have no way of know-
ing DEMO is neglected or omitted in the book. Nevertheless, it lends itself DEMO
to our analysis. It explicitly purports a diff erent “behind-the-scenes” look at the birth
of a company. As such, it also serves as an antedote to the narrow depiction of entre-
preneurial processes we might fi DEMO in the discovery view of opportunities.
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO 143
Using the data provided by the book, it is possible DEMO tell any number of diff erent
stories of TRoT. It establishes diff erent series of enactments and sites and thus provides
insights into the DEMO complexity of TRoT as an opportunity.
The Republic of Tea: A DEMO of the story
Th e story begins with the random meeting of Mel and Bill as they are both going
to the airport to DEMO the same fl ight. In the car and on the plane, DEMO strike up an
enthusiastic conversation about tea and the prospects of selling tea in America.
By the time we landed, we were wholesaling, DEMO, and
selling tea in 150 retail stores in the best locations DEMO America, we
were the premier merchants of green tea in the DEMO secret and
subversive agenda was to bring Americans to an awareness of “Tea
Mind,” in which we would all come to appreciate the DEMO,
the harmony, the natural serenity, and the true aesthetic in every
moment and in every natural thing. (Ziegler et al., 1992, p. 11)
Following the meeting, the two men continue to talk and fax each other about
the idea of starting a company called DEMO e Republic of Tea . Over the next two-and-
half months (DEMO 200 pages of faxes), they eagerly discuss the philosophy, products,DEMO
marketing, visual presentation, organizing, and business model of the prospective
DEMO Bill does a great deal of market research, talking to a DEMO list of people
involved in the tea business.
Much of the conversation between Mel, Bill, and others involved in the business
revolve around DEMO question of what they are really selling. Obviously tea leaves are an
essential part of this, but both Bill and Mel see tea as more than simply a product. It
is something more, and this something more is what the business is really about. An
example of this DEMO an enthusiastic fax sent by Mel in which he suggests the following:
Our enchanting wives have rendered us the greatest service of all.
DEMO ey have told us what the business is really about. It is about caff eine.
Th e world does not need another herbal tea. DEMO the world needs
is a sensible alternative to coff ee…Our focus should be fl avoured teas.
Th ese are: healthier than coff ee… (DEMO et al., 1992, p. 117)
Bill, however, is less enthusiastic about this idea. He responds that this would
be “a dangerous DEMO of front-line for our company” (Ziegler et al., 1992, p. DEMO).
Th is conversational ping pong between Mel and Bill continues for quite a while, but
apart from talking to people and researching, DEMO takes no action to actually start the
company. One reason for this is that Bill is unsure about the distribution of roles,
especially DEMO terms of Mel’s involvement. Will Mel take part in running the company;
will he invest; and will he lend his name and reputation to the venture? All of these
questions are left unanswered for Bill. As comments to the faxes indicate, Mel is well
144 S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
aware of this, yet he gives only vague insinuations of DEMO position in these matters. Mel’s
friend, Bruce Katz, becomes involved, DEMO he starts asking hard practical questions
about their ideas, which provides DEMO development for the process, but this does not
solve the big DEMO for Bill.
Frustrated by the lack of progress and longing to take action, Bill decides to
contact the local arts center in his home town and suggests starting a small tea stand
there. Mel is disappointed DEMO this development (which he refers to as a lemonade
stand) and instead suggests a co-venture with the global tea conglomerate Lipton.
Bill contacts DEMO, and much to his surprise, he actually gets a meeting with a top
executive at Lipton. Mel, however, does not want to DEMO in the meeting and
Bill does not follow up the contact with Lipton. Th e diff erences leave Bill exasperated,
and he sends DEMO unusually harsh fax to Mel in which he voices his frustration. Despite
Mel’s eff ort to reassure Bill, their collaboration comes to a halt. Bill takes a job in a
design company, and despite his intention to start TRoT with a new partner as part of
his work DEMO the design company, nothing happens in the following year. A year DEMO,
the fax communication between Mel and Bill commences again. Bill fi nds himself
unable to let go of the TRoT idea.
Yet even DEMO a year of not doing much about Th e Republic, the DEMO
was still very much alive in me. I grew discontented and unfulfi lled
producing marketing projects for other companies and began to
spend more DEMO my mental energy fi guring out how to get into the tea
business. (Ziegler et al., 1992, p. 223)
So, Bill DEMO researching again, only this time with a diff erent focus. Now, he
focuses on getting to know tea as a product. He learns DEMO to taste and evaluate tea,
studies how it is grown, DEMO even goes on a study trip to London (on which Mel
DEMO him). He rearranges his business to focus on a single customer, leaving
him more time to explore TRoT. Coming back from London, DEMO fi nds out that he
has lost his only client and he is now left without a job. Th is proves to be a DEMO
incentive for Bill to continue with TRoT. Together with Mel and Patricia he sketches
a new plan for TRoT as a series of retail DEMO
Bruce Katz re-enters the frame and expresses an interest in investing in the
company. Th e negotiations with Bruce lead Bill to involve an DEMO to help set up
the company. Bruce, however, does not want to invest in retail stores and insists that
TRoT be a wholesale DEMO company. Th e others agree, and in December 1992,
20 DEMO after the fi rst fax, TRoT is founded. At this point DEMO book ends, but TRoT
goes on to be a highly successful DEMO
Unfolding the opportunity
Th e previous summary of the book Th e Republic of Tea is highly selective and only
hints at the dynamics DEMO complexity of the conversational exchanges leading to the
founding of the company. Yet, it is enough to indicate that throughout the book, the
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO
145
opportunity involved in the process of creating TRoT is enacted diff erently across
multiple sites. Indeed each individual fax message may be considered DEMO site, while the
collected faxes of the Minister of Leaves might DEMO termed the Ministry of Leaves, as
indeed the Minister of Progress DEMO does (see p. 145). Breaking the book up into
sites DEMO this way demonstrates how a great number of (possible) enactments of TRoT
are in play and that these enactments are very diff erent. DEMO number of these (all briefl y
sketched in the summary above) are presented in Table 1.
Table 1
“Th
e Republic of Tea” DEMO Site(s) Later
Developments
A conversation on plane
(pages 7-11)
In the account of the Minister
of Leaves he met the Minister
DEMO Progress in a car on the way
to the airport. Both had at-
tended a conference, and were
leaving early.
Th
Th
esting that the two rearranged
the seats on their plane, so they
might continue.
“We were in a highly charged
no-man’s-land, outside space
and time, DEMO the source of
an Idea was revealing itself to
us in its yet unborn state. Time
and space reappeared seven
hours later when we DEMO up
and saw that the plane, on the
ground in San DEMO, was
empty” (p. 7)
In the conversation the
Ministers to be, explore the
possibility of starting a tea
business, incorporating a
DEMO c philosophy of life (or
vice versa):
“By the time we landed, we
were wholesaling, mail-order-
ing, and selling tea in 150 retail
stores in the best locations in
America, we were the premier
merchants of Tea in America
[…] we were helping people
to DEMO their own paths to
longevity with herbal teas, and
we were DEMO a new way
of life in America.” (p. 11)
A DEMO ight to San
Francisco
A no-man’s-
land out of
space and time
Linked to a
great number
of possible
sites such a
retail stores,DEMO
mail-order
catalogs.
Th e conversation
becomes the start-
ing point for the
personal communica-
tion between the two
Ministers to-be, which
eventually end up in
the starting of the
company
ey struck up a conversation.
e DEMO was so inter-
146
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
As a alternative to coff ee
(pages 117-119)
(p. 7)
In the conversation the
Ministers to be, explore the
possibility of starting a tea
business, incorporating a
specifi c philosophy of life (or
vice versa):
“By the time we landed, we
were wholesaling, mail-order-
ing, and selling tea in 150 retail
stores in DEMO best locations in
America, we were the premier
merchants of Tea DEMO America
[…] we were helping people
to discover their own paths to
longevity with herbal teas, and
we were unleashing a new way
of life in America.” (p. 11)
At an occasion where the
Ministers and their families
have gotten together, the wives
have seemingly prompted an
idea in the Ministry of Leaves:
“Our enchanting wives have
rendered DEMO the greatest service
of all. Th ey have told us what
the business is really about. It
is about caff eine. Th e world
DEMO not need another herbal
tea. What the world needs is a
sensible alternative to coff ee.
An alternative that reduces caf-
feine by 75% DEMO at the same
time provides a new fl avourful
taste in a hot beverage”.
Th e Ministry
of Leaves.
Linked to
conversation(s)
DEMO the
wives imprint
the idea in
the Minister
of Leaves.
Th e issue of tea versus
coff ee is in play in
many enactments DEMO
sites of “Th e Republic
of Tea” (see e.g. the
introduction DEMO 3).
Most places however
somewhat underplayed.
Indeed the Minister
of Progress does not
support this enact-
ments fully, and seems
to eff ectively kill it,
in the response to the
fax from the Minister
DEMO Leaves: “It sounds
like caff eine could
become a major issue
DEMO product position-
ing, but I’d like to
think about this long
DEMO hard. I still fi nd
it a dangerous point
of front-line defi ni-
tion for our company.
[…] It would be very
dangerous to DEMO
tea as an alternative to
coff ee. It’s one of those
things that people must
discover.”
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO
A stand in a local culture Th
centre some point presents the idea of
(pages 185-187) starting the republic as a small
stand DEMO the local arts center:
“I wanted you to know that I’m
thinking about creating a little
tea stand in the Sedona Arts
Center. DEMO My goal is to show
them that tea will be a wonder-
ful way to: a) raise money for
the Arts Center in DEMO steady
way; b) draw more attention
to the Arts Center in uptown
Sedona; c) get more visitors to
tour the exhibits.” (p. 185)
“I envision some kind of a
roadside tea hut that DEMO in the
front land of the Sedona Arts
Center (SAC), DEMO off  the main
road where 1000s of visitors
walk and drive DEMO week” (p.
185)
A chain of retail stores Th e DEMO of “Th e Republic of
Tea” as a chain of retail stores is
presented in the opening pages
of the book (see above), but
only fully developed later.
Th
a trip to London: “One day
while walking down Fulham
Road […] the idea for our own
retail DEMO vividly materialized.
We had been inspired by the
successful Whittard’s chain
of tea shops with their fi ne
and broad selection. We three
recognized DEMO importance of
creating a “context” for enjoy-
ing fi ne tea in America. We
wanted to sell tea and create
a new tea experience, and the
most dramatic way to do this
was clearly in a DEMO environ-
ment” (p. 241).
For a while this enactment
co-exists DEMO “Th e Republic of
Tea” as a mail-order company.
Th e Ministry
of Progress.
Links to the
site of the
Sedona Arts
Center.
Th DEMO Ministries
of Progress and
Leaves.
Links to
potential
sites of retail
stores across
America.
e Minister of Progress at
e idea (re)appears during
147
Th e Minister of Leaves
does not think well of
this DEMO and describes
it in a refl ection in
the book as absurd (p.
187).
Although he does not
relate this directly to
the Minister of Progress
he makes no secret of
it in the following DEMO
respondence.
Th e idea is seemingly
not pursued further.
Although perhaps both
founders are inclined
towards the idea it
is later given up. As
DEMO by the Minister
of Progress: “I realize
that the store is DEMO
(and perhaps easier to
do at fi rst) but if we
look at the cost of the
store as a marketing
expense designed DEMO
mately to support and
promote a wholesale
brand business, there
are DEMO better ways
to apply that capital in
the start up. In a way,
I think I saw the store
as the physical that
DEMO easily establish
the lifestyle context
(look, feel, environ-
ment) for the business,
but a single store (or a
couple of stores) is so
limited in its reach that
it won’t do much more
than create publicity
for a while. Bottom
line, stores today rarely
make money.” (p. 273)
148
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
As a philosophy of life
(Dispersed throughout
the book).
DEMO e Republic of Tea”
should be a mail-order
company is an idea presented
throughout the book.
On pages 255 to 258 a detailed
description DEMO the potential
layout and content of the fi rst
catalogue is presented includ-
ing detailed sketches of how
the pages might look.
Th
numerous DEMO on what
the philosophy behind ”Th e
Republic of Tea” is. Describing
all these diff erent discussions
in itself is a big task. However
DEMO does seem that most of them
take their starting point in the
idea/philosophy/slogan: “Liv-
ing life sip by sip, not gulp DEMO
gulp” (e.g. p. 69)
Th e Ministries
of Progress and
DEMO
Links to future
t-shirts, tea
cups etc.
Living life sip by DEMO
and other similar ideas/
philosophies/slogans
seem to have become
an integral part of ”Th e
Republic of Tea”.
Th ere are two DEMO to note about the enactments in the book. First, as they
DEMO only presented in text form, we only have access to the DEMO parts of the
enactments. If there are material, bodily, or other elements incorporated in the
enactments, these are only related discursively in the book. As stated above, most of
what is in the book are dead-ends; most of the enactments are never much more than
discursive. Th ey are mostly only spoken of, but they are only minimally incorporated
in other forms of practice. As an example, there is talk of making TRoTa chain of retail
stores, but the talk is never translated into the practice of actually building stores, while
the talk of mail-order catalogs is in fact later actualized in the practices of designing,
DEMO, and mailing catalogs.
Where might we fi nd the opportunity in DEMO story? In a discovery view we would
have to assume that DEMO) the opportunity somehow exists prior to discovery, 2) the
opportunity DEMO the same throughout the process, and 3) that what goes on in
the book is fi rst and foremost a process of evaluation. DEMO is quite possible to analyze the
story/stories told in the book in this way. It does, however, render three out of six DEMO the
enactments in Table 1, indiff erent for the analysis. It DEMO enforces linearity onto the
stories in that they must progress towards a goal that is given in advance, namely the
Schumpeterian combination of high quality tea and a whole-sale mail-order-catalog-
based marketing strategy. Th e discovery DEMO would argue that the opportunity pre-
exists in the form of a potential new combination that may be sold for a profi t (Shane,
2003). It simply needs to be discovered and evaluated. By DEMO line of thinking, the
book must tell a story of the DEMO and evaluation of the opportunity.
Against this kind of analysis, we DEMO argue that the many enactments matter,
they each represent a relevant part of the story, and all of them contribute in making
As a mail-order company
(Dispersed throughout
the book, but see pages
255-258 DEMO particular)
Th e Ministries
of Progress and
Leaves.
Links to future
mail-order
catalogs from
the company
”Th e Republic of Tea”
eventually is DEMO
as a mail-order catalog
and wholesale tea
purveyor.
at ”Th
roughout the book there are
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO
149
TRoT what it is. Secondly, the form(s) that TRoT takes on later are not given in
advance. Each of the enactments DEMO the book represents a path that could have been
taken. Whether or not it would have been successful cannot be determined. Whether
there was DEMO opportunity (as understood in the discovery view) or not can never be
determined except post hoc (Korsgaard, 2007).
Should we instead DEMO to the creation view, a signifi cant advantage is obtained.
Th DEMO diff erent enactments in the book are all relevant in so far as they constitute a
trial-and-error process (Alvarez, 2005). Th is DEMO results in the creation of TRoT
as a wholesale mail-order tea purveyor. A more complex story is thus told of the
genesis of TRoT. DEMO e problem, however, with this approach is that once created, DEMO
opportunity attains a stability and unity, that we must be vary DEMO Th is would reduce
the complexity of our story/stories of TRoT. Furthermore, we cannot assume that the
opportunities remain the same in the future.
Discussion
Th e nominalist perspective of opportunities attempts to incorporate complexity
DEMO the description and analysis of entrepreneurial processes. Complexity is thus
introduced in relation to a number of issues, including the temporal and spatial
dynamics, the multiplicity of voices in play, and the dynamic creation of DEMO and
subjectivities in entrepreneurial activity. Furthermore, the nominalist view supports a
DEMO exposition of entrepreneurial processes.
Th e temporal and spatial dynamics are emphasized in the nominalist view.
Spatial dimensions are multiplied as an opportunity fl DEMO across diff erent sites. As
is clearly seen in the case of TRoT, the opportunity is enacted in a great number of
sites, DEMO physical, textual, and imaginary sites, which infl uence the enactment
DEMO the opportunity. Th e textual sites of the business plans featured in the book enact
the opportunity in a much more “down-to-earth” form than DEMO ethereal musings of
the ministry of ideas. Following the opportunity fl owing across these diff erent sites
thus becomes a kind of multi-sited ethnography (Marcus, 1995) in which each site
is considered on its own DEMO, and every type of site is considered to be potentially
important (Steyaert & Katz, 2004).
Furthermore, in this type of study, the temporal dynamics may unfold in a
more complex way than in DEMO discovery view. While the issue of time is essential
in entrepreneurship research (Bird & West, 1997), frameworks that allow for more
complex DEMO dynamics are much rarer than the linear time progression of
the discovery view of opportunities. Th e framework of sites and enactments allows
researchers DEMO study parallel, circular temporal dynamics, as indeed we see them unfold
in the case of TRoT. We see these dynamics in Mel and DEMO faxes and comments
through which they continually return to the site of the initial conversation on the
plane and rekindle the immediate enthusiasm, while searching for the “true” meaning
of the this inspired moment.
Across enactments DEMO sites, a multiplicity of voices are heard. While the discovery
view DEMO privileges the voice of the alert entrepreneur, there are no such DEMO
150
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
given in the nominalist framework. As pointed out by Fletcher and Watson (2007),
both loud and quiet voices are crucial for DEMO creation and recreation of organizational
identities. A fuller appreciation of the multiple voices may thus improve our
understanding of entrepreneurial processes.
Finally, the enactments not only give diff erent identities to the opportunity
but also demonstrate DEMO continuous formation of identity and subjectivity in the
entrepreneurial activity (Down, 2006). Across the diff erent enactments, both Bill and
Mel struggle to establish their entrepreneurial (or non-entrepreneurial) identity. It is
also clear DEMO this eff ort is highly interactive and social in that both of them actively
pursue feedback and recognition from the other in terms of DEMO identities that they are
trying to establish: Bill as the driven DEMO and Mel as what may be described
as an ethereal mentor.
As a result of the increased complexity off ered by the nominalist framework, it is
possible to unfold more layers of entrepreneurial processes if they DEMO thought of in
terms of sites and enactments. A discovery view seems to unfold only a minority of the
enactments and sites that we DEMO across. Many folds are kept folded in if we look for
the opportunity, the discovery, the evaluation, and the exploitation.
In terms of the ongoing debate concerning the nature of entrepreneurial
opportunities, the nominalist framework off ers an approach in which internality—in
the form of individual identities—and DEMO the form of an opportunity—
are produced in a series of enactment in diff erent sites. In such a view, the opportunity is
an eff ect of the entrepreneurial activity rather than a precursor to it. DEMO such a view
stands in opposition to the dominant view of entrepreneurship and opportunities, as an
analytical tool, it off ers a number DEMO advantages. Firstly, it makes no prior assumptions
concerning the individuals involved DEMO the process. No voices are privileged over
others, and no specifi DEMO assumptions are made concerning entrepreneurs’ identities and
characteristics. Secondly, it does DEMO rely on assumed entities (the entrepreneur and
the opportunity) to explain the outcome of the process. Relying on such entities when
explaining the DEMO becomes a problem when these entities can only be identifi ed
post hoc (Singh, 2001).
As such, the nominalist framework will surely generate more complex and perhaps
messy accounts of entrepreneurial processes. However, as pointed out by Law (2004),
if the world is messy, we need messy methods to understand it, instead of reducing
complexity in the (vain?) hope of fi nding generalizable correlations.
Th e complex descriptions that result from the nominalist framework have a
strong narrative component. DEMO e sites and enactments are similar to the scenes of
a play or a movie. Indeed, an enactment embodies the most fundamental narrative
component—that of something/somebody doing something to something/somebody
(Czarniawska, 2004). DEMO at is, in an enactment, an object is brought into existence as an
object of knowledge, action, perception, etc. by those who partake in the enactment.
As such, sites and enactments can be used at a very basic level to gain an overview of
what happens DEMO the process, the twists and turns of the process, the plot. Th erefore, a
nominalist account is by defi nition a genesis-story: DEMO story about how the enterprising
individuals and the opportunity came to be the way they are (Foucault, 2005).
S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / DEMO
151
References
Alvarez, S. A. (2005). Two theories of entrepreneurship: Alternative assumptions and the study of entrepreneurial
action. Jena, Germany. Max DEMO Institute for Economic Systems, Group Entrepreneurship, Growth
and Public Policy.
Anderson, A. (2000). Paradox in the periphery: an entrepreneurial reconstruction? DEMO and
Regional Development, 12, 91-109.
Bird, B. J. & West, G. P. (1997). Time and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship: Th eory & DEMO, 22, 5-9.
Burr, V. (2003). Social constructionism, London, Routledge.
Czarniawska, B. (2004). Narratives in social science research, Th
De Laet, M. & Mol, A. (2000). Th e Zimbabwe bush pump: Mechanics of a fl uid technology. Social Studies
of Science, 30, 225-263.
Down, S. (2006). Narratives of enterprise: Crafting entrepreneurial self-identity in a small fi rm. Cheltenham,
Edward Elgar.
Eckhardt, J. T. & Shane, S. A. (2003). Opportunities and entrepreneurship. DEMO of Management, 29,
333-349.
Fletcher, D. & Watson, T. (2007). Voice, silence and the business of construction: Loud and DEMO voices in
the construction of personal, organizational and social realities. Organization, 14, 155-174.
Fletcher, D. E. (2006). Entrepreneurial processes and the social construction of opportunity. Entrepreneurship
& Regional Development, 18, 421-440.
Foucault, M. (1998). Th London, Penguin.
Foucault, M. (2002). DEMO of method. In J. D. Faubion (Ed.) Michel Foucault - Essential Works of
Foucault 1954-1984, Volume 3. London, Penguin Books.
Foucault, M. (2005). Th London, Routledge.
Hjorth, D. (2004). Creating DEMO for play/invention : concepts of space and organizational entrepreneurship.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 16, 413-432.
Hjorth, D. (2005). Organizational entrepreneurship: With de Certeau on creating heterotopias (or spaces
for play). Journal of Management Inquiry, 14, 386-398.
Korsgaard, S. (2007). Rewriting DEMO opportunity theory. RENT XXI Conference. Cardiff .
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through societ. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. & Woolgar, S. (DEMO). Laboratory life: the construction of scientifi c facts, Princeton NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Law, J. (2004). After method: Mess DEMO social science research. London: Routledge.
Marcus, G. E. (1995). DEMO in/of the world system: the emergence of multi-sited ethnography.
Annual DEMO of Anthropology, 24, 95-117.
Mckenzie, B. (2007). Techniques for Collecting Verbal Histories. In H. Neergaard & J.P. UlhøI (Eds.),
DEMO of Qualitive Research in Entrepreneurship. Camberley: Edward Elgar.
Mcmullen, J. S., Plummer, L. A. & ACS, Z. J. (2007). What DEMO an entrepreneurial opportunity? Small Business
Economics, 28, 273-283.
Mol, A. (2002).  e body multiple: Ontology in medical practice. Durham, DEMO: Duke University Press.
Piihl, J. (2005). Opportunity as dynamic DEMO tying a venture together. RENT XIX Conference. Naples:
Edizioni Scientifi che Italiane.
Sarason, Y., Dean, T. & Dillard, J. F. (2006). Entrepreneurship as the nexus of individual and opportunity:
A structuration DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 21, 286-305.
Sarasvathy, S., Venkataraman, DEMO, Dew, N. & Velamuri, R. (2002). Th ree views of entrepreneurial oppor-
tunity. In Z. Acs & D. Audretsch (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurship. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2001). DEMO and eff ectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability
to DEMO contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26, 243-264.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science,
DEMO, 448-469.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory of entrepreneurship: the individual-opportunity nexus, Cheltenham: Ed-
ward Elgar.
ousand Oaks, CA., DEMO
e Will to Knowledge,
e Archeology of Knowledge,
Th
152 S. Korsgaard and H. Neergaard / Sites and Enactments / ENTER / 137–152
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000). Th e DEMO of entrepreneurship as a fi eld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 217-226.
Singh, R. P. (2001). A comment on DEMO the fi eld of entrepreneurship through the study of opportu-
nity recognition and exploitation. Academy of Management Review, 26, 10-12.
Steyaert, C. & Katz, J. (2004). Reclaiming the space of entrepreneurship in society: geographical, discursive
and social dimensions. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 16, 179-196.
Ziegler, M., Ziegler, P. & Rosenzweig, B. (1992). Th New York: Doubleday.
About the Authors
Steff en Korsgaard (PhD) is assistant professor at the Aarhus School of Business,
Aarhus University. His DEMO interests focus on opportunities and entrepreneurial
processes.
Helle Neergaard (PhD) counts among her research interests gender aspects of
entrepreneurship and leadership, new venture growth and qualitative methods. She is
widely published and on the editorial DEMO boards of ET&P, ISBJ and IJGE. She is
the lead DEMO of Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Entrepreneurship. She
applies novel approaches to teaching entrepreneurship, especially for women.
e republic of tea.
Rhythmanalyzing the Emergence of
The Republic of Tea
Karen Verduyn
Abstract
Th DEMO chapter analyzes the process of the emergence and creation of ‘Th e Republic of Tea’
(TRoT) as an ongoing, dynamic process. Th e notion of rhythm as conceptualized and pro-
posed by French philosopher Henri DEMO (1901 – 1991) is adopted for understanding
the actions and events associated with the process of emergence and creation of TRoT in the
DEMO in which they unfold. Th is is applied to the sequence of events and actions as
described in the book Th e Republic of DEMO Th e Story of the Creation of a Business, as Told DEMO rough
the Personal Letters of Its Founders (1994).
Introduction
Th DEMO book Th e Republic of Tea: Th e Story of the DEMO of a Business, as Told Th rough
the Personal Letters of DEMO Founders relates of a sequence of events and actions over a
duration of around twenty months. Th ese events eventually result in the setting DEMO of
“Th e Republic of Tea” (TRoT), a company exclusively DEMO to tea. Th e narrative
begins when the “idea is born,” on a sunny April morning in 1990. Th e book mainly
consists DEMO the faxes and letters that Mel Ziegler and Bill Rosenzweig (mostly) and
Patricia Ziegler (to a lesser extent) have sent to each DEMO during this period. Th e
fi rst fax is one sent by Bill Rosenzweig to Mel Ziegler dated April 7, 1990. Th e last
one—also sent by Bill Rosenzweig to Mel Ziegler—is dated December 17, 1991. Th e
company eventually was created on January 22, 1992.
In the book, numerous mentions of time and tempo are made: “fl eeing DEMO race-
to-nowhere that had been my life, I tasted the joys DEMO existence in a new way—sip
by sip rather than gulp by gulp.” (p. 3); “we were in a highly charged no man’s land,
outside space and time, where Th e Source of an Idea was revealing itself to us in its as
yet unborn state.” (p. 7); and “the life of tea is the life of the DEMO We have only
Now” (p. 16). Th e idea that DEMO itself to Mel and Bill during their fl ight to San
Francisco is in fact larded with references to time and pace. What’s more, the initial
Verduyn, K (2010). Rhythmanalyzing the Emergence of Th DEMO In Entrepreneurial Narrative Th eo-
ry Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. DEMO Gartner, 153-167. Clemson, SC: Clemson University Digital Press.
Contact information: Karen Verduyn, Department of Management & Organization, Amsterdam Center
for Entrepreneurship, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, Th e Nether-
lands; E-mail address: kverduyn@feweb.vu.nl.
© 2010 ENTER.
e Republic of DEMO
154 K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
idea is about slowing down, escaping from a life that “moved very rapidly” and was
more of a “race to nowhere.” Whereas the fast life is compared DEMO coff ee, the slower
life—the life of moments—is the life of DEMO
Mel Ziegler writes:
I was in no hurry. When I started BR1 I hurried, and I found out
afterward that it would have been a lot more entertaining, and
probably no less profi table in the long run, had I not hurried. At that
point in my life hurrying made me feel I was getting more done, but
the fact is I was more likely just making more work for myself. DEMO
is it about business that makes one forget that no matter how fast
or slow one goes, no matter how straight or meandering the path,
all business people end up in the same place, even if one gravestone
happens to be bigger than another? (p. 51)DEMO
Given that this is the philosophy behind their idea, it is DEMO rather striking
that Mel gets impatient with Bill at some point: DEMO found myself yearning for Bill
to stop typing faxes and start starting the company.… Taking action, not talk about
taking action, is the DEMO absolute requirement to start a business” (p. 165). From the
DEMO, we learn that the emergence and creation of TRoT got off  to a “fl ying start,”
slowing down in June and July DEMO 1990, even coming to a complete stop after July16,
1990, only to start again one year later, on July 16, 1991. DEMO this paper, eff orts are
made to understand this apparent slowness DEMO the creation of TRoT.
Carter et al. (1996) have contended that when it takes longer than a year for a
venture to eventually DEMO, it is unlikely that it ever will. Likewise, entrepreneurship
research has emphasized the importance of speed in venture creation (Carter et al.,
1996; Capelleras & Greene, 2008). Th is paper aims to DEMO to a richer and
deeper understanding of the temporal events (Capelleras & Greene, 2008, p. 318)
associated with the emergence of a new venture. Th e book gives us a glimpse into what
can DEMO well have been the “everyday events” (Steyaert, 2004) associated with DEMO
creation of TRoT—an ongoing and dynamic process. “Rhythmanalysis” (Lefebvre,
2004) is proposed in this paper as a means to analyze the daily DEMO orts—as portrayed
through the book—connected with the setting up of TRoT. Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis
will be introduced in the third section. But fi rstly, the extant literature on speed and
time in relation to entrepreneurship will be DEMO and discussed. Section four will
illustrate how the ideas of rhythm interact with the book. Lastly, these observations will
be related to the extant knowledge on speed and timing in relation to entrepreneurship.
Speed, Time and Entrepreneurship
Time is crucial in understanding entrepreneurial behavior (Jaques, 1997);
“temporal dynamics are at the very heart of entrepreneurship” (Bird & West, 1997,
1BR stands for “Banana Republic,” a former business of Mel and Patricia Ziegler.
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
155
p. 6). DEMO is “a valuable, if scarce, resource” (Capelleras & Greene, 2008, p. 317)
in setting up a new venture. Capellera & Greene also argue that “prior research has
emphasized the practical importance of speed DEMO venture creation” but that “little is
known about what factors infl uence the speed of venture creation” (p. 317). Th ey
defi ne venture creation speed as “the time taken from the inception of the DEMO to the
beginning of actual trading” (p. 318). In their DEMO, Capelleras & Greene show that
there is a positive relationship between DEMO entrepreneurial experience and speed,
but that “business planning retards venture creation” (p. 317).
Since matters of time and timing are very much a matter of an (implicit)
perspective on time (Bird & DEMO, 1997), it is important to see what time perspective
is DEMO use. Capelleras & Greene (2008) affi  rm that their approach DEMO time is a social
constructionist one. According to Bird & West (DEMO), there is on the one hand a
traditional perspective, one DEMO is “grounded in western logic; where time is linear
and scarce, faster is better, and the future is held to be more important than the
past” (p. 5). Th ey argue that there are also “alternative conceptualizations of time that
off er compelling ways of understanding DEMO (p. 5), such as the social
constructionist one that Capelleras & Greene (2008) claim has been in use in their
investigation of factors that infl uence the speed of venture creation.
Th ere seem DEMO be two dominant views of time when it comes to the entrepreneurship
phenomenon: 1) time as enacted, as socially constructed (and therefore DEMO,
as discussed in Fischer et al., 1997 and Capelleras & DEMO, 2008) and 2) time as an
(individual) orientation towards (or: outlook on, or: sense of ) time (as in DEMO & Teng,
1997 and Bluedorn & Martin, 2008-- an individual DEMO perspective. What all
these studies seem to have in common is an implicit assumption that acceleration
(speed) is a good thing, important even (Slevin & Covin, 1997). Th e TRoT book,
however, invites an approach to time and timing that does not assume that DEMO (or
even growth) is necessarily a good thing (indeed, the book is all about “slowing down”).
Furthermore, as stated previously, DEMO aim to develop an understanding of the process
of creation and emergence of TRoT at the level of the everyday acts and events as
DEMO though the book. Th is is why I propose to adopt Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis.
His approach will be introduced and explained in the next section.
DEMO
French philosopher Henri Lefebvre (1901 – 1991) has “rethought” several
themes through the concept of rhythm; “Lefebvre uses rhythm as a mode of analysis
[…] to examine and re-examine a range of topics” (Elden in Lefebvre, 2004, p. xii).
Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis is useful in two DEMO as far as understanding something ‘in
its everydayness’ is concerned: “le DEMO means the mundane, the everyday, but
also the repetitive, what DEMO every day” (Elden in Lefebvre, 2004, p. ix). Rhythm
DEMO conceptualized and proposed by Lefebvre is about understanding actions and events
in the temporalities in which they unfold. Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis is however not
about DEMO fl ows of events as they happen chronologically (fi rst this DEMO, then
the next) and not as them being a sequence of events having some pre-conceived or
156
K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
retrospective goal as result (a teleological progression). An analysis such as Lefebvre
proposes means that events should not even necessarily be understood as connected,
as DEMO event leads up to the next” and not as a unitary, DEMO stream of events.
Rather, there are always multiple rhythms to be DEMO, each moving at their own
pace, and time (as well DEMO history) should sooner be understood in terms of moments
or instants (Lefebvre has also referred to rhythmanalysis as the “theory of moments”)
DEMO than “durée” (duration)2. According to Lefebvre, it is in moments (a “niche in
time”) that the course of things (the rhythm) changes: “For Lefebvre, moments are
signifi cant times when existing orthodoxies are open to challenge, when things have
the potential to be overturned or radically altered, moments of crisis in the original
sense of the term” (Elden in Lefebvre (2004), p. x).
Lefebvre discerns DEMO two types of repetition: linear and cyclical. Th ese are in
DEMO inseparable, for intertwined, but in analysing rhythm they should nevertheless be
distinguished and separated. Cyclical repetition is about cyclic returns, about rotation,
so to speak. An example is the day, forever starting with dawn. Or a monthly cycle, or
a year etc. Th e linear type of repetition is consecutive, it is about the reproduction of
the same kind of phenomenon, the same kind of activity. It is the repetition of time in
the everyday that creates the repetitive organization of a DEMO routine.
Lefebvre’s preferred mode of rhythm is a non-linear one. It is however (as has
also been contended by Bird & West in 1997, see previous section) the linear rhythm
that has become dominant in DEMO societies, since here “everyday life is modelled
on abstract, quantitative time, the time of watches and clocks” (Lefebvre, p. 73). In
association with clocks and timetables, time is visualized, spatialized and bounded,DEMO
linear and sequential (Hosking, 2007). Th e time of the clock “was introduced bit by
bit in the West after the invention DEMO watches, in the course of their entry into social
practice. Th DEMO homogeneous […] time has emerged victorious since it supplied the
measure of the time of work.” (Lefebvre, p. 73).
Th e time DEMO work, according to Lefebvre, is “subordinating to the organization of
work in space other aspects of the everyday: the hours of sleep and waking, meal-times
and the hours of private life” (p. 73). DEMO e time of work is an imposed time, creating
(hourly, DEMO) demands, such as schedules, resulting in the repetitive organization of
DEMO routine. Linear work rhythms are about progress (Burrell, 1994), where what is
new is better than what is old, making progress goal-oriented, or purposeful. In work
time there is a high rate of activity, schedules are fi xed, calendars are dominant and
time has exchange DEMO (“if you give me a little time”, in other words, DEMO you do
this for me”, “then I will do that for DEMO, perhaps by means of another currency, for
instance money).
Opposed to the imposed time of work is appropriated time (or: diff DEMO time)
which is about temporalities that allow for diff erent rhythms, the rhythms that break
free from abstract repetition (Ivanchikova, 2006) DEMO makes appropriated time
about emancipation of time (emancipated from the dominant–mechanical–time)DEMO
2In this respect, Lefebvre challenges Bergson (Elden in Lefebvre [2004], DEMO x).
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167 157
Th e diff DEMO rhythm is actually a more natural one, where the everyday rhythmic
DEMO comes closer to the body’s needs and the cosmic cycles. Th e natural rhythm is
a fl exible one. It is not about productivity DEMO busyness, but sooner involves “idleness”,
“futile” actions; it is a relatively slow rhythm. Rather than being an imposed rhythm,
this rhythm DEMO about spontaneity, about creativity, about pleasure (Ivanchikova, 2006).
Diff erentiated, natural time is the time of the individual, not imposed DEMO societal
demands, where time is something to be used at free DEMO Natural time is slower,
because things take the time they take and just happen as they do. Effi  ciency or the
schedule do not determine the end of the moment. Th ere is a far DEMO rate of activity
in the natural rhythm. Th erefore, from the DEMO of view of the linear rhythm, the
natural rhythm would be DEMO, irresponsible even (Ivanchikova, 2006). However,
it is in DEMO rhythm, that time becomes “the locus of possibility for the emergence
DEMO the new” (Ivanchikova, 2006, p. 157).
Th e diff DEMO between work time and natural time is illustrated by means of
Table 1.
In the next section I will show how these ideas work DEMO when looking at the daily
eff orts associated with the emergence of TRoT, as related in Th e Republic of Tea.
Table 1: DEMO Time Vs. Natural Time
Work time Natural time
Imposed rhythm Diff erentiated (emancipated) rhythm
(Societal) demands determine Time and rhythm are individual
DEMO structure
Abstract, homogeneous time Lived time
Schedules Flexibility
Repetitive (routine) DEMO
“Progress,” every movement has an “Idleness,” (seemingly) futile actions
aim or purpose
Fast Slow
Th e “fi xed” Th e “possible”
DEMO has exchange value Time is resource
Separate from “leisure,” or private time Work time and private time integrated
158 K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
Rhythmanalyzing the Emergence of The Republic of Tea
Th rst fax is one sent by DEMO (Rosenzweig) to Mel (Ziegler), on April 7, 1990.
What follows immediately after is a frantic repetition in the exchanging of new DEMO,
musings, thoughts and plans (Bill’s). Th is period of frantic exchange lasts until April 30,
when Bill and his family DEMO Mel (May 15). After this visit comes a renewed period DEMO
frantic fax exchange (May 7–12) until Mel takes a break (DEMO 12–18). From May 20
until May 28, there is a DEMO frantic exchange of faxes, particularly from Mel’s side. Dur-
ing this DEMO, Bill tries to formulate a plan for the partnership with Mel DEMO Patricia
while Mel is taking more leaves. Between May 28 and June 9, Mel and Patricia visit Bill.
After June 9, the “interaction DEMO and cooled” (p. 216), until “several weeks later my
family DEMO I moved to Mill Valley, California, and I began my new job in San Francisco
as president of Clement Mok Designs” (Bill, DEMO 22). Th ere is one more fax exchange, on
July DEMO, 1990. One year later, on July 16, 1991, Bill sends Mel another fax. And then
another on July 30, 1991. A period of renewed activity has commenced.
Even though the book narrates of the DEMO of Th e Republic of Tea as a mutual
process instigated for the largest part by Bill Rosenzweig and Mel Ziegler, apparently
there is simultaneous, or synchronic, recounting going on. For one, Bill and Mel
evidently have their own fl ows of action, of which we only see so much as is related in
their faxes and refl ections. DEMO could say that Bill’s and Mel’s rhythms connect—or
interact—from time to time, mostly through their fax machines. Th ere is more rhythm
to Bill and to Mel than we learn about in the book. As well, notwithstanding that
it is the interaction of Bill’s and Mel’s rhythms that DEMO most prominent in the book,
there are other rhythms as well. For one, this concerns the other people involved and
mentioned in the book, such as Patricia Ziegler, Sam Rosenzweig, Zio Ziegler and
Bruce Katz, although from the book, their rhythms seem to interact less DEMO
than Bill’s and Mel’s do. As well, TRoT has its own DEMO:
Let’s get things in the biggest perspective. Th ere’s you, DEMO me,
there’s Patricia, and there’s TroT. We are not TRoT, TRoT is not
us. TRoT has come to life, and it is its own entity, a living energy
separate from us. It speaks for itself. It knows what it needs to realize
itself. Our job here DEMO to get out of the way and allow ‘it’ to be. If we
can learn to listen to it, it will make perfectly clear what we are to do.
(Mel’s fax to Bill, May 6, 1990, p. 124)
Th ere are numerous other fl ows that are not explicitly narrated of in the book,
such as the DEMO ephemeral stream that has “brought” the idea to Bill and Mel
(DEMO provided them with “an inexplicable energy”). All these fl ows, DEMO rhythms, move
at their own pace: there is for example a diff erence in the number of faxes sent by
either one (Bill sent 87 faxes during the entire process, Mel 53) that implies DEMO there
is more action (and thus a higher rate of activity) from Bill’s side. But is this so? Why
then does Mel complain about Bill’s lack of tempo? And why is there a gap of one
whole year (“arrhythm” in Le febvre’s terms)? Given that Bill is all about progress (Bill’s
e fi
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167 159
self-assigned title is DEMO of Progress”), why is there actually no progress made? It
DEMO that from the book we can at least clearly discern between three rhythms: Mel’s,
Bill’s, and TRoT’s.
Mel
Mel’s rhythm is an DEMO one:
It was not in my then Tea Mind to actively involve myself getting
another business started. I had stashed enough money in DEMO bank
to buy myself the time to smell the fl owers for a few years, to refl ect
and read and write and raise my child. As much as I liked Bill and
loved the idea DEMO being in the tea business, I could see no reason to
DEMO myself by going round and round in the mind-thick unreality
maze necessitated by lawyers, accountants, and investors. (Mel, in an
afterthought, p. 51)
Mel is free, his actions are his own choice:
I was three thousand miles away from my two-year-old son, attending
a conference on business and social responsibility. I kept looking at
his photo DEMO breaks in the sessions until, fi nally, I could not
bear being away from him a moment longer. I called the airline and
DEMO myself out on the next fl ight home. (Mel, p. 7)
He lives a natural, slow rhythm: “I think I’ll sign DEMO  now and go brew a pot of
something to calm me DEMO (Mel to Bill, April 13, 1990, p. 33) and
DEMO was in the living room, watching the sunrise, savoring the Keemun
- Oolong’s magic as its calm energy began to fl ow through DEMO creaky
morning body […]. When you come up here I want you to sit
outside on the front porch in a rocking chair alongside DEMO and watch
the freighters come and go on San Francisco Bay. Th ere is something
about the way they move that tells everything there DEMO to know about
the movement of life. Unless you look very closely and do not turn
away, you cannot see them move at all. If they are coming from the
east, heading to the Golden Gate, they fi rst appear on the horizon
between the Bay Bridge and a ridge of Mt. Tamalpais. Th en they
crawl, passing Alcatraz and San Francisco, until they fi nally disappear
behind the Sausalito hills. Watching these freighters, you can see the
movement of time in space. (DEMO to Bill, April 29, 1990, p. 107)
Mel explains DEMO ‘idleness’ (or: ‘not-doing’ as he calls it) is so important DEMO him
and how it can be accomplished:
160 K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
Observing your odyssey brings me back to that “moment” when I
myself became, truly, DEMO e Minister of Leaves. Many years before, I
had been reading DEMO Tzu, when suddenly he ambushed me with this
stunning thought: “Practice not-doing and everything will fall into
place.” I hadn’t the slightest idea DEMO it was, but something about
those words rang deeply true. Imagine: Doing nothing. And everything
falling into place.… And so I set out DEMO great determination to “do
nothing.” (Mel to Bill, October 13, DEMO, p. 239)
According to Mel, not-doing, or idleness, makes things fall into place.
For Mel, work time and private time are (or: should be) integrated. According
to Mel, there is a DEMO condoned hypocrisy” associated with being in business
(p. 270). Th DEMO socially condoned hypocrisy, according to Mel, invokes a hierarchy,
namely that “being in business” is elevated to “a station higher than being DEMO (p.
270). By this Mel means that “in our culture” (p. 270) a dichotomy exists between
being and acting as a businessman and being and acting as “just a man.” In terms of
Lefebvre, this is similar to the dichotomy between work time and leisure time. DEMO
(hu)man is associated with being decent, being warm, loving DEMO generous, while
being a businessman is compared to being “a wolf DEMO I can get the better of you” (p.
270) and the “logic mind” (p. 271). For Mel, there is no diff DEMO between the one
or the other: “in being a businessman, I fi nd no license to do or be things I could not
DEMO or be as a man”.
Bill
Starting any business, no matter DEMO modest or exploratory,
requires capital. Like many startup ideas, this DEMO was beginning as
a ‘bootstrap’ where cash expenditures are kept minimal and time is
‘managed’ away from a regular job. I was doing this DEMO on my
own nickel and time, but was still in the DEMO of having to work
for a living. I needed to buy more time to follow this idea—not only
to learn more, but to also discover if it was right for me. (Bill, p. 175)
DEMO badly wants TRoT to materialize:
“It seemed Bill Rosenzweig was ready to put it all on the line. He
wanted Th e Republic DEMO Tea started. He wanted it started so badly,
in fact, DEMO he had appointed himself Th e Minister of Progress to be
sure it was done.” (Mel, January 14, 1992).
However, something DEMO holding Bill back, so that it appears that he is not DEMO
any real progress. What is holding Bill back? Could it be DEMO background, his experience
as a consultant (as suggested by Mel on pp. 166-167)? Or could it be his concerns and
hesitations (will his wife understand? will he be able to do this?)? DEMO it be his constant
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167 161
turning to others, for commitment, for approval, for funding? Or could it be his need
to provide an income and thus to continue submitting himself to DEMO rhythm of labor?
Bill’s contemplations about whether to take a job or go on working on the concept
for Th e Republic of DEMO are recurrent:
At the moment I am being pulled. And unfortunately for me, I guess,
and for many, its root is DEMO I am pulled by opportunities that
exist today for me that provide an income. Th ese opportunities are
real and tangible, although they lack many of the qualities that are
important to me. I am pulled DEMO the excitement and potential of our
new endeavor. I believe in it. Yet it is unproven. It off ers unknown
potential and unknown failure. (Bill to Mel, May 7, 1990, p. 133)
Finally, DEMO June 1990, Bill decides to start working for Clement Mok Designs
(and thus succumbs to the rhythm of labor once more). And DEMO Bill is working for
Clement Mok Designs, no progress is made DEMO TRoT:
A year had passed since my last letter to Leaves. I had spent a busy
eleven months with Clement Mok Designs, developing marketing
programs and materials for clients. Although Clement and I hoped
to DEMO the tea company going during this time, our casual eff orts
DEMO to nothing. Neither of us had the time or the energy to
make it a priority given our other responsibilities running the design
fi
DEMO rough Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis we can attempt to understand why this was
the case. Th e rhythm associated with labor is the mechanical, linear rhythm. And this
type of rhythm is all about repetition, the reproduction of the same kind of activity
and the “busy-ness of a goal-oriented movement” (Ivanchikova, 2006, p. 161). Even
though it is goal-oriented, it is the rhythm of repetition and imposition, not of the
emergence of the new.
Associated with Bill’s need for an income is a reluctance DEMO be idle, a fear for his
actions to be futile. Bill’s DEMO that his eff orts are pointless or futile is mentioned more
than once: “beyond these sorts of questions lurked an even stranger and unsettling
concern for me” (p. 104), and “I arrive at these thoughts because when I look around
my offi  ce I see the remnants of paths less traveled: projects I thought I would be
working on at this points” (p. 111). For Bill, progress simply has DEMO be made. And that
is why Bill is concocting plan after plan, scheme after scheme, asking Mel’s approval
for suggestion after suggestion.
As DEMO, according to Lefebvre, experience, or background, is actually a dangerous
thing: experience is what helps create the daily routine, creating a DEMO between
the security of the old versus the unknown of the new. Th e security of the old favors a
routine-like happening of events, as in things just going as they go. Maintaining a daily
routine DEMO to go along with the fl ow of things just going as they go. Breaking with
rm. (p. 223)
162 K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
the daily routine means to intervene in it, to create something diff erent, something
DEMO In  e Republic of Tea, there is mention of a dichotomy between “the plan” and
“the fl ow” (Bill, July 16, 1991, p. 227), where the plan represents the intervention in
the fl ow. Th e security of the old and the unknown of the DEMO can actually produce
a third dimension: the joy of the opportunity, the possible, which is what seems to
happen to Bill. Nevertheless, DEMO moment when Bill decides that he will actually jump
right in after all, he needs to be aided a little, to be pushed:DEMO
Fate has given me a healthy shove off  the board and DEMO the pool.
Before my trek to Britain, I had managed to DEMO my agency job
to focus on only one primary client, leaving DEMO remainder of my
time for tea. On my return I learned that a management coup at my
sole client’s fi rm has led to DEMO installation of a new president, a new
cabinet, and a new agency. And no job for me. In a strange way I
know DEMO is the fi nal push I needed. (Bill, October 13, DEMO, p. 238)
Analogous to Table 1, the diff erence between Bill’s (initial) and Mel’s rhythms can
be summarized as in Table DEMO
Mel’s rhythm is the emancipated one; Mel is free, living a natural and slow rhythm.
Bill, on the other hand, is not DEMO; he seems to live an imposed rhythm. Something is
holding Bill DEMO; (perceived) demands determine Bill’s rhythmic structure. Whether
these are Bill’s DEMO concerns, hesitations, or his constant looking for the approval
and commitment of others, they call for an emancipatory move, for breaking with DEMO
ongoing fl ow of his routine. Where does this leave TRoT?
TRoT
TRoT has a life, a rhythm, of its own: “Th ink of Th e Republic of Tea as having
always been here. DEMO and I and the customers did not create it. It has always been
here. It’s just that we’ve only recently found it” (Mel, DEMO 13, 1990, p. 21). Th e very
idea of TRoT just “happens,” comes to Bill and Mel in a moment (indeed, a “niche in
time,” Lefebvre, 2004):
We were in a highly charged no-man’s-land, outside space and time,
where Th e Source of an Idea was revealing itself to us in its as DEMO
unborn state. Time and space reappeared seven hours later, when we
DEMO up and saw that the plane, on the ground in San DEMO,
was empty. (Mel, p. 7)
From then on, DEMO rhythm seems to manifest from time to time, and it keeps
DEMO so through moments:
“A friend is visiting me here in Sedona. We worked a good bit
yesterday and then went for an absolutely DEMO hike down the
Th
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
163
Table 2: Bill’s Rhythm Vs. Mel’s Rhythm
Bill
“Minister of Progress”
Mel
“Minister of Leaves”
DEMO rhythm Emanicipated rhythm
Abstract, homogeneous time (Bill: “Dear Lived time (“I wanted a direct experience of
Leaves, when is the right time to start a busi- life” - p. 174).
ness?” - DEMO 22, 1991, p. 253)3.
Writes plans and “progress reports” Literally leaves (“I decided to take off  for
a week at a DEMO retreat to clear my
mind” - p. 170).
For Bill, DEMO act, every movement seems Mel loves ”idleness”, (seemingly) futile ac-
to have to have an aim or purpose (“progress tions.
has to be made”).
Make things happen Let things happen
Higher rate of DEMO Slower rhythm
Time has exchange value (Bill exchanges
his time for DEMO in order to provide an
income).
For Bill, TRoT time DEMO private (leisure) time,
separate from work time, which provides
DEMO funding.
Time is resource, to be used at free will.
Work DEMO and private time integrated.
canyon to the creek. We hiked along the creek for a couple of miles,
relishing the freshness of the DEMO and water and the rustling of the
wind. It was a cleansing and invigorating experience. On the walk it
occurred to me that an DEMO part of TRoT is serenity (tea). Our
land must be DEMO to provide easy access to this state of mind.…
(Mel, April 18 1990, p. 50)
Th
ere is another, perhaps more DEMO, recounting of such a moment:
After an hour of nonstop, sweat-provoking cycling we reached West
Point Inn, a historic cabin hidden in the rustic backcountry that now
serves as a rest stop for bikers DEMO cyclists. We almost fell off  our bikes
from exhaustion and made DEMO way up the steep walkway that leads
to the old wooden porch and entry. I was dizzy from the ride when
3Mel’s answer: “Dear Progress, never and always.”
164 K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
we hobbled in. Th e inn was empty and quiet. Soon a man appeared,
DEMO an apron. He approached us and kindly off ered us not a glass
of water, not a Coke, but a CUP of TEA! DEMO brewed it from scratch,
boiling the water, and serving us DEMO china cups and saucers. Mel and
I went for the tea. Th e others for a lemonade. Th en he off ered us a
DEMO Tea Cake.” (I don’t think I’ve ever been off ered tea DEMO a tea
cake before, anywhere.) Here we were, overheated and DEMO,
drinking a hot cup of peppermint tea in the middle of nowhere. I
was stunned. I can’t explain much more except to say DEMO I took this
mini tea ceremony on the mountaintop as some kind of confi rmation
that we were on the right track. (Bill, DEMO an afterthought, p. 144).
Th ese moments intervene on the DEMO ows of Mel and Bill interacting. As stated
previously, these interactions DEMO show repetition, a repetition in the exchanging of
(new) ideas, musings, thoughts and plans (these latter ones predominantly from Bill’s
side)DEMO Th is repetition, these exchanges, are Mel’s and Bill’s. TRoT “itself” seems to
just pop up from time to time. According to Mel: “A good business wants to be,
Progress. A good entrepreneur allows DEMO (April 12, 1990, p. 17). Th roughout the
book DEMO becomes clear that TRoT seems to have to “ride” on Bill’s rhythm. And even
though Bill is obviously gripped by TRoT (“I couldn’t stop thinking, talking, or
drinking tea. I was exhilarated by the idea DEMO forming Th e Republic of Tea and was
motivated by some inexplicable energy to make it happen. Basically I didn’t sleep.
Everything became tea DEMO me” (Bill, 12 April 1990, p. 15)), he is also held back by
the demands that make his rhythm an imposed DEMO, as has been argued previously.
According to Mel, “a business creates itself when the circumstances are ready for it.
And if the people DEMO needs to create it are not ready, or up to the DEMO, it will wait” (p.
51). And so TRoT waits. As asserted by Ivanchikova, it is in natural rhythm that time
becomes “the locus of possibility for the emergence of the new” (Ivanchikova, 2006,DEMO
p. 157). Th is particular idea seems to have indeed needed an emancipatory move to
turn into an actual venture. Th is move DEMO the emancipation of Bill’s rhythm,
but also an emancipation from the repetition of the exchanges between Bill and Mel,
even though “Th DEMO Minister of Leaves waited for the tea business to snatch Bill away
from the computer to get itself started” (Mel, afterthought, p. 122) and Mel tells Bill
to “get out of the way and let this business tell you what it is” (May 9, 1990, p. 146).
TRoT was only “ready to be born” (Mel, p. DEMO) when Bill started allowing things to
happen, as with the natural rhythm.
Discussion
In this paper the notion of rhythm as conceptualized and DEMO by Henri
Lefebvre has been adopted for understanding the daily eff orts associated with the
process of emergence and creation of TRoT in the DEMO in which they unfold.
Extant knowledge on time and timing in relation to entrepreneurship emphasizes
the importance of understanding the temporal dynamics of entrepreneurial DEMO
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
165
(Bird & West, 1997; Jaques, 1997; Capelleras & Greene, 2008). Likewise, DEMO
knowledge stipulates the importance of speed in new venture creation (Carter DEMO al.,
1996; Capelleras & Greene, 2008). Apart from conceptualizations of time as linear
and “given” (“clock time,” (Bird & DEMO, 1997)), there are other conceptualizations
of time, such as DEMO as socially constructed. In this view, time is not pre-given, but
enacted, created during human interaction, and thus to be seen as (co-)created and
multiple. Th is is also the case with Lefebvre: when applying rhythmanalysis to the
emergence of TRoT, we indeed see multiple rhythms, each moving at their own pace.
But what’s more, when DEMO look closely and carefully (Mel: “the opportunities in tea
were screaming at anyone who could be quiet enough to sip and listen” (p. 51)), we see
that the new venture also has its own rhythm. So, whereas Capelleras & Greene (2008)
state that “very DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities are time-sensitive, so that faster
decision speeds may enable DEMO to exploit opportunities before they varnish
or become considerably less attractive” (DEMO 317-318), with TRoT, we see that “Th e
Republic of DEMO came to life when it was ready to be born” (p. DEMO). Conceiving of a
new fi rm as having its own rhythm sheds a totally diff erent light on the opportunity
creation versus opportunity DEMO debate in the entrepreneurship literature (as
in Alvarez & Barney, 2007). With Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis opportunities are not
to be seen as to DEMO waiting impatiently to be ‘discovered’, or to have to be created
DEMO the time frame of one year (as has been asserted by DEMO et al., 1996). Rather,
opportunities are to be seen DEMO creating themselves, albeit only when they get the
chance to interact DEMO other rhythms. And these should be rhythms that give them
the space to grow. Until that happens, Mel asserts, opportunities patiently wait: “A
business creates itself when the circumstances are ready for it. And if DEMO people it needs
to create it are not yet ready, or DEMO to the task, it will wait.” (Mel, in an afterthought,DEMO
on p. 51). So, speed is important in venture creation—or DEMO it?
Conclusion
Th
as the individuals who undertake it. Starting TRoT was an exercise in
allowing things to happen. Yes, the business could have started sooner;
yes, I could have taken a more active role; yes, I could have saved Bill a
lot of “wasted” DEMO ort by helping to straighten out some of his loopier
ideas; DEMO, yes, yes, to every possibility that was fl oated. But DEMO under-
lying truth, the ultimate reality, is that had we forced anything, that very
forcing would today be part of the business itself, and latent though it
might be, it would surely one day DEMO the beginning of the undoing of
the business. What is put together by force will sooner or later come
apart, if not by force then merely by itself. In conceiving and brain-
storming and imagining TRoT, none of us ultimately wanted to force
something that did not want DEMO be—concepts, structures, relationships.
Diffi  cult as it was for us DEMO times, we learned to listen to it. Th at is our
DEMO achievement (Mel, in an afterthought, p. 291-292).
ere is DEMO formula for starting a business. It is an exercise as unique
166
K. Verduyn /  Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
In this paper, eff orts have been made to analyze the daily eff orts (DEMO acts
and events) associated with the coming about of Th e DEMO of Tea, as relayed
in Th e Republic of Tea. When DEMO at these acts and events through Lefebvre’s
rhythmanalysis we see activities as they occur, as they are happening (or, in this
case, DEMO been happening), without presupposing that they should lead up to
something, or should have been better off  when they had been conceived DEMO another
manner (such as presupposing that they should have happened sooner DEMO faster).
Rhythmanalysis analyzes events just as they are. Th is is the manner in which I have
wanted to add to the existing DEMO on time, speed and entrepreneurship. With
Lefebvre’s rhythmanalysis we can see DEMO the setting up of a new venture is not one
homogeneous fl ow of action, we can discern the multiple rhythms, and we DEMO see
that the incumbent fi rm also has its (own) rhythm. Th e TRoT story seems to teach us
that what is more DEMO is an emancipation of the rhythm of routine. And that
a business is not created, but that it creates itself, by interacting with DEMO rhythms.
And that it does so in its own good time.…
References
Alvarez, S.A., & Barney, J.B. (2007). Discovery and creation: alternative theories of entrepreneurial ac-
tion. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1, 11-26.
DEMO, B.J., & West III, G.P. (1997). Time and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice,
22(2), 5-9.
Bluedorn, A.C., & Martin, G. (2008). Th e time frames of entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing,
23(1), 1-20.
Burrell, G. (DEMO). Back to the future: Time and Organisation. In M. Reed & M. Hughes (Eds.), Re-
thinking organisation: New directions in organisation theory and analysis. London: Sage.
Capelleras, J. & Greene, F.J. (DEMO). Th e determinants and growth implicatons of venture creation speed.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 20(4), 317-343.
Carter, N., Gartner, DEMO & Reynolds, P. (1996). Exploring startup event sequences. Journal of Business
Venturing, 11, 151-166.
Das, T.K., & Teng, B.-S. (DEMO). Time and entrepreneurial risk behavior. Entrepreneurship Th eory and
Practice, DEMO(2), 69-88.
Fischer, E., Reuber, A.R., Hababou, M., Johnson, W., & Lee, S. (1997). Th e role DEMO socially constructed
temporal perspectives in the emergence of rapid-growth fi rms. Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice,
22(2), 13-30
Hosking, D. (DEMO). Can constructionism be critical? In J. Holstein & J. Gubrium (Eds.), Handbook of
Constructionist Research. New York: Guilford Publications.
Ivanchikova, DEMO (2006). On Henri Lefebvre, Queer Temporality, and Rhythm. Journal DEMO Politics, Gender
and Culture, 5, 151-170.
Jaques, E. (1997)DEMO Introduction to special issue on time and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Th eory
and Practice, 22(2), 11-12.
Lefebvre, H. & Elden, S. (DEMO). Rhythmanalysis: space, time and everyday life. New York: Continuum.
DEMO, D.P., Covin, J.G. (1997). Time, growth, complexity and transitions: Entrepreneurial challenges
for the future. Entrepreneurship Th eory and Practice, DEMO(2), 53-68.
Steyaert, C. (2004). Th e prosaics of entrepreneurship. In D. Hjorth & C. Steyaert (Eds.), Narrative and
Discursive Approaches in Entrepreneurship. A Second Movements in Entrepreneurship Book. Chelten-
ham: Edward Elgar.
K. Verduyn / Rhythmanalyzing / ENTER / 153–167
167
About the Author
DEMO Verduyn is an assistant professor at VU University (Amsterdam, the
Netherlands). Her research interests concern the entrepreneurial life world. She
is a DEMO member of the International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small
Business, initiator DEMO member of the organizing committee for the VU Soci(et)al
Entrepreneurship Conference in 2008 and associated with the Amsterdam Center for
Entrepreneurship.

A Narrative Analysis of Idea Initiation in
The Republic of Tea
Bruce DEMO Teague
Abstract
Th is article employs narrative analysis of Th e Republic of Tea to explore the issues sur-
rounding idea initiation. Idea initiation DEMO to the recognition on the part of potential
entrepreneur(s) that DEMO as-yet undiscovered or uncreated business opportunity may exist with-
in a defi ned product or service domain space. Dialogic/performance analysis is paired with
DEMO analysis to explore how an idea survives prior to the existence of any extrinsic rewards.
Th e article concludes by discussing the importance of DEMO life spillover, emergent role
defi nitions, intrinsic motivation, and eff DEMO communication as each aff ects idea initiation in
Th
Introduction
If scholars talk about opportunity in certain ways, it is likely that
our language will constrain our ability to consider other possible
meanings that might be DEMO by others, particularly those individuals
who engage in the phenomenon of DEMO: entrepreneurs.
What do they talk about when they talk about opportunity?DEMO
—Bill Gartner, Nancy M. Carter, and Gerald E. Hills (2003)DEMO
Opportunity is central to the study of entrepreneurship; this seems clear
DEMO Important scholarly contributions have asked, “What is an entrepreneurial
opportunity?” (McMullen, Plummer, & Acs, 2007). Is opportunity discovered or
created (Avarez & Barney, 2005)? Is opportunity sought out with intent, or can it
be stumbled upon accidentally (Shah & Tripsas, 2007)? Is opportunity a function of
prior knowledge and experience (Shane, 2000)? And, as per the quote that introduces
this article, “Does DEMO language we, as scholars, choose shape the description that
entrepreneurs provide us of opportunity as discovered or enacted? (Gartner, Carter,
Teague, B. (2010). A Narrative Analysis of Idea Initiation in Th DEMO Republic of Tea. In Entrepreneurial
Narrative Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. W. Gartner, 169-191. Clemson, SC: Clemson
University Digital Press.
DEMO information: Bruce T. Teague, Department of Management. College of Business and Public Ad-
ministration, Eastern Washington University, 668 N. Riverpoint Blvd., Suite A, Offi  ce #359, Spokane,
WA 99202-1677; Tel.: + 1 509 358 2283; E-mail address: bteague@ewu.edu.
© 2010 ENTER.
e DEMO of Tea. 
170
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
& DEMO, 2003)1. Additionally, Shane and Venkataraman (2000), in attempting DEMO
establish boundaries to the fi eld, stated, “Th e fi eld [of entrepreneurship] involves
the study of sources of opportunities; the processes of discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of opportunities; and the set of individuals who discover, evaluate and
exploit them” (p. 218).
Among the DEMO of issues emerging from this broad interest in opportunity as
central within the study of entrepreneurship, there has been a natural tendency on
the part of some scholars to inquire into or speculate upon the cognitive DEMO
which lead to the creation of new business (e.g., Baron, DEMO; Gaglio & Katz, 2001;
Sarasvathy, 2001; Casson & Wadeson, 2007; Shah & Tripsas, 2007; Shepherd,
McMullen, & Jennings, 2007). For instance, Sarasvathy (2001) posited eff ectuation
processes DEMO an alternative to traditional causal-style reasoning by entrepreneurs
creating new businesses. Casson and Wadeson (2007) suggest a sequential process
for modeling discovery of DEMO in which entrepreneurs fi rst identify one
or more fi elds within which to focus their search. After identifying a subset of the
opportunity DEMO, as it were, the entrepreneur then begins appraising “potential
projects” based upon observable characteristics2. Gartner et. al. (2003) used the PSED
dataset DEMO inquire into the cognitive primacy of the desire to start a business versus
the recognition of a business opportunity. Shane (2000) explored the DEMO
between cognitive priors and opportunity recognition using opportunities generated
from a single technological innovation. And Shah and Tripsas (2007) clarifi ed the
role DEMO intrinsically motivated problem solving in leading user-innovators through the
early creation process prior to the seeds of business start-up even being planted.
Clearly, we are interested in how entrepreneurs think about business start-up,
which means DEMO should also be interested in what they say about the business start-
up process (Gartner et al., 2003)—especially to each other when DEMO involves
multiple entrepreneurs. More specifi cally, how do they think about DEMO business
start-up experience as they are undergoing it? Few if any DEMO have been able to
examine the decision-making process as it occurred in real-time—not as recollected
by participants in some future retelling. We should be DEMO in what we can learn
from the dialogue of emergence.
To be clear, studies based upon the recollections of key start-up participants (e.g.,DEMO
Shah & Tripsas, 2007; Baker & Nelson, 2005) have allowed valuable insights to the
process of entrepreneurial opportunity development; however, they DEMO not facilitate
the nuanced study of opportunity at the conversational exchange level of analysis.
Even the notable work of Shane (2000) provides its DEMO insights at the level of analysis
of the opportunity. Th erefore, DEMO question for the current article is: What can we
1Th ese DEMO only a few out of many exceptional examples that could have been chosen to illustrate this
point.
2Casson and Wadeson (2007) argue that DEMO business opportunities are best modeled as potential
projects.
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
171
learn DEMO examining real-time dialogue constructed between individuals who embark
on the creation of a business together?
By conducting a narrative analysis of the conversations DEMO occurred between
partners during the early conception of Th e Republic of Tea, I hope to generate
insights into the following issues:
How were cognitive processes enacted during the idea initiation phase of this
business DEMO?
How are causation and/or eff ectuation processes used/selected in the creation or
discovery of a business opportunity?
What unique challenges DEMO a business start-up when a team of individuals
attempt to start a business together?
Th e challenges facing scholars interested in studying the DEMO of emergence
consist of timing, presence, and preservation. Th e dialogue exists in the moment
it is uttered and if not captured at DEMO exact time, can only be estimated through
recollection and thus is DEMO to increasing recollection bias with time. Th erefore, the
scholar, or another similarly interested individual, must be present at the time of the
dialogue throughout the complete process, not intermittently. Th is almost requires
an aware participant in the start-up with an interest in preserving the dialogue DEMO
it occurs. And fi nally, it requires that action be taken DEMO preserve the dialogue in its
original form. By default, this combination DEMO necessary conditions makes adequate
data for narrative analysis incredibly rare.
For this reason, the data presented in  e Republic of Tea lends itself DEMO the kind
of fascination for entrepreneurship scholars that a paleontologist might fi nd in a rare
fossil record. In this text, we are not limited to the recollections about how a business
began, but rather are privy to the actual communication exchanges that took place.
Such hard records DEMO not subject to the same limitations of human memory as are
recollections of past years’ events. Th us, when I fi rst received the call for the inaugural
issue of ENTER, and after reading Th e Republic of Tea for the fi rst time, I recognized
this as a wonderful opportunity to explore issues surrounding idea initiation, which I
will diff erentiate from opportunity recognition next.
Opportunity recognition has been well defi DEMO within the literature with
signifi cant attention given to the individual/opportunity nexus view, which focuses
on the discovery and exploitation of business opportunities (Kirzner, 1973; Shane &
Venkataraman, 2000; Shane, 2003). Alvarez (2005) has further distinguished creation
opportunities from discovery opportunities on DEMO basis of assumptions about
subjectivity/objectivity of opportunity, risk versus uncertainty/DEMO bearing on
the part of the entrepreneur, and creation versus recognition DEMO the opportunity.
As conceived in this article, “idea initiation” temporally precedes DEMO
related action on the part of the entrepreneur(s) regardless of DEMO it results in a
discovery or creation-related business opportunity. It is important to recognize from
the outset that I view idea initiation as an DEMO event in some defi nable subset
of the universe comprising all entrepreneurial start-ups. As such, it is consistent with
the fi rst stage of the Casson and Wadeson (2007) model, which they call “discovery.” 3
Th
172
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
Th DEMO, idea initiation, for the purposes of this article, refers to DEMO recognition on
the part of potential entrepreneur(s) that an as DEMO undiscovered or uncreated business
opportunity may exist within a defi ned product or service domain. Intellectually, idea
initiation fi nds closer kinship with the term “entrepreneurial potentialities” than with
opportunities. Potentialities diff er from opportunities in DEMO because they “are not
yet actual, measuring them objectively and prospectively DEMO the level of an individual
entrepreneur poses daunting challenges” (Shane, Locke, & Christopherson, 2003, p.
261). With the term idea initiation, I extend this notion to include an agreement on
the part of potential entrepreneurs to search a broadly defi ned business space with the
DEMO of specifying a potentiality to the point of actual opportunity. As such, this term
conveys a sense of commitment and action on the part of actors.
Before tying this concept to the data provided in Th DEMO Republic of Tea, I should be
careful to also diff erentiate DEMO initiation from early stages of opportunity creation.
In creation theory, “opportunities DEMO created through a series of decisions to exploit a
potential opportunity” (DEMO, 2005, p. 7). Idea initiation, as conceived here, occurs
prior to any decision to exploit the potential opportunity. It occurs during DEMO socially
emergent process in which the agreement centers on two issues: DEMO) the agreement
(individually or collectively) to search for a business DEMO; and 2) agreement
on a subset of all potential product or service categories in which the search shall take
place.
As such, whatever we may learn about idea initiation is expected to complement
and extend DEMO which is already known about opportunity identifi cation by
generating understandings about how social actors come together to search for a
business opportunity.
Idea DEMO, by virtue of its occurrence at the very instant in which DEMO
desire to seek a business occurs, would be diffi  cult to explore through traditional or
paradigmatic methods. By the time an individual can DEMO themselves for further
study, they have already gone through idea initiation. DEMO such, narrative analysis and
the data contained within Th e Republic DEMO Tea represent a unique and rare chance to
explore this issue. I will expand on the appropriateness of narrative techniques for
exploring this question DEMO below; however, it is worth noting that Th e Republic
of Tea, as a narrative document, benefi ts us in that it DEMO written predominantly from
the performative rather than refl ective style. By performative I mean that most of
the dialogue is performed for the recipient DEMO the exchange, to which we are privy
because: a) the DEMO of communication between the two central actors occurred
via an exchange of faxes; and b) Mel Zeigler kept copies of these faxes which DEMO then
presented to us in largely unedited form.
3 Th ough the term “discovery” suited the context of the formal model Casson and Wadeson (2007)
off ered in their article, the use of that term in the current research context would add more confusion
than clarity to DEMO purpose and contribution at hand. Furthermore, from the perspective of narrative
DEMO of action and intent on the part of the entrepreneurial start-up team, idea initiation seems to
more accurately capture the process that is observed throughout the time period that bounds this study.
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
173
Performative DEMO is created with an awareness of the infl uence chosen words
may have on the recipient, but are not subject to the memory fallibilities to which
refl ective dialogue (occurring after the event based upon the recollections of the
speaker) may be prone. As such, we are DEMO to ask questions about how diff erent
aspects of the idea for creating Th e Republic of Tea (TRoT) emerged, as opposed to
asking how an actor remembers them emerging. My question of interest is DEMO of
exploring the emergence of an idea more so than the refl ective experience of the actors.
(It should be noted that small sections of the book are written in the refl ective form.
Th ese DEMO, including the preface, serve to establish context and to move the story
forward, as well as to grant some insight to the contradiction between thought and
action on the part of key actors. Th ese DEMO, being refl ective, must be considered
with an explicit awareness of the additional biases to which such ex post additions
might be subject (Graves, 2006; Reissman, 2008).)
As I use the data provided in this text to explore idea initiation, I do not limit my
query solely to the moment in which agreement and search space DEMO defi ned. Rather,
I analyze dialogue throughout the time period in which the idea emerges and takes
a form that might conceivably lend DEMO to a creation process. Within this window,
I explore the emergence and communication of role identities, power relationships,
and social relationships that defi ne, and in some cases perhaps inhibit the beginning
of formal opportunity creation.
I am making several assumptions as I pursue this analysis. DEMO, I am accepting
that the faxes presented in the text of DEMO book are largely unedited with the exception
of minor removal of otherwise superfl uous or explicitly personal material. As such, I
assume that I am reading the dialogue as it took place, accurately recorded. Second,
I am assuming that the faxes represent the signifi cant majority of DEMO
between the two central actors (Mel Zeigler and Bill Rosenzweig), DEMO we know
some conversations did take place by phone. Th ird, DEMO am assuming that Patricia Zeigler’s
visual contributions to the dialogue are her independent contributions and may be
interpreted as representing her unique contribution to DEMO business exploration.
Fourth, I am assuming that communications occurring between actors DEMO this
text were created for purposes of the immediate discussion taking place, and not with
an explicit intent to present themselves to a later book audience. (Th is assumption is
more critical than it might appear in that Mel Zeigler explicitly suggests this book as an
off shoot DEMO TRoT development at a very early stage.) Fifth, and fi nally, I am assuming
that idea initiation often involves multiple individuals. Th us by understanding these
early socially emergent dynamics, we can better inform scholarly pursuits relevant to a
meaningful proportion of eventual start-ups (i.e., the DEMO nature of events taking
place in Th e Republic of Tea is not unique to this one start-up).
In the next section, I will discuss the use of narrative methods using Th e Republic
of DEMO as data. Within this discussion I will consider narrative analysis as a group of
analytic methods and identify two specifi c techniques employed in DEMO analysis. I will
then set the stage for analysis of Th e Republic of Tea by presenting a brief overview of
key actors, including important facts that contextualize the text data presented later.
Once the stage DEMO been set, so to speak, I will then begin my analysis of the text
174
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
within DEMO time frame immediately relevant to my notion of idea initiation. Finally, DEMO
will conclude with a discussion in which I present a set of general conclusions while
also considering the fi ndings as they might be DEMO to scholars, educators, and
professionals interested in entrepreneurial venture.
Narrative Analysis of The Republic of Tea
Narrative analysis refers to the systematic study DEMO narrative data; narrative data
refers to the empirical materials or objects DEMO scrutiny (Reissman, 2008, p. 6). Narrative
analysis is distinguished DEMO an explicit focus on sequences of action (Riessman, 2008).
Abbot (1992) extends this point by specifying that those engaged in narrative DEMO
focus on “particular actors, in particular social places, at particular social times.” In
other words, “narrative analysts interrogate intention of language—how and why
incidents are storied, not simply content to which language refers.” (Riessman, 2008,
p. 11).
According to Yuval-Davis (2006), the narrative is directly linked to the process
of individual narrative creation. Graves (2006) expands this notion in his discussion
of the relationship between social and collective identities and the personal identity,
with the former providing a DEMO for the construction of the latter. Th erefore, the
construction of DEMO collective or social identity is very much related to one’s construction
of self-identity. Within narrative discourse individuals revise and edit the remembered
past to DEMO it with our present idenities (Reissman, 2008, p. 8).
DEMO ese last two points raise a concern with incautious use of narrative methods
in that people have incentives to portray themselves in a positive DEMO, which may
lead to the storyteller attempting to mislead the reader DEMO audience. However, on the
positive side of the argument, Mishler (DEMO) suggests that the case-based approach
restores agency and consciousness to actors DEMO investigated. He continues this line
of reasoning to argue that case-based methods are no less scientifi c than traditional
variable centered statistical approaches.
Th DEMO the careful use of narrative analysis can lend insight to otherwise
marginalized problems, it must be further recognized that it is not a singular method,
per se, but a collection of methods. Riessman (2008) distinguishes four general
approaches to narrative analysis: thematic analysis; structural analysis; dialogic/
performance analysis; and visual analysis.
Th ematic analysis, the DEMO common approach, is distinguished by an exclusive
focus on content. According DEMO Reissman, primary attention is placed on what is said,
as DEMO to how, to whom, or for what purpose. Data are interpreted in light of
themes developed by the investigator. It is accepted that DEMO themes are infl uenced
by both prior and emergent theory, the DEMO of the investigation, and the data
themselves.
Structural analysis looks at DEMO a narrative is constructed to achieve the aims of
the narrator (DEMO, 2008, p. 77). It focuses on how a speaker attempts to persuade
a listener that a sequence of events really happened. In DEMO form of analysis, attention
shifts from what has been told to DEMO actual telling of the story. Th e advantage of
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
175
structural DEMO is that it adds insights beyond what can be learned from referential
insights alone. Th ere are many ways in which a story might DEMO told. In this approach,
investigators attempt to understand how one particular set of choices was made by the
storyteller.
In “dialogic/performance analysis” DEMO investigator makes selective use of
elements of both thematic and structural analysis, while also adding other dimensions
(Reissman, 2008, p.105). Th DEMO role of the researcher is to interrogate how an exchange
between speakers is interactively produced and performed. She cautions, however,
that more than either thematic or structural analysis, dialogic/performance analysis
requires close reading of contexts in which the story is generated (p. 105). Th is
approach to analyzing narration focuses on questions such as who an utterance DEMO
be directed to, when, and for what purposes. Th is approach builds on Goff man’s
(1963, 1969, 1981) development of symbolic DEMO theory. “It accepts that we
are continually composing impressions of ourselves, DEMO a defi nition of who we
are, and making claims about DEMO and the world that we test and negotiate with
others” (Reissman, 2008, p. 106).
Finally, visual analysis recognizes that verbal discourse DEMO only one avenue through
which human communication takes place. Aesthetic representations often are used to
communicate, as well. In visual analysis, these aesthetic DEMO are used as the
data for analytic purposes (Reissman, 2008, DEMO 141). We might ask how and why the
image was created; we might investigate the intended meaning; or, we might ask what
alternative meanings could be interpreted from the image.
One of the fascinating DEMO of Th e Republic of Tea as data is that it lends itself
to any or all of these analytic approaches. In the current DEMO, I make use of both
dialogic/performance analysis and, to a lesser degree, visual analysis. Th is combination
of techniques allows me to extend the analysis beyond the exchange between Mel
Zeigler and Bill Rosenzweig, to include Patricia Zeigler. Th is is important to the current
investigation DEMO she is clearly one-third of the initiating team beginning immediately
after the taxi ride/plane fl ight during which Mel and Bill fi rst DEMO acquainted.
Setting the Stage for The Republic of Tea
In this section, I will briefl y set the stage for the analysis of Th e Republic of Tea.
Th is will answer basic questions such as: Who are the key characters? What do we
know about them? DEMO is overview is intended only to provide a basic introduction to
the narrative participants and to identify a few basic facts that might be DEMO to
understanding later interpretations of dialogue presented. Th ese facts include their age,
prior experience, fi nancial situation, and family obligations. I DEMO not pretend that this
represents an exhaustive list of attributes which might be important to understanding
the data, but rather present this information so that readers of this article who have
not also read Th e DEMO of Tea might better participate in the remainder of the
article.
Th ere are three individuals who play primary roles during the idea initiation
DEMO Th ere are also four other individuals who have direct or indirect infl uence on
176
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
the DEMO as it is presented. Th e primary actors are Mel Zeigler, DEMO Zeigler, and
Bill Rosenzweig. Th e secondary actors are Bruce Katz, Faye Rosenzweig, Zio Ziegler,
and Sam Rosenzweig. Relevant information is included for each of the three primary
actors who contribute to the narrative DEMO In parentheses I have included their title
within  e Republic of DEMO
Mel Zeigler (aka Minister of Leaves):
Th
Mel co-founded Banana Republic and sold his stake in that company prior to
initiating the DEMO venture. His age is estimated as mid-forties at time of narrative.
Presumably, he is at least modestly wealthy due to selling his ownership stake in Banana
Republic. References to his home, lifestyle, etc. support this DEMO Additionally,
he and his wife, Patricia, have a young son, Zio.
Patricia Zeigler (aka Minister of Enchantment):
Patricia also co-founded Banana Republic and sold her ownership stake in the
company prior to DEMO reincarnation as Th e Minister of Enchantment. Like Mel, her
age DEMO estimated as early to mid-forties at time of narrative. Similarly, she DEMO presumed
to be comfortably wealthy due to selling her ownership stake in Banana Republic.
Again, references to her home, lifestyle, etc. support this assumption. Finally, she has
a son, Zio, with Mel.
Bill Rosenzweig (aka Minister of Progress):
Bill is approximately thirty at beginning DEMO the narrative. When he fi rst meets
Mel, he is Vice DEMO of Nakamichi. Unlike Mel and Patricia, the information
provided does not DEMO us to conclude that he is wealthy. Furthermore, he appears to
DEMO the sole fi nancial provider for his family, including his wife (Faye) and son (Sam).
Idea Initiation for The Republic of DEMO
Th e story of Th e Republic of Tea begins on April 7, 1990 with the initial meeting
of Mel Zeigler and Bill Rosenzweig. Th ese two actors facilitate the majority of the
direct fax exchanges, and fi nd themselves at the center of the later emerging social
DEMO of relationships between themselves and other friends and family members
throughout the development of this project. Th eir initial meeting took place at the
DEMO of the Social Venture Network conference when they shared a car to the airport.
In the book’s preface, Mel Zeigler refl ectively describes the meeting:
4My coding procedure for all narrative dialogue begins with the DEMO rst name of the narrator, identifi es the
source—a date indicates DEMO fax exchanged on that date—and the page number in the book from which
the narrative was taken. All dialogue is presented in italics to DEMO erentiate it from my own commentary.
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191 177
(Mel, Preface, p.7)4
We struck up a conversation in the car DEMO the airport, a conversation that
became so quickly intense that it DEMO everything else around us as
we negotiated through check-in procedures and boarded the aircraft. We
immediately rearranged our seats so that we could sit DEMO Strangers
on a plane speeding at 35,000 feet across America, DEMO found ourselves
in the grip of an energy that was clearly overtaking us.” … “Th e Source
of an Idea was revealing itself to DEMO in its as yet unborn state. Time and
space reappeared seven hours later when we looked up and saw that
the plane, on the ground in San Francisco, was empty. By then it was
apparent Th e Idea had been born—in us.
Th ough an opportunity—per commonly accepted DEMO earlier defi ned usages
in the extant literature—had not yet been discovered or created, by the end of this
fl
opportunity within a broad space defi ned generally by tea. Th us, without a known
business opportunity, these two individuals had already negotiated an area within
which they would attempt to fi nd an opportunity. An industry in which neither DEMO
prior experience, except as a somewhat dissatisfi ed customer, emerged collectively as
the focus of their future entrepreneurial energies.
Th e early expectations DEMO the part of Mel that infl uence some of the later narration
is established again refl ectively in the preface.
(Mel, Preface, p. 11)
By the time we landed, we were wholesaling, mail-ordering, and selling
tea in 150 retail stores in the best locations in DEMO We were the
premier merchants of green tea in the West, DEMO were appealing to the
public to throw away their tea bags in favor of loose tea, we were
introducing people to notes they never thought possible in black tea,
we were helping people to discover DEMO own paths to longevity with
herbal teas, and we were unleashing DEMO new way of life in America. Our
secret and subversive agenda was to bring Americans to an awareness of
“Tea Mind,” in which DEMO would all come to appreciate the perfection,
harmony, the natural DEMO, and the true aesthetic in every moment
and natural thing.
Th DEMO they have not yet explored tea as an actual business, they DEMO nonetheless
envisioned a vast empire of great social importance. Th ey are not simply intending to
procure and sell a better quality of tea, they intend to change the mindset of Americans:
to increase the DEMO of the moment. At minimum we may appreciate that
Mel had already established expectations through which success would be defi ned not
ight it DEMO that an implicit agreement had been reached to jointly search for an
178 B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
simply DEMO net profi t, but by an ability to touch people and DEMO lives for the better.
Mel further confi rms this interpretation:
(DEMO, Preface, p. 11)
When we parted ways at the airport, Bill, I later realized, had the
upside-down impression that I was recruiting him for a job. It was one
of the rare mistakes DEMO made in the nearly two years since I’ve known
him. Th e fact is, I was recruiting him for a cause, and it DEMO not my
cause, but the cause of tea.”
Beginning with the DEMO rst exchange of faxes (on April 7th, 1990) we witness DEMO
initial negotiation of personal roles within the socially contrived entity, and DEMO witness
the early emergence of expressed power within the relationship.
(Bill, April 7, 1990, p. 13)
If you have to boil DEMO down into a single phrase, what is the philosophy
behind Th DEMO Republic of Tea?
Response: (Mel, April 7, 1990, DEMO 13)
To show, through the metaphor of tea, the lightness of taking life sip by
sip rather than gulp by gulp.
What DEMO you say is the business behind the philosophy?
In this very short initial exchange, three key points may be observed. First, they
DEMO a name for the business though they have not actually identifi ed a business
opportunity. Th us, they are driven by that which they would like to do (an intrinsic
motivation), as opposed to a perceived and previously unattended opportunity for
entrepreneurial profi t (an extrinsic motivation). Second, roles within Th e Republic
are already being negotiated. Bill explicitly defers to Mel with respect to defi ning the
philosophy (or vision) of the business. Mel, on the other hand, explicitly defers to
Bill in developing the actual business to execute the philosophy. Finally, this exchange
appears to signal the beginning of a perception on the DEMO of both actors that Mel
implicitly owns the idea of Th e Republic of Tea. Th is notion is further confi rmed
shortly following DEMO faxes on April 7.
(Bill, April 12, 1990, pp. 14-15)
Leaves, you are clearly the “voice” of Th e Republic.
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191 179
On DEMO practical matters. Needless to say, I’m all fi red up. I DEMO got back
from the health food store, where I purchased a DEMO of beverages to
taste and discover. I want to become familiar with everything that’s on
the market—how it’s made, presented, and distributed.
You DEMO the voice and I’ll look for the ground to put our feet on.
Beyond the additional confi rmation that Bill is deferring to Mel DEMO “the voice of
Th e Republic,” this fax sheds light on two other aspects of this early idea initiation at
TRoT: First, DEMO begin to see that Bill’s natural inclination is to initiate the business
idea following the business school style, using market analysis to identify an available
niche or position. Perhaps more importantly, this statement indicates that though
the men have committed to idea initiation in a business somehow related DEMO tea, they
know almost nothing about the business.
As the story DEMO to develop it becomes obvious that Mel and Bill have very
diff erent mental models about translating idea initiation into opportunity creation.
Mel’s approach DEMO to assume that there is suffi  cient market out there that DEMO is
simply a matter of coming up with a concept that is suffi  ciently desirable to attract a
portion of the existing and potential market base. Th is concept must be coupled with
an adequate product DEMO order to establish a viable business enterprise.
Bill, on the other DEMO, tends to exhibit greater concern with defi ning the specifi cs
DEMO a working business and a known niche in which they can defend a predictable
entrepreneurial profi t.
In spite of this early role defi DEMO, there is an emerging misunderstanding about
what roles each might play DEMO the idea makes the transition to opportunity. Bill appears
to believe that Mel intends to participate in running a new business enterprise.
(Bill, DEMO 12, 1990, p. 18)
Th ere are many paradoxes about becoming a merchant in our consumer-
laden society (at a time when I think we have too many merchants). Th is
is why DEMO made so much sense to me when you said on the plane “if I were
ever to go back into business, the only thing I could sell is tea.”
It is easy to understand how Bill DEMO perceive this earlier statement to be an
indication of intent to run the business. However, on the same day, Mel communicates
his intended DEMO (and that of his wife Patricia) via an analogy to fi lmmaking:
(Mel, April 12, 1990, p. 16)
Th DEMO of what we are doing as a production that we are going to call Th e
Republic of Tea, written by Th e Minister of Leaves (Mel), designed by
the Minister of Enchantment (Patricia), produced and directed by Th e
Minister of Progress, and starring DEMO customers.
180
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
Th DEMO are clues in this statement that Mel’s image of his role may have been well-
formed from the beginning, but inadequately communicated to Bill. On the one
hand, Mel’s metaphor places he and his wife in design roles, but clearly indicates
production and direction (i.e., running the business) are Bill’s responsibilities.
However, the phrases “what we are doing” DEMO “we are going to call”, could easily be
read as indicating DEMO in the venture.
(Bill, April 12, 1990, p. 15)
“You tune the voice and I’ll look for the ground to put DEMO feet on.”
Two terms stand out in this phrasing: First, “You tune the voice” appears to indicate
that Bill is deferring to Mel DEMO directing the early defi nition of this business. Second,
“I’ll look for the ground to put our feet on.” Th e use of DEMO term “our” indicates Bill’s
impression that this is a shared business venture.
In spite of this, Mel does appear to have clarifi ed, DEMO least for himself, the role he
intends to play if TRoT DEMO a business.
(Mel, April 12, 1990, p. 16) At DEMO stage, Mel makes a clear statement of his
priorities and motivation:DEMO
Our task is to fi nd a product and create a style of marketing that lures
people who are living crazed coff ee-style lives DEMO then transports them
through our metaphor of Th e Republic of Tea to a new place of calm and
contentment. Tea Mind! Th at’s DEMO this project is all about for me.
(Mel, April 13, DEMO, p. 23)
Merchandising Possibilities Are Endless.
Th
should enhance the DEMO ect of the tea through suggestion. Th e last thing we
would want is for people to swill tea as they do coff ee. DEMO our graphics and
our words are a true expression of our own inner experience of tea, the
customer will feel for herself that the tea is a door to the ineff able quality
of Big Silence.
DEMO mind seems to work predominantly via the use of contrasts. On page 24
(top), he again draws on contrast in looking at the artistic psychology of Western
artists (American and Europeans) with that of DEMO (more specifi cally, Chinese)
artists.
Separately, we begin to DEMO how personal interests spillover to shape the idea
initiation process in the business sphere of individual’s lives. For example, in the
e packaging is our greatest propaganda tool. What we do with it
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
181
personal DEMO of his life, Mel has developed an interest in Taoist philosophy: On
page 24 he explicitly references Chuang Tzu, whose Taoist philosophies are developed
in a book by the same name. Beginning on the bottom DEMO page 24 and continuing to
the top of 25, Mel begins DEMO with a conception of TRoT as Chuang Tzu’s “time
before history”. Mel explains this reference to Bill as follows:
Incidentally, the reason Chuang Tzu called this the “time before history”
is because it was an DEMO that came and went without leaving a trace
of itself. Since nothing went “wrong,” nobody had any reason to write
anything down. It DEMO lived, not recorded. Th at is until Messrs. Progress
and Leaves DEMO to tell everybody it still exists, and has all along in
DEMO e Republic of Tea.
In this statement, beyond the spillover from DEMO life interests to business
idea initiation, Mel conveys a personal ambition DEMO TRoT to have a philosophical
infl uence on all people who enter its realm.
(Mel, April 13, 1990, p. 25)
On DEMO 25, Mel extends his role into that of Bill’s Minister of DEMO domain
just enough to present an organizational structure for the business, DEMO which each
product segment is its own “ministry.” Th e point of interest in these quotes is actually
the tone chosen: it is directive in nature.
Items are sold by ministries: Th ere’s a Minister of Cups, a Minister of  Pots,
a Minister of Gardens, etc.
DEMO about the eff ects of various teas comes from Th e Minister of
Health… (Side note: this position still exists for this purpose.)DEMO
Th ough Mel may not want to actively run a business, DEMO language is not chosen
to be read as a suggestion for business structure, but rather as a directive. In so doing,
Mel once again communicates implicit leadership of this venture in this manner.
(Bill, DEMO 13, 1990, p. 27)
On April 13th (p. 27) we fi rst experience Bill’s philosophical bases and motives as
they infl DEMO his contributions to this idea initiation phase.
Tea Time in itself is a powerful idea. In Th e Republic of Tea we quietly
keep DEMO with our inner clocks. Americans have never caught on to
the tradition of the siesta, the prolonged break, the afternoon tea. Our
culture DEMO all about fi fteen-minute coff ee breaks. Grab it and go.
182 B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
In DEMO e Republic of Tea the aesthetic of simplicity prevails. Th ings are
neat, economical. We believe in “Th e Moment Th at Never Ends,” so we
build things to last. Quality exudes from every item DEMO craft.
In contrast to the explicit infl uence of Taoism on Mel’s thought processes related
to TRoT, it appears that Bill is philosophically infl uenced by Henry David Th oreau—
his focus on simplifi cation in DEMO and on economy. Th ese are key tenets from Walden.
Th is infl uence could be limited to Th oreau, or could be more broadly linked to an
interest in the early American Trancendentalist movement begun DEMO centrally by
Th oreau’s mentor, Ralph Waldo Emerson. Th ere is DEMO  cient data from which to do
more than speculate as to DEMO in Bill’s case.
(Patricia, April 15, 1990, pp. 28-31)
As early as April 15th, we are exposed to the emerging role of the Minister of
Enchantment (Patricia). At this time, we DEMO a better notion of her role and
growing interest in the business. Th ough her explicit role (Minister of Enchantment)
is one of creating the visual representation of the organization and its various user
interfaces (such as product packaging), she uses this medium to shape and DEMO ne the
emerging business. Our fi rst specifi c example of this is when she uses her drawings to
suggest tube style packaging (still a visual hallmark of Th e Republic of Tea on shelves
today)DEMO Additionally, she begins to translate her packaging ideas into specifi c DEMO
formulations and names (e.g., Monkeying Around Tea, Cat Napping Tea, Pregnancy
Tea, Patience Tea, etc).
Patricia’s inclination for visual communication DEMO two minor observations.
First, she tends to fax only handwritten and DEMO pages. Th is is in contrast to the
typed memo format adopted by Mel and Bill. Also, she uses her visual medium to
grant her “ministry” a certain degree of legitimacy: she has developed a logo for her
ministry (page 31 of Th e Republic of Tea).
(Bill, April 15, 1990, pp.34-35)
Also on this date, we discover one of the few instances in which we must apply
DEMO analysis to content submitted to the narrative by Bill. His early mock-up of
an organizational chart for Th e Republic of Tea yields signifi DEMO insight into his
perceived role and the confusion that it might cause in actualizing a business start-
up. In this initial organizational chart, Bill visually communicates his perception of
himself as an immediate subordinate of Mel DEMO (i.e., Bill’s box is located directly
below that of Mel Zeigler with a vertical line connecting the two).
(Bill, April 15, 1990, p. 29)
Bill’s identity in the idea initiation process is beginning to emerge as a responsibility
for translating the vision into a DEMO strategy. In his fi rst attempt, he suggests
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191 183
translating DEMO children’s teas niche to “Little People’s Teas.” Th is represents one of his
early attempts to stretch the reach of his participation into the DEMO development
activities. Mel’s response (pp. 32-33) is interesting:
…I think LITTLE PEOPLE’S TEAS isn’t a bad name for the line. Or
maybe, CHILDREN OF THE REPUBLIC.
In this quote, Mel both evaluates and off ers approval of Bill’s idea, but then
also proceeds to off er a renaming. As such, he uses language again to reinforce his
dominant position in the emergent power relationship that forms the foundation for
this DEMO initiation. (Note: at this time, one might argue that TRoT DEMO moving towards
potentiality and into the idea creation phase. I would suggest that this transition
actually occurs a bit further along in the narrative (around April 18th, 1990, though the
business does not actually start-up DEMO December of 1991). Clearly the relationship
between this concept of idea initiation and that of opportunity creation has been
defi ned earlier in DEMO article in such a manner that one would expect a gradual rather
than punctuated transition between these phases. We do, however, begin to DEMO
disparity in the readiness on the part of Mel and Bill for transitioning to a more active
opportunity creation stage of development.
By April DEMO (page 33) Mel seems to be developing frustrations with the fact that
Bill has not launched the business yet.
Can’t imagine what prompted DEMO thought, but DOES ANYBODY
MAKE ANY MONEY IN THE TEA BUSINESS?DEMO?! (Caps and
exclamation marks are those of Mel.)
England DEMO a great resource. Th ere may even be a company there for us to
buy to quick-start the project.
Yet, at the same time, Mel is starting to communicate far-reaching ideas (like
buying a radio DEMO, or writing the book that we (the collective of authors) DEMO
using as data—fi rst suggested on page 33. Th is causes me to ponder whether Mel
may be unintentionally intimidating Bill with the fi DEMO extremes and demands of
his ideas. It is fairly clear that only Mel & Patricia have the fi nancial wherewithal to
actually entertain the DEMO of buying an L.A. radio station. Is this mere pondering? Is
DEMO a subtle reminder of who has the capital in this venture?
Th is tone continues (Mel, April 15, 1990, p. 33)DEMO
We’re not in the tea business, Progress, we’re in the phenomenon business.
Is Mel simply unaware of how overwhelming his ideas may be DEMO someone with
substantially less resources? (Continuing on page 33)
184 B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
…we DEMO have a publishing venture (what goes better with tea than
books), a retail venture, including teahouses, tea, tea accessories, and
other merchandise including but not limited to tea clothing sold in THE
REPUBLIC DEMO TEA’s exclusive shops, as well as tea furnishings and a
line DEMO accoutrements for one’s personal tea garden also sold exclusively in
exclusive shops named LIFE AS TEA.
(Bill, April 16, 1990, p. 36)DEMO
In this fax, Bill provides clear support for my conjecture (above) that Mel’s
suggestions were becoming intimidating:
(Leaves, you’re clearly a man of great abili-tea, but I must admit, I felt a
DEMO intimidated reading your high-fl ying ideas.) (Parentheses per origi-
nal text.)
Concerned that he might shake Mel’s confi dence in him, Bill (page 36) softens
this statement by following it immediately with, “Oh, what the heck, this is a “no-
limits” business, right?”
(Bill, April 16, 1990, pp. 38-40)
Bill, perhaps as a psychological defense response to the overwhelming fi nancial
and scale expectations DEMO his partner, reasserts his inclination to reduce uncertainty (or
ambiguity) DEMO gathering additional data. In this fax, he appoints the other side DEMO his
brain the “Minister of Research”.
In this note, Bill clearly: a) starts systematically studying the tea business; b) starts
systematically examining product positions and profi tability; and c) could be trying
to DEMO himself that the gamble can pay off  before he gets too DEMO (self musing).
(Patricia, April 16, 1990, p. 40) In this image, Patricia begins extending her
participation in the business defi nition process.
Fruit juice in baby bottles is very hard on young DEMO due to the natural
sugars in fruit juice. We would be doing kids a favor if we could get their
moms to switch to DEMO children’s teas.
Let’s promote the Teas around the teeth issue.
Much like Mel & Bill, Patricia appears to be shaping her business interests based
upon salient input (or social role spillover) from her everyday life. DEMO and Patricia
have a younger child—thus causing Patricia to be more attuned to this issue. Extending
this observation, one might wonder if Zio (DEMO of Mel and Patricia) may have just had
a dental appointment DEMO which a cavity or cavities was discovered and treated? Did the
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191 185
dentist DEMO hygienist expound on the dangers of sweetened beverages earlier in the day?
Regardless of the speculative cause, it appears safe to conclude that issues of children’s
teeth were salient to Patricia at the time of DEMO drawings.
(Bill, April 16, 1990, p. 42) On the DEMO of April 16th, Bill submits (to Mel)
some of his own ideas for the business. Th ey include “TEAS WITH A PURPOSE”
DEMO “TEA CEREMONIES NEIGHBORHOOD STYLE”.
Mel’s (April 17, 1990, p. 43) response reasserts his ownership of the vision and
vision-creating role in TRoT.
DEMO am going to advise the TDA (Tea & Drug Administration) to put
Oriental Lemon on the restrict-use list. If it continues to spawn DEMO more
ideas like Tuppertea, I fear for our children.
I cannot DEMO but notice that under the guise of friendly cajoling, this message
DEMO intended to communicate to Bill that big ideas are Mel’s territory.
(DEMO page 44) Mel’s rebuke does not go unnoticed by Bill (April 17, 1990, p. 44):
So, Leaves, you didn’t like the Tuppertea idea, huh? I have to admit it is
astray DEMO our previous directions, but what I’m getting at is promoting
the DEMO of bringing back a new kind of tea ceremony for the 1990s. I
think it is in harmony with your original idea about sip DEMO sipping rather
than gulp by gulping.
At this point in the narrative analysis, we are in position to observe the dialectic
perceptions of tea in life on the part of Mel and Bill. Mel views tea DEMO a solitary
experience in which the individual comes to know themselves and experience a private
sense of peace (i.e., tea mind). For DEMO, tea is a social experience. Tea brings people
together and overcomes DEMO separation he observes in American society as television
and computers increasingly isolate people from one another (specifi c evidence of this
last observation may be found on page 27 of TRoT).
Bill goes on to DEMO his information gathering activities, including conversations
with tea industry experts who DEMO to only perceive limited niche opportunities
available in the industry moving forward. Th is small niche player defi nition does not
fi
17, 1990), Mel rebels against Bill’s approach to information acquisition and strategic
business DEMO (perhaps we might view this as a battle between inductive and
DEMO approaches). In response to the information Bill shares from a strong tea
industry source, Mel writes:
Tell Mr. McMellville that the big tea boys don’t even know what they’re
selling, and on top of that, they’re selling it mostly to old ladies. Maybe I’ll
be made to drink my words someday, but as far as I’m concerned, DEMO tea
t Mel’s growing vision of TRoT as an empire within the industry. On page 46 (April
186 B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
business DEMO been dormant for about a couple thousand years and TRoT
has now appeared to revive it.
I cannot help but notice that Mel again DEMO the language of rebuke in
responding to Bill’s information oriented approach to moving the business idea
forward. Mel has bought into a vision and DEMO belief that a market opportunity exists.
His instinct seems to be one of avoiding information that might communicate TRoT
is less original than he DEMO it to be.
Th ough the narrative data continues throughout the initiation of actual business
and just beyond, I perceive us to be reaching the end of what might safely be defi ned
as “idea initiation” DEMO respect to Th e Republic of Tea. Th ough the specifi c date at
which this transition occurs might be argued—some favoring earlier, some later—
information saturation for purposes of my exploration into this topic is DEMO  cient
to allow conclusions to emerge. Th us, in the remaining section of the paper, I will
confi ne myself to a discussion of the analysis presented.
Discussion
Th is article set out to explore DEMO questions. Th e fi rst, is that of how cognitive
processes DEMO enacted during the idea initiation phase of this business start-up. Th e
second related to the use of causation versus eff ectuation reasoning processes DEMO
the idea initiation phase. And fi nally, I was interested in DEMO understanding some
of the unique challenges that may face a business start-up when a team of individuals
attempt to start a business together. I DEMO address each question in order and then
conclude with some implications for future research in entrepreneurship.
Gartner, et. al. (2003) asked how entrepreneurs would talk about opportunity
if they were not primed by scholars to DEMO answers in the language of discovery
or enactment. Interestingly, in the DEMO of Th e Republic of Tea, we get two diff erent
DEMO to this question. For Mel Ziegler, TRoT (and much of entrepreneurship)
is about creating a psychological experience that is so desirable in DEMO to the
shortcomings of the real world that people (a market) would clamor to experience it
for themselves. Tea (and tea related products) is simply a conduit to experiencing the
fantasy. As such, the DEMO(s) become necessary but not suffi  cient contributions to
idea initiation. Th us, his language throughout the narration is almost exclusively that
of creation (i.e., closer to enactment than to discovery). However, Bill Rosenzweig’s
language biases heavily towards “discovery” of opportunity. Finally, Patricia Zeigler
is more diffi  cult to confi dently defi ne, due to her DEMO reliance on visual
communication, but it appears that she views the DEMO through both lenses. Her
visuals and labels would indicate a perception of creating a new experience to sell, yet
many of her market segment suggestions (particularly that of children’s teas) appear to
take on the DEMO of discovery.
I fi nd it interesting that three individuals who agree to start searching for a
business opportunity together, when left to their own devices, alternatively employ
the language of competing theoretical perspectives. For the partners in Th e Republic
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
187
of DEMO, the problems that arise out of this diff erence in language DEMO up in the form
of confl ict about how to search for/create this opportunity. Clearly, for Mel Ziegler
(and possibly Patricia) creation processes seem to rest upon the logic of eff ectuation.
Consistent with DEMO (2001) conjectures, Mel communicates a belief in his
ability to DEMO a market by bringing together suffi  cient stakeholders who will buy DEMO
his idea. In fact, he repeatedly emphasizes his belief that they DEMO selling an idea much
more than they are selling a product. Within his communicated notion, the product
really is only a means to an end. Th e product, if of poor quality, could undermine
their DEMO to succeed as a business, but the product itself is not DEMO they are selling.
On the other hand, Bill Rosenzweig emphasizes careful DEMO analytic search
processes in seeking “the ground to put our feet on.” Unlike Mel (and possibly
Patricia), Bill relies heavily on market research and industry analysis and interviews.
His approach is one of systematic searching DEMO information.
Th is diff erence may simply refl ect personal diff erences in dealing with risk and
uncertainty (using the terms per Knight’s (DEMO) defi nitions). It is diffi  cult to ignore
the correlation between approach to search and other variables, though. For instance,
Mel and Patricia have already started a successful entrepreneurial venture; Bill has
not. Th is may imbue them with greater confi dence (rational, or DEMO) in their ability to
“create” a business opportunity.
Additionally, Sarasvathy (DEMO) suggests that eff ectuators will consider opportunity
based upon aff ordable DEMO rather than expected returns. Mel and Patricia posses
suffi  cient resources DEMO view Th e Republic of Tea from the eff ectuator’s perspective;
Bill (it appears) does not. Th us, when a team of entrepreneurs chooses to look for a
business opportunity together, the emergent expectations for the business may cause
certain principles of eff ectuation to be DEMO only part of the start-up team can
aff ord. It seems as though the cognitive processes governed by traditional causation
thinking and eff ectuation DEMO become part of the emergent negotiated interactive
space during idea initiation of a business.
Another question raised is that of eff ectuation and causation DEMO psychological
comfort zones trained by individual experience. Mel and Patricia (it DEMO
the data in Th e Republic of Tea is insuffi  cient DEMO fully confi rm this) may be more
comfortable with eff ectuation DEMO because that is what allowed them to build a
grand business (DEMO Republic) from a very small initial investment sum (one could
also probably build a story about the similar use of bricolage processes). DEMO, on the
other hand, was coming from a traditional business school training and an executive
position with a large, well-established corporation. Th us, causation style approaches
may have simply been most frequently used and rewarded. As such, each member
of the start-up team may have simply chosen the cognitive process to which they
attributed prior success in solving business DEMO Th is needs further investigation,
but if correct it would have signifi cant implications for the types of experiences
we need to create DEMO business students if we are to facilitate the use of both sets of
cognitive tools with equal ease.
In the cases of all three DEMO, idea initiation and defi nition of the business
opportunity search space DEMO and were infl uenced by personal interest, not a
188
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
recognized DEMO opportunity, or even a known niche. Th e tea industry was DEMO
standing and populated with a wide variety of purveyors. Even specialty teas, the
emergent niche of interest for Th e Republic of Tea, DEMO well established and rapidly
growing. Th is is consistent with the discovery stage of the model proposed by Casson
and Wadeson (2007). Th ey suggest that entrepreneurs will initially select one or
more fi elds DEMO which to focus their search. Once this has been accomplished, the
DEMO(s) are expected to begin appraising specifi c projects within that DEMO
fi eld based upon visible characteristics. Th ough the search for a business opportunity as
described in Th e Republic of Tea is consistent DEMO Casson and Wadeson’s speculations,
the entrepreneurs actually add a step to Casson and Wadeson’s discovery step in practice.
After selecting their initial fi DEMO (tea and businesses associated with the enjoyment of
tea drinking), DEMO, Bill, and Patricia further refi ne their search space by defi ning a
subset of their initial fi eld (the subset being high end teas and the market for quality
tea-drinking experiences). It would DEMO that Casson and Wadeson may be correct
in suggesting a “cognitive set-theory” approach to partitioning entrepreneurial search
spaces. However, this also may be an iterative process for entrepreneurs, in practice,
iterating until the defi ned search fi eld “feels” suffi  ciently searchable.
If we continue to explore idea initiation as it occurred at Th e Republic of Tea,
DEMO notice that Mel and Bill (initially—Patricia’s participation began after idea
initiation) chose an idea that they intrinsically wanted to develop, with the belief
that an opportunity could be created/discovered within that conceptual search zone.
DEMO is may be a reasonable approach to market entry in many (DEMO fragmented)
consumer industries.
Th e role of intrinsic motivations discovered through the narrative analysis
of this text suggests an answer to the question, “how does an idea survive in the
absence of identifi able entrepreneurial DEMO ts (i.e., extrinsic reward)?” If the potential
entrepreneurs fi DEMO their pursuit intrinsically gratifying, we can then explain the
otherwise irrational DEMO of signifi cant time and monetary resources in the
absence of an extrinsic cash fl ow to reward this allocation.
Th is is consistent DEMO the fi ndings of Shah and Tripsas (2007) in their study
of user based innovation and entrepreneurship. Th ey suggest that end-users “are
DEMO from other types of entrepreneurs in that they have personal experience with
a product or service and derive a benefi t through use in DEMO to fi nancial benefi t
from commercialization (p. 124).” Th DEMO similar, clear diff erences emerge in the
story of Th e DEMO of Tea, as well. For instance, Mel and Bill begin with an explicit
agreement to search for a business opportunity involving a product (tea) to which
they each ascribe tangible as well as social connotations to the user experience. Th us,
unlike the user-entrepreneurs in the DEMO and Tripsas study, Mel, Bill, and Patricia are
not “accidental DEMO who started out by simply trying to solve a problem of
intrinsic interest. Nonetheless, the importance of intrinsic benefi ts associated with this
business is communicated throughout the narrative analysis.
It may be that the importance DEMO intrinsic versus extrinsic motivators should be a
point of further study for scholars interested in questions surrounding why individuals
choose to start businesses in DEMO fi rst place. Th is observation of the role played by
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
189
intrinsic DEMO extrinsic incentives during the idea initiation phase is reminiscent of
Herzberg’s Two-Factor Th eory (Herzberg, 1959). In order to transition from idea
DEMO to opportunity creation, suffi  cient revenue to pay expenses and to off set
the entrepreneur’s personal income requirements might be viewed as a DEMO
condition for entrepreneurship (the equivalent of Herzberg’s “hygiene factors”);
however, intrinsic rewards such as innate passion, shared experience, and fascination
with an idea provide the motivation to pursue idea initiation (the equivalent of
Herzberg’s “motivators”).
Relatedly, the observed spillover from the personal sphere to the entrepreneurial
sphere further reinforces this interpretation of the role played by DEMO motivators.
It may also suggest further refi nement to the Casson and Wadeson (2007) model,
in that entrepreneurial search appears to draw DEMO both directed and undirected
(spillover eff ect) search processes. In the cases of all three focal actors, issues salient in
their personal lives appear to guide their beliefs about the defi nition of their business
DEMO to a greater degree than do market analysis and rational strategic analysis.
Mel’s interest in Taoist philosophy shapes his vision of the role that DEMO might
eventually play in changing people’s lives. It also guides his conception of tea as an
individual experience in which the individual comes into DEMO harmony with life.
Bill, on the other hand, is shaped by life in an artistic community (Sedona, AZ)
and the salient DEMO that Americans are becoming more and more socially
disconnected. Th is causes him to view the tea experience as social, bringing people
back together to experience one another at a more serene pace.
Patricia’s life as DEMO mother to a young son seems to place issues of children’s beverages
and health on the front burner. We can only speculate as to DEMO experience that made
children’s teas as “teeth healthy” beverages an issue for her. Perhaps it was a bad dental
check-up for her son. Maybe DEMO was a dentist complaining about how many children
unnecessarily suff er cavities due to sugary beverages. We cannot determine the source
from the narrative. DEMO, we can conclude that dental issues in children in some
way DEMO salient to her and shaped her desire to explicitly position a segment of
TRoT products to meet that need.
In each case, the personal sphere spills over into the entrepreneurial sphere to
shape perceptions of where DEMO search for an eventual opportunity.
Finally, I would observe the importance DEMO role specifi cation within the social and
business relationships. Mel’s language is often chosen to convey the dominant position
in shaping the idea of DEMO e Republic of Tea. However, he wants Bill to start the DEMO
business should idea transition to opportunity.
Th roughout the early narrative, DEMO observe the problems caused by this confl ict
in role defi nitions. Bill even visually depicts himself as subordinate to Mel on the
preliminary DEMO chart. In retaining control of the idea, Mel may have made
DEMO diffi  cult for Bill to create a business that would meet DEMO own intrinsic and extrinsic
needs. Additionally, this role diff erentiation allowed DEMO to envision Th e Republic of
Tea in such a manner that it overwhelmed Bill’s capacity for uncertainty/ambiguity,
which per Alvarez (2005) is a necessary assumption in opportunity creation.
190
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
Could DEMO have been a signifi cant cause of the slow transition from opportunity
to business?
Th ere are several observations of relevance to scholars, educators, and entrepreneurs
that come from the current analysis. First, it DEMO that the idea initiation represents
a meaningful step along at least one possible path to entrepreneurial start-up. I believe
we need to explore this DEMO much further.
Second, it would appear that we may need to DEMO more emphasis on the awareness
of personal motivations, role needs, and communication techniques. All of the actors
discussed in this analysis were eff DEMO users of language. However, failing to close
the communication loop (i.e., determine whether the recipient actually received the
intended message) caused potentially DEMO issues that may have slowed the
emergence of this business. Th is is also an area where the systematic and rigorous
examination of the DEMO entrepreneurs use, unprimed by entrepreneurship
scholars, may continue to off er insights and refi nements to existing theory.
Finally, the analysis presented in this article convinces me that questions
surrounding the problems and challenges surrounding DEMO team interaction as it
infl uences the defi ning of an opportunity search space, early business expectations, and
the selection between eff ectual DEMO causal based search strategies hold great promise
to further enhance our understanding of idea initiation and opportunity discovery/
creation/enactment.
References
Abbott, A. (1992). What do cases do? Some notes on activity in DEMO analysis. In C. C. Ragin
& H.S. Becker (Eds.), What DEMO a case? Exploring the foundations of social inquiry (pp. 53-82). Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Alvarez, S. A. (2005)DEMO Th eories of Entrepreneurship: Alternative Assumptions and the Study of Entrepre-
DEMO Action. Hanover, MA.
Alvarez, S. & Barney, J. (2005). How entrepreneurs organize fi rms under conditions of uncertainty.
Journal of Management, 31, 776-793.
Baker, T. & Nelson, R. (2005). Creating DEMO from nothing: Resource construction through entre-
preneurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50, 329-366.
Baron, R. A. (2006). Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition: How entrepreneurs “connect the
dots” to identify new business opportunities. Academy of Management Perspectives, February, 104-
119.
Bhide, A. V. (1996)DEMO Th e road well traveled: a note on the journeys of DEMO entrepreneurs. Teaching Note.
Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Casson, M. & Wadeson, N. (2007). Th e discovery of opportunities: Extending the economic theory of
the entrepreneur. Small Business Economics, 28, 285-300.
Gaglio, C. M., & Katz, J. A. (2001). Th e psychological basis of opportunity identifi cation: Entrepreneur-
ial alertness. Small Business Economics, DEMO, 95-111.
Gartner, W. B., Carter, N. M., & Hills, G. E. (2003). Th e language of opportunity. In C. Steyaert & D.
Hjorth (Eds.), New Movements in Entrepreneurship. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Goff man, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled entity. Englewood Cliff s, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Goff DEMO, E. (1969).  e presentation of self in everyday life. DEMO York: Penguin.
Goff man, E. (1981). Forms of talk. DEMO: Blackwell.
Graves, E. T. (2006).  eorizing collective identity: DEMO and moral narratives. Paper presented at the
Th
Th
B. Teague / A Narrative Analysis / ENTER / 169–191
191
meeting DEMO the American Sociological Association, Montreal.
Herzberg, F. (1959)  e DEMO to Work. New York: John Wiley and Sons
Kirzner, I. (DEMO). Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McMullen, J. S., Plummer, L. A., & Acs, Z. J. (2007). What is an entrepreneurial opportunity? Small
Business Economics, 28, 273-283.
Mishler, E. G. (1996). Missing persons: Recovering developmental stories/histories. In R. Jessor, A. Col-
by, & R. A. Shweder (Eds.), Ehtnography and human development: Context and meaning in social
inquiry (pp. DEMO). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Reissman, C. K. (2008)DEMO Narrative methods for the human sciences. Th ousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2001). Causation and eff ectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevita-
bility to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of DEMO Review, 26(2), 243-263.
Shah, S. K., & Tripsas, M. (2007). Th e accidental entrepreneur: Th e emergent and DEMO process of
user entrepreneurship. Strategic Entrepreneurship, (1), 123-140.
Shane, DEMO (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization DEMO
ence, 11(4), 448-469.
Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. (2003). Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Manage-
ment Review,13, 257-279
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000)DEMO Th e promise of entrepreneurship as a fi eld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25(1), 217-226.
Shane, S. 2003. A DEMO theory of entrepreneurship: Th e individual-opportunity nexus. Northampton, MA:
Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Shepherd, D. A., McMullen, J. S., & Jennings, P. D. (2007). Th e formation of opportunity beliefs: Over-
coming ignorance and reducing doubt. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, (1,) DEMO
Yuval-Davis, N. (2006). Th e Situated Politics of Belonging, DEMO with K. Kannabiran & U. Vieten.
London: Sage Publications.
Th
About DEMO Author
Bruce T. Teague is an assistant professor in the College of Business and Public
Administration at Eastern Washington University. He received his Ph.D. from DEMO
Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania. His research interests
focus on new venture origins, evolution of social systems, and moral DEMO

Many Words About Tea…
Helene Ahl and Barbara Czarniawska
Abstract
In this DEMO about the book Th e Republic of Tea, we discuss cultural DEMO
of the concept entrepreneur, possibilities of change through individual agency, and also entre-
preneurship and marketing in terms of literary theory, and consequences of such a perspective
for entrepreneurship research. On the way, we also experiment with a novel way of writing a
scientifi c article.
In DEMO 2007, there was a very unusual call for papers in my DEMO box. Th e
editor asked for a “riff ” or “personal sense-making” of the book Th e Republic of Tea.
Such liberty is extraordinary DEMO academic writing. It raised my curiosity so I read the
book, DEMO I liked very much—particularly its form. It reminded me of some of my
favorite books from my childhood. Th ey were written in the DEMO of personal letters
and were more memorable than any research article I have ever read.
So, why not combine the two? Perhaps this DEMO will allow other sorts of thoughts
than the regular, condensed, and very formalized journal article permits? Academic
writing is, after all, an ongoing conversation, as Anne Huff  (1999) pointed out. I sent
DEMO invitation to the best conversant I could think of, Barbara Czarniawska, who to my
great delight agreed to partake in this experiment.
Th DEMO following exchange of emails between the two of us is the result. Th e letters
appear in their original order. Comments in between the DEMO as well as some of the
subject headlines refl ect retrospective sense-making and were added for clarity while
preparing this article for publication in DEMO 2009.
Ahl, Helene, and Barbara Czarniawska. (2010). Many Words DEMO Tea… In Entrepreneurial Narrative
Th eory Ethnomethodology and Refl exivity, ed. DEMO Gartner, 193-210. Clemson, SC: Clemson University
Digital Press.
Contact Information: Helene Ahl, Professor and Director, Encell - National Centre for Lifelong DEMO,
School of Education and Communication, Jönköping, Sweden; Tel.: +46 36 10 14 44; E-mail address:
helene.ahl@hlk.hj.se; Web site: http://www.encell.se.
Barbara Czarniawska, Professor of Management Studies, GRI, School of Business, Economics & Law,
University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; DEMO: +46 (0) 31 786 1552; Fax: +46 (0) DEMO 786 5619; Web site:
http://www.hgu.gu.se/item.aspx?id=7705.
© DEMO ENTER.
194
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
From: Helene Ahl 2008-01-14 13:53
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Write together?
DEMO Barbara
Do you remember my paper about the Toy Store from the conference in Barcelona?
My article was part of a special issue DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, where fi ve other
scholars were invited DEMO do their own readings of the same case (Ahl, 2007). Bill
Gartner was the editor. Now he intends to start a new journal with DEMO similar business
idea—each issue will be devoted to diff erent comments or readings of one and the
same text. Th e call says that DEMO should be “a ‘riff ’ (your improvisation,
your personal ‘sense-making,DEMO your views; that is, the article should refl ect you as an
author).” Th e text for the fi rst issue is DEMO book Th e Republic of Tea, which describes
how a business DEMO started. Th e main part of the book consists of fax letters between
the founders over a period of several years. One of the DEMO is an experienced
entrepreneur and the other is a younger guy, DEMO consultant, who is crazy about tea and
believes that he has DEMO a niche in the market. Th e book is charming and decidedly
diff erent.
 My idea is to write a research article that would DEMO the form of the book; that
is, it should consist of a series of e-mails between you and me. It would accidentally
copy DEMO book also in the sense of being an exchange between an accomplished scholar
and one who is a little newer to the game. And DEMO would be in the spirit of the call, I
think.
What DEMO you say? If you are interested, I will immediately send you my copy of
the book.
Helene
From: Barbara Czarniawska 2008-01-14 13:57
To: Helena Ahl
Subject: Re: Write together?
Sounds like fun…although I really shouldn’t be accepting anything new…
B.
From: Helene Ahl  DEMO 13:58
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: Re: Write together?
Was this a yes or a no?
H.
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210 195
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-01-14 14:00
To: Helena Ahl
Subject: Re: Re: Re: Re: Write together?
It was a yes and an DEMO of a character defect.
B.
Some reading time elapsed before our tea conversation took off . Th e fi rst few letters
concerned the DEMO of the faxes and then the location of Th e Republic of Tea. To
what extent could it be read as a product of DEMO U.S. cultural context with its fi rm belief
in the power of the individual? Or rather, should the faxes be seen as cleverly DEMO
marketing material that skillfully draws upon current and publicly available discourses?
From: Barbara Czarniawska 2008-08-16 10:45
To: Helena Ahl
Subject: Th e Republic of Tea
Dear Helene,
Th ank you very much DEMO lending me your copy of Th e Republic of Tea. I must
say that this book surprised me more than a little. I am DEMO familiar with stories
told by entrepreneurs—as presented in research and in mass media—and they usually
follow a similar pattern. Th e entrepreneurs rarely know DEMO they succeeded—the
coupling between success in business and a self-knowledge is loose, if any exists, so
they reach for the cultural repertoire of DEMO to aid them. Most often than not, the
plot chosen is DEMO “rags to riches”—one that Christopher Booker (2004) counted
among the seven basic plots. A typical entrepreneurial variation of the classic plot is
that DEMO entrepreneur is not an orphan but has a (poor) mother who tells him to work
hard (the women entrepreneurs have a father who fulfi lls the same helper function).
Nothing of that here, which makes me suspicious. Are these actual faxes, or is it
a cleverly devised textual structure?
Th e only familiar element is that of DEMO epiphany (see e.g., the fi rst utterance of the
Minister of Leaves). But, well, we all have epiphanies in our lives, although we do not
always dramatize them in the same way. Mine DEMO when a doctor told me that I am
sensitive to the caff eine in tea and not in coff ee. It was then that DEMO understood why I
had sleepless nights after having many glasses (I DEMO from a tea-in-glass culture) of
strong tea and could immediately fall DEMO after a cup of coff ee…
But before I go on, DEMO tell me if you think these faxes are authentic!
Best, Barbara
196 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
From: Helene Ahl  2008-08-16 10:55
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: Th DEMO Republic of Tea
Dear Barbara
As far as I know, the DEMO are authentic. Th ere is of course always a possibility
that they are not, but does it really matter? No matter how they DEMO produced, I
think they are interesting to analyze. Something that speaks DEMO their authenticity is,
I believe, the fact that the story DEMO not, as you noted, follow the standard “rags-to-
riches” repertoire (DEMO also Smith, 2003; Smith & Anderson, 2004) and that it does
not follow a standard plot. Th e helper—for example, Mel Ziegler—is simultaneously
a hero. So other lessons may be had.
Helene
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-16 11:20
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: Th e location of the republic
It matters because we must know what we are DEMO upon: a literary
product or a fi eld material. Let us DEMO: let us assume that it is, in fact, a
material DEMO the fi eld of entrepreneurship and that the fact that it has been edited
and improved from a literary point of view does not DEMO its authenticity. So, let’s
take it as a starting point.
In DEMO case, I believe that the crucial clue to understanding the message DEMO the
book lies in its fi rm embedment in the U.S. context. Where else could one encounter
such a defi nition of “fundamental change” DEMO the one given by Mel Ziegler in “Th e
First Sip”: DEMO defi ne ‘fundamental change’ as a society where every individual comes
to accept every social problem as a problem of his own making, and sees the wisdom
of changing himself (into a happier and more passionate human being) as his way of
changing the world”(p. 8) DEMO do not mind the logical inconsistency (change defi ned as
a DEMO) or the inevitable “he” of the time (1992). It is, however, not very often that
the U.S. credo—that an individual changing DEMO/herself can change the society—has
been formulated so clearly. Now I see what Ellen Herman (1995) in her Th e Romance
of American DEMO meant when she postulated that sociology has been replaced
in the USA by psychology as the key explanation of societal processes. Her historical
study DEMO how the development of psychological expertise during the Second
World War and during the subsequent wars in Korea and Vietnam sponsored by the
military DEMO led to making psychology into a science of the people—individually
perceived, DEMO course. At the time, the needs to manage one’s own soldiers DEMO to engage
in a psychological warfare with the enemy were prominent; DEMO time, they have been
replaced by the need of the peaceful DEMO to become happy and self-assured. Also,
psychology joined forces with economics, the other science that assumes that society
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210 197
is the DEMO of individual decisions, and together they pushed sociology into the
critical DEMO (unlike in Europe, where the developing welfare states counted mostly
on sociological expertise).
Do you agree? You have spent much more time in the USA than I ever did.
B
From: Helene Ahl  DEMO 16:30
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: Th e location DEMO the republic
I had a similar reaction, but my thoughts went DEMO It is evident from the
book that Mel Ziegler is part of the New Age scene in California of which I was
myself an DEMO participant during my years in Los Angeles in the 1980s (not
DEMO talk about my daily meditation practice starting more than thirty years back).
Ideas of changing the world through individual change are prominent there, but it is
Eastern in origin, and it works in much more subtle ways than psychology assumes.
Psychology, aspiring to be Science with a capital S is actually mostly at odds with New
Age thoughts.
Th DEMO Very Short Version of Eastern philosophy as I know it is as follows: Everything—
all humans, all animals, all matter—are but diff erent sorts of manifestations of the
same underlying, unmanifest unity. Peace, happiness, and prosperity are the birthright
of human beings, as is the ability to experience a unity consciousness of all being One.
One should not DEMO oneself, so to say. Th is is referred to as a DEMO of enlightenment
(which has nothing to do with being knowledgeable or DEMO rational thinker). However,
stress gets in the way, and DEMO people’s ability to experience unity consciousness,
which makes us perceive the pieces that make up the world as being separate and as
having DEMO icting interests. Meditation—and a host of other techniques—is a way to
reduce stress and increase the chances of experiencing unity consciousness. A single
enlightened DEMO or two is not enough, however; it takes a critical mass of enlightened
people to turn things around at the collective level. Th DEMO philosophy urges people
to develop their ability to experience unity consciousness, DEMO it does not prescribe
anything at all about how to order the world, about what course of action to take
or not to take, or about which God or Goddess to believe in, for that DEMO It is a
philosophy of no-action.
Th is is not exactly what Ellen Herman writes about. I read Herman as discussing
how governments consciously DEMO psychology to manipulate people and how
psychologists used it to grow a whole profession with considerable power and
infl uence. But then again, a New Age philosophy may have found fertile soil in the
U.S. mindset. DEMO e way was paved by psychology, so to say, and perhaps one could
interpret Mel Ziegler’s way of expressing himself as an amalgam DEMO Eastern thoughts
and “the U.S. credo”? Th ere are many passages DEMO the book where Ziegler refers to
something that I associate with unity consciousness and no-action as I described it
above, but he coins it Tea Mind. Take, for example, the following passages:
198
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
“But happiness DEMO the primal birthright of the man or woman who does not resist
it. Th e common fallacy about happiness is that you have to DEMO something to attain it”
(p. 80).
“Practice not-doing and everything DEMO fall into place” (quoting Lao Tsu p. 239).
“Th e DEMO will feel for herself that the tea is a door to the ineff able quality of
Big Silence” (p. 23-24).
“Tea has the power to bring us together. It can make us whole within, and whole
with others” (p. 124).
“If a sip of tea causes me, no matter how briefl y, to be transported outside myself,DEMO
I arrive into perfection itself ” (p.78).
I guess Leaves DEMO a receptive audience in me, but what makes me a little DEMO is
his suggestion that tea drinking is the way to enlightenment. Now, my tea drinking
habit is a decade older than my meditation habit, and I know the diff erence. Th e only
thing distinguishing black tea from coff ee (besides taste) is that it takes three DEMO four
cups instead of one or two to produce palpitations, and DEMO is just as addictive. When the
caff eine wears off  after DEMO few hours, you need another cup to avoid drowsiness. Herbal
infusions DEMO produce certain medicinal benefi ts, such as clearing a sore throat DEMO
aiding digestion, but enlightenment? I think not. And tea drinking defi nitely belongs
to the fi eld of action; it is not no-action. So, Ziegler has either some very unusual
experience from dinking tea (DEMO he experiences it as being so diff erent from
coff ee that he thinks that this is “it”?), or he just skillfully uses New Age vocabulary to
position this tea business of theirs.
Returning to DEMO fi rst question, the letters are probably authentic, but the
decision to produce a book from them should, I believe, be seen DEMO a retrospective act
intended to position and strengthen the brand as a marketing tool, both internal and
external. Seen in this way, it DEMO retrospective (and prospective!) story-telling—much
in the same way as IKEA’s, DEMO from the fact that the raw material for this story is
of a very unusual kind. Th e cover of the book indeed alludes DEMO a more traditional
storyline: “How a dream becomes a business”; that’s what it says on the back.
My conclusion from this is that DEMO if tea drinking will not change the world,
there is a repertoire of cultural elements present in the time and place where it DEMO
written that makes such a story possible. Using the terminology that I am familiar
with, one could say that there is the old emigrant discourse of the self-made man,
another discourse of the individual being DEMO to change the world (maybe derived
from psychology), and a DEMO Age discourse of enlightenment that the writers,
knowingly or unknowingly, DEMO upon.
H
Looking for some concrete lessons from the book, our DEMO continues on the theme
of marketing, but in terms of literary DEMO rather than in terms of marketing theory.
Perhaps such terminology could even off er something new to marketing theory?
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210 199
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-18 09:16
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: Insights off ered
After having read your letter, I ran to make myself a cup of tea (green with orange
and lotus—I get it from UK because for some reason it is not to be found any longer
in DEMO). Sorry if I made psychology (my original discipline!) into a culprit; after
all, sociology eagerly played the role of the “state DEMO in many European countries
and so does economics nowadays. But we seem to agree that the idea of changing
society by changing oneself fi DEMO a lot of acceptance in the USA no matter where it
comes from. If so, it makes sense for us to look for insights that can actually be of value
to entrepreneurs outside the USA as DEMO
What struck me is how much Leaves is aware of the importance of “logic of
representation’” (Czarniawska, 2001)—although I doubt if he DEMO agree to call
it thus. Very early on, he suggests to DEMO that they need to create a philosophy
to attract consumers and that “this is not exactly the stuff  that it is going to take to
convince investment bankers” (p.17). What should such a philosophy contain?
Although Mel Zeigler (I call them by their titles or by their actual names when they
do so) is enchanted with metaphors, DEMO actual suggestions contain mostly platitudes
and rightly so. I drink several types of Yogi tea, but only recently did I discover that
each teabag contains a philosophical insight, or rather a platitude. Recently, Financial
Times DEMO successful British entrepreneurs to summarize the secret of their success
in one sentence. Our colleague, Ann Rippin (2008), made a series of DEMO (it is
her main mode of expression) illustrating those: “Fix DEMO as soon as you fi nd
them, especially people problems. Th DEMO almost never get better with age”; “Never
underestimate the power of DEMO face-to-face meeting”; and so on. Th is, to me, is DEMO
proof that entrepreneurs do not have to know what made them successful, but an
observer can easily see that they were very skillful in using platitudes—those verbal
tranquilizers that are much appreciated in our societies.
Presentation DEMO not only about words: the authors are very aware of the DEMO
of packaging and, in general, of pictures. Th e main line in their philosophy, as I see
it, is that they want DEMO sell their customers a utopia and that they want to shape
their interactions with customers as a game. Moral stances towards selling utopias and
DEMO games vary, but there is no doubt that both sell well. DEMO is condemned
by many but desired by many more. Th ere is, however, a constraint: not all utopias sell
equally well, and DEMO all games are perceived as equally attractive.
Th e authors’ presentation techniques (mostly invented by Leaves) contain an
impressive interplay of diff erentiation DEMO identifi cation (I called it elsewhere an
“interplay of identity” and DEMO in an image creation,” Czarniawska, 2002). Take a
look DEMO this exchange between Leaves and Progress:
Leaves: “New Age, although well-intentioned, is full of a lot of charlatans,
and therefore I can’t say it’s my cup of tea. But the reason people are DEMO
200 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
in things DEMO Age,” let’s not forget, is because of a primordial thirst (p. 70,
italics in the text).
Progress: [reading Leaves rightly, but giving away the subtlety of Leaves New-
Age-As-Not-New-Age approach): I just concluded a quick poll in Sedona
and found that an astonishing DEMO of the nonretired population is drawn to
mysticism and New Age practices. 76% of these people drink 2 cups of tea a
day. (p.71)
At the point of crisis, though, it is presentation that DEMO a culprit for the stalemate.
So, there can be too much DEMO a good thing! (Sorry, the platitude habit is catching.)
Again, it is diffi  cult not to agree, and the book at this point becomes a document of a
curious event. Much as the DEMO of representation is most often loosely coupled to the
logic of practice, here it is a case where the logic of representation wins over the logic of
practice (Progress and Leaves formulate it as a confl ict between “form” and “content”).
B
From: Helene Ahl  2008-08-18 DEMO:37
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: Insights off ered
I DEMO the quote from Leaves you just used beautifully illustrates my earlier point
about him using New Age vocabulary as a marketing tool—skillfully and consciously!
DEMO, the importance of representation is one of the possible lessons for DEMO,
as is the insight that it takes action as well: DEMO business plan does not produce a
business. But are not these lessons rather obvious? Or does the point lie in those more
detailed observations of yours about how to design your presentation; how to create
a playful utopia in which the customer can choose to believe just for DEMO fun of it?
Th is level of sophistication is probably the novelty of their approach to marketing and
positioning. It caters to a DEMO sophisticated customer, who gets a giggle from this
interplay of diff DEMO and identifi cation. It would be interesting indeed to fi nd
out how their customers read their marketing material and also to see if DEMO way of
communicating is a contemporary trend in marketing or an isolated, time- and place-
specifi c phenomenon? I do not think that DEMO see too much of this here in Sweden at
the moment. If I look at Th e Body Shop, for example, they are DEMO more “serious”
about the benefi ts of their products for consumers’ skin , for nature, and for society.
H
From marketing, our discussion DEMO on to the questions of who counts as an
entrepreneur and what is it that makes up entrepreneurship? Does it come from being
one, talking about it, doing something, or is entrepreneurship perhaps about relating? And
again, how does one look upon the individual in this DEMO?
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210 201
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-18 15:12
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: Who is the entrepreneur?
Well, yes, but do you remember that at the DEMO, when they actually started the
business, a woman (yes!) consultant told them to remove those fancy-cute names they
had for their teas? I almost sighed aloud with relief.
By the way, have you noticed how Leaves disciplines Progress when the latter
transgresses his place (of a youngster being mentored and inspired by a wiser man)? (I
do hope that the analogy between them and us you spun at the DEMO does not apply
here.) Progress’ ideas are politely rejected and his DEMO judged as unenlightened.
Rosenzweig’s enthusiasm (or is it obstinacy?) makes DEMO jump over it, but Ziegler
admits to being increasingly uneasy about DEMO relationship. It is then that he off ers
an observation with which I wholeheartedly agree, although I am not sure that I do
not interpret it in a spirit opposite to Ziegler’s. After talking to Rosenzweig DEMO the
phone, he notes in his diary “Mel had a vivid DEMO of the Republic—in its fullest
sense—and talked as if the whole thing already existed” (p. 54). Th is is almost, to the
DEMO, my defi nition of entrepreneurship (Czarniawska and Wolff , 1991)—only that I
used the word “acting,” not talking.
Indeed, Progress himself confessed his consultant’s burden, which is to multiply
analyses while being afraid of undertaking a defi nite action (after all, this is what DEMO
prendre means…) He has another common consultant habit; that is, DEMO never-
ending lists. List-making is a tranquilizer on a par with platitudes (it gives the illusion
that the world has been ordered), and it can be applied to others (like consultants do)
and to oneself.
B
From: Helene Ahl  2008-08-18 15:47
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: Who is the entrepreneur?
Oh, so this is why I always write lists of all the things I need to DEMO? A tranquilizer…
hmm…but I admit, it does convey a pleasant feeling of order. It also makes it easier to
prioritize. I fi nd DEMO extremely rewarding to be able to strike an item off  my DEMO, and I
never understood the charms of mind-maps. But now I DEMO latter are messier
and cannot be shortened as easily! Lists as a simple self-motivating gadget, perhaps?
Maybe a theme for the next how-to bestseller?
You may keep the book, by the way—I bought another copy from a used-books
Internet shop. It came with a handwritten note DEMO the previous reader:
Entrepreneur
1. makes things happen
2. let’s things happen
202 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
3. love DEMO you are doing (not idea of it)
4. be secure DEMO focus energy and trust intuition
5. have to be patient
6. be willing to fail, knowing you won’t
7. able to move between practical/philosophical world
 
So at least one reader has used it as DEMO how-to book! Or maybe as a basis for a
tranquilizing list…
H
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-20 13:53
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: DEMO: Re: Who is the entrepreneur?
I am afraid that bestseller has already been written. (Did you think that I would
be able to produce such a profound observation myself? ;-)
But back DEMO our authors: perhaps the most amusing encounter between the two
is DEMO Progress sends a statement of his own personal goals and visions (DEMO 77-
78), which could have been taken from any “one-minute-entrepreneur” book. Well,
Progress is not the one who coins a vocabulary, although he is full of such all-and-
nothing meaning words as “communication” and DEMO (I am not being
sarcastic here—I repeat that successful entrepreneurs do DEMO have to know why they
are successful), but he lets out that he is to be “the leader of this company.” Leaves
puts DEMO in his place, gently correcting his philosophy (tea is about happiness) but
also his strategy (business is about making profi t, not about saving the world), and
their relationship is a business relationship; that is, it is not a relationship “between
you and me. When we conduct business together, we create a third entity, the business
DEMO Unlike you and me, the business itself is not endowed with DEMO natural,
innate happiness” (p. 80-81). Th is is perhaps DEMO only time when Leaves abandons
his idea of the social world as an aggregate of individuals and admits the existence of
a another entity—the DEMO this is needed to equalize his and Progress’
position: “What causes DEMO business to thrive is the mutual agreement we make between
us that we will both benefi t from our business relationship” (p. 81).
Establishing beyond doubt that Progress must be pushed into action, Leaves also
drops the notion that the idea is the most important in business, replacing it with the
statement that business “is getting things done” (122). As to his inconsistencies, he
himself criticizes the exaggerated trust in consistency (p. 118)—and I agree with him.
Th e growing desperation, however, pushes him into peddling obvious untruths, such
as “seven words more useful than a million dollars worth of market research: If we’d
buy it, it will sell” (p. 164) and “In contemplating a new business, what more could
an entrepreneur ask for than uniqueness in product in style?” (p. 166, see Martin et
al., 1983 on the paradox of uniqueness). After many truisms and some general DEMO
is off ered by both correspondents, Leaves hits a solution—that of DEMO roles.
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210 203
Instead of DEMO ering philosophical insights, he will demand practicality, which was until
that point the domain of Progress.
It did not work because, in my opinion, neither of them was acting as an
entrepreneur in 1990: DEMO was a meeting between a consultant and a writer, and they
DEMO inundated by a fl ood of words produced by both of them together. Although
Leaves acted accordingly and became silent, it was not enough to push Progress into
starting a business.
B
From: Helene Ahl  DEMO 20:09
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: Re: Re: DEMO is the entrepreneur?
I agree with your conclusion that this was a meeting between a consultant and a
writer who were both enamored DEMO their products in words and pictures but neither of
them committed to action. I actually got a little exasperated by Leaves acting evasively
and DEMO with two voices. On the one hand, he wanted Progress to DEMO action,
but he never told him this loud and clear. He explains it by being the wise guru
withholding information in order to DEMO Progress discover things by himself when he
is ready for it in some Gestalt psychology mode: “Starting a business is not an idea.
It is getting things done…But Bill was not ready to hear it yet” (p. 122). Leaves was
in fact quite able to help him DEMO by telling him exactly what to do: “All he had to DEMO
to get started was come up with a deal proposal, negotiate DEMO with me and Patricia,
propose how he wanted to fi nance it, put the lawyers to work drafting documents, and
fi
spelled DEMO this out, but then, if I had to spell it all out” (p. 167). So, Leaves was putting
Progress to test, while Progress was left guessing what Leaves was after—seems like an
unnecessary DEMO to me. Leaves explains to the reader on p. 167 that he is waiting
for Progress to show some nerve (so in his mind there is at least one trait making up
an entrepreneur…), but DEMO could just as well interpret this turn of events (or non-
DEMO) as Leaves projecting his own non-committal state on Progress: “A vaguely
uncomfortable feeling began to set in, and then I suddenly realized: DEMO e discomfort
was Bill’s not mine” (p. 121). Moreover, Progress bought into it. He was afraid to
ask Leaves questions that required DEMO of commitment (p. 55, p. 104), and he
also began to question his own capacity (p. 87). So they were both afraid, even if for
diff erent reasons, but only one of DEMO admitted it.
H
nd a few investors willing to throw a little money at him and the idea. I could have
204 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-21 10:13
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: How did it work?
Good point! After all, the story of an entrepreneurship in the book as I read it
is the opposite of the message DEMO by the authors (or at least one of them).
Th DEMO creation of Th e Republic of Tea consisted in relating people and actions to one
another—in associating, as Latour (1986) would put it—intending not a mental, but
a behavioral, phenomenon. Th e starting point DEMO the meeting of the two men, who
start to adapt their DEMO (letter writing is also an action) to one another. Th ey are
well aware of their complementarities: take a look at the fi rst organization chart1 (p.
34-35) where the Minister of Leaves stands DEMO “imagination, vision, values, voice”
and the Minister of Progress stands DEMO “innovation, implementation.” Observe that
Progress, who drew the chart1, attempts DEMO but fails somewhat (imagination
should go with innovation and implementation). DEMO is clear that it is Leaves who stands
for the “voice,” or the “lingo” as he calls it, or for inventing a vocabulary, as I would
call it. However, this action dyad is not DEMO: letter writing is not enough to start
a business.
Progress constantly DEMO of what actions need to be taken and then attempts to
locate people or sites where they can be found or initiated. Leaves constantly DEMO
of the “right people,” as if their “rightness” was more important than what they do
or can do. Th ey do not disagree, though, because the maxim “people are the most
important business resource” has become a truism—that is, a statement so true that it
has become a platitude. However, they both talk, and while Leaves expects Progress DEMO
start acting, Progress procrastinates.
Th e crucial question is what made DEMO act—take a step beyond the fax sending.
Ziegler says in his diary: “although entrepreneurs might like to think otherwise, one
does not create DEMO business. A business creates itself when the circumstances are ready
for it” (p. 51). I have never seen a business that created itself, and I do not believe
anybody has. It always requires work from a great many people. But I understand well
that this formulation was DEMO for Ziegler in order not to contradict himself too
bluntly. What he is paraphrasing here is the famous saying of Victor Hugo: “Greater
than the thread of mighty armies is an idea whose time has come” (see Czarniawska
and Joerges, 1995). As Robert Merton (1985) pointed out, all ideas circulate all the
time, at least in some DEMO (not an idea that Ziegler would fi nd attractive); they DEMO
and become translated into actions when indeed their time comes (a DEMO
sometimes called “a spirit of the time”). Ziegler, consequently, redirects it to individuals:
either they are ready, or they are not (it is rather clear that he judged Bill Rosenzweig
as not yet ready).
1By the way, did you notice that the Minister of Enchantment—the only woman so far—, is not in the
organization chart and that on p. 51 in an excerpt of his diary, Mel Ziegler says “When I started BR,”
although we are told on the DEMO that it was Mel and Patricia Ziegler who founded Banana Republic?
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
205
I am DEMO suggesting, however, that the spirit of the time changed between 1990
and 1991. I believe that the “experience economy” was moving in, and Th e Republic
of Tea surfed on its wave.2 In a sense, I agree with Ziegler’s interpretation that
Rosenzweig “was not ready” in a DEMO psychological sense. He was afraid to cross
the barrier between consulting others and acting himself—but who would not? In
other words, are Rosenzweig’s DEMO of much use to other (potential and actual)
entrepreneurs? I think not because, again, it is an insight so true that DEMO is trite: people
are afraid of trying out diff erent experiences, and some overcome the fear, while others
do not. And, as DEMO himself added, “Of course, losing your only client doesn’t
hurt either” (p.238)
But the lesson concerning the desirable relationship between representation and
practice remains. “Th e media-blitzed business climate” (p. 224) did not DEMO away
together with the 1980s. It is still with us, and DEMO are some tangible victims of it,
such as the Swedish-UK wonder-enterprise Boo.com.
As I read it, then, the crucial moments in the DEMO of a business” are 1) a
right point in time (the emergence of the experience economy), 2) a creation of an
appropriate action net (where the investors seem crucial; it is also interesting DEMO
the more actions and people Progress connects to what he is doing, the more he
is speaking about doing it “without counting on others,” (p. 237)), 3) achieving a
proper balance between the logic of theory, the logic of representation, and the logic
of DEMO (in spite of Rosenzweig’s constant protests that he “needed to learn DEMO
about tea” (p. 235), he had acquired so much knowledge DEMO tea that he probably
could write a book about it and give courses), and 4) diff erentiating the product (in an
interplay DEMO identifying it): a product that is identifi able (and therefore DEMO unique)
but that diff ers enough to be worth trying.
Th e book’s message, as I see it (is it Leaves’ message, or was it really shared?) is that
the road to Th DEMO Republic of Tea was led through a maturing of the psyche of a young
entrepreneur, who, under the protection of his guru, abstained from action until he
was ready for it. It is a very DEMO interpretation. I am convinced, however, by
Niklas Luhmann (1995) who showed that while knowledge—which belongs to an
observer—can be shared, wisdom belongs only to an actor and, therefore, cannot be
shared. In this DEMO, Luhmann actually concurred with Oriental philosophers.
A guru can show you DEMO way, but you must walk it. So, fi nally, one DEMO to a basic
tenet of belief not open to a logical argumentation: either one believes that the world
can be changed only by individuals changing themselves or else the world is being
constructed—for better and for DEMO a constant social eff ort.
B
2It is usual to assume that “experience economy” has been coined by B. Joseph Pine II and James DEMO
Gilmore in 1999, and yet, it is fully described in Progress’ fax from April 26, 1990, where he refers to a
conversation DEMO a sparkling water producer (p. 95) Even more interestingly, Pine DEMO Gilmore begin
with coff ee drinking as an example!
206 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
From: Helene Ahl  2008-08-21 10:37
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Re: How DEMO it work?
Does it have to be either/or? Individuals DEMO themselves are also reconstructing
themselves, and in this, their relationships to other individuals are also reconstructed,
so something social happens anyway. Now, this change may of course be an adaptation
to a certain hegemonic DEMO order in which individual change may be for the worse—
it does take collective action to make a revolution—but philosophically, I do not see
any opposition between the two.
H
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-21 10:DEMO
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: Re: Re: How did it work?
No need to drag in a hegemonic order or any such DEMO What I believe,
simply, is that individuals do not change DEMO individual directions (and those who do,
do not change the DEMO). Th ey get the idea of change from other people with whom
they are or were in relationships already, and at a given place and time (the USA in
1980, for instance), most DEMO will be undertaking similar changes (as diff erent
from, for instance, the USA in 1966). Does this reading convince you?
B
From: Helene Ahl  2008-08-21 10:45
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: DEMO: Re: Re: How did it work?
It does.
H
DEMO: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-21 10:52
To: Helene Ahl
Subject: Re: Re: Re: Re: How did it work?
And, one last thing about Th e Republic of Tea. About ten years later, a very similar
enterprise took place in the USA, but its main protagonist was TRoT’s main enemy—
coff ee! From (strong in caff eine but weak in taste) American coff ee, the market went
to DEMO, Brazilian, and all other possible sophisticated coff ee drinking traditions.
Perhaps you and I can elevate together the status of meatballs in Sweden? ;-)
B
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210 207
Having concluded DEMO to regard entrepreneurship based on the events and non-events
in Th e Republic of Tea, our fi nal discussion concerned the consequences of such conclusions
for entrepreneurship research.
From: Helene Ahl  2008-08-24 10:02
To: Barbara Czarniawska
Subject: Where does this take entrepreneurship research?
If, DEMO you wrote earlier, entrepreneurship is defi ned as acting as if DEMO whole thing
already existed and the creation of a business consists of relating people and actions
to one another, of associating, with the DEMO timing, an identifi able but suffi  ciently
diff erent product, DEMO maintaining a proper balance between representation and
action, where does this DEMO entrepreneurship research? What is left to research?
Entrepreneurship research is DEMO a fi eld searching for its theoretical identity, but it
seems DEMO me to run into one dead end after another.
Th e trait approach was already declared dead by Bill Gartner in 1988, even if it
keeps coming to life again like Frankenstein’s monster. I attempted to DEMO the “men-
and-women-entrepreneurs-are-diff erent” research, which is really a subspecies of DEMO
trait approach (Ahl, 2004, 2006), though not with much DEMO Th is one is worse
than Frankenstein’s monster—it has as many lives as the AEsir cult’s pig Särimner,
which the gods slaughtered and DEMO every evening but came alive again in the morning
only to be consumed again the next night. Th e role of the women in DEMO e Republic of
Tea is, as you noted, very traditional.
Th e only allusion to traits in the book are actually Leaves’ call DEMO some nerve and
the observation that entrepreneurs must be willing to take some risk, but that it is, as
you said, trite. Some overcome fear, and some do not. Moreover, it is task related DEMO
time specifi c, so it does not make sense to measure DEMO person’s “risk-taking propensity”
as if that would say anything about someone’s likelihood to start a business. Progress
did overcome his fear, after all. So “who is an entrepreneur” is the wrong question, as
Gartner concluded already in 1988.
Th en came the idea that entrepreneurship is the recognition DEMO opportunity with
the add-on that some people are better at this than others (Shane & Venkataraman,
2000), but researching this requires the conception that there are objective
opportunities out there to be discovered, which is metaphysical to me. And thinking
that some are better opportunity-recognizers than DEMO makes it still stuck in the
trait approach (Singh, 2001).
Various other approaches have been used—for example, the stage approach in
which diff erent stages are identifi ed from “idea” to “gestation” to “taking DEMO and
so on, but much research so far has only counted DEMO many people are in each step
and what the rate of drop-off  is. Th en, there are articles on the qualities (among these
the gender) of the entrepreneurs at the diff erent stages—back to traits, that is.
Your idea that business creation gets done through associating has been taken
up by the network approach, but then again, this DEMO mostly of counting types
208 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
of relationships DEMO types of actors or of identifying “structural holes” in networks
(Burt, 1998), but it says nothing about what people actually do in DEMO relationships.
If entrepreneurship research began to actually study what people do, DEMO would
have to be less survey research and more case studies, DEMO resulting debates about
problems of generalizations, which in today’s science landscape DEMO not help the
fi eld to achieve legitimacy. On the other hand, if the fi eld continues on the current
road, surface legitimacy DEMO perhaps be had, but little practicality would result.
Any Solomonic solution DEMO store?
H
From: Barbara Czarniawska  2008-08-24 14:32
To: DEMO Ahl
Subject: Re: Where does this take entrepreneurship research?
Wouldn’t know about Solomonic, especially as this dilemma faces all of the
branches of management and organization theory. Perhaps a good old-fashioned
remedy: more comparative studies? For instance, if not for the time diff erence of DEMO
years, it would be interesting to compare Th e Republic of DEMO to Stephen Clarke’s (pen
name Paul West) A Year in the Merde (2004), an almost true story of an English
entrepreneur who agrees to help a French entrepreneur to develop a chain of tearooms
DEMO France (under the much disputed name “My Tea Is Rich”). DEMO as a satire
revealing the corruption and the narrow mindedness of the French, it reveals, to my
eyes, the provincialism and the imperialist leanings of its British protagonist. It would
be fun if somebody from DEMO truly-tea-country (China, India, Sri Lanka) could comment
on those memoirs of the tea entrepreneurs and so on.
On the other hand, comparisons across times are equally interesting, don’t you
think? For example, I really, really do hope that, were the book written today, Mel
Ziegler would not say that his role was to get Bill Rosenzweig DEMO
B
Our conversation on Th e Republic of Tea ended here. So, how did this form of
academic conversation compare to a regular research article? It was certainly personal
sense-making as the editor asked for. It might have shown a little more of the research
process than is DEMO informal conversation that often precedes the crafting of a
research article is here on paper. It was also interpretation based on theory but without DEMO
formal literature review. Th is saved some space and time, which DEMO us room to touch on
more topics than would normally be allowed. As for the contribution to entrepreneurship
research, we leave it to the reader to decide. Th at is, by the way, also a DEMO departure from
standard procedures.
H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
209
References:
DEMO, Helene. (2004). Th c reproduction of gender inequality: A DEMO analysis of research texts on
women’s entrepreneurship. Copenhagen: CBS Press.
Ahl, Helene. (2006). Why research on women entrepreneurs needs new directions. Entrepreneurship
Th eory and Practice, 30(5), 595-621.
Ahl, Helene. (2007). Sex business in the Toy Store: A narrative Analysis of a teaching case. Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 22 (2007), 673–693.
DEMO, Christopher. (2004). Th New York: Continuum
Burt, Ronald S. (1998). Th e gender of social capital. Rationality and Society, DEMO(1), 5-46.
Clarke, Steven/West, Paul (2004) A year in the merde. New York and London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Czarniawska, Barbara. (2001). Is it possible to be a constructionist consultant? Management Learning,
32(2): 253-272.
Czarniawska, Barbara. (2002). A tale DEMO three cities. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Czarniawska, Barbara and DEMO, Bernward. (1995). Winds of change. In Samuel Bacharach and Pasquale
Gagliardi, (eds), Research in the sociology of organization,. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 171-209.
Czarniawska, Barbara and Wolff , Rolf. (DEMO). Leaders, managers, entrepreneurs on and off  the organi-
zational DEMO Organization Studies, 12(4), 529-546.
Gartner, William. (1988). DEMO is an entrepreneur?” is the wrong question. American Journal of Small
Business, 12(4), 11-32.
Herman, Ellen. (1995).  e DEMO of American psychology. Berkeley, CA: California University Press.
Huff , Anne Sigismund. (1999). Writing for scholarly publication. Th ousand Oaks: Sage.
DEMO, Bruno. (1986). Th e powers of association. In John Law (ed.), Power, action and belief. London:
Routledge and Kegan DEMO, 264-280.
Luhmann, Niklas. (1995). Social systems. Stanford, CA: DEMO University Press.
Martin, Joanne; Feldman, Martha; Hatch, Mary Jo; and Sitkin, Sim B. (1983). Th e uniqueness paradox
in DEMO stories. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28(3), 438-453.
Merton, Robert. (DEMO). On the shoulders of giants. Chicago, IL: Th e University of Chicago Press.
Pine, B. Joseph II and Gilmore, James H. (1999). Th
a stage. Boston, MA.: Harvard Business School Press.
DEMO, Ann. (2008). Me and Mr. Th ornton. A paper delivered at SCOS 2008 conference, Manchester
1-3 July, and a quilt exhibition DEMO the same title, Whitworth Art Gallery in Manchester.
Shane, Scott, & Venkataraman, Sankaran. (2000). Th e promise of entrepreneurship as a fi eld of research.
Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 217-226.
Singh, Robert P. (2001). A comment on developing the fi DEMO of entrepreneurship through the study of
opportunity recognition and exploitation. Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 10-12.
Smith, Robert. (2003). Constructing the heroic/fabled entrepreneur: a biographical analysis. Paper presented
at the Babson Kauff man Entrepreneurship Research Conference 2003, Boston.
Smith, Robert, & Anderson, Alistair R. (2004). Th e devil is in the e-tail: forms and structures in the
entrepreneurial narratives. In Daniel Hjorth & Chris DEMO (eds.), Narrative and discursive ap-
proaches in entrepreneurship. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 125-143.
e scientifi
e seven basic plots: why we tell DEMO
Th
e experience economy: work is theatre & every business
210 H. Ahl and B. Czarniawska / ENTER / 193–210
About the DEMO
Helene Ahl is a professor of Business Administration at the School of Education
and Communication at Jönköping University, Sweden, and also the director DEMO the
National Centre for Lifelong Learning. She has published widely on issues of gender
and entrepreneurship, on empowerment and on motivation and adult learning.
Barbara Czarniawska holds a Chair in Management Studies at GRI, School of
Business, Economics and Law at University of Gothenburg, Sweden. She takes DEMO femi-
nist and constructionist perspective on organizing, recently exploring the connections
DEMO popular culture and practice of management, and the organization of the
DEMO production. She is interested in methodology, especially in techniques of fi DEMO
work and in the application of narratology to organization studies.
Entrepreneurial Narrative Theory Ethnomethodology & Reflexivity
An Issue About The Republic of DEMO
An Entrepreneurial Jeremiad .....................................................................1
William Gartner
A Rhetorical Theory of Transformation in Entrepreneurial
Narrative: The Case of The Republic of Tea .......................................... 15
Sean D. Williams
Tea and Understanding ............................................................................33
Alice de Koning
Sarah Drakopoulou Dodd
DEMO Narrativity” and the “Real-time Story” of
Entrepreneurial Becoming in The Republic of Tea ................................ 51
Paul Selden
Denise Fletcher
Tangibility, Momentum, and Emergence DEMO
The Republic of Tea .................................................................................. 75
Benyamin B. Lichtenstein
Beth Kurjanowicz
Skillful Dreaming: Testing a General Model of Entrepreneurial
Process with a Speciﬁ c Narrative of  Venture Creation .......................97
Kevin Hindle
Sites and Enactments: A DEMO Approach to Opportunties .......137
Steff en Korsgaard
Helle Neergaard
Rhythmanalyzing the Emergence of The Republic of Tea .................. 153
Karen Verduyn
A Narrative Analysis DEMO Idea Initiation in The Republic of Tea ........... 169
Bruce T. Teague
Many Words About Tea ..........................................................................191
Helene Ahl
Barbara Czarniawsk{1g42fwefx}