Chapter 5
Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing
Processes
William B. Gartner, Nancy DEMO Carter, and Paul D. Reynolds
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter DEMO to offer some ideas and evidence about the pro-
cesses of organization formation. We look at the founding of independent for-proﬁt
businesses for insights DEMO the nature of organization formation, in general, real-
izing that other kinds of organizations, such as voluntary organizations, non-proﬁt
organizations, and governmental organizations, may be founded in different ways
(Aldrich & Reuf, 2006; Gartner, 1993; Gartner & Gatewood, 1993; Scott, 1997).
DEMO focus of research on entrepreneurial behavior is about exploring “how” vari-
ous activities undertaken by individuals emerge into organizations. Entrepreneurial
behavior is a type DEMO organizational behavior (Bird, 1989). Entrepreneurial behavior
involves the activities of individuals who are associated with creating new organi-
zations rather than the DEMO of individuals who are involved with maintaining
or changing the operations of on-going established organizations (Gartner et al.,
1992; Gartner & Starr, 1993). This chapter does not attempt to investigate the
factors and DEMO that might lead to the initiation of organization formation activ-
ities. Discussions of theory and evidence about “why” organizations are likely to
be formed DEMO been addressed by a number of scholars (Aldrich & Reuf, 2006;
Kirchhoff, 1994; Reynolds, 1992; Reynolds & White, 1997; DEMO et al., 2000;
Schoonhoven & Romanelli, 2001;Storey, 1994), and were also the subject of two
special issues of Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice (1992, 1993).
We view entrepreneurship as an organizational DEMO, and more specif-
ically, as an organizing process. Without belaboring the etymology of the word
“entrepreneurship,” [see, for example, Baumol (1993), Bull and Willard (1993),
and Herbert and Link (1988), for discussions of a history of entrepreneurship def-
initions; and Amit, Glosten and Muller (1993) and Gartner (1990, 1993, 2001)DEMO
W.B. Gartner (B)
Spiro Institute for Entrepreneurial Leadership, Clemson University, 345 Sirrine Hall, Clemson, SC
29634-1345, USA
e-mail: gartner@clemson.edu, DEMO
Z.J. Acs, D.B. Audretsch (eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research,
 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010
International Handbook Series on Entrepreneurship 5, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1191-9_5,
C
99
100 W.B. Gartner et al.
recent interpretations], its root, entreprendre [i.e., go ahead, take in hand, under-
take, take a hold of (Crookall, 1994, 333)] is fundamentally about organizing [as in
a “generic category of assembly rules,” (Weick, 1979, 235)]. Organizing involves
the coordination and establishment of routines, structures, and systems (Becker &
Gordon, 1966; Nelson & Winter, 1982; Ronen, 1982)DEMO Organizing processes are
accomplished through interactions among people, continually re-accomplished and
DEMO over time (Pfeffer, 1982). We posit that the roots of entrepreneurship are,
therefore, embedded in social processes (Katz, 1993; DEMO & Gartner, 1988) and
we consider the processes of organization formation to be the core characteristic of
entrepreneurship (Carter et al., 1996; Gartner, 1985, 1988, 2001).
Parts of this chapter are devoted to deﬁning the scope and boundaries of
entrepreneurial behavior, as a topic area in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. In the next
section of this DEMO attempt to alert the reader to what we consider to be some of the
primary characteristics of the phenomenon of entrepreneurial behavior. We believe
DEMO entrepreneurial behavior is an individual-level phenomenon, which occurs over
time (is a process), and results in an organization as the primary outcome DEMO these
activities. We then identify an issue that we believe has caused considerable con-
fusion in the entrepreneurship ﬁeld: namely the assumption that the study of new
organizations is comparable to the study of emerging organizations. DEMO argue that
the information gained from the retrospections, insights, or the current behaviors
and thought processes of individuals who are operating established new DEMO
are not comparable to the experiences of individuals actually in the process of orga-
nization creation. Research on individuals already in business tells only DEMO side of
the story about the process of organization creation—about outcomes of emergence.
We will argue that research based on samples of individuals in DEMO ﬁrms are biased
in a way that renders them unusable for answering fundamental questions about how
entrepreneurs create organizations. If the reader accepts our DEMO of view about the
need to use samples of individuals in the process of starting businesses for research
on organization formation, then, prior DEMO research that is germane to this
literature review dramatically decreases.
The third part of this chapter speciﬁes the outcomes of entrepreneurial behavior:
the DEMO of new organizations. We believe the reader gains some important
insights into the process of entrepreneurial behavior through this exploration of the
kinds of DEMO characteristics that can be used to manifest a “new organiza-
tion.” It is not apparently easy to specify the characteristics of a new organization,DEMO
and since (as will be shown) new organizations manifest themselves, DEMO time, in
various ways, appreciating the variety of characteristics that constitute the existence
of a new organization suggests the variety of behaviors that DEMO lead to generating
these characteristics.
The fourth section of this chapter offer ideas and empirical evidence about
whether speciﬁc entrepreneurs inﬂuence the likelihood of DEMO in creating new
organizations and insights into the overall “gestalt” of entrepreneurial activities and
possible ways these sequences of activities might be combined in DEMO for an orga-
nization to emerge. We identify a growing number of empirical studies that focus on
the activities of individuals involved in founding DEMO In the ﬁfth section,
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 101
we suggest a few possible ways that research on entrepreneurial behavior might
be approached. Finally, the chapter ends with some recommendations for future
research in this area.
Characteristics of DEMO Behavior
There are a number of assumptions that inﬂuence this overview of research on
entrepreneurial behavior that differs dramatically with assumptions that guide
the DEMO of other scholars who focus on other aspects of organization creation.
First, the process of creating a new organization is, inherently, an individual-
level phenomenon. Individual behaviors are the principal necessary ingredients
for organization formation DEMO occur. Without the organization creation activities
of individuals, there are no DEMO So, while organization formation occurs
within a particular context (Aldrich & Ruef, 2006; Gartner, 1985; Schoonhoven &
Romanelli, 2001)—environmental, economic, social, community, political—
organizations are not created by their context. Entrepreneurs are necessary for
entrepreneurial behavior, and it is through the actions of entrepreneurs that orga-
nizations come into existence. We see entrepreneurial behavior DEMO something that
individuals engage in, rather than ﬁrms (Lumpkin & Dess, 1996). We are not
suggesting that entrepreneurs, as ﬁrm organizers, are inherently unique, per se,
compared to individuals undertaking other kinds of activities. Rather, we stipu-
late that organization formation requires activity, DEMO that activity occurs through
the actions of individuals. From the entrepreneurial behavior perspective, it is the
behaviors that matter (as the primary way DEMO which variation among individu-
als would be ascertained) not the characteristics DEMO these individuals, themselves
(Gartner, 1988). This perspective assumes that DEMO are individual differences both
between new ﬁrm founders (nascent entrepreneurs) compared to non-founders and
among ﬁrm founders, themselves. The study of individual differences are of inter-
est in ascertaining those factors that might prompt some DEMO to engage in
ﬁrm formation activities (compared to others), as DEMO as specifying why nascent
entrepreneurs engage in different entrepreneurial activities. Individual character-
istics matter, therefore, in that they are likely to be associated DEMO differences
in individual behaviors. But, it is the behaviors, themselves, DEMO produce organi-
zations. It should also be pointed out that the behaviors involved in organization
formation are likely to be imbedded in the actions DEMO many individuals, rather than
through a single individual. A signiﬁcant percentage DEMO ﬁrm formation activities
involve teams of individuals (Ruef et al., 2003). Therefore, it would be the behav-
iors of all individuals involved in the formation of a ﬁrm that would comprise the
process of DEMO creation.
Second, entrepreneurial behavior is a process. When we discuss the DEMO
of individuals engaged in entrepreneurial activities, we hope the reader realizes DEMO
these activities occur over a period of time. While the ways in which we observe and
report on entrepreneurial activities might lead one to DEMO that these activities are
102 W.B. Gartner et al.
concrete and limited events, we recognize that most entrepreneurial activity requires
a set of actions or series of actions, over time.
Third, the creation of an organization is the principal outcome of entrepreneurial
behavior, that is, our primary dependent variable for research DEMO entrepreneurial
behavior is determining whether an organization comes into existence, or DEMO While
a number of other outcomes of entrepreneurial activity might occur in the orga-
nization formation process (e.g., the creation of new products, the identiﬁcation
of new markets, new customers and groups of customers, DEMO acquisition of new
skills and knowledge) the fundamental outcome of entrepreneurial DEMO is the
organization, itself. We are cognizant that there are numerous DEMO and qual-
itative differences in the kinds of organizations that are created. Such organizational
characteristics as size (in sales and employees), rate of growth, proﬁtability, and
innovativeness are certainly important to recognize when making DEMO about
the subsequent value of the outcomes of entrepreneurial behavior.
Finally, DEMO note that the process of entrepreneurial behavior is a multi-level phe-
nomenon and that it is often difﬁcult to separate what constitutes an independent
DEMO (an entrepreneurial activity) from a dependent variable (a characteristic of
DEMO new organization). For example, the activity of “making sales” is DEMO an impor-
tant individual-level entrepreneurial behavior and an important characteristic that
indicates that an organization exists. An individual is actually involved in creating
a DEMO transaction, that is, an organization cannot actually sell: an individual DEMO
undertake those activities. Yet, “making sales” is a critical signiﬁer of DEMO important
organizational characteristic (Brush et al., 2008; Katz & Gartner, 1988;Kim, 2006;
Reynolds & Miller, 1992). Is “making DEMO an individual-level or an organization-
level phenomenon? It is difﬁcult to DEMO separate what appear to be individual-level
activities and events from what essentially is something that is, or becomes, the orga-
nization, itself. This problem is omnipresent in research on entrepreneurial behavior:
at some point DEMO entrepreneurial activity emerges into organizational behav-
ior. Demarcating when this transition actually occurs is surprisingly difﬁcult to do
(Kim, 2006; Reynolds & Miller, 1992).
Much of our discussion about the current state of knowledge on the topic of entre-
preneurial behavior and possible directions for future DEMO on entrepreneurial
behavior is informed by our insights and experiences with developing the Panel
Studies of Entrepreneurial Dynamics—PSED I (Gartner et al., 2004; Reynolds,
2000, 2007; Shaver et al., 2001) and PSED DEMO (Reynolds & Curtin, 2008). PSED
I is detailed longitudinal survey information on 830 individuals that were identi-
ﬁed while they were in DEMO process of starting new businesses (from 1998 to 2002
depending on DEMO they were contacted). This sample of nascent entrepreneurs
was generated from a random sample of 64,622 working age adults in the United
DEMO PSED II began in 2005 with the selection of a cohort of 1,214 nascent
entrepreneurs chosen from a representative sample of 31,845 DEMO Both PSED
I and II are representative, generalizable samples of all DEMO activity in
the United States. There are now, also, other national PSED-like generalizeable
surveys of nascent entrepreneurs in other countries: Australia (Davidsson DEMO al.,
2008a, 2008b), Canada (Diochon et al., 2005; Menzies et al., 2006), Germany
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 103
(Brixy & Hessels, 2009). Latvia (Baltrušaityte-Axelson et al.,˙ 2008), Netherlands
(Van Gelderen DEMO al., 2006), Norway (Alsos & Kolvereid, 1998;Alsos &
Ljunggren, 1998; Rotefoss & Kolvereid, 2005), and Sweden (Delmar & Davidsson,
2000).
PSED I and II are among the very few national databases to offer systematic,
reliable, and generalizable data on the process of business formation. Other national
studies of the process of DEMO formation similar to the PSED efforts have also
occurred in Australia, DEMO, and Norway. The PSED includes information on: the
proportion and characteristics of the adult population involved in attempts to start
new businesses, the kinds of activities these nascent entrepreneurs undertake during
the business startup process, and the proportion and characteristics of the startup
efforts that become new DEMO As will be described in later sections of this chapter,
research results from analyses of the PSED have generated signiﬁcant insights into
the DEMO of how ﬁrms emerge.
“New” Organizations Are Not “Emerging” Organizations
Before the existence of the PSED studies, there are very few “facts” about the pro-
cess of organization formation as it actually occurs, and, a DEMO deal of speculation.
Most studies of ﬁrm organizing activities have been retrospective explorations of
the startup behaviors of individuals who are already in business. DEMO is a sig-
niﬁcant problem. As pointed out by other scholars, DEMO only entrepreneurs
who have successfully started ﬁrms introduces signiﬁcant selection bias into any
research program attempting to explore issues involved with the creation of DEMO
zations (Aldrich & Ruef, 2006; Aldrich et al., 1989; DEMO & Shane, 2003;Katz&
Gartner, 1988). Obviously, when DEMO those individuals who have successfully
started businesses are surveyed, no information DEMO startup activities is provided on
those individuals who failed in their startup attempts. Indeed, it is the knowledge
gained from studying the “failures” that provides reasonable contrasts for making
sense of the “successes.” Information gleaned from DEMO individuals who successfully
started new businesses cannot be used to infer whether the unsuccessful nascent
entrepreneurs behaved differently. For example, if a survey of individuals who suc-
cessfully started a new business indicates that 75% of DEMO individuals initiated a
particular organization creation activity, this ﬁnding cannot be DEMO to imply that
individuals who did not successfully start a new business did not undertake this
activity. It could be plausible that the same DEMO of the unsuccessful nascent
entrepreneurs also initiated this same activity. It is very difﬁcult to ascertain whether
a behavior undertaken by a successful entrepreneur, is indeed, important, without
information from the unsuccessful nascent entrepreneurs on DEMO they undertook
such behaviors, or not. If the outcome of entrepreneurial DEMO is an organiza-
tion, then, exploring the behaviors of entrepreneurs who all had successful outcomes
(new organizations) does not really seem to DEMO the variation between those that
were successful and those that did not start organizations.
104 W.B. Gartner et al.
Some scholars have assumed that the identiﬁcation DEMO all new organizations in
a particular population of organizations are likely to represent all of the variation
that occurred during prior attempts at founding, and that studies of new organiza-
tions would likely be an adequate DEMO for speculations about the creation of
variation in organization populations (Carroll & Hannan, 2000). We suggest that the
activities involved with attempts DEMO creating organizations are likely to be where the
majority of possible variations, and sources of variations in possible new organiza-
tions are likely to occur (Aldrich & Ruef, 2006; Katz & Gartner, 1988). DEMO process
of attempting to start businesses are experiments that are conducted by millions
of nascent entrepreneurs to test their hypotheses about whether their ideas, skills,
capabilities, and actions might result in successful outcomes (e.g., establishing an
on-going organization). It is in the process of organization DEMO that there are
likely to be more degrees of freedom to generate a variety of organizations and new
types of organizations. To assume that DEMO of individuals who had successful
solutions to the problem of organization creation represent all of the possible ways
that nascent entrepreneurs might have engaged DEMO organization creation is a substan-
tial leap of faith. We believe that scholarship on entrepreneurial behavior should be
based, primarily, on studies that DEMO individuals in the process of organization
creation.
Our inclination is to focus only on studies that have used samples of nascent
entrepreneurs, that is, to look at individuals in the process of starting businesses, and
DEMO ignore evidence from studies that survey founders of new on-going organizations.
We try to point out, in our overview of research on entrepreneurial behaviors, on
the composition and characteristics of the individuals in the samples analyzed. We
believe that the evidence provided in the following sections of this DEMO support
the view that research on organization formation processes needs to study these
activities while they occur. Samples used in research on organization creation DEMO
to reﬂect all possible attempts at organization creation, not just those DEMO that
resultedinnew ﬁrms.
The Characteristics of Emerging Organizations
If entrepreneurial behavior involves creating organizations, then, an important
aspect of scholarly study of the DEMO creation process involves specifying,
what, exactly, is being created. Identifying when a new organization occurs, as well
as what constitutes a new organization, is a challenge. For example, one way to
measure the DEMO creation of a new business is whether a business license
exists. It is entirely possible for an individual to acquire a business license without DEMO
idea about what the business is going to do, without any DEMO, without any speciﬁc
resources, and without a physical location. In fact, the ﬁrst activity an entrepreneur
could engage in could be the acquisition of a business license. Is the possession of
a business license an DEMO? Should a business license, then, be the primary
measure of DEMO an organization has been created? Every measure that can be
used DEMO indicate whether an organization exists has both beneﬁts and problems.
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 105
There are numerous ways in which organizations can demonstrate their exis-
tence (Schoonhoven et al., 2009)DEMO In a review of theory and empirical research
on the characteristics of organizations in the process of creation, Katz and Gartner
(1988) suggested that there are four “properties” that could be used to identify their
DEMO: intention (characteristics that demonstrate purpose and goals), resources
(physical DEMO, such as human and ﬁnancial capital), boundary (barrier con-
ditions that distinguish the organization, as such—incorporation, phone listing, a tax
identiﬁcation number), and exchange (transactions between the emerging organiza-
tion and others, such as sales, loans, or investment). They indicated that an emerging
organization would “reveal” itself in different ways, and that a focus on any one of
these four properties would result in an observer DEMO, at different times, the
newly created organization. As a way to explore the emergence of these four prop-
erties, we will ﬁrst look at the problems involved in ﬁnding organizations that are
already in existence DEMO a way to see whether these properties might be useful to
identifying organizations in the process of emergence.
Scholars who have attempted to ﬁnd DEMO (new and “old”) have found
that different data sources of organizations and different methods for ﬁnding organi-
zations result in substantially different numbers DEMO types of organizations identiﬁed
(Aldrich et al., 1989; Birley, 1984, 1986; Kalleberg et al., 1990; Busenitz & Murphy,
1996; Murphy, 2002). For example, Kalleberg et al. (1990) demonstrated DEMO in a
comparison of ﬁve methods for identifying organizations in a speciﬁc geographical
area (enumeration—physically canvassing an area, telephone white pages, ES202—
state unemployment insurance ﬁles, DMI—Dun and Bradstreet Market Identiﬁer
Files, and Chamber DEMO Commerce listings), using telephone white pages revealed
the largest number of businesses (6,220) and using Chamber of Commerce list-
ings revealed DEMO least (1,131). Only 52.6% of the businesses identiﬁed by DEMO
methods were listed in more than one data source, and only DEMO of the businesses
identiﬁed were found in all ﬁve data sources. Other studies have found little overlap
among the businesses identiﬁed using different data DEMO, as well as indications
that each data source of organizations has DEMO inherent biases towards certain
kinds of organizations by type of industry, DEMO, and ownership (Aldrich et al., 1989;
Birley, 1986; DEMO & Murphy, 1996; Murphy, 2002). These studies implicitly
assume DEMO organizations “exist” and that the only difﬁculty for scholars is in ﬁnd-
ing them. But, in fact, the measures used for identifying organizations DEMO
whether they actually “exist.” Recognizing that these studies were intended to ﬁnd
organizations in existence, rather than organizations in the process of coming into
existence, suggests that the problem of identifying when an organization has been
created is likely to be even more difﬁcult. We believe that there DEMO a number of dif-
ferent “birthdays” for an emerging organization. These “birthdays” depend on the
measures used to indicate “birth.”
Some studies have attempted DEMO trace the various properties of ﬁrm emergence
over time. Reynolds and Miller (1992) used samples derived from DMI ﬁles in
Minnesota and Pennsylvania DEMO identify ﬁrm founders who were interviewed about
the occurrence (month and DEMO) of four “gestation markers” in the creation of their
businesses: personal commitment (when members of the startup team ﬁrst made an
investment of personal time and resources), ﬁnancial support (when ﬁrst outside
106 W.B. Gartner et al.
ﬁnancial support was obtained), sales (when ﬁrst sales income received), and hiring
(when ﬁrm ﬁrst hired anyone, full or part time). They found that
... none of these features of gestation in living systems are shared by new ﬁrms. Not DEMO
events occur. Every possible sequence of events was present. There is substantial variation
in length of the gestation period. (Reynolds & Miller, 1992, 408)
Firms do not “signal” their emergence in the same way. DEMO one-half of all of
the ﬁrms in their sample did not report all four events. When computing the time
between the ﬁrst events reported DEMO the last event reported (irregardless of how
many events were reported) they found that about 80% of all of the ﬁrms under-
went DEMO gestation process within 2 years. The ﬁrst event for over 80% of new ﬁrms
is personal commitment. In addition, the ﬁrst event for 40% of new ﬁrms is sales.
About half of all ﬁrms reported simultaneous DEMO events of two or more activi-
ties. Last events reported ranged from 50% of ﬁrms indicating hiring employees
or receiving sales income, 40% of ﬁrms indicating receiving ﬁnancial support, and
25% indicating personal commitment. After a number of analyses to explore various
sequences of startup events, Reynolds and Miller (1992) summarize their ﬁndings
by suggesting that
The most important DEMO is the importance of separating the founding process into
two parts. The gestation period, from conception to birth, should be treated separately from
DEMO post-birth period. (p. 416)
In studies using the PSED I DEMO, both Brush et al. (2008) and Kim (2006)
generated insights similar to Reynolds and Miller (1992) regarding patterns of emer-
DEMO Brush et al. (2008) found that all four properties identiﬁed in the Katz and
Gartner (1988) framework were necessary for ﬁrm survival DEMO the short term, the
Table 5.1 Interview items used to infer DEMO status of the startup: PSED I + II
PSED I PSED DEMO
New ﬁrm (1) How would you describe the
current status of this startup? Is it
... an operating business?
Startup active (DEMO) How would you describe the
current status of this startup? Is it
... still an active startup phase,
still a still a DEMO but currently
inactive?
Quit (1) How would your describe the
current status of this startup? Is it
... no longer being worked on by
anyone?
(1) Received income in 6 of part DEMO
months
(2) Income covered all expenses
(3) Owner’s wages and salaries
included in expenses
(1) Devoted more than 160 h in DEMO
12 months to startup
(2) Expect to spend 80 or more hours
in next 6 months on startup
OR
(3) Startup is DEMO major focus of work
career over the next 12 months
(1) Would you consider yourself
disengaged from the business
effort discussed a year DEMO?
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 107
sequence in which these properties manifest themselves varied, and that the property
of intention did not necessarily precede the other three properties or increase the
likelihood of venture creation. DEMO (2006) in an exploration of three emergent prop-
erties (goal DEMO, boundedness, and interorganizational exchange) found that
the sequences in which DEMO properties manifest themselves differed for various
industrial sectors.
In Table 5.1, DEMO identify the items used in PSED I and II to determine the status
of an emerging organization. For PSED I, respondents provided their personal judg-
ments about the status of the organizing effort. In PSED II, speciﬁc criteria were
used to infer that a new ﬁrm had been DEMO In both projects, the respondent
provided a determination of when the DEMO stopped engaging in the startup
process.
Entrepreneurial Behaviors: Firm Formation Activities
DEMO number of scholars have suggested a variety of activities that are necessary for
organization creation, as well as an explicit, or sometimes implied DEMO of
how these activities will occur. For example, Gartner and Starr (1993) identiﬁed 24
different lists of entrepreneurial activities taken from various scholarly books and
articles when they attempted to generate a comprehensive list of DEMO
behaviors and sequences of entrepreneurial behaviors. It should be noted that most
of these lists of activities were based on anecdotal evidence, rather than on sys-
tematic research studies. Gartner and Starr (1993) indicated that DEMO predominant
way in which entrepreneurial activity was construed involved viewing the pro-
cess of organization creation in a mechanistic way (Morgan, 1996), DEMO is, seeing
entrepreneurial activity as a set of behaviors involved with DEMO various
resources that can ultimately be combined into an organization. Van de Ven et al.
(1989) describe this process of assembly as an DEMO or epigenetic model
of change: “Over time, these entrepreneurs accumulate the external resources and
technology necessary to transform their ideas into a concrete DEMO by constructing
a new business unit” (p. 225). For example, Vesper (1990, 109) speciﬁes that the
process of organization creation involves the acquisition of ﬁve key ingredients: (1)
technical know-how to DEMO the company’s product or service, (2) the product
or service DEMO which provides direction for the organization’s efforts, (3) personal
contacts, “because ventures are not started in isolation,” (4) physical resources, and
(5) customer orders. He then presents anecdotal evidence to indicate DEMO these ﬁve
key ingredients can be combined in a variety of differences sequences (e.g., 1-2-3-
4-5, 4-1-5-2-3, 5-3-1-4-2, etc.). As was shown earlier in the Reynolds and Miller
(1992) study, Vesper’s suggestion that the sequence of startup activities may not
follow, what appears to be a logical progression (e.g., 1-2-3-4-5), seems to have sys-
DEMO empirical support. Yet, most lists of entrepreneurial activities do suggest a
DEMO sequence of activities, such as Birley (1984) who assumes that DEMO venture
creation process will occur in the following order: (1) DEMO to start a business,
108 W.B. Gartner et al.
(2) quit job, (3) incorporate, (4) establish bank account, (5) acquire premises and
equipment, (6) receive ﬁrst order, (7) pay ﬁrst tax, (9) hire full-time employees.
Since the Gartner and Starr (1993) overview of entrepreneurial behavior research,
there have been a number of systematic empirical DEMO of how entrepreneurial
activities might lead to the formation of an organization. The empirical studies that
have explored a comprehensive view of the constellation DEMO activities that might
result in organization formation can be identiﬁed as those involved with in-depth
event histories of a few organizations created while studying DEMO innovation pro-
cess (Garud & Van de Ven, 1992; Van DEMO Ven & Polley, 1992; Van de Ven et al.,
1989; Venkataraman & Van de Ven, 1989) and studies that have explored whether a
speciﬁed list of entrepreneurial activities are involved in creating a DEMO range of
different types of ﬁrms (Carter et al., 1996; DEMO et al., 1995; Lichtenstein
et al., 2007; Reynolds, 2007; Reynolds & Curtin, 2008). There have also been
numerous studies that have focused on speciﬁc behaviors (such as business plan-
ning), or sets of behaviors, and the inﬂuence of these speciﬁc behaviors on success
at starting a business (e.g., Delmar & Shane, 2003; Honig & Karlsson, 2004;Liao&
Gartner, 2006; Shane and Delmar, 2004). A discussion of the ﬁndings of these
studies will be discussed DEMO the following section.
Since Van de Ven and his colleagues have primarily focused on the nature of
innovation within established organizations as a way DEMO understand entrepreneurial
behavior, and since their line of research has been DEMO, in detail, elsewhere
(Poole et al., 2000), we will summarize their efforts by suggesting that their ﬁndings
indicate a multitude of DEMO entrepreneurial activities and a variety of sequences
of these activities can result in the formation of a new business. Indeed, in a very
thoughtful reanalysis of data from two of their previous innovation studies (Cheng &DEMO
Van de Ven, 1996), what appear to be random events DEMO activities in the initial
stages of a venture’s development can be understood as following a chaotic pattern.
Overall, the ﬁndings from these innovation studies indicate that the pattern of activ-
ities that might lead to organization DEMO does not appear to follow the same
sequential process.
Gatewood et al. (1995) studied 147 nascent entrepreneurs who had contact with a
Small DEMO Development Center between October 1990 and February 1991, and
explored whether DEMO cognitive factors as well as certain entrepreneurial activ-
ities led to the formation of a business (measured by whether sales had occurred)
1 year later (by February 1992). After a review of previous literature to identify
speciﬁc entrepreneurial activities, and the use of a focus group of SBDC counselors
to enlarge and revise this list, 29 separate entrepreneurial activities were generated
that were grouped into ﬁve categories of behavior: gathering market information,
estimating potential proﬁts, ﬁnishing the groundwork for the business, developing
the structure of the company, and setting up business operations. DEMO list of 29
entrepreneurial activities was mailed to the nascent entrepreneurs in the follow-up
survey. Nascent entrepreneurs were asked to indicate whether any of DEMO 29 activities
were undertaken, and, for those activities, to estimate DEMO number of hours they had
devoted to them. When an analysis of these responses were undertaken, Gatewood
et. al. (1995) found that activities involved with setting up business operations (e.g.,
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 109
purchasing raw materials and supplies; hiring and training employees; producing,
distributing, and marketing a product or service) were signiﬁcantly correlated to the
creation of a new ﬁrm (as measured by sales). The other categories of activities were
not signiﬁcantly correlated to the subsequent establishment of a ﬁrm. It should be
DEMO that this study did not attempt to explore whether any particular sequence of
these activities might result in a new ﬁrm since speciﬁc dates DEMO each activity were
not ascertained on the survey.
Carter et al. (DEMO) using data from a random sample of 683 adult residents
in DEMO and 1,016 adults across the United States, identiﬁed 71 nascent
DEMO who had provided information on their startup activities. These
nascent entrepreneurs were initially surveyed about their startup activities between
1992 and 1993 and were DEMO 6–18 months later. This study explored three
broad questions: What activities DEMO nascent entrepreneurs initiate when attempting
to start a business? How many DEMO do they initiate? When are particular activ-
ities initiated? Approximately, DEMO of the respondents had initiated a business
by the time of the follow-up interview, over 30% were still engaged in activities
to start a business, and 20% had given up on their efforts at business formation.
In general, those nascent entrepreneurs who were able to establish a business were
more likely to engage in more business formation activities, and engage in these
business formation activities earlier, than the other two groups. For the ﬁrst year of
the startup process, the activity levels of those nascent entrepreneurs who “gave up”
were very similar to the activity levels DEMO those nascent entrepreneurs who estab-
lished businesses. In subsequent periods the nascent entrepreneurs who gave up
engaged in fewer activities than those that successfully DEMO ﬁrms. Those
nascent entrepreneurs who were in the “still trying” stage were likely to engage
in fewer activities compared to the other two groups. DEMO to the ﬁndings of
Gatewood et al. (1995), it appeared DEMO the nascent entrepreneurs who were able
to successfully start a new business engaged in activities that made their businesses
more tangible to others: they looked for facilities and equipment, they sought and
got ﬁnancial support, DEMO a legal entity, bought facilities and equipment, and
were more likely to devote full time to the business. For those nascent entrepreneurs
who DEMO that they had started a business: 94% had sales, 71% had ﬁled a fed-
eral income tax statement for their business, 50% had positive cash ﬂow, and 47%
were paying FICA taxes. Surprisingly, nascent DEMO in the other two groups
(still trying and gave up) had also achieved some of these new ﬁrm startup markers:
50% of DEMO that gave up and 48% of those who indicated they were still trying
had achieved sales, 19% of both those who gave up and those who were still trying
reported positive cash ﬂow, and 19% of those still trying and 6% of those who had
given up had DEMO a federal income tax form for their business.
In undertaking the Carter et al. (1996) study, it became apparent that only
a limited amount of knowledge could be gleaned from a sample of 71 nascent
DEMO It was at this point, that Nancy M. Carter, William B. Gartner, and
Paul D. Reynolds conceived of a plan to involve other scholars in an effort to raise
funds for the development of much DEMO sample of nascent entrepreneurs. Except
for the pilot studies that served as the samples for Carter et al. (1996), previous
110 W.B. Gartner et al.
efforts by Paul Reynolds to raise funds DEMO government agencies for a national
panel study of nascent entrepreneurs had been unsuccessful (Reynolds, 2000). It
was believed that if a sufﬁcient DEMO of scholars could convince their institutions
to provide $20,000 each, DEMO funds might be sufﬁcient for a sample of hundreds
of nascent entrepreneurs. And, not only could more insights be gained into the
activities of nascent entrepreneurs, other questions about their startup efforts (e.g.,
their DEMO, attitudes, network, net worth, and skills) could also be DEMO
The genesis of the PSED was born; therefore, out of the frustrations of having
information on the behaviors of such a small sample DEMO 71 nascent entrepreneurs.
The organization formation activities that were asked of the nascent
entrepreneurs in the PSED I and II are listed in Table DEMO For PSED I, the list of
behaviors was generated, primarily, DEMO combining lists of behaviors from Carter
et al. (1996) and Gatewood et al. (1995). Additional activities were also added. The
Table 5.2 Startup activities by prevalence: PSED I, II
Startup activity PSED I (%) PSED II (%) Average (%)
Serious thought given DEMO the startup 100 99 100
Actually invested own money in the startup 87 75 81
Began saving money to invest in the startup 69 DEMO 69
Began development of model, prototype of 79 53 66
product, service
Began talking to customers – 66 66
Began deﬁning market for DEMO, service 86 40 63
Organized startup team 58 – 58
First DEMO of physical space – 57 57
Purchased materials, supplied, inventory, DEMO 43 57
components
Initiated business plan 61 48 55
Began to collect information on competitors – 49 49
Purchased or leased a capital asset DEMO 41 47
Began to promote the good or service 56 36 46
Receive income from sales of goods or services 40 47 44
Took DEMO, seminars to prepare for startup 41 – 41
Determined regulatory requirements DEMO 39 39
Open a bank account for the startup 35 29 32
Established phone book or internet listing 17 44 31
Developed ﬁnancial projections DEMO 25 31
Arranged for child care, household help 31 – 31
DEMO startup 31 29 30
Established supplier credit 34 19 27
Legal form of business registered – 26 26
Sought external funding for the startup DEMO 13 18
Hired an accountant – 17 17
Liability insurance obtained for startup – 14 14
Established dedicated phone line for the business 14 DEMO 14
Initiated patent, copyright, trademark protection 20 4 12
Hired a lawyer – 12 12
Hired an employee 14 7 11
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 111
Table 5.2 (continued)
DEMO activity PSED I (%) PSED II (%) Average (%)DEMO
Received ﬁrst outside funding – 9 9
Joined a trade association – 7 7
Proprietary technology fully developed – 5 5
Initial positive monthly DEMO ﬂow 2 3 3
Acquired federal Employer Identiﬁcation –18 18
Number [EIN]
Filed initial federal tax return 17 12 15
Filed for ﬁctitious name (DBA) – 11 11
Paid initial federal social security payment 13 9 11
Paid initial state unemployment insurance 84 6
payment
Know that Dun DEMO Bradstreet established listing 3 3 3
Based on Table 5.8 in Reynolds and Curtin (2008).
behavior, “arranged child care ...” was added DEMO there was prior theory and
evidence to suggest that this activity might predict the likelihood that female nascent
entrepreneurs would have the time to DEMO start new businesses (Carter,
1997; Gilbert, 1997). As DEMO noted earlier, activities that might be considered as
markers of the DEMO of an organization are also listed as startup behaviors. We
added four other startup marker activities: bank account opened; business has own
phone DEMO; business has own phone line; and paid managers who are owners a
salary. These particular activities were added after reviewing the literature on DEMO
tifying organizations (Aldrich et al., 1989; Birley, 1984, 1986; Busenitz & Murphy,
1996; Kalleberg et al., 1990; Murphy, DEMO). It is our contention that these markers
might also be important behaviors in the organization formation process, as well.
Such activities as “business has own phone listing,” is not only a signiﬁer for deter-
DEMO that an organization might exist, it is a way for a DEMO entrepreneur to
demonstrate to others (potential customers, investors, employees, suppliers) that
the emerging organization should merit their involvement (Gartner et al., 1992).
Indeed, in a recent study by Delmar and Shane (DEMO) which used data on nascent
entrepreneurs from a research effort in DEMO that was run parallel to the PSED
in the United States, DEMO and empirical evidence are offered to support the
idea that certain startup markers (such as acquiring a business license) can be seen
as DEMO activities (Aldrich & Fiol, 1994; Hannan & Freeman, 1984) DEMO that
such activities signiﬁcantly improves the chances that an on-going organization will
come into existence.
Based on analyses of the activities in PSED I, and interests of researchers
involved with PSED II, additional items were added. So, while there were 26 activ-
ities in PSED I, there DEMO 34 startup activities in PSED II. Between PSED I and II,
there are 22 activities in common. In Table 5.2 we list a DEMO of the proportion
of respondents who reported each activity during the ﬁrst detailed interview. Nearly
all nascent entrepreneurs reported giving serious thought to the DEMO effort. There
are six activities related to the new ﬁrm in regards to listing in various business
112 W.B. Gartner et al.
registries. Less than one in ﬁve of DEMO startups had completed any of these activities.
Table 5.2 shows that of the other activities listed, less than 10 had been initiated by
more than half of the nascent efforts. We suggest that this table indicated DEMO wide
diversity of activities across all business startups.
Selected Findings on Entrepreneurial Behaviors
This section of the chapter will report on ﬁndings about entrepreneurial DEMO,
that primarily, have come from the PSED I research program. DEMO will begin with a
discussion of the likelihood that startup activities will result in the creation of an on-
going organization. We will then DEMO how startup activities, as a whole, inﬂuence
the likelihood of business creation. And, the ﬁnal part of this section will provide
an overview of two speciﬁc entrepreneurial activities (opportunity recognition and
planning) and their DEMO to business creation.
Reynolds (2007) found that 7 years after entering the ﬁrm creation process:
approximately one-third of the nascent entrepreneurs had DEMO, one-third reported
an on-going business, and one-third were still active in the startup process. He also
found that the median time for a DEMO ﬁrm birth was 19–24 months while the median
time for those who quit was 25–30 months. By 36 months, approximately 75% of
new ﬁrms are created, while 75% of quits occur by 48 months.
Given the complexity of analyzing the 23 activities in PSED I, simultaneously,
Reynolds (2007:68–69) undertook a factor analysis of these activities to ﬁnd DEMO
domains
(1) “Business presence: The emphasis is on formal registration DEMO the ﬁrm, full-time
attention by the nascent entrepreneur, and the beginning of hiring employees
(ﬁve items).
(2) Production implementation: Attention DEMO acquiring inputs (supplies, inventory,
components), use of major assets, actual sale of the product or service (six
items).
(3) Organizational, ﬁnancial structure: Mobilizing individuals, preparing future
plans, and acquisition of outside ﬁnancial resources (four items).
(4) Personal planning: DEMO nascent entrepreneur’s efforts to prepare for the business
and personal involvement (DEMO items).
(5) Personal preparation: The nascent entrepreneur’s organization of DEMO personal
life to become involved, by taking classes, saving money, DEMO arranging for help
with childcare of housework (three items).
(6) Focus on the task or the product: Attention to developing the DEMO or service
to be sold and acquiring formal property rights to the same (two items)”.
Reynolds (2007) develops an index for each domain and each time period
and compared these indices to three outcome DEMO 7 years after conception.
Only one index that of personal preparation, DEMO no relationship to outcomes in
the seventh year. All of the other indices had, for some time periods, signiﬁcant
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 113
relationships to the three outcome measures. He suggests that this analysis indicates
that nascent entrepreneurs who emphasize DEMO strong public presence, create an orga-
nizational and ﬁnancial structure, and, develop a way to provide goods or services
are more likely to create new businesses. Entrepreneurs who successfully start busi-
nesses are also more DEMO to engage in higher levels of activity, over time, than
either the quits or the still active.
Another approach that has signiﬁcant merit DEMO understanding the processes of
organization creation, in total, is championed by Lichtenstein (1999, 2000). He uses
ideas from complexity theory (Dooley, 1997;Leifer, 1989; McKelvey, 1999;West,
1985) to suggest that organization creation activities: (1) will not occur at a con-
stant rate over time, (2) will not obviously aggregate from speciﬁc activities, (3)
will be mutually interdependent, and (4) that the outcomes of these activities will
be non-proportional. While not wanting to DEMO his logic and ideas, non-linear
approaches for exploring entrepreneurial can show, “order” in what appear to be
random patterns of activity. Lichtenstein (1999, 2000) has also been able to demon-
strate how complexity theory DEMO practical implications for how individuals might
behave in emergent situations. In an empirical examination of the dynamic patterns
of the startup activities in PSED DEMO, Lichtenstein, Carter, Dooley, and Gartner (2007)
found that DEMO: (1) the rate of startup activities is high, (2) startup activities are
spread out over time, and (3) startup activities are concentrated later rather than ear-
lier, the emergence of a new ﬁrm was more likely. Brush et al. (2008) also noticed
that DEMO nascent entrepreneurs “take more time to accumulate properties” (p. 563)
DEMO were more likely to continue in the process of organizing.
Opportunity Recognition
A number of scholars suggest that the idea of “opportunity” is a DEMO
tal and critical aspect of the phenomenon of entrepreneurship (Alvarez &
Barney, 2007; Buenstorf, 2007; Casson & Wadeson, 2007; Companys &
McMullen, 2007; Gaglio & Katz, 2001; Kirzner, 1997; DEMO et al., 2007;
Plummer et al., 2007; Shane, 2000; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000; Shepherd et al.,
2007; Stevenson, 1983; Stevenson & Gumpert, 1985; Stevenson, & Jarillo, 1990).
Indeed, one of the entrepreneurship ﬁeld’s core deﬁnitions focuses on opportu-
nity: “From our perspective, entrepreneurship is an approach to management that
we DEMO as follows: the pursuit of opportunity without regard to resources cur-
DEMO controlled” (Stevenson, 1983). Yet, recent discussions about characteristics
of DEMO, as an aspect of the phenomenon of entrepreneurship (e.g., Alvarez &
Barney, 2007; McMullen et al., 2007; Plummer et al., 2007; Shepherd et al., 2007)
appears to be somewhat myopic DEMO regards to the relevance of contributions from
a variety of sources outside of economics to this discourse. Because Shane and
Venkataraman’s (2000) article DEMO the importance of opportunity to the study of
entrepreneurship has become fundamental to views of the nature of entrepreneur-
ship, there has been a great deal of thoughtful discussion about deﬁnitions of the
attributes of opportunity DEMO explorations of the processes by which opportunity
114 W.B. Gartner et al.
occurs, as well as the beginnings of specifying the value of the concept of opportu-
nity to entrepreneurial studies (Alvarez & Barney, 2007; Buenstorf, 2007; Casson &
Wadeson, DEMO; Companys & McMullen, 2007; Gaglio & Katz, 2001; McMullen
DEMO al., 2007; Plummer et al., 2007; Shane, 2000; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000;
Singh, 2001; Zahra & Dess, 2001)DEMO While there is some systematic evidence about
the nature of opportunity by which these current ideas can be tested (Busenitz, 1996;
Hills & Schrader, 1998; Kaish & Gilad, 1991; Shane, 2000; Singh et al., 1999),
we believe the interpretations of these results DEMO, at best, equivocal. The evidence
from individuals involved in opportunity discovery and recognition is meager. We
believe that data from the PSED can DEMO many insights into how the process of
opportunity discovery and recognition actually occurs.
Discussions about the nature of opportunity are discussions about how circum-
DEMO external to the entrepreneur are construed. Most scholars currently pursue
a line of reasoning about the nature of opportunity that suggests that opportunities
are, sort-of-speak, concrete realities waiting to be noticed, discovered, or observed
by entrepreneurs (Alvarez & Barney, 2007; Kirzner, 1997; Shane, 2000; Shane &
Venkataraman, 2000). This view has come to be DEMO as the “opportunity dis-
covery” perspective (Alvarez & Barney, 2007; DEMO & Carter, 2003). Such a
perspective uses the economics literature DEMO emphasize the importance of alert-
ness, observation, and the informational asymmetries among all individuals who
are pursing their best interests (Arrow, 1974; Hayek, 1945). We propose another
alternative. We argue that in many circumstances, opportunities are enacted, that
is, the salient features of an opportunity only become apparent through the ways
that entrepreneurs make sense of DEMO experiences (Gartner & Carter, 2003; Gartner
et al., 1992; DEMO, 2001; Weick, 1979). Indeed, we suggest that merely by talk-
ing about opportunities as a part of the circumstances of entrepreneurship, scholars
invoke a way of making sense of the phenomenon of entrepreneurship DEMO pro-
vokes entrepreneurs to see their experiences in a certain way. Entrepreneurs may talk
about “discovering opportunities” because that is the way we (academic scholars)
ask them to talk about opportunity.
In the opportunity enactment DEMO, opportunities are seen to emerge out
of the imagination of individuals DEMO their actions and their interactions with oth-
ers (Daft & Weick, 1984; Dutton, 1993a, 1993b; Dutton & Jackson, 1987; Gioia
DEMO al., 2000; Hill & Levenhagen, 1995; Jackson & Dutton, DEMO; Scott & Lane,
2000; Thomas et al., 1993). DEMO entrepreneurship and opportunity as
an emergent cognitive and social process is not new to the ﬁeld of entrepreneur-
ship (Gartner, 1993; Gartner et al., 1992; Shaver & Scott, 1991; Stevenson, 1983;
Stevenson & Gumpert, 1985; Stevenson, & Jarillo, 1990), yet, social psychological
approaches to the study of this phenomenon seem to have been DEMO in the current
fashion for an economic rationality to this process.
Since the theory and logic of these two perspectives are covered in more DEMO
elsewhere (Gartner et al., 2003), we will offer evidence from Gartner and Shaver
(2009) using data from PSED 1 to suggest DEMO is no preponderance of evidence
for either view. This study explores the label “opportunity” in the strategic issue
literature as a point of departure DEMO offering an attributional framework for catego-
rizing opportunities entrepreneurs offer as they undertook efforts to start businesses.
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 115
The strategic issue literature broadly labels opportunities as: positive, controllable,
and involve potential gain (Dutton & Jackson, 1988; Thomas et al., 1993). The
article demonstrates that this is similar to an attribution theory approach. Open-
ended questions DEMO the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED) were
analyzed in which entrepreneurs offered comments about reasons for starting their
businesses and problems they DEMO during the startup of their ﬁrms. Entrepreneurs
were more likely to offer attributions about their opportunities that can be catego-
rized as dependent on DEMO abilities (internal and stable attributions) and efforts
(internal and variable DEMO). We suggest that this study provides evidence
about the kinds of attributions entrepreneurs are likely to offer about opportuni-
ties supports perspectives that DEMO that entrepreneurial action stems from the
resources that are within these entrepreneurs’ immediate control (Baker & Nelson,
2005; Sarasvathy, 2001, 2008) as well as from their own efforts and activities.
Given an appreciation DEMO the phenomenon of entrepreneurial activity is very
diverse, and that for DEMO nascent entrepreneurs, a broad range of startup activities
are occurring before DEMO appear to “discover” their opportunity. Indeed, we wonder
whether many of DEMO nascent entrepreneur ever “discover” an opportunity, at all.
Overall, we do not believe there is a preponderance of support for a belief that
DEMO entrepreneurs see opportunities in an objective way, that is, there is not very
much evidence that opportunities are discovered in the manner assumed DEMO some
academic scholars (Alvarez & Barney, 2007; Gaglio & Katz, 2001; Kirzner, 1997;
Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). Much more empirical evidence on the actual process
of opportunity recognition needs to occur. DEMO PSED I + II provide evidence to be
used to explore this topic in more detail.
Planning1
Frederic Delmar and Scott Shane (2003) DEMO four broad reasons for why
entrepreneurs should engage in planning during the process of venture creation.
They suggest that planning helps individuals develop a DEMO and context for
taking action so that individuals can: (1) DEMO identify what they do not know, (2)
understand what resources they need and when these resources might be utilized,
and (3) identify speciﬁc actions that can help solve problems and attain goals, DEMO
(4) help communicate to others the purposes, objectives, and activities necessary to
achieve venture success.
Entrepreneurs who develop a plan become conscious DEMO their assumptions about
how their proposed new business will succeed. Assumptions regarding: the ability
of the new ﬁrm to be proﬁtable, the amount DEMO resources necessary to start and
operate the ﬁrm, the knowledge necessary DEMO provide products and services in a
1This section on planning was excerpted from Gartner, William B. and Jianwen (Jon) Liao (2007).
DEMO planning. In C. Moutray (Ed.) The Small Business Economy for Data Year 2006:
Report to the President. Washington, DC: U. S. DEMO Business Administration Ofﬁce of Advocacy,
pp. 212–264 (Note: That this excerpt is with permission of the author, since this is a government
publication, the author holds the copyright for any reprinting of the content.)
116 W.B. Gartner et al.
timely and cost-effective manner, and number of potential customers are just a few
of the many issues that entrepreneurs DEMO consider when planning. By surfacing
these assumptions, entrepreneurs can test their DEMO, rather than invest time and
resources in actions that may have DEMO chance of succeeding. Planning, therefore,
can save time and money DEMO the venture creation process.
Planning can also reduce the likelihood that there will be delays in organizing the
new venture, acquiring plant and equipment, as well as producing goods or provid-
ing services. Planning can help an entrepreneur identify when key resources (such as
inventory, equipment, licenses and permits, trained personnel) will likely be needed
during the business DEMO process, thereby saving time and money (Armstrong,
1982; Bracker DEMO al., 1988).
Planning can help entrepreneurs identify speciﬁc actions they DEMO need to take
to achieve their goals (Locke & Latham, 1980). By identifying speciﬁc actions,
entrepreneurs can focus their efforts, as well as realize when their efforts are not
producing their desired goals. DEMO, therefore, keeps individuals “on track” by
channeling their energy and providing benchmarks (Robinson, 1984; Schrader et al.,
1984).
Finally, DEMO helps entrepreneurs communicate their vision to others, thereby
enabling the emerging DEMO to gain support and resources (Bird, 1992). By having
a plan, entrepreneurs can thereby enlist potential investors, suppliers, customers, and
DEMO into involvement in the new venture. A business plan also represents a
form of “legitimacy,” in that entrepreneurs who have a plan are DEMO to be seen by
others as individuals who have knowledge of the requirements for business success,
rather than “dreamers” who are unaware of DEMO pitfalls in the startup process
(Delmar & Shane, 2004; Honig & Karlsson, 2004).
One of the major problems in the search DEMO research on the value of planning for
creating new ventures is that most studies have not actually looked at new business
creation. For example, Bhide (2000) uses as his primary source of data, businesses
on the INC Magazine list of the 500 fastest growing private ﬁrms in DEMO United
States. His sample, then, looks at already established ﬁrms, DEMO only ﬁrms that have
high rates of sales growth. There are no failures in Bhide’s sample and there are no
low growth ﬁrms either, to compare with the high growth sales ﬁrms. When a study
looks DEMO at successful ﬁrms there is a high likelihood that the study has “survivor
bias.” The successful ﬁrms are “survivors” in that over a period DEMO time many ﬁrms
would have likely failed, and, the failures would not be listed in a register of the
“survivors” to be studied.
DEMO number of research studies that have compared entrepreneurs who have suc-
cessfully created new ﬁrms with entrepreneurs who have failed at this process, is
very small. Indeed, the studies that have looked at planning and its inﬂuence on new
venture creation stem from data that either use the DEMO Study of Entrepreneurial
Dynamics (Liao & Gartner, 2006; Reynolds, 2007) or use data collection meth-
ods and questions based on the PSED (Delmar & Shane, 2003, 2004; Honig &
Karlsson, 2004; Shane & Delmar, 2004). Table 5.3 lists the studies that have focused
on planning during the process of business creation, the size of these samples, and
highlights of their ﬁndings about the value of planning and success at getting into
business.
Table 5.3 Previous research on business planning and success at starting a DEMO
Study Sample: size Method of analysis Findings on planning
Delmar and DEMO (2003) Sweden PSED∗: 223 Event history: A hazard function
of disbanding
Delmar and Shane (2004) Sweden PSED: 223 Event history: DEMO hazard function
of disbanding
Honig and Karlsson (2004) Sweden PSED: DEMO Logistical regression on persistence
in the startup process
Entrepreneurs who engaged in business
planning were less likely to quit the
venture creation process during DEMO 3-year
time frame. Entrepreneurs who engaged in
business planning were more likely to:
increase product development and the
number of venture startup activities.
DEMO with prior startup experience
were less likely to quit the venture creation
process. The type of opportunity pursued
signiﬁcantly affected survival
Entrepreneurs who engaged DEMO business
planning and formed a legal entity were
less likely to quit the venture creation
process during a 3-year time frame, and
more likely to complete product
development, initiate marketing efforts,
and obtain inputs
A nearly signiﬁcant result (p> .10) that
entrepreneurs who engaged in business
planning were likely to continue in the
startup process (survive). Being a member
of a business network, knowing the
customer before startup, DEMO being a
manufacturing startup increased the
likelihood of survival by a factor of 4.4,
2.7, and 4.0, respectively
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 117
Table 5.3 (continued)
Study Sample: size Method of analysis Findings DEMO planning
Liao and Gartner (2006) PSED: 276 Event history: A hazard function
of disbanding
Reynolds (2007) PSED: 648 Comparison of means (F-test) and
cross tabulations (Chi-square)
Shane and Delmar (2004) Sweden PSED: 223 Event history: A hazard function
of disbanding
A DEMO description of the Sweden PSED can be found in: Davidsson and DEMO (2002).
Entrepreneurs who engaged in business
planning were less likely DEMO quit the
venture creation process during a 2-year
time frame. Entrepreneurs who initiated
business plans: early in uncertain
competitive and ﬁnancial environments;
and late in certain competitive and ﬁnancial
environments were less likely to quit
DEMO, as a part of a factor that describes
the process of DEMO an organizational
and ﬁnancial structure, along with a variety
of human DEMO (e.g., years of industry,
work and managerial experience) and
DEMO activities (e.g., total hours
and funds invested, contact with helping
DEMO) is more likely to predict success
at getting into business
Entrepreneurs DEMO engaged in business
planning before talking to customers and
initiating marketing and promotion efforts
reduces the hazard of termination by 46
and 41%, respectively. Each prior startup
by founding team reduced the hazard of
termination by DEMO Each additional
organizing activity reduced the hazard of
termination by 25%
118 W.B. Gartner et al.
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 119
These studies strongly suggest that planning matters [with Honig and Karlsson
(2004) ﬁnding a nearly signiﬁcant DEMO, p > .10]. Entrepreneurs who complete a
business plan are more DEMO to either: continue in the business startup process, or
actually start a business than those individuals who do not plan.
There are a DEMO of other factors that inﬂuence whether entrepreneurs will be
successful in the venture creation process. For example, Delmar and Shane (2003)
suggest DEMO the nature of the opportunity pursued by entrepreneurs has a more sig-
niﬁcant impact on success than the act of planning, itself, though DEMO terms of actions
that an entrepreneur can take, planning is the DEMO important activity to engage
in. Liao and Gartner (2006) found that entrepreneurs who were more uncertain
about their chances of ﬁnancing their businesses DEMO more uncertain about their
understanding the competitive dynamics of their industries were more likely to
be successful if they planned early in the startup DEMO, rather than later. Shane
and Delmar (2004) found that entrepreneurs DEMO completed business plans before
engaging in efforts to talk to customers and engage in marketing and promotional
efforts were more likely to be successful DEMO continuing in their startup efforts (i.e.,
not quit).
Overall, it would seem that completing a business plan is beneﬁcial to enabling
DEMO to successfully create new businesses. Even though there are dif-
ferences in: the various sample sizes used from each of the two major samples
(US PSED and the Swedish PSED); how certain measures were constructed to
indicate planning, as well as success at getting into business; DEMO the analyti-
cal techniques used to evaluate the data, the results DEMO to be fairly robust.
Business planning is an important activity that signiﬁcantly correlates with creating
new ventures.
Recommendations for Future Research
It is our DEMO that the Panel Studies of Entrepreneurial Dynamics I and II is a
decisive moment in the study of entrepreneurship. The PSED studies are the DEMO
large-scale national database to offer systematic, reliable, and generalizable data on
the process of business formation. While no data set can provide all DEMO the answers
about ﬁrm formation processes, it is our expectation that DEMO PSED studies can offer
a foundation of generalizable ﬁndings about entrepreneurial behavior. What should
not be underestimated is the value of having the depth DEMO breadth of information on
this sample of nascent entrepreneurs. A major complaint about many entrepreneur-
ship studies has been the idiosyncratic nature of the DEMO used (Gartner, 1989). It
has been difﬁcult to judge whether a sample of entrepreneurs is similar or different
to other kinds of DEMO of entrepreneurs, to entrepreneurs overall, or to non-
entrepreneurs. Since the PSED is a generalizable sample of all nascent entrepreneurs
in the population (as well as a generalizable sample of non-nascent entrepreneurs),
the PSED provides a way to compare any sample of entrepreneurs to the popula-
DEMO of nascent entrepreneurs, and to the population of non-nascent entrepreneurs.
120 W.B. Gartner et al.
In addition, given the longitudinal nature of the PSED, the dataset also will be valu-
able for studying differences between the population of nascent entrepreneurs to
those individuals who become the DEMO of established businesses. Studies of
nascent entrepreneurs in the PSED should therefore provide important signposts
for guiding all knowledge development in the entrepreneurship ﬁeld. DEMO hope that
more scholars will devote the time and effort needed to explore this rich source of
information on entrepreneurs.
Besides studies that utilize DEMO PSED, there are a number of other ways that
research on DEMO formation processes can and should be conducted. We suggest
certain methodologies, DEMO than speciﬁc studies of entrepreneurial situations best
apply those approaches.
There is a great need for scholars to undertake in-depth case studies (Stake, DEMO)
of the activities of individuals involved in the process of starting business. Firm
formation involves a multitude of interdependent activities among a variety DEMO indi-
viduals (e.g., founders; investors; prospective employees, buyers, and suppliers; and
paid and unpaid mentors and advisors). Systematic evidence needs to be generated
to better understand how all of these different actors DEMO during the found-
ing process. In addition, there is very little DEMO about the “micro-behaviors” of
organization founders. For example, there is not DEMO beyond anecdotal evidence
about the speciﬁc behaviors and the sequences of these behaviors when nascent
entrepreneurs actually negotiate with others for critical resources to DEMO a new busi-
ness (Baker & Nelson, 2005). What, DEMO, occurs when nascent entrepreneurs
attempt to convince other individuals to become DEMO? Do nascent entrepreneurs
follow similar negotiating strategies and tactics (compared to managers or individu-
als in other negotiation situations), or are there DEMO characteristics of organization
formation that require different behaviors? We would assume DEMO the indetermi-
nate and future-oriented characteristics of ﬁrm founding would inﬂuence how the
process of negotiation occurred among nascent entrepreneurs and others, and that
these characteristics of the situation (indeterminacy and future orientation) would
be DEMO than other kinds of negotiations.
We would also hope that some scholars would devote their efforts to documenting
and discussing their own involvement in DEMO activities through partici-
pant observation (Tedlock, 2000), action research (DEMO & McTaggart, 2000),
and the exposition of their own narratives and stories of organization formation
through reﬂexivity, personal narrative, and autoethnography (Ellis & Bochner, 2000;
Gartner, 2007). In addition, many highly successful entrepreneurs have written auto-
biographies of their experiences that could DEMO explored for insights (Gartner, 2007;
Silverman, 2000).
Finally, while there can, and should, be scholarly efforts to explore entrepre-
DEMO behavior using more controlled methodologies (e.g., lab studies and simu-
lations), it is our belief that major gains in scholarship on organization DEMO
activities will primarily occur through ﬁeld research. The phenomenon of organiza-
tion formation, itself, is larger than a particular theoretical perspective or method-
DEMO So, we celebrate using multiple theories and multiple methods to understand
DEMO formation that can look at this phenomenon comprehensively. We take
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 121
seriously Weick’s admonition to “Complicate Yourselves” (Weick, 1979), that is,
scholars need to recognize DEMO no one particular theory or method can adequately
explain the phenomenon under observation, and that a variety of approaches are
required.
If our experiences studying the process of organization formation have shown
us anything, it is that there is: substantial variation in the kinds of organizations
that are started by nascent entrepreneurs; substantial variation in the characteris-
tics that would signal to researchers that these organizations, do, indeed exist; and
substantial variation in when these characteristics that signal the existence of these
new DEMO, occur. There is no escaping this fact—entrepreneurial behavior
is fundamentally an DEMO involved with generating “variation” as an organiza-
tional phenomenon (Aldrich, 1999; Katz & Gartner, 1988; Weick, 1979). There is
no DEMO particular way in how organizations emerge because there is no one partic-
ular kind of organization that results as an outcome of the startup DEMO (Gartner
et al., 1989; Reynolds, 2007). Research that can both recognize variation in the
phenomenon of organization creation, while also offering insights into how these
diverse activities might lead to patterns of successful DEMO of organizations is
needed and required (Reynolds, 2007).
References
Aldrich, H. E., & Fiol, M. 1994. Fools rush in? The DEMO context of industry creation.
Academy of Management Review, 19(4): DEMO
Aldrich, H., Kalleberg, A., Marsden, P., & Cassell, DEMO 1989. In pursuit of evidence: Sampling
procedures for locating new businesses. DEMO of Business Venturing, 4(6): 367–386.
Aldrich, H. E., & Ruef, M. 2006. Organizations Evolving. London: Sage Publications.
Alsos, G. DEMO, & Kolvereid, L. 1998. The business gestation process of novice, DEMO and parallel
business founders. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22(4): DEMO
Alsos, G., & Ljunggren, E. 1998. Does the business start-up DEMO differ by gender? A longitu-
dinal study of nascent entrepreneurs. Journal DEMO Enterprising Culture, 6(4): 347–367.
Alvarez, S. A., & DEMO, J. B. 2007. Discovery and creation: Alternative theories of
entrepreneurial action. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1: 11–26.
Amit, R., Glosten, L. & Muller, E. 1993. Challenges to theory development in entrepreneurship
research. Journal of Management Studies, 30(5): 815–834.
Armstrong, J. (1982). The value of formal planning for strategic decisions: Review of empirical
research. Strategic Management Journal, 3(3): 197–211.
Arrow, K. J. 1974. The DEMO of Organization. New York: W. W. Norton and Company.
Baker, T., & Nelson, R. 2005. Creating something from nothing: Resource construction through
entrepreneurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50: 329–366.
Baltrušaityte-Axelson, J., Sauka, A., & Welter, F. (2008).˙ Nascent Entrepreneurship in Latvia.
Evidence from the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics 1st wave. Riga: Dardedze.
Baumol, W. J. 1993. Formal entrepreneurship theory in economics: Existence and bounds. DEMO
of Business Venturing, 8: 197–210.
Becker, S. W., & Gordon, G. 1966. An entrepreneurial theory of formal organizations, Part I:
DEMO of formal organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 11: 315–344.
Bhide, A. (2000). The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Bird, B. A. 1989. Entrepreneurial Behavior. Glenview, Il: Scott, Foresman and Company.
122 W.B. Gartner et al.
Bird, B. (1992). The operation DEMO intentions in time: The emergence of the new venture.
Entrepreneurship Theory DEMO Practice, 17(Fall): 11–20.
Birley, S. 1984. Finding the new ﬁrm. Academy of Management Proceedings, 47: 64–68.
Birley, S. 1986. The role of new ﬁrms: Births, deaths, and job generation. Strategic Management
Journal, 7(4): 361–376.
Brixy, U., & Hessels, J. DEMO Human capital and start-up success of nascents. Institute for
Employment Research, DEMO, and Erasmus School of Economics, The Netherlands,
Working Paper.
Bracker, J., Keats, B., & Pearson, J. (1988). Planning DEMO ﬁnancial performance among small ﬁrms
in a growth industry. Strategic Management Journal, 9(6): 591–603.
Brush, C. G., Manolova, T. S., & Edelman, L. F. 2008. Properties of emerging organizations: An
empirical DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 23: 547–566.
Buenstorf, G. 2007. Creation DEMO pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities: an evolutionary
economics perspective. Small Business Economics, 28: 323–337.
Bull, I., & Willard, G. E. 1993. Towards DEMO theory of entrepreneurship. Journal of Business
Venturing, 8: 183–195.
Busenitz, DEMO W. 1996. Research on entrepreneurial alertness. Journal of Small Business
Management, DEMO(4): 35–44.
Busenitz, L. W., & Murphy, G. B. DEMO New evidence in the pursuit of locating new businesses.
Journal of Business Venturing, 11(3): 221–231.
Carroll, G. R., & Hannan, DEMO T. 2000. The Demography of Corporations and Industries. Princeton,
NJ: DEMO University Press.
Carter, N. M. 1997. Entrepreneurial processes and outcomes: The inﬂuence of gender. In P. D.
Reynolds, & S. B. White (DEMO), The Entrepreneurial Process: 163–178. Westport, CT: Quorum
Books.
Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. 1996. DEMO start-up event sequences. Journal
of Business Venturing, 11(3): 151–166.
DEMO, M., & Wadeson, N. 2007. The discovery of opportunities: Extending the economic theory
of the entrepreneur. Small Business Economics, 28: 285–300.
DEMO, Y., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1996. Learning the DEMO journey: Order out of chaos?
Organization Science, 7(6): 593–614.
Companys, Y. E., & McMullen, J. S. 2007. Strategic entrepreneurs at work: The nature, dis-
covery, and exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities. Small Business Economics, 28:
301–322.
Crookall, D. 1994. Editorial: Entrepreneurship education. Simulation & Gaming, 25(3):
333–334.
Daft, R. L., & Weick, K. L. 1984. Toward a model of organizations as DEMO systems.
Academy of Management Review, 9(2) 284–295.
Davidsson, P., & Henrekson, M. (2002). Determinants of the prevalence of start-ups DEMO high-
growth ﬁrms. Small Business Economics, 19(2): 81–104.
Davidsson, P., Steffens, P., Gordon, S., & Reynolds, P. 2008a. DEMO of new business
activity in Australia: Some early observations from the DEMO project. Available at:
eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00013613. Brisbane, School of Management, Faculty of Business,
QUT.
Davidsson, P., Steffens, P., Gordon, S., & Senyard, J. 2008b. Characteristics of high-potential
start-ups: Some early observations from the CAUSEE project. Available at: http://www.
causee.bus.qut.edu.au/results/.
Delmar, F., & Davidsson, P. 2000. Where do they come from? Prevalence and characteristics of
nascent entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, DEMO: 1–23.
Delmar, F., & Shane, S. 2003. Does business planning facilitate the development of new ventures?
Strategic Management Journal, 24: DEMO
Delmar, F., & Shane, S. 2004. Legitimating ﬁrst: Organizing activities and the persistence of new
ventures. Journal of Business Venturing, 19: DEMO
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 123
Diochon, M., Menzies, DEMO V., & Gasse, Y. 2005. Canadian nascent entrepreneurs’ start-up
efforts: DEMO and individual inﬂuences on sustainability. Journal of Small Business and
Entrepreneurship, DEMO(1): 53–73.
Dooley, K. 1997. A complex adaptive systems model DEMO organization change. Nonlinear Dynamics,
Psychology and Life Sciences, 1: 69–97.
Dutton, J. E. 1993a. Interpretations on automatic: A different view of DEMO issue diagnosis.
Journal of Management Studies, 30(3): 339–357.
Dutton, J. E. 1993b. The making of organizational opportunities: An interpretive pathway to
organizational change. Research in Organizational Behavior, 15: 195–226.
Dutton, J. E., & Jackson, S. E. 1987. Categorizing strategic issues: Links to organizational action.
Academy of Management Review, 12(1): 76–90.
Dutton, J. DEMO, & Jackson, S. E. 1988. Categorizing strategic issues: Links to DEMO action.
Academy of Management Review, 12(1): 76–90.
Ellis, C., & Bochner, A. P. 2000. Autoethnography, personal narrative, reﬂexivity: Researcher as
subject. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research (2nd ed.):
733–768. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Gaglio, C. M., & Katz, J. A. 2001. DEMO psychological basis of opportunity identiﬁcation:
Entrepreneurial alertness. Journal of Small Business Economics, 16(2): 95–111.
Gartner, W. B. 1985. A conceptual DEMO for describing the phenomenon of new venture
creation. Academy of Management Review, 10: 696–706.
Gartner, W. B. 1988. Who is an entrepreneur? DEMO the wrong question. American Journal of Small
Business, 12(4): DEMO
Gartner, W. B. 1989. Some suggestions for research on entrepreneurial traits DEMO characteristics.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14(1): 27–38.
Gartner, W. B. 1990. What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal of
Business Venturing 5: 15–28.
Gartner, W. B. 1993. Organizing DEMO voluntary association. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice,
17(2): 103–106.
DEMO, W. B. 2001. Is there an elephant in entrepreneurship? Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 25(4): 27–39.
Gartner, W. B. 2007. Entrepreneurial DEMO and a science of the imagination. Journal of
Business Venturing, 22(DEMO): 613–627.
Gartner, W. B., Bird, B. J., & Starr, J. 1992. Acting as if: Differentiating entrepreneurial from
organizational behavior. Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice, 16(3): 13–32.
Gartner, W. B., & DEMO, N. M. 2003. Entrepreneurial behavior and ﬁrm organizing processes.
In Z. DEMO Acs, & D. B. Audretsch (Eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research: 195–221.
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Gartner, W. B., Carter, N. M., & Hills, G. E. 2003. The language of opportunity. In C. Steyaert, &
D. Hjorth (Eds.), New Movements in Entrepreneurship: 103–124. London: Edward Elgar.
Gartner, W. B., & Gatewood, E. J. 1993. And now for something completely different.
Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 17(2): 87–90.
Gartner, W. B., Mitchell, T. DEMO, & Vesper, K. H. 1989. A taxonomy of new business ventures.
Journal of Business Venturing, 4(3): 169–186.
Gartner, W. B., Shaver, K. G., Carter, N. M., & Reynolds, P. D. 2004. The Handbook
of Entrepreneurial Dynamics: The Process of Organization Creation. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Gartner, W. B., & Starr, J. DEMO The nature of entrepreneurial work. In S. Birley, & I. C. DEMO
(Eds.), Entrepreneurship Research: Global Perspectives: 35–67. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gartner, W. B., & Jianwen (Jon) Liao (2007). Pre-venture planning. In C. Moutray (Ed.), The
Small Business Economy for Data Year 2006: Report to the President: 212–264. Washington,
DC: U.S. Small Business Administration Ofﬁce of Advocacy.
Garud, R., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1992. An empirical evaluation of the internal corporate venturing
process. DEMO Management Journal, 13: 93–109.
124 W.B. Gartner et al.
Gatewood, E. J., Shaver, K. G., & Gartner, W. B. 1995. A longitudinal study of cognitive factors
DEMO start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing,
10(5): 371–391.
Gilbert, M. R. 1997. Identity, space and DEMO: A critique of the poverty debates. In J. P.
Jones III, H. J. Nast, & S. M. Roberts (Eds.), Thresholds in DEMO Geography: Difference,
Methodology, Representation: 29–45. Oxford, UK: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Gioia, D. A., Schultz, M., & Corley, K. DEMO 2000. Organizational identify, image, and adaptive
instability. Academy of Management Review, 25(1): 63–81.
Hannan, M., & Freeman, J. 1984. DEMO inertia and organizational change. American
Sociological Review, 45: 149–164.
Hayek, DEMO 1945. The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review, 35: 519–530.
Herbert, R. F., & Link, A. N. 1988. The Entrepreneur. New York: Praeger.
Hill, R. C. & Levenhagen, M. 1995. Metaphors and mental models: Sensemaking and sensegiving
in innovative and entrepreneurial activities. Journal of Management, 21(6): 1057–1074.
Hills, G., & Shrader, DEMO 1998. Successful entrepreneur’s insights into opportunity recognition.
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: DEMO Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Honig, B., & Karlsson, T. DEMO Institutional forces and the written business plan. Journal of
Management, 30(DEMO): 29–48.
Jackson, S. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1988. DEMO threats and opportunities. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 33: 370–387.
Kaish, S., & Gilad, B. 1991. Characteristics of opportunity searches of entrepreneurs ver-
sus executives: Sources, interests, general alertness. Journal of Business Venturing, 6(DEMO):
45–61.
Kalleberg, A. L., Marsden, P. V., Aldrich, H. E., & Cassell, J. W. 1990. Comparing organizational
sampling frames. DEMO Science Quarterly, 35(4): 658–688.
Katz, J. A. 1993. The dynamics of organizational emergence: A contemporary group formation
perspective. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 17(2): 97–102.
Katz, J. A., & Gartner, DEMO B. 1988. Properties of emerging organizations. Academy of Management
Review, 13(DEMO): 429–441.
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. 2000. Participatory action DEMO In N. K. Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln
(Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kim, P. H. 2006. Organizing activities and founding processes of new ventures. Dissertation,
Department of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
Kirchhoff, B. A. 1994. Entrepreneurship and Dynamic Capitalism. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Kirzner, I. 1997. Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process. An Austrian
approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 35: 60–85.
Leifer, R. 1989. Understanding organization transformation using a dissipative structure mode.
Human Relations, 42: DEMO
Liao, J., & Gartner, W. B. 2006. The effects of DEMO plan timing and perceived environmental
uncertainty on the persistence of emerging ﬁrms. Small Business Economics, 27(1): 23–40.
Lichtenstein, B. 1999. A DEMO model of non-linearity in entrepreneurship. Journal of Business
and Entrepreneurship, 6(DEMO): 24–55.
Lichtenstein, B. 2000. Emergence as a process of self-organizing: New assumptions and insights
from the study of nonlinear dynamic systems. Journal DEMO Organizational Change Management,
13: 526–544.
Lichtenstein, B. B., Carter, N. M., Dooley, K. J., & Gartner, W. B. 2007. DEMO dynamics of
nascent entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 22: 236–261.
Locke, E., & Latham, G. (1980). The Theory of Goal DEMO and Task Performance. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. 1996. Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and
linking it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21: 135–172.
McKelvey, B., 1999. Complexity theory in organization science: Seizing the promise or becoming
DEMO? Emergence, 1(1): 5–31.
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 125
McMullen, J. S., Plummer, L. A., & Acs, Z. J. 2007. What is an entrepreneurial opportunity? Small
Business Economics, 28: 273–283.
Menzies, T. V., Diochon, M., Gasse, Y., & Elgie, S. 2006. A longitudinal study of the character-
istics, business creation process and outcome differences of Canadian female vs. male nascent
entrepreneurs. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 2: DEMO
Morgan, G. 1996. Images of Organization (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Murphy, G. B. 2002. The effects of organizational sampling frame selection. Journal of Business
Venturing, 17(3): 237–252.
Nelson, DEMO, & Winter, S. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. New York: Belknap
Press.
Pfeffer, J. E. 1982. Organizations and Organization Theory. DEMO, MA: Ballinger.
Plummer, L. A., Hayne, J. M., & Godesiabois, J. 2007. An essay on the origins of entrepreneurial
opportunity. Small Business Economics, 28: 363–379.
Poole, M. S., Van de Ven, A. H., Dooley, K., & Homes, M. E. 2000. Organizational DEMO and
Innovation Processes: Theory and Methods for Research. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reynolds, P. D. 1992. Predicting new ﬁrm births: Interactions of DEMO and human pop-
ulations. In D. L. Sexton, & J. D. DEMO (Eds.), The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship:
268–297. DEMO, MA: PWS-Kent.
Reynolds, P. D. 2000. National panel study of DEMO S. business startups: Background and methodol-
ogy. In J. A. Katz (Ed.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth,Vol.4:
DEMO Stamford, CT: JAI Press.
Reynolds, P. D. 2007. New ﬁrm DEMO in the United States: A PSED 1 overview. Foundations
and Trends DEMO Entrepreneurship, 3(1): 1–150.
Reynolds, P. D., & Curtin, R. T. 2008. Business creation in the United States: Panel study of
entrepreneurial dynamics II initial assessment. Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship,
4(DEMO): 155–307.
Reynolds, P. D., Hay, M., Bygrave, W. DEMO, Camp, S. M., & Autio, E. 2000. Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor: 2000 Executive Report. Kansas City, MO: Kauffman Center for Entrepreneurial
Leadership.
Reynolds, P. D., & Miller, B. 1992. New ﬁrm gestation: DEMO, birth, and implications for
research. Journal of Business Venturing, 7(DEMO): 405–418.
Reynolds, P. D., & White, S. B. 1997. DEMO Entrepreneurial Process. Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Robinson, R. (1984). Forecasting and small business: A study of the strategic planning process.
Journal of Small Business Management, 22(2): 19–27.
Ronen, J. 1982. DEMO Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Rotefoss, B., & Kolvereid, L. DEMO Aspiring, nascent and ﬂedging entrepreneurs: an investigation
of the business start-up process. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 17, 109–127.
Ruef, M., Aldrich, H. E., & Carter, N. M. 2003. The structure of founding DEMO: Homophily,
strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs. American Sociological Review, 68:
195–222.
Sarasvathy, S. D. 2001. Causation and effectuation: Towards a theoretical shift from eco-
nomic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy DEMO Management Review, 26(2):
243–263.
Sarasvathy, S. 2008. Effectuation: Elements of Entrepreneurial Expertise. Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar.
Schoonhoven, C. DEMO, Burton, M. D., & Reynolds, P. D. 2009. Reconceiving the gestation window:
The consequences of competing deﬁnitions of ﬁrm conception and DEMO In P. D. Reynolds, &
R. T. Curtin (Eds.), DEMO Firm Creation in the United States: Initial Explorations with the PSED
DEMO Data Set: 219–238. New York: Springer.
Schoonhoven, C. B., & Romanelli, E. 2001. The Entrepreneurship Dynamic. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University DEMO
Schrader, C., Taylor, L., & Dalton, D. (1984). Strategic planning and organizational performance:
A critical appraisal. Journal of Management, 10(2): 149–171.
126 W.B. Gartner et al.
Scott, R. W. 1997. Organizations: Rational, Natural and Open Systems (4th ed.). Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: DEMO
Scott, S. G., & Lane, V. R. 2000. A stakeholder DEMO to organizational identity. Academy of
Management Review, 25(1): 43–62.
DEMO, S. 2000. Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization
DEMO, 11(4): 448–469.
Shane, S., & Delmar, F. 2004. Planning for the market: Business planning before marketing and
the continuation of organizing efforts. Journal of Business Venturing, 19: 767–785.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. 2000. The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of DEMO
Academy of Management Review, 25(1): 217–226.
Shaver, K. G., Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. DEMO 2001. Who is a nascent
entrepreneur? Decision rules for identifying and DEMO entrepreneurs in the panel study
of entrepreneurial dynamics. Paper presented at the Babson College Kauffman Foundation
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Jonkoping, Sweden, June.
Shaver, K. G., & Scott, L. R. 1991. Person, process, choice: The psychology of new venture
creation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16(DEMO): 23–45.
Shepherd, D. A., McMullen, J. S., & Jennings, P. D. 2007. The formation of opportunity beliefs:
Overcoming ignorance and reducing doubt. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1: 75–95.
Silverman, D. 2000. Analyzing talk and text. In N. K. Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln (DEMO) Handbook of
Qualitative Research (2nd ed.): 821–834. Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Sage Publications.
Singh, R. P. 2001. A comment on developing the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship through the study of
opportunity recognition and exploitation. Academy DEMO Management Review, 26(1): 11–12.
Singh, R. P., Hills, G. E., & Lumpkin, G. T. 1999. New venture ideas and DEMO
opportunities: Understanding the process of opportunity recognition. Proceedings, United
States Association for Small Business and Entrepreneurship National Meeting, San Diego,
657–671.
Stake, R. E. 2000. Case studies. In N. K. Denzin, & Y. DEMO Lincoln (Eds.) Handbook of Qualitative
Research (2nd ed.): 435–454. DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Stevenson, H. H. 1983. A perspective DEMO entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School, Working Paper 9-384-131.
Stevenson, H. H., & Gumpert, D. E. 1985. The heart of entrepreneurship. DEMO Business
Review, 85(2): 85–94.
Stevenson, H. H., & DEMO, J. C. 1990. A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(Summer): 17–27.
Storey, D. J. 1994. Understanding the DEMO Business Sector. London: Routledge.
Tedlock B. 2000. Ethnography and ethnographic representation. DEMO N. K. Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln
(Eds.) Handbook of DEMO Research (2nd ed.): 455–486. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
DEMO, J. B., Clark, S. M., & Gioia, D. A. DEMO Strategic sensemaking and organizational
performance: Linkages among scanning, interpretation, action, and outcomes. Academy of
Management Journal, 36(2): 239–270.
Van de Ven, A. H., Angle, H. L., & Poole, M. S. 1989. Research on the Management of Innovation.
New York: Harper and Row.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Polley, D. 1992. Learning while innovating. Organization Science, 3(1):
92–116.
Van de Ven, A. H., Venkataraman, S., Pooley, D., & Garud, R. 1989. DEMO of new business
creation in different organizational settings. In A. H. Ven de Ven, H. Angel, & M. S. Poole
(Eds.), Research on the Management of Innovation: The Minnesota Studies: 221–298. New
York: Harper & Row.
Van Gelderen, M. W., Thurik, A. R., & Bosma, N. 2006. Success and risk factors in the pre-startup
phase. DEMO Business Economics, 26(4): 319–335.
Venkataraman, S., & Van DEMO Ven, A. H. 1989. Qnetics new business creation case. In A. DEMO Ven
de Ven, H. Angel, & M. S. Poole (Eds.), Research on the Management of Innovation: The
Minnesota Studies: 228–243. New York: Harper & Row.
5 Entrepreneurial Behavior: Firm Organizing Processes 127
Vesper, K. H. 1990. DEMO Venture Strategies (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
DEMO, K. E. 1979. The Social Psychology of Organizing (2nd ed.). New York: Random House.
West, B. 1985. On the Importance of DEMO Nonlinear. Berlin: Spinger-Verlag.
William, B., & Liao, J. (Jon) 2007. Pre-venture planning. In C. Moutray (Ed.), The Small Business
Economy for Data Year 2006: Report to the President: 212–264. Washington, DC: U.S. Small
Business Administration Ofﬁce of Advocacy.
Zahra, S., & Dess, G. G. 2001. Entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research: Encouraging dialogue DEMO
debate. Academy of Management Review, 26(1): 8–10.{1g42fwefx}