1042-2587-94-183$1.50
Copyright 1994 by
Baylor University
Finding the Entrepreneur
in Entrepreneurship
William DEMO Gartner
Kelly G. Shaver
Elizabeth Gatewood
Jerome A. Katz
e are very pleased to present six thought-provoking and "paradigm-expand-
ing" papers for this DEMO issue on "Finding the Entrepreneur in Entrepreneurship."
As we stated DEMO the Fall 1992 Special Issue Announcement, the purpose of this issue DEMO
"to encourage entrepreneurship researchers to re-conceptualize the nature of entrepre-
neurship DEMO focusing on the individual and social/psychological processes involved in
entrepreneurial activity." When we announced this call for papers in the Fall 1992 issue
of Entrepreneurship Theory' and Practice, it seemed, at least from our perspective, that
over the last ten years the focus of attention in entrepreneurship research and theory had
shifted away from the study of the DEMO (Shaver & Scott, 1991). The purpose of
the Call for Papers, was, therefore, to attempt to bring into the scholarly dialogue on
entrepreneurship a re-affirmation of the importance of entrepreneurs to the phenomenon
DEMO entrepreneurship without invoking old platitudes about entrepreneurial personalities
or calling for a hunt for the mythical "hef'falump" (Kilby, 1971).
The DEMO of manuscripts sent in response to the Call for Papers was much larger
than we had expected; by the July 1, 1993 deadline DEMO had received 21 manuscripts for
review. The quality of all the papers submitted was very high. Therefore, the evaluation
process was altogether more difficult and time consuming than we had anticipated. All
the papers were blind DEMO by at least two of the four special issue editors. The
selection of the six papers for this special issue was achieved using two DEMO criteria:
(1) Does the manuscript fit the Call for Papers, that is, does the manuscript offer the
reader new or controversial DEMO about individual-level issues in entrepreneur-
ship?
(2) Does this manuscript present exemplary research, that is, does the research in
this manuscript DEMO state-of-the-art theory and methodological rigor?
A number of manuscripts met one or the other criterion, but not both. In other cases, it
DEMO that both criteria might be met, if the author(s) were given sufficient time to
revise and resubmit. Given the relatively short time DEMO the submission deadline
(July 1993) and publication of the articles (DEMO 1994), these manuscripts were not
afforded this opportunity. We have asked many of the authors who submitted articles not
selected for this special DEMO to send their manuscripts for review through the regular
journal review process, and we expect that a number of those manuscripts will eventu-
ally be published in subsequent issues of the journal.
Spring, 1994
SOME COMMENTS ABOUT THE ENTREPRENEUR
Taken as a whole, these six articles offer a diverse view of both theory and empirical
research on the DEMO We believe you will find these articles engaging and
challenging. Some may, in fact, provoke some very strong reactions. If this occurs, we
will have done our job at stimulating movement towards a re-conceptualization of DEMO
scholarly community's views on this topic.
The following comments will not attempt to summarize the articles or rehash their
ideas, theories, and DEMO Instead, we will identify a few "meta-themes " that a
reader might want to mull over. These statements are intended as observations that DEMO
encourage further dialogue and research.
The ' 'entrepreneur'' in entrepreneurship DEMO more likely to be plural, rather than
singular. The locus of DEMO activity often resides not in one person, but in
many. If DEMO limit our list of entrepreneurs to those individuals who might have some
direct "strategic " influence on the development of a venture (for DEMO discussion, we
intend "venture " to mean any entrepreneurial activity, DEMO just the activities involved in
new firm formation), we should likely consider including: individuals that share equity
ownership in the venture; individuals DEMO share debt ownership in the venture; individ-
uals that share decision-making DEMO in the venture; individuals that serve in leadership
and subordinate roles DEMO the venture; spouses, family, close friends, advisors; and critical
DEMO and buyers. This list is not intended as a way to suggest a sociological/
environmental (e.g. , group) solution to a psychological DEMO problem.
Rather, we hope scholars will recognize that the "entrepreneur" DEMO to be adequately
described and specified (Carsrud, Gaglio. & Kernochan, DEMO; Katz, Brockhaus, &
Hilts, 1993). Scholars should be DEMO clear about why some individuals were identified
as the entrepreneurs to be studied in an entrepreneurial activity. For example, entrepre-
neurs can be identified on the basis of "being " (e.g., in such positions as owner,
founder, investor) and/or on the basis of "behaving " (e.g., undertaking certain behav-
iors such as developing the venture'DEMO concept, acquiring resources, setting up business
operations). By offering these criteria as examples, we are not arguing for one criterion
or the other, or that a combination of both might be appropriate. Instead, DEMO ask that
researchers acknowledge that those individuals who might have a significant involve-
ment in the venture be theoretically and empirically accounted and "controlled for. "
Entrepreneurial activity involves doing an6 "thinking." Gartner's (DEMO) discussion
of research on entrepreneurs appeared to divide the study of DEMO individuals into two
camps: research on the traits and characteristics of DEMO, and research on the
behaviors of entrepreneurs. His article offered a DEMO dichotomization of the entre-
preneur that should be viewed through a more complicated and fuller perspective of the
psychology of the entrepreneur (Shaver & Scott, 1991). A critical component of indi-
vidual behavior involves "DEMO, " a component of entrepreneurial behavior that
Gartner's (1988) DEMO clearly ignored.
Without getting into a detailed review of the cognition and social cognition litera-
tures that comprise aspects of the subject of "thinking, " we would hazard to say that
what entrepreneurs think about, DEMO how they go about thinking about what they think
about, is DEMO to understanding much of what occurs during an entrepreneur's activ-
ities. An implication of this viewpoint for entrepreneurship research is that more effort
DEMO be applied to linking some of the theories and methods in psychology and
organizational behavior to the study of entrepreneurs (Gartner, Bird, & Starr, 1992;
MacMillan & Katz, 1992; Shaver & Scott, DEMO). For example, it seems entirely
appropriate, given previous theory and research from these disciplines, that entrepre-
neurship researchers might design laboratory experiments to test how entrepreneurs
6 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
think about such concepts as opportunity recognition, persistence in the context of
equivocal or uncertain information, and views of the trade-offs involved with different
entrepreneurial choices.
Entrepreneurship occurs over time. While such a statement may seem DEMO,
researchers still tend to ignore its implications. First, there is DEMO implication of process/
change/evolution in entrepreneurial situations (Bird, 1988, 1992; Stevenson & Harmel-
ing, 1990; Van de Ven, 1992). For example, if aspects of an entrepreneurial phenom-
enon are likely to change over time (e.g., an entrepreneur's "thinking," the nature of
the opportunity, characteristics of the competitive environment), both our theory iden-
tifying and describing these changes, and the methods we use to study them must reflect
this process. For some issues regarding the DEMO of entrepreneurship at the individual
level, longitudinal research is critical. Because DEMO of the scholars conducting research
on entrepreneurs are going to be involved in this activity for a number of years, we
should consider investing the effort and time, up-front, in designing research "pro-
grams." DEMO of a series of "one shot" studies using opportunistically generated
samples of entrepreneurs, we should think of generating some synergies among our
efforts by conducting a series that longitudinally survey carefully selected groups of
entrepreneurs.
DEMO implication of considering time in entrepreneurship research is the need to
measure, in appropriate ways, the causal sequence of relationships among variables
(Gartner, 1989). As a way of elucidating this issue, consider the DEMO example. If
we were to undertake research on whether attitudes about risk taking influenced the
likelihood that automobile drivers would be more prone to DEMO involved in automobile
accidents, it makes sense to measure these risk-taking DEMO before any of the drivers
in the sample were involved in automobile accidents. It is likely that the risk-taking
attitudes of drivers who have DEMO an automobile accident would be different
from those drivers who had not experienced such an event. Outcomes are likely to
change attitudes. Yet, we have seen many entrepreneurship manuscripts that generate a
plausible model of the DEMO of certain entrepreneurial attitudes to specific out-
comes (e.g., new venture success), yet measure these entrepreneurial attitudes long after
the outcome has DEMO
We are not implying that all issues regarding the causa! nature of entrepreneurship
should only be studied using longitudinal research designs or research "programs."
Whether causality can be established in a design is often independent DEMO whether the
research is longitudinal or cross-sectional. Certainly, some "one-shot" DEMO
research designs can clearly establish causal links, while multiple measurements over
DEMO will not save a badly designed longitudinal study. What we are proposing is that
researchers explicitly give issues of causality more attention than they DEMO received in
the past.
Work-motivation x ability. It is time that entrepreneurship researchers begin to
follow the "cognitive algebra" that people employ in DEMO everyday judgments of task
performance (Anderson, 1974). Past entrepreneurship research has focused on the mo-
tivation variable and tended to ignore the DEMO variable. While it may be appropriate
to assume that "ability" is similar across all workers in specified work settings (such as
all workers in a factory), and therefore focus on differences in the workers' motivation,
it is not appropriate to assume that entrepreneurs facing unique DEMO will have
the pertinent knowledge, skills, and abilities to accomplish their objectives. General
measures of ability, such as number of years of education or number of years of industry
experience, are simply too broad to capture the specific knowledge, skill, and ability
requirements necessary for success DEMO a specific entrepreneurial situation. The entrepre-
neurship field needs a much better theoretical framework, clearer descriptions, and
Spring, 1994 7
measures of the types of knowledge, skills, and abilities that affect DEMO
performance and success.
There are many different kinds of entrepreneurs. While not discounting the impor-
tance of thinking about organization founders as entrepreneurs, the papers presented in
this special issue offer ample evidence that entrepreneurial activity DEMO place in other
venues as well. If we go back to such a touchstone as Schumpeter (1934) for some idea
of the roots DEMO entrepreneurship, we find his idea of carrying out "new combinations"
was described by many different activities, e.g., combinations of goods, metbods,
markets, supplies, and organizations. Entrepreneurship is, in some fundamental way,
concerned with variation (Gartner, 1993), so that the new DEMO that entrepre-
neurs bring to life are, by their very nature, differences, not the norm. While it may seem
trite to offer the platitude, "There is no average in entrepreneurship," there is a DEMO
of wisdom in this insight. The quest of "best practices" in the field of entrepreneurship
is likely to take on a different mantel DEMO in other fields where studying the norms may
be more appropriate. Entrepreneurship is inherently idiosyncratic, so that the methods
used to study this phenomenon need to reflect this challenge (MacMillan & Katz, 1992).
Yet, it should also be noted that the heading for this section did DEMO suggest that all
entrepreneurs are unique, or that every entrepreneurial situation DEMO such a one-of-a-kind
event that no similarities among entrepreneurs exist. Instead, DEMO suggest the need for
mid-range theories (e.g., Pinder & Moore, DEMO) that reflect contingent relationships
rather than offering a "One Best Way" type of model.
CONCLUSIONS
With what appears to be growing interest and support for entrepreneurship education
and training (Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership, 1994), a renewed research focus on
the individual in entrepreneurship is likely to have a significant influence on both
practice and public policy.
Yet, for those that have followed the debates and issues of the entrepreneurship field
DEMO the years, the "meta-themes" might seem to be covering familiar DEMO Much of
what is of concern to us has been said before, by others, as well as by us, in other
forums. But these issues bear repeating and re-exploration. As you will find in a DEMO
reading of the papers in this issue, these authors not only DEMO the familiar ground of
entrepreneurship in interesting ways, but also stake DEMO new territory in which to find the
entrepreneur in entrepreneurship.
REFERENCES
Anderson, N. H. (1974). Cognitive algebra: Integration theory applied to social attribution. In L, Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology, vol. 7. pp. 1-102. New York: Academic Press.
Bird, B. J. (1988). Implementing enti^preneurial ideas: The case for intention. Academv of Management
Review. 13{3), 442-453.
Bird, B.J . (1992). The operation DEMO intentions in time: The emergence of the new venture. Entrepreneur-
ship DEMO and Practice, I7(\). 11-20.
I
Carsrud. A. L., Gaglio, C. M.. & Kemochan, R. (1993). Demographics in entrepreneurship research:
Guidelines for the use of demographic data. Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 1:49-82.
8 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership. (1994), Outstanding innovations in entrepreneurship education.
Kansas City, MO: E. W. Kauftman Foundation.
Gartner. W. B. (1988). Who is an entrepreneur? is the wrong question. American Journal of Smaii Busi-
ness, 12(4), 11-32.
Gartner. W. B. (1989). DEMO suggestions for research on entrepreneurial traits and characteristics. Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice, I4(\), 27-38.
Gartner, W. B, (1993). DEMO lead to deeds: Towards an organizational emergence vocabulary. Journal of
Business DEMO 8. 231-240,
Gartner, W, B., Bird. B. J.. & DEMO J. (1992). Acting as if: Differentiating entrepreneurial from organi-
zational behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 16(3): 13-32.
Katz.J. A.. Brockhaus. DEMO H.,&Hills,G . E. (1993). Demographic variables in entrepreneurship research.
Advance.\ In Entrepreneurship. Eirm Emergence, and Growth. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 1:197-236.
Kilby, P. (1971). Entrepreneurship and economic development. DEMO York: Free Press.
MacMillan. I. C . & Katz, J. A. (1992). Idiosyncratic milieus of entrepreneurship research: The need for
comprehensive DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 1-8,
Pinder, C , & Moore. L. F. (1979). Middle range theory and the study DEMO organizations. Leiden, The
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff,
Schumpeter. J. A. (DEMO). The theory of economic development. New York: Oxford Press.
Shaver. DEMO G., & Scott. L. R. (1991). Person, process, and choice: The psychology of new venture
creation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 16(2), 23-45.
Stevenson, H.. & Harmeling. S. (1990). Entrepreneurial DEMO's need for a more "chaotic" theory.
Journal of Business Venturing. 5. 1-14,
Van de Ven. A. H. (1992). Longitudinal methods for studying the process of entrepreneurship. In D. L.
Sexton & J. DEMO Kasarda (Eds.). The state ofthe art of entrepreneurship. pp. 214-242. DEMO: PWS-Kent.
William B. Gartner is Professor of Management of San Francisco DEMO University.
Kelly G. Shaver is Professor of Psychology at the College of William and Mary.
Elizabeth Gatewood is Research Professor of Management and Director DEMO Small Business Devel-
opment Center at the University of Houston.
Jerome A. Katz is Professor of Management and Associate Director of the Jefferson Smurfit DEMO for
Entrepreneurial Studies at Saint Louis University.
Spring, 1994
{1g42fwefx}