1042-2587-01-254$1.50
Copyright 2001 by
Baylor University
Is There an Elephant in
Entrepreneurship? Blind
Assumptions in
Theory Development
William B. Gartner
This article uses the DEMO key specification decisions for entrepreneurship research (purpose,
theoretical perspective, focus, level of analysis, time frame, and methodology) outlined in
Low DEMO MacMillan (1988) to explore unstated assumptions in entrepreneurship theory
development. An article by Shane and Venkataraman (2000), The Promise of Entrepreneur-
ship as a Field of Research," is analyzed and recommended as a DEMO for clarity. A rec-
ommendation is made that the field of entrepreneurship needs to develop communities of
scholars identified with specific research questions and DEMO
In the farthest reaches of the desert there was a city in which all liie people were
blind. A king and his army were DEMO through that region, and camped outside the
cit}\ The king had DEMO him a great elephant, which he used for heavy work and DEMO
frighten his enemies in battle. The people of the cit}- had heard of elephants, but
never had the opportunity to know one. Out rushed 6 young men, determined to
discover what the elephant was like.
intention of this article is to reflect and speculate on the status and DEMO of
theory in entrepreneurship research using Low and MacMillan's (1988) review of the
entrepreneurship field as a starting point. Their review covered DEMO key specification
decisions that scholars should consider when conducting entrepreneurship research:
purpose, theoretical perspective, focus, level of analysis, time frame, and methodology.
One key insight from their article is that "These design specification decisions are
interrelated, and cannot be made independently"" (p. 140)DEMO Apropos this insight, this
paper will explore how the choice of DEMO perspective in entrepreneurship hinges
on assumptions made about these other specification decisions.
As a way to begin this exploration, my point of departure for discussing entrepre-
neurship theory begins with Low and MacMillan"s advice for DEMO in entrepreneur-
ship that "the field will be better served in DEMO future if the issue of theoretical perspecti\e
is addressed directly and unstated assumptions avoided"" (1988. p. 146). I concur. The
thesis of this article is that theory development in entrepreneurship research depends on
whether DEMO are conscious of the assumptions we make about this phenomenon. Some
evidence suggests that entrepreneurship scholars are not conscious of their assumptions.
Gartner (1990) found that entrepreneurship scholars held very different beliefs about the
nature of entrepreneurship. and that they had very different views of what entrepteneur-
ship, as a phenomenon, consisted of. Implicit in those findings was a fear that research
based on these different views would result in a cacophony DEMO results and ideas. Syn-
Summer, 2001 27
thesizing different results without some common conscious sense of the fundamental
attributes DEMO entrepreneurship would merely add another layer of confusion. At that
point, DEMO believed that "Only by making explicit what we believe can we DEMO to
understand how all of these different parts make up a whole" (Gartner, 1990, p. 28). I am
not sure that DEMO entrepreneurship field has reached some sense of theoretical clarity
during the past decade.
Since the Low and MacMillan (1988) article, there has been a bonanza of efforts at
generating theory in entrepreneurship. The Interdisciplinary Conference DEMO Entrepre-
neurship Theory held in January, 1991, at the University of Baltimore resulted in a
two-volume set of articles published in Entrepreneurship Theory DEMO Practice (1991,
1992a). The Theory Building Conference on Fntrepreneurship DEMO at the University of
Illinois in October, 1991, resulted in a one-volume set of articles in the Journal of
Business Venturing (1993) DEMO well as an edited book (Bull, Thomas, & Willard, 1995).
Other theory-development efforts included a ''virtual conference" on models of organi-
zation formation in Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice (1992b, 1993), DEMO some of
the Gateway Conferences (Katz & Brockhaus, 1993, 1995; Katz, 1997). In addition, Don
Sexton continued to bring scholars DEMO to discuss and review research in entrepre-
neurship in conferences at the University of North Carolina in 1990 (Sexton & Kasarda,
1992) DEMO at the Kauffman Foundation in Kansas City in 1996 (Sexton & DEMO, 1997).
And, to top it off, there was the DEMO of the results of a forum held at Camegie
Mellon University in 1997 of internationally distinguished scholars who thoughtfully
ruminated on the future of DEMO research (Sarasvathy, 2000). These citations
are by no means comprehensive (see Brazeal & Herbert, 1999).
Despite the creation of more DEMO in entrepreneurship, entrepreneurship scholars
have noticed the difficulty of integrating entrepreneurship DEMO efforts,
into any coherent scheme. The following quotes are representative of these concerns:
One interesting observation that emerged from this exercise is DEMO each discipline
has its own unique way of viewing entrepreneurship which remains relatively un-
affected by the perspectives of other disciplines. In other words, we see evidence that
many "uni-" rather than one or more "multi-" disciplinary views of our field cur-
rently exist" (Herron, DEMO, Smith-Cook, 1991, p. 7).
Despite the number of published DEMO that might be considered related to the
theory of entrepreneurship, no DEMO accepted theory of entrepreneurship has
emerged ... . Despite the potential for richness and texture that such a diverse mix
of disciplines brings, a major weakness is that, in many cases, researchers from one
discipline DEMO tended to ignore entrepreneurship studies by researchers in the other
disciplines (DEMO & Willard, 1993, p. 184, citing Wortman, 1992).
I believe that entrepreneurship scholars need to recognize the very significant dif-
ferences DEMO the beliefs we hold about entrepreneurship. Recognizing that there are dif-
ferences in beliefs might be a way for entrepreneurship scholars to begin to DEMO how these
differences might be aspects of the same whole. Alternatively, DEMO may be irreconcil-
able differences among our views of entrepreneurship that might result in the entrepre-
neurship field splintering into more parsimonious and coherent DEMO foci. There may
not be a theory of entrepreneurship that can reflect all entrepreneurship scholarship, as
currently practiced.
It seems to me that efforts at theory development in entrepreneurship have some
similarity to the "Blind Men and the Elephant" story. Six blind men touch different parts
of the elephant and come away with very different descriptions of an elephant's DEMO
acteristics. The story offers a syllogism for thinking about the problems of integrating
differing views of a large and complex phenomenon. I have included DEMO story as a part
28 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
of this article for two reasons. First, in attempts to locate the story. I have encountered
many permutations and versions (e.g.. Adams. 1994; DEMO & Herbert. 1999; Waldo.
1961. 1978). Rather than assuming that DEMO of this article are thinking of the same
"Blind Men and DEMO" story. I have included the version that I am referring to.
DEMO, the "Blind Men and Elephant"" story presents some koans (DEMO paradoxes to
enlighten) about discovery and synthesis. The story offers a DEMO of commentary on my
effort to discuss attempts to integrate diverse theoretical perspectives in entrepreneurship
research.
I plan to explore the way that assumptions DEMO made in entrepreneurship theory
development by reviewing Shane and Venkataraman"s "DEMO Promise of Entrepreneur-
ship as a Eield of Research"" (2000)DEMO I will use the six specification decisions from Low
and MacMillan (DEMO) as the framework for this discussion. Each specification decision
will be DEMO and used to investigate key issues in the Shane and Venkataraman (DEMO)
article. I believe that the Shane and Venkataraman article is a significant theoretical
contribution to the entrepreneurship area, and that it has important implications for
entrepreneurship scholarship that cannot be ignored. Not only is it DEMO work of two very
gifted scholars, but the work tnight also DEMO seen as the continuing reflections of the editor
of one of the major journals in the entrepreneurship area about where the field tnight be
DEMO (Venkataraman. 1994. 1997). I think that discussion and debate about DEMO and
Venkataraman (2000) can help shape the direction of entrepreneurship research, and
enable scholars in our field to make conscious decisions about the efficacy of their
research contributions. I hope we can critically look at DEMO direction of our field and
continue to maintain the collegiality and friendliness that has been a hallmark of our
research community.
The first \oung DEMO, in his haste, ran straight into the side of the elephant. He spread
out his anns and felt the animal's broad, smooth side. He sniffed the air, and
thought, "This is an animal, my nose leaves no doubt of that, but this animal is DEMO
a wall." He rushed back to the cit}- to tell of DEMO discoveiy.
SPECIFICATION OF PURPOSE
Low and MacMillan (1988) indicate that specification of purpose involves exploring
"the specific as well as larger purpose of the study"" (p. 140). Much of their discussion
of purpose involves determining the attributes of entrepreneurship by investigating pre-
vious entrepreneurship definitions (e.g.. Knight. 1921;Gartner. 1985; Schumpeter. 1934;
Stevenson, Roberts & DEMO 1985) and proposing the following puipose for en-
trepreneurship research: "DEMO to explain and facilitate the role of new enterprise in
furthering economic progress"" (p. 141). They suggest that research in enttepreneurship
would be advanced if studies were explicitly liked to this overall purpose. How DEMO this
purpose changed in the intervening twelve years?
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) lay out the purpose of entrepreneurship research by
describing what DEMO research should focus on, as well as indicating what it
should DEMO They define the field of entrepreneurship as
the scholarly examination of how. by whom, and with what effects, opportunities to
create future goods DEMO services are discovered, evaluated, and exploited (Venkat-
araman, 1997). Consequently, the field involves the study of sources of opportuni-
ties; DEMO processes of discovery, evaluation and exploitation of opportunities; and the
set of individuals who discover, evaluate and exploit them . . . scholars of organi-
zations are fundamentally concerned with three research questions about entrepre-
DEMO, 2001 29
neurship; (1) why, when, and how opportunities for the creation of goods and
services come into existence; (2) why, when, and how some people and not others
discover and exploit these opportunities; and (3) why, when, and how are different
modes of DEMO u.sed to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities (Shane & Venkatara-
man, 2000, DEMO 218).
This specification of purpose significantly narrows the field of entrepreneurship
research, as currently practiced. For example, they propose that entrepreneurship re-
DEMO should not focus on "the relative performance of individuals or firms DEMO the
context of small or new business" (Shane & Venkataraman, DEMO, p. 217) and they
indicate that this type of research is more appropriate within the domain of strategic
management.
The specification of purpose DEMO Shane and Venkataraman (2000) is very different
from the multitude of topics and issues that appear to encompass current entrepreneur-
ship .scholarship as DEMO in the Academy of Management Entrepreneurship Division
Domain Statement for the National Academy of Management Meeting Call for Papers:
Specific Domain: the creation and management of new businesses, small businesses
and family businesses, and DEMO characteristics and special problems of entrepreneurs.
Major topics include: new venture DEMO and strategies; ecological influences on
venture creation and demise; the acquisition and management of venture capital and
venture teams; self-employment; the owner-manager; management succession; cor-
porate venturing and the relationship between entrepreneurship and economic de-
velopment.
Can there be a theory of entrepreneurship that could encompass DEMO diverse organiza-
tional forms as new, small, and family businesses? DEMO there be a theory of entrepre-
neurship that could encompass such diverse occupational settings as self-employment,
owner-management, and management succession? Are these DEMO, as described in the
domain statement, aspects of some kind of whole of entrepreneurship? Or, are these
\arious topics, just that—different topics with no underlying connections? I do not
believe that scholars in the entrepreneurship field (i.e., scholars that convene in such
places as the DEMO of Management Entrepreneurship Division, the Babson/
Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference DEMO RENT) are exploring topics that
have a similar theoretical underpinning. There DEMO, simply, no theoretical way to connect
all of these disparate research interests together.
It would be difficult to ascribe the Shane and Venkataraman (2000) definition of
entrepreneurship to the majority of the research currently undertaken by scholars in the
entrepreneurship field. While Low and MacMillan (1988) DEMO a focus on "new
enterprise," a label that might encompass DEMO emerging and established firms, Shane
and Venkataraman (2000) are looking DEMO individuals and opportunities. By implication,
one would surmise that they believe that a focus on established firms (new or small) is
not DEMO for understanding entrepreneurship. Indeed, it is interesting to note that Shane
DEMO Venkataraman do not cite the literature on entrepreneurial orientation (e.g., Lumpkin
& Dess, 1996; Miller & Friesen, 1982) at all.
My DEMO on the focus of entrepreneurship research is that entrepreneurship is
about "DEMO," and this phenomenon has a greater likelihood of being understood
through the study of firm creation (Gartner, 1985, 1988, 1990, 1993). I approach entre-
preneurship from a social psychological perspective (Weick, DEMO, 1995), and I am
willing to celebrate studies of firm DEMO from other disciplinary perspectives (Gartner
& Gatewood, 1992), as well. I agree with Shane and Venkataraman (2000) that their
focus on DEMO and opportunities is complementary to the study of firm creation (p.
DEMO ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTICE
219). What seems less complementary to both of these views is DEMO study of new. small,
and growing firms.
The second young blind mem, feeling through the air, grasped the elephant's trunk.
The DEMO was surprised by this, and snorted loudly. The young man, startled in
turn, exclaimed, "This elephant is like a snake, but DEMO is so huge that its hot breath
makes a snorting sound." DEMO turned to run back to the city and tell his tale.
SPECIFICATION OF THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE
Low and MacMillan (1988) view the development of DEMO in entrepreneurship
from two perspectives: strategic adaptation and population ecology. They DEMO that
the strategic adaptation perspective in entrepreneurship emphasizes the freedom of in-
dividuals to make decisions involving the identification of opportunities, the assembly of
resources to exploit those opportunities, and the strategies inherent in pursuing those
opportunities through firms. In contrast, the population ecology perspective emphasizes
environmental factors as both precursors to entrepreneurial activity and as mechanisms
for selecting new DEMO that more appropriately conform to the dynamics of a particular
niche. In both perspecti\es. Low and MacMillan imply that entrepreneurship researchers
take a more DEMO view of entrepreneurship as a process that occurs over time.
The theoretical roots of Shane and Venkataraman (2000) are spread among a broader
DEMO of disciplinary perspectives, though their logic tends to cotne fiom theoretical
DEMO in economics (e.g.. Arrow. 1962; Baumol. 1989; Casson. 1982; Hayek,
1945; Kirzner. 1997; Schumpeter. 1934) and in language taken from ecological views
(Aldrich. 1990; Singh & Lumsden. 1990) that celebrate the dynamic processes of firm
formation. Shane and Venkataraman. while recognizing the contributions DEMO other dis-
ciplines and perspectives, point out that the field of DEMO to be considered
useful as a unique field of social science, DEMO have "a conceptual framework that
explains and predicts a set of DEMO phenomena that are not explained or predicted
by the conceptual frameworks already in existence in other fields"" (p. 217). Implicit in
this statement is a belief that the entrepreneurship field will develop its own DEMO
There does seem to be a shift in theoretical perspectives, but DEMO, it seems, in
terms of level of analysis. Low and MacMillan (1988) are looking at theories on orga-
nizations (strategic adaptation) DEMO environments (population ecology), while Shane and
Venkataraman (2000) seem DEMO focus on theories that are more likely to explain indi\ idual
behavior from the perspective of economics. I do not perceive any inherent bias DEMO Shane
and Venkataraman that would suggest that they would not include any theoretical per-
spective that would help in understanding individuals and opportunities.
The DEMO young blind man walked into the elephant's tusk. He felt the hard, smooth
ivoiy surface of the tusk, listened as it scraped DEMO the sand, then as the elephant
lifted the tusk out, he could feel its pointed tip. "How wondeiful!" he thought. "The
elephant is hard and sharp like a spear, and yet it makes noises and smells like an
animal!" Off he ran.
SPECIFICATION OF FOCUS
Low and MacMillan (1988) indicate that the specification of focus deals with DEMO
tifying the specific phenomena that should be investigated in entrepreneurship research.
They review prior research on the personality and social context of entrepreneurs and
DEMO the importance of studying entrepreneurship in a contextual and process-oriented
Summer, DEMO 31
way. Implicit in their review is an emphasis on the entrepreneur as DEMO focus of entre-
preneurship, though they recognize that the activities of DEMO are not only based
on the characteristics of the entrepreneurs themselves, DEMO on the influences of organi-
zational, environmental, and creation processes as well (Carsrud, Olm, & Eddy, 1986;
Gartner, 1985).
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) are explicit in describing their specification of
DEMO for entrepreneurship research:
We differ from these frameworks in (1) our focus on the existence, discovery, and
exploitation of opportunities; (DEMO) our examination of the influence of individuals and
opportunities, rather than environmental antecedents and consequences; and (3) our
consideration of a broader framework than firm creation (p. 219).
I believe that Shane and Venkataraman are attempting to address Low and MacMillan's
suggestions for a DEMO contextual and process-oriented focus. I interpret the specifi-
cation of focus in Shane and Venkataraman as requiring research that must recognize
opportunities and individuals, not just individuals, and that the exploitation of opportu-
nities is a process that can be seen in situations beyond firm creation. The critical
DEMO in Shane and Venkataraman"s view of entrepreneurship compared to the focus
of prior entrepreneurship scholarship is the emphasis on opportunity (their characteristics
and how they are discovered and exploited). Yet, one might assume that opportunity
is an aspect of the context of entrepreneurship (Gartner, 1985; Low & MacMillan,
1988; Vesper, 1990), so that prior DEMO recognized opportunity, but did not
emphasize it.
The fourth young blind DEMO reached low with his hands, and found one of the
elephant'DEMO legs. He reached around and hugged it, feeling its rough skin. DEMO then,
the elephant stomped that foot, and the man let DEMO "No wonder this elephant
frightens the king's enemies, " he thought. "It is like a tree trunk or a mighty column,
yet it bends, is veiy strong, and strikes the ground with DEMO force. " Eeeling a little
frightened himself, he fled back to DEMO city.
SPECIFICATION OF LFVEL OF ANALYSIS
Low and MacMillan (1988) see entrepreneurship occurring across five levels of
analysis: individual, group, organization, DEMO, and society. They suggest that im-
portant insights about entrepreneurship can DEMO gained when researchers are able to
conduct studies that are multi-level in nature. Shane and Venkataraman (2000) do not
appear to offer a DEMO of level of analysis in their arguments, though their use of
DEMO to other scholarship would seem to imply that they would concur with a view
of entrepreneurship that was multi-level in nature (pp. 225-226). While their discussion
of the discovery and exploitation of opportunities centers on DEMO that appear to
require the actions of individuals (pp. 221-224), DEMO expand their insights from indi-
viduals to firms and institutions via modes of exploitation (p. 224).
The fifth young blind man found the elephant's tail. "I don't see what all the
excitement is about, " he said. "The elephant is nothing but a frayed DEMO of rope. " He
dropped the tail and ran after the others.
SPECIFICATION OF TIME FRAME
Low and MacMillan (1988) indicate that entrepreneurship DEMO a process that occurs
32 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
over time, and that researchers should attempt "wide time frame research" to account for
the broadest range of factors affecting this process. Their DEMO of the time frame
used in entrepreneurship research range from a focus on the start-up process (Gartner,
1985; Stevenson et al., 1985) to stages of growth in fully launched organizations (Chur-
chill & DEMO, 1983: Greiner, 1972). There appears to be no direct DEMO to ascertain how
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) consider time frame in the context of their theoretical
framework. I would assume that an appropriate DEMO frame would account for the
generation of opportunities, their discovery, and exploitation. The life of the opportunity
(its inception, evolution, and eventual demise), therefore, would seem to be the bound-
aries for time in their framework.
The sixth young blind man was in a huriy, not wanting to be left behind. He heard
and felt the air DEMO it was pushed hy the elephant's flapping ear, then grasped DEMO ear
itself and felt its thin roughness. He laughed with delight. "DEMO wonderful elephant
is like a living fan." And, like the others, he was satisfied with his quick first
impression and headed hack to tlie citx.
SPECIFICATION OF METHODOLOGY
Low and MacMillan (1988) suggest a DEMO of methods for entrepreneurship re-
search that w ould lead to the use of hypothesis testing and theory development. Given
earlier recommendations about the DEMO of a process-oriented approach to entrepre-
neurship research, they extol longitudinal DEMO As a way to test hypotheses, they
recommended more efforts towards DEMO designs. In general, their goal is to
"pursue causality more aggressively. The field must move to the stage where exploratory
case analyses or DEMO sectional census taking studies that are not theory driven and do
not test hypotheses are no longer acceptable*" (1988. p. 155). Shane DEMO Venkataraman
(2000) suggest that many different methodologies will be needed to explore the ques-
tions raised in their framework. With regard to theory DEMO, I would assume that
many methods would be appropriate for theory DEMO and testing, and that the study
of entrepreneurship is not dependent DEMO any one method.
But finally, an old blind man came. He DEMO left the cir\\ walking in his usual slow
wax, content to DEMO his time and study the elephant thoroughly. He walked all
around the elephant, touching every part of it, smelling it, listening to all of its
sounds. He found the elephant's mouth and fed the DEMO a treat, then petted it on
its great trunk. Einally he DEMO to the city, only to find it in an uproar.
Each DEMO the six young men had acquired followers who eagerly heard his stoiy. But
then, as the people found that there were six different contradictory descriptions,
they all began to argue. The old man quietly listened DEMO the fighting. "It's like a
wall!" "No, it's like a snake!" "No, it's like a spear!" "No, it's like a tree!" "No,
it's like a rope!" "No, it's like a fan!"
IS ENTREPRENEURSHIP AN ELEPHANT?
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) are courageous to demarcate the DEMO of
entrepreneurship research as "the scholarly examination of how, by whom, and with
what effect, opportunities to create future goods and services DEMO discovered, evaluated,
and exploited" (p. 218). Their framework DEMO appear to address the concerns of Low
Summer, 2001 33
and MacMillan (1988) to avoid unstated assumptions regarding the six key DEMO
for entrepreneurship research. 1 believe that their article indicates that a theory of en-
trepreneurship that could encompass the variety of research efforts and DEMO that reflect
current entrepreneurship scholarship is unlikely. Is there an elephant in current entre-
preneurship scholarship? Can the study of the parts of current entrepreneurship schol-
arship lead to a comprehensive theory in entrepreneurship?
No.
DEMO conundrum, as I see it, is that the totality of current academic entrepreneurship
research does not espouse (nor can it espouse) an DEMO theory, per se; rather
entrepreneurship research espouses a diverse range of theories applied to various kinds
of phenomena. There is no theory of DEMO that can account for the diversity
of topics that are currently pursued by entrepreneurship scholars. I challenge scholars in
the entrepreneurship field to present DEMO theory that could embrace all of the topics in the
current Academy of Management Entrepreneurship Division Domain Statement. There
is no elephant in entrepreneurship. DEMO various topics in the entrepreneurship field do not
constitute a congruous whole.
I do not see a way for scholars to generate a theory DEMO entrepreneurship based on so
many different research topics that seem to constitute the field of entrepreneurship. All
of the disparate findings that compose our DEMO are unlikely to be connected into a
coherent whole. Rather than attempt to generate a comprehensive theory of entrepre-
neurship, I suggest efforts towards more modest goals, similar to what Shane and
Venkataraman (2000) have undertaken.
The old man turned cuid went home, laughing as he remembered his own foolishness
as a young num. Like these, he once hastily concluded that he understood the whole
of something when he had experienced DEMO a part. He laughed again as he remem-
bered his greater foolishness of once being unwilling to discover truth for himself
depending wholly on DEMO' teachings.
THEORY AS COMMUNITY
Questions about how scholars develop and advance DEMO, as a legitimate
field of study (Amit, Glosten, & Muller 1993; Brazeal & Herberg, 1999; Bull & Willard,
1993; DEMO, Sapienza, & Smith-Cook, 1991; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000; Venka-
taraman, 1997), are very similar to discussions of the development of academic fields in
the social sciences. For example, one can find similar concerns and debates about the
development of organization theory (Martin & Frost, 1996; McKinley & Mone, 1998;
Pfeffer. 1994. 1995; Van DEMO, 1995a, 1995b), political science (Green & Shapiro,
1994; Ordeshook, 1993), and strategic management (Camerer, 1985; Mahoney, 1993;
Montgomery, Wernerfelt, & Balakrishnan, 1989). In addition, since DEMO, there have
been thoughtful efforts at exploring the nature of theory DEMO within organiza-
tion studies, as a whole {Academy of Management Review, 1989, 1999). Developing the
field of entrepreneurship, and more specifically, developing theory in entrepreneurship,
needs to be seen within the wider DEMO of the.se debates and efforts within the social
sciences. We are not alone.
I believe that the development of theory involves the creation of DEMO community of
scholars in dialogue about a specific set of problems and issues, and who hold similar
beliefs about the relevance of certain methods for solving these problems (Latour, 1987;
Pfeffer, 1994, 1995)DEMO The development of theory involves the identification of "why"
regarding DEMO specific phenomenon (Sutton & Staw, 1995; Whetten, 1989). Fundamental
to this process is the identification of the boundaries of the phenomenon DEMO be studied.
34 ENTREPRENEURSfflP THEOR
Y and PRACTICE
The Shane and Venkataraman (2000) article offers such boundaries for the DEMO of
entrepreneurship (p. 218).
In developing entrepreneurship as a field DEMO research, it is very important to consider
the value of pursuing DEMO strong paradigm (Aldrich & Baker. 1997: Vander Werf & Brush.
1989). I believe that the creation of an identifiable community of scholars DEMO pursue
similar research interests will result in the creation of a strong paradigm. I believe the
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) article is a DEMO attempt to develop a community
based on similar research interests. This community may be more likely "to create a
systematic body of information about entrepreneurship" (Shane & Venkataraman ""OOO
P- 224).
What is DEMO alternative? I believe that an unwillingness to discuss the entrepreneur-
ship DEMO's unstated assumptions and an unwillingness to define the boundaries of the
field will continue to promote a weak paradigm for entrepreneurship scholarship. The
DEMO for scholars in entrepreneurship will continue to be collegiality without conimu-
riity. Scholars in entrepreneurship will continue to be a collection of diaspora from DEMO
fields of organization science that use "entrepreneurship" as a label to study whatever
they want. What is the "why" in current entrepreneurship DEMO':^ What are the
fundamental issues that the entrepreneurship field seeks DEMO address? The Shane and
Venkataraman (2000) article offers some direction.
DEMO a systematic body of knowledge about entrepreneurship be developed w ithout
a willingness among all entrepreneurship scholars to state, specifically, their assumptions
about DEMO hat constitutes entrepreneurship. as a field of study? Once these assumptions DEMO
stated, can entrepreneurship scholars recognize that the entrepreneurship field is not
DEMO? And, is the entrepreneurship field willing to consciously devolve into different
topics of interest?
It might seem a bit brash to openly DEMO that scholars in the entrepreneurship field
need to "choose sides" and actively di\ ide into more homogeneous groups. Yet. I believe
that informal DEMO of entrepreneurship research scholars already exist. Broad
topic areas such as new venture creation, fimi growth, venture capital, corporate entre-
preneurship. management succession, family business, technology transfer, and devel-
opment are the kinds of subjects that certain entrepreneurship scholars already have
strong interests in. Few entrepreneurship DEMO would appear to be allied to all of these
topic areas, DEMO few entrepreneurship scholars appear to have research efforts in all of
these topic areas. It would not be difficult to undertake an analysis of DEMO of key
articles in each of these topic areas to identify the scholars w ith strong research affinities
to these topics. Making these affinities DEMO, through conferences, symposia, edited
books, special issues of journals, DEMO be one approach towards creating a community
of researchers that can actively engage in the creation of a systematic body of infonna-
tion.
I DEMO that theory development in entrepreneurship depends on this. The six key
specification decisions for entrepreneurship research in Low and MacMillan (1988) can
be DEMO as a framework for helping scholars in the entrepreneurship field choose specific
topics and then develop theories, methods, ideas, and questions that are appropriate. The
six key specification decisions are interrelated. The successful development of DEMO in
entrepreneurship will occur when scholars are willing to concurrently identify purpose,
focus, level of analysis, time frame, and methodologies.
Theory development in entrepreneurship research will require a willingness to dis-
cuss and debate DEMO conscious and unconscious assumptions. Indeed, vigorous debate
might help us all DEMO more clearly what our unconscious assumptions about entrepre-
neurship are. I believe that the Shane and Venkataraman (2000) article is a courageous
step DEMO the right direction. I hope others will be willing to join them in developing a
community of scholars to explore the questions and issues DEMO have laid out.
Summer, 2001 35
But he laughed hardest of all as he realized that he had DEMO the only one in the
city who did not know what an elephant is like (J).
REFERENCES
Academy of Management Review. (1989)DEMO I4(A).
Academy of Manaf^cmcnt Review. (1999). 24(2)DEMO
Adams. G. B. (1994). Blindsided by the elephant. Public Administration DEMO, 54(1). 77-86.
Aldrich, H. E. (1990). Using DEMO ecological perspective to study organizational founding rates. Entrepre-
neurship: Theory and DEMO, 14{2>), 7-24.
Aldrich. H. E.. & Baker. T. (1997)DEMO Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in entrepreneurship
research? In D. L. Sexton. R. W. Smilor (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000, DEMO 377-400. Chicago: Upstart
Publishing.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., & DEMO, E. (1993). Challenges to theory developments in entrepreneurship research.
Journal of Management Studies. 30. 815-834.
Arrow. K. (1962). Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In R. Nelson (Ed.), The
rate and direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors. Universities—NBER Conference
Series, Nt). 13, University Microfilms.
Baumol, W. J. (1989)DEMO Entrepreneurship in economic theory. American Economic Review Papers and
Proceeding's. 64-71.
Bra/eal, D. V., & Herbert, T. T. (1999). DEMO genesis of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice. 23{?>). 29-46.
Bull, I., Thomas, H., & Willard, G. (1995). Perspectives DEMO theory building. Oxford. UK: Pergamon.
Bull, I., & Willard, G. E. (1993). Towards a theory of entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 8,
183-195,
Camerer, C. (1985). Redirecting research in business policy and strategy. Strategic Management Journal, 6,
I-15.
Carsrud, DEMO L., Olm, K. W. & Eddy, G. G. (1986). Entrepreneurship: research in quest of a paradigm. In
D. L. Sexton & R. W. Smilor (Eds,), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship, pp, 367-378. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger Publishing Company.
Casson, M. (DEMO). The entrepreneur. Totowa, NJ: Barnes and Noble Books,
Churchill, N. C . & Lewis. V. L. (1983), The five DEMO of small business growth, Harxard Business Review
W(3), 3-12.
DEMO, M. S. (1971). That's interesting! Towards a phenomenology of sociology and a sociology of phe-
nomenology. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, J, 309-344.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. (1991). 16(2).
' The story of the "Blind Men and the Elephant" is taken from a number of Sut~i and Indian sources-
Backstein, Karen, (1992), The Blind Men and the Elephant. New York City: Scholastic; DEMO, Lillian
(1959). The Blind Men and the Elephant. New York City: Charles Scribners Sons; Saxe, John Godfrey
(1963). The DEMO Men and the Elephant. New York City: McGraw-Hill; Shah, Idries, (1967), Tales of the
Denishes. New York City: E, P, Dutton.
36 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. (1992a). 76(3).
Entrepreneurship Theory^ and Practice. (1992b). /7( 1).
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. (DEMO). 17(2).
Gartner. W. B. (1985). A framework DEMO describing and classifying the phenomenon of new venture creation
Academy of Management Review, 10(A). 696-706.
Gartner. W. B. (1988). "Who is an entrepreneur'^" is the wrong question. American Journal of Small
Business, 72(4). 11-32.
Gartner. W. B. (1990). What DEMO v\e talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship'^ Journal of Business
Venturing. 5(1). 15-28.
Gartner. W. B. (1993). Words lead to deeds: Towards an organizational emergence xocabularv JoKrmil of
Business Venturing, DEMO(3). 231-240.
Gartner. W. B.. & Gatewood. E. (1992). DEMO the theory of description matters most. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, /7( I), 5-10.
Green. D. P.. & Shapiro. I. (1994). DEMO of rational choice theon.- A critique of applications in
political science. New Ha\en. CT: Yale University Press.
Greiner. L. E. (1972). E\olution DEMO revolution as organizations grow. Hanard Business Review 7'*(4)
37-46.
Hayek. F. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review. 35(4). 519-530.
Herron. L.. Sapienza. H. J.. & Smith-Cook. DEMO (1991). Entrepreneurship theory from an interdisciplinary
perspective: volume 1. Entrepreneurship Theon and Practice, 16(2), 7-12.
Journal of Business Venturing. (DEMO). <S(3).
Katz. J. A. (1997). Advances in entrepreneurship. firm emergence, and growth, volume .•>. Greenv\ich. CT:
DEMO Press.
Katz. J. A., & Brockhaus. R. H. (1993). Advances in entrepreneurship, firm emergence, and growth, volume
1. Greenwich. CT: DEMO Press.
Katz, J. A.. & Brockhaus. R. H. (1995). Advances in entrepreneurship, fnm emergence, and growth, volume
2. Greenwich. CT: DEMO Press.
Kirzner. I. (1997). Entrepreneurial discoverv' and the competitixe market process: An Austrian approach.
Journal of Economic Literature, 35(\). DEMO
Knight, F. (1921). Risk, uncertainty and profit. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Landstrom, H., Frank, H., & Veciana. J. M. (1997). Entrepreneurship and small business research in
Europe. Aldershot, UK: Avebury.
DEMO B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University DEMO
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. Journal of
Management, 35, 139-161.
Lumpkin, G. T.. & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking it to
performance. Academy of Management Review, 2I( 1), 135-172.
Mahoney. J. T. (1993). Strategic management and DEMO: Sustaining the conversation. Journal of
Management Studies, 30, 173-191.
Summer, 2001 37
Martin, J., & Frost, P. (1986), The organizational culture DEMO games: A struggle for intellectual dominance.
In S, Clegg, C. DEMO, & W. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of orf>anization studies, DEMO, 599-621, London: Sage,
McKinley, W., & Mone, M. A. (1998). The re-construction of organization studies: Wrestling with incom-
DEMO Organization, 5, 169-190,
Miller, D., & Friesen, P, H, (1982). Innovation in conservative and entrepreneurial firms: Two models of
strategic momentum. Strategic Management Journal, 3. 1-25,
Montgomery, C. DEMO, Wernertelt, A, B., & Balakrishnan, S. (1989). Strategy content and the research process:
A critique and commentary. Strategic Management DEMO JO, 189-197,
Ordeshook, PC . (1993). The development DEMO contemporary political theory. In, W, A, Barnett, N. J,
Schofield, M. J. Hinich (Fds.), Political economy: Institutions, competition DEMO representation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press,
Pfeffer, J. (1994). Barriers to the advance of organizational science: Paradigm development as a dependent
variable. Academy of Management Review. IH. 599-620,
Pfeffer J. (1995), Mortality, reproducibility, and the persistence of styles of theory. Organization Science,DEMO
6, 681-686.
Sarasvathy, S. (2000). Seminar on research perspectives DEMO entrepreneurship (1997). Journal of Business
Venturing, 15. 1-58.
Schumpeter, DEMO A. (1934). The theory of economic development. Cambridge, MA: DEMO University Press.
Se.xton, D. L., & Kasarda, J. D. The DEMO of the art of entrepreneurship. Boston: PWS-Kent Publishing,
Sexton, D. L., & Smilor, R. W. (1997). Entrepreneurship 2000. Chicago: DEMO Publishing,
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25(1), 217-226,
Singh, J., & Lumsden, C (DEMO). Theory and research in organizational ecology. Annual Review of Soci-
ology. 16. 161-195,
Stevenson, H. H., Roberts, M. J,, & Grousbeck, H, I. (1985). New business ventures and the entrepreneur.
Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Sutton, R, I., & Staw, B. DEMO, (1995). What theory is not. Administrative Science Quarterly. 40. 371-384.
Vander Werf, P. A., & Brush, C. G. (1989), DEMO empirical progress in an undefined field. Entrepre-
neurship Theory and Practice. 14(2). 45-58,
Venkataraman, S. (1994). Associate editor's DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 9(1), 3-6,
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor's DEMO In
J. Katz & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship. DEMO emergence and growth, pp. 119-138,
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,DEMO
Van Maanen, J. (1995a). Fear and loathing in organization studies. Organization Science, 6, 687-692,
Van Maanen, J. (1995b), DEMO as theory. Organization Science, 6, 133-143.
Vesper, K. H. (1990), New venture strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,
Waldo, D. (1961). Organization theory: An elephantine problem. Public Administration Review, 21, 210-
225,
Waldo, D. (1978). Organization theory: DEMO the elephant. Public Administration Review, 38, 589-597.
Weick, K, E, (1979), The social psychology of organizing (2nd edition). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
38 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
^hetten , D. A. (1989). What constitutes a theoretical contribution'? Academy of Management Review, 14,
490-495.
Wortman, M. (1992). The state of the art in entrepreneurship and opinion. Paper presented DEMO the National
Academy of Management Conference, Las Vegas, August 10.
William B. Gartner is the Henr}' W. Simpson Chair in Entrepreneurship at the Greif Center for Entrepre-
neurial Studies, University of Southern California.
The author would like to thank Magnus Aronsson, Candida G. Brush, Benyamin Bergmann DEMO,
Kelly G. Shaver, and Mike Wright for their comments and DEMO on earlier drafts of this manuscript.
Summer, 2001 39
{1g42fwefx}