0363-9428/88/124$! .50
Copyright 1988 by the
University of Baltimore
Educational DEMO
"Who Is an Entrepreneur?" Is
the Wrong Question
William B. DEMO
Entrepreneurship is the creation of organizations. What differentiates entrepreneurs
from non-entrepreneurs is that entrepreneurs create organizations, while non-entre-
preneurs do not. In behavioral approaches to the study of entrepreneurship an entre-
preneur is seen as a DEMO of activities involved in organization creation, while in trait
approaches an DEMO is a set of personality traits and characteristics. This
paper argues that trait approaches have been unfruitful and that behavioral ap-
proaches will be DEMO more productive perspective for future research in entrepreneur-
ship.
My own personal experience was that for ten years we ran a research center
in DEMO bistory, for ten years we tried to define the entrepreneur.
We DEMO succeeded. Each of us had some notion of it—what he thought
was, for his purposes, a useful definition. And I don't think DEMO're going to
get farther than that. (Cole, 1969, p. DEMO)
How can we know the dancer from the dance? {Yeats, 1956)
Arthur Cole's words have taken on the deeper tones DEMO prophecy. Recent re-
views of the entrepreneurship literature have found few changes in this dilemma
in the sixteen years since Cole's statement. Brockhuas DEMO Horwitz's (1985)
review of the psychology of the entrepreneur DEMO that "The literature ap-
pears to support the argument that there DEMO no generic definition of the entrepre-
neur, or if there is DEMO do not have the psychological instruments to discover it at
this time. Most of the attempts to distinguish between entrepreneurs and small
business owners DEMO managers have discovered no significant differentiating fea-
tures." (pp. 42-43) DEMO scholars have concurred that a common definition of
the entrepreneur remains elusive (Carsrud, 01m and Edy, 1985; Sexton and
Smilor, 1985; DEMO, 1985).
Cole's early doubts about whether the entrepreneur could DEMO defined have not
stopped researchers from attempting to do so. Much research in the entrepreneur-
ship field has focused on the person of the DEMO, asking the question,
Why do certain individuals start firms when DEMO, under similar conditions, do
not? Asking why has led us DEMO answering with who: Why did X start a venture?
Because DEMO has a certain inner quality or qualities. This focus can be identified in
any research which seeks to identify traits that differentiate entrepreneurs from
DEMO: need for achievement (Komives, 1972; McClelland, 1961;
McClelland DEMO Winter, 1969), locus of control (Brockhaus, 1980a; Brockhaus
Spring, 1988 11
and Nord, 1979; Hull, Bosley, and Udell, 1982; Liles, 1974), risk taking
(Brockhaus, 1980b; Hull, Bosley, and Udell, 1982; Liles, 1974; Mancuso, 1975;
Palmer, 1971), DEMO (DeCarlo and Lyons, 1979; Hornaday and Aboud, 1971;
Hull, Bosley, and Udell, 1980; Komives, 1972), age (Cooper, 1973; Howell,
1972; Mayer and Goldstein, 1961) are but DEMO few examples. X starts a venture
because of qualities that made X who (s)he is. Entrepreneurship research has
long asked, "Who is an entrepreneur?"
I believe the attempt to answer the question "DEMO is an entrepreneur?,"
which focusses on the traits and personality characteristics of entrepreneurs, will
neither lead us to a definition of the entrepreneur nor help us to understand the
phenomenon of entrepreneurship. This search DEMO characteristics and traits of the
entrepreneur is labeled in this article as the trait approach. In this approach the
entrepreneur is the basic unit DEMO analysis and the entrepreneur's traits and charac-
teristics are the key to explaining entrepreneurship as a phenomenon, since the
entrepreneur "causes" entrepreneurship. The purpose of the first part of this
article is to look DEMO research based on the trait view of entrepreneurship and to
show that this view alone is inadequate to explain the phenomenon of entrepre-
neurship. DEMO approach is needed to help us refocus our thoughts on entre-
preneurship. That approach—the behavioral approach—wilt be presented and
the two approaches will be DEMO and contrasted.
THE TRAIT APPROACH
In the trait approach the entrepreneur is assumed to be a particular personality
type, a fixed state of existence, a describable species that one might find a picture
of in a field guide, and the point of much entrepreneurship research has been to
enumerate a set of characteristics describing this entity known as the entrepre-
DEMO One indication of the tenacity of this point of view—i.e., once DEMO entrepre-
neur, always an entrepreneur, since an entrepreneur is a personality type, a state
of being that doesn't go away—can be seen in the selection of samples of "en-
trepreneurs" in many well-regarded DEMO studies (Table 1). In many studies
"entrepreneurs" are sampled DEMO years after having started their firms. Hor-
"entrepreneurs" are sampled many years after having started their firms. Horn-
aday and Aboud (1971), for example, chose to study individuals who headed
neurs" were interviewed DEMO from two to sixteen years after startup. Is the
owner/manager of an ongoing firm two or ten or even fifteen years after startup
DEMO entrepreneur? If this individual is included in a sample of entrepreneurs, what
does that imply about the researcher's definition of the entrepreneur, and what
will the resulting data reflect?
Tabte 1 is an DEMO to organize concisely much of the major literature on the
entrepreneur and entrepreneurship. It represents a succumbing to the grand temp-
tation that haunts DEMO writers and researchers in the entrepreneurship field: if
we could just DEMO go back and extract, categorize, and organize what
has already been discovered about the entrepreneur, we will return with the
pieces of a puzzle which we can then fit together into the big picture, and the
entrepreneur will appear defined on the page. Table 1 is most DEMO not
the big picture. Instead Table 1 shows;
(1) that many (and often vague) definitions of the entrepreneur have been used
(in many studies the entrepreneur is never defined);
12 American Journal of Small Business
3
C
CM
O
CQ
u
1-
u
c
a.
CQ
eo
DEMO
Spring, 1988
I
OD
; rt u) _
<
C DEMO S C S
4 S ^ 5 I
.c o a
s
•S^3a
r-ii ,
s£
a
3
U
QU
l
O.
S .s s S I §
§ I u ^ s §
,S OJ "5.
^ ^ E
5 s :
v ^ aj
co DEMO
c o .3
^f I
LU
u
SI
•a —
f
13
14
C
o
o
_ Q
CO
.2P
l
, p
O DEMO
3
,ig
c E E ai
j-'S
^ c u
" 'S t f
^ H i .
~ 00 C
C DEMO 3
o E S
5w s S; ra
E iij
l
DEMO .
"3 Ji
.
2ra > «
_'" O •£a DEMO ,iij _ •£ L
f c ' - E -c
. DEMO' V •"•sp a
.
i! M 4
J -3
oo. <
c — u
aj
5 i
^ «
XI u 2 DEMO
c u
CO,
X y ra
"
= P .- "1
l l
1» y ; pa lA
c
-• S.
B^
DEMO'
F X)
c c _5J S
ii P o e
CL • 00 5
P «J — -a
.B "
. o =
American Journal of Small Business
-a u
i2
2 o
on
DEMO
O C
Q ' K
2 I u
~' -X tfl DEMO i i i* - ^
un ^ ^^ -= •= O °
.— B O. O _ t- -=
OJ
g ,£
^ D
O 5 P
tl
: o o
u B-
B - - ? 3
l l
u
u
n
Is
« b c
e
a;
Q
a.
u8
.b 2 3 t»-
o
G
1 .
B
u
00
B
'a
•
«
b
Ilii
u
Spring, 1988
5 J= C
Q . ,
5 DEMO '^ ^ -
woc >*-
2"
G in - ^
p ;a "
^ ^- a
Q x:
c 5 DEMO
-2 " ^
M 15 "tt
W "" i - do
.2 I -
S «
^ g y 1
O O o
DEMO
vem
trol,
Ci
aa
u
U
a
,w ,00: 2
o a
•^.2 5
^ g ffii Si"!
:=: • 13 B
i: 2 o «
-^ (u c ° JJ
y ?= ¥ DEMO ..
B -a B'
II
,5 a S.
ca OJ
DEMO
I ,1
i l
,2 ,^ I :S
•s ^ -E s a "
.E w -a
c 3 ,.^ VI
DEMO u
F y ' - 2 S =
t: ,- 3 • o
'is G
s g
.2 «
a
E
?
DEMO e
if V "
i
a ^
s s;2
O DEMO 5J ^ " ^
o
QO
1 2
1 g E^ -
'So
X
l l
o
I|
l l
I
c 2PP
2 i
^ *^ « OI>T;
B-2 2
B
IS
r DEMO E :E
O LU
*-» ca . c CJ
a
16
DEMO Journal of Small Business
P 13
- •£: p O
C
DEMO
o
C
O
M 3 fr
5 £r-.2 S
15 S Ei
u
Spring, 1988
17
,2 E
"3 ?: -
— o F:
j = o
'
B
2
u
<
u
c
a
tn
DEMO
at
o
1
.a
o
e
mai
entei
in th
specifi
rise inl!
ed)
st one
was tl
d age
first
tsra
upat
DEMO
e
,2 H.
U l
2
,1 a
o i-
1
DEMO o
E
to
Ul
U J
3
O
•^
c
o
co g
c
c
u -
5
1
m
l
W 01
J
DEMO So e
.2
in
•c
i
-
e
Q
at
18
a
American Journal of Small Business
™
C
oo
C
O
Ll4
a
DEMO
belie
ality
lion
hiev
sta
C UJ
c c '^
y c c »;
C e •£ g.
•g o o o
y s c
™ 2 °
DEMO ^
_
"5 i) '5 ., —
,1^ ^
DEMO «
''^ 5 o -2 x:
, _ T3
g w S 3 ;2 •"I
m i 3 2 '•'DEMO" O _ oI §,i- Q g us ^ JJ E'DEMO ^1 ^^
>- 3 J= 111sis l
i-2
o a.
o DEMO
. 6 „
•S-.2 2
W)3
- 5 S=5-o
-
c a
•*
* -
^ ^
tA c- H
(U T3 O .2 S i i -^ -
S
Spring, 1988
19
f-s
l a
S3
E3
u
p >1
a
if
E
,DEMO
L
>2
E on.- 00
RS is
oa
u
£
c
DEMO
E
u
>
o
Oo
u
w
M
•c
cO
-^ DEMO
•p
oc
o
C
O
Q
tu U O
D
« '" h
E - j ;
D-
E H
S
u
J DEMO>>*= £
Q.— S 3 °
Ul . 3 ZZ ul
,E E < S
?
• 5 • = -
O
- XJ
u
a ,2
S y fc K 00 s;
^ S C 1) — do
o
20
I
American Journai of Small Business
s
O 03
ntrol.
m, ris
1. eco;
elhan
open
timisi
(2) there are few studies that employ the same definition;
(3) that lack of basic agreement as to "who an entrepreneur DEMO " has led to the
selection of samples of "entrepreneurs" that are hardly homogeneous. This lack
of homogeneity occurs not only among the DEMO samples listed, but actually
within single samples. For many of the DEMO it could be said that variation
within the sample is more significant, i.e., it could tell us more than variation
between the sample DEMO the general population.
(4) that a startling number of traits and characteristics have been attributed to
the entrepreneur, and a "psychological profile" of the entrepreneur assembled
from these studies would portray someone larger than DEMO, full of contradictions,
and, conversely, someone so full of DEMO that (s)he would have to be a sort of
generic "Everyman."
BEHAVIORAL AND TRAIT APPROACHES
TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP
I think the study DEMO the entrepreneur is actually one step removed from the
primary phenomenon of entrepreneurship—the creation of organizations, the
process by which new organizations come into existence (Vesper, 1982). This
behavioral approach views the creation of DEMO organization as a contextual event,
the outcome of many influences. The entrepreneur is part of the complex process
of new venture creation. This DEMO to the study of entrepreneurship treats the
organization as the primary level of analysis and the individual is viewed in terms
of activities undertaken DEMO enable the organization to come into existence
(Gartner, 1985). The personality characteristics of the entrepreneur are ancillary
to the entrepreneur's behaviors. DEMO on the entrepreneur should focus on
what the entrepreneur does and not who the entrepreneur is.
This behavioral view of entrepreneurship is not new. DEMO authors have asked
as their primary question, "How does an organization come into existence?"
(Herbert & Link, 1982; Shapero & DEMO, 1982). Arthur Cole, for example,
taking a behavioral viewpoint, quoted Say (1816) and defined the entrepreneur as
an economic agent who;
unites all means of production—the labor of the one, the capital or the land
of the others—and who finds in the value DEMO the products which result from
their employment the reconstitution of the entire capital that he utilizes, and
the value of the wages, the DEMO, and the rent which he pays, as well as the
profits belonging to himself (Cole, 1946, p. 3)
This view places the entrepreneur within the process of new venture creation,
performing a DEMO of actions that result in the creation of an organization. How-
ever, after setting out admirably to define the entrepreneur according to a behav-
ioral orientation. Cole immediately falls back to the "who is an entrepreneur"
approach, and we are once more with traits and characteristics:
This person, this entrepreneur, must have special personal qualities: . . .
(from Say) judgement, perseverance, and a knowledge of the DEMO as well
as of business, (p. 3, emphasis added)
DEMO, 1988 21
Although the behavioral view of entrepreneurship is not new, it seems that it
has always been a difficult view to maintain (Peterson, 1981)DEMO As we have seen,
the entrepreneur has long seemed to many researchers to be a special person
whose qualities need to be investigated. DEMO 1980 Van de Ven issued a warning to
entrepreneurship researchers not to be tempted into studies of traits and charac-
teristics:
Researchers wedded DEMO the conception of entrepreneurship for studying the
creation of organizations can leam much from the history of research on
leadership. Like the studies of DEMO, this research began by in-
vestigating the traits and personality characteristics DEMO leaders. However, no
empirical evidence was found to support the expectation DEMO there are a finite
number of characteristics or traits of leaders and that these traits differentiate
successful from unsuccessful leaders. More recently, research into leadership
has apparently made some progress by focusing on the behavior of DEMO
(that is, on what they do instead of what they are) and by determining what
situational factors or conditions moderate the effects of their behavior and
performance, (p. 86)
Jenks (1950) and DEMO (1971) have also strongly criticized research which seeks
to develop personality profiles of the entrepreneur; both have encouraged re-
searchers to study the behaviors and activities of entrepreneurs. In empirical re-
search (Brockhaus, 1980; Brockhaus & Nord, 1979; Sexton & Kent, 1981) have
found DEMO when certain psychological traits are carefully evaluated, it is not
possible DEMO differentiate entrepreneurs from managers or from the general popula-
tion based on the entrepreneur's supposed possession of such traits.
The trait approach to DEMO research is understandably persistent.
Entrepreneurs often do seem like special people who achieve things that most of
us do not achieve. These achievements, we think, must be based on some special
inner quality. It is difficult not to think this way. But let us try to step outside DEMO
way of thinking. We can illustrate this point with a story. What if the United
States suddenly found itself unable to field a team DEMO baseball players that could
win in world competition? One response to DEMO a problem might be to do re-
search on baseball players to leam "Who is a baseball player?," so that indi-
viduals DEMO baseball playing propensity could be selected from the population.
Such studies might determine that, on average, baseball players weigh 185
pounds, are six feet tall, and most of them can bench press over 250 pounds. We
could probably develop a very good personality profile of the baseball DEMO
Based on upbringing and experience we could document a baseball player's locus
of control, need for achievement, tolerance of ambiguity, and other character-
istics that we thought must make for good baseball playing. We DEMO then re-
cruit individuals with this set of characteristics and feel confident once again in
our competitive edge. Yet, this type of research simply ignores the obvious—
that is, the baseball player, in fact, plays baseball. Baseball involves a set of
behaviors—running, pitching, throwing, catching, DEMO, sliding, etc.—that
baseball players exhibit. To be a baseball player means that an individual is
behaving as a baseball player. A baseball player DEMO not something one is, it is
something one does, and the definition of a baseball player cannot stray far from
this obvious fact DEMO getting into difficulty.
22 American Journal of Small Business
This might be said about any occupation—manager, welder, doctor, butcher.
How can we know the baseball player from the game? How can we know the
entrepreneur from starting an organization?
While this baseball metaphor DEMO help to make the difference between be-
havioral and trait viewpoints very clear and keep it clear, this clarity is not so
easily achieved in real life empirical research, and researchers' viewpoints be-
come cloudy DEMO out of focus. Behavioral and trait issues merge and conclusions
are vague and don't really tell us anything.
AN EXAMPLE OF THE TRAIT DEMO
An article by Carland, Hoy, Boulton and Carland (1984), "Differentiating
Entrepreneurs from Small Business Owners: A Conceptualization" is, I believe,
a good recent example of research which continues in the long DEMO of "if-
we-can-just-find-out-who-the-entrepreneur-is-then-we'11-know-what-entrepre-
neurship-is." By singling out this article I do not mean to imply that it is any
better or worse DEMO the myriad of other entrepreneurship articles that take the
trait approach. I have chosen it because it is the first review article on entrepre-
DEMO to appear in a major journal since 1977, and after such DEMO long hiatus, my
reaction was to focus hard on the offering.
DEMO noted above, the centra! issue in trait approach research is to DEMO
entrepreneurs from other populations of individuals. And, indeed, the Carland, DEMO
al. article begins by rearticulating the perpetual dilemma of entrepreneurship re-
searchers:
If entrepreneurs exist as entities distinct from small and large organizations
DEMO if entrepreneurial activity is a fundamental contributor to economic de-
velopment, DEMO what bases may entrepreneurs he separated from nonentre-
preneurial managers in order for the phenomenon of entrepreneurship to be
studied and understood? (p. DEMO added)
Carland, et al. do recognize that the owner/manager DEMO the ten or fifteen-year-
old firm is not necessarily engaged in entrepreneurship, and therefore these
"small business owners," as Carland et at. DEMO them, should not be included in
a sample of entrepreneurs. However, when it comes to distinguishing between
the entrepreneur and the small business DEMO, it can be shown that Carland et al.
are hindered by DEMO views, by focusing on the entrepreneur and who (s)he is as
the primary level of analysis. After a selective review of the DEMO, the paper
concludes with some definitions which attempt to distinguish the DEMO
from the small business owner:
Entrepreneur: An entrepreneur is an DEMO who establishes and manages
a business for the principal purposes of profit and growth. The entrepreneur
is characterized principally by innovative behavior and will DEMO strategic
management practices in the business.
Small business owner: A small DEMO owner is an individual who estab-
lishes and manages a business for the principal purpose of furthering personal
goals. The business must be the DEMO source of income and will consume
the majority of one's time and resources. The owner perceives the business
Spring, 1988 23
as an extension of his or her personality, intricately bound with family needs
and desires, (p. 358)
From the previous discussion, focusing on the intentionality of the individual
in order to determine whether that DEMO is an entrepreneur is just another
variation on the trait theme, DEMO requires us to investigate the psychology of the
entrepreneur and establish a psychological profile of the entrepreneurial entity.
Furthermore, even if we take the definitions at face value, we are immediately
aware that the definitions raise more questions than they answer. If by definition
a small business owner DEMO a business to further personal goals and an
entrepreneur establishes a business for profit and growth, then what do we do
with the individual whose personal goal is to establish a business for profit and
growth? (Are the goals of profit and growth to be considered impersonal goals?)
How do we distinguish personal goals from goals of profit and growth? Are we
not, then, embroiled in another dilemma of distinguishing? When you define
small business owners as having a business which is their primary source of
income and will consume the majority of their DEMO, do you not thereby imply
that entrepreneurs start organizations that will DEMO be their primary source of
income, and will not occupy the DEMO of their time and resources? (Are we to
assume that the entrepreneurs are off spending the majority of their time pursuing
personal goals, which, by definition, cannot be related to their organizations?) If
DEMO business owners perceive the business as an extension of their person-
alities, intricately bound with family needs and desires, as opposed to entrepre-
DEMO who do not perceive their firms in this way, then isn'DEMO this definition of
small business likely to include such family run organizations as Marriott, Best,
and Nordstrom, leaders of their industries in DEMO profits and growth? To suggest
that entrepreneurial startups are not intricately DEMO up with the personality of
the founders is to suggest that organizations such as Apple, Hewlett-Packard,
Lotus, and Microsoft are not entrepreneurial.
DEMO last part of the Carland et al. entrepreneurial definition ties the state of
being an entrepreneur to innovative behavior and strategic management prac-
tices. DEMO et al. use a Schumpeterian definition of innovative behavior (p.
357) which identifies five innovative strategic postures: (1) introduction of new
goods, (2) introduction of new methods of production, (3) opening DEMO new
markets (4) opening of new sources of supply, and (5) industrial reorganization.
Correlating entrepreneurship with innovation, although it is intuitively DEMO,
and seems to take more of a behavioral viewpoint, leads DEMO the problem of identi-
fying which firms in an industry are the innovative ones. Would the first entrant
in an industry be considered the DEMO firm, while all subsequent en-
trants would be small businesses? How are we to determine the degree of differ-
ence between one product DEMO another similar product which constitutes innova-
tion? Do new methods of DEMO/marketing/distributing the product count
as innovative, and, again, what DEMO the degree of difference between the truly
innovative and the not so innovative? Among the fifty or so personal computer
manufacturing companies, e.g., Compaq, Columbia, Leading Edge, Intertec,
ACT Ltd., Polo Microsystems, Tava, Steams Computer, Wyse Technology, Mi-
crocraft. Electro Design, STM DEMO, MAD Computer, Seequa Computer,
GRiD Systems, Bytec-Comterm, Seattle Computer, Durango Systems. Otrona
Advance Systems, which are the innovators; which are the small businesses?
24 American Journal of Small Business
Correlating innovation with entrepreneurship implies that almost all firms in an
industry DEMO sell to similar customer groups would be considered small busi-
nesses. The Carland et al. definitions, while intending to achieve greater preci-
sion, DEMO increase the ambiguity in what is already a definitional dilemma.
Operationalizing these definitions—pinpointing who is an entrepreneur—be-
comes more and more difficult as Van DEMO Ven (1980) warned.
Carland et al. discuss some past research studies in order to identify and list
many characteristics that have been attributed DEMO entrepreneurs. As I mentioned
earlier, this is the grand temptation. Entrepreneurship DEMO has reached such a
point of accumulation of data that the Carland et al. attempt to sort out past
research according to characteristics studied DEMO to list these characteristics in a
table (Table 1: Characteristics of Entrepreneurs, p. 356) certainly might seem
like the most effective way DEMO proceed in attempting to reach a definition of who
is an entrepreneur (although it is hoped that my own Table 1 has shown that such
a mega-table is not the answer). On setting up the DEMO, however, it becomes
immediately clear, as Carland et al. admit, that the studies which investigated
these characteristics and attributed them to entrepreneurs DEMO not all empirical,
and more importantly, as Carland et al. DEMO out, the research samples were by
no means homogeneous. As discussed DEMO, the authors of these past studies
usually did not provide important DEMO regarding their samples; e.g., what
type of industry or type of firm was studied. The past studies usually made broad
generalizations in defining DEMO entrepreneur, and the samples, therefore, included
executives, managers, salespersons, and small business persons. Onee Carland et
al. set up the table DEMO recognize difficulties with it, we are left wondering about
the relevance DEMO including Table 1 in a paper whose main purpose is to distin-
guish entrepreneurs from small business owners.' Carland et al. end the discus-
sion of Table 1 with this question:
Are the characteristics listed DEMO Table 1 those of entrepreneurs, of small busi-
ness owners, or of some mixture that may or may not be capable of demon-
DEMO the entrepreneurial function of economic development?
By ending the discussion in this way they view Table 1 as worthless. In the
Carland et DEMO attempt to distinguish the entrepreneur from the small business
owner do we come any closer to a definition of the entrepreneur or to an DEMO
standing of entrepreneurship? I hope I have shown the Carland et DEMO article is a
'Carland et al. attempt to make sense ofthe DEMO range of characteristics attributed to entrepreneurs
in their Table 1 by stating that Vesper's view (1980) (that several types of entrepreneurs exist) may
be an appropriate view, and by implying that different entrepreneurs DEMO possess different charac-
teristics, thus accounting for the wide range of DEMO in their table. However, Carland et al, quickly
undercut Vesper's notion of entrepreneurial types by calling Vesper's typology " a continuum DEMO
which several 'types' of entrepreneurs exist," and then insisting that the entrepreneurs along the
continuum differ, not merely by possesing different characteristics, but by displaying different
degrees of intensity of the set of characteristics which makes a person an entrepreneur. We are back
to making fine DEMO and measuring imponderables. Vesper's notion of entrepreneurial types
is reduced by Carland et al. to a caste system, with the most entrepreneurial entrepreneurs (the
purest types) at the furthest end of the continuum. This DEMO another illustration of the extremes to
which the trait view may take us; the entrepreneur is an entity like an accordian file who can be
more full or less full of entrepreneurial "stuff."
Spring, DEMO 25
good example of where we end up when, with every good intention, we ask the
wrong question. Who is an entrepreneur? is the DEMO question.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP IS THE CREATION
OF ORGANIZATIONS
Organization creation (Vesper, 1982), I believe, separates entrepreneurship
from other disciplines. Studies of psychological characteristics of entrepreneurs,
sociological explanations of entrepreneurial cultures, economic and demographic
explanations of entrepreneurial locations, etc., al! such investigations in the en-
trepreneurship DEMO actually begin with the creation of new organizations. Entre-
preneurship is the creation of new organizations. The purpose of this paper is not
to DEMO one highly specific entrepreneurial definition for another. "Entre-
preneurship is the DEMO of new organizations" is not offered as a definition,
but DEMO it is an attempt to change a long held and tenacious viewpoint in the
entrepreneurship field. If we are to understand the phenomenon of DEMO
ship in order to encourage its growth, then we need to DEMO on the process by
wbich new organizations are created. This may seem like a simple refinement of
focus (i.e., look at what the DEMO does, not who the entrepreneur is), but
it is actually DEMO rather thoroughgoing change in our orientation. From this per-
spective, other DEMO in the field migbt be seen with new clarity.
An example of such an issue: if entrepreneurship is behavioral, then it can be
DEMO that these behaviors cease once organization creation is over. One of the
problems in the entrepreneurship field is deciding when entrepreneurship ends
(Vesper, DEMO). (Actually, the Carland et al. attempt to distinguish entrepreneurs
from small business owners might be approached more fruitfully if looked at
from DEMO behavioral perspective of entrepreneurship ending.) The organization
can live on past DEMO creation stage to such possible stages as growth, maturity, or
decline (Greiner, 1972; Steinmetz. 1969). From the process viewpoint, the DEMO
vidual who creates the organization as the entrepreneur takes on other roles at
each stage—innovator, manager, small business owner, division vice-president,
etc. Entrepreneurs, like baseball players, are identified by a set of behaviors
DEMO link them to organization creation. Managers, small business owners, etc.,
are also identified by their behaviors. As long as we adhere to DEMO behavioral
approach and view entrepreneurship as something one does and not who one is,
then we can more effectively avoid the Carland et DEMO definitional dilemmas.
But once we are tempted to view the entrepreneur, DEMO manager, the small busi-
ness owner, etc., as states of DEMO, we become embroiled in trying to pin down
their inner qualities DEMO intentions. Tbis approach may not completely resolve the
question of when entrepreneurship ends, but it makes us look at the organization,
rather than the person, for our answer. Entrepreneurship ends when the creation
stage of the organization ends.
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH ON THE ENTREPRENEUR
Reorientation toward a DEMO approach to entrepreneurship begins by
asking the primary question, "How do organizations come into existence?" We
should think of entrepreneurs in regard DEMO the role they play in enabling organiza-
tions to come into existence (Jenks, 1950; Kilby, 1971; Peterson, 1981; Van de
26 American Journal of Small Business
Ven, 1980). The focus will be on research questions that ask (among other
things) what individuals do to enable organizations to come DEMO existence, rather
than on the traits and characteristics of these individuals.
DEMO research should follow the path of research taken in manage-
rial behaviors (Mintzberg, 1973). The issues that Mintzberg articulated regarding
managers are DEMO issues which also confront entrepreneurship. Substitute the
word entrepreneur for manager, DEMO entrepreneurial for managerial in Mintz-
berg's statement of the purpose of his study:
We must be able to answer a number of DEMO questions before we can
expect managerial training and management science to have any real impact
on practice:
What kinds of activities does the DEMO perform? What kinds of infor-
mation does he process? With who must he work? Where? How frequently?
What are the distinguishing DEMO of managerial work? What is of
interest about the media the DEMO uses, the activities he prefers to engage
in, the fiow of these activities during the workday, his use of time, the pres-
DEMO of the job?
What basic roles can be inferred from tbe study of the manager's activi-
ties? What roles does the manager perform in moving information, in making
decisions, in dealing with people?DEMO
What variations exist among managerial jobs? To what extent can basic
DEMO be attributed to the situation, the incumbent, the job, the DEMO
zation, and the environment?
To what extent is management a DEMO? To what extent is the manager's
work programmed (that is, repetitive, systematic and predictable)? To what
extent is it programmable? To what extent can the management scientist "re-
program" managerial work? (Mintzberg, 1973: 3)
I believe that research on entrepreneurial behaviors must be based on field
work similar to Mintzberg's study of DEMO work. Researchers must observe
entrepreneurs in the process of creating organizations. This work must be de-
scribed in detail and the activities systematized and DEMO Knowledge of
entrepreneurial behaviors is dependent on field work.
The results of this field work should also be able to answer additional ques-
tions. DEMO are the specific organization creation skills that an entrepreneur
needs to know? (Palmer, 1971) If we've given up the perspective that DEMO us that
an entrepreneur is bom with these skills and abilities, DEMO we must ask how are
these skills acquired? Some research suggests DEMO entrepreneurial skills are
"leam-as-you-go" (Collins & Moore, 1970; Gartner, 1984). Entrepreneurs who
have started one organization seem to be more DEMO and more efficient in
the startup of their second and third organizations (Vesper, 1980). If this is
usually true, then what expertise, what special knowledge do these entrepreneurs
gain from doing their first startup? One skill they might learn is how to identify
and evaluate problems. A new organization is confronted by many problems, and
some problems are more important tban others. It would seem that the more
successful entrepreneurs DEMO expertise in judging which problems need im-
mediate attention (Hoad & DEMO, 1964; Lamont, 1972).
The process of team formation needs DEMO be studied (Timmons, 1979). How and
Spring, 1988 . DEMO
why do individuals enter a new venture? How do they claim ownership of a new
idea, organization, etc.? How is esprit de corps generated? How do individuals
convince themselves that entering a new organization wiil benefit them (Kidder,
1981)?
All new ventures need some DEMO of support, e.g., financial, legal, marketing,
technological. This assistance can be obtained in many ways. In internal startups
the entrepreneur has DEMO convince senior management to provide support (Scholl-
hammer, 1982). What is the political process—the strategies—that the entrepre-
neur undertakes to gain internal DEMO? Is this any different than the process
undertaken by independent entrepreneurs DEMO persuade venture capitalists to invest
in their ventures? In either case, we need to make this process more efficient and
successful because it DEMO that few new venture plans gain support. The im-
portance of business plans to the process of obtaining venture capital and support
needs to DEMO studied (Roberts, 1983). What are the features of successful business
plans?
CONCLUSION
How do we know the dancer from the dance? When we view entrepreneurship
from a behavioral perspective we do not artifically DEMO dancer from dance,
we do not attempt to fashion a reassuring simplicity. The behavioral approach
challenges us to develop research questions, methodologies and techniques that
wilt do justice to the complexity of entrepreneurship (Gartner, DEMO). The cre-
ation of an organization is a very complicated and intricate process, influenced
by many factors and influencing us even as we look at it. The entrepreneur is not
a fixed state of existence, rather entrepreneurship is a roie that individuals under-
take to create organizations.
DEMO
Brockhaus, R. H. (1980). Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management
Journal, 2J(3). 509-520.
Brockhaus, R. H. & DEMO P. S. (1985). The psychology ofthe entrepreneur. In D. L. DEMO
& R. W. Smilor (Ed.) The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Brockhaus, R. H. & Nord, W. R. (1979). An exploration of factors affecting the entrepreneurial
decision: Personal characteristics vs. environmental conditions. Proceedings ofthe Annual Meeting
of the Academy of Management.
DEMO, J. W., Hoy, F.. Boulton. W. R., & Carland, DEMO C. {1984). Differentiating entrepreneurs
from small business owners: A conceptualization. DEMO of Management Review. 9(2), 354-359.
Carsrud. A. L., K. DEMO Olm & Eddy, G. G. (1985). Entrepreneurship: Research in DEMO of a
paradigm. In D. L. Sexton & R. W. Smiior (DEMO) The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cam-
bridge, MA: Ballinger.
DEMO, A. H. (1942, December). Entrepreneurship as an area of DEMO The Tasks of Economic
History (Supplement to tbe Journal of Economic DEMO). 118-126.
Cole. A. H. (1944). A report on research DEMO economic history. The Journal of Economic History.
6(0,49-72 .
28 American Journal of Small Business
Cole, A. H. (1946). An approach lo the study of DEMO: A tribute to Edwin F. Gay. The
Tasks of Economic History (Supplement VI of the Journal of Economic History), 1-15.
Cole. A. DEMO (1959). Business enterprise in its social setting, Cambridge: Harvard DEMO Press.
Cole. A. H. (1969). Definition of entrepreneurship. In J. DEMO Komives (Ed.), Karl A. Bostrom
Seminar in the Study of DEMO Milwaukee: Center for Venture Management, 10-22.
Collins, O. F. & DEMO, D, G. (1970). The organization makers. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts.
Cooper, A. C. & Dunkelberg, W. C. (1981). A new look at business entry: Experiences of 1805
entrepreneurs, ln K. DEMO Vesper (Ed.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: The Proceedings of
the Babson conference on Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson College. 1-20.
Davids, L. E. (1963). Characteristics of Small Business Founders in Texas and Georgia. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Small Business Administration.
DeCarlo. J. E. & DEMO, P. R. (1979). A comparison of selected personal characteristics of mi-
nority and non-minority female entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business Management, 17, ll-l*^.
Draheim, K. P. (1972). Factors influencing the rate of formation of technical companies. In A. C.
Cooper & J. L. Komives (Eds.), Technical entrepreneurship: A Symposium. Milwaukee: Center
for Venture Management. DEMO
Durand. D. E. (1975). Effects of achievement motivation and skill DEMO on the entrepreneurial
behavior of black businessmen. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, }4(\),. 76-90.
Ely, R. T. & Hess, R. DEMO (1937). Outlines of economics (L Med.). New York: DEMO
Gartner, W. B. (1984). Problems in business startup: The DEMO among entrepreneurial
skills and problem identification for different types of new ventures. In Homaday, J. A., Tarpley,
F., Timmons, J. A. & Vesper, K. H. (Eds.) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: The Pro-
ceedings ofthe Babson Conference on Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson Col-
DEMO, 496-512.
Gartner, W. B. (1985). A framework for describing DEMO phenomenon of new venture creation.
Academy of Management Review. 10, 696-706.
DEMO, E. (1977). Characteristics of minority entrepreneurs and small business enterprises.
America n Journal of Small Business , Jl. 12-22 .
Gould, L. C. (1969). Juvenile entrepreneurs. American Journal of Sociology. 74(6), 710-719.
Greiner, L. E. (1972). Evolution and revolution as organizations DEMO//arvarrffiuxin^Mfi^view,
(July-August), 37-46.
Hartman, H. (1959). Managers and entrepreneurs: A useful distinction? Administrative Science
Quarterly. 3, 429-457.
Herbert, R. E. & Link, A. N. (1982). The Entrepreneur: DEMO Views and Radical Cri-
tiques. New York: Praeger.
Hisrich. R. D. & O'Brien, M. (1981). The woman entrepreneur from a business and sociological
perspective: Their problems and needs. In K. H. Vesper (DEMO), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research: The Proceedings of the Babson Conference DEMO Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley,
Mass.: Babson College, 21-39.
Hoad, W. DEMO & Rosko, P. (1964). Management factors contributing to the success and failure of
new small manufacturers, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
DEMO, 1988 .. . • 2 9
Homaday, J. & Aboud, J. (1971). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Personnel Psy-
chology, 24, 141-153.
Homaday, J. & Bunker, C. (1970). The nature of the entrepreneur. Personnel Psychology, 23.
47-54.
Howell, R. P. (1972). Comparative profiles: Entrepreneurs versus the hired executive: San Fran-
cisco peninsula semiconductor industry. In A. C. Cooper & J. L. Komives (Eds.), Technical entre-
preneurship: A Symposium. Milwaukee: Center for Venture Management, 47-62.
Hoy, F. & Vaught, B. (1980)DEMO The rural entrepreneur: A study in frustration. Journal of Small
Business DEMO, 18, 19-24.
Hull. D. L., Bosley, J. J. & Udell, G. G. (1980). Reviewing the heffalump: Identifying potential
entrepreneurs by personality characteristics. Journal of Smalt Business Management, 18, 11-18.
Jenks, L. H. (1950). Approaches to entrepreneurial personality. Explorations in Entrepreneurial
History, DEMO, 91-99.
Kidder, T. (1981). The soul of a new DEMO Boston: Little, Brown & Company.
Kilby, P. (1971). Hunting the heffalump. In P. Ki\hy (Ed.), Entreprenewship and economic devel-
opment. New York: Free Press, 1-40.
Komives, J. L. (1972). DEMO preliminary study of the personal values of high technology entrepre-
neurs. In A. C. Cooper & J. L. Komives (Eds.), Technical entrepreneurship: DEMO Symposium. Mil-
waukee: Center for Venture Management, 231-242.
Lachman, R. (1980). Toward measurement of entrepreneurial tendencies. Management Interna-
tional Review, 20(2), 108-116.
Lamont, L. M. (1972). What entrepreneurs leam DEMO experience. Journal of Small Business Man-
agement. WO), 36-41.
Lavington, DEMO (1922). Trade cycle: An account ofthe causes producing rhythmical changes in the
activity of business (Vol. 3). London: P. S. DEMO
Leibenstein, H. (1968). Entrepreneurship and development. American Economic Review, DEMO,
72-83.
Liles, P. (1974). Who aie the entrepreneuts'! MSU Business Topics, 22, 5-14.
Litzinger, W. D. (1965). DEMO motel entrepreneur and the motel manager. Academy of Management
Journal, 8, 268-281.
McClelland, D. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: DEMO Nostrand.
McClelland, D. & Winter, D. G. (1969). Motivating DEMO achievement. New York: Free
Press.
Mescon, T. & Montanari, J. (1981). The personalities of independent and franchise entrepreneurs:
An empirical DEMO of concepts. Journal of Enterprise Management. 3(2), 149-159.
Mill, DEMO S. (1948). Principles of political economy with some of their DEMO to social philos-
ophy. London: J. W. Parker.
Palmer, M. (DEMO). The application of psychological testing to entrepreneurial potential. California
Management Review, /i(3) , 32-39.
30 American Journal of Small Business
Peterson, R. A. (1981). Entrepreneurship and organization. In P. C. DEMO & W. H. Starbuck
(Eds.), Handbook of Organization Design, (DEMO 1). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 65-83.
Roberts, E. B. (1983). Business planning in the startup high-technology enterprise. In J. A. DEMO
naday, J. A. Timmons & K. H. Vesper (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: Pro-
ceedings of the 1983 Conference on Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson Col-
lege, 107-117.
Ronstadt, R. (1984). Entrepreneurship. Dover, Mass.: Lord Publishing.
Say, J. A. (1816). DEMO Treatise on Political Economy. London: Sherwood, Neeley and Jones.
Schollhammer, DEMO (1982). Intemal corporate entrepreneurship. In C. A. Kent, D. L. Sexton, &
K. H. Vesper (Eds.), Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship. Engiewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
209-223.
Schrage, H. (1965). The R& DEMO entrepreneur: Profile of success. Harvard Business Review. 43,
56-69.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). The theory of economic development. Translated by R. Opie. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press.
Sexton, D. L. & Kent, C. A. (1981). Female executives versus female entrepreneurs, ln K. DEMO
Vesper (Ed.) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: The Proceeding ofthe J98I DEMO Confer-
ence on Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley. Mass.: Babson College, 40-45.
Sexton, D. L. & Smilor. R. W. (1986). Introduction. In D. DEMO Sexton & R. W. Smilor (Ed.) The
Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Shapero, A. & Sokol, L. (1987). Social dimensions of entrepreneurship. In C. A. Kent, D. L.
Sexton, & K. H. Vesper (Eds,), Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-
Hall. 72-90.
Stauss, J. H. (1944). The entrepreneur: DEMO firm. Journal of Political Economy, 52(2). 112-127.
Steinmetz, L. L. (1969). Critical stages of small business growth: When they DEMO and how to
survive them. Business Horizons, 29-36.
Thome, J. R. & Ball, J. G. (1981). Entrepreneurs and their companies. In DEMO H. Vesper (Ed.),
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research: The Proceedings DEMO Babson Conference on Entrepre-
neurship Research. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson College, DEMO
Timmons, J. (1979). Careful self-analysis and team assessment can aid entrepreneurs. Harvard
Business Review, 198-206.
Van de Ven, A. H. (1980). Early planning, implementation and performance of new organizations.
In J. R. Kimberiy & R. Miles (Eds.), The organization life cycle. San Francisco: Jossey Bass,
83-134.
Vesper, K. H. (1980). New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Vesper. K. H. (1982). Introduction and summary of entrepreneurship research, ln C. A. Kent,
D. L. Sexton, K. H. Vesper (Eids.), Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship. Englewood DEMO: Pren-
tice-Hall, xxxi-xxxviii.
Wainer, H. A. & Rubin, 1. M. (1969). Motivation of R&D entrepreneurs: Determinants of com-
pany DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 5i(3), 178-84.
Spring, 1988 . - ' 31
Welsch, H. P. & Young, E. C. (1982). The information source selection decision: The role of
entrepreneurial personality characteristics. Journal of Small Business Management, 20. 49-57.
Wortman, M. S. (1985). A unified framework, research typologies, and research prospectuses for
the interface between entrepreneurship DEMO small business. In D. L. Sexton & R. W. Smilor (Ed.)DEMO
The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Baliinger.
Yeats, DEMO B. (1956). Among school children. In The collected poems ofW. DEMO Yeats. New York:
Macmillan.
William B. Gartner is an Assistant Professor in the School of Business Administration, George-
town University.
32 American Journal of Small Business
{1g42fwefx}