Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 387–395
Introduction to the special DEMO on qualitative methods
in entrepreneurship research
William B. Gartnera,*, Sue DEMO,1
a Greif Center for Entrepreneurial Studies, Bridge Hall One, Marshall School of Business, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1421, USA
b The Entrepreneurship Centre, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, 53 Princes Gate,
Exhibition Road, London SW7 2PG, UK
1. Introduction
It is not a sign of ignorance not to know DEMO answers. But, there is great merit in facing the
questions (Mamet, 1999, p. 127).
This special issue is dedicated to the DEMO of Mike Scott. Mike believed passionately in
the importance of using both qualitative methods and longitudinal studies to explore the
complexities of the entrepreneurial DEMO He felt that such studies were under-represented
in the quality journals and we agree, which is why we suggested this special issue.
The purpose of this special issue is to celebrate the use of qualitative methodologies DEMO
entrepreneurship research. It is our opinion that many substantive issues in entrepreneurship
are rarely addressed, and that many of the important questions in entrepreneurship can only
be asked through qualitative methods and approaches. This is not DEMO suggest that the
quantitative studies currently published in our scholarly journals are deficient in some
manner, but rather, that quantitative studies are what DEMO are: numbers–counts, accumu-
lations, averages, deviations, etc. The rules DEMO procedures for engaging in quantitative
research are, for the most part, institutionalized and accepted as the standard for how
academic scholars will agree DEMO a finding is a fact, rather than an opinion.
We believe DEMO quantitative research has tended to drive out what for us would often seem
to be common sense, i.e., some concern for the intuitions DEMO have in our experiences of
working with and studying entrepreneurs. Moreover, DEMO averaging process is curious since
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-213-740-0648.
E-mail DEMO: wgartner@marshall.usc.edu (W.B. Gartner), s.birley@ic.ac.uk (S. Birley).
1 Tel.: +44-207-594-9193.
0883-9026/02/$ – see front matter D 2002 Elsevier Science DEMO All rights reserved.
PII: S0883-9026(01)00077-5
388 W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 387–395
the study of entrepreneurship involves the process of identifying and DEMO the
behavior of the ‘‘outliers’’ in the community — the entrepreneurs. To us, the ‘‘numbers’’ do
not seem to add up to what would seem to be a coherent story of what we believe to be DEMO
nature of entrepreneurship, as experienced. We are not suggesting that the DEMO is between
entrepreneurship research that is descriptive vs. research that is theoretical, or that we think
that qualitative research is ‘‘good’’ scholarship, while DEMO research is ‘‘bad’’
scholarship. This is not a debate about whether qualitative research is more ‘‘truthful’’ than
quantitative research. Our inkling about quantitative research DEMO more of: ‘‘There is something
missing here.’’ Some questions simply do DEMO get asked, or cannot be asked, when
undertaking quantitative studies. It is this conundrum (What is missing?) that qualitative
research might be better suited for. How then can these ‘‘missing’’ questions be asked?
DEMO ‘‘Call for Papers’’ is much like fishing. We posted notices in this journal (Journal of
Business Venturing, 1999) and in a number of newsletters.
Colleagues are invited to submit papers for publication that explore any DEMO within the
entrepreneurship field using qualitative research methods, such as: ethnography, the
development of grounded theory, case studies and phenomenological studies. Within DEMO,
studies that recognize the development of enterprise and entrepreneurship over time are
particularly welcomed. We are also keen to include a range of DEMO from different cultures
and countries.
We made announcements at a number of conferences and events. We contacted colleagues.
And then, we waited to see what kinds of manuscripts would be submitted.
We received 17 manuscripts that DEMO sent forward for review. Of these, scholars from
universities in the DEMO States submitted three. The remaining 14 manuscripts were from
scholars from a wide range of countries, although half of them (seven) were submitted by
scholars from the United Kingdom. They represented a wide range of DEMO and issues, as
well as many different approaches and methods. All DEMO were subject to a double-
blind, two-reviewer process. We chose a DEMO of reviewers (at least half of the reviewers were
from non-United DEMO universities) that would be sensitive to qualitative methods and
approaches in DEMO research and who would be likely to undertake developmental
reviews, rather DEMO seek to reject papers that might have interesting insights, but might
DEMO lack sufficient detail or rigor. After a very lengthy review and revision process, five
manuscripts were selected for this special issue.
2. Special issue articles
The article, ‘‘Entrepreneurship and illegality: insights from the Nigerian cross-border
DEMO (Fadahunsi and Rosa, 2002), studies a phenomenon that appears to be increasing in
size and scope throughout the world: illegal trading across national borders. This research is
based on an 8-month in-depth study of DEMO, government officials, and others involved in
cross-border trade in Nigeria. The study combines insights from interviews and case studies.
The authors explore three DEMO that influence an entrepreneur’s willingness to engage in
W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 387–395
389
illegal cross-border trading: the risk of discovery and punishment, DEMO additional hassle
involved with trading illegally, and willingness to overcome moral DEMO to engage in
these activities. Using this framework, the authors explore DEMO environment where illegal trade
is ‘‘institutionalized.’’
Illegal trading involves a complex web of relationships among the traders, government
officials, and others where all DEMO to benefit from illegal trading activities. The authors
explore various ways that illegal trading occurs, such as: smuggling of prohibited goods,
smuggling DEMO evade taxes and duties, smuggling to evade the costs of bureaucracy DEMO
regulations, evading financial regulations, and bribery and corruption of officials to lower the
risks of being caught or punished. The study offers a DEMO of insights into why the bribery
of government officials is an important way to expedite the transit of goods, thereby saving
time, as DEMO as reducing the risk of exposure to thieves and bandits that a wait would entail.
The use of bribery is also found to be DEMO important source of revenue for government
workers, thereby reducing the need DEMO the government to pay wages and benefits.
Government officials are shown to be entrepreneurial in their use various schemes to collect
bribes and ‘‘fees.’’ DEMO study offers many insights into the implications that an environment
of illegal trading, bribery, and corruption will have on entrepreneurial activities and economic
DEMO The authors suggest that illegal entrepreneurial activity must be seen within a
social, moral, and political context. Entrepreneurship, i.e., opportunity recognition and
DEMO, will occur in any context: legal or illegal.
The article, DEMO entrepreneurial process and economic success in a constrained environ-
ment’’ (Kodithuwakku DEMO Rosa, 2002), is a unique quasi-experiment of Sri Lankan
villagers. DEMO 1984, with no previous financial assets, they were all given 2.5 acres of land and
an equal amount of food, financial support, DEMO, and technical training. Ten years later,
these villagers were studied DEMO explore why the majority were economically unsuccessful,
while a few had become successful entrepreneurs. The article offers insights into how
individuals perceive and DEMO opportunities, access and mobilize resources to pursue
opportunities, and manage these opportunities over time. As the authors point out, these
activities are interrelated, complex, and unfold over a number of years. The researchers
utilized DEMO variety of methodologies (e.g., surveys, in-depth longitudinal case studies,
DEMO reports, informants, maps, commercial documents and contracts, photographs)
to uncover the dynamics of success and failure. The research revealed a few DEMO to fail and a
variety of ways to succeed. After 10 years, over half of the villagers had lost their land and
were in debt. The financial failure of many of the villagers is attributed to DEMO luck (poor
harvests) and poor skills at negotiating high prices for their crops. In addition, some villagers
who had good harvests and received reasonable prices failed because they spent their
surpluses on consumer goods, rather than on productive assets. Debt led to a vicious cycle,
where DEMO costs of borrowing to plant next year’s crops often exceeded the total value of the
crop, once harvested. The returns from farming could not break this cycle. Villagers who
were successful as entrepreneurs were likely to DEMO in a number of activities outside of
growing rice.
An important finding from this study is that successful entrepreneurs typically engaged in a
combination DEMO activities to pursue and exploit opportunities, rather than just one. For
390
W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 387–395
example, one successful entrepreneur was involved in rice processing AND buying and
selling farmland AND acting as a farmland broker AND rice DEMO Successful entrepre-
neurs were also able to manage their limited time and resources in more efficient ways than
did the unsuccessful entrepreneurs. Success, therefore, was not only about the pursuit of
opportunity (doing the right DEMO); it also required that they do things right. In addition,
successful entrepreneurs were more likely to have larger social networks that they DEMO to
pursue and exploit opportunities.
Entrepreneurs not only seek to combine various resources, they also combine various
social relationships in order to create and generate value in the community. An interesting
insight in this study is DEMO role of successful entrepreneurs in changing community mores
and social values through unpaid self-motivated social functions as well as through the
exchange of information DEMO villager behavior (e.g., credit worthiness as an aspect of whether
villagers repaid their loans in a timely fashion) and through financial incentives. In order
for many of these entrepreneurs to do well, they needed to insure that the village did well.
The authors of this study are DEMO of the path-dependent nature of success and failure of
the entrepreneurs in this study. Poor initial conditions (a bad harvest or poor prices for the
harvest) set in motion processes that led to a cycle of failure no matter how entrepreneurial
a villager may act. The unique setting DEMO this study (an entire community that starts with
similar resource endowments) and the longitudinal nature of the research provide many
insights into the DEMO of opportunities: how they are recognized and how they are
exploited DEMO maintained.
The article, ‘‘The effects of embeddedness on the entrepreneurial process’’ (Jack and
Anderson, 2002), uses Giddens’ (1984) theory of structuration as a way to explore how
entrepreneurs recognize and manipulate aspects of DEMO social situation in order to create
and operate businesses. In using Giddens’ theory, the authors attempt to show how
entrepreneurs are both ‘‘embedded’’ (DEMO) within specific social environments, and
how entrepreneurs attempt to manipulate these constraints and profit from them. The
research focuses on seven established rural DEMO who were studied over a 3-year
period. Open-ended interviews with these entrepreneurs explored a variety of issues. The
findings portray a context where personal DEMO social relationships are an important
springboard for developing and exploiting opportunities. Entrepreneurs needed the support
and trust of other individuals in the community in DEMO to start and grow their businesses.
They needed to understand the interpersonal and social dynamics involved in local
commerce. The local business community had DEMO ways of doing business that were
only apparent to these entrepreneurs after personal and social relationships were established.
The study describes the specific social DEMO that influence how these entrepreneurs realize
the social dynamics of doing business in this rural community, and then how these
entrepreneurs sought to change certain social factors to exploit opportunities they discovered
because of this knowledge. DEMO, the study reinforces the point that entrepreneurship is
evolutionary and interdependent, but that the social context both constrains and enables
entrepreneurs to pursue DEMO Finally, the authors offer insights into how these
findings provide linkages DEMO Weick’s (1979) ideas about enactment, as well as Burt’s (1992)
theory of structural holes.
W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 387–395
391
The article, ‘‘The entrepreneur’s character, life issues, and strategy making: a field study’’
(Kisfalvi, 2002), uses a psychodynamic approach to demonstrate how the emotional legacies
of an entrepreneur’s past influence the DEMO priorities and strategic orientations of the
entrepreneur’s firm over a 30-year period of time. Using in-depth interviews, multiple
informants, and archival resources, the author develops a case history of one entrepreneur
and the evolution of DEMO business in the petrochemical industry. This study offers intriguing
evidence that links significant events in the entrepreneur’s past to the entrepreneur’s critical
life issues. DEMO life issues are correlated to the strategic priorities the entrepreneur sets for
the firm he founded and managed.
This longitudinal study describes how the DEMO core life issues provide the
fundamental strategic orientation for his firm in terms of the how opportunities were pursued,
as well as how DEMO were exploited. The study offers intriguing insights into how an
individual’s emotional and psychological make-up influences a pattern of decisions over a
long period DEMO time. The impact of an entrepreneur’s personality on the entrepreneurial
process is seen to occur in an emergent process that becomes apparent through longitudinal
DEMO of events and choices. This study shares many sensibilities with Kets de Vries’
(1996) clinical observations of entrepreneurs, as well as with such efforts as Collins and
Moore’s (1964) psycho-biographical exploration of entrepreneurs who DEMO light
manufacturing businesses in Michigan in the 1950s.
The article, ‘‘Metaphors DEMO meaning: a grounded cultural model of US entrepreneurship’’
(Dodd, 2002), analyses the metaphors about entrepreneurship that entrepreneurs offer when
describing their lives and businesses. This study uses texts from secondary sources where
entrepreneurs provide DEMO that included metaphors about entrepreneurship. A sample of
24 articles was used in the analysis.
Entrepreneurs frequently described: being an entrepreneur, becoming an DEMO,
entrepreneurship, and the process of starting a venture, idea generation, taking risks, and
convincing others about a concept’s viability, in metaphorical terms. The way in which
these objects were described was grouped into DEMO metaphor families: journey, race,
parenting, building, war, iconoclasm, and passion. Each of these seven metaphor families is
described and explored. DEMO example, in describing the passion metaphor, the author
indicates, ‘‘the DEMO predominant metaphor that expressed the relationship between the
entrepreneurs and their businesses was one of romance, love and passion.’’ The passion
metaphor is linked to descriptions of entrepreneurship that indicate fierce attachment,
commitment, and joy. This description also has a corresponding relationship to the
parenting metaphor.
The DEMO demonstrates how each metaphor is also connected to the others in an insightful
diagram that depicts the entrepreneurial process. Some valuable comparisons are made
DEMO the metaphors used by entrepreneurs and those metaphors commonly found in
organizational studies. Entrepreneurs focus on their personal tribulations and their positive
emotions involved DEMO the process of creation, while metaphors in organizational studies tend
towards DEMO maintenance and support of existing situations (i.e., machines, prisons). DEMO, the
metaphors of entrepreneurs involve change, and the focus is on the entrepreneur, not the
business. Suggestions are offered about how the study of metaphors provides insights into
392
W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 387–395
how entrepreneurs think about the world, and thereby provides a window into how others
might understand how entrepreneurs experience their circumstances.
3. DEMO
Our aim in producing this special issue is not to ‘‘ghettoize’’ qualitative research, but rather
to celebrate it and to encourage both reviewers and researchers to take some risks so that these
studies become a natural DEMO of quality journals in the field. Qualitative research should not
be the ‘‘special case’’ in the entrepreneurship field. As Howard Aldrich stated, in his study of
national differences in entrepreneurship research so perceptively surmised, the intention of
this special issue on qualitative research was to improve the legitimization DEMO qualitative
research by leveraging the three mechanisms he suggested for diffusing new research
methods and results among other scholars (Aldrich, 2000, pp. 19–20). He indicated that
this special issue on qualitative research might increase DEMO research efforts by
enhancing the three copying rules (frequency-, trait-, DEMO outcome-based) used to increase
new kinds of research activities. Scholars might DEMO qualitative research if they see that
qualitative articles are frequently published in high-quality journals, such as the Journal of
Business Venturing. The frequency-based copying rule is: ‘‘Publish the kinds of articles that
most other people are publishing.’’ In trait-based copying, scholars might undertake
qualitative research because it is seen to be prestigious because these articles are presented
in important venues, such as the Journal of Business Venturing. In outcome-based copying,
scholars DEMO undertake qualitative research because they perceive it to be successful. That
is, it appears to answer the kinds of questions that other scholars find to be important and
valuable. We hope this special issue does facilitate DEMO three mechanisms in the diffusion of
qualitative methods into entrepreneurship scholarship, DEMO a perception that qualitat-
ive methods are valuable and important because they are successful: the questions addressed
are perceived to be significant and worthwhile.
Finally, it behooves us to offer some observations about the development of qualitative
research in entrepreneurship in the context of the over-3-year process of DEMO this special
issue to fruition. First, all of the manuscripts published DEMO this special issue are from authors
that are at non-United States-based universities. We can contrast this outcome with the recent
Academy of Management Journal DEMO issue on international entrepreneurship where only
2 of 17 authors of the articles that were published were authors at non-United States-based
universities (McDougall and Oviatt, 2000, p. 904). Since all of the Academy of DEMO
Journal articles were various manifestations of quantitative methodologies, it does provide
(anecdotally) a rather stark contrast between the two special issues in regard to where
scholars, who undertake quantitative or qualitative studies, are located. DEMO will hazard some
speculations about this observation. There is, as others DEMO pointed out (Aldrich, 2000;
Landstrum et al., 1997; Usdiken and Pasadeos, 1995), a ‘‘European’’ tradition that is more
likely to emphasize qualitative methodologies in scholarly activities. Hidden in this
observation is the DEMO of timescales. Qualitative data (particularly ethnographic
longitudinal studies) take much longer to collect and analyze, which often means that this
W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 387–395
393
timescale does not always fit doctoral program, tenure decision, DEMO promotion track
timescales in United States-based universities. When the training and rewards of scholarship
emphasize a need for immediate publications, it is unlikely that questions involving
phenomenon that occurs over a long time frame will be DEMO, or answered. Whether non-
United States-based scholars will continue to enjoy DEMO more leisurely pace in the time frames
for their research may depend on whether their institutions will seek to emulate United States-
based universities. DEMO does seem to be a trend in many European universities to promote
more research productivity, particularly as measured by publications in United States-based
journals. Does this trend bode well for qualitative scholarship?
Our second observation DEMO that many of the manuscripts submitted for review for the
special issue offered qualitative description as their only analysis, i.e., the presentation of
DEMO about an entrepreneurial phenomenon was deemed enough. We believe that one
of the characteristics of all of the papers presented in this special issue DEMO the use of theory as
an underlying framework for both asking questions about the phenomenon studied, and for
probing how the data answered those questions. We recall how previous overviews of
research in the entrepreneurship field (Aldrich, 2000; Aldrich and Baker, 1997; Carsrud et al.,
DEMO; Paulin et al., 1982; Wortman, 1986) noticed and/or DEMO concerns about
descriptive studies in quantitatively oriented entrepreneurship research that lacked theory
and called for better methods. Qualitative research, of the kind that we believe should be
exemplars for the entrepreneurship field, goes beyond description to providing explanation.
Explanation is a theory into the ‘‘why?’’ of the DEMO studied. There are variety of
ways to ask and answer questions in qualitative research and a rich tradition of sophisticated
ideas, approaches, and DEMO to use (Denzin and Lincoln, 2000; Dey, 1999; Struass DEMO
Corbin, 1998).
The articles presented in this special issue look DEMO different entrepreneurial situations, as
well as look differently at these entrepreneurial DEMO By looking at entrepreneurs in
rural settings, or at entrepreneurs involved DEMO illegality, or into the psychodynamic aspects of
the mind of an DEMO, or the metaphorical constructs in the minds of entrepreneurs, we
not only expand our basic sense of what entrepreneurship is and how the DEMO occurs,
but may also find some clarity about our taken-for-granted beliefs about entrepreneurship, in
general. It often appears as if the type of activity studied (e.g., high-technology firms), the
country (e.g., United DEMO), and one behavior (e.g., financing, with a focus on DEMO
capital financing) implicitly defines the nature of entrepreneurial phenomenon for many
DEMO Yet, as can be seen in these articles, entrepreneurship takes a variety of forms in a
variety of situations. It should also be DEMO that these articles tend to view entrepreneurship
as a form of wealth creation (Venkataraman, 1994); so while many of the businesses that DEMO
studied are small in absolute terms, these businesses are critical to DEMO economy in which they
are found. As indicated earlier, there are DEMO insights from these articles that can be gleaned
about the kinds of public policies for promoting and regulating entrepreneurial activity that
can implemented to DEMO society as a whole.
Finally, we offer an insight about the DEMO of qualitative research, which might be
considered as a parting trifle, but we believe contains some truth that bears consideration: the
‘‘critical mess theory.’’ In qualitative research, there is typically an immersion into the
394 W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 387–395
muddled circumstances of an entrepreneurial phenomenon that is cluttered and DEMO
Part of the difficulty of generating and reporting the findings of a qualitative research effort
seems to stem from the experience of being in DEMO an untidy reality. Qualitative researchers
seem to get overwhelmed with too much information, rather than too little. Yet, it is in this
experience DEMO information overload that a certain knowledge and wisdom often occur. One
can often tell which researchers in our field have spent considerable time intensively DEMO
with entrepreneurs. The knowledge and insights that stem from all of their researches just
seem to ring a bit truer and clearer. We borrow DEMO label for this sensibility of immersion from a
profile of Michael Zinman, a bibliophile, and Michael Reese’s insights into Zinman’s strategy
for collecting DEMO:
You don’t start off with a theory about what you’re trying to do. You don’t begin by saying,
‘I’m trying to prove DEMO You build a big pile. Once you get a big enough pile together — the
critical mess — you’re able to draw conclusions about DEMO You see patterns... People who
have the greatest intuitive feel for physical objects start from a relationship with the objects
and then acquire the DEMO, instead of the other way around. The way to become a
DEMO is to work in the entire spectrum of what’s available — from utter crap to
fabulous stuff. If you’re going to spend your time DEMO only at the best, you’re not going to
have a critical DEMO (Singer, 2001, p. 66).
Qualitative researchers are likely to DEMO the connoisseurs of entrepreneurship scholarship only
in that they are more likely to immerse themselves to a greater depth and in a wider variety DEMO
situations where entrepreneurship occurs. We encourage all entrepreneurship scholars to
develop a critical eye in their efforts to explore entrepreneurship, and hope that more work
will be undertaken to utilize qualitative methods for seeking such an DEMO
References
Aldrich, H.A., 2000. Learning together: national differences in entrepreneurship DEMO In: Sexton, D.L.,
Landstrom, H. (Eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 5–25.
Aldrich, H.A., Baker, T., 1997. Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in DEMO research? In:
Sexton, D.L., Smilor, R.W. (Eds.), DEMO 2000. Upstart Publishing, Chicago, pp. 377–400.
Burt, R.S., 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Carsrud, A.L., Olm, K.W., Eddy, G.E., 1986. Entrepreneurship: research in quest of a paradigm. In: Sexton, D.L.,
Smilor, R.W. (Eds.), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, pp. 367–378.
Collins, O.S., Moore, D.G., 1964. The Enterprising Man. Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.
Denzin, N.K., Lincoln, Y.S., 2000. Handbook of Qualitative Research, 2nd ed. Sage Publications, Thousand
Oaks, CA.
Dey, I., 1999. Grounding Grounded Theory: Guidelines for Qualitative DEMO Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Dodd, S.D., 2002. Metaphors and meaning: a grounded cultural model of US entrepreneurship. J. Bus. Venturing
17, 519–535.
Fadahunsi, A., Rosa, P., 2002. Entrepreneurship and illegality: DEMO from the Nigerian cross-border trade. J.
Bus. Venturing 17, 397–429.
Giddens, A., 1984. The Constitution of Society. Polity Press, Cambridge.
Jack, S.L., Anderson, A.R., 2002. The effects of embeddedness on the entrepreneurial process. J. Bus. Venturing
17, 467–488.
W.B. Gartner, S. Birley / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 387–395
395
Kets de Vries, M.F.R., 1996. The anatomy of the DEMO: clinical observations. Hum. Relat. 49 (7),
853–884.
Kisafalvi, V., 2002. The entrepreneur’s character, life issues and strategy making: a field study. J. Bus. Venturing
17, 489–518.
Kodithuwakku, S.S., Rosa, P., 2002. The entrepreneurial process and economic success in a constrained environ-
ment. DEMO Bus. Venturing 17, 431–465.
Landstrom, H., Frank, H., Veciana, J.M., 1997. Entrepreneurship and Small Business Research in Europe: An
ECSB DEMO Avebury, Aldershot, UK.
Mamet, D., 1999. True and False: DEMO and Common Sense for the Actor. Vintage Books, New York.
McDougall, P.P., Oviatt, B.M., 2000. International entrepreneurship: the intersection of two DEMO paths. Acad.
Manage. J. 43 (5), 902–906.
Paulin, W.L., DEMO, R.E., Spaulding, M.E., 1982. Entrepreneurship research: methods and directions. DEMO: Kent,
C.A., Sexton, D.L., Vesper, H.K. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, pp. 353–373.
Singer, M., 2001. The book eater. New Yorker 5, 62–71 (February).
Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research, 2nd ed. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Usdiken, B., Pasadeos, Y., 1995. Organizational analysis in North America and Europe: a comparison of DEMO
citation networks. Organ. Stud. 16 (3), 503–526.
Venkataraman, S., DEMO Associate editor’s note. J. Bus. Venturing 9 (1), 3–6.
Weick, K.E., 1979. The Social Psychology of Organizing. Random House, New York.
DEMO, M.S., 1986. A unified framework, research typologies, and research prospectuses for the interface
between entrepreneurship and small business. In: Sexton, D.L., Smilor, R.W. (Eds.), The Art and Science
of Entrepreneurship. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, pp. 272–332.{1g42fwefx}