Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
DOI 10.1007/s11162-011-9247-y
From Gatekeeping DEMO Engagement: A Multicontextual,
Mixed Method Study of Student Academic Engagement
DEMO Introductory STEM Courses
Josephine A. Gasiewski • M. Kevin Eagan • Gina A. Garcia •
Sylvia Hurtado • Mitchell J. Chang
Received: 1 June 2011 / Published online: 14 December 2011
 The Author(s) DEMO This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract The lack of academic engagement in introductory science courses is considered
by some to DEMO a primary reason why students switch out of science majors. This study
employed a sequential, explanatory mixed methods approach to provide a richer under-
standing of the relationship between student engagement and introductory science
instruction. Quantitative DEMO data were drawn from 2,873 students within 73 intro-
ductory science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses across 15
colleges and universities, and qualitative data were collected from 41 student focus groups
at eight of these institutions. The ﬁndings indicate that students tended to be DEMO engaged
in courses where the instructor consistently signaled an openness to student questions and
recognizes her/his role in helping students succeed. Likewise, students who reported
feeling comfortable asking questions in class, seeking out tutoring, DEMO supplemental
instruction sessions, and collaborating with other students in the course DEMO also more
likely to be engaged. Instructional implications for improving students’ levels of academic
engagement are discussed.
Keywords Introductory courses
Gatekeepers  Active learning
DEMO
STEM

Mixed methods

Student engagement

Introduction
In discussing why students leave science, Daryl Chubin, director of the American Asso-
ciation DEMO the Advancement of Sciences’ Center for Advancing Science & Engineering
Capacity, DEMO: ‘‘The culture of science says, ‘Not everybody is good enough to cut it,
and we’re going to make it hard for them, and the cream will rise to the top’’’ (Epstein
2006). Nowhere is this more evident than in introductory ‘‘gatekeeper’’ courses, those
initial introductory college math and science courses which either explicitly or implicitly
J. A. DEMO (&)  M. K. Eagan  G. A. Garcia  S. Hurtado  M. J. Chang
University of California, 405 Hilgard Ave., DEMO Moore Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521, USA
e-mail: joski@ucla.edu
123
230 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
function to eliminate all DEMO the ‘top tier’ students and champion the concept that ‘‘sci-
entists are born, not made’’ (Tobias 1990, p. 11). It is within the ﬁrst 2 years of taking these
courses that the majority of DEMO in the sciences occurs in college (Chang et al. 2008;
DEMO and Hewitt 1997). In fact, Seymour and Hewitt (1997) DEMO STEM students’
performance in introductory courses as one of the key indicators as to whether they switch
out of their intended STEM majors during DEMO
Scholars have linked these high attrition rates to several factors, including DEMO reliance on
large lecture-based courses and lack of engaging pedagogy. Although it may represent an
efﬁcient method for presenting a tremendous amount of content DEMO a large audience, lecture
tends to encourage one-way, passive, superﬁcial DEMO (Biggs 1999; Bransford et al.
2000; Moore et al. 1996; Seymour and Hewitt 1997). Additionally, lectures tend to pro-
mote memorization over conceptual understanding (Bligh 2000; Booth 2001; Knight and
Wood 2005; Novak et al. 1999). Indeed, college-level introductory science and mathe-
DEMO courses have been shown to focus too much on the acquisition of content knowl-
edge through memorization and too little on the development of DEMO skills
related to critical thinking and scientiﬁc literacy (Handelsman et al. DEMO; Hurd 1997;
Williams et al. 2004). Instead, Glasson and Lalik (1993) argue that students need to reﬂect
on, relate to, and examine concepts as they are presented as part of an active, constructive
process. According to Thalheimer (2003), unless a student cognitively DEMO a question
and participates in answering it (even if mentally), DEMO rarely takes place. This higher
level of engagement is unlikely to occur in traditional lecture classes where the constant
stream of information leaves students DEMO to take accurate notes with little time to
process questions and concepts (Beswick and Ramsden 1987).
The critics of introductory ‘‘gatekeeper’’ courses in STEM have argued that traditional
lecture-based courses need to be transformed from DEMO, instructor-led classrooms to
dynamic student-centered learning arenas (National Research Council [NRC], 2003; Wood
2003). The movement espousing this transformation has gained DEMO support from
national funders including: the National Science Foundation, the National Science
Resources Center, the National Science Teachers Association, the National Institutes DEMO
Health (NIH), and many professional scientiﬁc societies. The call for DEMO active learning
in introductory science courses has led to a burgeoning body of research known as the
scholarship of teaching (Boyer 1990), conducted by the research scientists teaching these
courses, that investigates student outcomes related to these strategies. Scholars, however,
have not given as much attention to the climate of introductory courses that students
encounter during their ﬁrst DEMO of college, particularly in the STEM context. Given that
introductory STEM DEMO may serve as a critical barrier to students’ progress toward
their STEM degree aspirations, an examination of the relationship between students’
experiences in these courses and their resultant self-reported engagement is warranted, as a
substantial proportion of intended science majors decide to leave STEM ﬁelds by the end
DEMO the ﬁrst year of college (Chang et al. 2008).
Using DEMO sequential, explanatory mixed methods approach, this study draws from
quantitative survey data from 73 introductory STEM courses across 15 colleges and uni-
versities DEMO combination with qualitative data collected from focus groups with students
enrolled in these courses at eight of these institutions to examine the learning strategies DEMO
pedagogical practices that best relate to students’ self-reported academic engagement.
With this research design, we sought not only to examine the predictive power of speciﬁc
learning strategies and classroom contexts that relate to STEM students’ engagement DEMO
introductory courses but also to further support and enrich these ﬁndings through students’
narrative experiences of being enrolled in these courses.
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 231
The Importance of Academic DEMO
In the early 1980s, Astin (1984, 1985) and Pace (DEMO), and later Kuh et al. (1991)
pioneered the early DEMO in student engagement theory. Despite their use of various terms,
‘‘their views were based on the simple, but powerful, premise that students DEMO from what
they do in college’’ (Pike and Kuh 2005, p. 186). While this basic premise still holds true
today, academic engagement continues to be deﬁned by scholars in a number of nuanced
ways. DEMO et al. (2004) note that academic engagement represents a multifaceted
construct that includes three dimensions: behavioral, emotional, and cognitive. Behavioral
engagement encompasses student involvement in academic tasks and includes measures of
effort, asking questions, and paying attention in class (Birch and Ladd 1997). Emotional
DEMO relates to students’ feelings of boredom, anxiety, and excitement in the
classroom (Connell and Wellborn 1991; Skinner and Belmont 1993), and DEMO
engagement is conceptualized as students’ investment in learning with measures relating to
individuals’ commitment to working hard and exceeding expectations (Connell and
Wellborn 1991; Greene and Miller 1996). In conceptualizing this study, we deﬁne
DEMO as mainly behavioral and draw from several studies that have examined this
form of engagement. Svanum and Bigatti (2009) measured course engagement as DEMO
dance in lectures and review sessions whereas Larose et al. (1998) conceptualized
engagement simply as collaboration with other students. Handelsman et al. (2005) oper-
ationalized course engagement as interaction with course content both inside and outside
the classroom.
In this study, we also draw from theories of motivation and learning to offer insight into
the psychological traits that foster DEMO behavioral academic engagement among stu-
dents. Hofer (2002) maintains that extrinsically motivated students focus more on earning
grades and receiving recognition from their DEMO and professors rather than empha-
sizing concept mastery. Thus, a drive DEMO higher grades, admission into a particular pro-
gram, or recognition from faculty, such as a letter of recommendation, may motivate
students to DEMO more engaged in the classroom. By contrast, Ryan and Deci (2000)
argue that intrinsically motivated students have a greater likelihood of having DEMO
educational experiences in the classroom due to their interest and enjoyment in learning for
the sake of learning. These students are likely to become DEMO engaged when instructors
provide them greater autonomy and choice regarding learning exploration (McCombs
1991). Thus, students who lack excitement for course material DEMO go unchallenged by the
rigor of the academic work may demonstrate lower levels of engagement in the classroom.
In addition to motivation, other student factors also inﬂuence engagement. Students who
lack conﬁdence in their ability to DEMO may also lack willingness to engage in their
courses (Rocca 2010)DEMO Similarly, feelings of intimidation and inadequacy may prohibit
students from participating DEMO class, particularly when the intimidation is tied to a lack of
DEMO of course content (Fassinger 1995; Weaver and Qi 2005). These psycho-
logical factors may well promote or prohibit students’ academic engagement in DEMO
ductory STEM courses.
Faculty behaviors that set the classroom context also contribute to students’ academic
engagement. Many scholars, including Chickering and Gamson (1987), Ewell and Jones
(1996), and Tinto (1993, 2000), DEMO documented the strong association between faculty-
student interactions and increased student learning and engagement. Students often arrive at
college not knowing whom or how DEMO ask for help, and faculty shape the climate and
classroom activities DEMO orient students in ways that affect their likelihood of success. When
it comes to providing access to institutional resources and socializing students in the DEMO
123
232 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
process, for example, DEMO signal accessibility cues that indicate to students their openness
to questions and availability for support (Wilson et al. 1974). Crombie et al. (DEMO) also
found that students who sensed that their instructors cared about DEMO demonstrated
increased levels of engagement in their courses, which underscores the DEMO of faculty
behavior. Mutual respect in the classroom that values student contributions and encourages
participation and questions provides for a more inviting classroom climate DEMO promotes
greater engagement (Crombie et al. 2003; Dallimore et al. 2004). When instructors validate
and afﬁrm students’ responses to questions, they also increase students’ willingness to
participate and engage in class (West and Pearson 1994). Thus, while academic engagement
has been conceptualized as an attribute of student behavior, it is also dependent on the
classroom context, DEMO the interchange between the instructor and students.
To summarize, there is DEMO long and well established link between academic engagement,
performance, and DEMO (Astin 1993; Hurtado and Carter 1997; Pascarella and Ter-
enzini DEMO; Stage and Hossler 2000), which is particularly relevant to STEM DEMO
graduate education (Seymour and Hewitt 1997). Academically engaged students have DEMO
increased likelihood of persisting beyond the ﬁrst year of college (Nelson DEMO et al.
2008), and students who participate more in class and seek out faculty during ofﬁce hours
also tend to earn signiﬁcantly higher DEMO grades (Handelsman et al. 2005).
Overall, being more academically engaged improves students’ motivation, critical thinking
skills, personal character, and academic abilities (Gellin 2003; Pike 1999, 2000; Pike and
Killian 2001; Rocca 2010).
Active Learning Pedagogies
Another important consideration for this study are DEMO learning based teaching strategies
(NRC 2003; Wood 2003), which are generally understood as techniques that promote
student engagement in the learning process (Prince 2004). Chickering and Gamson (1987)
argue that active learning techniques require students to write, think, and talk about their
learning DEMO simultaneously applying it to their own lives. Instructors who encourage
active learning amongst their students have an opportunity to capitalize on students’
intrinsic motivation, which can lead to greater academic engagement (Tagg 2003).
According to Tagg (2003), by incorporating collaborative activities and real-world
applications into teaching, instructors have the capacity to encourage greater compre-
hension and learning, DEMO students engage with one another to better master a concept and
are able to take conceptual knowledge and apply it to real-world problems. At DEMO
undergraduate level, this may include a number of in- and out-of-class DEMO, such as
team projects and peer reviews that promote a deeper DEMO of understanding (Chickering
and Gamson 1987). Similarly, Rogers and Freiberg (1994) argue for a person-centered
approach to teaching whereby faculty facilitate DEMO acquisition through a variety of
pedagogical methods rather than simply distributing knowledge through lecture. It is this
active process of learning that, according to Handelsman et al. (2004), helps students to
develop the habits of mind that drive science.
Although critics often note that STEM faculty are DEMO to embrace active learning
practices in introductory courses, the use of DEMO strategies appears to be growing. Some
examples of more widely used strategies include ‘‘bookending’’ the lecture with questions
that tightly focus student discussion, incorporating student response systems, requiring
group projects and presentations, implementing peer-led team DEMO, and introducing
problem-based learning or case studies (Allen and Tanner 2005). A number of researchers
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 233
have tested these active DEMO strategies, but the impact on course satisfaction and
grades tends to DEMO mixed.
One active learning strategy that has been implemented and tested in numerous settings
is the use of student response systems or ‘‘clickers.’’ Caldwell (2007) contends that the use
of clickers may increase attendance and engagement while decreasing course attrition.
Clickers have the potential to increase students’ understanding DEMO course content, as they
provide immediate signals to the instructor that DEMO have not fully grasped the concept
from a lecture or demonstration; DEMO, instructors must also have an adaptive response
with immediate feedback once DEMO become aware of students’ difﬁculty in grasping
concepts (Caldwell 2007; Crossgrove and Curran 2008). These devices have also been
shown to increase DEMO attentiveness and alertness in class (Nagy-Shadman and
Desrochers 2008).
Another DEMO learning approach includes collaborative and cooperative learning,
which researchers have examined in the context of introductory science courses. Such
strategies include, but are not limited to, Just in Time Teaching, Peer-Led Team Learning,
DEMO, inquiry labs, and problem-based learning (Smith et al. 2005). DEMO and
cooperative learning strategies require students to work together, but Prince (2004) dis-
tinguishes the two based on the method of assessment; DEMO cooperative learning, students are
graded individually while collaborative learning techniques call DEMO a group-based grade.
Some studies have found that adding cooperative problem solving and student participation
activities to class results in increased learning gains and DEMO levels of conceptual
understanding (Knight and Woods 2005; Tagg 2003).
Web-based pedagogy in introductory courses is another way to engage students by
DEMO in-class lectures with out-of-class web-enhanced activities. It has become
popular over the past decade with the introduction of programs such as WebCT, Black-
board, and eClassroom. McFarlin (2008) found that students who took a course that offers
50% of the course content via traditional methods and 50% DEMO the web (‘‘hybrid’’ courses)
reported appreciating the self-paced nature of DEMO technology, which enhanced
autonomy as advocated by McCombs (1991). Students in hybrid courses also reported that
they enjoyed using web-based technology for DEMO course materials and interacting
with their peers and instructors (Smith et DEMO 2005). Thus, such practices have the potential
to increase student DEMO
Unfortunately, the research regarding active learning pedagogy is somewhat limited.
Most DEMO the studies have been conducted in one or two classrooms at one institution by the
instructors responsible for implementing these strategies while teaching the DEMO This
research design is problematic, given the difﬁculty in generalizing ﬁndings DEMO one
setting and possible inherent bias on the part of the researcher who is testing a method in
his/her own course. Additionally, a majority of the research has been quantitative in nature
with data collected DEMO surveys and course evaluations. The present study addresses these
limitations through the use of a mixed-methods approach across multiple classrooms and
institutions. We have DEMO both quantitative and qualitative data at multiple institu-
tions in hopes of reporting more generalizable ﬁndings enhanced by nuanced explorations
of engagement in introductory DEMO classrooms.
Methodology
To address student engagement in introductory STEM classrooms, we DEMO a sequential
explanatory mixed methods design, which consisted of collecting, analyzing, and
123
234 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
integrating both quantitative and DEMO data during the research process (Creswell
2005; Teddlie and Tashakkori 2009). This approach was taken as neither quantitative nor
qualitative methods were DEMO sufﬁcient to capture the breadth and depth of student
experiences across multiple introductory STEM classrooms (Johnson et al. 2007). When
properly combined, DEMO and qualitative methods can complement each other and
provide a more complete picture of the research problem (Creswell and Plano Clark 2011;
Green et al. 1989; Johnson and Turner 2003; Tashakkori and Teddlie 1998)DEMO The quanti-
tative data were collected ﬁrst, preliminarily analyzed, and used to inform the selection of
institutional sites for qualitative data collection. The DEMO of the quantitative and qual-
itative phases were then more fully integrated in the results and discussion sections.
In integrating the quantitative and qualitative DEMO, we aimed to satisfy the mixed
methods evaluation criteria deﬁned by DEMO and Plano Clark (2011) wherein they
describe ‘‘results or interpretation sections in which the authors explicitly brought together
the two databases’’ (p. 269). Additionally, we were guided by Bryman et al.’s (2008)
DEMO for evaluating mixed methods studies, which further emphasized integration or
mixing DEMO ﬁndings and the importance of providing a rationale for utilizing mixed methods.
In this study, the quantitative data and results provided a general picture of students’
engagement nested in 73 classrooms and 15 institutions, whereas the qualitative data
reﬁned and explained those statistical results by exploring the participants’ DEMO regarding
their introductory classroom experience in more depth. (See Fig. 1 DEMO a diagram of the
mixed methods sequential explanatory design procedures employed in this study.) The use
of this ﬁgure itself, utilizing the standardized DEMO methods research notational system,
satisﬁes one of the nine general characteristics of quality in mixed methods research
(Tashakkori and Teddlie 2010). This mixed method design not only enhances explanation
but also provides an opportunity DEMO cross-validation of ﬁndings across techniques and
across multiple institutions, which enhances DEMO of the ﬁndings while also
maintaining an emphasis on contextual differences.
Quantitative Design
Sample
The quantitative data for this study come from three surveys DEMO during the spring of
2010: a pre- and post-survey of students DEMO introductory STEM courses and a one-time
survey of faculty teaching these introductory science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) courses. In the fall of 2010, we identiﬁed 15 campuses to participate
in a study of introductory STEM courses funded by the NIH through the American
Recovery and DEMO Act (ARRA) of 2009. These campuses varied by institutional
control, DEMO, selectivity, minority-serving status [i.e., Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) and Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs)], geographic region, and
Carnegie classiﬁcation.
DEMO each campus, we worked with administrators to identify introductory STEM
courses. DEMO total of 81 separate courses composed the classroom sample, and the DEMO of
courses selected within each institution ranged from one to 18, DEMO the average institution
having ﬁve courses. These introductory courses spanned several disciplines and included
such courses as calculus, pre-calculus, cell biology, introduction to design, introduction to
computer science, introduction to physics, and general chemistry, among others. After
identifying introductory STEM courses within each institution, we DEMO all students
enrolled in these selected courses with an invitation to participate in an online survey.
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 235
Phase
QUANTITATIVE
Data Collection
DEMO
•
•
Procedure
Institutional and course
identification
Survey administration
Registrar’s data
collection
•
Product
Quantitative data on
innovations in 73
classrooms
Connecting
Quantitative
and DEMO Phases
Qualitative Data
Collection
•
•
•
•
Developing qualitative
interview protocol
Purposefully selecting
institutions based on
innovation and
participation
Focus groups with 241
DEMO participants
Demographic
questionnaire
•
•
•
•
•
Participant cases
Faculty cases
Institutional cases
2000 pages of
transcription
Participant background
questionnaires
QUANTITATIVE
Analysis
•
DEMO
•
Descriptive analyses
Factor analysis
Multivariate analyses
•
•
•
Factors
Correlations
Multivariate statistics
Qualitative
Analysis
•
•
Coding and thematic
analysis
NVivo8 qualitative
DEMO data sorting
•
•
•
NVivo coding
architecture
Coded transcriptions
Casebook linking
demographic data with
interview data
Integration of the
Quantitative and
Qualitative Results
DEMO
•
Cross validation of
findings by technique
Significant quantitative
themes are nuanced by
qualitative data and
integrated
•
•
•
Conclusion
Discussion
Implications
Fig. DEMO Visual model of mixed-methods design procedures (adapted from Ivankova et al. DEMO)
This initial survey, administered at the beginning of the academic DEMO, requested
information on students’ pre-college preparation, pre-college experiences, background
characteristics, and educational and career plans. Two weeks prior to the end of DEMO
academic term, we invited all students in these introductory courses to DEMO a follow-
up survey, which post-tested career and educational aspirations and DEMO about stu-
dents’ experiences inside and outside the context of their introductory course, their
123
236 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
perceptions of faculty members’ DEMO style, and scientiﬁc habits of mind. We
piloted versions of these DEMO student surveys during the 2006–2007 academic year, and
many of the DEMO items were developed from Conley’s (2005) work on the development
of scientiﬁc dispositions and collegiate habits of mind. Copies of the survey instrument DEMO
available upon request. Students received a $10 gift card for completing each survey. In
total, 3,205 students completed both surveys, which provided DEMO a longitudinal response
rate of 42.1%.
In addition to the student surveys, we conducted a survey of all faculty teaching these 81
introductory STEM courses. The faculty survey requested information regarding faculty
members’ pedagogical styles in DEMO introductory courses, their expectations of students,
their perceptions of students’ DEMO, and issues of faculty workload. Faculty members
received a $100 gift DEMO for completing the survey, and the response rate for the faculty
DEMO was 90.1%.
After deleting cases with missing data on the outcome and demographic characteristics
and deleting students in courses where faculty did not complete DEMO survey, the ﬁnal analytic
sample for this study includes 2,873 DEMO in 73 introductory STEM courses across 15
colleges and universities. The institutional sample for the quantitative portion of the study
included a balanced mix DEMO public and private institutions; research, masters, and
minority-serving institutions, including three HBCUs and two HSIs. A majority of the
student sample identiﬁed DEMO White (52%), and 61% of students were women. Nearly half
(42%) of students aspired to earn a medical degree, and 21% DEMO students wanted to earn a
Ph.D. or an Ed.D. Approximately 75% of students reported majoring in a STEM discipline.
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics DEMO all variables included in the analysis.
Variables
The dependent variable in the quantitative analyses represents the extent to which students
reported being academically engaged DEMO their introductory STEM course. Eight items
compose the factor of behavioral academic engagement: frequency with which students
asked questions in class, discussed course DEMO or assignments with the instructor,
attended professor’s ofﬁce hours, participated DEMO class discussions, tutored other students in
their introductory STEM course, reviewed class material before it was covered, attended
review or help sessions to enhance understanding of course content, and studied with
students from their introductory STEM course. In creating this construct, we relied on the
work of Handelsman et al. (2004) and Fredricks et al. (2004), with the items reﬂecting the
behaviors of students who strive for excellence in DEMO science and are the activities of
successful students. Principal axis factoring suggested a single-factor solution for these
eight items, and Table 2 provides the factor loadings for an academic engagement con-
struct, which had a Cronbach’s a of 0.75.
The initial exploratory factor analysis included items related to DEMO engagement,
such as feeling excited about learning new concepts, and DEMO items loaded separately on a
factor that appeared to represent emotional engagement. We detected no cross-loading of
items between the behavioral and emotional engagement DEMO and decided to proceed
with statistical model that used course experiences, DEMO characteristics, emotional
engagement measures, and classroom contexts to predict variation in students’ behavioral
academic engagement.
To predict variation across students in their reported DEMO of academic engagement in
their introductory STEM course, we included several DEMO predictors that address
students’ demographics, prior academic achievement (Rocca 2010), intrinsic and extrinsic
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 237
Table 1 Descriptive statistics DEMO variables included in the HLM analysis
Mean SD Min. Max.
Dependent variable
Academic engagement 0.00 1.00 -1.60 2.62
Course-level variables
Faculty course goal: Use technology to effectively engage students 3.16 0.88 1.00 4.00
Faculty agreement: In my classroom, there is no such thing as a question 3.52 0.82 1.00 4.00
that is too elementary
Faculty agreement: I feel it is primarily up to students whether they succeed 3.00 0.72 1.00 4.00
in DEMO course
Faculty agreement: There is not enough time available to give DEMO student 3.05 1.00 1.00 4.00
individualized attention
Tenure status: Tenured (reference group: not on tenure track) 0.42 0.50 0.00 1.00
Tenure status: Not tenured, on tenure track 0.13 0.34 0.00 1.00
(reference group: not on tenure track)
Student-level variables
Sex: Female 0.61 0.48 0.00 1.00
Race: White (reference group: non-White) 0.52 0.50 0.00 1.00
DEMO composite score (9100) 12.58 1.55 4.00 16.00
HS biology grade 3.73 0.51 1.00 4.00
HS chemistry grade 3.65 0.57 0.00 4.00
Earned college DEMO credits in high school 0.21 0.41 0.00 1.00
Freshman (reference group: non freshman) 0.60 0.49 0.00 1.00
Degree aspiration: Medical doctorate 0.42 DEMO 0.00 1.00
(reference group: all other aspirations)
Frequency: Asked DEMO teacher for advice or help outside of class in HS 1.94 0.66 1.00 3.00
Self-rating: Communication skills 3.69 0.90 1.00 5.00
Self-rating: Initiative-taking DEMO 0.88 1.00 5.00
Self-rating: Ability to know when and whom to DEMO for help 3.63 0.89 1.00 5.00
Agreement: Faculty gave students written DEMO on their performance 2.59 0.98 1.00 4.00
or progress in the course
Self-rating: Competitiveness 2.62 0.93 1.00 5.00
Frequency: Sought tutoring from a DEMO ofﬁce or program 2.26 1.41 1.00 5.00
Frequency: Sought a professional (off-campus) tutor 1.71 1.17 1.00 5.00
Frequency: Attended supplemental instruction sessions DEMO 2.15 1.00 13.00
Frequency: Felt excited about learning new concepts 3.13 DEMO 1.00 5.00
Frequency: Felt collaboration among other students in this course DEMO 1.12 1.00 5.00
Proportion of class time devoted to lecture 5.84 1.16 1.00 7.00
Proportion of class time devoted to class discussion 2.48 1.56 DEMO 7.00
Proportion of class time devoted to group work 1.95 1.32 1.00 7.00
Agreement: Felt my hard work was reﬂected in my grades 2.68 0.84 1.00 4.00
Agreement: Felt comfortable asking questions in class 2.71 0.79 1.00 4.00
Agreement: I was motivated to try hard on course 3.07 0.74 1.00 4.00
assignments and exams
Agreement: I received feedback that helped me learn and improve 2.62 0.77 1.00 4.00
123
238 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
Table 2 Factor loadings DEMO
academic engagement
Note. The scale for each the ﬁrst
seven items ranged from
1 = never to 5 = very often; the
scale for ‘‘studied with other
students from this course’’ ranged
from 1 = 0 DEMO per week to
13 = more than 10 h per week
Cronbach’s a
Factor
loading
Academic engagement 0.75
Asked questions in class 0.73
Discussed DEMO or assignments 0.71
with the instructor
Attended my professor’s ofﬁce hours 0.69
Participated in class discussions 0.59
Tutored other students in this class 0.57
DEMO class material before it was 0.53
covered
Attended review or help sessions to enhance 0.46
understanding of the content of the course
Studied with DEMO students from this course 0.38
motivation (Hofer 2002; Ryan and Deci 2000), and connections to and perceptions of
institutional agents, or faculty (Stanton-Salazar 2010). The analyses examined the pre-
dictive power of aspiring to a medical degree (compared to any other degree), which
served as a proxy for respondents’ extrinsic motivation, as we hypothesized that pre-med
students may demonstrate greater levels of engagement due to the competitive nature DEMO
medical school admissions. Measures of intrinsic motivation included students’ self-rated
competitiveness, DEMO, excitement for the course, and motivation to try hard on
exams.
Regarding students’ connections to institutional agents, we examined how students’
connections with teachers in high school and their likelihood to seek tutoring or supple-
DEMO instruction (SI) related to their academic engagement in the course. Three items
measured students’ reports of the pedagogical methods used in the course: proportion of
time devoted to lecture, class discussion, and group work. DEMO climate was repre-
sented by students’ perception that their hard work was reﬂected in their grades (fairness),
their sense of collaboration among DEMO peers, and their level of comfort asking questions
in class.
To DEMO for variation across classrooms, we included several course-level variables
collected from DEMO faculty survey. The level-2 model includes faculty perceptions of the
climate they perpetuate in their classroom, their goals for undergraduate education, and
dummy DEMO representing whether faculty have earned tenure or are on the tenure
track (compared to their colleagues who are not on the tenure track). Because of the limited
number of institutions in our sample, we did not include any predictors at level 3, the
institutional model. Table 4 in the Appendix includes all of the variables and their coding
schemes.
DEMO
Before using multivariate statistical techniques to analyze the data, we ﬁrst DEMO the
data to adjust for non-response bias and accounted for cases with missing data. To adjust
for non-response bias, we weighted the data by race, gender, and class standing, all of
which were collected for the population of students enrolled in our selected introductory
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 239
STEM courses within each DEMO We then used logistic regression to determine the
probability of responding to both surveys for each student originally enrolled in the
introductory course. The DEMO given to each student was the inverse of the probability of
responding to both surveys. Thus, a student with a 33% probability of responding to both
surveys received a weight of 3. We then normalized the DEMO to avoid inﬂated t-statistics.
To account for missing data, we relied DEMO the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm
for all ordinal and continuous student-level variables excluding the dependent variable. For
student respondents with missing data on DEMO variables or the dependent variable,
we used listwise deletion of cases. The vast majority of variables had fewer than 5% of
cases with DEMO data, and composite SAT score had the highest proportion of missing
DEMO at 12.1%. The EM algorithm relies on maximum likelihood techniques to impute
missing values when variables have a small proportion of missing data (Allison 2002;
McLachlan and Krishnan 1997), and thus this method provides DEMO a more robust process
of handling missing data than mean replacement or listwise deletion (McLachlan and
Krishnan 1997). A drawback to the EM algorithm is that it provides a single imputation for
missing values, and more recent research suggests missing values may be a source of
variation DEMO and of itself, and averaging over that variation requires more sophisticated
DEMO, such as multiple imputation (Sinharay et al. 2001).
After accounting for missing data and weighting the data for non-response bias, we
began descriptive and multivariate analyses of the data. The quantitative data represent a
DEMO nested design, as students are clustered within classrooms which are clustered
DEMO institutions. Given the clustered nature of the data and the continuous outcome
variable, we used a three-level hierarchical linear model (HLM). HLM DEMO the most
appropriate statistical technique when analyzing multi-level, clustered data, as this method
accounts for the homogeneity of errors with groups (i.e., DEMO and institutions);
additionally, using HLM helps researchers to avoid making a Type I statistical error by
erroneously concluding the signiﬁcance of a DEMO (Raudenbush and Bryk 2002).
HLM avoids violating the assumption of DEMO of observations by partitioning
variance to each respective level (i.e., student, classroom, and institution). Furthermore,
HLM provides for a more DEMO estimation of cross-level effects (i.e., slopes as out-
comes) where DEMO can examine how variables at one level affect the relationship
between an independent predictor and the dependent variable at another level (Raudenbush
and Bryk 2002).
To justify the use of HLM, the outcome variable must differ signiﬁcantly across groups.
For this study, we determined the extent of variation in the students’ self-reported aca-
demic engagement across classrooms and institutions DEMO running a fully unconditional
model (Raudenbush and Bryk 2002). The DEMO unconditional model produced estimates of
the intra-class correlation (ICC), or DEMO extent to which academic engagement signiﬁcant
varied across classrooms and across institutions. These estimates suggested that 3.1 and
4.1% of the variance in academic DEMO was attributable to differences across
classrooms and institutions, respectively. In other DEMO, classrooms and institutions
appear to have a marginal effect on students’ DEMO engagement, and the vast majority
of variance we see in academic DEMO can be attributed to differences between
students. Although these ICCs indicate that nearly all (92.8%) of the variation in academic
engagement occurs at DEMO student level, given our interest in examining pedagogical issues
of classroom DEMO and appropriately accounting for the three-stage nested design, we
proceeded with DEMO HLM analysis using a three-level model. Similar to other research with
a limited number of observations at level 3 (e.g., Marks 2000), DEMO level-3 model only
includes the random intercept, as having just 15 DEMO at level 3 limits our ability to
123
240 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
make robust statistical inferences DEMO institutional predictors; however, we believe it is
important to account for the clustering of students and classrooms within institutions given
potential similarities of DEMO and students within each institution (Raudenbush and Bryk
2002).
Qualitative DEMO
In the second, qualitative phase, we purposefully selected institutions based upon their high
rates of participation in our quantitative survey and the resultant DEMO of higher
amounts of classroom innovation occurring on each campus. In sum, 41 focus groups were
conducted over a ﬁve-month time span, from DEMO 2010 to February 2011, with 241
student participants from eight universities DEMO the United States: one HSI, one HBCU,
and six predominantly White institutions (PWI). Of these institutions, four are publically
funded, and four are privately funded. We include a chart summarizing key characteristics
DEMO each institution in Table 5 in the Appendix, where we report DEMO full-time enrollment,
funding, predominant racial designation, Carnegie Classiﬁcation, region, SAT selectivity
measure, and annual research dollars. Yet when reporting student quotes we include only
the institutional descriptors of geographic location, public versus private, and Carnegie
classiﬁcation to provide the reader with an identiﬁer based on context.
The student sample included 14% African Americans, 54% Whites, 8% DEMO/as, 21%
Asian Americans, and 3% Native American; 62% were DEMO; 42% were freshmen, 33%
sophomores, 18% juniors, and 1% seniors; 30% of the student sample described them-
selves as pre-med, while DEMO 4% described themselves as pre-dental.
The student focus groups consisted of students either currently enrolled in introductory
STEM courses or students who had completed DEMO courses and participated in our
quantitative data collection in spring 2010. We asked students to describe their experiences
in introductory STEM courses through a DEMO of nine main questions and corresponding
probes, centering around student motivation, course structure, learning, instruction, and
assessment, allowing their responses to DEMO the order with which we asked the
questions.
Focus group interviews, DEMO from 60 to 90 min, were conducted with two to ten
DEMO per session, averaging ﬁve focus groups per campus. We utilized a DEMO
structured interview technique that allowed us to respond ‘‘to the situation at hand, to the
emerging worldview of the respondent, and to new DEMO on the topic’’ (Merriam 1998,
p. 74). Maxwell (2005) suggests that this technique increases the ‘‘internal validity and
contextual understanding and is particularly useful in revealing the processes that led to
speciﬁc outcomes’’ (p. 80). Prior to the interviews, participants were asked to complete a
brief biographical questionnaire, which gathered data on a range of relevant background
characteristics (e.g., demographic information, educational attainment, and research
experience)DEMO All interviews were digitally recorded, transcribed verbatim by a professional
transcription DEMO, checked for accuracy, and loaded into NVivo8 qualitative
software.
In order to develop the coding architecture utilized in NVivo, each transcript was open
coded by examining the raw data and identifying salient themes supported by DEMO text.
This constant comparative approach followed an inductive process of narrowing from
particular (text segments) to larger themes while allowing the researcher to DEMO ‘‘to
‘saturate’ the categories—to look for instances that represent the category and to continue
looking until the new information does not provide further insight DEMO the category’’
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 241
(Creswell 2005, pp. DEMO). Our team of six researchers each read transcripts from two
institutions, gathering and comparing themes across focus groups and institutions, which
also DEMO analytical triangulation (Patton 2002). Once we determined that we had
DEMO saturation in generating themes, we developed several iterations of coding
schemes, wherein codes were created, expanded, deﬁned, and reﬁned. These categories/
themes in the raw data were then labeled as ‘‘nodes.’’ Six researchers DEMO coded
three randomly selected sections of text, and inter-coder reliability ratings DEMO
ranged between 80% and 85% (Miles and Huberman 1994). Following DEMO reli-
ability exercises, the coding was re-validated and we were able DEMO add new codes and sub-
codes where necessary. Once the coding structure was ﬁnalized, we utilized 22 primary
nodes, 114 secondary nodes, and 14 tertiary nodes in NVivo8. The data selected were
stored under the DEMO and the link to the full record was maintained. After these bins of
relevant data were created, we re-read the data repeatedly in order to solidify our
understanding and see connections amongst the categories. Queries were DEMO linking
participant attributes with coding references.
Findings
Academic Engagement in STEM Classrooms
Quantitative results provide general information about the relationship between student
learning strategies, faculty attitudes and characteristics, pedagogical techniques, and stu-
dent level engagement DEMO introductory STEM courses and are enhanced by qualitative
ﬁndings that provide more detail about student perspectives about their own and faculty
behavior. The ﬁndings DEMO integrated, or ‘‘mixed,’’ throughout the results section and
discussed in DEMO of direction (i.e., more vs. less engaged). Table 3 provides a full
accounting of the HLM results analyzing students’ academic engagement. Among DEMO
student-level variables, the ﬁndings suggest that White and students of color DEMO not sig-
niﬁcantly differ in their reported level of academic engagement in introductory STEM
courses. Likewise, we detect no signiﬁcant differences across gender. Only one of the four
pre-college preparation variables remained signiﬁcant to the ﬁnal DEMO: high school
chemistry grade. Students who reported earning higher grades in DEMO school chemistry
also reported themselves to be signiﬁcantly more academically engaged in their intro-
ductory college STEM courses; however, high school biology grade, SAT composite score,
and earning college math credits did not signiﬁcantly DEMO students’ academic
engagement in introductory STEM courses. Freshmen reported signiﬁcantly higher levels
of academic engagement in introductory courses than students who had been in DEMO for
a longer period of time, which suggests that students who DEMO to fulﬁll STEM course
requirements are likely to be less engaged.
Although background characteristics and pre-college preparation largely lacked sig-
niﬁcance in predicting students’ DEMO in introductory STEM courses, the quanti-
tative ﬁndings suggest that students DEMO felt excited about learning new concepts tended to
report signiﬁcantly higher levels of engagement. Initially, we examined students’ interest
in taking introductory courses, DEMO taking the course for personal interest predicted higher
levels of engagement; DEMO, when we added students’ sense of excitement about
learning new concepts DEMO the model, this variable accounted for the predictive power of the
DEMO interest variable. This ﬁnding suggests that a genuine interest in learning, DEMO
than simply striving to make a certain grade in the course, DEMO signiﬁcantly related to
123
242 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
Table 3 HLM results DEMO students’ academic engagement
Coef. SE Sig.
Course-level variables
Faculty course goal: DEMO technology to effectively engage students 0.03 0.02
Faculty agreement: In my DEMO, there is no such thing 0.05 0.02 *
as a question DEMO is too elementary
Faculty agreement: I feel it is primarily up DEMO students whether they -0.04 0.02 *
succeed in this course
Faculty agreement: There is not enough time available to give every -0.03 0.01 *
student individualized attention
Tenure status: Tenured (reference group: not on tenure track) 0.09 0.04 *
Tenure status: Not tenured, on tenure track (reference group: not on 0.10 0.06
tenure track)
Student characteristics DEMO pre-college variables
Sex: Female -0.03 0.02
Race: White (reference group: non-White) 0.02 0.03
SAT composite score 0.01 0.01
HS biology grade -0.04 0.03
HS chemistry grade 0.05 0.02 *
Earned college math credits in DEMO school 0.05 0.03
Freshman (reference group: non freshman) 0.11 0.03 DEMO
Degree aspiration: Medical doctorate (reference group: all other 0.05 0.02 DEMO
aspirations)
Frequency: Asked a teacher for advice or help outside DEMO class in HS 0.13 0.02 ***
Students’ self-rated abilities
Communication skills 0.05 0.02 *
Initiative-taking 0.05 0.02 *
Ability to know when and whom DEMO ask for help 0.06 0.02 ***
Competitiveness 0.04 0.01 **
Course-related experiences
Agreement: Faculty gave students written feedback on their 0.05 0.02 ***
performance or progress in the course
Frequency: Sought tutoring from a campus ofﬁce or program 0.19 0.01 ***
Frequency: Sought a professional (off-campus) tutor 0.23 0.01 ***
Frequency: Attended supplemental instruction sessions 0.05 0.01 ***
Emotional academic engagement
Frequency: Felt excited about learning new concepts 0.08 0.01 ***
Frequency: Felt collaboration among other students in this course 0.09 0.01 *
Agreement: Felt my hard work was reﬂected in my grades -0.05 0.02 *
Agreement: I was motivated to try hard on course assignments 0.07 0.02 ***
and exams
Faculty pedagogy
Proportion of class time devoted to DEMO -0.04 0.01 ***
Proportion of class time devoted to class discussion 0.02 0.01 *
Proportion of class time devoted to group work 0.04 0.01 DEMO
Classroom climate
Agreement: Felt comfortable asking questions in class 0.22 0.02 DEMO
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 243
Table 3 continued
Coef. DEMO Sig.
Faculty agreement: In my classroom, there is no such thing 0.06 0.03 *
as a question that is too elementary
Faculty agreement: There is not enough time available -0.06 0.02 *
to give every DEMO individualized attention
Agreement: I received feedback that helped me learn and DEMO 0.07 0.02 ***
Model statistics
Level-1 variance explained 0.56
Level-2 variance explained 0.96
Overall variance explained 0.55
* p \ 0.05; ** p \ 0.01; *** p \ 0.001
students’ engagement in their studies, which DEMO work by Ryan and Deci (2000)
regarding intrinsic motivation and DEMO Our qualitative data enriches this point, as
expressed by Marie:
DEMO realizing for the ﬁrst time, maybe, that with these classes, DEMO, I want my
knowledge to be furthered. I obviously want to DEMO an A, but like, in my biology class
he [the professor] was saying ‘You don’t necessarily have to read this chapter for the
DEMO, there’s some material you don’t necessarily need to know for the DEMO, but you
can if you want,’ and I found myself DEMO, ‘I want to read this chapter’, you know?
Like, DEMO want to know, just to further my knowledge, to know the material better, and I
think that – I dunno, just measuring DEMO is like, furthering knowledge and
enriching that, I guess. (Southwestern DEMO Research University)
Marie appears to be highly engaged in her introductory courses, as she is willing to go
above and beyond course requirements to enrich her own knowledge and learn for
learning’s sake. Her statement, however, was somewhat unique in that few others in the
focus groups articulated engagement in the same way.
The Pre-Med Phenomenon – Career Motivation DEMO Engagement
When asked why they enrolled in introductory STEM courses, most DEMO simply said
that they needed to fulﬁll a requirement for their major. We found that pre-med students,
however, were an exception. The quantitative ﬁndings indicate that those students who
came to college with aspirations for DEMO school tended to report being signiﬁcantly
more academically engaged than their peers with other educational goals. Given the
competitive nature of medical school admissions, students with plans for medical school
likely recognize the need to do DEMO well as possible in their science courses, which may
explain these DEMO increased levels of academic engagement.
The pre-med students who participated in our focus groups had a keen awareness of the
importance of introductory STEM DEMO and described needing to excel in order to form
a strong science knowledge base to succeed in upper level courses, be prepared for their
planned scientiﬁc careers, and do well on the MCAT. Maggie, a DEMO student, discussed
her approach to introductory STEM courses:
123
244 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
All my math and DEMO classes I’m currently taking are a requirement for my
major, and DEMO ﬁt nicely in this semester. However, you know, it’s not just you
know, oh, I wanna get in this class and get DEMO A, it’s also like you know, if I later on
choose to take the MCAT you wanna know what you’re doing on there, and learn it
well. (Southwestern Public Research University)
Maggie’s statement is indicative of the approach to learning and high level of engagement
with DEMO course and class content evidenced by the majority of pre-meds in the focus
groups, and such a perspective underscores these students’ motivation to learn and master
course content. While their learning is often motivated by a DEMO to be prepared for future
steps along the STEM pipeline, that DEMO not mean that grades are unimportant or that
competition does not exist. In fact, the HLM results indicate that in these introductory
courses, DEMO who thought of themselves as more competitive than their peers tended to
report signiﬁcantly higher levels of academic engagement, even after controlling for
respondents’ educational aspirations.
Although qualitatively we did not ﬁnd substantial data regarding students’ DEMO sense
of competition, the interaction of engagement and competition was evidenced DEMO other
ways. Students who were particularly engaged in their courses, who DEMO striving to earn
an A, most often described feeling a sense DEMO competition in their classes, either between
themselves and pre-meds or amongst DEMO, as evidenced by student interaction. As
Marian reported, it becomes ‘‘survival of the ﬁttest.’’
When I know that someone is pre-med, I mean, I can be friends with the person, but
there’s always gonna DEMO, if I know…that there is an internship for a hospital, I’m not
gonna tell the person next to me that. I’m gonna get DEMO, I’m gonna ﬁnd out, I am, yes,
sometimes I DEMO very selﬁsh when it comes to that. Because it’s – survival of the
ﬁttest. (Southwestern Public Research University)
This attitude extended not only to more weighty opportunities like internships but also into
more fundamental daily DEMO, even to something as simple as answering one
another’s questions. Many DEMO described either being unwilling to help their fellow
students or encountering students unwilling to help others for fear of boosting other
students’ grades, and being edged out of their A.
In my [STEM] classes I, I just would be like, ‘Oh can we, like can you like DEMO
this to me?’ and they’re kinda more like, ‘Well I DEMO need to study. Like I don’t
have time,’ or…I remember right before an exam I was in the hallway asking. I asked
someone DEMO question like, ‘Do you know about…something about mitosis.’ And
they’re like, ‘Oh sorry I don’t know.’ Which I knew they knew because they DEMO
studying mitosis right on their sheet. (Rose, Midwestern Public Research University)
It is clear that these students are engaged, working hard, DEMO also trying to outdo one
another. This type of competition not only affects the climate inside the courses but also
occasionally extends into interactions DEMO the classroom where students who do not
view themselves as particularly competitive feel uncomfortable interacting with their more
competitive peers, which affect attempts at collaborative learning, as Celina explained.
I don’t really, really like to DEMO study groups because I feel like it’s just them trying to
compete and them trying to show me how much they know versus how DEMO I know,
and I know some people do like study groups. It does help them, but because they’re
competitive, and naturally I’m DEMO really a competitive person so I usually study by
myself. (Southwestern DEMO Research University)
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 245
Celina’s conception of other DEMO ‘‘showing how much they know’’ or Rose’s notion of
students just looking out for themselves speaks to the ways in which a competitive climate
DEMO these courses can potentially limit a fundamental mechanism of student engagement:
genuine collaboration.
Collaboration with Peers and Use of Interventions
Quantitatively, collaboration among peers positively predicted students’ level of engage-
ment in the course. This DEMO suggests that more active student learning with peers
provides a context that enhances students’ connection and interest in the class (Tagg 2003).
Likewise, many students in the focus groups described the favorable inﬂuence of a col-
laborative environment in their introductory courses, which often encouraged them to
engage more fully. As suggested by Stewart below, students were often more inclined to
get involved in SI and/or tutoring sessions if other DEMO joined them:
I know in math, I usually try to DEMO people around me, like, in pre-Calculus I had a
small group of people that sat around me in class. And you know, if I didn’t get
something, it was easier to turn to them and see if any of them understood it. And if
they did, then I could ask them for help, and it was a lot easier than trying to ask the
professor, and then you know — you don’t wanna study alone for something you
don’t get, so it’s nice to have a small group of people to go with you to DEMO the Q lab
or SI sessions and things. So that way, DEMO know, if one person doesn’t get it then the
other people DEMO help him. If the [SI Leader] is not being as helpful as they could be,
then there are other people to help back DEMO up. (Southwestern Public Research
University)
In considering use of SI DEMO/or tutoring sessions, the quantitative ﬁndings suggest that
students who spend DEMO time with tutors, either on-campus or off-campus in private
settings, tend to also have signiﬁcantly higher levels of academic engagement than peers
who DEMO out tutoring less frequently. Similarly, students who attended more SI sessions
DEMO being signiﬁcantly more academically engaged in their introductory courses. We
know from our qualitative data that some institutions in our sample required these sessions
DEMO students whereas other campuses made SI optional. The quantitative ﬁndings suggest
that, regardless of why students attend these sessions, more frequent attendance contributed
DEMO higher levels of engagement within the course. Our qualitative data provide a more
nuanced view of how students’ use tutoring and/or SI sessions, suggesting that students
often sought this additional instruction when they felt that DEMO classroom-based instruc-
tion was insufﬁcient for them to properly learn the material.
I absolutely didn’t understand anything the professors were telling me. So, I ﬁnally
broke down and went to the tutors, the second time I had to retake Chemistry II, and
it helped so much. The way they were explaining things, they actually got the models
and showed me how the molecules break, and came together, or they would test DEMO
They wouldn’t give me the answer, they’d make me work for DEMO answer. I did so
much better in that class. He [the instructor] just talked, and tried to explain it like, as
if he DEMO teaching in class again, so. I chose to go to tutors DEMO I’d ever go to the
professors. (Cadence, Northeastern Private Master’s College)
Cadence was not able to learn from her professor, so she took an additional step and
‘broke down’ by going to the tutoring DEMO Through the use of tutors who utilized active
learning strategies like hands on models and problem based learning, she was able to better
123
246 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
understand concepts and more DEMO engage with the content of her courses. Cadence’s
issue with her professor is representative of sentiments expressed by many other students
who struggled in DEMO, teacher-centered courses.
Faculty Pedagogy and Engagement
Similarly, our quantitative ﬁndings suggest that students who described the course as
predominantly lecture-based tended to report DEMO less engagement in the course.
These sentiments were echoed throughout the focus groups, as many students described the
mind-numbing lectures that they regularly sat through, often feeling unengaged and
unenthusiastic about the course. Talia described it well:
In a lot of my biology courses, the professor just sort of talks at me, and I’m like – I
don’t feel, like, as engaged or I feel like, in those courses there is a lot more
memorization only, which is why I don’t get as much out of them because I’m very
hands-on. Like, if I’m doing something in the class, I can grasp that I’m under-
standing it, but if the professor is just talking at me, writing DEMO on the board,
expecting me to write it down, like DEMO doing nothing, and then I’m completely
disengaged in class. (Southeastern Private Master’s College)
By contrast, quantitative analyses revealed that sensing a greater proportion of time
devoted to class discussion or group work seemed to DEMO students’ frequency of
engaging with course content and connecting with faculty inside and outside the classroom.
Not only did the focus groups conﬁrm this DEMO but they also provided more details
about the innovative pedagogical techniques that students found to be most engaging. We
present exemplars representing the three DEMO students discussed most often: group
work, clickers, and web-based pedagogy.
DEMO my class now he gives us like the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of class, like he’ll assign us
groups and then say just discuss the homework…just getting in groups, sometimes
explaining it as a student to another student who’s just read the same chapter as you
or something, who maybe understands it a little better can be a lot, can be more
helpful than even talking to a professor who’s not sure what DEMO confused about or
something like that. So I think group work in class can really be, can really be
effective. (Bernadette, Southeastern Private Master’s College)
They use clickers like, throughout their lecture. So, DEMO you’re like, following along
and taking notes, like, they’ll ask DEMO question, it’s good to get some interaction, I
think. And that kinda keeps you like, waiting…it keeps you kind of into it when they
get to a question…they’re not just sitting up there teaching the DEMO time, they’ll
ask, like in the middle of a lecture, DEMO might ask you like ﬁve questions in a row
about what he’s lectured on so far, so you can kind of apply what you’ve learned, if
it’s chemistry or if it’s biology you can just kind of see, if you remember what you
just covered in the last like, 20 min. So I think that’s really helpful for me. (DEMO,
Northeastern Private Master’s College)
In biology we used this website called mastering biology and it has like videos and
questions and quizzes DEMO and different like videos of the cells. Then you can have
videos of it being used in real life with the organisms themselves so DEMO gives you like
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 247
different perspectives. It was DEMO interesting. (Holly, Western Private Master’s
College)
Students described these pedagogical techniques as ‘‘helpful,’’ providing ‘‘interaction,’’
and representing ‘‘different perspectives,’’ DEMO all words indicating the positive effects of
these active learning strategies on students’ engagement. Yet while the majority of students
preferred these active teaching DEMO and recognized their beneﬁts, a small number of
students in the DEMO groups, primarily those who were pre-med, indicated that they prefer
STEM courses to be mostly lecture, since there is so much information to be covered. Even
when lecture was the primary vehicle for conveying course DEMO, the professor’s atti-
tude, knowledge base, enthusiasm for the subject, and ability to explain the content clearly
were all important characteristics that DEMO students’ level of engagement. These
qualitative ﬁndings suggest that the lecture itself may not be the problem, but the style of
lecture combined with the professor’s own engagement profoundly impact students’
engagement. Here Harlow described the DEMO of professors’ enthusiasm for the
subject matter they are teaching.
Well, DEMO think there are some professors, too, who get real excited during lectures.
They’re very excited and just passionate about the subject. When that DEMO, I feel
it’s easier for you to become more excited about DEMO and enjoy the class and come to
class and be like, DEMO, this is fun. This is great.’ This professor enjoys what they’re
DEMO about, so it’s easier to learn from them. It’s not just DEMO and boring. Those are
usually the professors that have group activities or other things that are built in that
allow for a more well-rounded DEMO to learn than just lecture. (Western Private
Master’s College)
Accessibility DEMO and Engagement
While professors’ teaching strategies, attitudes, and enthusiasm were inﬂuential factors of
classroom climate that shaped students’ engagement in introductory classrooms, the
quantitative results also indicate that students who felt comfortable asking questions in
DEMO reported being signiﬁcantly more engaged in their introductory STEM courses. This
ﬁnding not only points to the effect of students’ self-conﬁdence on engagement, as we
controlled for self-rated communication ability and initiative-taking as well as prior
DEMO in asking for help, but also underscores the overall climate students DEMO in
class. That is, students are likely to feel more comfortable DEMO questions in class when
professors encourage questions and participation. In fact, DEMO found that the positive
beneﬁts on academic engagement of feeling comfortable asking questions in class sig-
niﬁcantly varied across classrooms. Tests for cross-level interaction DEMO revealed that
being in a classroom with a faculty member who felt there is no such thing as a question
that is too elementary DEMO the positive beneﬁts of students feeling comfortable asking
questions (see Table DEMO). By contrast, being in a classroom where faculty felt there DEMO not
enough time to give every student individualized attention mitigated the positive rela-
tionship between feeling comfortable asking questions and academic engagement. Thus,
DEMO feeling comfortable asking questions may promote engagement, that conﬁdence
can be DEMO if faculty are dismissive or do not take the time to afﬁrm a student’s
inquiry.
Students in the focus groups also discussed the importance DEMO professors providing a
supportive environment in STEM introductory classrooms. Although some students said
123
248 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
they felt uncomfortable asking DEMO in class, others stated that their professors created
an environment that DEMO friendly and playful, which made it easier to ask questions. This DEMO
highlighted by Carter’s words:
On the other hand, I have DEMO [biology] class and it’s like 200 kids, and I don’t have DEMO
problem asking a question in that class because he’s just – he’s cool about it, you
know…he has the attitude that there’s not a stupid question and he’s really neat about
it. It’s like he’s heard DEMO all, you know, and he’ll make jokes about stuff and things
like that and he really has a really playful attitude. (Southwestern Private Research
University)
The connection between academic engagement and students’ perception of DEMO
climate is further underscored by results of the course-level variables in the level-2 model
of the quantitative analysis. For example, signiﬁcantly higher levels of academic
engagement were reported in classrooms where faculty agreed with the statement DEMO
‘‘there is no such thing as a question that is too elementary’’ (Table 3). When faculty are
open to student questions in this way, they may be communicating a broader set of explicit
or implicit messages that signal to students that the classroom represents a safe environ-
DEMO, which in turn may encourage students to become more engaged in DEMO curious about
course content. Even in a situation where the professor initially seems intimidating, stu-
dents may become more engaged after receiving a small signal from the professor, as
illustrated by Bella’s words:
My Chemistry teacher, at ﬁrst he looked scary cause he was almost like kind of
yelling. But I guess that’s how he is. But there was DEMO one time like, everybody was
scared to answer this one question. DEMO then he was like, ‘Why?’ And then one
student was DEMO, ‘Cause I don’t understand,’ and then he was like, ‘There you go.
There you go. Just ask me what it is,’ DEMO then he gave her like ﬁve points on her
exam. So, DEMO that we were all like, ‘Hey Professor, how do you do this?’…he was
like, really open. (Southwestern Public Research University)
DEMO encouraging students to ask questions, the classroom climate may be further
DEMO when professors provide immediate feedback and make themselves accessible to
students. Findings across classrooms show that students who received feedback that helped
them to DEMO and improve reported being signiﬁcantly more engaged in their introductory
STEM courses (see Table 3). Students also discussed the value of such immediate feed-
back as they described the value of clickers and other student DEMO systems based on
the same principles.
By contrast, ﬁndings indicate that DEMO had signiﬁcantly lower levels of academic
engagement in classrooms where faculty reported a lack of time to provide them with
individualized attention or where DEMO agreed that it is primarily up to students to be
successful in their introductory courses (Table 3). Together these classroom-level ﬁndings
point to how accessibility cues from faculty can affect engagement; thus, if students
DEMO faculty to be uncaring, unengaged, or unavailable to help them succeed in
learning, they may disengage from the course. This ﬁnding is further highlighted by Tilly’s
words:
There are some situations where you can DEMO out to a professor, but there are some
where you can’t. DEMO can suggest to get a study session going for a certain course,
but if that professor doesn’t have enough time or doesn’t have DEMO available to meet
up with everyone, then it’s like a wasted DEMO And after a while, once you keep
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 249
attempting and attempting to DEMO those study sessions going and that professor is
continuously unavailable, it DEMO like replays in your head. Okay, well, I might as
well just not even try with that professor. Just do it on my DEMO as I’ve been doing.
(Southeastern Public Master’s College)
When professors DEMO that they are available, students are more likely to ask questions,DEMO
attend ofﬁce hours, and participate in out-of-class review sessions with the DEMO Our
ﬁndings highlight the importance of the professor in creating an engaging classroom
environment in order to enhance student learning.
Empowered and Resourceful Students
DEMO many students expect faculty to provide support, encouragement, and space for
mastering course content, students must still play an active role in their own learning.
Those students who embrace their own agency and actively seek DEMO professors are
typically the most engaged. Indeed, considering students’ self-ratings and DEMO
aspirations, the quantitative results indicate that students who conceived of themselves
DEMO more resourceful at the beginning of the academic term, as indicated DEMO higher self-
ratings on communication skills, initiative-taking, and ability to know when and whom
to ask for help, reported being signiﬁcantly more academically engaged in their intro-
ductory STEM courses. Likewise, respondents who reported more frequently asking a
teacher for advice or help outside of class in DEMO school tended to have higher levels of
academic engagement in college introductory STEM courses. Given that the outcome
for the quantitative portion of the DEMO included items related to asking questions in
class, it is not DEMO that students with better communication skills, initiative taking,
and an DEMO of how to be resourceful with instructors signiﬁcantly and posi-
tively relate to students’ reported level of academic engagement in their introductory
STEM course.
DEMO our qualitative data, we are able to describe the numerous ways DEMO which
engaged students enacted this resourcefulness in terms of interacting with faculty mem-
bers. Some described interactions as simple and straightforward as asking a DEMO in
class, but even this act requires students to initiate the DEMO and as Marshall
described, many students are reluctant to do this:DEMO
I don’t usually ask questions just to ask questions, the professors DEMO ask, ‘Does
everyone understand? Does anyone have any questions?’ and then at that point I’m
like, ‘I do not know what he’s talking about at all’, so I’ll ask a question. I think a lot
of different people do that but some people just don’t really. DEMO think sometimes
professors like want you to ask questions…because I think it helps them understand
like instead of just going through and lecturing all DEMO (Southwestern Private
Research University)
Other students took a different approach DEMO sought professors outside of class, utilizing
their resourcefulness to actively engage DEMO their own learning. There were three typical
ways in which students sought this additional communication with their professors: after
class, during ofﬁce hours, and through email.
Well, I think there’s just like different ways of teaching that topic. Just sometimes if
they can go over – and DEMO lot of times, you can ask, I can go and talk to my professor
after class and he would explain it a different DEMO and make more sense. So, I think
123
250 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
just being able to DEMO your professors really is helpful. (Finnian, Western
Private Master’s College)
I’d have to say probably ofﬁce hours, like sitting and talking to the professor does
help out, because they know the stuff. And they can probably have a different way of
explaining it than what they DEMO in class. (Blaze, Western Public Research
University)
So, I DEMO to e-mail ‘em, and most of ‘em are pretty good at DEMO back e-mails, and
sometimes they’ll work around your schedule too. ‘Cuz DEMO the teachers that I had,
they always wanted you to know if you need any extra help, they’re there…If you
really want to get help, they will help you. (Sky, Southwestern Public Research
University)
In these ways, many students were able to actively engage with their professors and
courses. Through these interactions, students increased their understanding of course
content, built relationships with their professors, and got the help DEMO they needed by being
resourceful and learning how to acquire their professors’ support.
Conclusion
With increased interest in STEM among entering students, the U.S. is at a critical crossroads
in terms of its opportunity to improve DEMO production of science degrees at four-year col-
leges and universities. Indeed, DEMO intentions to major in biomedical and behavioral
sciences have nearly doubled in the last 15 years, and engineering ﬁelds have regained
student interest (DEMO et al. 2007); additionally, there has been increasingly more focus DEMO
STEM education from a national perspective. These positive developments may be offset by
the substantial proportion of intended science majors who leave STEM ﬁelds DEMO the end of
the ﬁrst-year of college (Chang et al. 2008) often because of their experiences in intro-
ductory STEM courses. Even if DEMO signiﬁcantly raised the level of student preparation in
high school science, DEMO may not necessarily improve STEM degree completion unless we
also address engagement in college introductory courses. Such academic engagement has as
much to do DEMO the engagement behaviors and attitudes of faculty who teach these courses
as it does with motivated, resourceful, and engaged students themselves.
We have DEMO academic engagement mainly from a behavioral angle, combining
elements from several DEMO examining behavioral aspects of engagement. Additionally,
we have considered the psychological traits of an engaged student, while taking into
account the associations between instructor characteristics and engagement. It is this
comprehensive conceptualization of academic engagement DEMO sets our study apart from
current literature. In fact, some scholars DEMO that the term engagement should be
reserved speciﬁcally for work such as this, where multiple components are considered as
part of the dynamic between faculty and students (Fredricks et al. 2004; Wentzel and
Wigﬁeld 2009)DEMO In examining students’ engagement across multiple classrooms and
institutions utilizing both quantitative and qualitative data, we were able to learn a great
deal more about engagement in introductory courses. The measure of academic engage-
ment we DEMO emphasizes striving for excellence, as articulated in Essential Learning
Outcomes for DEMO responsibility associated with learning (AAC&U 2002).
We found that DEMO behavior, emotions, and cognition were important factors in
predicting their academic engagement in introductory STEM courses. Students who were
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 251
genuinely interested in course DEMO, learning for the sake of learning, intrinsically
motivated, and resourceful DEMO to be the most engaged. Supporting the ﬁndings of Birch
and Ladd (1997), these students possess strong communication skills, take initiative, and
have the ability to know when/whom to ask for help. Academically DEMO students not
only ask questions in class, they also interact with DEMO professors after class, during ofﬁce
hours, and via email. This is in line with current literature on student-faculty interaction,
where increased student-faculty DEMO are positively related to student engagement
(Tinto 2000; Umbach and Wawrzynski 2005). Further, engaged students utilize all
available resources, including SI (whether it is required or not), tutors, and review sessions,
and they regularly collaborate with their peers, whether in formal or informal study groups,
or working homework problems. These ﬁndings echo those of DEMO (2001) and Horowitz
(2010) which also found that more successful and engaged students studied in structured
groups with their peers, as a result of formal and/or informal course activities.
We also found that DEMO introductory classrooms, pre-med students were more engaged
than their peers, as pre-meds were motivated by a range of unique factors, most commonly
a strong desire to master content in order to build a ﬁrm foundation DEMO upper level courses
or for future careers, as well as in DEMO for the MCAT. Given the potential selection
bias among pre-med students, DEMO typically have stronger academic preparation than their
peers not intending to pursue a medical degree, future research should use advanced
statistical techniques, such DEMO propensity score matching, to determine whether pre-meds’
signiﬁcantly greater level of DEMO engagement remains after accounting for potential
biases in students’ self-selection into a pre-med tract. Our ﬁndings seem to combine
conﬂicting conclusions from the literature DEMO the motivational factors driving pre-
med students. While some research supports the explanation that pre-med students are
highly motivated by the desire to master DEMO content and by intellectual stimulation
(Horowitz 2010; Lovecchio and Dundes 2002), other research highlights pre-med students’
exclusive focus on high grades and DEMO on the MCAT as key motivating factors
(Kortemeyer 2007). Whatever DEMO motivation, we found that pre-med students’ behavior
can undermine collaboration by DEMO other students’ sense of competition, which in
turn can negatively affect DEMO students’ learning in introductory courses. Faculty can
address the negative effects that emerge from a highly competitive climate by employing
practices that move away DEMO gatekeeping strategies where few are expected to do well
and instead move toward practices that ensure more students can succeed.
Indeed, professors play an important role in sustaining engagement in science by sig-
naling accessibility cues DEMO a unique set of behaviors and attitudes, which can have a
DEMO effect on student learning and engagement. This is well supported in the
literature, where faculty practices such as active learning and higher-order cognitive
activities create environments that positively relate to student engagement (Chickering and
Gamson 1987; Ewell and Jones 1996; Kumbach and Wawrzynski 2005; Tinto 1993, DEMO).
Additionally, we found that students tend to be more engaged DEMO professors create an
atmosphere where inquiry is valued and no question is too elementary. Conﬁrming studies
by Light (2001) and Horowitz (2010), we found that a professor’s demeanor and attitude
signal implicit and explicit DEMO that inﬂuence whether or not students feel engaged in
class, and DEMO professors who utilized humor, exhibited care, or showed a real passion for
their subject matter were more likely to be viewed by students DEMO the most engaging.
It is clear that professors’ behaviors are just as important as those of their students in
determining engagement. We found that DEMO professors utilized active learning peda-
gogies, employed teaching strategies that offer DEMO feedback, ensured that more
students have grasped the material, or made the most of new technologies for illustrating
123
252 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
concepts, students became more engaged in courses. Professors can also enhance
engagement by encouraging student collaboration DEMO group projects and assignments
that require teamwork. These ﬁndings support previous research that found that adding
cooperative learning strategies increase educational gains, conceptual understanding, and
engagement (Knight and Wood 2005; Kumbach and Wawrzynski 2005; DEMO 2003; Zeilik
and Morris 2004). By contrast, consistent with previous ﬁndings (Biggs 1999; Bransford
et al. 2000; Moore et al. 1996; Seymour and Hewitt 1997), students were less engaged in
teacher-centered, DEMO classes, where they must ﬁgure things out on their own and
DEMO do not check for student understanding except via exams or other high stakes
evaluation.
Composite Representations
Based on these mixed methods ﬁndings, we have gained tremendous insight into the traits
of ‘‘Gatekeeper professors,’’ ‘‘Engaged STEM DEMO,’’ and ‘‘Engaged STEM stu-
dents.’’ We present these idealized composite representations as narratives combining
many of the qualities of students and professors that DEMO predict students’ level of
academic engagement in the introductory STEM classroom. Sewn together from the words
of students in the focus groups, and while realizing that most professors and students are
complex combinations of positive and DEMO traits, these composites provide a rich
context regarding what has been, what is possible, and what we should be avoiding or
striving to achieve in STEM education, while also providing a more holistic depiction of
our ﬁndings.
The ‘‘Gatekeeper’’ Professor
The term ‘‘gatekeeper’’ has been used to DEMO introductory STEM courses, but perhaps
this analogy is better suited for DEMO the approach undertaken by some introductory
STEM course instructors. Gatekeeper professors lecture straight from a PowerPoint while
students hang on their every word. It DEMO nearly impossible to write down everything the
gatekeeper says, let alone DEMO the information, so students make the personal decision
to listen, in hopes of understanding, or to take notes, in hopes of making DEMO of it later. A
brave student may ask the gatekeeper to slow down, but most students know that the
gatekeeper does not want to slow down or repeat what has already been said. Students may
have DEMO better chance of processing the information in lecture if they had an outline to
follow, but the gatekeeper does not believe in posting the PowerPoint lecture online
because this may discourage students from coming to class. DEMO will not ask questions
in class because the gatekeeper has already trained them that lectures are for ‘‘listening,’’
not for interacting.
Additionally, gatekeeper professors disregard individual learning styles because they
are so focused on conveying DEMO abundance of information that must be passed on to
students who are worthy of passing through the gates. Their expectation is that students can
DEMO should understand the content at a sophisticated level. The gatekeeper may deﬂect
students from the major by continuously making content feel intimidating and difﬁcult DEMO
learn. Students who learn through visual presentation or hands-on methods often struggle
with the gatekeeper’s style of lecture. Students may wonder if all STEM DEMO will lack
the engagement and real-world application that they need to learn the material. Others get
discouraged because they spend so much out-of-class time DEMO to understand the con-
cepts that the gatekeeper failed to explain clearly during lecture. Beyond lecture, the
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 253
gatekeeper is inaccessible through DEMO hours and e-mail, making it difﬁcult for students
to get additional DEMO Clearly there is a disconnect between the gatekeeper’s style of
teaching and the learning style of students, leaving most feeling disengaged from their
introductory STEM courses.
The ‘‘Engaging’’ Professor
The ‘‘gatekeeper’’ is a well known image DEMO has had a lasting impact in higher education
classrooms despite calls for more engaging pedagogy in the STEM disciplines. The image
of an ‘‘engaging’’ DEMO, however, has begun to emerge from more innovative insti-
tutions, DEMO students have taken notice. The engaging professor uses strategies that
encourage active learning, cooperation among students, and student-faculty contact
(Chickering and Gamson 1987; Tagg 2003). A collaborative learning environment is
fostered by the engaging professor, both in- and out-of-class. After engaging professors
explain a concept—for example, the way blood ﬂows through the heart—they will ask
students to get into groups and explain the concept to each other. Walking around the DEMO
allows the engaging professor to gauge the general level of understanding while students
personally evaluate their own ability to explain the way blood ﬂows DEMO the heart. Out-
of-class group projects also foster a collaborative spirit amongst students while encour-
aging students to process the material beyond the lecture. DEMO course websites, the
engaging professor provides students with a one-stop shop DEMO downloading PowerPoint
presentations to be used in lecture, podcasts from previous DEMO, video clips that can
enhance understanding of difﬁcult topics, and discussion groups that encourage additional
collaboration amongst students. The night before a quiz, students utilize the web-based
discussion groups to ask each other questions while DEMO engaged professor continues to
facilitate discussions from the comfort of home.
The engaging professor also facilitates student excitement in the classroom through
humor, enthusiasm, and practical application. The excitement and passion for the subject is
contagious, and students begin to have fun and learn in an environment that fosters interest
in STEM disciplines. Studying disease suddenly becomes more enjoyable because DEMO
dense content is applied to a real-world problem that students can relate to, such as cancer
or HIV. Beyond real-world applications, the engaging DEMO uses physical objects,
including Legos, puppets, play guns, and DEMO, to model the concepts in class. This
strategy helps students to DEMO subjects such as physics, microbiology, and organic
chemistry because the abstract concept is now connected to a three dimensional demon-
stration. Beyond the DEMO, the engaging professor is highly accessible to students and
encourages them DEMO participate in additional learning opportunities provided by the uni-
versity. The engaging professor responds to e-mails, encourages students to stop by for
ofﬁce hours, and provides additional assistance at SI workshops. There is no limit to the
things the engaging professor will do to get students motivated in DEMO STEM major and
excited about the possibilities of pursuing a STEM career.
The ‘‘Engaged’’ Student
In introductory STEM courses, an engaged student is often, but not always, pre-med and
looking to bolster her knowledge base DEMO the MCAT or more advanced science courses, as
well as to DEMO major requirements. This student is very focused on getting high grades
while also mastering the material. The engaged student chooses professors strategically,
looking DEMO engaging and thorough teachers by utilizing Rate My Professor or through
123
254 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
advice from upper classmen. DEMO with strong pre-college preparation, this student enters
these courses with eagerness DEMO a strong interest in science, which is evidenced by
commonly seeking DEMO professors after class, attending ofﬁce hours, and emailing them
regularly.
The engaged student is incredibly resourceful, taking advantage of multiple opportu-
nities to enhance learning. Regular attendance is commonplace at class-related SI or
recitations. This DEMO has strong study skills and often meets with peers in self-initiated
study groups where they re-teach one another content and prepare for tests together. DEMO
and tutoring centers provide additional opportunities for the engaged student to work with
more advanced students or graduate students to clarify understanding. This student DEMO
advantage of any available opportunities to collaborate with professors and build rela-
tionships with them by participating in undergraduate research or by becoming an DEMO
instructor or TA. Assuming professors are somewhat engaging, the engaged student’s
DEMO in introductory STEM courses typically furthers interest in the topic and
dedication to science.
Implications for Research and Practice
Keeping these composites in mind, we turn to the ways in which we can work towards
transforming DEMO STEM instruction from gatekeeping to engaging. Most STEM
faculty prize the ‘‘engaged student’’ who goes the extra mile to learn material, demon-
strates intellectual curiosity, and strives for excellence in class. Their own attitudes and
behaviors, however, are critical in producing more of these students and in DEMO process of
transitioning their role from ‘‘gatekeepers’’ to ‘‘engaged faculty.’’ Although multiple
authors have stated that few faculty are familiar with the science education DEMO and
unaware of the data and analyses that demonstrate the effectiveness of active learning
techniques (Handelsman et al. 2004; Labov 2004), the DEMO body of literature
indicating the importance of active learning techniques can no longer be ignored (see
Caldwell 2007; Crossgrove and Curran 2008; Knight and Wood 2005; Preszler et al. 2007;
Prince 2004; Smith DEMO al. 2005; Zeilik and Morris 2004). If the goal is DEMO increase STEM
degree attainment, STEM faculty must begin to take responsibility DEMO engaging students in
the classroom. While we recognize that faculty face considerable demands besides
teaching and that it takes substantial time to develop an DEMO learning approach, more and
more introductory STEM instructors are embracing the DEMO to enact change in their
classrooms, as this approach is truly DEMO to student success, as shown in this study. The
scope and DEMO of re-shaping classrooms into engaging spaces through curriculum
redesign and adoption of innovative teaching techniques can certainly be enhanced through
institutional support that encourages DEMO sustains those efforts.
In addition to supporting faculty in their desire to revamp their introductory STEM
classroom, institutions need to simultaneously take proactive steps to train students how to
be more like the ‘‘engaged student.’’ These DEMO can involve tailoring orientation
activities to students’ potential majors, assigning upper DEMO as mentors, reinforcing
available resources repeatedly throughout the semester, perhaps through STEM study habit
seminars, or increasing mandatory student collaboration both in and out of class. One
highly effective way to increase student collaboration and DEMO is to change the
landscape of large lecture classes, as many DEMO the institutions in this study have done, by
adding smaller, required class sessions, whether called ‘‘workshops,’’ ‘‘SI,’’ or ‘‘recita-
tion.’’ Additionally, as students may come to college with study habits poorly adaptable to
college-level work, faculty need to be prepared to help students learn how to learn or at the
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 255
very least make learning DEMO engaging by utilizing more innovative pedagogy and
making themselves available and accessible to their students. It is critical to recognize that
these innovative pedagogies DEMO not be cost prohibitive. For example, several instructors
in our sample DEMO institutions could not afford clickers instead utilized paper response
systems, single DEMO of paper, with A, B, C, D in each corner, folded into four blocks,
thus allowing the professor to query their students and keep them engaged all for the cost
of printing one DEMO per student.
As educators adopt well-established active learning pedagogies and search for new
ways to engage students and enhance learning environments, institutional researchers can
also play a key role by helping to identify gatekeeper courses that DEMO students’ aspi-
rations in the sciences, as well as those that DEMO student engagement. This involves not
only assessing student behaviors but also faculty behaviors across classrooms and sections,
and communicating ﬁndings across faculty and DEMO, organizing faculty retreats
and having them observe and/or train one DEMO in active learning strategies, all of which
can be inexpensive and DEMO ways to improve pedagogy across campus. At the same
time, institutional DEMO should continue to think about various methods for gathering
data related to introductory STEM classrooms, including the use of mixed methods
strategies that enable thorough, rich exploration. Finally, such assessments should result in
feedback to DEMO so that they have a greater context for understanding student success
strategies inﬂuenced by their own behaviors; for example, faculty who participated in DEMO
mixed method study received reports about their classrooms.
In conclusion, education DEMO fundamentally a human enterprise and, accordingly, this
study focused on the unique dynamic between faculty and students within key STEM
courses. At the DEMO level, our ﬁndings show that the actions of faculty affect the
DEMO of students, in this case students’ engagement with their introductory courses.
DEMO, the actions of students affect their own success and faculty willingness DEMO engage
them. These combined and accumulated interactions also shape the climate or shared
understanding that exists within classrooms, which can either enhance or suppress
engagement. If educators are the key change agents in this dynamic, the ﬁndings suggest
that introductory STEM course instructors must think just as carefully DEMO thoroughly
about how they interact with and come across to students as they do about the course
content and how to assess its mastery, especially when it comes to scaling up STEM
achievement and increasing student DEMO
Acknowledgments This study was made possible by the support of the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences, NIH Grant Numbers 1 R01 GMO71968-01 and R01 GMO71968-05, the National Science
Foundation, NSF Grant Number 0757076, and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
through the National Institute DEMO General Medical Sciences, NIH Grant 1RC1GM090776-01. This inde-
pendent research and DEMO views expressed here do not indicate endorsement by the sponsors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution DEMO
mercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
Appendix
See Tables 4 and 5.
123
256 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
Table 4 Table of DEMO
Variable Coding
Dependent variable
Academic engagement Factor composed of eight items: DEMO with
which students asked questions in class, discussed
course grades or DEMO with the instructor,
attended professor’s ofﬁce hours, participated in
class DEMO, tutored other students in their
introductory STEM course, reviewed class material
before it was covered, attended review or help
sessions to enhance understanding of course
content, and studied with students from this course
Course-level variables
Faculty course goal: Use technology to effectively 1 = strongly disagree to 4 = strongly agree
engage students
Faculty agreement: In my classroom, DEMO is no 1 = strongly disagree to 4 = strongly agree
such thing as a question that is too elementary
Faculty agreement: I feel it is primarily up to 1 = strongly disagree to 4 = DEMO agree
students whether they succeed in this course
Faculty agreement: There DEMO not enough time 1 = strongly disagree to 4 = strongly agree
available to give every student individualized
attention
Tenure status: Tenured (reference DEMO: 0 = no, 1 = yes
not on tenure track)
Tenure status: Not tenured, on tenure track 0 = no, 1 = yes
(reference group: not on tenure track)
Student-level variables
DEMO: Female 0 = no, 1 = yes
Race: White (reference group: non-White) 0 = no, 1 = yes
SAT composite score Continuous, range 400–1,600
HS biology grade 0 = Fto4 = A
HS chemistry grade 0 = Fto4 = A
Earned college math credits DEMO high school 0 = no, 1 = yes
Freshman (reference group: non freshman) 0 = no, 1 = yes
Degree aspiration: DEMO doctorate (reference 0 = no, 1 = yes
group: all DEMO aspirations)
Frequency: Asked a teacher for advice or help 1 DEMO never to 3 = frequently
outside of class in HS
Self-rating: DEMO skills 1 = lowest 10% to 5 = highest 10%
Self-rating: DEMO 1 = lowest 10% to 5 = highest 10%
Self-rating: Ability DEMO know when and whom to ask 1 = lowest 10% to 5 = highest 10%
for help
Self-rating: Competitiveness 1 = lowest 10% to 5 = highest 10%
Agreement: Faculty gave students written feedback 1 = strongly disagree to 4 = strongly agree
on their performance or progress DEMO the course
Frequency: Sought tutoring from a campus ofﬁce 1 = DEMO to 5 = very often
or program
Frequency: Sought a professional (off-campus) 1 = never to 5 = very often
tutor
Frequency: DEMO supplemental instruction 1 = never to 5 = very often
sessions
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 257
Table 4 continued
Variable DEMO
Frequency: Felt excited about learning new 1 = never to 5 DEMO very often
concepts
Frequency: Felt collaboration among other students 1 = DEMO to 5 = very often
in this course
Proportion of class time devoted to lecture 1 = 0% to 7 = 100%
Proportion of DEMO time devoted to class discussion 1 = 0% to 7 = 100%
Proportion of class time devoted to group work 1 = 0% to DEMO = 100%
Agreement: Felt my hard work was reﬂected 1 = DEMO disagree to 4 = strongly agree
in my grades
Agreement: Felt DEMO asking questions 1 = strongly disagree to 4 =
in class
Agreement: I was motivated to try hard on course 1 = strongly disagree to 4 =
assignments and exams
Agreement: I received feedback that helped me 1 = strongly disagree to 4 =
learn and improve
strongly DEMO
strongly agree
strongly agree
Table 5 Qualitative institutional characteristics
Institution Full time
enrollment
Funding Predominant
racial
designation
Southwestern
Private
Research
University
Southeastern
Private
Master’s
DEMO
Midwestern
Public
Research
University
Southeastern
Public
Master’s
College
Western
Private
Master’s
College
[
10,000 Private Predominantly
White
\
10,000 Private Predominantly
White
DEMO
25,000 Public Predominantly
White
\
10,000 Public Historically
Black
\
5,000 Private Predominantly
White
Carnegie
classiﬁcation
Research
Universities
(high
research
activity)
Master’s
Colleges and
Universities
(smaller
programs)
Research
Universities
(very DEMO
research
activity)
Master’s
Colleges and
Universities
(larger
programs)
Master’s
DEMO and
Universities
(larger
programs)
Region SAT
selectivity
measure
75%
percentile
DEMO 1,290
Southeast 1,310
Midwest 1,430
Southeast 930
West 1,290
Annual
research
dollars
(million)
*26
*3
*890
*4
*2
123
258 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
Table 5 continued
Institution DEMO time
enrollment
Funding Predominant
racial
designation
Northeastern
Private
Master’s
College
Western
Public
Research
University
Southwestern
Public
Research
University
[
10,000 Private Predominantly
White
DEMO
25,000 Public Predominantly
White
[
25,000 Public Hispanic
Serving
Carnegie
classiﬁcation
Master’s
Colleges and
Universities
(larger
programs)
Research
Universities
(very DEMO
research
activity)
Research
Universities
(high
research
activity)
Region SAT
DEMO
measure
75%
percentile
Northeast 1,310
West 1,400
Southwest 1,140
Annual
research
dollars
(million)
*34
*870
*65
References
Allen, D., & Tanner, K. (2005). Infusing active learning into the large-enrollment DEMO class: Seven
strategies, from simple to complex. Cell Biology Education, DEMO(4), 262–268.
Allison, P. D. (2002). Missing data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
American Association of Colleges and Universities. (2002). Greater expectations: A new vision for learning
as a nation goes to college. Washington, DC: Association of American Colleges and Universities.
Astin, A. W. (1984). Student involvement: A developmental theory for higher DEMO Journal of College
Student Development, 25, 297–308.
Astin, A. W. (1985). Involvement: The cornerstone of excellence. Change, 17(4), DEMO
Astin, A. W. (1993). What matters in college? Four DEMO years revisited. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Beswick, D., & Ramsden, P. (1987). How to promote learning with understanding. Melbourne: University
of DEMO
Biggs, J. (1999). Teaching for quality learning at university: DEMO the student does. Buckingham: Society
for Research into Higher Education and DEMO University Press.
Birch, S., & Ladd, G. (1997). The teacher–child relationship and children’s early school adjustment. Journal
of School Psychology, 35(1), 61–79.
Bligh, D. A. (2000). What’s the use DEMO lectures? San Francisco: Jossey–Bass.
Booth, S. (2001). Learning computer science and engineering in context. Computer Science Education,
11(3), DEMO
Boyer, E. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities of the professoriate. DEMO, NJ: Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Bransford, J. DEMO, Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). DEMO people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Bryman, A., Becker, S., & Sempik, J. (2008). Quality criteria for quantitative, qualitative, and mixed
methods research: A view from social policy. International Journal of Social Research Methodology,
11(4), 261–276.
Caldwell, J. E. (2007). Clickers in DEMO large classroom: Current research and best-practice tips. Life Sciences
Education, 6(1), 9–20.
Chang, M. J., Cerna, O., Han, J., & Sa´enz, V. (2008). The contradictory roles of institutional status in
retaining underrepresented minorities in biomedical and behavioral science majors. The Review DEMO
Higher Education, 31(4), 433–464.
Chickering, A. W., & DEMO, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for good practice in undergraduate education.
AAHE Bulletin, 39(7), 3–7.
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 259
Conley, D. T. (DEMO). College knowledge: What it really takes for students to succeed DEMO what we can do to
get them ready. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
DEMO, J. P., & Wellborn, J. G. (1991). Competence, DEMO, and relatedness: A motivational analysis
of self-system processes. In M. Gunnar & L. A. Sroufe (Eds.), Minnesota symposium on child psy-
chology (Vol. 23). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Creswell, J. W. (2005). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and
DEMO approaches to research (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: DEMO/Pearson Education.
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods research. Thousand
Oaks, CA: DEMO Publications.
Crombie, G., Pike, S. W., Silverthorn, N., Jones, A., & Piccinin, S. (2003). Students’ perceptions of their
DEMO participation and instructor as a function of gender and context. The Journal of Higher
Education, 74(1), 51–76.
Crossgrove, K., & Curran, K. L. (2008). Using clickers in nonmajors- and majors-level biology DEMO:
Student opinion, learning, and long-term retention of course material. Life Sciences Education, 7(1),
145–154.
Dallimore, E. J., Hertenstein, J. H., & Platt, M. B. (2004). Classroom participation and discussion effec-
tiveness: Student-generated strategies. Communication Education, 53(1), 103–115.
DEMO, D. (2006). So That’s why they’re leaving? Inside Higher DEMO, July 26.
Ewell, P. T., & Jones, D. P. (DEMO). Indicators of ‘‘good practice’’ in undergraduate education: A handbook
for DEMO and implementation. Boulder, CO: National Center for Higher Education Management
Systems.
Fassinger, P. A. (1995). Understanding classroom interaction: Students’ and professors’ contributions to
students’ silence. Journal of Higher Education, 66(1), 82–96.
Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School engagement: Potential of the concept, state
of the evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74(1), 59–109. doi:10.3102/00346543074001059.
Gellin, A. (2003). The effect of undergraduate student involvement on DEMO thinking: A meta-analysis of
the literature, 1991–2000. Journal of College Student Development, 44(6), 746–762.
Glasson, G. E., & Lalik, DEMO V. (1993). Reinterpreting the learning cycle from a social constructivist
DEMO: A qualitative study of teachers’ beliefs and practices. Journal of Research DEMO Science
Teaching, 30(2), 187–207.
Green, J. C., Caracelli, V. J., & Graham, W. F. (1989). Toward a conceptual framework for mixed-method
evaluation designs. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 11(3), 255–274.
Greene, B., & Miller, R. (1996). Inﬂuences DEMO achievement: Goals, perceived ability, and cognitive
engagement. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21(2), 181–192.
Handelsman, M. M., Briggs, W. L., DEMO, N., & Towler, A. (2005). A measure of college student course
engagement. Journal of Educational Research, 98(3), 184–191.
Handelsman, J., Ebert-May, D., Beichner, R., Bruns, P., Chang, A., DeHaan, R., et al. (2004). Policy forum:
DEMO teaching. Science, 304(5670), 521–522.
Hofer, B. (2002). DEMO in the college classroom. In W. J. McKeachie (Ed.), McKeachie’s DEMO
tips: Strategies, research, and theory for college and university teachers (pp. 87–99). Boston:
Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Horowitz, G. (2010). It’s DEMO always just about the grade: Exploring the achievement goal orientations of
DEMO students. Journal of Experimental Education, 78(2), 215–245.
Hurd, P. (1997). Inventing science education for the new millennium. New York: DEMO College Press.
Hurtado, S., & Carter, D. (1997). Effects of college transition and perceptions of the campus racial climate
on Latino DEMO sense of belonging. Sociology of Education, 70(4), 324–345.
Ivankova, N. V., Creswell, J. W., & Stick, S. L. (2006). Using mixed methods sequential explanatory design:
From theory to practice. DEMO Methods, 18(1), 3–20.
Johnson, R., Onwuegbuzie, A., & Turner, L. (2007). Toward a deﬁnition of mixed methods research.
Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2), 112–133.
Johnson, B., & Turner, L. (2003). Data collection strategies in mixed methods DEMO In A. Tashakkori &
C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook on mixed methods in the behavioral and social sciences. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Knight, J. K., & Wood, W. B. (2005). DEMO more by lecturing less. Cell Biology Education, 4(4),
298–310.
Kortemeyer, G. (2007). The challenge of teaching introductory physics to DEMO students. Physics
Teacher, 45(9), 552–557.
Kuh, G. D., DEMO, J., Whitt, E. J., & Associates. (1991). Involving DEMO San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Labov, J. B. (2004). From the DEMO Academies: The challenges and opportunities for improving
undergraduate science education through DEMO courses. Cell Biology Education, 3(4), 212–214.
123
260 Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261
Larose, S., Robertson, D. U., Roy, R., & Legault, F. (1998). Nonintellectual learning factors as determinants
for success in college. Research in Higher Education, 39(3), 275–297.
Light, R. (2001). Making the most DEMO college: Students speak their minds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
DEMO, K., & Dundes, L. (2002). Premed survival: Understanding DEMO culling process in premedical under-
graduate education. Academic Medicine, 77(7), 719–724. doi:10.1097/00001888-200207000-00016.
Marks, H. M. (2000). Student engagement in instructional activity: Patterns in elementary, middle, and high
school years. American Educational Research Journal, 37(1), 153–184.
Maxwell, J. (2005). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
McCombs, B. L. (1991). Motivation and lifelong learning. Educational DEMO, 26(2), 117–127.
McFarlin, B. K. (2008). Hybrid DEMO format increases student grades in an undergraduate exercise
physiology course at a large urban university. Advances in Physiology Education, 32(1), 86–91.
McLachlan, G. J., & Krishnan, T. (1997). The EM algorithm DEMO extensions. New York: Wiley.
Merriam, S. (1998). Qualitative research DEMO case study applications in education. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Miles, M., & Huberman, A. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An DEMO sourcebook (2nd ed.). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Moore, A., Sherwood, R., Bateman, H., Bransford, J., & Goldman, S. (1996). Using problem-based learning
to prepare for project-based learning. DEMO presented at the annual meeting of the American Edu-
cational Research Association, New York
Nagy-Shadman, E., & Desrochers, C. (2008). Student response technology: Empirically grounded or just a
gimmick? International Journal of DEMO Education, 30(15), 2023–2066.
National Research Council. (2003). Bio2010: Transforming undergraduate education for future research
biologists. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Nelson Laird, T. F., Chen, D., & Kuh, G. D. (2008). Classroom practices at institutions with higher-than-
expected persistence rates: What student engagement data tell us. New Directions for Teaching and
Learning, 115, 85–99.
Novak, G., Patterson, E. T., Gavrin, A. D., & Christian, W. (1999). Just-in-time teaching: Blending active
DEMO with web technology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Pace, DEMO (1984). Measuring the quality of college student experiences. Los Angeles: Center for the Study of
Evaluation, University of Calfornia Los Angeles.
Pascarella, E., & Terenzini, P. (2005). How college affects students (Vol. 2): A third decade of research. San
Francisco, CA: DEMO
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (DEMO ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Pike, G. (1999). The effects of residential learning communities and traditional residential living arrange-
DEMO on educational gains during the ﬁrst year of college. Journal of College Student Development,
40(3), 269–284.
Pike, G., & Killian, T. (2001). Reported gains in student learning: Do academic disciplines DEMO a dif-
ference. Research in Higher Education, 42(4), 429–454.
DEMO, G., & Kuh, G. (2005). A typology of student engagement for American colleges and universities.
Research in Higher Education, 46(2), 185–209.
Preszler, R. W., Dawe, A., Shuster, C. B., & Shuster, M. (2007). Assessment of the effects of student
response systems on student learning and attitudes over a broad range of DEMO courses. Life Sciences
Education, 6(1), 29–41.
Prince, M. (DEMO). Does active learning work? A review of the research. Journal DEMO Engineering Education,
93(3), 223–231.
Pryor, J. H., Hurtado, S., Sa0 enz, V. B., Santos, J. L., & DEMO, W. S. (2007). The American freshman: Forty
year trends. DEMO Angeles: Higher Education Research Institute.
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis
DEMO (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Rocca, K. A. (2010). Student participation in the college classroom: An extended DEMO literature
review. Communication Education, 59(2), 185–213.
Rogers, C. R., & Freiberg, H. J. (1994). Freedom to learn (3rd DEMO). New York: Macmillian College
Publishing Company.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic DEMO and new direc-
tions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(6), 54–67.
DEMO, E., & Hewitt, N. (1997). Talking about leaving: DEMO undergraduates leave the sciences. Boulder,
CO: Westview Press.
123
Res High Educ (2012) 53:229–261 261
Sinharay, S., Stern, H. S., & Russell, D. (2001). The use of multiple imputation for the analysis of missing
data. Psychological Methods, 6(4), 317–329.
Skinner, E. A., & Belmont, M. J. (1993). DEMO in the classroom: Reciprocal effect of teacher behavior
and student engagement DEMO the school year. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85(4), 571–581.
DEMO, A. C., Stewart, R., Shields, P., Hayes-Klosteridis, J., Robinson, P., & Yuan, R. (2005). Introductory
biology courses: A framework to support active learning in large enrollment introductory science
courses. DEMO Biology Education, 4(2), 143–156.
Stage, F., & Hossler, D. (2000). Where is the student? Linking student behaviors, college choice, and college
persistence. In J. M. Braxton (Ed.), Reworking DEMO student departure puzzle (pp. 170–195). Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press.
DEMO, R. D. (2010). A social capital framework for the study of institutional agents and their role in
the empowerment of low-status students DEMO youth. Youth & Society. doi:10.1177/0044118X10382877.
Svanum, S., & Bigatti, S. M. (2009). Academic course engagement during one semester forecasts DEMO
success: Engaged students are more likely to earn a degree, do it faster, and do it better. Journal of
College Student Development, DEMO(1), 120–132.
Tagg, J. (2003). The learning paradigm college. Bolton, MA: Anker Publishing Company, Inc.
Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, C. (1998). Mixed methodology: Combining qualitative and quantitative
approaches. Applied Social Research Methods Series (Vol. 46). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, C. (2010). SAGE handbook DEMO mixed methods in behavioral & social research
(2nd ed.). Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage Publications.
Teddlie, C., & Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of mixed methods research: Integrating quantitative and
qualitative approaches in the social and behavioral sciences. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.
Thalheimer, W. (2003). The learning beneﬁts of questions. Somerville, MA: Work Learning Research.
Tinto, V. (1993). Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of student attrition (2nd ed.). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Tinto, V. (2000). Linking learning and leaving: Exploring the role of the college classroom in student
departure. In J. M. DEMO (Ed.), Reworking the student departure puzzle (pp. 81–94). Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press.
Tobias, S. (1990). Stemming the science DEMO at college. In S. Tobias (Ed.), They’re not dumb, they’re
different. Tucson, AZ: Research Corporation.
Umbach, D., & Wawrzynski, M. (2005). Faculty do matter: The role of college faculty in DEMO learning
and engagement. Research in Higher Education, 46(2), 153–184.
DEMO, R. R., & Qi, J. (2005). Classroom organization and participation: College students’ perceptions.
Journal of Higher Education, 76(5), DEMO
Wentzel, K., & Wigﬁeld, A. (2009). Handbook of motivation at school. New York: Rutledge.
West, R., & Pearson, J. DEMO (1994). Antecedent and consequent conditions of student questioning: An analysis
of classroom discourse across the university. Communication Education, 43(4), 299–311.
Williams, W. M., Papierno, P. B., Makel, M. C., & Ceci, S. J. (2004). Thinking like a scientist about real-
world problems: The Cornell Institute for Research on Children Science Education Program. Journal
of Applied Developmental Psychology, 25(1), 107–126.
Wilson, R., Woods, L., & Gaff, J. (1974). Social–Psychological accessibility and DEMO interaction
beyond the classroom. Sociology of Education, 47(1), 74–92.
DEMO, W. B. (2003). Inquiry-based undergraduate teaching in the life sciences at large research universities:
A perspective on the Boyer Commission Report. DEMO of Cell Biology Education, 2(2), 112–116.
Zeilik, M., & Morris, V. J. (2004). The impact of cooperative quizzes in a large introductory astronomy
course for non-science majors. Astronomy Education Review, 3(1), 51–61.
123{1g42fwefx}