American Economic Association
An Introduction to Applicable Game Theory
Author(s): DEMO Gibbons
Source: The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11, No. DEMO (Winter, 1997), pp. 127-149
Published by: American Economic Association
DEMO URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2138255
Accessed: 12/03/2009 08:34
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR'DEMO Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/DEMO/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, DEMO part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your DEMO, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of DEMO work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aea.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must DEMO the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to DEMO trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these DEMO For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Economic Association DEMO collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
DEMO of Economic Perspectives.
http://www.jstor.org
Journal
of
Economic
Perspectives-Volume
11, Number
1-Winter 1997-Pages 127-149
An Introduction to Applicable Game
Theory
Robert Gibbons
G ame theory is rampant in economics. DEMO long ago invaded industrial
organization, game-theoretic modeling is now commonplace in DEMO
tional, labor, macro and public finance, and it is gathering DEMO in de-
velopment and economic history. Nor is economics alone: accounting, finance, law,
marketing, political science and sociology are beginning similar DEMO Many
modelers use game theory because it allows them to think like an economist when
price theory does not apply. That is, game-theoretic models allow economists to
study the implications of rationality, self-interest and equilibrium, DEMO in market
interactions that are modeled as games (such as where DEMO numbers, hidden
information, hidden actions or incomplete contracts are present) DEMO in nonmar-
ket interactions (such as between a regulator and a DEMO, a boss and a worker, and
so on).
Many applied economists seem to appreciate that game theory can comple-
ment price theory DEMO this way, but nonetheless find game theory more an entry
barrier DEMO a useful tool. This paper is addressed to such readers. I try to give clear
definitions and intuitive examples of the basic kinds of DEMO and the basic solution
concepts. Perhaps more importandly, I try to DEMO the welter of solution concepts
and other jargon into a few basic principles that permeate the literature. Thus, I
envision this paper as a tutorial for economists who have brushed up against game
theory but have DEMO (yet) read a book on the subject.
The theory is presented in four sections, corresponding to whether the game
in question is static or dynamic and to whether it has complete or incomplete
* Robert
DEMO
ciate,
Gibbons
School
National
of
Bureau
is the Charles
Management,
of
Dyson
Cornell
Economic
Professor
University,
Research,
Economics
Ithaca,
DEMO,
of
and Organizations,
New York,
Massachusetts.
and Research
Johnson
Asso-
128 Journal of Economic Perspectives
information. ("Complete information" means that there is no private information:
the timing, feasible moves and payoffs of the game are all common knowledge.)
We begin with static games DEMO complete information; for these games, we focus
on Nash equilibrium as the solution concept. We turn next to dynamic games with
complete information, for which we use backward induction as the solution con-
cept. We DEMO dynamic games with complete information that have multiple Nash
equilibria, and DEMO show how backward induction selects a Nash equilibrium that
does not rely on noncredible threats. We then return to the context of static games
DEMO introduce private information; for these games we extend the concept of DEMO
equilibrium to allow for private information and call the resulting solution concept
Bayesian Nash equilibrium. Finally, we consider signaling games (the simplest dy-
DEMO games with private information) and blend the ideas of backward induction
DEMO Bayesian Nash equilibrium to define perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
This outline may seem to suggest that game theory invokes a brand new equi-
librium concept DEMO each new class of games, but one theme of this paper DEMO that
these equilibrium concepts are very closely linked. As we consider progressively
richer games, we progressively strengthen the equilibrium concept to rule out im-
plausible equilibria in the richer games that would survive if we applied DEMO
concepts suitable for simpler games. In each case, the stronger equilibrium DEMO
differs from the weaker concept only for the richer games, not DEMO the simpler
games.
Space constraints prevent me from presenting anything other than the basic
theory. I omit several natural extensions of the theory; I only hint at the terrific
breadth of applications in economics; I say nothing about the growing body of field
and experimental evidence; and I do not discuss recent applications outside eco-
nomics, including fascinating efforts to integrate game theory with behavioral and
social-structural elements from other social sciences. DEMO conclude the paper, there-
fore, I offer a brief guide to further reading.'
Static Games with Complete Infornation
We begin with two-player, simultaneous-move games. (Everything we do for
two-player games extends easily to three or more players; we consider sequential-
move games below.) The timing DEMO such a game is as follows:
1) Player 1 chooses DEMO action a, from a set of feasible actions A1. Simulta-
neously, player 2 chooses an action a2 from a set of feasible actions DEMO
2) After the players choose their actions, they receive payoffs: DEMO (a,, a2) to
player 1 and w2(al, a2) to player 2.
' Full disclosure requires me to reveal that I DEMO one of the books mentioned in this guide to further
reading, DEMO readers should discount my objectivity accordingly. By the gracious consent of the publisher,
much of the material presented here is drawn from that DEMO
Figure 1
An Example of Iterated Elimination of Dominated Strategies
Player 1
DEMO
Player 2
Middle
Right
Up
Down
1,0
0, 3
1,DEMO
0,1
0,1
2, 0
Robert
Gibbons 129
A classic DEMO of a static game with complete information is Cournot's (1838)DEMO
duopoly model. Other examples include Hotelling's (1929) model of candidates'
platform choices in an election, Farber's (1980) model of final-offer arbitration and
Grossman and Hart's (1980) model of takeover DEMO
Rational Play
Rather than ask how one should play a given game, we first ask how one should
not play the game. Consider the game in Figure 1. Player 1 has two actions, {Up,
DownJ; player 2 has three, {Left, Middle, RightJ. For player 2, playing Right is dom-
inated by playing Middle: if player 1 chooses Up, then Right yields 1 for player 2,
whereas Middle yields 2; if 1 chooses Down, then Right yields 0 for 2, whereas
Middle yields 1. Thus, a rational player 2 will not play Right.2
Now take the argument a step further. If player 1 knows DEMO player 2 is rational,
then player 1 can eliminate Right from player 2's action space. That is, if player 1
knows that player 2 is rational, then player 1 can play the game as if player 2's only
moves were Left and Middle. But in DEMO case, Down is dominated by Up for player
1: if 2 plays Left, then Up is better for 1, and likewise if DEMO plays Middle. Thus, if
player 1 is rational (and player 1 knows that player 2 is rational, so that player 2's
only moves are Left and Middle), then player 1 will not play DEMO
Finally, take the argument one last step. If player 2 knows DEMO player 1 is
rational, and player 2 knows that player 1 DEMO that player 2 is rational, then player
2 can eliminate Down DEMO player 1's action space, leaving Up as player 1's DEMO
move. But in this case, Left is dominated by Middle for DEMO 2, leaving (Up,
Middle) as the solution to the DEMO
This argument shows that some games can be solved by (repeatedly) asking
how one should not play the game. This process is called DEMO elimination of
dominated strategies. Although it is based on the appealing idea that rational
2 More generally, action a' is dominated by action DEMO, for player 1 if, for each action player 2 might choose,
I's payoff is higher from playing di' than from playing a'. That is, ul (a', a2) < ul (DEMO,f, a2) for each action
a2 in 2's action set, A2. A rational player will not play a dominated action.
130 Journal of
Economic
Perspectives
Figure 2
A Game without Dominated Strategies DEMO be Eliminated
L
C
4,0
0,
3, 5
R
DEMO,3
5,3
6, 6
T
0,4
M
4,0
DEMO
3, 5
players do not play dominated strategies, the process has two drawbacks. First,
each step requires a further assumption about what DEMO players know about each
other's rationality. Second, the process often DEMO a very imprecise predic-
tion about the play of the game. Consider the game in Figure 2, for example.
In this game there are no dominated strategies to be eliminated. Since all the
strategies in the DEMO survive iterated elimination of dominated strategies, the
process produces no prediction DEMO about the play of the game. Thus,
asking how one should not play a game sometimes is no help in determining
how one DEMO play.
We turn next to Nash equilibrium-a solution concept that produces much tighter
predictions in a very broad class of games. We will see DEMO each of the two games above
has a unique Nash equilibrium. In any game, the players' strategies in a Nash equilibrium
always survive DEMO elimination of dominated strategies; in particular, we will see that
(DEMO, Middle) is the unique Nash equilibrium of the game in Figure 1.
Nash Equilibrium
We have just seen that asking how one should DEMO play a given game can
shed some light on how one should play. To introduce Nash equilibrium, we
take a similarly indirect approach: DEMO of asking what the solution of a given
game is (that DEMO, what all the players should do), we ask what outcomes DEMO
be the solution. After eliminating some outcomes, we are left with DEMO or more
possible solutions. We then discuss which of these possible solutions, if any,
deserves further attention. We also consider the possibility that the game has no
compelling solution.
Suppose game theory offers a unique DEMO about the play of a particular
game. For this predicted solution to be correct, it is necessary that each player be
willing to choose the strategy that the theory predicts that individual will play. Thus,
DEMO player's predicted strategy must be that player's best response to the predicted
strategies of the other players. Such a collection of predicted DEMO could be
called "strategically stable" or "self-enforcing," because no DEMO player wants to
An Introduction
to
Applicable
Game
Theoay 131
Figure 3
The Prisoners' Dilemma
Player 1
LI
RI
Player 2
L2
R2
1L
1
5) 0
?' 5
4' 4
deviate from his or her predicted strategy. DEMO will call such a collection of strategies
a Nash equilibrium.3
To relate this definition to the motivation above, suppose game theory offers
the actions (a*, c4) as a solution. Saying that (a*, a*) DEMO not a Nash equilibrium is
equivalent to saying that either a* is not a best response for player 1 to a*, or c is
not a best response for player 2 to a*, or both. Thus, if the theory offers the strat-
egies (a*, c4) as DEMO solution, but these strategies are not a Nash equilibrium, then
at least one player will have an incentive to deviate from the theory'DEMO prediction, so
the prediction seems unlikely to be true.
To see DEMO definition of Nash equilibrium at work, consider the games in Fig-
DEMO 1 and 2. For five of the six strategy pairs in Figure 1, at least one player would
want to deviate if that strategy pair were proposed as the solution to the game. Only
(Up, DEMO) satisfies the mutual-best-response criterion of Nash equilibrium. Like-
wise, of the nine strategy pairs in Figure 2, only (B, R) is "strategically stable" or
"self-enforcing." In Figure 2, it happens that DEMO unique Nash equilibrium is effi-
cient: it yields the highest payoffs DEMO the game for both players. In many games,
however, the DEMO Nash equilibrium is not efficient-consider the Prisoners'
Dilemma in Figure 3.4
Some games have multiple Nash equilibria, such as the Dating Game (DEMO Battle
of the Sexes, in antiquated terminology) shown below in Figure 4. The story behind
this game is that Chris and Pat will DEMO having dinner together but are currently on
their separate ways home from work. Pat is supposed to buy the wine and Chris the
main DEMO, but Pat could buy red or white wine and Chris steak DEMO chicken. Both
Chris and Pat prefer red wine with steak and white with chicken, but Chris prefers
the former combination to the latter and Pat the reverse; that is, the players prefer
' Formally, in the two-player, simultaneous-move game described above, the actions (a, 4a) are a Nash
equilibrium if a* is a best response for player DEMO to a4*, and a4* a best response for player 2 to DEMO That
is, a* must satisfy ul (a*, a4*) 2 ul (a,, a4*) for every a, in Al, and a4* DEMO satisfy w2 (a*, a4*) 2 u2(a*, a2)
for every a2 in A2.
4Another well-known example in which the unique Nash DEMO is not efficient is the Cournot
duopoly model.
is
132 Journal of
Economic
Perspectives
Figure 4
The Dating Game
Pat
Chris
DEMO
Chicken
Red
2, l
0, 0
White
0, 0
1, 2
to coordinate but disagree about how to do so.5 In this DEMO, Red Wine and Steak
is a Nash equilibrium, as is White Wine and Chicken, but there is no obvious way
to decide between these equilibria. When several Nash equilibria are equally com-
pelling, as in the Dating Game, Nash equilibrium loses much of its appeal as a
prediction of play. In such settings, which (if any) Nash equilibrium emerges as a
convention may depend on accidents of history (Young, DEMO).
Other games, such as Matching Pennies in Figure 5, do not have a pair of strategies
satisfying the mutual-best-response definition of Nash DEMO given above. The
distinguishing feature of Matching Pennies is that each player would like to outguess
the other. Versions of this game also arise DEMO poker, auditing and other settings. In
poker, for example, the DEMO question is how often to bluff: if player i is known
DEMO to bluff, then i's opponents will fold whenever i bids DEMO, thereby making
it worthwhile for i to bluff on occasion; on the other hand, bluffing too often is also a
losing strategy. Similarly, in auditing, if a subordinate worked diligently, then the boss
prefers not to incur the cost of auditing the subordinate, but if the boss is not going
to audit, then the subordinate prefers to shirk, and so on.
In any game in which each player would like to outguess the other, there is no
pair of strategies satisfying the definition of Nash equilibrium given above. Instead,
the solution to such DEMO game necessarily involves uncertainty about what the players
will do. To model this uncertainty, we will refer to the actions in a player's action
space (Ai) as pure strategies, and we will define a mixed strategy to be a probability
distribution over some or all of DEMO player's pure strategies. A mixed strategy for
player i is sometimes described as player i rolling dice to pick a pure strategy, but
later in the paper we will offer a much more plausible interpretation DEMO on player
j's uncertainty about the strategy player i will choose. Regardless of how one inter-
prets mixed strategies, once the mutual-best-response definition of Nash equilib-
'I owe the nonsexist, nonheterosexist player names to DEMO Rabin. Allison Beezer noted, however, that
no amount of Rabin's relabeling could overcome the game's original name, so she suggested the Dating
Game. Larry Samuelson suggested the updated choices available to the players.
DEMO are of course many applications of this game, including political groups DEMO to establish
a constitution, firms attempting to establish an industry standard, and colleagues deciding which days to
work at home.
Robert
Gibbons 133
Figure 5
Matching Pennies
Player 2
Heads Tails
Heads DEMO, -1
Tails - 1 ,
rium is extended to allow mixed as well as pure strategies, then any game with a
finite number of players, each of whom has a finite number of pure strategies, has
a Nash equilibrium (possibly involving mixed strategies). See Nash'DEMO (1950) classic
paper for the proof, based on a fixed-point DEMO
Dynamic Games with Complete Information
We turn next to dynamic games, DEMO with two-player, sequential-move
games. The timing of such a game is DEMO follows:
1) Player 1 chooses an action a, from a set of feasible actions Al.
2) Player 2 observes l's choice and then chooses an action a2 from a set of
feasible actions DEMO
3) After the players choose their actions, they receive payoffs: DEMO(al, a2) to
player 1 and u2(al, a2) to player 2.
A classic example of a dynamic game with complete information DEMO Stackelberg's
(1934) sequential-move version of Cournot duopoly. Other examples include Leon-
tief's (1946) monopoly-union model and Rubinstein's (1982) DEMO model
(although the latter may not end after only two moves)DEMO
The new solution concept in this section is backward induction. We will see
that in many dynamic games there are many Nash equilibria, some of which depend
on noncredible threats-defined as threats that the threatener would DEMO want to
carry out, but will not have to carry out DEMO the threat is believed. Backward induction
identifies a Nash equilibrium that does not rely on such threats.
Backward Induction
Consider the Trust Game in DEMO 6, in which player 1 first chooses either to
Trust or DEMO Trust player 2. For simplicity, suppose that if player 1 chooses DEMO
Trust then the game ends-I terminates the relationship. If player 1 chooses to
Trust 2, however, then the game continues, and 2 chooses either to Honor or to
Betray l's trust. If player 1 DEMO to end the relationship, then both players'
Player 1
134
Journal of Economic Perspectives
Figure 6
The Trust Game
Not
Trust
DEMO 1
0
O
Honor
1
1
Trust
Player 2
etray
-1
2
Player 2
Honor
Betray
Trust
Player 1 Not
Trust
1, I
O,
-1, 2
0 0
payoffs are 0. If 1 chooses to Trust 2, then both players' payoffs are 1 if 2 Honors
DEMO 's trust, but player 1 receives -1 and player 2 receives 2 if player 2 Betrays 1 's trust.
All of this is captured by the game tree on the left-hand side of Figure 6. DEMO game
begins with a decision node for player 1 and reaches a decision node for player 2
if 1 chooses Trust. At the end DEMO each branch of the tree, player l's payoff appears
above DEMO 2's. The bold branches in the tree will be explained momentarily.
We solve the Trust Game by working backward through the game tree. DEMO player
2 gets to move (that is, if player 1 chooses Trust) then 2 can receive a payoff of 1
by choosing to Honor l's trust or a payoff of 2 by choosing to DEMO l's trust. Since
2 exceeds 1, player 2 will Betray DEMO's trust. Knowing this, player l's initial choice
amounts to DEMO the relationship (and so receiving a payoff of 0) or Trusting
player 2 (and so receiving a payoff of -1, after player DEMO Betrays l's trust). Since 0
exceeds -1, player 1 DEMO Not Trust. These arguments are summarized by the
bold lines in the game tree.
Thus far, it may appear that simultaneous-move games must be represented in
matrix (or "normal") form, as in the previous section, while sequential-move games
must be represented using game trees. Similarly, DEMO may appear that we use two different
methods to solve these two kinds of games: Nash equilibrium in simultaneous-move
games and backward induction in sequential-move games. These perceptions are not correct.
Either kind of game can DEMO represented in either normal form or a game tree, but for
DEMO games it is more convenient to use one than the other. The Trust Game, for
example, is represented in normal form on the DEMO side of Figure 6, and using
this representation one can verify DEMO the Nash equilibrium is (Not Trust, Betray), just
as we found by working backward through the game tree.
The reassurances just offered DEMO one subtle point: in some games, there
are several Nash equilibria, some of which rely on noncredible threats or promises.
Fortunately, the DEMO solution to a game is always a Nash equilibrium
An Introduction to Applicable Game Theoay 135
Figure 7
A Game that DEMO on a Noncredible Threat
1
L R
2 L
L R
1, 2 1, 2
<
2 ~R 0,2,1
o 2
0 1
that does not rely on noncredible threats or promises. As DEMO illustration of a Nash
equilibrium that relies on a noncredible threat (DEMO does not satisfy backward in-
duction), consider the game tree and associated normal form in Figure 7. Working
backward through this game tree DEMO that the backward-induction solution is for
player 2 to play R' DEMO given the move and for player 1 to play R But the normal
form reveals that there are two Nash equilibria: (R, R') and (L, L'). The second
Nash equilibrium exists because player l's best response to L' by 2 is to end the
game by choosing L. But (L, L') relies on DEMO noncredible threat by player 2 to play
L' rather than R' if given the move. If player 1 believes 2's threat, then 2 is off the
hook because 1 will play L, but 2 would never want to carry out this threat if given
the opportunity.
DEMO induction can be applied in any finite-horizon game of complete
information in which the players move one at a time and all previous moves DEMO
common knowledge before the next move is chosen. The method is simple: go to
the end of the game and work backward, one DEMO at a time. In dynamic games
with simultaneous moves or an infinite horizon, however, we cannot apply this
method directly. We turn next DEMO subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium, which extends
the spirit of backward induction to DEMO games.
Subgame-Perfect Nash Equilibrium
Subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium is a refinement Nash equilibrium; that is,
to be subgame-perfect, the players' strategies must first be a Nash equilibrium and
must then fulfill an additional requirement. The DEMO of this additional require-
ment is, as with backward induction, to rule out Nash equilibria that rely on non-
credible threats.
To provide DEMO informal definition of subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium, we
return to the motivation DEMO Nash equilibrium-namely, that a unique solution to
a game-theoretic problem must DEMO Nash's mutual-best-response requirement.
In many dynamic games, the same argument DEMO also be applied to certain pieces
of the game, called subgames. DEMO subgame is the piece of an original game that
remains to be played beginning at any point at which the complete history of the
DEMO
136 Journal of Economic Perspectives
play of the game thus far is DEMO knowledge. In the one-shot Trust Game, for
example, the history of play is common knowledge after player 1 moves. The piece
of the DEMO that then remains is very simple-just one move by player 2.
As a second example of a subgame (and, eventually, of subgame-perfect Nash
equilibrium), consider Lazear and Rosen's (1981) model of a DEMO First,
the principal chooses two wages- H for the winner, DEMO for the loser. Second, the
two workers observe these wages and DEMO simultaneously choose effort levels. Fi-
nally, each worker's output (which equals the worker's effort plus noise) is observed,
and the worker with the higher output earns WH. In this game, the history of play
is common knowledge after the principal chooses the wages. The DEMO of the game
that then remains is the effort-choice game between the workers.
Because the workers' effort-choice game has simultaneous moves, we cannot
DEMO to the end of the game and work backward one move at a time, as with backward
induction. (If we go to the DEMO of the game, which worker's move should we analyze
first?) Instead, we analyze both workers' moves together. That is, we DEMO the
entire subgame that remains after the principal sets the wages by solving for the
Nash equilibrium in the workers' effort-choice game given arbitrary wages chosen
by the principal. Given the workers' equilibrium response to these arbitrary wages,
we can then work backward, solving the principal's problem: choose wages that
maximize expected profit given the workers' equilibrium DEMO This process
yields the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium of the tournament game.
There typically are other Nash equilibria of the tournament game that are
not DEMO For example, the principal might pay very high wages be-
cause DEMO workers both threaten to shirk if she pays anything less. Solving for
the workers' equilibrium response to an arbitrary pair of wages reveals that this
threat is not credible. This solution process illustrates Selten's (1965) definition
of a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium: a Nash equilibrium (of the game as
whole) is subgame-perfect if the players' strategies constitute a DEMO equilibrium
in every subgame.6
Repeated Games
When people interact over time, DEMO and promises concerning future
behavior may influence current behavior. Repeated games capture this fact of
life, and hence have been applied more broadly than any other game-theoretic
model (by my armchair count) -not only in DEMO every field of economics
but also in finance, law, marketing, DEMO science and sociology.
In this section, we analyze the infinitely repeated DEMO Game, borrowed from
Kreps's (1990a) analysis of corporate culture. DEMO previous outcomes are known
before the next period's Trust Game is played. Both players share the interest rate
r per period.7 Consider the DEMO "trigger" strategies:
'Any finite game has a subgame-perfect Nash DEMO, possibly involving mixed strategies, because
each subgame is itself a finite game and hence has a Nash equilibrium.
7 The interest rate rcan DEMO interpreted as reflecting both the rate of time preference and the probability
that the current period will be the last, so that the "DEMO repeated" game ends at a random date.
Robert Gibbons 137
Player 1: In the first period, play Trust. DEMO, if all moves in all pre-
vious periods have been Trust DEMO Honor, play Trust; otherwise, play Not
Trust.
Player 2: If given the move this period, play Honor if all moves in all previous
periods have been Trust and Honor; otherwise, play Betray.
Recall DEMO in the one-shot version of the Trust Game, backward induction
yields (Not Trust, Betray), with payoffs of (0, 0). Given the trigger strategies
stated above for the repeated game, this backward-induction outcome of the
stage game will be the "punishment" outcome if cooperation DEMO in the
repeated game. Under these trigger strategies, the payoffs from "cooperation"
are (1, 1), but cooperation creates an incentive DEMO "defection," at least for
player 2: if player 1 chooses Trust, player 2's one-period payoff would be max-
imized by choosing to Betray, producing payoffs of (-1, 2). Thus, player DEMO will
cooperate if the present value of the payoffs from cooperation (DEMO in
each period) exceeds the present value of the payoffs from DEMO followed
by punishment (2 immediately, but 0 thereafter). The former present
value exceeds the latter if the interest rate is sufficiently small (here,
rc 1).8
What about player 1? Suppose player 2 is playing his strategy given above.
Because player 1 moves first, she has no chance to defect, in the sense of cheat-
ing while player 2 attempts to cooperate. The only possible deviation for player
1 DEMO to play Not Trust, in which case player 2 does not DEMO the move that period.
But 2's strategy then specifies that any future Trusts will be met with Betrayal.
Thus, by playing Not Trust, player 1 gets 0 this period and 0 thereafter (be-
cause DEMO Not Trust forever after is l's best response to 2's anticipated
Betrayal of Trust). So if player 2 is playing his DEMO given above, then it is
optimal for player 1 to play DEMO Thus, if the interest rate is sufficiently small,
then the DEMO strategies stated above are a Nash equilibrium of the repeated
game.9
The general point is that cooperation is prone to defection-otherwise we
should call DEMO something else, such as a happy alignment of the players' self-interests.
But in some circumstances, defection can be met with punishment, in DEMO case
a potential defector must weigh the present value of continued cooperation against
the short-term gain from defection followed by the long-term loss from DEMO
If the players are sufficiently patient (that is, the interest rate is sufficiently small),
then cooperation can occur in an equilibrium of the repeated game when it cannot
in the one-shot game.
8 If DEMO 1 is playing her strategy given above, then it is a DEMO response for player 2 to play his strategy
if I1 + (DEMO/r) 11 ? 2 + (l/r) O, 0 or r ? 1. More generally, if a player's payoffs (per DEMO) are C from
cooperation, D from defection and P from punishment, then the player has an incentive to cooperate
if l + (DEMO/r)IC? D + (1/r)P, or r? (DEMO)/(D- C).
' In fact, this Nash equilibrium of DEMO repeated game is subgame-perfect.
138 Journal of Economic Perspectives
Static Games with Incomplete Information
We turn DEMO to games with incomplete information, also called Bayesian games.
In a DEMO of complete information, the players' payoff functions are common
knowledge, DEMO in a game of incomplete information at least one player is
uncertain about another player's payoff function. One common example of a static
DEMO of incomplete information is a sealed-bid auction: each bidder knows his DEMO
her own valuation for the good being sold, but does not DEMO any other bidder's
valuation; bids are submitted in sealed envelopes, so the players' moves are effec-
tively simultaneous. Most economically interesting Bayesian games are dynamic,
however, because the existence of private information leads naturally to attempts
by informed parties to communicate (or mislead) and DEMO attempts by uninformed
parties to learn and respond.
We first use the idea of incomplete information to provide a new interpretation
for mixed-strategy Nash DEMO in games with complete information-an inter-
pretation of player i's mixed strategy in terms of player j's uncertainty about i's
action, rather than in terms of actual randomization on i's part. Using DEMO simple
model as a template, we then define a static Bayesian DEMO and a Bayesian Nash
equilibrium. Reassuringly, we will see that a DEMO Nash equilibrium is simply a
Nash equilibrium in a Bayesian game: DEMO players' strategies must be best responses
to each other.
Mixed Strategies DEMO
Recall that in the Dating Game discussed earlier, there are two DEMO
Nash equilibria: (Steak, Red Wine) and (Chicken, White Wine). There is also a
mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium, in which Chris chooses Steak with probability 3
and Chicken with probability 3, and Pat chooses White Wine with probability 2 and
Red Wine with probability 3. To DEMO that these mixed strategies constitute a Nash
equilibrium, check that given DEMO's strategy, Chris is indifferent between the pure
strategies of Steak DEMO Chicken and so also indifferent among all probability dis-
tributions over these pure strategies. Thus, the mixed strategy specified for Chris
is one of a continuum of best responses to Pat's strategy. The same is DEMO for Pat,
so the two mixed strategies are a Nash equilibrium.
Now suppose that, although they have known each other for quite some time,
Chris and Pat are not quite sure of each other'DEMO payoffs, as shown in Figure 8. Chris's
payoff from Steak DEMO Red Wine is now 2 + t,, where t, is DEMO known by Chris;
Pat's payoff from Chicken with White Wine is now 2 + tp, where tp is privately known
by Pat; and t, and tp are independent draws from a uniform distribution DEMO [0, x].
The choice of a uniform distribution is only for DEMO, but we do have in
mind that the values of t, and tp only slightly perturb the payoffs in the original
game, so think of x as small. All the other payoffs are the same DEMO in the original
complete-information game.
We will construct a pure-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this incomplete-
information version of the Dating Game in which DEMO chooses Steak if t, exceeds
An Introduction
to
Applicable
Game
Theory 139
Figure 8
The Dating Game DEMO Incomplete Information
Pat
Red
Chris
Steak
Chicken
2 + tc, 1
DEMO, 0
White
0, 0
1, 2 + tp
a critical DEMO, c, and chooses Chicken otherwise, and Pat chooses White Wine DEMO
tp exceeds a critical value, p, and chooses Red Wine otherwise. In such an equilib-
rium, Chris chooses Steak with probability (x DEMO c) /x, and Pat chooses White Wine
with probability (x - p) /x. (For example, if the critical value c DEMO nearly x, then the
probability that t, will exceed c is almost zero.) We will show that as the incomplete
information disappears-that is, as x approaches zero-the players' behavior in
this pure-strategy Bayesian Nash DEMO of the incomplete-information game
approaches their behavior in the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in the original
complete-information game. That is, both (x - c) /x and (x - p) /x approach 3 as x
DEMO zero.
Suppose that Pat will play the strategy described above for the incomplete-
information game. Chris can then compute that Pat chooses White Wine DEMO prob-
ability (x - p)/x and Red with probability p/x, so Chris's expected payoffs from
choosing Steak and from choosing Chicken are p(2 + tc)/x and (x - p)/x, respec-
tively. Thus, Chris's best response to Pat's DEMO has the form described above:
choosing Steak has the higher expected payoff if and only if tc 2 (X-3p)/p-c.
Similarly, given Chris's strategy, Pat can compute that Chris chooses Steak with
probability (x - c)/x and Chicken with probability c/x, so Pat's expected payoffs
from choosing White Wine and from choosing Red DEMO are c(2 + tp)/x and
(x - c) /x, respectively. Thus, choosing White Wine has the higher expected payoff
DEMO and only if tp (x- 3c)/c-p.
We have now shown that Chris's strategy (namely, Steak if and only if
tC DEMO c) and Pat's strategy (namely, White Wine if and DEMO if tp 2 p) are best
responses to each other if DEMO only if (x - 3p) /p = c and (x - 3c) / c = p. Solving
these two equations for p and c shows that the probability that Chris chooses
Steak, namely, (x - c)/x, and the probability that Pat chooses White DEMO,
namely, (x - p) / x, are equal. This probability approaches 2 as x approaches zero
(by application of l'Hopital's rule). Thus, as the incomplete information dis-
appears, the DEMO' behavior in this pure-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium
of the incomplete-information game DEMO their behavior in the mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium in the original game of complete information.
Harsanyi (1973) showed that this result is quite DEMO: a mixed-strategy Nash
140 Journal of Economic Perspectives
equilibrium in a game of complete information DEMO (almost always) be interpreted
as a pure-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium in a closely related game with a little
bit of incomplete information. Put DEMO evocatively, the crucial feature of a mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium is DEMO that player j chooses a strategy randomly, but rather
that player DEMO is uncertain about player j's choice; this uncertainty can arise DEMO
because of randomization or (more plausibly) because of a little incomplete
information.
Static Bayesian Games and Bayesian Nash Equilibrium
Recall from the first DEMO that in a two-player, simultaneous-move game of
complete information, first the players simultaneously choose actions (player i
chooses ai from the feasible set Ai) and then payoffs ui(ai, aj) are received. To
describe a two-player, simultaneous-move game of incomplete information, the first
step is DEMO represent the idea that each player knows his or her own payoff function
but may be uncertain about the other player's payoff function. DEMO player i's possible
payoff functions be represented by ui(ai, DEMO; ti), where ti is called player i's type and
DEMO to a set of possible types (or type space) Ti. Each type ti corresponds to a
different payoff function that player i might DEMO In an auction, for example, a
player's payoff depends not only on all the players' bids (that is, the players' DEMO
ai and aj) but also on the player's own valuation DEMO the good being auctioned (that
is, the player's type ti).
Given this definition of a player's type, saying that player i knows his or her
own payoff function is equivalent to saying DEMO player i knows his or her type.
Likewise, saying that player DEMO may be uncertain about player j's payoff function is
equivalent to saying that player i may be uncertain about player j's type DEMO (In an
auction, player i may be uncertain about player j's valuation for the good.) We use
the probability distribution p I to denote player i's belief about player j's type,
DEMO, given player i's knowledge of her own type, ti. For notational simplicity we assume
(as in most of the literature) that DEMO players' types are independent, in which case
p(tj I ti) does not depend on ti, so we can write player i'DEMO belief as p(tj).'?
Joining these new concepts of DEMO and beliefs with the familiar elements of
a static game of complete information yields a static Bayesian game, as first defined
by Harsanyi (DEMO, 1968a,b). The timing of a two-player static Bayesian game DEMO as
follows:
1) Nature draws a type vector t = (tl, t2), where ti is independently drawn from
the probability distribution p(ti) over player i's set of possible types Ti.
2) Nature reveals ti to player i but not to player j.
"' As an example of correlated types, imagine that two firms are DEMO to develop a new technology.
Each firm's chance of success depends in part on how difficult the technology is to develop, which is
not known. Each firm knows only whether it has succeeded, not whether the other has. If firm 1 has
succeeded, however, then it DEMO more likely that the technology is easy to develop and so also more likely
that firm 2 has succeeded. Thus, firm l's belief about firm 2's type depends on firm l's knowledge of
DEMO own type.
(tj ti)
Robert
Gibbons 141
3) The players simultaneously choose actions, player i DEMO a- from the
feasible set A.
4) Payoffs ui(ai, aj; ti) are received by each player."
It may be helpful DEMO check that the Dating Game with incomplete information
described above is a simple example of this abstract definition of a static Bayesian
game.
We DEMO need to define an equilibrium concept for static Bayesian games. To
do so, we must first define the players' strategy spaces in such DEMO game, after which
we will define a Bayesian Nash equilibrium to DEMO a pair of strategies such that each
player's strategy is a best response to the other player's strategy. That is, given the
appropriate definition of a strategy in a static Bayesian game, the appropriate def-
inition of equilibrium (now called Bayesian Nash equilibrium) is just DEMO familiar
definition from Nash.'2
A strategy in a static Bayesian game is an action rule, not just an action. More
formally, a (pure) strategy for player i specifies a feasible action (ai) for each of
player i's possible types (ti). In the Dating Game with incomplete information, for
example, Chris's strategy was a DEMO specifying Chris's action for each possible value
of tc: Steak DEMO tc exceeds a critical value, c, and Chicken otherwise. Similarly, DEMO an
auction, a bidder's strategy is a rule specifying the DEMO's bid for each possible
valuation the bidder might have for the good.
In a static Bayesian game, player l's strategy is a best response to player 2's if,
for each of player DEMO's types, the action specified by l's action rule for DEMO type
maximizes 1's expected payoff, given 1's belief about DEMO's type and given 2's action
rule. In the Bayesian Nash equilibrium we constructed in the Dating Game, for
example, there was DEMO incentive for Chris to change even one action by one type,
given Chris's belief about Pat's type and given Pat's DEMO rule (namely, choose
White Wine if tp exceeds a critical value, p, and choose Red Wine otherwise). Like-
wise, in a Bayesian Nash equilibrium of a two-bidder auction, bidder 1 has no
incentive to change even one bid by one valuation-type, given bidder I's belief about
bidder 2's type and given bidder 2's bidding DEMO'3
" There are games in which one player has private information not only about his or her own payoff
function but also about DEMO player's payoff function. As an example, consider an asymmetric-
information DEMO model in which costs are common knowledge, but one firm knows DEMO level of
demand and the other does not. Since the level of demand affects both players' payoff functions, the
informed firm's type DEMO the uninformed firm's payoff function. To allow for such information struc-
tures, the payoff functions in a Bayesian game can be written as ui(ai, a,; ti, t,).
12 Given the close connection between Nash equilibrium and Bayesian Nash equilibrium, it should not
be surprising that a Bayesian Nash equilibrium exists in any finite Bayesian game.
DEMO It may seem strange to define equilibrium in terms of action rules. In an auction, for example, why
can't a bidder simply DEMO what bid to make given her actual valuation? Why does it DEMO what
bids she would have made given other valuations? To see DEMO this puzzle, note that for bidder 1 to
compute an optimal DEMO, bidder 1 needs a conjecture about bidder 2's entire bidding DEMO And to
determine whether even one bid from this rule is optimal, bidder 2 would need a conjecture about
bidder l's entire bidding rule. Akin to a rational expectations equilibrium, these conjectured bidding
rules must be correct in a Bayesian Nash equilibrium.
142 Journal of Economic Perspectives
Dynamic Games with Incomplete Information
As noted DEMO, the existence of private information leads naturally to at-
tempts by DEMO parties to communicate (or to mislead) and to attempts by
uninformed parties to learn and respond. The simplest model of such attempts is
DEMO signaling game: there are two players-one with private information, the other
without; and there are two stages in the game-a signal sent by the informed party,
followed by a response taken by the uninformed DEMO In Spence's (1973) classic
model, for example, the informed party is a worker with private information about
his or her productive DEMO, the uninformed party is a potential employer (or a
market of same), the signal is education, and the response is a wage offer.
Richer dynamic Bayesian games allow for reputations to be developed, main-
tained or milked. In the first such analysis, Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts and Wilson
(1982) showed that a finitely repeated prisoners' dilemma that begins with a little
bit of (the right kind of) private DEMO can have equilibrium cooperation in
all but the last few periods. In contrast, a backward-induction argument shows that
equilibrium cooperation cannot occur in any round of a finitely repeated prisoners'
dilemma under complete information, because knowing that cooperation will break
down in the last round causes it DEMO break down in the next-to-last round, and so on
back to DEMO first round. Signaling games, reputation games and other dynamic
Bayesian games (like bargaining games) have been very widely applied in many
fields of economics and in accounting, finance, law, marketing and political science.
For example, see Benabou and Laroque (1992) on insiders and gurus in financial
markets, Cramton and Tracy (1992) on strikes and Rogoff (DEMO) on monetary
policy.
Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
To analyze dynamic Bayesian games, we introduce a fourth equilibrium con-
cept: perfect Bayesian equilibrium. The crucial new feature of perfect Bayesian
equilibrium is due to Kreps and Wilson (1982): beliefs are elevated to the level of
importance of strategies DEMO the definition of equilibrium. That is, the definition of
equilibrium no DEMO consists of just a strategy for each player but now also in-
cludes a belief for each player whenever the player has the move DEMO is uncertain
about the history of prior play."4 The advantage of making the players' beliefs an
explicit part of the equilibrium is that, just as we previously insisted that the players
choose credible (that DEMO, subgame-perfect) strategies, we can now also insist that
they hold DEMO beliefs.
" Kreps and Wilson (1982) formalize this perspective on equilibrium by defining sequential equilibrium,
an equilibrium concept that is equivalent to DEMO Bayesian equilibrium in many economic applications
but in some cases is slightly stronger. Sequential equilibrium is more complicated to define and to apply
than DEMO Bayesian equilibrium, so most authors now use the latter. Kreps and DEMO show that any
finite game (with or without private information) has a sequential equilibrium, so the same can be said
for perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
An Introduction
to
Applicable
Game
Theory 143
Figure 9
Why Players' Beliefs are as Important as their Strategies
[PI
Lf
L
-
-2--
Rf
DEMO
M/
-
Lf
R
~~~Player I
2
1
0
0
0
2
P
f
0
1
L
M
R
Player 2
L'
DEMO, 1
0, 2
R'
0, 0
0, 1
1,3
1,3
To illustrate why the players' beliefs are as important as their strategies,
consider the example in Figure 9. (This example shows that perfect Bayesian
equilibrium refines subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium; we return to dynamic
Bayesian games in the next subsection.) First, player 1 chooses DEMO three
actions: L, M and R If player 1 chooses R then the game ends without a move
by player 2. If player DEMO chooses either L or M then player 2 learns that R was not
chosen (but not which of L or M was chosen) DEMO then chooses between two
actions, L' and R', after which the game ends. (The dashed line connecting
player 2's two decision nodes in the game tree on the left of Figure 9 indicates
DEMO if player 2 gets the move, player 2 does not know DEMO node has been
reached-that is, whether player 1 has chosen L DEMO M. The probabilities p and
1 - p attached to player 2's decision nodes will be explained below.) Payoffs are
given in the game tree.
The normal-form representation of this game on the right-hand side DEMO Figure
9 reveals that there are two pure-strategy Nash equilibria: (L, L') and (R, R'). We
first ask whether DEMO Nash equilibria are subgame-perfect. Because a subgame is
defined to begin when the history of prior play is common knowledge, there are
no subgames in the game tree above. (After player l's decision node at the begin-
ning of the game, there is no point at which the complete history of play is common
knowledge: the only other nodes are player 2's, and if these nodes are reached,
then player 2 does not know whether the previous play was L or DEMO) If a game has
no subgames, then the requirement of subgame-perfection-namely, that the play-
ers' strategies constitute a Nash equilibrium on every DEMO trivially satisfied.
Thus, in any game that has no subgames the DEMO of subgame-perfect Nash
equilibrium is equivalent to the definition of Nash equilibrium, so in this example
both (L, L') and (R, R') are subgame-perfect Nash equilibria. Nonetheless, (R, R')
DEMO depends on a noncredible threat: if player 2 gets the move, then playing L'
dominates playing R', so player 1 should DEMO be induced to play R by 2's threat to
play R' if given the move.
144 Journal of Economic Perspectives
One way to strengthen the equilibrium concept DEMO as to rule out the sub-
game-perfect Nash equilibrium (R, R') is to impose two requirements.
Requirement 1: Whenever a player has the move and is uncertain about the
history of prior play, the player must have a belief over the set of feasible histories
of DEMO
Requirement 2: Given their beliefs, the players' strategies must be DEMO
rational. That is, whenever a player has the move, the player's action (and the
player's strategy from then on) must DEMO optimal given the player's belief at that
point (and the DEMO players' strategies from then on).
In the example above, Requirement 1 implies that if player 2 gets the move, then
player 2 must have a belief about whether player 1 has played L or DEMO This belief
is represented by the probabilities p and 1 - p attached to the relevant nodes in
the game tree. Given player 2'DEMO belief, the expected payoff from playing R' is
p 0 + (1 - p) 1 = 1 - p, while the expected payoff from playing L' is
p I + (1 - p) * 2 = 2-p. Since 2-p > 1 -p for any value DEMO p, Requirement
2 prevents player 2 from choosing R'. Thus, simply requiring that each player
have a belief and act optimally given DEMO belief suffices to eliminate the implau-
sible equilibrium (R, R') in this example.
What about the other subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium, (L, L')? Require-
ment 1 dictates that player 2 have a belief but does not specify what it should be.
In the spirit of DEMO expectations, however, player 2's belief in this equilibrium
should be p = 1. We state this idea a bit more formally as
DEMO 3: Where possible, beliefs should be determined by Bayes' rule DEMO
the players' equilibrium strategies.
We give other examples of Requirement 3 DEMO
In simple economic applications, including the signaling games discussed be-
low, Requirements 1 through 3 constitute the definition of perfect Bayesian equilib-
rium. DEMO richer applications, more requirements need to be imposed to eliminate
implausible DEMO'5
Signaling Games
We now return to dynamic Bayesian games, where DEMO will apply perfect Bayes-
ian equilibrium. For simplicity, we restrict attention DEMO (finite) signaling games,
which have the following timing:
1) Nature draws a type t, for the Sender from a set DEMO feasible types T = {t1,
t1} according to a probability distribution p(ti).
IF To give a sense of the issues not DEMO by Requirements 1 through 3, suppose players 2 and 3 have
DEMO the same events, and then both observe a deviation from the DEMO by player 1. Should
players 2 and 3 hold the same belief about earlier unobserved moves by player 1? Fudenberg and Tirole
(1991a) give a formal definition of perfect Bayesian equilibrium for a broad class DEMO dynamic Bayesian
games and provide conditions under which their perfect Bayesian equilibrium is equivalent to Kreps and
Wilson's (1982) sequential equilibrium.
Robert
Gibbons 145
Figure 10
The Beer and Quiche Signaling Game
B, 1
duel
[P]
.1n ot
Quiche
Receiver
duel
Quiche
not [ury
wimpy
DEMO
Beer
Nature
9
Beer
[q]
duel
not
Receiver
duel
[1q
not
B+D,O
0, -1
D,
O
0,1
D,0
B, DEMO
B+D,0
2) The Sender observes ti and then chooses a DEMO mj from a set of feasible
messages M = {ml, . DEMO ., mj}.
3) The Receiver observes mj (but not ti) and then chooses an action ak from a
set of feasible actions DEMO = {a,, . . ., aKj.
4) Payoffs are given by Us(ti, m>, ak) and UR(t,, mj, ak).
In Cho and Kreps's (1987) "Beer and Quiche" signaling game, shown in Figure
10, the type, message and DEMO spaces (T, M and A, respectively) all have only two
elements. While most game trees start at the top, a signaling game starts in the middle,
with a move by Nature that determines DEMO Sender's type: here t4 = "wimpy" (with
probability .1) or t = "surly" (with probability .9). 16 Both DEMO types then have the
same choice of messages-Quiche or Beer (as DEMO breakfasts). The Receiver
observes the message but not the type. (DEMO above, the dashed line connecting two of
the Receiver's two DEMO nodes indicates that the Receiver knows that one of the
nodes in this "information set" was reached, but does not know which node-that is,
the Receiver observes the Sender's breakfast but not his DEMO) Finally, following each
message, the Receiver chooses between two actions-to DEMO or not to duel with the
Sender.
The qualitative features of the payoffs are that the wimpy type would prefer to
have quiche for DEMO, the surly type would prefer to have beer, both types would
prefer not to duel with the Receiver, and the Receiver would prefer to duel with
the wimpy type but not to duel with the DEMO type. Specifically, the preferred break-
fast is worth B > 0 DEMO both sender types, avoiding a duel is worth D > 0 DEMO both
Sender types, and the payoff from a duel with the DEMO (respectively, surly) type
is 1 (respectively, -1) for the Receiver; all other payoffs were zero.
The point of a signaling game is that the Sender's message may convey
ti Readers over the DEMO of 35 may recognize that the labels in this game were inspired by Real Men Don't
Eat Quiche,
a highly visible book DEMO this example was conceived.
146 Journal of
Economic
Perspectives
information to the Receiver. We call the DEMO's strategy separating if each type
sends a different message. In Beer and Quiche, for example, the strategy [Quiche
if wimpy, Beer if surly] is a separating strategy for the Sender. At the other extreme,DEMO
the Sender's strategy is called pooling if each type sends the same message. In a
model with more than two types there are DEMO partially pooling (or semiseparating)
strategies in which all the types DEMO a given set of types send the same message, but
different DEMO of types send different messages. Perfect Bayesian equilibria involving
such strategies for the Sender are also called separating, pooling, and so on.
If DEMO > D, then the Sender's strategy [Quiche if wimpy, Beer if surly] and the
Receiver's strategy [duel after Quiche, no duel after Beer], together with the beliefs
p = 1 and q = 0 satisfy Requirements 1 through 3 and so are a perfect Bayesian
DEMO of the Beer and Quiche signaling game. Put more evocatively, when
DEMO > D, having the preferred breakfast is more important than avoiding DEMO duel, so each
Sender type chooses its preferred breakfast, thereby signaling its type; signaling this
information works against the wimpy type (because DEMO induces the Receiver to duel),
but this consideration is outweighed DEMO the importance of getting the preferred
breakfast.
We can also ask whether Beer and Quiche has other perfect Bayesian equilibria.
The three other pure DEMO the Sender could play are [Quiche if wimpy, Quiche
if surly], [Beer if wimpy, Quiche if surly] and [Beer if wimpy, Beer DEMO surly]. When
B > D, the lowest payoff the wimpy Sender-type DEMO receive from playing Quiche
(B) exceeds the highest available from playing Beer (D), so the wimpy type will not
play Beer, DEMO [Quiche if wimpy, Quiche if surly] as the only other strategy DEMO
Sender might play. Analogously, the lowest payoff the surly Sender-type could DEMO
ceive from playing Beer (B) exceeds the highest available from playing Quiche (D),
so the surly type will not play Quiche. DEMO, the separating perfect Bayesian equi-
librium derived above is the unique DEMO Bayesian equilibrium of the Beer and
Quiche signaling game when B > D.
What about when B < D? Now there is no separating perfect Bayesian equilib-
rium.17 But there are two pooling perfect Bayesian equilibria. DEMO is straightforward
to show that when B < D, the Sender'DEMO strategy [Beer if wimpy, Beer if surly] and
the Receiver's DEMO [duel after Quiche, no duel after Beer], together with the
beliefs p = 1 and q = .1 satisfy Requirements 1 through 3. (In fact, any p 2 .5 would
work as well.) This DEMO equilibrium makes sense (just as the separating equilib-
rium above made DEMO when B > D): the surly type gets its preferred breakfast and
avoids a duel; because B < D, the wimpy type DEMO prefers to hide behind the high
prior probability of the surly type (.9, which dissuades the Receiver from dueling
without further information) rather than have its preferred breakfast.
There is also another pooling equilibrium: when B < D, the Sender's strategy
[Quiche if wimpy, Quiche DEMO surly] and the Receiver's strategy [no duel after
17 To see why, work out what the Receiver would do if, say, the wimpy Sender-type chose Quiche and the
surly choose Beer, and then work out whether these Sender-types would in fact make these choices,
given DEMO response just calculated for the Receiver.
An Introduction
to Applicable
Game
Theoay 147
Quiche, duel after Beer], DEMO with the beliefs p = .1 and q = 1 satisfy Require-
ments 1 through 3. (In fact, any q 2 .5 would DEMO as well.) Cho and Kreps argue
that the Receiver's belief DEMO this equilibrium is counterintuitive. Their "Intuitive
Criterion" refines perfect Bayesian equilibrium by putting additional restrictions
on beliefs (beyond Requirement 3) that rule DEMO this pooling equilibrium (but not
the previous pooling equilibrium, in which both types choose Beer).
Further Reading
I hope this paper has DEMO defined the four major classes of games and their
solution concepts, DEMO well as sketched the motivation for and connections among
these concepts. This may be enough to allow some applied economists to grapple
with game-theoretic DEMO in their own research areas, but I hope to have interested
DEMO least a few readers in more than this introduction.
An economist seeking further reading on game theory has the luxury of a great
deal DEMO choice-at least eight new books, as well as at least two DEMO texts, one now in
its second edition. (I apologize for excluding several other books written either for or
by noneconomists, as well as any books by and for economists that have escaped my
attention.) These ten books are Binmore (1992), Dixit and Nalebuff (1991), DEMO
(1990), Fudenberg and Tirole (1991b), Gibbons (1992), DEMO (1990b), McMillan
(1992), Myerson (1991), Osborne and DEMO (1994) and Rasmussen (1989). These
books are all excellent, but I think it fair to say that different readers will find DEMO
books appropriate, depending on the reader's background and goals. At DEMO risk of
offending my fellow authors, let me hazard some characterizations DEMO suggestions.
Roughly speaking, some books emphasize theory, others economic applica-
tions, and still others "the real world." Given a book's emphasis, there is then a
question regarding its level. I see Binmore, DEMO, Fudenberg-Tirole, Kreps,
Myerson and Osborne-Rubinstein as books that emphasize theory. If I were trying
to transform a bright undergraduate into a game DEMO (as distinct from an ap-
plied modeler), I would start DEMO either or both of Binmore and Kreps, and then
proceed to DEMO or all of Friedman, Fudenberg-Tirole, Myerson and Osborne-
Rubinstein. In contrast, I see Gibbons and Rasmussen (and, to some extent, Mc-
DEMO) as books that emphasize economic applications. Each is accessible to a
DEMO undergraduate, but could also provide the initial doctoral training for an
DEMO modeler and perhaps the full doctoral training for an applied economist
wishing to consume (rather than construct) applied models. The next step for DEMO
who wish to construct such models might be to sample from Fudenberg-Tirole, as the
most applications oriented of the advanced theory books. Finally, DEMO see Dixit-
Nalebuff and McMillan as books that emphasize the real world (McMillan being more
closely tied to applications from the economics literature). These are the texts to use
to teach an undergraduate (or an MBA) to think strategically, although for this purpose
one should also DEMO the collected works of Thomas Schelling. These books would also
148 Journal of
Economic
Perspectives
be useful additions to the training of DEMO applied modeler, in the hope that the student
would learn to DEMO his or her eye on the empirical ball.
All of this further reading is for economists seeking a deeper treatment of the
theory. I DEMO I could offer analogous recommendations for those seeking further
reading on the many ways game theory has been used to build new theoretical
models, both inside and outside economics; this will have to await a future survey.
More importantly, I eagerly await the first thorough assessment of how game-
theoretic models in economics have fared when confronted with field data DEMO the kind
commonly used to assess price-theoretic models. For an important step in a related
direction, see Roth and Kagel's (1995) excellent Handbook of Experimental Economics,
which describes laboratory evidence pertaining to many DEMO models.
* I thank
Taylor
Carl
for helpful
Shapiro
for
comments.
shaping
this
project
and
Brad
DeLong,
Alan Krueger
and Timothy
References
Benabou, Roland, and Guy Laroque, "Using
Privileged Information to Manipulate Markets:
Insiders, Gurus, and Credibility," Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, August 1992, 107, 921-58.
Binmore, Ken, Fun and Games:
Theory. DEMO, Mass.: D. C. Heath & Co,
1992.
Cho, In-Koo, and David Kreps, "Signaling
Games and Stable Equilibria," Quarterlyjournal
Economics, May 1987, 102, 179-222.
Cournot, A., Recherches sur les Principes DEMO
matiques de la Theorie des Richesses. 1838. English
edition, Bacon, N., ed., Researches into the Mathe-
matical Principles of the Theory of DEMO New York:
Macmillan, 1897.
Cramton, Peter, and Joseph Tracy, "Strikes
and Holdouts in Wage Bargaining: Theory and
Data," AmericanEconomicReview, March 1992, 82,
100-21.
Dixit, Avinash, and Barry Nalebuff, DEMO
Strategically: The Competitive Edge in Business, Poli-
tics, and Everyday DEMO New York: Norton, 1991.
Farber, Henry, "An Analysis of DEMO Ar-
bitration," Journal of Conflict Resolution, Decem-
ber 1980, 35, 683-705.
Friedman, James, Game Theory with Applications
to Economics. 2nd ed., Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1990.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole, "Perfect
Bayesian Equilibrium and Sequential Equilib-
rium," Journal ofEconomic Theory, April 1991a, 53,
236-60.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole, DEMO The-
ory. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press, 1991b.
DEMO, Robert, Game Theory for Applied Econ-
omists. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1992.
Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart, "Take-
over Bids, the Free-Rider Problem, and the The-
ory of the Corporation," BellJournal of Economics,
Spring 1980, 11, 42-64.
Harsanyi, John, "Games with Incomplete In-
formation Played by 'Bayesian Players': I. DEMO Ba-
sic Model," Management Science, November 1967,
14, 159-82.
Harsanyi, John, "Games with Incomplete In-
formation Played by 'Bayesian DEMO': II. Bayes-
ian Equilibrium Points," Management Science, Jan-
uary DEMO, 14, 320-34.
Harsanyi, John, "Games with Incomplete In-
formation DEMO by 'Bayesian Players': III. The
Basic Probability Distribution of the DEMO,"
Management Science, March 1968b, 14, 486-502.
Harsanyi, John, "Games with Randomly Dis-
turbed Payoffs: A New Rationale for Mixed DEMO
egy Equilibrium Points," InternationalJournal of
Game Theory, 1973, 2:1, 1-23.
Hotelling, Harold, "Stability in Competition,"
EconomicJournal, March DEMO, 39, 41-57.
Kreps, David, "Corporate Culture and Economic
Theory." In Alt, J., and K Shepsle, eds., Perspectives
on Positive DEMO Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990a, pp. 90-143.
A Text
DEMO Game
of
Robert
Gibbons 149
Kreps, David, Game Theory and Economic Mod-
eling. DEMO: Oxford University Press, 1990b.
Kreps, David, and Robert Wilson, "Sequential
Equilibrium," Econometrica, July 1982, 50, 863-94.
Kreps, David, Paul Milgrom, John Roberts,
and Robert Wilson, "Rational Cooperation in
the Finitely Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma," Jour-
nal of Economic Theory, DEMO 1982, 27, 245-52.
Lazear, Edward, and Sherwin Rosen, "Rank-
Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Con-
tracts,"Journal of PoliticalEconomy, October DEMO,
89, 841-64.
Leontief, Wessily, "The Pure Theory of the
Guaranteed Annual Wage Contract," Journal of
Political Economy, February 1946, DEMO, 76-9.
McMillan, John, Games, Strategies, and Manag-
ers. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Myerson, Roger, Game Theory: Analysis of DEMO
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Nash, John, "Equilibrium Points in n-Person
Games," Proceedings
ences, 1950, 36, 48-9.
Osborne, Martin, and Ariel Rubinstein, A
Course in Game Theory. Cambridge, DEMO: Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1994.
Rasmussen, Eric, Games and Information: An In-
troduction to Game Theory. New York: Basil DEMO
well, 1989.
Rogoff, Kenneth, "Reputation, Coordination,
and Monetary DEMO" In Barro, R., ed., Modern
Business Cycle Theory. Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard
University Press, 1989, pp. 236-64.
Roth, Alvin, and DEMO Kagel, Handbook of Ex-
perimental Economics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University DEMO, 1995.
Rubinstein, Ariel, "Perfect Equilibrium in a
Bargaining Model," Econometrica, January 1982,
50, 97-109.
Selten, R., "Spieltheoretische Behandlung ei-
nes Oligopolmodells mit Nachfragetragheit,"
Zeitschriftfur Gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1965, 121,
301-24.
Spence, A. Michael, "Job Market Signaling,"
Quarterly DEMO of Economics, August 1973, 87,
355-74.
von Stackelberg, H., Marktform und Gleichgew-
icht. Vienna: Julius Springer, 1934.
Young, H. Peyton, "The Economics of Con-
vention," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring
1996, 10, 105-22.
of the
National
Academy
of Sci-{1g42fwefx}