Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P.M., & the ABC Research Group. (1999). Simple Heuristics That Make
Us Smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER 4: Betting on One Good Reason: Take The Best and DEMO Relatives
Gerd Gigerenzer and Daniel G. Goldstein
Bounded rationality is what cognitive psychology is all about. And
the study of bounded rationality is not DEMO study of optimization in
relation to task environments.
Herbert A. Simon, DEMO
God, as John Locke (1690/1959) asserted, “has afforded us only the twilight of probability;
suitable, I presume, to the DEMO of mediocrity and probationership he has been pleased to place us in
here …” In the two preceding chapters, we argued that humans can make the best of this mediocre
uncertainty. Ignorance about real-world environments, luckily, is often systematically rather than
randomly distributed and thus allows organisms to navigate through the twilight with the recognition
heuristic. In this chapter, we analyze heuristics which draw inferences from information beyond mere
recognition. The source DEMO this information can be direct observation, recall from memory, first-hand
experience, or rumor. Darwin (1872), for instance, observed that people use facial cues, such as
eyes that waver and lids that hang low, to infer a person’s guilt. Male toads, roaming through
swamps at DEMO, use the pitch of a rival's croak to infer its DEMO when deciding whether or not to fight
(Krebs & Davies, 1991). Inferences about the world are typically based on cues that are DEMO
indicators: the eyes can deceive, and so can a medium-sized ethologist mimicking a large toad with a
deep croak in the darkness. As DEMO Franklin remarked in a letter in 1789: “In this world
nothing DEMO certain but death and taxes.”
How do people make inferences, predictions, and decisions from a bundle of imperfect cues
and signals? The classical view of rational judgment under uncertainty is illustrated by Benjamin
Franklin’s moral DEMO In an often cited letter to the British scientist Joseph Priestle y, Franklin
(1772/1987) explained how to decide which of two options to take, based on uncertain cues (which
he calls “reasons”):
... [M]y Way is, to divide half a Sheet of Paper by a Line into two Columns,
writing over the one Pro, and over the other Con. Then during three or four Days
Consideration I DEMO down under the different Heads short Hints of the different
Motives that at different Times occur to me for or against the Measure. When DEMO
have thus got them all together in one View, I endeavor DEMO estima te their
respective Weights; and where I find two, one on each side, that seem equal, I
strike them both out:  If I find a Reason pro equal to some two Reasons con, I
strike out the three. If I judge some two Reasons con  equal to some three
Reasons pro, I strike out the five; and thus proceeding I find at length where the
Ballance lies; and if after a Day or two of farther Consideration nothing new that
DEMO of Importance occurs on either side, I come to a Determination  accordingly.
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/2
And tho' the Weight or Reasons cannot be taken with the Precision of Algebraic
Quantities, yet when each is thus considered separately and comparatively, and
the whole lies before me, I DEMO I can judge better, and am less likely to make a
DEMO Step; and in fact I have found great Advantage from this DEMO of Equation, in
what may be called Moral  or Prudential Algebra.
Franklin’s moral algebra, or what we will call Franklin’s rule, is DEMO search for all reasons,
positive or negative, weigh each carefully, and add them up to see where the balance lies. This linear
DEMO of reasons carries the moral sentiment of rational behavior: carefully look DEMO every bit of
information, weigh each bit in your hand, and combine them into a judgment. Franklin’s method is a
variant of the DEMO view of rationality which emerged in the Enlightenment (see Chapter 1), a view
that is not bound to linear combinations of reasons. Classical rationality assumes that the laws of
probability are the laws of human DEMO, at least of the educated ones (the hommes éclairés, see
DEMO, 1988). As Pierre Simon de Laplace (1814/1951, p. DEMO) put it, probability theory is
"nothing more at bottom than DEMO sense reduced to a calculus."
But in real-world situations with sufficient complexity, the knowledge, time, and
computation necessary to realize the classical ideal of unbounded rationality can be prohibitive—too
much for humble humans, and often also too much for the most powerful computers. For instance, if
one updates Franklin’s weighted linear combination of reasons into its modern and DEMO version,
multiple linear regression, then a human would have to DEMO the weights that minimize the error  in
the “least-squares”  sense for all the reasons before combining them linearly—a task most of us
could DEMO do without a computer. If one were to further update Franklin’s method to (non-linear)
Bayesian networks, then the task could become too DEMO complex to be solved by a
computer.
Despite their psychological implausibility, DEMO preferred models of cognitive processes since
the cognitive revolution of the 1960s were those assuming demons: subjective expected utility
maximizing models of choice, DEMO models of categorization, multiple regression models of
judgment, Bayesian models of proble m solving, and neural network models of almost everything.
Demons that can perform amazing computations have not only swamped cognitive psychology, but
also economics, optimal foraging theory, artificial intelligence, and other fields. Herbert Simon has
countered “there is a complete lack of evidence that, in actual human choice situations of any
complexity, these computations can be, or DEMO in fact, performed” (1955a, p. 104).
Simon proposed to DEMO models of bounded rationality rather than of optimizing. But how?
What else could mental processes be, if not the latest statistical techniques?
Simple Stopping Rules
In this chapter, we deal with the same type of task as in Chapter 2: determining which of two
objects scores higher on a criterion. This task is a special case of the DEMO general problem of
estimating which subclass of a class of objects has the highest values on a criterion (as in Chapter 3).
Examples are treatment allocation (e.g., which of two patients to treat first DEMO the emergency room,
with life expectancy after treatment as the criterion), financial investment (e.g., which of two securities
to buy, with profit as criterion), and demographic predictions (e.g., which of two DEMO has higher
pollution, crime, mortality rates, and so on).
DEMO illustrate the heuristics, consider the following two-alternative choice task:
Which DEMO the two cities has a larger population?
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/3
(a) Hannover
(b) Bielefeld
Assume that DEMO person has heard of both cities, so she cannot use the DEMO heuristic.
She needs to search for cues that indicate larger population. Search can be internal (in memory) or
external (e.g., in libraries)DEMO Limited search is a central feature of fast and frugal heuristics: DEMO all
available information is looked up, and consequently, only a fraction of this information influences
judgment. (In contrast, laboratory experiments in which DEMO information is already conveniently
packaged and laid out in front of the participants eliminate search, and in line with this experimental
approach, many DEMO of cognitive processes do not even deal with search.)
[Figure 4-1]
Limited search implies a stopping rule . Fast and frugal heuristics use DEMO stopping rules.
They do not follow the classical prescription to search as long as the perceived marginal benefits of
acquiring additional information exceed the DEMO marginal costs (Stigler, 1961). That minds
could and would routinely calculate this optimal cost-benefit trade-off is a dominant, yet implausible,
assumption in models of information search (see the epigram introducing this chapter).
We demonstrate a simple stopping rule with Figure 4-1. This figure represents DEMO person’s
knowledge about four objects a, b, c, and d (cities, for example) with respect to five cues (such as
whether the city has a big-league soccer team, is a state capital, DEMO so forth) and recognition
(whether or not the person has heard of the city before). For instance, if one city has a soccer team
in the major league and the other does not, then the city with the team is likely, but not certain, to
DEMO the larger population. Suppose we wish to decide which of city a and city b is larger. Both a
and b are recognized so DEMO recognition heuristic can not be used. Search for further knowledge  in
DEMO brings to mind information about Cue 1, the soccer team cue. DEMO a has a soccer team in
the major league, but city DEMO does not (the positive and the negative values on Cue 1 DEMO Figure 4-1).
Therefore, the cue discriminates between the two cities. DEMO is terminated, and the inference is
made that city a is DEMO larger city. More generally, for binary (or dichotomous) cues, the simple
stopping rule is:
Stopping rule : If one object has DEMO positive cue value (“1”) and the other does not (i.e., either
“0” or unknown) then stop search.
For convenience, we use DEMO for the cue value that indicates a higher value on the criterion
(e.g., a larger population). If the condition of the stopping DEMO is not met, then search is continued for
another cue, and so on. For instance, when deciding between objects b and c in Figure 4-1, Cue 1
does not discriminate, but Cue 2 does. DEMO b is inferred to be larger on the basis of this single
cue. Note that limited search works in a step-by-step way; cues are looked up one-by-one, until the
stopping rule is satisfied (similar to DEMO Test Operate Test Exit procedures of Miller, Galanter, &
Pribram, 1960). If no cue was found that satisfy the stopping rule, a random guess is made. No cost-
benefit computations need to be DEMO to stop search. The fo llowing three heuristics—
Minimalist, Take The DEMO, and Take The Best—use this simple stopping rule. They also use DEMO
same heuristic principle for decision, one-reason decision making, that is, DEMO base an inference on
only one reason or cue. They differ in how they search for cues.
Heuristics
The Minimalist. The minimal intuition needed DEMO cue-based inference is the direction in which
a cue points, for DEMO, whether having a soccer team in the major league indicates a DEMO or a
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/4
small population. This direction can, for instance, DEMO estimated from a small learning sample (and the
estimated direction may DEMO be wrong, see below). The Minimalist has only this minimal
DEMO Nothing more is known, for instance, about which cues are better predictors than others.
Consequently, the heuristic for search that the Minimalist uses is to look up cues in random order.
Whenever the Minimalist can, it will take advantage of the recognition heuristic (see Chapter 2).
However, there are situations where the recognition heuristic can not be used, that is, when both
objects are recognized, or when recognition is not correlated with the criterion.
The Minimalist heuristic can be expressed in DEMO following steps:
Step 0. If applicable, use the recognition heuristic, that is, if only one object is recognized,
predict that it has the higher value on the criterion. If neither is recognized, then guess. If both are
recognized go on to Step 1.
Step 1. DEMO search: Draw a cue randomly (without replacement) and look up DEMO cue
values of the two objects.
Step 2. Stopping rule: If DEMO object has a positive cue value and the other does not (DEMO,
either negative or unknown value) then stop search and go DEMO to Step 3. Otherwise go back to Step
1 and search for another cue. If no further cue is found, then guess.
Step 3. Decision rule: Predict that the object with the positive cue value has the higher value
on the criterion.
Take The Last. Like the Minimalist, Take The Last only has an intuition in which direction a
cue DEMO but not which cues are more valid than others. Take The Last differs from the Minimalist
only in Step 1. It uses a heuristic DEMO for search that draws on a strategy known as an
“Einstellung set.” Karl Duncker and other Gestalt psychologists demonstrated that when people
work on DEMO series of problems, they tend to start with the strategy that DEMO on the last problem
when faced with a new, similar-looking problem (Duncker 1935/1945; Luchins & Luchins, 1994),
and thereby build up an Einstellung set of approaches to try. For the first problem, Take The Last
tries cues randomly like the Minimalist, but from the second problem onward it starts with the cue
that stopped search the DEMO time. If this cue does not stop search, it tries the DEMO that stopped search
the time before last, and so on. Because DEMO that recently stopped search tend to be cues that are
more likely than others to stop search (i.e., they are cues with higher DEMO rates), Take The
Last tends to search for fewer cues than the Minimalist. For instance, if the last decision was based
on the soccer team cue, Take The Last would try the soccer team cue first on the next problem. In
contrast to the Minimalist, Take The Last needs a memory for what cues discriminated in the past.
Step DEMO of the Take The Last is:
Step 1. Einstellung search: DEMO there is a record of which cues stopped search on previous
problems, choose the cue which stopped search on the most recent problem and has not yet been
tried. Look up the cue values of the DEMO objects. Otherwise try a random cue and build up such a
Take The Best. There are environments for which humans or animals know (rightly or
wrongly) not just the signs of cues, but also which DEMO are better than others. An order of cues can
be genetically prepared (e.g., cues for mate choice in many animal species) or learned by
observation. In the case of learning, the order of cues can be estimated from the relative frequency
with which it predicts the criterion. DEMO example, the validity of the soccer team cue would be the
DEMO frequency with which cities with soccer teams are larger than cities without teams. The
validity is computed across all pairs in which one city DEMO a team and the other does not. If people
can order cues according to their perceived validities - whether or not this subjective order
DEMO
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/5
corresponds to the ecological order- then search can DEMO this order of cues. Take The Best first
tries the cue with the highest validity, and if it does not discriminate, the next DEMO cue, and so on. Its
motto is “take the best, ignore the rest.” Take The Best differs from the Minimalist only in Step DEMO,
which becomes:
Step 1. Ordered search: Choose the cue DEMO the highest validity that has not yet been tried
for this choice task. Look up the cue values of the two objects.
Note that DEMO order that Take The Best uses is not an “optimal” one  DEMO it is, rather, a frugal
ordering. It does not attempt to grasp the dependencies between cues, that is, to construct an order
DEMO conditional probabilities or partial correlations (see Chapter 6). The frugal DEMO can be
estimated from a small sample of objects and cues (DEMO Chapter 5).
To summarize, the three fast and frugal heuristics DEMO presented embody the following
properties: limited search using a step-by-step procedures, simple stopping rules, and one -reason
decision making. One-reason decision making, DEMO inferences on just one cue, is implied by the
specific stopping DEMO used here. It is not implied by all simple stopping rules. Furthermore, one-
reason decision making does not necessarily imply the stopping rule used by the three heuristics. For
instance, one could search for a large number of cues that discriminate between the two alternatives
(such as in a situation where one has to justify one’s decision) but still base the decision on only one
cue.
Compare the spirit of these simple DEMO to Franklin’s rule. One striking difference is that
all three heuristics practice one-reason decision making. Franklin’s moral algebra, in contrast,
advises us to search for all reasons—at least during several days consideration—and to carefully
weigh DEMO reason and add them all up to see where the balance lies. The three heuristics avoid
conflicts between cues that may point in opposite DEMO Avoiding conflicts makes the heuristics
non-compensatory:  no amount of contrary evidence from later (unseen) cues can compensate for or
counteract  the decision made by an earlier cue.  An example is the inference that a is larger than b in
Figure 4-1; neither the two positive values for b nor the negative value for a can reverse this
inference. DEMO an entire decision on just one reason is certainly bold, but DEMO it smart?
Psychologically Plausible But Dumb?
Consider first a species that practices one-reason decision making closely resembling Take
The Best. In populations DEMO guppies, the important adaptive task of mate choice is undertaken by DEMO
females, which respond to both physical and social cues (Dugatkin, DEMO). Among the physical cues
they value are large body size and bright orange body color. The main social cue they use is whether
DEMO not they have observed the male in question mating with another female. The cues seem to be
organized in a hierarchy, with the orange-color cue dominating the social cue. If a female has a
choice between DEMO males, one of which is much more orange than the other, she will choose the
more orange one. If the males are close DEMO orangeness, she prefers the one she has seen mating with
another DEMO She prefers this one even if he has slightly less orange color. The stopping rule for the
orangeness cue is that one male must DEMO much (about 40%) more orange than the other. Mate
choice in female guppies illustrates limited search, simple stopping rules, and one-reason decision
DEMO
People, not just lower animals, often look up only one or two relevant cues, avoid searching
for conflicting evidence, and use non-compensatory DEMO (e.g. Einhorn, 1970; Einhorn &
Hogarth, 1981, p. 71; Fishburn, 1988; Hogarth, 1987; Payne et al., 1993; Shepard, 1967). For
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/6
instance, Take The Best (unlike the Minimalist DEMO Take the Last) is related to lexicographic
strategies. The term “lexicographic” DEMO that the cues are looked up in a fixed order of validity,
like the alphabetic order used to arrange words in a dictionary. DEMO Arabic (base 10) and
Babylonian (base 12) number systems are lexicographic. To see which of two numbers with equal
numbers of digits DEMO larger, one has to look at the first digit: if this digit is larger, the whole number is
larger. If they are equal, one has to look at the second digit, and so on. DEMO simple method is not
possible for Roman numbers, which are not DEMO In experimental studies, lexicographic
strategies seem to be favored under time DEMO (Payne et al., 1993, see also Chapter 7). In
DEMO, Take The Best and the more general framework of probabilistic mental DEMO
(Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, & Kleinbölting, 1991) have been successful in DEMO various empirical
phenomena (Gigerenzer et al., 1991; Juslin, 1993; DEMO, 1994; McClelland and Bolger, 1994).
However, simple heuristics that embody one -reason decision making, avoid conflicts, and
are non-compensatory were DEMO discredited as irrational, because they look stupid in comparison
to traditional DEMO of rationality which focus on coherence rather than on performance in real-world
environments. For instance, when Keeney and Raiffa (1993) discuss lexicographic strategies, they
repeatedly insert warnings that this strategy “is more widely adopted in practice than it deserves to
be” because “it is naively simple” and DEMO rarely pass a test of ‘reasonableness’”(pp. 77-78). They
did not actually perform  such a test. We shall.
Can Fast and Frugal Heuristics Be Accurate?
Heuristics are often evaluated by principles of internal coherence, rather than by criteria that
measure their performance in the external world: accuracy, frugality and speed, among others. The
major exception in judgment DEMO decision-making research is the work by Payne et al. (1993), DEMO
have systematically compared the “accuracy-effort” trade-off of simple strategies to the performance
of the weighted additive rule (Franklin’s rule), which is often taken as normative for preferences (see
also Beach & Mitchell, 1978; Beach et al., 1986). In contrast to our research, Payne and DEMO
colleagues studied preferences in artificial problems rather than inferences about the real world. One
consequence of this is that there is no external criterion DEMO accuracy (for example the actual
population of a city), so DEMO must be constructed. In their studies, the weighted additive rule is
DEMO as the gold standard, and accuracy is defined as how close DEMO strategy comes to this rule.
Therefore, no strategy can ever be DEMO accurate than the norm. When making inferences about the
real world, DEMO, it does not necessarily hold that the weighted additive rule is DEMO best one can
do.
How accurate can heuristics be that violate the following two commandments that are often
taken as characteristic of rational judgment?DEMO
Complete search. Thou shalt find all the information available. If thou cannot because of time
or computational constraints, then compute the point where the cost of further searching exceeds the
benefits of doing so, and search until this point.
Compensation. Thou shalt combine all pieces of information. Thou DEMO not rely on just one
While Franklin’s rule respects both commandments, DEMO Minimalist, Take The Last, and
Take The Best heuristics violate them. They do not look up all cue values (limited search) and DEMO use
piece.
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/7
a simple stopping rule. They do not combine DEMO values (non-compensation). The Minimalist, in
addition, can violate transitivity, a sacred principle of internal coherence.1
To answer the question of how DEMO fast and frugal heuristics are, we evaluated their
performance in a DEMO that pitted three standard statistical strategies against the three fast and
frugal heuristics introduced above. The goal was to see which strategy would yield DEMO most accurate
inferences while looking up the fewest cue values.
The Competitors
To provide standards of comparison, we introduce three competitors that do not violate
these commandments of rational judgment. The first is a weighted linear DEMO of cues, which
we call Franklin’s rule, because it applies Franklin’s principles to the two-alternative choice tasks
considered here. It is actually a DEMO sophisticated method than Franklin’s original moral algebra
because the weights are not subjective but computed from the data. In the present simulation, the cue
weights are ecological validities, to be defined shortly. Franklin’s rule multiplies each cue value by its
weight and sums the total, inferring that the object with the larger sum is the larger object. In the
simulation, positive and negative cue values are coded as 1 and 0, respectively.
The other two competitors are linear combinations of cues like Franklin’s rule. DEMO of them
demands considerably more knowledge and computation, and one demands DEMO The more
demanding algorithm is multiple linear regression. Multiple regression takes care of the dependencies
between cues by calculating weights that minimize the error  in the “least-squares”  sense. Variants of
weighted linear models have been proposed as descriptive or prescriptive models of cognitive
processes, for instance, in DEMO H. Anderson’s (e.g., 1981) information integration theory, and in social
judgment research (Brehmer, 1994; Brunswik, 1955). As descriptions of DEMO processes,
weighted linear models, and particularly multiple linear regression are DEMO, given the
complex computations they assume (Brehmer & Brehmer, 1988; Einhorn & Hogarth, 1975;
Hogarth, 1987). A more psychologically DEMO version of a linear strategy employs unit weights,
as suggested by Robyn Dawes (e.g., 1979). This strategy simply adds up the DEMO of positive cue
values (or ones) and subtracts the number of negative cue values (or zeroes). Thus it is fast (it DEMO
not involve much computation), but not frugal (it looks up DEMO cues). For short, we call this strategy
Dawes's rule DEMO
In the simulations we report, these three linear models serve as DEMO against which to
evaluate the performance of the fast and frugal heuristics. Note that Franklin’s rule and multiple linear
regression use all the information DEMO three heuristics use, and more. They also carry out more
sophisticated DEMO on this information.
The Environment
After Germany was reunified in 1990, DEMO country had 83 cities with more than 100,000
inhabitants. These cities and nine cues for population size constituted the environment for the
1 DEMO can result from the fact that the Minimalist picks cues in random order, as is illustrated by Figure 4-1. For
instance, if Cue DEMO happens to be applied to objects a and b, Cue 2 DEMO b and c, and Cue 3 to a and c, we get the intransitive
judgment a>b, b>c, and c>a. DEMO can result from the fact that the Minimalist picks cues in random order, as is
illustrated by Figure 4-1. For instance, if Cue DEMO happens to be applied to objects a and b, Cue 2 DEMO b and c, and Cue 3 to a and
c, we get the intransitive judgment a>b, b>c, and c>a.
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/8
simulation. The cues were chosen from people’s reported DEMO in experiments (Gigerenzer et al.,
1991; Gigerenzer & Goldstein, DEMO). The task was to infer which of two cities has a larger
population. Each cue has two important characteristics: its ecological validity and its discrimination
rate. The ecological validity of a cue is the relative DEMO with which the cue correctly predicts
the criterion, defined with respect DEMO the reference class (here, all German cities with more than
100,000 inhabitants). For instance, if one checks all pairs in which one city has a soccer team but the
other city does not, one finds that in about 87% of these cases the city with DEMO team also has the
higher population. This .87 value is the ecological validity of the soccer team cue. In general, the
ecological validity vi of the ith cue is:
vi = number of correct predictions/DEMO of predictions
where the number of predictions is the number of pairs in which one object has a positive and the
other a negative DEMO The ecological validities of the cues varied over the whole range (DEMO 4-1).
A cue with a high ecological validity, however, is not very useful if its discrimination rate is
small. The discrimination rate DEMO a cue is the relative frequency with which a cue discriminates
between pairs of objects from the reference class. The discrimination rate is a DEMO of the
distribution of the cue values and the number N of objects in the reference class. Let the relative
frequencies of the positive DEMO negative cue values be x and y respectively. Then the discrimination
rate di of the ith cue is:
y
i
di = 1 DEMO 1 ,
N
2 x
i
as an elementary calculation shows. DEMO, if N is very large, the discrimination rate is approximately
2xiyi.
The larger the ecological validity of a cue, the better the inferences. The larger the
discrimination rate, the more often a cue can be used to make an inference. The pairwise correlations
between the 9 cues DEMO between -.25 and .54, with an average absolute value of .19.
DEMO strategies extract different information from the environment. The Minimalist, for
instance, does not extract information about which cues are better than others, it only needs to
estimate in which direction a cue points. Take The DEMO extracts information about the order in which
cues should be tried. All competitors made use of the actual cue values from the complete
environment DEMO calculate parameters such as ecological validities or regression coefficients.
[Table 4-1]
Limited Knowledge
We simulated subjects with varying degrees of knowledge about this environment. DEMO
knowledge can take two forms. One is limited recognition of objects. The other is limited knowledge
about the cue values of recognized objects. To DEMO limited recognition knowledge, we simulated
subjects who recognized between 0 and DEMO (83) German cities (i.e., 84 different levels of
recognition). To model limited knowledge of cue values, we simulated 6 classes of subjects, who
knew 0, 10, 20, 50, 75, or DEMO of the cue values associated with the objects they recognized.
Combining the two sources of limited knowledge resulted in 6 x 84 types of DEMO each having
different degrees and kinds of limited knowledge. For each type of subject, we created 500
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/9
simulated individuals, who differed randomly from one another in the particular objects and cue
values they knew.
The simulation needed DEMO be realistic in the sense that the simulated subjects should be able
to invoke the recognition heuristic. Therefore, the sets of cities the simulated subjects recognized had
to be carefully chosen so that the recognized cities DEMO larger than the unrecognized ones a certain
percentage of the time. We performed a survey to get an empirical estimate of the actual relationship
DEMO the recognition of cities and city populations. In a survey of undergraduates at the University
of Chicago, we found that the cities they recognized (within the 83 largest in Germany) were larger
than the cities DEMO did not recognize in about 80% of the cases. We incorporated this value into our
simulations by choosing sets of cities (for each knowledge state, that is, for each number of cities
recognized) where the known cities were larger than the unknown cities in about 80% of DEMO cases.
Thus, the cities known by the simulated subjects had the DEMO relationship between recognition and
population as did those of the human subjects. For details of the simulation see Gigerenzer and
Goldstein (1996a).
Each simulated subject made inferences about which of two cities is larger, using each of six
strategies: the three fast and frugal heuristics (Take DEMO Best, Take The Last, and Minimalist) and the
three linear DEMO (regression, Franklin’s rule, and Dawes's rule). The question DEMO how well a fast
and frugal heuristic performs in a real-world environment has rarely been posed in research on
inductive inference. If the simple DEMO are adapted to environmental  structures, then they should
not fail outright.
How Frugal Are the Heuristics?
We measure frugality by the number DEMO cues a heuristic looks up. The three linear models
always look up and integrate all 10 cues (9 ecological cues plus recognition). Across all states of
limited knowledge, Take The Last looked up on average only 2.6 cues, the Minimalist 2.8 cues, and
Take The Best DEMO cues (Table 4-2). Take The Last owes its frugality to DEMO “Einstellung set” which
tends to collect the cues which discriminate most often. The reason why the Minimalist looked up
fewer cues than Take The DEMO is that cue validities and cue discrimination rates are negatively
correlated (DEMO 4-1). Therefore, randomly chosen cues tend to have higher discrimination DEMO
than cues chosen by cue validity. All in all, the three DEMO look up less than a third of the cues
used by the linear models, on average.
How Accurate Are the Heuristics?
How accurate are the three heuristics, given that they look up only a fraction of the available
information? Recall that the Minimalist looks up on average only 2.8 cues, uses one-reason-decision
making, does not know which cues DEMO better than others, and can violate transitivity. It must be
doomed DEMO fail. Table 4-2, however, shows that the Minimalist achieves an average accuracy of
64.7%. This is slightly higher than Take The Last, but lower than Take The Best with 65.8%. But
how much more accurate DEMO Dawes's rule, Franklin’s rule, and multiple regression, which use DEMO
cues' values and combine them? The result in Table 4-2 is surprising. Dawes's rule is outperformed
by each of the three heuristics, although Dawes's rule has all the information that the Minimalist and
DEMO The Last have (only Take The Best knows about the order DEMO cues, which is not available to
[Table 4-2]
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/10
Dawes's rule). Franklin’s rule has all DEMO information that each of the three heuristics has, and more.
Still, it is outperformed by even the most frugal of the simple heuristics.
DEMO do the heuristics compare to a more powerful competitor? Multiple regression
DEMO a set of weights considered optimal for linear prediction, and arriving DEMO these weights
requires considerable computational might. Though it makes more accurate inferences than both the
Minimalist and Take The Last, regression is matched in accuracy by the fast and frugal Take The
Best.
Figure 4-2 shows DEMO accuracy of the six competitors as a function of the number of cities
recognized. Here, the situation where all competitors perform best is shown, namely when
knowledge of cue values is 100%. The figure shows that the Minimalist and Take The Last can
compete well with the other DEMO in accuracy when the number of objects recognized is limited,
but take a loss when all are known, that is, when complete DEMO is available. Franklin’s rule
and Dawes's rule match Take The Best when no or all objects are recognized, but suffer with
intermediate levels of recognition. Why is this? The reason is that these two strategies violate the
wisdom of the recognition heuristic. They sometimes choose unrecognized cities DEMO larger than
recognized ones. In this environment, most cities have more DEMO cue values than positive ones,
for example the average city is not a state capital, does not have a major league soccer team, and so
on. Dawes’s rule, which subtracts the number of negative DEMO values from the number of positive
ones, often arrives at a DEMO total for a recognized city that exceeds that of an unrecognized city
(which is always -1, because of one negative reason: no recognition). The same holds for Franklin’s
rule, which weights the reasons (DEMO & Goldstein, 1996a). Therefore, an unrecognized city is
often inferred to be larger than a recognized one, which turns out to be a bad idea in this environment
where the recognized cities were larger DEMO the unrecognized cities 80% of the time. When one
helps the linear strategies by endowing them with the recognition heuristic, their performance roughly
matches that of Take The Best and multiple regression.
[Figure 4-2]
Figure 4-2 DEMO illustrates a less-is-more effect (see Chapter 3) in four of the six strategies. In
contrast to Figure 3-4, which shows a noisy less-is-more effect obtained by Take The Best in a
simulation where the recognition DEMO was determined empirically at each level of recognition, here
we see DEMO in a smooth, refined form—a result of holding the recognition validity DEMO at our
estimate of its empirical average.
Trade-off Between Accuracy and Frugality
Within the three heuristics, the expected trade-off holds: the more frugal (the fewer cue
values looked up), the less accurate. However, when we compare the family of heuristics to the three
linear strategies, then things get very interesting. Compared to multiple regression, Take The Best did
not sacrifice accuracy for frugality, it achieved both. Compared to Dawes's and Franklin’s rules, all
three heuristics managed to be more accurate and yet more frugal at the same time.
When we first obtained these DEMO, we could not believe them. We hired independent
programmers in the DEMO and Germany to rerun the simulations to exclude possible wishful thinking on
our part. When we finally published the results, we also included the data on the environment so that
everyone could perform their own replications, and many did (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996a). Fast
and frugal DEMO do not necessarily have to trade off accuracy for simplicity.
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/11
Can Frugality and Accuracy Both Be Possible?
DEMO and frugal heuristics can make accurate inferences about unknown properties of the
world, that is, inferences that are equal to or more accurate DEMO the three linear strategies. In
designing these simulations, we wondered if DEMO heuristics would fail dismally. Before we reported the
results, three eminent DEMO in judgment and decision-making predicted that Take The Best
might perform 10 or 5 percentage points worse than the linear strategies. Each of the DEMO heuristics,
however, exceeded these expectations, and even outperformed some of the linear strategies. Take
The Best matched or outperformed them all. At DEMO juncture we did not understand how the
competition could come out that way. The answer—in the form of what we call ecological
rationality—was only DEMO after some further struggling, and will be developed in Chapter  7. Here
we summarize a few insights.
The observation of a flat maximum DEMO linear models is one insight. If many sets of weights
can perform about as well as the optimal set of weights in a linear DEMO, this is called a flat
maximum. The work by Robyn Dawes DEMO others (e.g., Dawes & Corrigan, 1974) made this
phenomenon known to decision researchers, but has actually been known for longer. Since Wilks
(1938) wrote about the robustness of equal weights, many have argued that weights are irrelevant
both for making predictions by an artificial system (such as an IQ test) and for describing actual
human inferences. In psychometrics, weighting the components of a test battery is rare because
various weighting schemes result in surprisingly similar composite scores, that is, in DEMO maxima (e.g.,
Gulliksen, 1950). Flat maxima seem to occur when cues are strongly positively correlated. The
performance of fast and frugal DEMO indicates that a flat maximum can extend beyond the issue of
weights to decision strategies themselves: inferences based solely on the best cue can be as accurate
as those based on a weighted linear combination of DEMO cues.
There is also scattered earlier evidence that simple, non-compensatory heuristics DEMO
perform well. However, because much of the earlier work concentrated on DEMO (rather than
inferences) and on artificial stimuli (rather than real-world DEMO), external criteria of
performance were often hard to come by. As mentioned before, the closest relatives of Take The
Best are lexicographic  DEMO Payne, Bettman, and Johnson (1993) showed that lexicographic
judgments can sometimes be close those of a weighted linear model, but they had no external criteria
for accuracy. A second class of close relatives are DEMO algorithms in machine learning, which can
perform highly accurate classifications (Holte, 1996; Rivest, 1996). A more distant relative to Take
The Best is Elimination By Aspects (Tversky, 1972), which also employs DEMO search and a
stopping rule, but deals with preference rather than DEMO, does not use the order of cues but a
probabilistic criterion  for search which requires knowledge of the quantitative validities of each cue,DEMO
has no recognition heuristic built in, and does not employ one DEMO decision making. Another more
distant class of relatives are classification and regression trees (CART),  which use a simple decision
tree and one DEMO decision making, but differ in the knowledge and computational power they DEMO
for setting up the simple tree. For instance, Breiman et al. (1993) reported a simple CART  algorithm
with only three binary, ordered cues that classified heart-attack patients into “high” and “low” risk
groups. This DEMO tree was more accurate than standard statistical classification
methods, which used DEMO to 19 variables (see Chapter 1). The practical relevance is DEMO: In the
emergency room, the physician can quickly obtain the measures on one, two, or three variables, and
does not need to perform any computations since there is no integration. For theories that postulate
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/12
mechanism that resemble Take The Best see Relevance DEMO (Sperber, Cara, & Girotto, 1995)
and optimality theory (DEMO & Smolensky, 1991; Legendre, Raymond, & Smolensky, 1993).
DEMO in all, the observation of flat maxima, the performance of simple machine learning rules
and CART trees, and the work by Payne, DEMO, and Johnson, gave us hope that there was
something larger to discover behind this first surprising finding.
Matching Stopping Rules To Environments
What DEMO of information in real-world environments can fast and frugal heuristics
exploit in order to perform as accurately as they did? Where would they fail? Chapters 6 and 7 will
address these questions. Here, we will DEMO this idea of ecological rationality— the match
between mind and environment—by the positive bias of the stopping rule. Recall that the
combination of a DEMO value and an unknown value stop search, but a negative and DEMO unknown
value do not. This asymmetry is what we mean by a positive bias. Positive biases of various kinds
have been observed in humans (e.g., Klayman & Ha, 1987), and can result in both DEMO frugal and
more accurate inferences than an unbiased stopping rule. Consider first an unbiased stopping rule
that demands a positive and a negative cue DEMO (as proposed by Gigerenzer et al., 1991). This
stopping rule would be less frugal, because search would take longer when there is limited
knowledge (i.e., unknown cue values) than it would with a positive bias. Now consider a faster,
unbiased stopping rule that always DEMO search when the positive bias rule does, but in addition
when DEMO negative and an unknown value are obtained. Compared to this second unbiased stopping
rule, a positive bias can be shown to achieve more accurate judgments in environments where
negative cue values are more frequent than positive DEMO The intuition for this result is that the
unknown value is most lik ely a negative value. If the unknown value is negative, however, this will
lead to fewer accurate judgments when one stops with a negative and an unknown value, because
this would often mean that there were actually two negative values. Thus, a stopping rule with
positive bias is ecologically rational in environments where negative cue values outnumber positive
ones. DEMO example is the environment studied in this chapter, where only relatively DEMO cities have
soccer teams in the major league, and only a DEMO are state capitals (other examples lead to the
“rarity” assumption of DEMO & Chater, 1994). More generally, in environments where positive
indicators are few and scattered —a rare symptom that signals a disease, an unusual feature that
hints competence— a stopping rule with positive will prove DEMO rational.
Generalization
How does Take The Best estimate the order of cues? How do Take The Last and the
Minimalist learn in which direction a cue points? There are several ways cues and their ranking may
be learned. Cues, or the preparedness to learn cues, may be DEMO coded through evolution.
Cues for distance perception, mate choice, and food avoidance have been proposed as examples
(e.g., Buss, 1992). Cues can also be learned through cultural transmission. For example, the cues
needed for expertise can be learned from apprenticeship and the exchange of trade DEMO Finally,
cues can be learned from direct observation. For instance, DEMO person who knows some cue values for
just 10 German cities, DEMO knows for some pairs of these cities which has a higher population, could
use this knowledge to estimate the rank order and direction of cues for the entire set. In contrast, in
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/13
the simulations reported in this chapter, each strategy computed the parameters needed (direction of
cue, cue order, cue validities, regression coefficients) from the entire data set.
How well would Take DEMO Best do if it were to learn cues from a small sample? Recall that
Take The Best extracts from a learning sample only the order and sign of the cues, a very small
amount of information compared to the real-valued weights, regression coefficients or conditional
probabilities extracted by more complex statistical procedures. Thus, in a learning situation, Take
The DEMO takes away only a small amount of information from a small sample. Regression, in
contrast, extracts considerably more information from a small sample. DEMO is the better policy?
Figure 4-3 shows Take The Best, DEMO The Last, and the Minimalist competing with multiple
regression at making DEMO from a training set to a test set.  Each strategy estimated DEMO
respective parameters from a proportion (between 10% and 90%) of the German cities, and made
predictions about the complement. The process of dividing the environment into training and test sets,
learning the parameters from DEMO training set, and making predictions about the test set was repeated
DEMO times. In these simulations recognition was not a factor, that is, all objects were assumed to be
recognized. Let us first consider the DEMO in which all cue values are known for all objects in the
training and test sets (Figure 4-3a).  At the point where DEMO training set is 50% of the total
environment, for instance, Take The Best reaches 72% correct predictions, whereas Multiple
Regression achieves 71%.  DEMO generally, throughout the entire range of training set sizes, Take
The Best outperforms Multiple Regression, especially when the training set is small.  DEMO 4-3b
shows a more difficult situation where half of the cue values were eliminated from the environment
before the training and test sets were DEMO  Here, the advantage of Take The Best is slightly more
pronounced.  Furthermore, when the training set is very small, the two most simple heuristics, Take
The Last and Minimalist, perform as well as DEMO better than the other strategies..  These results
indicate that Take The DEMO is more robust than Multiple Regression on this data set, and DEMO prone
to overfit a training set.  Under situations of limited knowledge, simpler strategies may be more
robust.
[Figure 4-3]
What about the generalization DEMO of more computationally expensive strategies than
multiple regression?  Using the German cities environment, Chater et al. (1997) tested Take The
Best against complex strategies, including neural networks and exemplar models of categorization.
Like multiple regression, none of these strategies has a stopping rule, but rather DEMO all available cues.
When the training set was less than 40% of the test set, Take The Best outperformed all other
competitors. This advantage was largest (ten percentage points) when the size of the training DEMO was
smallest. Only when the training set grew beyond 40% of the German cities environment (which is
actually more knowledge than most anybody has about German demographics, Germans included)
then the competitors’ performance increased above that of Take The Best, at most attaining a margin
of about five percentage points. Note however that the simulations of Chater et al. DEMO only dealt
with the case where there were not any unknown cue values (as represented by the question marks
in Figure 4-1).
These results, which came as a surprise to us, show how very DEMO heuristics can excel in
situations where knowle dge is limited, and DEMO generalizations must be made from one sample to
another.  Chapters 6 DEMO 7 will address the robustness of fast and frugal heuristics in more detail.
The Adaptive Toolbox
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/14
The Minimalist, Take The Last, and Take DEMO Best are candidates for the collection of
heuristics in what we call the adaptive toolbox. The emphasis is on “collection.” None of these three
DEMO can perform all possible inferences under uncertainty—for instance, all three are DEMO
to make estimates about which of two objects is larger, more DEMO, more dangerous, and so on.
They cannot, for instance, estimate the quantitative values of one object. However, some of the
building blocks—simple stopping rules, one-reason decision making—can be recombined  to make
heuristics for DEMO estimation, classification, and other tasks, as we will see in DEMO chapters.
One may think of a collection of heuristics as a body made up of organs that have evolved
over time rather than being DEMO in a grand pla n. Thus, the adaptive toolbox may have DEMO
by adding features to already existing tools, rather than by replacing DEMO generation of tools with a
completely new generation. The three heuristics studied in this chapter, for instance, are built around
the recognition heuristic. DEMO the recognition heuristic can be used, search for further knowledge is DEMO
needed. If it cannot, the inference is made by the additional DEMO Here, the order in which these two
layers of heuristics are DEMO follows their likely developmental and evolutionary order:
Recognition and recognition memory are the more fundamental adaptive functions, less able to be
damaged by age and brain injury (see Chapter 3) than the recall memory DEMO by Take The Best and
its relatives.
The single most important result in this chapter is: Fast and frugal heuristics that embody
simple psychological mechanisms can yield inferences about a real-world environment that are at
least DEMO accurate as standard linear statistical strategies embodying classical properties of rational
judgment. This result liberates us from the widespread view that only “rational” algorithms, from
Franklin’s rule to multiple regression, can be accurate. Human inference does not have to forsake
accuracy for simplicity. The mind can have it DEMO ways .
When we concluded our first report of these results (DEMO & Goldstein, 1996a) with
the previous sentence, deep in our DEMO we still had nagging doubts. Can heuristics really be fast,
frugal, and accurate at the same time? Maybe there is something peculiar DEMO city populations, or to
German cities? Does the power of these heuristics to combine simplicity and frugality with accuracy
generalize to other domains? What structures of information in natural environments do these
heuristics exploit? Where do they break down? The following chapters tell what we have learned, so
far. More surprises are to come.
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/15
Cue
Ecological Validity
Discrimination
Rate
National Capital (is the city the national capital?)
Exposition Site (was the city DEMO an exposition
site?)
Soccer Team (does the city have a team in the
major leagues?)
Intercity Train (is the city DEMO the Intercity line?)
State Capital (is the city a state capital?)
License Plate (is the abbreviation only one letter
long?)
University (is the city home to a university?)
Industrial DEMO (is the city in the industrial belt?)
East Germany (DEMO the city formerly in East
Germany?)
Table 4-1: Cues, DEMO validities, and discrimination rates
1.0
.91
.87
.78
.77
.75
.71
DEMO
.51
.02
.25
.30
.38
.30
.34
.51
.30
.27
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/16
Strategy
Take The Last
Minimalist
Take The Best
DEMO's rule
Franklin’s rule
Multiple regression
Knowledge about
cues
direction
direction
order
direction
validities
beta weights
Frugality (number of
cues looked up)
2.6
2.8
3.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
Accuracy (%)
64.5
64.7
65.8
62.1
62.3
65.7
Table 4-2: A tournament between three fast and frugal heuristics (Minimalist, Take The Last, Take
The Best) and three linear DEMO ( Dawes's rule, Franklin’s rule, and multiple regression). Results
are averaged across all levels of limited knowledge, that is, limited DEMO and limited number of
cue values known (see text). For DEMO, the Minimalist looked up only 2.8 cues on the average
and DEMO 64.7% correct inferences.
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/17
Take The Best
(one-reason decision making)
a
b
c
d
Recognition
Cue 1
Cue 2
+
1
?
+
0
1
+
?
?
–
?
?
Cue 3
DEMO 4
Cue 5
.
..
0
?
?
.
..
1
0
?
.
..
1
0
0
.
..
?
?
?
.
..
Figure 4-1: Illustration of bounded search through limited DEMO Objects a, b, and c are
recognized, d is not. DEMO values are positive (+), or negative (-); missing knowledge is shown by a
question mark. For instance, to infer whether a>b, Take The Best looks up only the values in the
shaded space. To infer whether b>c, search is bounded to the dotted space. The other cue values
are not looked up and so are DEMO within the diagram as shrouded in the fog of memory.
Take The Best
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/18
Take The Last
Min imalist
DEMO
.55
Regression
Franklin's Rule
Dawes's Rule
.50
0
10
20 30 40 50 60
Number of Objects Recognized
Figure 4-2: Results of the competition when knowledge of cue values is 100%.
.80
.75
.70
DEMO
70
80
Proportion of Correct Inferences
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/19
Figure 4-3b
.72
.70
20
Cue Values Known: 50%
Take The Best
Minimalist
Take The Last
Regression
.68
.66
.64
DEMO
.60
.58
.56
.54
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Size of training set (in %)
Figure 4-3: Generalizing DEMO a training set to a test set. Results are shown for training sets with between
10% and 90% of the objects. Competitors were tested DEMO the complement of the training set, so in the
10% condition, the test set included the remaining 90% of the objects.  We also varied amount of missing
knowledge in the environment. Figure 4-3a shows the DEMO where the training and test sets had no
missing cue values. Figure 4-3b shows the case where 50% of the cue values, selected at random, were
Figure 4-3a
.72
.70
.68
.66
.64
.62
.60
.58
.56
.54
10
Cue Values Known: 100%
Take The Best
Minimalist
Take The Last
Regression
30
40 50 60
Size of training set (in %)
70
80
90
Proportion of correct inferences
Proportion of correct DEMO
chap 4-Simple Heuristics/20
eliminated (replaced with question marks) from the DEMO environment before dividing it into training and
test sets.{1g42fwefx}