PERSPECTIVES ON PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Why Heuristics Work
Gerd Gigerenzer
Max Planck Institute DEMO Human Development, Berlin, Germany
ABSTRACT—The adaptive toolbox is a Darwinian-inspired
theory that conceives of the mind as a modular system that
is composed DEMO heuristics, their building blocks, and
evolved capacities. The study of the adaptive toolbox is
descriptive and analyzes the selection and structure of
heuristics DEMO social and physical environments. The study
of ecological rationality is prescriptive and identiﬁes the
structure of environments in which speciﬁc heuristics
either succeed or DEMO Results have been used for designing
heuristics and environments to improve professional
decision making in the real world.
Logic, probability, and heuristics are DEMO central ideas in the
intellectual history of the mind. For Aristotle, DEMO was a theory
of ideal human reasoning and inference. Probability theory
emerged only late in the mid-17th century, replacing logical
certainty with a more modest theory of rationality acknowledg-
ing the fundamental uncertainty of human conduct (Daston,
1988). From its inception to the mid-19th century, probability
theory was regarded as being, in Laplace’s (1814/1951, p. 196)
famous phrase, ‘‘only common sense reduced to a calculus.’’
Mathematical probability and human thinking were originally
seen as two sides of the same DEMO, and in his famous treatise An
Investigation of The Laws of DEMO, George Boole (1854/1958)
set out to derive the laws of logic and probability from the
psychological laws of thinking. Probability theory DEMO since
transformed science and everyday life, from statistical me-
chanics to DEMO to DNA statistics. We christened this
process the probabilistic revolution (Gigerenzer DEMO al., 1989;
Kru¨ ger, Gigerenzer, & Morgan, 1987). Yet only the 20th century
saw the beginnings of a systematic study DEMO cognitive heuristics,
promoted by biologists such as Niko Tinbergen, who DEMO
the rules of thumb animals use for choosing mates, food, and nest
sites; by Gestalt psychologists such as Karl Duncker, who de-
DEMO heuristic methods for restructuring and insight; and by
the mathematician George DEMO lya, who introduced Herbert Si-
mon to heuristics. Heuristics are frugal—that DEMO, they ignore part
of the information. Unlike statistical optimization procedures,
DEMO correspondence to Gerd Gigerenzer, Max Planck Institute
for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany;
e-mail: gigerenzer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de.
heuristics do not try to optimize (i.e., ﬁnd the best solution), but
rather satisﬁce (i.e., ﬁnd a good-enough solution). Calculating
the maximum of a function is a form of optimizing; choosing
the ﬁrst option that exceeds an aspiration level is a form of
satisﬁcing.
Each of the three systems DEMO the goals of human be-
havior in its own way. Logic focuses on truth preservation.
Consequently, mental logic, mental models (in the sense of
Johnson-Laird, 1983), and other logic-inspired systems inves-
tigate cognition in terms of its ability to solve syllogisms,
maintain consistency between beliefs, and follow truth table
logic. Logic makes us see the mind as DEMO intuitive logician, as in
Piaget’s operational stage of development. The relevance DEMO the
logical and the psychological has been discussed since the very
beginnings of psychology as a discipline. For instance, Wundt
(1912/1973) rejected both the descriptive and normative use-
fulness of logic: ‘‘We can in fact say of such attempts, that
measured by the results they have been absolutely fruitless.
They have disregarded the psychological processes them-
selves.’’ Probability DEMO depicts the mind as solving a broader
set of goals, performing DEMO rather than deductive infer-
ence, dealing with samples of information involving DEMO rather
than full information that is error-free, and making risky ‘‘bets’’
DEMO the world rather than deducing true consequences from as-
sumptions. Yet it played only a limited role in cognitive theories
before 1950 and was DEMO rejected by leading psychol-
ogists of the time, including Stanley Stevens, Edwin Boring, and
David Krech (Gigerenzer & Murray, 1987). Probability theory
suggest that the mind is an intuitive statistician, as in signal
detection theory modeled after Neyman-Pearson theory or in
causal attribution theory modeled DEMO Fisher’s analysis of
variance (Gigerenzer, 1991). Models of heuristic cognition, in
contrast, focus on situations in which people need to act DEMO
(rarely a concern for logical models of mind), the probabilities DEMO
utilities are unknown, and multiple goals and ill-deﬁned prob-
lems prevent DEMO or probability theory from ﬁnding the optimal
solution. In this view, DEMO mind resembles an adaptive toolbox
with various heuristics tailored for speciﬁc classes of prob-
lems—much like the hammers and screwdrivers in a handy-
man’s DEMO
None of these three systems is always the best to use in any
situation. This insight corrects several misunderstanding con-
cerning heuristics: that heuristics are always second-best
20
Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science
V
DEMO 3—Number 1
Gerd Gigerenzer
TABLE 1
Six Common but Erroneous Beliefs About Heuristics
Six DEMO misconceptions
1. Heuristics produce second-best results;
optimization is always better.
2. Our minds rely on heuristics only because of our
cognitive limitations.
3. DEMO rely on heuristics only in routine
decisions of little importance.
4. People with higher cognitive capacities employ
complex weighting and integration of
information; those with lesser capacities use
simple heuristics (related to Misconception 1).
5. Affect, availability, causality, and
representativeness are models of heuristics.
6. More information and computation is always
better.
strategies, that we use them only because of our cognitive lim-
itations, and that logic or probability is always the best way to
solve a problem (see the six misconceptions in Table 1). If we
take a broader view and include DEMO principles of logic and
probability as tools in the adaptive toolbox, DEMO new task emerges:
deﬁning the class of problems where a given strategy of logic,
statistical inference, or heuristic works. This is the question of a
strategy’s ecological rationality (see below).
Although formal systems of logic and probability have been
developed over centuries, nothing comparable yet exists for
cognitive heuristics. In this article, I will focus on the formal
system being developed by my research group at the Max Planck
DEMO for Human Development, based on earlier work by
Nobel laureates Herbert DEMO and Reinhard Selten and the
work of others (e.g., Payne, DEMO, & Johnson, 1993; Thorn-
gate, 1980; Tversky, 1972). This brief article cannot do justice to
the experimental, simulation, and DEMO results that have
been gathered in the last 10 years. I begin with ﬁve principles of
models of heuristics, followed by concrete examples.
MODELS OF HEURISTICS
Computational Models
The ﬁrst goal is to design computational models DEMO heuristics that
make precise predictions and can be tested experimentally and
by computer simulation. Formalization enhances transparency
and testability and facilitates comparing heuristics with DEMO
and probabilistic models of mind in terms of accuracy or other
criteria. Yet much of the research on heuristics previously relied
on labels such DEMO representativeness, availability, and affect
heuristics. The problem is that without a formal deﬁnition,
common-sense labels can account for almost everything. Heu-
ristics DEMO sometimes subsumed into a ‘‘System 1’’ that is sup-
posedly responsible for associations and making errors and is
V
olume 3—Number 1
Clariﬁcations
In DEMO situations, optimization is impossible (e.g., computationally intractable) or
less accurate because of estimation errors (i.e., less robust; see investment example).
Characteristics of the environment (e.g., computational intractability) and of the mind
make us rely on heuristics.
People rely on heuristics for decisions of DEMO low and high importance. See investment
and organ donation examples.
Not supported by experimental evidence (e.g., Bro¨ der, 2003). Cognitive capacities
seem to be linked to the adaptive selection of heuristics and seem less DEMO to the
execution of a heuristic. See also the Markowitz example in this article.
These terms are mere labels, not formal models of heuristics. A model makes precise
predictions and can be tested, such as in computer simulations.
Good decisions in a partly uncertain world require ignoring part DEMO the available
information (e.g., to foster robustness). See the investment example in this article.
contrasted with a ‘‘System 2’’ that embodies the DEMO of logic and
probability, again without specifying models of the processes DEMO
either system. In contrast, I believe that such process models
can DEMO theoretical progress (Gigerenzer & Regier, 1996).
For instance, without DEMO models we would not know
that situations exist in which a simple heuristic makes more
accurate predictions than multiple regression or Bayesian
models do (see below; Brighton, 2006; Czerlinski, Gigerenzer, &
Goldstein, 1999). They are essential in overcoming the misun-
derstandings listed in Table DEMO instance, that heuristic
cognition is always second-best to complex information inte-
DEMO Formal models help to identify the class of problems in
which more information and processing pays or those in which
ignoring or forgetting information DEMO successful.
Tractability
Another misunderstanding is that we use heuristics only be-
cause of our cognitive limitations. Yet the reasons for using them
also lie DEMO the very nature of the problem the mind has to solve.
Two of the reasons the mind reaches for heuristics are tract-
ability and DEMO Many real-world problems are compu-
tationally intractable (or NP-hard ), which means that no
machine or mind can ﬁnd the best (optimal) DEMO, even if one
exists. For instance, determining the best strategy may be
tractable in the children’s game tic-tac-toe but not in the
more DEMO game of chess. Probabilistic inferences using
Bayesian belief networks are NP-hard (DEMO, 1990), as are
approximate inferences (Dagum & Luby, 1993)DEMO In fact, almost
every interesting problem in artiﬁcial intelligence is computa-
DEMO intractable (Reddy, 1988), as are computer games with
well-deﬁned rules such as Tetris and Minesweeper. In addition,
ill-deﬁned problems, such as ‘‘ﬁnding a spouse,’’ are by deﬁni-
tion beyond the reach of DEMO Intractable problems defy
21
Why Heuristics Work
optimizing and make satisﬁcing solutions necessary for both
mind DEMO machine.
Robustness
Humans and other animals need to predict the future and not
merely rely on hindsight to analyze the past. A complex cogni-
DEMO strategy is said to overﬁt relative to a simpler one if it is more
accurate in ﬁtting known data (hindsight) but less accurate DEMO
predicting new data (foresight). One can intuitively understand
overﬁtting from DEMO fact that information from all past experience
can be divided into two groups: information that is relevant for
the future and irrelevant information (DEMO ‘‘noise’’). Everything
else being equal, the more difﬁcult a criterion DEMO to predict (i.e.,
the higher its uncertainty), the more DEMO exists in past infor-
mation that needs to be ignored. An adaptive cognitive system
that operates in an uncertain world thus needs to ignore DEMO of
the information. The problem is determining which part to ig-
nore. Heuristics that order cues by importance and employ
limited search are means DEMO that end. A cognitive heuristic
that can reduce the chance of ﬁtting noise is called robust.
Robustness can be enhanced by ignoring information and DEMO
cognitive limitations such as forgetting. These are not simply
regrettable deﬁciencies, DEMO they can enable cognitive devel-
opment (Turkewitz & Kenny, 1982) DEMO functioning in an un-
certain world (Hertwig & Todd, 2003).
Evolved Capacities
Some models of cognition stem from statistical methods that
were DEMO onto the mind (Gigerenzer, 1991). Heuristics, in
contrast, can exploit evolved capacities naturally available to
humans to ﬁnd different solutions for DEMO problem than a statistical
calculus would. Recognition memory is one such evolved
capacity that is exploited by the recognition heuristic and the
ﬂuency heuristic. DEMO important point here is that these
capacities need not be unlimited. In fact, a certain degree
of systematic forgetting is beneﬁcial for the recognition and
ﬂuency heuristics to operate (Schooler & Hertwig, 2005).
Social DEMO
Simon once compared mind and environment with the two
blades of a pair of scissors: to understand behavior, one must
look at both DEMO at how they ﬁt. Studying only one blade will not
reveal why scissors cut so well. Similarly, studying only the mind
can mislead researchers into confusing adaptive heuristics with
a cognitive deﬁcits. Yet ecological perspectives are DEMO rare in
cognitive science aside from a few exceptions, such as DEMO
perspectives of Brunswik, Gibson, Shepard, and Anderson and
Schooler. Most DEMO are about mental processes only: neural
networks, production rules, Bayesian DEMO, or dual-
systems notions. An ecological theory deﬁnes human rationality
by DEMO (how cognition succeeds in the world) rather
22
than by coherence (its match with the laws of logic or proba-
bility). An evolutionary view broadens this ecological view from
present to past environments and DEMO researchers understand
that behavior adapted to the past may fail when environments
change quickly (Cosmides & Tooby, 1992). The link between
mind DEMO environments is the topic of the study of ecological
rationality: In DEMO environment does a given heuristic perform
well and where will it fail?
EXAMPLES OF HEURISTICS
Let me illustrate these principles with two examples DEMO heuristics.
Investment Behavior
In 1990, Harry Markowitz received a Nobel Prize DEMO Economics
for his theoretical work on optimal asset allocation. He ad-
dressed a vital investment problem that everyone faces in some
form or other, be it saving for retirement or earning money on the
stock market: How to invest your money in N assets? Markowitz
proved that there is an optimal portfolio that maximizes the re-
turn and minimizes the DEMO Nevertheless, for his own retire-
ment investments, he did not use his award-winning
optimization technique but relied instead on a simple heuristic,
DEMO 1/N rule, which states, ‘‘Allocate your money equally to each
of N funds.’’
There is considerable empirical evidence for this heuristic:
DEMO 50% of people studied intuitively rely on it, and most
consider DEMO three or four funds to invest in. Researchers in
behavioral ﬁnance criticized this behavior as simple and silly.
But how much better is optimizing DEMO the 1/N rule? A recent
study compared the results of DEMO optimal asset allocation poli-
cies with the results of the 1/N rule in seven allocation problems,
such as allocating one’s money to DEMO American industry port-
folios. The 12 policies included Bayesian and non-Bayesian
models of optimal choice. Despite their complexity, none of the
12 policies could beat the 1/N heuristic on various ﬁnancial
measures (DeMiguel, Garlappi, & Uppal, 2006).
How can a heuristic strategy be better than an optimizing
one? At issue is not computational intractability, but robustness.
DEMO optimization models performed better at data ﬁtting
(adjusting their parameters to DEMO data of the past 10 years)
than the simple heuristic did, but they performed worse at
predicting the future. Thus, they overﬁtted DEMO past data. In
contrast, the 1/N heuristic, which does not estimate any pa-
rameter, cannot overﬁt.
Note that 1/N is not generally superior to optimization or vice
versa. The important question of when, in fact, it does better
predict the future can be answered by studying the ecological
rationality of a heuristic. Three relevant environmental features
for DEMO performance of 1/N are known: the predictive uncertainty
of the DEMO, the number (N) of assets, and the size of the
learning sample.
V
olume 3—Number 1
Gerd Gigerenzer
Typically, the larger the uncertainty and the number of assets
and the smaller the learning sample, the greater the advantage of
1/N. When would the optimization models begin to outperform
the heuristic? As the uncertainty of funds is large and cannot be
changed, we focus on the learning sample, which was comprised
of 10 years of data in DeMiguel et al.’s (2006) study. The authors
report that with DEMO assets to allocate one’s wealth to, the opti-
mization policies would DEMO a window of 500 years before they
eventually outperformed the 1/N rule.
The Markowitz case illustrates that an optimization model
does not guarantee DEMO optimal outcome. Both heuristic and
optimization models can lead to good or bad outcomes, de-
pending on the structure of the environment, including DEMO three
features speciﬁed above.
Moral Behavior
Since 1995, an estimated 50,DEMO Americans have died waiting
in vain for an organ donor. As a consequence, a black market in
kidneys and other organs has emerged as an illegal alternative.
Why are only 28% of Americans potential organ donors DEMO
comparison with a striking 99.9% of the French? Do the French
DEMO a higher moral consciousness, or are Americans perhaps
less informed about DEMO shortage? The answer, however, cannot
be found by examining differences DEMO national personality traits
or knowledge. Rather, the majority of Americans and DEMO
seem to employ the same default heuristic, which states, ‘‘If there
is a default, do nothing about it.’’ But how would that heuristic
explain why there are too few organ donors in the U.S., whereas
France has plenty? Recall Simon’s two blades: mind and the
environment. DEMO the United States, the legal default is that no-
body is DEMO donor without registering to be one. You need to opt in.1
In France, everyone is a potential donor unless they opt out.
Behavior is a consequence of the default heuristic and of the
legal environment, leading to the striking contrasts between
countries (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003). DEMO the cognitive
process has policy implications. For instance, it explains why
DEMO various expensive information campaigns in the opt-in
countries have failed to increase participation: the issue is not
lack of information. If most citizens in the U.S. rely on the same
default heuristic that the citizens of DEMO use, the solution for
the donor problem is to change the DEMO default.
TOW
ARD A SCIENCE OF HEURISTICS
1/N and the default heuristic are instances of fast and frugal
heuristics. These are fast in DEMO and frugal in the infor-
mation used. Note that 1/N is not an investment heuristic, nor is
the default heuristic a moral heuristic. Their range is broader.
For instance, 1/N is used to achieve fairness in sharing goods
between friends, where it is known as the equality rule, and
1In some U.S. states, citizens are forced to DEMO a choice.
V
olume 3—Number 1
insurance policy buyers rely on the default heuristic when
choosing between several policies. Heuristics are neither par-
ticular DEMO general, but they have some intermediate range of
applicability. The study DEMO heuristics serves three goals, the ﬁrst
descriptive, the second prescriptive, DEMO the third one of design
(Gigerenzer & Selten, 2001; Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC Re-
search Group, 1999).
1. The DEMO toolbox. The goal is to analyze the adaptive
toolbox—that is, the DEMO, their building blocks, and
the evolved capacities exploited by the building blocks. This
analysis includes phylogenetic, ontogenetic, and cultural
development.
2. Ecological DEMO The goal is to determine the envi-
ronmental structures in which a given heuristic is success-
ful—that is, the match between mind and environment. This
analysis includes the coevolution of heuristics and envi-
ronments.
3. Design. DEMO goal is to use the results of (1) and (2) to design
heuristics and/or environments that teach and improve de-
cision DEMO in ﬁelds such as health care, law, and politics.
As in the natural sciences, attempts to understand the mind
are structured by scientiﬁc themata (Holton, 1988). I already
introduced one themata for modeling DEMO processes: opti-
mizing versus satisﬁcing. Heuristics aim at satisﬁcing solutions
(i.e., results that are good enough), which can be found even
when optimizing is unfeasible. A second themata is universality
versus modularity. When he DEMO young, the philosopher Leibniz
dreamt of formulating the universal calculus that DEMO all
scientiﬁc debates and personal quarrels by simple calculation.
Leibniz never realized his beautiful dream. Yet the vision of a
universal calculus of reason DEMO in the form of surrogates—
the expected utility calculus, logic, and Bayesian statistics have
all at one time or another been interpreted this DEMO The study of
the adaptive toolbox, in contrast, implies a modular view of the
mind. Rather than one universal calculus, there are many
heuristics, organized into building blocks by the evolved ca-
pacities they exploit.
THE ADAPTIVE TOOLBOX
With no claim to completeness, Table 2 lists 10 heuristics that,
according to empirical evidence, are likely to be in the adaptive
toolbox of humans and are used in an adaptive way (e.g., Bergert
& Nosofsky, 2007; Bro¨ der & Schiffer, 2003; Rieskamp &
Otto, 2006). Each of these heuristics can be DEMO with and
without awareness. In the latter case, each provides a DEMO
mechanism of intuition. An intuition is deﬁned as a judgment
that is fast in consciousness, whose underlying mechanism is
unconscious, yet is nevertheless DEMO enough to act upon
(Gigerenzer, 2007).
23
Why Heuristics Work
TABLE 2
10 Heuristics That Are Likely
Heuristic
Recognition DEMO
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
2002).
Fluency heuristic (Schooler &
DEMO, 2005)
Take the best (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996)
Tallying (unit-weight linear
model; Dawes, 1979)
Satisﬁcing (Simon, 1955; Todd
& Miller, 1999)
1/N; equality heuristic
(DeMiguel DEMO al., 2006)
Default heuristic (Johnson &
Goldstein, 2003)
Tit-for-tat (Axelrod, 1984)
Imitate the
Richerson,
Imitate the
Richerson,DEMO
majority (Boyd &
2005)
successful (Boyd &
2005)
Cooperate ﬁrst, keep a memory of
Size 1, and then imitate DEMO
partner’s last behavior.
Look at a majority of people in your
peer group, and imitate their
behavior.
Look for the most successful person
and imitate his or her behavior.
Note. The two last columns are illustrative, not exhaustive.
1For formal deﬁnitions, see references.
SELECTING A HEURISTIC
How does the mind select a heuristic from the adaptive toolbox
or construct a DEMO one from its building blocks? One answer is
reinforcement learning, with the unit of learning being heuris-
tics rather than behavior. Strategy selection DEMO theory
describes how heuristics are selected based on individual re-
inforcement learning (Rieskamp & Otto, 2006). In general,
heuristic selection can DEMO guided by (a) individual reinforce-
ment learning; (b) social DEMO, as in medical training in
which physicians are instructed on what DEMO to look up in what
order; and (c) evolutionary learning, as with rules of thumbs for
predation and mate search in animal DEMO (Hutchinson &
Gigerenzer, 2005).
in the Adaptive Toolbox
Deﬁnition1
DEMO one of two alternatives is
recognized, infer that it has the
DEMO value on the criterion.
If one alternative is recognized
faster than another, infer that it has
the higher value on the criterion.
Infer which of two alternatives has
the higher value by (a) searching
through DEMO in order of validity, (b)
stopping the search as soon as a cue
discriminates, (c) choosing the
alternative this cue favors.
To estimate a criterion, do not
estimate weights but simply count
the number of favoring cues.
Search through alternatives, and
choose the ﬁrst one that exceeds
your aspiration level.
Allocate resources equally to each
of N DEMO
If there is a default, do nothing
about it.
24
Ecologically DEMO if:
Recognition validity
>.5
Fluency validity
>.5
Cue validities vary highly,
moderate to high redundancy,
scarce information (Hogarth &
DEMO, 2005, 2006; Martignon
& Hoffrage, 1999, 2002).
Cue DEMO vary little, low
redundancy (Hogarth & Karelaia,
2005, 2006)DEMO
Decreasing populations, such as
those in seasonal mating pools
(Dudey & Todd, 2002).
High unpredictability, small
learning sample, large N.
Values of those who set defaults
match with those of decision
maker, consequences of choice
hard to predict.
If other players also play tit-for-tat;
DEMO the rules of the game allow only
defection or cooperation, but DEMO
divorce.
Environment is not or only slowly
changing, info search is DEMO or
time-consuming.
Individual learning slow, info
search costly and time-consuming.
Bold DEMO
Contradicting information about
recognized object is ignored, less-
is-more effect if DEMO >b, forgetting is
beneﬁcial.
Less-is-more effect, forgetting is
beneﬁcial.
Can DEMO as accurately as or
more than multiple regression
(Czerlinski et al. DEMO), neural
networks, exemplar models, and
classiﬁcation and regression trees
(DEMO, 2006).
Can predict as accurately as or
more than multiple DEMO
Unknown
Can outperform optimal asset
allocation models.
Can predict behavior when trait
and preference theories fail.
Can earn more money than
optimization (backward
induction).
Mass phenomena, cultural
evolution.
Cultural evolution.
Various experiments suggest that people tend to check the
ecological rationality of a heuristic from trial to DEMO before they
eventually apply it routinely. Consider the recognition heuristic
(Table DEMO). Before it is applied, two judgments have to be made:DEMO
recognition and evaluation. The recognition judgment determines
whether the heuristic can be used in the situation—that is,
whether one alternative is recognized but DEMO the other. If the
heuristic can be applied, an evaluation process DEMO still inhibit
its application. This process amounts to assessing the heuristic’s
ecological rationality for a given situation. A neuroimaging study
indicates that the heuristic DEMO the default, so to speak, but that
contradicting source knowledge and criterion knowledge can
deter its use (Volz et al., 2006). DEMO instance, Oppenheimer (2003)
asked members of Stanford University which city has the larger
V
olume 3—Number 1
Gerd Gigerenzer
population between Chernobyl and Heingjing and between
Sausalito and ‘‘Heingjing.’’ DEMO was invented by the author
and could not be (correctly) recognized, whereas participants
knew Chernobyl because of the nuclear accident (source knowl-
DEMO) and Sausalito because it was a small nearby town of 7,DEMO
(criterion knowledge). In both cases, many participants did not
follow the recognition heuristic and answered ‘‘Heingjing.’’ They
recognized a city for reasons DEMO from population (which
invalidated the heuristic in this situation) or because they had
direct knowledge about the criterion (population).
In general, DEMO studies indicate that people select
different heuristics in different environments, intuitively DEMO
uating their ecological rationality (as speciﬁed in Table 2).
For DEMO, the larger the recognition validity in a study, the
larger the proportion of participants who follow the recognition
heuristic (Pohl, 2006), DEMO the larger the variability of cue
validities, the larger the proportion DEMO participants who follow
the take-the-best heuristic (Rieskamp & Otto, 2006). The
adaptive selection is not perfect: It tends to be more successful
in a new situation but seems to break down when people begin DEMO
use a heuristic habitually and when the experimenter later
changes the environment (Bro¨ der & Schiffer, 2006). Although
adaptive heuristic selection has DEMO reported in several studies,
less is known about how this process works. In general, the
modular organization of the adaptive toolbox reduces the size of
the selection problem—some (but not all) heuristics are appli-
DEMO in a given situation. My intuition is that there is no universal
Bayesian algorithm that evaluates which heuristic to use but that
instead there DEMO multiple selection principles, as indicated
above.
HEURISTICS AND THEIR BUILDING BLOCKS
DEMO are typically composed of several building blocks,
and by adjusting one or a few of these, they can be adapted to
new situations. Consider the take-the-best heuristic, which has
three building blocks (Gigerenzer & DEMO, 1996): search
rule (look up cues in order of validity), stopping rule (stop search
after the ﬁrst cue discriminates between alternatives), and de-
cision rule (choose the alternative that this cue favors). Note that
the building blocks are ﬁtted to each other. The DEMO rule
employs extremely limited search, yet the search rule adjusts for
DEMO by ordering cues according to their validity. Validity does
not guarantee the ‘‘best’’ ordering of cues; it ignores depen-
dencies between cues and, DEMO (or because of) this, produces
reasonably robust orders. Given that DEMO problem of ordering
cues is computationally intractable, it would be unrealistic DEMO
assume that minds search for the best order (Martignon &
Hoffrage, 2002).
However, how do people adjust to new situations where DEMO is
difﬁcult to learn a reasonable cue order? Experimental results
suggest DEMO people in these circumstances tend to extend search
to enable more extensive cue learning (i.e., stop search after two
V
olume 3—Number 1
DEMO indicate the same alternative; Dieckman & Todd, 2004).
This stopping rule asks for a conﬁrming reason and is ecologi-
cally rational in DEMO where one is uncertain about the
order of cues (Karelaia, 2006) and also in situations where the
search for cue values is inexpensive. Similarly, the tit-for-tat
heuristic (see Table 2) can be adjusted by changing the mem-
ory from Size 1 to Size 2, resulting in tit-for-two-tats. This pre-
vents both tit-for-tat players from defecting after one makes DEMO
mistake.
The take-the-best heuristic is designed to help one choose
between two alternatives, but its building blocks can be adjusted
for classiﬁcation tasks in which one object has to be assigned to
one of several classes (e.g., assigning a patient to one of several
treatments). The resulting classiﬁcation rule, a fast-and-frugal
tree, allows for a quick decision at DEMO node of the tree (Fig. 1;
Martignon, Vitouch, Takezawa, & Forster, 2003).
EVOL
VED CAPACITIES
Heuristics exploit evolved capacities. The term evolved does not
refer to a skill shaped by nature or DEMO alone. Rather, nature
provides humans a capability, and extended practice turns it
into a capacity. Without the evolved capacities, heuristics could
not do their job; without heuristics, the capacities alone could
not do the DEMO either. For instance, the ﬁrst two heuristics in
Table 2 take DEMO of the evolved capacity for recognition
memory, such as face, voice, and name recognition. The take-
the-best, tallying, and satisﬁcing heuristics exploit recall
memory, including the ability to recall cues, cue values, and
aspiration levels. Imitation heuristics take advantage of the
human capacity to imitate, a capacity that no other species has
evolved in this form. The DEMO heuristic is probably based
on the evolved capacity for reciprocal altruism, DEMO enables
the social exchange of favors and goods among unrelated con-
speciﬁcs. Evidence of tit-for-tat behavior in other species apart
from humans is scant DEMO controversial. Heuristics are simple
precisely because they exploit complex evolved capacities.
ECOLOGICAL RA
TIONALITY
Behavior is often called rational if and only if it DEMO the laws
of logic or probability theory, and psychological research has
DEMO interpreted judgments that deviate from these
laws as reasoning fallacies. From a Darwinian perspective,
however, the goal of an organism is not to follow logic, but to
pursue objectives in its environment, such as DEMO alli-
ances, ﬁnding a mate, and protecting offspring. Logic may or
may not be of help. The rationality of the adaptive toolbox is DEMO
logical, but ecological; it is deﬁned by correspondence rather
than coherence.
The study of ecological rationality analyzes which heuristics
match with which environmental DEMO Its tools are math-
ematical analysis and computer simulation, and its DEMO are
25
Why Heuristics Work
Fig. 1. Fast-and-frugal trees for coronary care unit allocation (left; based on Green & Mehr, 1997)
and for macrolide DEMO for children (right; based on Fischer et al. 2002). The former assists
emergency unit physicians in deciding whether a patient with severe DEMO pain should be sent to the
coronary care unit or a regular nursing bed; the latter assists pediatricians in diagnosing whether
children are infected with Mycoplasma pneumoniae and should be treated with ﬁrst-line antibiotic
treatments (macrolides). A fast-and-frugal tree is a classiﬁcation tree that has M 1 DEMO exits (M is the
number of cues) and allows for a classiﬁcation after each question (cue). In contrast, the number of
DEMO nodes of a complete tree (2M) increases exponentially, which makes DEMO trees computa-
tionally intractable for large numbers of cues.
statements such as ‘‘Heuristic A is more frugal or accurate than
is Heuristic B in DEMO X’’ (see the examples in Table 2).
For instance, if cue validities are highly skewed (noncompen-
satory), no linear strategy can be more accurate in ﬁtting than the
frugal take-the-best heuristic; yet if cue validities are equal, the
tallying strategy is more accurate than the take-the-best heuristic
(Martignon & Hoffrage, 2002). The results can also DEMO quantita-
tive (rather than comparative), such as the curves for DEMO
effects (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002).
The study of ecological rationality also aims to discover
structures that permit more general conclusions about the DEMO
between cognitive processes and environments. One example is
the degree of predictability of the criterion (e.g., stock portfolio,
weather) one wants to forecast (everything else being equal),
which gives rise to the DEMO selection principle: The more
unpredictable a situation, the more information needs to be
ignored.
This general selection principle may at ﬁrst seem counterin-
DEMO, but its validity can in fact be easily seen. When pre-
DEMO the outcome of a chance device such as a roulette wheel,
all previous information can be ignored. When predicting the
outcome of a DEMO deterministic system known in all de-
tails, all relevant information must DEMO taken into consideration.
Most human goals lie somewhere in between—for instance,
selecting investment funds or predicting whether a patient with
severe chest pain DEMO suffering a heart attack. As the predict-
ability is uncertain in both cases, but higher for heart attacks
than for stocks, this principle DEMO that good diagnostic
systems should ignore information in both cases but should do so
to a greater degree when investing in stocks.
Previous research DEMO that ignoring information is
necessary because of the costs involved in acquiring it, pro-
ducing an accuracy–effort trade-off (Payne et al., 1993). This is
only half of the story—the thought-provoking part is yet to DEMO
In an uncertain world, even if the information costs nothing,
DEMO processes should still ignore a proportion of it. Dawes’s
seminal work (DEMO) showed that the tallying heuristic (which
does not pay attention to weights) can match and outperform
multiple regression in prediction. In the late 90s, we discov-
ered—to our own surprise—that the take-the-best heuristic
(which DEMO on one good reason and ignores the rest) was
both more DEMO and more accurate than multiple regression
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1999). Czerlinski et al. (1999)
conﬁrmed this result for 20 real-world problems with binarized
cues, which are arguably more psychologically plausible than
are continuous real values. The take-the-best heuristic made, on
average, more accurate predictions DEMO did the multiple re-
gression strategy, and it made equally accurate DEMO when
tested with continuous cues. Brighton (2006) showed for the ﬁrst
time that the take-the-best heuristic is often more accurate and
frugal than DEMO complex nonlinear algorithms, including neural
networks, exemplar models, and classiﬁcation DEMO regression
trees. In these situations, the trade-off between accuracy and
effort DEMO This insight may be hard to grasp, but cog-
nition seems DEMO take advantage of this fact intuitively. An
adaptive system needs to know when to ignore information, even
when it is free, and cognitive DEMO need to model how in-
formation is ignored.
DESIGN
A good theory of the mind should be useful. The study of heu-
ristics aspires DEMO this objective by improving strategies and/or
environments to support better decisions. For instance, Green
26
V
olume 3—Number 1
Gerd Gigerenzer
and Mehr (1997) dealt with the problem of overcrowding DEMO an
intensive care unit in a Michigan hospital, which was caused DEMO
physicians who cautiously allocated 90% of the patients sus-
pected of heart disease to the unit. Using the building blocks of
the take-the-best heuristic, they designed a fast-and-frugal tree
for coronary care unit allocation, which was more accurate in
predicting heart attacks than were a complex logistic regression
DEMO and the physicians’ decisions (Fig. 1). Fischer et al.
(2002) designed a fast-and-frugal tree for macrolide prescrip-
tion in children with community-acquired pneumonia. Heuris-
tics offer diagnostic procedures that can be applied rapidly and
DEMO limited information. Last but not least, they are transparent.
Physicians like DEMO decision tools because these corre-
spond to their own intuitions, and DEMO physicians at the Michigan
hospital still happily use the fast-and-frugal tree. As Elwyn,
Edwards, Eccles, and Rovner (2001) wrote in Lancet, ‘‘the next
frontier will involve fast and frugal heuristics; rules for patients
and clinicians alike’’ (p. 574).
Apart from designing strategies, one DEMO also design human
environments. Consider number representation. The Arabic
number system proved superior to earlier systems in simplifying
division. Unlike Roman numerals, it allows us to determine
which of two numbers is larger by simply using DEMO take-the-best
heuristic. For example, consider 2,543,001 and 2,498,DEMO
Comparing the digits from left to right and stopping after the
ﬁrst two differ shows that the ﬁrst number is greater than the
second (5 > 4). Trafﬁc rules governing right of way and the DEMO
soccer world championship rules are designed in the same
lexicographic way. Relying on one good reason and making no
trade-offs can promote safety and DEMO fairness in human
interaction—consider the complaints over the American Bowl
Championship Series formula that ranks college football teams
by complex weighting and adding. External DEMO of
risk that are adapted to the human mind have improved risk
communication in medicine, law, and AIDS counseling and are
indispensable for DEMO consent and shared decision making
(Gigerenzer 2002; Gigerenzer & Edwards 2003; Hoffrage,
Lindsey, Hertwig, & Gigerenzer, 2000). Applications in DEMO
decision making are provided by Gigerenzer and Engel (2006)
and DEMO (2003), and applications in marketing are provided
by Yee, Hauser, Orlin, and Dahan (2007).
THEORY INTEGRA
TION
Psychological theory today is a patchwork, much like the mosaic
of principalities that eventually became Italy and Germany circa
1870. A major goal for all theorists must DEMO to integrate what
exists rather than to neglect or denigrate the rest of psychology.
Connecting theories conceptually exposes our mutual blind
spots and can DEMO to new and bold insights. For instance,
Schooler and Hertwig (DEMO) implemented the recognition and
ﬂuency heuristics in Anderson’s ACT–R cognitive architecture
DEMO discovered that systematic forgetting is beneﬁcial for heu-
V
olume 3—Number 1
ristic inference, producing counterintuitive less-is-more effects.
Pleskac (2007) investigated the recognition heuristic from the
perspective of signal-detection theory and derived how false
recognition, such as de´ ja` vu, inﬂuences the performance of the
heuristic. Lexicographic heuristics such as the take-the-best
heuristic have been used for modeling the DEMO processes
underlying Allais’ paradox and other violations of expected
utility theory (DEMO tter, Gigerenzer, & Hertwig, 2006),
conﬁdence (Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, & Kleinbo¨ lting, 1991), and
hindsight bias (Hoffrage, Hertwig, & Gigerenzer, 2000), which
for the ﬁrst time has enabled predictions as to whether or not
hindsight occurs at an individual level. Finally, the puzzle of
cognitive biases has begun to make sense from the DEMO of
the adaptive toolbox (Gigerenzer, 2004). In my opinion, DEMO
degree to which currently balkanized theories can be integrated
will largely determine the future success of psychology as a
discipline.
Why do heuristics work? They exploit evolved capacities that
come for free, and thus they can provide solutions to problems
that are different from strategies of logic and DEMO In
addition, they are tools that have been customized to solve DEMO
verse problems. By understanding the ecological rationality of a
heuristic, we DEMO predict when it fails and succeeds. The sys-
tematic study of the environments in which heuristics work is a
fascinating topic and is still DEMO its infancy. Eventually, it will
clarify what models of logic, probability, and heuristics can
contribute to understanding how cognition works.
REFERENCES
Axelrod, DEMO (1984). The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic
Books.
Bergert, F.B., & Nosofsky, R.M. (2007). A response-time approach to
DEMO generalized rational and take-the-best models of de-
cision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33, 107–129.
Boole, G. (1958). An investigation of the laws of thought on which are
founded the mathematical theories of logic and probabilities. New
York: Dover. (DEMO work published 1854)
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P.J. (2005). The origin and evolution of cul-
tures. New York: Oxford University Press.
Brandsta¨ tter, E., Gigerenzer, G., & Hertwig, R. (DEMO). The priority
heuristic: A process model of risky choice. Psychological DEMO,
113, 409–432.
Brighton, H. (2006). Robust inference with DEMO cognitive models. In
C. Lebiere & B. Wray (Eds.), Between DEMO rock and a hard place:
Cognitive science principles meet AI-hard problems. Papers from
the AAAI Spring Symposium (AAAI Tech. Rep. No. SS-06-03, DEMO
17–22). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Bro¨ der, A. (2003). Decision making with the ‘‘adaptive toolbox’’: In-
ﬂuence of environmental structure, intelligence, and working
memory load. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 29, 611–625.
Bro¨ der, A., & Schiffer, S. (2003). Take The Best versus simultaneous
feature matching: Probabilistic inferences from memory and ef-
fects of representation format. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 132, 277–293.
27
Why Heuristics Work
Bro¨ der, A., & Schiffer, S. (2006)DEMO Adaptive ﬂexibility and maladaptive
routine in selecting fast and frugal decision strategies. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32,
DEMO
Cooper, G. (1990). The computational complexity of probabilistic in-
ference using Bayesian belief networks. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 42,
393–405.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive adaptations for social
exchange. In DEMO Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The
adapted DEMO: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of
culture (pp. 163–228). New York: Oxford University Press.
Czerlinski, J., Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D.G. (1999). How good are
simple heuristics? In G. Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd, & the ABC
Research Group, Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. 97–
118). New York: Oxford University Press.
DEMO, P., & Luby, M. (1993). Approximating probabilistic inference
in Bayesian belief networks is NP-hard. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 60,
141–153.
Daston, DEMO (1988). Probabilistic expectation and rationality in clas-
sical probability theory. DEMO Mathematica, 7, 234–260.
Dawes, R.M. (1979). The robust beauty of improper linear models in
decision making. American Psychologist, 34, 571–582.
DEMO, V., Garlappi, L., & Uppal, R. (2006, August)DEMO 1/N. Paper
presented at the 2006 European Financial Association Meeting,
Zurich, Switzerland. Retrieved November 7, 2007, from http://
ssrn.com/abstract=911512
Dhami, M.K. (2003). Psychological models of professional decision-
making. DEMO Science, 14, 175–180.
Dieckmann, A., & Todd, P.M. (2004). Simple ways to construct search
orders. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 26th Annual Conference DEMO the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
309–314). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
DEMO, T., & Todd, P.M. (2002). Making good decisions with minimal
information: Simultaneous and sequential choice. Journal of
Bioeconomics, 3, 195–215.
Elwyn, G.J., Edwards, A., Eccles, M., & Rovner, D. (2001). Decision
analysis in patient care. Lancet, 358, 571–574.
Fischer, J.E., Steiner, F., Zucol, F., Berger, C., Martignon, L., Bossart,
W., et al. (2002). Use of simple heuristics to target macrolide
prescription in children with community-acquired pneumonia.
Archives of DEMO and Adolescent Medicine, 156, 1005–1008.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). From tools to theories: A heuristic of discovery
in cognitive psychology. Psychological Review, 98, 254–267.
Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Calculated risks: How to know when numbers
deceive you. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gigerenzer, DEMO (2004). Fast and frugal heuristics: The tools of bounded
rationality. In D.J. Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.), Blackwell
handbook of judgment and decision making (pp. 62–88). Oxford,
United Kingdom: Blackwell.
DEMO, G. (2007). Gut feelings: The intelligence of the unconscious.
DEMO York: Viking.
Gigerenzer, G., & Edwards, A.G.K. (2003). DEMO tools for under-
standing risks: From innumeracy to insight. British Medical
DEMO, 327, 741–744.
Gigerenzer, G., & Engel, C. (2006). Heuristics and the law. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and
frugal way: Models of bounded rationality. Psychological Review,
103, 650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D.G. (1999). Betting on one good reason:
DEMO Take The Best heuristic. In G. Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd, & the
28
ABC Research Group, Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp.
DEMO). New York: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbo¨ lting, H. (1991). Probabilistic
mental models: A DEMO theory of conﬁdence. Psycholog-
ical Review, 98, 506–528.
Gigerenzer, G., & Murray, D.J. (1987). Cognition as intuitive statistics.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gigerenzer, G., & Regier, T. (1996). How do we tell an association from
a rule? Comment on Sloman (1996)DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 119,
23–26.
Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (Eds.). (2001). Bounded rationality: The
adaptive toolbox. Cambridge, DEMO: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Swijtink, Z., Porter, T., DEMO, L., Beatty, J., & Kru¨ ger,
L. (1989)DEMO The empire of chance: How probability changed science
and everyday life. DEMO, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P.M., & the ABC Research Group. (1999).
Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Goldstein, D.G., &Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological rationality:
The recognition heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75–90.
Green, L.A., & Mehr, D.R. (1997). DEMO alters physicians’ decisions to
admit to the coronary care unit? Journal DEMO Family Practice, 45,
219–226.
Hertwig, R., & Todd, P.M. (2003). More is not always better: The
beneﬁts of cognitive DEMO In D. Hardman & L. Macchi (Eds.),
The psychology of reasoning and decision making: A handbook
(pp. 213–231). Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley.
Hoffrage, U., Hertwig, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Hindsight bias:
A by-product of knowledge updating? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 566–581.
Hoffrage, DEMO, Lindsey, S., Hertwig, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (2000)DEMO
Communicating statistical information. Science, 290, 2261–2262.
Hogarth, R.M., & Karelaia, N. (2005). Ignoring information in binary
choice with continuous variables: When is less ‘‘more’’? Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 49, 115–124.
Hogarth, R.M., & Karelaia, N. (2006). Take-The-Best and other simple
DEMO: Why and when they work ‘‘well’’ with binary cues.
Theory and DEMO, 61, 205–249.
Holton, G. (1988). Thematic origins of scientiﬁc thought (2nd ed.).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hutchinson, DEMO, & Gigerenzer, G. (2005). Simple heuristics and
rules of DEMO: Where psychologists and behavioural biologists
might meet. Behavioural Processes, 69, DEMO
Johnson, E.J., & Goldstein, D.G. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Sci-
ence, 302, 1338–1339.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Karelaia, N. (2006). DEMO for conﬁrmation in multi-attribute choice:
Does search for consistency impair decision performance?
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100,
128–143.
Kru¨ ger, L., Gigerenzer, G., & Morgan, M.S. (Eds.). (1987). The prob-
abilistic revolution: Vol. 2: Ideas in the DEMO Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Laplace, P.-S. (1951). A DEMO essay on probabilities (F.W.
Truscott & F.L. Emory, Trans.). New York: Dover. (Original work
published 1814)
Martignon, L., & DEMO, U. (1999). Why does one-reason decision
making work? A DEMO study in ecological rationality. In G.
Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group, Simple
V
olume 3—Number 1
Gerd Gigerenzer
heuristics that make us smart (pp. 119–140). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Martignon, L., & Hoffrage, U. (2002). Fast, frugal and ﬁt: Lexico-
graphic heuristics for paired comparison. Theory DEMO Decision,
52, 29–71.
Martignon, L., Vitouch, O., Takezawa, M., & Forster, M.R. (2003). Naive
and yet enlightened: DEMO natural frequencies to fast and frugal
decision trees. In D. Hardman & L. Macchi (Eds.), Thinking:
Psychological perspectives on reasoning, judgment DEMO decision
making (pp. 189–211). Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley.
Oppenheimer, D.M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so frugal!): DEMO
thinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition, 90, B1–B9.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, J.R., & Johnson, E.J. (1993). The adaptive de-
cision DEMO Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University
Press.
Pleskac, T.J. (2007). A signal detection analysis of the recognition
heuristic. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 373–391.
Pohl, R.F. (2006). Empirical tests of the recognition heuristic. Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 251–271.
Reddy, R. (DEMO). Foundations and grand challenges of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence: AAAI Presidential Address. DEMO Magazine, 9,
9–21.
Rieskamp, J., & Otto, P.E. (DEMO). SSL: A theory of how people learn to
select strategies. DEMO of Experimental Psychology: General,
135, 207–236.
Schooler, L.J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids heuristic
inference. Psychological Review, 112, 610–628.
Simon, H.A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 69, 99–118.
Thorngate, W. (1980)DEMO Efﬁcient decision heuristics. Behavioral Sci-
ence, 25, 219–225.
Todd, P.M., & Miller, G.F. (1999). From pride and prejudice to per-
DEMO: Satisﬁcing in mate search. In G. Gigerenzer, P.M. Todd,
& the ABC Research Group, Simple heuristics that make us smart
(pp. DEMO). New York: Oxford University Press.
Turkewitz, G., & Kenny, P.A. (1982). Limitations on input as a basis for
neural organization and perceptual development: A preliminary
theoretical statement. Developmental Psychobiology, 15, 357–
368.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psy-
chological Review, 79, 281–299.
Volz, K.G., Schooler, L.J., Schubotz, R.I., Raab, M., Gigerenzer, G., &
von DEMO, D.Y. (2006). Why you think Milan is larger than
Modena: Neural correlates of the recognition heuristic. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1924–1936.
Wundt, W. (1973). An introduction to psychology (R. Pintner, Trans.).
New York: Arno (Original work published 1912)
Yee, M., Hauser, J., Orlin, J., & Dahan, E. (DEMO). Greedoid-based
non-compensatory two-stage consideration-then-choice infer-
ence. Marketing Science, 26, 532–549.
V
olume 3—Number 1
29{1g42fwefx}