The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at The current DEMO and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister www.emeraldinsight.com/0268-3946.htm
JMP
19,6
588
Journal of Managerial Psychology
Vol. 19 DEMO 6, 2004
pp. 588-607
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0268-3946
DOI DEMO/02683940410551507
Transformational leadership
and shared values: the building
blocks of trust
DEMO A. Gillespie
Melbourne Business School, University of Melbourne, Carlton, Victoria, Australia
Leon Mann
School of Behavioural Sciences, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Keywords Trust, Leadership, Team leaders, Research, Development
Abstract Interpersonal DEMO is central to sustaining team effectiveness. Whilst leaders play the
primary role in establishing and developing trust, little research has examined the speciﬁc
leadership practices which engender trust toward team leaders. This study investigated the
relationship DEMO a set of leadership practices (transformational, transactional, and
consultative) and members’ trust in their leader, in research and development (R&D) teams.
Usable questionnaires were completed by 83 team members drawn from 33 DEMO&D project teams.
Three factors together predicted 67 per cent of the variance in team members’ trust towards
leaders, namely: consulting team members DEMO making decisions, communicating a collective
vision, and sharing common values with the leader. Trust in the leader was also strongly associated
with the DEMO effectiveness. The implications of these ﬁndings for leadership development, team
building DEMO future research are discussed.
The central importance of interpersonal trust for sustaining team and organisational
effectiveness is increasingly being recognised (Dirks and Ferrin, DEMO). Employees’
trust in their leaders has been related to a range of productivity-related processes and
outcomes, such as the quality of communication and problem-solving, discretionary
effort, organisational citizenship behaviour, organisational commitment and the rate of
employee turnover (Dirks and Ferrin, 2002). Trust towards leaders DEMO also been
directly related to team performance (Dirks, 1999, 2000), as well as bottom line
indicators of organisational performance, such as DEMO levels and net proﬁts (Davis
et al., 2000; Rich, 1997). Trust is also a major contributor to organisational
competitiveness because it DEMO be easily imitated or replicated ( Jones and George,
1998). Fairholm (1994) succinctly summarises the importance of trust in leaders,
DEMO “... no organisation can take place without interpersonal trust, and no
DEMO leader can ignore the powerful element of trust” ( p. 98).
Leaders are believed to play the primary role in establishing and developing DEMO in
teams and organisations (Creed and Miles, 1996; Fairholm, 1994; McAllister, 1995;
Shaw, 1997). Trust in leaders is particularly important for effective functioning in
teams and organizations where tasks are complex DEMO unstructured, and require high
levels of interdependence, cooperation and information sharing (Creed and Miles, 1996;
Zand, 1972). These features are typical of research and development (R&D) teams.
The authors would DEMO to thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and
suggestions on this paper.
R&D work involves considerable interdependence between team members who bring
diverse DEMO highly specialised knowledge and skills to the team. The success of these
teams requires high levels of cooperation and collaboration between team members
and DEMO the leader. Team members often have more up-to-date knowledge than their
leaders, and the teams rely on members to share novel scientiﬁc ideas openly and
provide honest feedback on each other’s work to produce innovative products
DEMO processes. The team leader typically plays a vital role in managing the team and
project, negotiating adequate resources and sponsorship for the team, DEMO representing
its work to higher levels of the organisation.
This study focuses on the question of how R&D project leaders earn the trust DEMO
their team members. Speciﬁcally, this study examines the relationship between a DEMO
set of leadership practices and members’ trust in their team leaders. To date, no
research has examined this relationship in the context of R&D teams. Podsakoff et al.
(1990) highlight the need to examine DEMO a wide range of leadership practices impact
on followers’ trust. This study examines the relationship between transformational,
transactional, consultative, active-corrective, and passive-avoidant leadership
practices, and followers’ trust in the leader. In addition to these leadership practices,
this study also examines how shared values between leaders DEMO team members relate
to team members’ trust in the leader.
The following section describes the deﬁnition and conceptualisation of trust used in
this study. DEMO the theory and research relating each of the leadership practices, as
DEMO as shared leader-member values, to team members’ trust in the leader DEMO discussed,
and hypotheses are posed.
Conceptualisation and measurement of trust
Rousseau et al. (1998) note growing convergence around the following deﬁnition of
DEMO: “Trust is a psychological state comprising the intention to accept vulnerability
DEMO upon positive expectations of the intentions or behaviour of another” (p. DEMO).
This deﬁnition draws heavily on the work of Mayer et al. (1995).
Trust is a complex multidimensional construct (Mayer et al., 1995; Rousseau et al.,
1998). Theoretical and empirical work suggests that trust has cognitive, affective, and
behavioural bases (Clark and Payne, 1997; Cummings and Bromiley, 1996; McAllister,
1995). Cognitive DEMO refers to beliefs about another’s trustworthiness, whilst affective
trust refers to DEMO important role of emotions in the trust process. Recent research
identiﬁes two common forms of behavioural trust in teams, namely: relying on another
DEMO disclosing sensitive information to another (Gillespie, 2003).
Podsakoff et al. (1990) identiﬁed the need for future research on leadership and trust
DEMO employ a comprehensive measure of trust. Indeed, it is important for DEMO to act in
ways that not only build followers’ beliefs about the leader’s trustworthiness, but also
build followers’ behavioural and emotional trust towards the leader. Till date, no
studies have examined the relationship between leadership and trust, using a
comprehensive measure inclusive of these multiple components of trust. The measure
of trust used in this study assessed the multiple components DEMO trust.
Transformational leadership and trust
Research on leadership in the past decade has focused on the transformational theory
of leadership, which is arguably the dominant model of effective leadership (House and
Leadership and
shared values
589
JMP
19,6
590
Shamir, 1993). Transformational leaders motivate their followers to perform beyond
expectations by making them more aware of the importance DEMO value of goals,
inducing them to transcend self-interest for the good of the group/organisation, and
appealing to followers’ higher order needs (DEMO, 1985). Whilst theories of
transformational leadership differ in some of DEMO speciﬁc leadership behaviours they
identify, all theories posit trust as a DEMO feature of the relationship such leaders have
with their followers, and DEMO that it is through followers’ trust and respect in their
leader that they are motivated to perform beyond expectations (Bennis and Nanus,
1985; Conger and Kanungo, 1987; House, 1977; Podsakoff et al., DEMO; Sashkin, 1988;
Shamir et al., 1994; Yukl, 1989)DEMO
In a recent meta-analysis on trust and leadership, Dirks and Ferrin (2002) report that
the transformational leadership is strongly predictive of trust[1]. However, empirical
work on the relationship between speciﬁc transformational leadership behaviours and
trust in the leader shows mixed and inconsistent ﬁndings. The ﬁndings suggest that
DEMO transformational leadership practices, such as providing an appropriate model,
individualised DEMO, and fostering acceptance of group goals, are consistently
positively associated with trust in the leader (Butler et al., 1999; MacKenzie et al., 2001;
Podsakoff et al., 1996, 1990). However, mixed DEMO have been found for other
transformational practices, such as articulating a DEMO, setting high expectations, and
stimulating new ways of thinking. For example, in a study of managers and
professionals, Podsakoff et al. (1996) report that these three behaviours have no
signiﬁcant association with trust. However, in a study of salespeople, Podsakoff et al.
(1990) report DEMO high performance expectations and intellectual stimulation have a
negative impact on trust. In contrast to these studies by Podsakoff and his colleagues,
Butler DEMO al. (1999) report that all six of these transformational leadership practices
have a positive impact on trust in the leader, in self-directed work teams.
Studies using related measures of charismatic leadership behaviour also yield
inconsistent DEMO For example, in a study of managers, Conger et al. (DEMO) found
that only one charismatic leadership behaviour (sensitivity to the environment)
predicted trust in the leader, whereas other behaviours, such as DEMO a vision
and sensitivity to member needs (similar to individualised support), had no effect. In a
study of military units, Shamir et DEMO (1998) found that supportive leadership and
emphasizing a collective identity were associated with identiﬁcation and trust in the
leader, whilst emphasizing collective values and mission, and demonstrating
commitment to values and goals, had only DEMO correlations.
Overall, these studies show mixed ﬁndings for the relationship between DEMO
transformational leadership practices and trust. The fact that four of the studies
showing inconsistent ﬁndings used the same leadership measure and similar methods
(Butler et al., 1999; MacKenzie et al., 2001; Podsakoff et al., 1996, 1990), suggests that
the impact of speciﬁc leadership behaviours on followers’ trust in the leader may be
sample or setting speciﬁc. This DEMO does not aim to resolve the inconsistent ﬁndings
reported in earlier studies. Rather, this paper aims to examine which leadership
practices are predictive of followers’ trust in the leader, in the context of R&D teams.
To date, only one study (Butler et al., 1999) has DEMO the relationship between
transformational leadership practices and trust in the leader, DEMO the context of teams.
The current study focuses on the theory of transformational leadership developed
by Bass (1985) and colleagues. This model is DEMO through the multifactor
leadership questionnaire (MLQ; Bass and Avolio, 1995, 1997), which DEMO the most widely
used and researched instrument to measure transformational leadership (DEMO and
Hunt, 1999). The MLQ measures four transformational leadership practices, namely:
idealised inﬂuence (communicating important values and a shared sense of purpose),
inspirational motivation (conﬁdently communicating a compelling vision and goals),
individualised consideration (treating followers as individuals and supporting their
development), and intellectual stimulation (challenging old ways of thinking and
encouraging different perspectives). The MLQ also measures attributed charisma
(follower’s attributions of pride, DEMO and conﬁdence in the leader).
In the context of R&D teams, it is expected that the team leader’s use of each of these
transformational leadership practices will be positively associated with team members’
trust DEMO the leader. By communicating and role-modelling important values and a shared
sense of purpose (i.e. idealised inﬂuence), team leaders demonstrate their integrity,
competence, and hence trustworthiness. By conﬁdently communicating attractive and
attainable goals for the team (i.e. inspirational motivation), leaders motivate and focus
team members’ efforts on a set of shared goals, which in turn facilitate trust (Bennis and
Nanus, 1985; Fairholm, 1994; Sashkin and Fulmer, DEMO). The alignment of leader’s
and team member’s goals helps team members to predict their leader’s future behaviour
and suggests that the leader will DEMO in mutually beneﬁcial ways.
By communicating their willingness to understand the individual needs and
capabilities of followers, and to put effort into developing their individual strengths
and serving their needs (i.e. individualised consideration), the leader demonstrates that
they value and care about their team members, and hence, can be trusted (Conger et al.,
2000; Fairholm, 1994; Jung and Avolio, 2000). As Bass (1985) notes, the DEMO
supportive leaders are perceived to be, the deeper and more enduring DEMO followers’
trust in them. In the context of R&D teams, DEMO who encourage and teach their
team members to approach problems in new ways and critically re-examine
assumptions (i.e. intellectual stimulation), are essentially coaching and developing
their members. Such behaviour reinforces the leader’s commitment to the DEMO
of their team members, as well as to rigorous scientiﬁc thinking DEMO the team, and hence
will build trust. Finally, when leaders act in ways that build the respect, pride and
conﬁdence of their team members (i.e. attributed charisma), they will be trusted. The
following hypothesis is made:
H1a. In R&D teams, members’ perceptions of their leader’s idealised inﬂuence,
inspirational motivation, individualised consideration, intellectual
stimulation, and attributed charisma, will be positively associated with
members’ trust towards the leader.
Transactional leadership and trust
Transactional leadership, also known as contingent reward, DEMO based on the leader
providing assistance and rewards that meet follower’s needs contingent on the
follower’s performance. In contrast to transformational leadership, transactional
leadership is not believed to require a high level of trust between leaders DEMO followers
(Bass, 1985; Jung and Avolio, 2000). Jung and Avolio (2000) argue that transactional
leadership, including contingent reward, is DEMO for building the level of trust
to achieve the full potential of a workforce. Rather, intellectually stimulating,
Leadership and
shared values
591
JMP
19,6
592
developmentally oriented, inspirational, and therefore transformational modes DEMO
leadership, are required to achieve high levels of follower trust. Podsakoff DEMO al. (1990)
and Pillai et al. (1999) provide empirical DEMO for this view, reporting that
transactional leadership does not inﬂuence trust.
DEMO contrast to this position, Shamir (1995) argues that consistent honouring DEMO
transactional agreements characterised by contingent reward, can build team
members’ trust DEMO their leaders. In support of this view, Butler et al. (1999), Jung and
Avolio (2000) and MacKenzie et al. (2001) DEMO a signiﬁcant empirical relationship
between transactional leadership and trust. In their meta-analysis, Dirks and Ferrin
(2002) also report a moderate to strong association between transactional leadership
and trust in the leader[1]. Hence, there are competing theories and mixed ﬁndings
about the effect of transactional leadership on followers’ DEMO
In the context of R&D teams, the leader’s use of DEMO reward is expected to
build team members’ trust towards the leader. By clarifying role responsibilities for
meeting objectives and providing rewards when objectives are DEMO, the leader
facilitates the team’s achievement of goals, and hence will be seen as competent. Such
behaviour also demonstrates the leader’s commitment to DEMO rewards as
promised when expectations are met and to treating followers in a consistent and fair
manner.
H1b. In R&D teams, members’ perceptions of their leader’s use of contingent
reward will be positively associated with DEMO trust towards the leader.
Consultative leadership and trust
Podsakoff et al. (DEMO) suggest that followers’ trust in their leader may be most
inﬂuenced DEMO the leader’s consultation and consideration of the interests and welfare of
their followers when making important decisions. This consultative leadership style is
likely to DEMO trust as it provides an opportunity for followers to voice their opinions,
needs and concerns, and have greater inﬂuence and control over their work
environment. This in turn acts to reduce their feelings of risk DEMO uncertainty.
Consultative leadership also communicates that the leader respects and values team
members’ views and input. Korsgaard et al. (1995) provide empirical support DEMO the
relationship between consultative leadership and trust in the leader. In an experimental
design involving 20 intact management teams, these authors found that members’
trust in the leader increased if the leader considered the members’ input, but decreased
if their input was not considered. On the basis of DEMO theory and research, the following
hypothesis is made:
H1c. In DEMO&D teams, members’ perceptions of their leader’s use of consultative
leadership DEMO be positively associated with their trust towards the leader.
Corrective, passive DEMO avoidant leadership and trust
While it is important to understand which leadership practices contribute to trust, it is
also informative to understand common leadership practices that may adversely affect
trust. In their full range leadership model, Bass and Avolio (1997) identiﬁed three
ineffective leadership styles characterised by DEMO corrective leadership (e.g. leading
by monitoring and focusing on mistakes), DEMO corrective leadership (e.g. waiting
for things to go wrong before intervening), and laissez-faire leadership (e.g. avoiding
getting involved when important issues arise).
The impact of active DEMO leadership on trust may depend on the
organisational context. For example, DEMO industries where adherence to rules has little
relationship with success and goal achievement, such corrective behaviour may be
perceived as micro-management, a threat DEMO the conﬁdence and self-esteem of
followers, and a source of frustration. DEMO these contexts, active corrective leadership is
likely to diminish trust. However, in industries where close attention and adherence to
procedures, rules, and DEMO on the job is necessary for success or the avoidance
of negative consequences (e.g. scientiﬁc organisations, chemical plants, nuclear plants,
armed forces, etc.), leaders will be expected to vigilantly pay attention to monitoring
and correcting deviations and mistakes. Hence, in this environment, such behaviour DEMO
unlikely to undermine trust.
In the context of scientists working in R&D teams, where following rigorous
research methodology, checking and double checking DEMO, and adhering to
established standards is necessary to produce good work, active corrective leadership
is not expected to be associated with trust in DEMO leader. On the one hand, team
members may feel more willing DEMO trust a leader who they know pays attention to
ensuring all scientiﬁc work is completed to the required standards. On the other hand,
DEMO members may be hesitant to trust a critical leader who they perceive to be overly
focused on the negatives. Hence, no overall association is expected between active
corrective leadership and trust in the leader, in the context of R&D work.
H2a. In R&D teams, members’ perceptions of their leader’s use of active corrective
leadership will not be associated DEMO their trust in the leader.
Through their avoidance of taking an active leadership role, passive and avoidant
leaders lose the opportunity to build the trust of their followers, or if a level of trust
already exists, such behaviour is likely to undermine that trust with time. Such
behaviour sends the signal that the leader is not reliable or competent, and is not
actively committed to facilitating or achieving the team’s goals.
H2b. DEMO R&D teams, members’ perceptions of their leader’s use of Laissez-faire DEMO
passive corrective leadership will be negatively associated with their trust in
the leader.
Shared values and trust
In a review of the literature on DEMO within organisations, Bigley and Pearce (1998)
recommend that researchers examine a range of trust determinants within the same
study, and identify whether some determinants are substitutes for others. Several
scholars have pointed to the DEMO role that shared values play in establishing high
levels of trust. Lewicki et al. (1998) suggest that a determining characteristic of high
trust DEMO is the extent to which both parties identify with each other’s values.
Jones and George (1998) argue that shared values are the primary DEMO through
which people experience the highest form of trust, “unconditional trust”. DEMO (1983)
further suggests a reciprocal process between shared values and DEMO, with shared
values helping to create a relationship built on trust, and trust serving to maintain and
express those shared values.
Leadership and
DEMO values
593
JMP
19,6
594
Although several scholars have proposed that shared values DEMO an important role
in building trust between leaders and followers, there DEMO been little empirical work
testing this relationship. This study provides an opportunity to test and compare the
effects of shared values and a range DEMO leadership practices on follower’s trust in their
leaders.
H3. The extent to which team members’ perceive they share common values with
their leader will DEMO positively associated with their trust in the leader.
The impact of trust on leader effectiveness
A secondary aim of this study was to examine DEMO relationship between trust in the
team leader and the leaders’ effectiveness in R&D teams. In line with theory and
empirical research indicating that DEMO enhances cooperation, openness of
communication, and commitment in relationships (for DEMO review of this literature see
Dirks and Ferrin, 2001) and is an important predictor of the general effectiveness of the
relationship (Gomez and Rosen, 2001; Graen and Uhl-Bien, 1995; McAllister, 1995;
Robinson, 1996), it was expected that team members’ trust in their leader would be
positively associated with their perceptions of the leader’s effectiveness, their
satisfaction with the leader, and the effectiveness of their relationship with the leader.
In a recent meta-analysis, Dirks and Ferrin (2002) report that trust in the leader is
associated with the discretionary effort employees put DEMO their work. In the current
study, this association was tested in DEMO context of R&D teams. Speciﬁcally, the
following hypothesis was made.
DEMO Team members’ trust in their leader will be positively associated with their
ratings of the extra effort they put into their work, the leader’s effectiveness,
satisfaction with the leader, and the effectiveness of the leader-member
relationship.
In summary, this study contributes to the literature by examining the relationship
between team members’ trust in their leader, and a broad range of leadership practices,
namely: transformational practices (idealised inﬂuence, inspirational motivation,
individualised support, intellectual stimulation, and attributed charisma), consultative
leadership, contingent reward, active corrective leadership, and passive-avoidant
leadership, as well as common values between leaders and members. These
relationships are examined in the DEMO of R&D teams. A comprehensive measure of
trust, encompassing team DEMO cognitive, affective, and behavioural trust in their
leader is used.
Methodology
Data collection and selection of participants
Project teams in a large, public R&D organisation based in Australia were studied. At
the time of DEMO collection, the organisation was undergoing signiﬁcant government
funding cuts and downsizing. DEMO were collected from 33 teams across two divisions.
Teams ranged in size from 2 to 15 members, with a median of six members. The project
leader and two team members (randomly chosen), completed a questionnaire assessing
leadership and trust. The two team members were randomly labelled team DEMO 1
(TM1) and team member 2 (TM2). Only team DEMO who had been working in
the team for a minimum of three months and reported directly to DEMO leader were
selected. Thirty-three team leaders, 33 TM1, and 32 TM2 returned the questionnaire. In
one division, questionnaires were administered to all team members. This resulted in
an additional 20 questionnaires from nine teams. In DEMO, completed questionnaires
were received from 33 team leaders and 85 team DEMO Only the demographic data
collected from team leaders are described in this paper.
Sample demographics
The mean age of team members and team leaders DEMO 40 and 46 years, respectively.
Thirty-ﬁve per cent of team members DEMO 22 per cent of leaders were female. On
average, team members DEMO been employed by the organisation for 10.5 years, and
leaders for DEMO years. Team leaders typically had seven years experience in the role of
managing a team, and on average team members had worked directly with the leader
for four years. Team members typically spent just over four DEMO a week in
face-to-face contact with their leader and 85 per cent of dyads reported working in an
interdependent fashion.
Questionnaire measures
Trust
Cognitive DEMO A short-form of the conditions of trust inventory (CTI; Butler, DEMO),
was used to measure team members’ cognitive-based trust in their DEMO The original
44-item CTI assesses whether the target person is judged to be trustworthy on the
following ten conditions; competence, integrity, promise fulﬁlment, reliability, loyalty,
consistency, discreetness, fairness, openness and availability. The short-form of the
CTI comprised the 11 items with the highest factor DEMO for the respective trust
condition, that were appropriate for rating leaders DEMO team members. These are items
4, 5, 9, 15, 20, 22, 25, 29, 35, 40, 42 from the original DEMO An example item is: “To what
extent do you agree that DEMO leader .. . does things that he/she promises to do for you”.
The items were rated on a ﬁve-point scale (1 ¼ strongly disagree, 5 ¼ strongly agree,
astudy of 236 team members drawn from 88 R&D teams, Gillespie (2004) reports¼ 0.94). The validity of the original CTI has been demonstrated (Butler, 1991). DEMO a
evidence of the convergent, divergent and construct validity of the DEMO short-form, as
well as its unidimensional factor structure.
Affective trust. This DEMO scale, derived from McAllister (1995) and 15 pilot
interviews, measures team members’ affective bonds with the leader. An example item
is “I DEMO comfortable depending on my leader”. A ﬁve-point scale was used
(1 DEMO strongly disagree, 5 ¼ strongly agree, a¼ 0.88).
Behavioural trust. This six-item scale measured the extent to which team members
trust their DEMO professionally, by relying on the leader’s skills and judgements, and
personally by sharing their beliefs, feelings and personal information with the leader.
The scale was constructed on the basis of Zand’s (1972) reciprocal model DEMO trust and
from content analysis of 15 pilot interviews. Two example items are: “To what extent
do you trust your leader in regards to ... Relying on his/her task-related skills and
abilities? Sharing your personal beliefs?” A seven-point scale was used (1 ¼ no trust,
7 ¼ complete trust). The alpha reliability for the six item DEMO was a¼ 0.89 (with
a¼ 0.84 for the professional trust factor, and a¼ 0.92 for the personal trust factor).
Leadership and
shared DEMO
595
JMP
19,6
596
Table I.
Description of the
leadership scales
Overall DEMO The following item was used to capture team members’ overall trust
towards the leader, “How would you rate your overall trust in your project leader?”
A seven-point scale was used (1 ¼ no trust, DEMO ¼ complete trust).
Leadership
The multifactor leadership questionnaire (MLQ (Form 5X); Bass and Avolio, 1995).
The MLQ measures nine leadership dimensions, comprising ﬁve transformational
leadership scales (inspirational motivation, idealised inﬂuence, DEMO
consideration, intellectual stimulation, attributed charisma); contingent reward; two
corrective DEMO scales (active and passive management by exception), and an
avoidant DEMO scale (Laissez-faire). The questionnaire uses a ﬁve-point scale
(0 ¼ not at all, 4 ¼ frequently=always). Table I describes each leadership scale and
provides example items. Bass and Avolio (1997) report evidence DEMO the convergent and
discriminant validity of the MLQ scales. The reliabilities for these leadership scales
range from a¼ 0:73 to 0.91 (Bass and Avolio, 1997).
Leadership scale Description Example item
Transformational leadership practices
Attributed charisma Followers’ attributions of pride,
respect, and conﬁdence in the
leader
Idealised inﬂuence Communicating and modeling
important values and a shared
purpose
Inspirational DEMO Conﬁdently communicating a
compelling vision and goals
Intellectual stimulation Questioning of old ways of
doing and thinking
Individualised Treating followers in an
consideration equitable DEMO individual
manner and encouraging their
development
Transactional leadership
Contingent reward Facilitating the achievement of
agreed upon objectives and
appropriate rewards
Ineffective leadership practices
Corrective (active) Management by monitoring
and focusing on mistakes
Corrective (passive) Intervenes only when things go
wrong
Laissez-faire Absence of leadership and
avoidance of DEMO
Consultative leadership
Consultative leadership Consulting and considering
team member’s input in
leadership
Acts in ways that builds my
respect
Considers the moral and ethical
DEMO of decisions
Talks enthusiastically about
what needs to be accomplished
Re-examines critical assumptions
to question whether they are
appropriate
Considers me as having different
DEMO, abilities and aspirations
from others
Discusses in speciﬁc terms who
is DEMO for achieving
performance targets
Focuses attention on
irregularities, mistakes,
exceptions, and deviations from
standards
Fails to interfere until problems
become serious
Avoids DEMO involved when
important issues arise
Consulting team members before
making important decisions that
affect them
Consultative leadership. This three-item scale was based on Yukl (1998)
and assesses how well the leader consults team members, considers their input, DEMO
uses their suggestions before making important decisions. A seven-point scale was
used (1 ¼ not at all well, 7 ¼ extremely well, a¼ 0.88). See Table I for an example
item.
Leadership outcomes. Three DEMO from the MLQ (Bass and Avolio, 1995) measure
satisfaction with DEMO leader, the effectiveness of the leader, and the extra effort team
members put into their work due to the motivating inﬂuence of their DEMO The
reliabilities for these scales range from a¼ 0.77 to 0.84 (DEMO and Avolio, 1997). The
following item was also included, “How effective is your working relationship with
your leader?” This item is DEMO to be the single best measure of the quality of
leader-member exchange (Graen and Uhl-Bien, 1995). It uses a seven-point scale
(1 ¼ extremely ineffective, 7 ¼ extremely effective).
Common values
Two items measured the extent to which team members’ share common values with
their DEMO and identify with their leader’s values. An example item is, “To DEMO
extent do you share common values with your leader?” A seven-point scale was used
(1 ¼ to a very small extent, 7 DEMO to a very great extent, a¼ 0.78).
Results
Levels of DEMO and transformational leadership
On average team members had “high” to “very high” overall trust in their leaders
(M ¼ 4:7; SD ¼ DEMO:90; 1-7 scale). However 10 per cent of team members DEMO “little”
or “no trust”. The means for the different components of trust indicated that, on
average, leaders were trustworthy (cognitive trust, M DEMO 4:2; SD ¼ 0:75; 1-5 scale), and
members had positive feelings towards their leader (affective trust, M ¼ 3:DEMO;
SD ¼ 0:73; 1-5 scale). Team members were DEMO to rely on their leader’s skills and
their personal thoughts and beliefs with their leader (personal behavioural trust,judgments (professional behavioural trust, M ¼ 5:3; SD ¼ 1:1; 1-7 scale) and share
M ¼ 4:6; SD ¼ 1:4; 1-7 scale). DEMO members reported signiﬁcantly higher
professional trust in their leaders, than personal DEMO [As expected, the cognitive, affective, and behavioural measures of trust DEMO 5:91; p , 0.01].
inter-correlated with correlations ranging from r DEMO 0:68 to 0.80 ( p , 0.01). The overall
(DEMO item also correlated with each of these measures, ranging fromp , DEMO). An aggregate index of all three components of trust (labeled DEMO trust)r ¼ 0:70 to 0.81
was computedteam members’ ratings of trust in their leader using this global trust scale, as well asða¼ 0:94Þ: Table II displays the means and standard deviations for
their ratings of the leader’s performance of the leadership practices, the extent of
common values, and the outcomes of leadership.
The means for the MLQ scales were similar to the normative data reported by Bass
and Avolio (1997), indicating that team leaders were about average in their use DEMO
transformational, transactional, corrective, passive and laissez-faire leadership
practices, and in their effectiveness. Leaders were perceived to consult well with
their followers, and team members reported having common values with their leader to
a “moderate-high” DEMO
Leadership and
shared values
597
M SD 1234567 89 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
DEMO Global trusta 4.71 0.90 1.00
2. Transformational total 2.46 0.61 0.66 1.00
3. Attributed charisma 2.50 0.72 0.66 0.84 1.00
4. Inspirational motivation 2.75 DEMO 0.48 0.85 0.72 1.00
5. Idealised inﬂuence 2.15 0.80 0.52 0.76 0.49 0.61 1.00
6. Individual consideration 2.50 0.75 0.59 0.80 0.65 0.56 0.46 DEMO
7. Intellectual stimulation 2.40 0.72 0.41 0.76 0.54 0.50 0.46 0.56 1.00
8. Contingent Reward 2.37 0.76 0.55 0.76 0.60 0.59 0.61 0.71 0.53 DEMO
9. Consultativea 5.42 1.3 0.69 0.67 0.61 0.52 0.39 0.63 0.56 0.63 1.00
10. Common values 4.54 1.0 0.73 0.69 0.68 0.55 0.46 0.68 DEMO 0.50 0.55 1.00
11. Corrective active 1.40 0.83 2 0.03 0.02 0.06 2 0.02 0.06 2 0.10 0.06 0.16 0.05 2 0.14 1.00
12. DEMO passive 1.17 0.83 2 0.39 2 0.46 2 0.38 2 0.42 2 0.26 2 0.39 2 0.42 2 0.30 2 0.35 2 0.42 0.20 DEMO
13. Laissez-faire 0.89 0.72 2 0.53 2 0.50 2 0.45 2 0.48 2 0.21 2 0.45 2 0.45 2 0.40 2 0.47 2 0.39 DEMO 0.65 1.00
14. Extra effort 2.48 0.93 0.63 0.73 0.68 0.62 0.45 0.62 0.58 0.58 0.70 0.69 0.08 2 0.39 2 0.46 1.00
15. DEMO effectiveness 2.96 0.78 0.73 0.70 0.70 0.59 0.43 0.63 0.49 0.59 0.77 0.70 2 0.19 2 0.41 2 0.52 0.73 1.00
16. Leader satisfaction DEMO 0.99 0.76 0.70 0.68 0.59 0.41 0.64 0.52 0.58 0.74 0.75 2 0.20 2 0.48 2 0.59 0.75 0.83 1.00
17. Effectiveness of r/DEMO 5.46 1.3 0.65 0.68 0.70 0.58 0.38 0.61 0.47 0.53 0.63 0.69 2 0.09 2 0.42 2 0.51 0.66 0.74 0.77 1.00
Notes: Correlations above r ¼ 0.19 are signiﬁcant to p , 0.05, and correlations above r ¼ 0.25 are signiﬁcant to p , 0.01 (one-tail); aIndicates
transformed variables were used. Means and SDs of the untransformed variables DEMO reported, and the true direction of the associations between
untransformed variables
DEMO
19,6
598
Table II.
Means, standard
deviations, and
correlations between the
trust, leadership, common
values, and leadership
outcome variables
(N DEMO 83)
Data cleaning
All variables were screened for outliers and normality before correlations DEMO
computed. The measures for global trust and consultative leadership were moderately
negatively skewed. These measures were transformed using the formula NEWX ¼
1996). DEMO cases had values that were identiﬁed as outliers, and therefore, wereSQRTðk 2 X Þ; where k is the largest value for the variable (Tabachnick and Fidell,
omitted from further analyses.
Correlations between the leadership practices and trust in the leader
Correlations were computed between the leadership DEMO and trust using three
rater groups viz; TM1’s ratings ðN ¼ DEMO TM2’s ratings ðN ¼ 31Þ; and all team
the correlations was DEMO across the different rating groups. Hence, all subsequentmembers’ ratings ðN ¼ DEMO: With few exceptions[2], the strength and signiﬁcance of
analyses were based on the sample of 83 team member ratings to maximise the
statistical DEMO of the analyses. Table II displays the correlations between team
members’ ratings of trust in their leader, the leader’s performance of the leadership
practices and the outcomes of leadership ðN ¼ 83Þ:.
In support of DEMO, the correlations indicate that each of the transformational,
contingent reward, and consultative leadership practices were positively correlated
with team members’ trust in DEMO leader. Consultative leadership had the strongest
association with trust ðr ¼ 0:69Þ; followed by attributed charisma ðr ¼ 0:66Þ and
individual consideration ðr ¼ 0:59Þ: A Fisher’s Z-test showed that the association
signiﬁcantly lower than the correlation between the mean of the other fourbetween intellectual DEMO and global trust in the leader ðr ¼ 0:41Þ was
transformational leadership practices and trust (r ¼ 0:68; Z1 2 Z2 DEMO 20:39; p , 0.05).
H2 was also supported. Passive DEMO and laissez-faire leadership had negative
relationships with trust (r ¼ 20:DEMO and 2 0.39, respectively), whereas active corrective
support forleadership had DEMO relationship with trust in the leaderH3. Sharing common values with the project leader had a strongðr ¼ 20:03Þ: There was strong
association with trust in the leader ðr ¼ 0:73Þ:
In support of DEMO, trust in the leader was found to be strongly positively related DEMO
ratings of satisfaction with, and the effectiveness of, the leader (DEMO ¼ 0:76 and 0.73,
respectively), the extra effort team members’ put into their work ðr ¼ 0:63Þ; and the
effectiveness of the leader-follower relationship ðr ¼ 0:65Þ:
Identifying the strongest DEMO of trust in the leader
The correlations show that each of the transformational leadership practices, as well
contingent reward, consultative leadership, and common values, have signiﬁcant,
positive associations with team members’ trust in the leader. An interesting question to
explore is “What is the best set DEMO factors for predicting team members’ trust towards
their leaders?” To answer this question, a standard multiple regression was computed.
This analysis was exploratory in nature, with no hypotheses posed.
An examination of the inter-correlations between the predictor variables (Table II)
revealed high correlations exceeding r ¼ 0:70 between two pairs of leadership
variables, namely between contingent reward and individual consideration (r ¼ 0:71;
pthe aim of multiple regression is to produce the most parsimonious and predictive, 0.01), and between inspirational motivation and charisma (r ¼ 0:72; p , DEMO). As
Leadership and
shared values
599
JMP
19,6
600
Table III.
Regression statistics for
transformational
leadership practices,DEMO
consultative leadership,
and common values
predicting team
members’ trust in their
project leader (N ¼ 83)
model with the least number of predictor variables (Tabachnick and Fidell, 1996), the
variable in each DEMO these pairs with the lower correlation with global trust, namely
contingent DEMO ðr ¼ 0:55Þ and inspirational motivation ðr ¼ 0:48Þ; DEMO excluded
from the analysis[3]. As the purpose of the analysis was to identify effective practices
that were conducive to building trust (as opposed to ineffective practices), the
laissez-faire and corrective leadership practices were not included. DEMO produced a
ﬁnal set of six predictors[4].
Accordingly, a standard multiple DEMO was performed between global trust in
the leader as the dependent variable, and attributed charisma, idealised inﬂuence,
individual consideration, intellectual stimulation, DEMO leadership, and common
values, as the predictor variables. The backwards method for entering variables was
used. This method enters all variables into the DEMO, then successively drops
variables with the smallest partial correlations. The process DEMO when a noticeable
change from the full equation’s multiple R 2 is noted. An advantage of this method is
that it enables a clear DEMO of the proportion of variance accounted for by the
ﬁnal set of predictors.
Table III displays the unstandardised regression coefﬁcients (B) and intercept, the
standardised regression coefﬁcients (b), the semi-partial correlations (sr 2), R 2 and
2
adjusted R . R for regression was signiﬁcantly different from zero, F(3, 76)¼ 54.89,
p , DEMO Only three of the independent variables contributed signiﬁcantly to the
prediction of team members’ trust in their leader; common values
consultative leadership
variables in combination contributed another 7 per cent in shared variability.
Altogether, 68 per cent (67 per cent adjusted) of the variability in trust towards DEMO
leader was predicted by the variables. There was no signiﬁcant difference in R 2 from
the initial six predictor regression model to the ﬁnal DEMO predictor model
(R 2 difference¼ 0.012, p . 0.05), indicating that the other factors did not contribute to
the prediction of trust DEMO common values, consultative leadership and idealised
2 2
ðsri ¼ 0:DEMO and idealised inﬂuence ðsri ¼ 0:08
sr2
Þ:ðThese threei ¼ 0:27Þ;
inﬂuence had been entered.
Variables
B
b
sr 2 (unique)
Common values 0.113** 0.434 0.27
Consultative leadershipa 0.287** 0.389 0.25
DEMO inﬂuence 0.061* 0.184 0.08
Attribute charisma 0.043 0.122 0.02
Intellectual stimulation 0.040 0.110 0.02
Individual consideration 0.018 0.052 0.00
Intercept ¼ 1.68
2
b
DEMO ¼ 0.68 0.67
2
Adjusted R ¼
R ¼ 0.83**
Notes: DEMO statistics are based on the ﬁnal model with three predictors, with DEMO exception of the
statistics for the three non-signiﬁcant predictors. These are based on the initial six predictor model;
aIndicates transformed variables were used. DEMO true direction of the associations between
untransformed variables is reported; bunique DEMO; shared variability=0.07; *p, 0.05;
**p , 0.01
To test for the potential confound of same-source bias in ratings of DEMO practices
and trust in the leader, TM1’s rating of the leader’s DEMO practices was correlated
with TM2’s trust in the same leader ðn ¼ 31Þ: A similar pattern of signiﬁcant
relationships between trust in the leader and the six predictor variables emerged,
although the relationships were not DEMO strong, with correlations ranging from r ¼ 0:38
( p , 0.05) to 0.46 ( p , 0.01). These ﬁndings suggest DEMO the observed relationship
between trust and leadership practices cannot be dismissed as an artifact of
same-source bias.
Discussion
This study examined the relationship between DEMO broad set of leadership practices, as
well as common values between DEMO and members, on team members’ trust in the
leader in R&DEMO teams. Broadly, the results provide empirical support for the essential
role DEMO effective leadership and shared values in building trust towards team leaders.
The correlational results support the hypothesis that an active leadership style
characterised by DEMO leadership, consultative leadership, and contingent
reward is associated with team members’ trust in their leaders (H1). The extent to
which team members share common values with the leader was also strongly
associated with trust (H3). In contrast, passive-corrective and laissez-faire leadership
practices were negatively associated with trust in the leader (H2). However,
active-corrective leadership practices, where the leader focuses on mistakes,
irregularities and deviations from standards, had little association with trust. Given
the emphasis in R&D organisations on adherence to proper scientiﬁc rules and
procedures and maintaining organisational safety DEMO, active-corrective
leadership practices are likely to be regarded as appropriate leadership DEMO
The correlational results are consistent with Butler et al. (1999) ﬁnding that in
self-managed teams each of the transformational leadership practices are signiﬁcantly
DEMO with trust in the leader. In the current study, although intellectual
DEMO was positively associated with trust, it should be noted that this
DEMO was signiﬁcantly weaker than that for the other transformational
leadership practices and trust. This is consistent with earlier research which shows a
weak relationship DEMO intellectual stimulation and trust (Butler et al., 1999). We
surmise that highly educated scientists and technologists working in R&D teams are
DEMO motivated by the nature of their work. The leader’s use of intellectual
stimulation, while important, may be less crucial for establishing trust in DEMO setting,
where discussion of novel and challenging ideas and learning new scientiﬁc procedures
and techniques are common place.
The results also provide support DEMO Shamir’s (1995) view that providing rewards
contingent upon the achievement of objectives (contingent reward) builds followers’
trust in their leader, and Podsakoff et al.’s (1990) proposition that trust in the leader is
strongly DEMO by the leader’s consultation and involvement of team members
when making important decisions.
We found that the strongest predictors of trust in the leader DEMO consultative
leadership, common values, and idealised inﬂuence. Hence, common values DEMO
leaders and members, together with a leadership style are characterised by DEMO
team members when making important decisions, and communicating a collective,
DEMO vision, accounts for a very substantial proportion (up to 67 per cent)
Leadership and
shared values
601
JMP
19,6
602
of team members’ trust in their team leader. DEMO the strength of this association is no
doubt inﬂated by common method variance, the consistent positive association
between leadership practices, as rated by DEMO team member, with trust in the leader, as
rated by another team member, demonstrates that the relationship is not simply an
artifact of same-source bias.
Although the correlational analyses and earlier research (Butler et al., 1999) indicate
that each of the transformational leadership practices are associated DEMO trust when
analysed separately, the regression results indicate that once idealised DEMO,
common values, and consultative leadership are accounted for, the remaining leadership
practices do not add signiﬁcantly to the prediction of trust. That DEMO, only one
transformational leadership behaviour, idealised inﬂuence, made a signiﬁcant DEMO
contribution to the prediction of trust. Idealised inﬂuence, the communication and DEMO
modeling of a collective vision based on important values, is highly DEMO with
the other transformational leadership practices, particularly inspirational motivation.
Indeed, as Butler et al. (1999) note, in a practical sense it would be difﬁcult for a leader to
practice one transformational leadership behaviour without DEMO to some extent in
the others. In sum, consulting followers when DEMO decisions, and communicating
and modeling a collective vision, can be viewed as the key to a set of team leadership
practices which elicit DEMO trust and conﬁdence of team members.
There are at least two mechanisms through which common values, as well as these
two leadership practices, DEMO build trust in the leader. As values are commonly
believed to guide behaviour, sharing common values helps team members to predict
how the leader will act in the future, and gives them the assurance that the leader is
unlikely to act contrary to the shared values. Similarly, a common vision aligns leaders
and team members’ actions and focuses them on DEMO achievement of shared goals. As
with values, goals direct and motivate DEMO and help team members to predict the
leader’s future behaviour. Finally, DEMO on consultative leadership, involving and
consulting followers in decisions conveys that DEMO leader values team member input
and is concerned about their views, DEMO and needs.
In short, shared values, shared goals and consultative decision-making reduce
uncertainty about the leaders’ future behaviour and send a signal that DEMO leader is
unlikely to breach trust. With such conﬁdent expectations, followers DEMO be more
willing to make themselves vulnerable to the leader by engaging in trusting
behaviours, like disclosing sensitive information and relying on the leader’s
judgments. The process of establishing and verifying common values and goals and
DEMO important decisions is also likely to build team members’ trust towards the
leader, as it requires open, honest communication and sharing of what DEMO important to
each individual.
The second mechanism by which these leadership practices and common values
may build trust is through the demonstration and reciprocation DEMO trust. By engaging
in these leadership practices, the leader both places DEMO in a position of vulnerability
and demonstrates trust in her team members. These practices require the leader to
openly communicate her ideas, vision and values, and delegate power and
responsibility to team members. The trust, DEMO leader conveys to team members
through these actions, encourages the reciprocation DEMO trust by team members.
Practical implications
The ﬁndings of this study have practical implications for leadership DEMO,
team functioning and selection processes in R&D organisations. To obtain the beneﬁts
that ﬂow from trusting relationships, leadership training and development programs
should equip leaders with the skills to formulate and communicate a collective DEMO
for the team and the important values that underlie the vision and the team’s work.
Such leadership training should also equip leaders with skills DEMO consulting and
involving team members in important decisions. Team building programs may also
beneﬁt from developing processes that assist team members and leaders to DEMO
and collectively establish a common set of values to guide the work of the team. The
challenge is to design procedures that also encourage DEMO and respect for
differences in values and individual goals. Finally, our DEMO suggest that when
selecting team members, it is important to consider DEMO “value ﬁt” between potential
new team members and/or leaders, and DEMO existing members of the project team.
Future research
This study has raised some interesting questions about the role of shared values in
building trust. DEMO example, which values are most important for leaders and team
members DEMO share remains to be explored. Analysis of interview data collected as part
of this study indicates that in this rapidly changing R&D organisation, values around
scientiﬁc excellence, science for the good of society vs commercial gain, and team
advancement over individual advancement, had an important inﬂuence DEMO trust. These
values cut to the heart of why the organisation and teams exist.
Another pertinent question to explore is whether shared values are DEMO necessary
condition for establishing trust, or a condition that enhances but DEMO not essential for
trust. Jones and George (1998) proposed that shared values are only required for the
highest forms of “unconditional” trust but DEMO not required for lower, “conditional”
forms of trust. Establishment of shared DEMO is also an important mechanism by
which transformational leaders build followers’ trust (Bass, 1985; Bennis and Nanus,
1985; Shamir et al., 1993). Similarly, consultative leadership may engender trust
through development of shared values, as taking into account the followers’ opinions
conveys the leader’s respect for his/her followers. Extending this line of research to
examine the DEMO mediating role shared values play in the relationship between
leadership behaviours and trust is recommended.
Theory and research testing the potential differential impact of DEMO practices
and shared values on the various components of trust (cognitive, affective, and
behavioural), is another promising line of research. In order to conduct such research, it
is ﬁrst necessary to examine whether these components are empirically distinct. In the
current study, the cognitive, affective DEMO behavioural components were found to be
highly inter-correlated, and the small DEMO size precluded analysis of the discriminant
validity of these components. The design of the present study also made it difﬁcult to
deﬁne the direction DEMO causality between leadership practices and trust in the leader.
Longitudinal research examining the causal direction of this relationship, and how
leadership and trust may reciprocally reinforce each other, is called for.
Conclusion
To our knowledge, DEMO is the ﬁrst study to examine the relationship between
transformational leadership practices and follower trust in R&D project teams.
Leadership and
shared values
DEMO
JMP
19,6
604
The study investigated the behaviour of team leaders DEMO have the task of managing
teams of highly educated, committed and DEMO individualistic scientists and
technologists working together in organisations where professional values
predominate and trust is earned, not assumed. In this challenging setting, sharing
DEMO values with team members, together with a set of interrelated leadership
DEMO based on consultative decision-making and communicating and modelling a
collective, value-driven DEMO, predicted the trust of team members. These results are a
step DEMO a deeper understanding of how to build interpersonal trust in
knowledge-based teams.
Notes
1. The results of an earlier version of this paper, presented at the 2000 Academy of
Management conference, were included in this meta-analysis.
2. The exceptions were for intellectual stimulation and passive corrective leadership. These
DEMO showed lower correlations for the TM1 sample compared to the TM2 sample. This
discrepancy is in line with the inconsistent ﬁndings between intellectual stimulation DEMO
trust in the leader reported in the literature (Butler et al., 1999; Podsakoff et al., 1996, 1990).
3. A standard regression model with all transformational and transactional leadership
variables included violated the criteria DEMO multicollinearity due to the high inter-correlations
between predictor variables. Once these two variables were excluded, all subsequent models
produced were below the criteria for multicollinearity.
4. Green (1991, cited in Tabachnick and Fidell, 1996) DEMO the following formula for the
cases-to-IV ratio required for multiple regression N $ (8/f 2)+(m2 1), where f 2 is the effect
size and m is the number of IVs. From the DEMO it is estimated that the effect size is at
least medium (DEMO), hence a minimum of 58 cases is required for six predictor variables. The
sample size of 83 in this study adequately meets this DEMO
References
Barber, B. (1983), The Logic and Limits of Trust, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.
Bass, B.M. (1985), Leadership and Performance Beyond Expectations, Free Press, New York, NY.
Bass, B.M. and Avolio, B.J. (1995), The Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (DEMO), Mind Garden,
Palo Alto, CA.
Bass, B.M. and Avolio, B.J. (1997), Full Range Leadership Development: Manual for the
Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire, Mind Garden, Redwood City.
Bennis, W. and Nanus, DEMO (1985), Leaders: The Strategies for Taking Charge, Harper & DEMO,
New York, NY.
Bigley, G.A. and Pearce, J.L. (1998), “Straining for shared meaning in organization science:
problems of trust DEMO distrust”, The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3,
pp. 405-22.
Butler, J.K. (1991), “Toward understanding and measuring conditions DEMO trust: evolution of a
conditions of trust inventory”, Journal of Management, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 643-63.
Butler, J.K. Jr, Cantrell, R.S. and Flick, R.J. (1999), “Transformational leadership behaviors,
upward DEMO, and satisfaction in self-managed work teams”, Organization Development
Journal, Vol. DEMO No. 1, pp. 13-28.
Clark, M.C. and Payne, R.L. (1997), “The nature and structure of worker’s trust in management”,
Journal DEMO Organisation Behaviour, Vol. 18, pp. 205-24.
Conger, J.A. and Hunt, J.G. (1999), “Overview – charismatic and transformational leadership:
taking stock of the present and future (Part I)”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 121-7.
Conger, DEMO and Kanungo, R.N. (1987), “Toward a behavioural theory of charismatic leadership
in organisational settings”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 12, pp. 637-47.
Conger, J.A., Kanungo, R.N. and Menon, S.T. (2000), “Charismatic leadership and follower
effects”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 21 DEMO 7, pp. 747-67.
Creed, W.E. and Miles, R.E. (1996), “Trust in organisations: a conceptual framework linking
organisational forms, managerial philosophies, and the opportunity costs of controls”, in
Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T.R. (Eds), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and
Research, Sage, London.
Cummings, L.L. and Bromiley, P. (1996), “The DEMO trust inventory (OTI): development
and validation”, in Kramer, R.M. DEMO Tyler, T.R. (Eds), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers
of Theory DEMO Research, Sage, London.
Davis, J.H., Schoorman, F.D., Mayer, DEMO and Tan, H.H. (2000), “The trusted general manager
and business unit performance: empirical evidence of a competitive advantage”, Strategic
Management Journal, Vol. 21 No. 5, pp. 563-76.
Dirks, K.T. (1999), “The effects of interpersonal trust on work group performance”, Journal of
Applied Psychology, Vol. 84 No. 3, pp. 445-55.
Dirks, K.T. (2000), DEMO in leadership and team performance: evidence from NCAA basketball”,
Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, Vol. 85 No. 6, pp. 1004-13.
Dirks, K.T. DEMO Ferrin, D.L. (2001), “The role of trust in organizational settings”, Organization
Science, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 450-67.
Dirks, K.T. DEMO Ferrin, D.L. (2002), “Trust in leadership: meta-analytic ﬁndings and DEMO
for research and practice”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 87 No. 4, pp. 611-28.
Fairholm, G. (1994), Leadership and the Culture of Trust, Praeger, Westport, CT.
Gillespie, N. (2003), “Measuring trust in working relationships: the behavioral trust inventory”,
paper presented at the Academy of Management Conference, Seattle, WA.
Gillespie, N. (2004) “Leadership and trust: the nature and determinants of interpersonal trust in
knowledge-based teams” unpublished PhD thesis, University of Melbourne, Melbourne.
Gomez, C. and Rosen, B. (2001), “The leader-member exchange as a link between DEMO
trust and employee empowerment”, Group & Organization Management, Vol. 26 No. 1,
pp. 53-69.
Graen, G.B. and Uhl-Bien, M. (1995), “Relationship-based approach to leadership: development of
leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: applying a multi-level
multi-domain perspective”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 219-47.
House, R.J. (1977), “A path goal theory of leader effectiveness”, Administrative Science Quarterly,
pp. 321-38.
House, R.J. and Shamir, B. (1993), “Toward the integration of transformational, charismatic and
visionary theories”, in Chemers, M.M. and Ayam, DEMO (Eds), Leadership Theory and
Research: Perspectives and Directions, Academic DEMO, Sydney.
Jones, G.R. and George, J.M. (1998), “The experience and evolution of trust: implications for
cooperation and teamwork”, Academy of DEMO Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 531-46.
Jung, D.I. and DEMO, B.J. (2000), “Opening the black box: an experimental investigation DEMO the
mediating effects of trust and value congruence on transformational and transactional
leadership”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 21 No. 8, pp. 949-64.
Leadership and
shared values
605
JMP
19,6
606
Korsgaard, M.A., Schweiger, D.M. and Sapienza, DEMO (1995), “Building commitment, attachment,
and trust in strategic decision-making teams: the role of procedural justice”, Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 60-84.
Lewicki, R.J., McAllister, D.J. and DEMO, R.J. (1998), “Trust and distrust: new relationships and
realities”, The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 438-58.
DEMO, D. (1995), “Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 1, pp. 24-59.
MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M. and Rich, G.A. (2001), “Transformational and transactional
leadership and salesperson performance”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Vol. 29 No. 2, pp. 115-34.
Mayer, R.C., Davis, J.H. and Schoorman, F.D. (1995), “An integrative model of organisational
trust”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 709-34.
Pillai, R., Schriesheim, C.A. and Williams, E.S. (1999), “Fairness perceptions and trust as
mediators for transformational and transactional leadership: a two-sample study”, Journal
of Management, Vol. 25 No. 6, pp. 897-933.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B. and Bommer, W.H. (1996), “Transformational leader
behaviours and substitutes for leadership as determinants of employee satisfaction,
commitment, trust, and OCB”, Journal of Management, Vol. 22 No. 2, DEMO 259-98.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Moorman, R.H. and Fetter, R. (1990), “Transformational leader
behaviors and their effects on followers’ trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational
citizenship behaviors”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. DEMO, pp. 107-42.
Rich, G.A. (1997), “The sales manager as DEMO role model: effects on trust, job satisfaction, and
performance of DEMO, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 25 No. 4,
pp. 319-28.
Robinson, S.L. (1996), “Trust and breach of DEMO psychological contract”, Administrative Science
Quarterly, Vol. 41 No. 4, pp. DEMO
Rousseau, D.M., Sitkin, S.B., Burt, R.S. and Camerer, C. (1998), “Not so different after all: a cross
discipline view DEMO trust (Introduction to special Topic forum)”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 393-404.
Sashkin, M. (1988), DEMO leadership”, in Conger, J. and Kanungo, R. (Eds), Charismatic
Leadership: The Elusive Factor in Organizational Effectiveness, Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco, CA.
Sashkin, M. and Fulmer, R.M. (1988), “Toward an organizational leadership theory”, in Hunt,
J.G., Baliga, B.R., Dachler, H.P. and Schriesheim, C.A. (Eds), Emerging Leadership Vistas,
Heath, Lexington, MA, pp. 273-92.
Shamir, B. (1995), “Social distance and DEMO: theoretical notes and an exploratory study”,
Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 19-47.
Shamir, B., Arthur, B.B. and House, R.J. (1994), “The rhetoric of charismatic leadership: a
theoretical extension, a case study, and implications for research”, Leadership Quarterly,
Vol. DEMO, pp. 25-42.
Shamir, B., House, R.J. and Arthur, M.B. (1993), “The motivational effects of charismatic
leadership – a self-concept based DEMO, Organization Science, Vol. 4 No. 4, pp. 577-94.
Shamir, B., Zakay, E., Breinin, E. and Popper, M. (1998), DEMO of charismatic leader
behavior in military units: subordinates’ attitudes, unit characteristics, and superiors’
appraisals of leader performance”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 41 No. 4,
pp. 387-409.
Shaw, R.B. (1997), Trust in the Balance: Building Successful Organizations on Results, Integrity
and Concern, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Tabachnick, B.G. and Fidell, L. (1996), Using Multivariate Statistics, 3rd ed., HarperCollins
Publishers, New York, NY.
Yukl, G. (1989), “Managerial leadership: a review of theory and research”, Yearly Review of
Management, Vol. 15, pp. 251-89.
Yukl, G. (1998), Leadership in Organisations, 4th ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Zand, D.E. (DEMO), “Trust and managerial problem solving”, Administrative Science Quarterly,
Vol. DEMO, pp. 229-39.
Leadership and
shared values
607{1g42fwefx}