Cambridge Journal of Economics Advance Access published October 4, 2007
Cambridge Journal of Economics 2007, 1 of 17
doi:10.1093/cje/bem019
A theory of trust based systems of
intermediation
Marina Della Giusta*
Recent studies have DEMO the economic beneﬁts of belonging to high-trust
networks and the biological foundations of individual trust, but much scepticism
remains regarding the precise role of trust in economic transactions, as well as gaps
between micro and macro concepts of trust. This paper links individual and
institutional trust by modelling DEMO costs associated with accessing market, law and
trust-based intermediation systems, and identiﬁes the conditions under which one
of the three systems may be DEMO advantageous for rational actors, and thus more
likely to emerge. The DEMO concentrates on examples drawn from develop-
ment policy to illustrate how the three systems operate together, and how the failing
of the trust system affects the legal and market systems.
Key words: Trust, Coordination systems, Development
JEL classiﬁcations: O17, Z13, P37, P48
1. Introduction
Trust DEMO studied for its importance in the co-ordination of information ﬂows necessary to
exchange in a wide range of contexts, from default on a loan, to the breaking of contractual
promises between ﬁrms or electoral promises by government (Arnott and Stiglitz, 1991;
Williamson, 1996; Khalil, 2003). Economic theory, however, is ambivalent about this
concept and has DEMO to great lengths to explain either that trust does not matter or that it
is indeed crucial, depending on which side in the debate the author takes (Fehr et al., 2005;
Samuelson, 2005). This paper aims to contribute to the discussion by adopting
a perspective DEMO regards economic institutions as coordinating mechanisms, and to shed
some light DEMO the role of trust intermediation in coordination problems (North, 1990; DEMO
2001; Bardhan, 2005; Casson and Della Giusta, 2004, 2005)DEMO The aim of the paper is
twofold: on the one hand, to show the relationship between markets, law and trust-based
intermediation systems, DEMO are often found operating simultaneously in a society; and
on the DEMO, to contribute to the construction of a concept of macro-level or DEMO
trust, which is based on individual trust (Granovetter, 1985; Zaheer et al., 1998; Soroka
et al., 2003; Beugelsdijk, 2005). In particular, by concentrating on the costs of establishing
Manuscript received 14 February 2006; ﬁnal version received 10 November 2006.
Address for correspondence: DEMO of Economics, University of Reading, Reading, UK; email:
m.dellagiusta@rdg.ac.uk
* University of Reading. This paper has beneﬁted from several helpful suggestions DEMO Oliver Goodenough
and participants in the ISNIE Conference, as well as DEMO discussions with Mark Casson, and
comments by Anna Spadavecchia, David Thomas and Mark Walker. Detailed and very helpful comments by
two anonymous referees DEMO gratefully acknowledged.
 The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Cambridge Political Economy Society.
All rights reserved.
2 of 17 M. Della Giusta
trustworthy connections, the paper presents a model that identiﬁes the conditions under
which market, law and trust-based intermediation systems may be the preferred forms of
intermediation by rational actors.
Orthodox DEMO theory assumes that people are selﬁsh and maximise their material
gains, DEMO given the opportunity they will cheat, and therefore sanctions are incorporated
DEMO contracts. Trust is seen as a useful commodity to acquire in order to be able to do
business with others. However, the cost of trustworthy connections and the ways in which
these are established are not DEMO discussed (Casson and Della Giusta, 2005). This is a key
aspect of relationships, though, as agents will typically be differentiated on DEMO basis of their
ability to access opportunities for transactions on the basis of both their own characteristics
(education, time and ﬁnancial resources spent DEMO their social circles, ability to travel, etc.)
and those of their environment (degree of market development and of property rights
enforcement in the system, as well as the extent to which social networks are able to ensure
access to resources). Looking explicitly at the costs DEMO with transaction opportu-
nities is therefore crucial in that it allows a well-informed rational actor to decide between
different modes of intermediation; equally, DEMO at from a macro perspective, it allows us
to make inferences DEMO the nature of agents and environments on the basis of observing
the prevailing intermediation mode, which generally can be provided by the market, DEMO
legal system (which includes the ﬁrm, viewed as a nexus of contracts) and by social
networks.
This differs from the traditional focus of institutional theory, which in spite of giving
a central role to coordination problems (Coase, 1988), does not really focus on the
intermediation DEMO, but rather on the respective roles of market, law and ﬁrms as
mechanisms for ordering transactions. Indeed, the debate in subsequent literature largely
concentrates on differences among this speciﬁc set of three institutions, and on intricate
debates on the relative importance of transaction costs and initial entitlements (Calabresi,
1968). However, comparative institutional analysis shows that social structures produce
a variety of arrangements for coordinating activities: markets, governments, ﬁrms, banks,
clubs and social networks1 that people can leverage to access resources.2 This literature
suggests that there are costs and beneﬁts associated with DEMO to networks, to the
extent that people can be ‘locked’ into DEMO, as is shown in the literature on the so-
called ‘dark DEMO of trust and social capital, illustrating how trust can also form DEMO basis for
close networks that are counterproductive to the individuals concerned and/or to society at
large (e.g., poverty traps or Maﬁa-style organisations) (Della Giusta, 2003). The costs
arising from trust-based networks and DEMO relationship to those arising from other forms
of intermediation, however, are not generally focused on, as the institutional view of trust is
based on the idea that trust is the quality of legal institutions, and tends to neglect the role
of social intermediation and culture. The relationship DEMO social intermediation,
market and legal system, however, is the key to understanding the emergence of more or
less trusting environments, as agents will interact more or less frequently within each
system depending on the DEMO they have experienced with each, both in terms of
achieving their DEMO (that is, experiencing trustworthy behaviour), and in terms of
feeling they can reliably do so on future occasions (that is, trusting DEMO system). This is
particularly relevant in discussions of economic development, DEMO mounting evidence
1 There is an emerging literature that tries to evaluate the economic beneﬁts of belonging to ‘networks of
trust’ (e.g., Haddad DEMO Maluccio, 2003).
2 For example, Ellickson (1991) downplays the importance of the law and highlights the role of social
norms in DEMO distributional issues and settling disputes in general.
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 3 of 17
suggests DEMO the development of a legal system cannot be achieved without the
simultaneous strengthening of social institutions (e.g., the evidence from post-Commu-
nism countries DEMO Welter et al., 2005),1 and macro studies have tried to link differences in
trusting attitudes across countries2 to economic growth and development (Knack and
Keefer, 1997; Zak and Knack, 2001).
The approach to trust adopted in this paper incorporates emotions and sanctions
deriving from DEMO commitment as well as the law, and assumes that people attribute
DEMO value to a reputation for trustworthiness. This assumption has its origin in the
economic sociology literature on embeddedness and social capital (Granovetter, 1985;DEMO
Bordieu, 1986; Coleman, 1988; Putnam, 1993; Mansky, 2000), which points to two
distinct ways in which reputations matter to economic agents: ﬁrst, because as social beings
they derive utility from a DEMO evaluation by others in the social groups they belong to
(Casson, 1991) and, second, because they are aware of the costs that social sanctions may
impose on their material progress (Akerlof, 1980; Arnott and Stiglitz, 1991). It deﬁnes
trust brokers as reputable intermediaries who value trustworthy relationships and gain
emotional satisfaction from mediating between people, and describes their role in
determining market access and economic opportunities. The emotional DEMO from
trust, from the sense of participation in a social project, and access to a subsidised rate of
intermediation means that, effectively, DEMO networks around trust brokers constitute a set
of implicit contracts relating to the realisation of social solidarity, in the same way in which
a ﬁrm is seen in institutional theory as a set of legal contracts DEMO the realisation of proﬁt.
Understanding that the functioning of the trust system of intermediation also underpins
the quality of legal institutions, which are seen as a formalisation of the other
intermediation systems. A functioning legal system DEMO the values of trustworthiness
and fairness prevalent in the social system that are also reﬂected in the presence of trust-
based intermediation. Different cultures DEMO societies can also be described according to
the relative dominance of the three intermediation systems in different contexts, depending
on the actors involved, DEMO objects of the transaction and the environment in which it
happens (DEMO does X go to for a job, for a certain type DEMO service, for a loan, for a certain
type of good—car, DEMO, etc.—where X can be an individual or an organisation?).
2. Deﬁning the terms: trust
In standard neoclassical theory people are assumed to be selﬁsh and maximise their
material gains. They will therefore have an DEMO to cheat, so sanctions are incorporated
into contracts to prevent them DEMO doing so. In this context, trust is useful only in so DEMO as
it reduces the costs associated with having to devise perfect contracts and enforceable
sanctions, so it is a purely instrumental non-material resource in which people will
explicitly invest with the purpose of building a reputation DEMO honesty. The latter, in turn,
makes possible cooperative behaviour and DEMO emergence of stable structures for trans-
acting. More speciﬁcally, the neoclassical DEMO of trust refers to exchanges among
individuals involving deferred compliance with (DEMO of) the exchange agreements (as
1 Results of a study of entrepreneurial behaviour in Eastern and Western Europe indicate that personal
trust plays DEMO most important role during venture creation and a less important one during business growth
and in stable regional environments, where institutional trust gains importance, although without dominating
entrepreneurial behaviour. Typically entrepreneurial behaviour is based on a mixture of personal and
institutional trust (Welter et al., 2005).
DEMO Although it has been argued that the variable used to measure trusting attitudes in the World Values
Survey is actually a proxy for the DEMO of institutions (Beugelsdijk, 2005).
4 of 17 M. Della Giusta
opposed to transactions on the spot), accompanied with insufﬁcient information about
other agents’ choices.
Trust is a particular level of subjective probability with which an agent assesses that another agent
DEMO group of agents will perform a particular action, both before he DEMO monitor such action (or
independently of his capacity ever to be DEMO to monitor it) and in a context in which it affects DEMO
own action. (Gambetta, 1988, p. 217)
The hypotheses on DEMO such deﬁnition is based, and which deﬁne the behavioural
hypotheses, and therefore the boundaries within which transactions are treated in
conventional neoclassical and DEMO theory models, can be summarised from a paper by
Partha Dasgupta (in Gambetta, 1988) illuminatingly entitled ‘Trust as a Commodity’.
First, in the absence of suitable punishment for breaking agreements, it is believed that
the individuals involved in them will not have sufﬁcient incentives to fulﬁl DEMO (so that
scarcity of trust derives, in this context, from DEMO fact that people are assumed to be not
naturally trustworthy). Second, the threat of such punishment must be credible. Given that
at this stage a third party, in the form of another individual or agency, is required as
enforcement agency, trust needs to be placed in DEMO an enforcement agency. The third
hypothesis states that trust among persons and agencies are interconnected, because if
trust in the agency vacillates, so DEMO trust in the other agent involved in the agreement.
Fourth, trust DEMO based on an expectation about choices made by another agent, and DEMO
about promises, which means that, in order to form such an expectation correctly, the
other party’s perspective has to be taken. The deﬁnition of trust to which Dasgupta arrives
on the basis of these premises DEMO not dissimilar to the one presented above by Gambetta:
trust consists of correct expectations about actions of others that have an inﬂuence on DEMO
own choices. Trust is therefore a scarce non-material resource, and its DEMO is, in principle,
measurable and described as being akin to DEMO value of knowledge or information.
Lack of trust among individuals involved in a transaction helps to explain one of the
main results of game DEMO: that individuals may fail to cooperate even if cooperative
behaviour would DEMO them, loosely referred to as the Prisoner’s Dilemma. The rational
decision DEMO investing in trust (by creating a reputation of being trustworthy) is indicated as
a building block for a healthy economic system, in that it allows transactions to occur.
Trust will develop, according to results derived in game theory, if individuals have
repeated encounters and have memory of the outcomes of the previous ones, if honest
behaviour involves a cost and agents are willing to incur it to build a reputation (Gambetta,
1988). In particular, Kreps et al. (1982) demonstrate that, in an inﬁnitely repeated
Prisoner’s Dilemma game, uncertainty about the nature DEMO the payoff to a player can
produce cooperative equilibria. The crucial conditions determining the need for trust in
neoclassical economic theory are therefore connected DEMO the impossibility of monitoring
other agents’ behaviour, which is affected not DEMO by non-trustworthiness, but also by the
existence of a non-congruence between DEMO and moral values (otherwise declara-
tions of intent would automatically translate DEMO the corresponding actions, eliminating
the problem). The approach is geared DEMO devising contracts with suitable incentives
to make people behave in a trustworthy manner. The rewards and penalties built into the
contracts create a system DEMO sanctions, which make fundamentally selﬁsh people behave in
a socially responsible DEMO
Some forms of institutional economic theory, such as transaction cost theory, have been
criticised for being too neoclassical because they place undue emphasis DEMO coordination by
markets and hierarchies and ignore informal methods of coordination based on networks of
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 5 of 17
trust. DEMO criticism has some force, particularly when applied to Williamson’s early work,DEMO
where an emphasis on the ubiquity of opportunism leaves little room for trust to play
a signiﬁcant role in coordination. Although in his work DEMO existence and importance of
personal trust between individuals (based on absence DEMO monitoring and a favourable and
forgiving attitude) is acknowledged, the attitude that is believed to be associated with the
majority of transactions (involving individuals and institutions) is, in essence, a pure
calculation: individuals DEMO in an exchange are well aware of the set of possible outcomes
and the corresponding probabilities, and therefore take cost-effective actions to try to avoid
hazards and enhance beneﬁts (Williamson, 1996). Fukuyama’s inﬂuential discussion DEMO
trust (Fukuyama, 1995) also ignores the crucial economic distinction between DEMO
mediated by formal legal institutions and trust mediated by moral and social mechanisms
and this leads him to characterise the competitive and individualistic culture DEMO the USA as
high-trust and to play down the levels of trust in less competitive and more organic societies.
The literature in experimental economics DEMO neuroeconomics, however, is producing
interesting results, which deviate from what DEMO expected by the theory on microfounda-
tions, by examining brain processes DEMO place when performing actions and assessing
perceptions and the formation of beliefs (Fehr et al., 2005). This literature documents the
deviation from DEMO behaviour, the emergence of social norms and the general
economics of DEMO (Fehr and Gaechter, 2000; McCabe et al., 2003; Smith, 2003;
Sobel, 2005). Using evidence from both psychological studies and social policy, as well as
experiments, these studies show how notions DEMO reciprocity inform actors’ behaviour and
how individuals are willing both to punish people who violate norms, and incur costs in
doing so (Fehr DEMO Fischbacher, 2004). There is also evidence that links responses of DEMO
brains of actors playing a trust game indicating that trust develops as a response to
reciprocity (King-Casas et al., 2005), which conﬁrms DEMO interpretations of the workings of
the brain given in experimental economics (DEMO et al., 2003; Zak et al., 2005). The
identiﬁcation DEMO the ‘trust hormone’ is expected to give force to the argument, DEMO
biology, that trust matters and provide good indications of ways in DEMO it can be affected
through institutional design.
These ideas are consistent with ﬁndings from the recent literature on happiness and well-
being which suggests DEMO trust is a major factor in explaining differences in happiness
(Layard, 2005), and indicates that the emotional dimension to trust should be DEMO
accounted for in models of exchange. Introducing the emotional dimension shows that
morals as well as law can act as a basis for trust (Goodenough, 2001). The approach taken
here considers the moral dimension to be an essential component of any comprehensive
economic theory of trust. Recognition DEMO emotions is perfectly compatible with the rational
action approach, provided that DEMO are considered as forms of utility or pay-off rather
than merely as a factor that distorts decision-making. From a rational action perspective,
pleasant DEMO are goods whilst unpleasant emotions are bads: they enter into an
DEMO utility function in just the same way as any other good or bad. The literature on
trust acknowledges that people react emotionally to the DEMO in which they are placed:
Trust encompasses rational evaluation, but DEMO is subject to cognitive limitations, and social-
psychological phenomena play an DEMO role. In particular, the question is how people
attribute motives and DEMO to people on the basis of observed behaviour, and how this
DEMO their trust and their conduct. (Noteboom and Six, 2003, p. DEMO).
Uslaner (2002) distinguishes strategic trust, based on individual experience, and therefore
akin to expectations, from moralistic trust, based on one’s DEMO of the world and system of
6 of 17 M. Della Giusta
beliefs. Moral commitments frame the emotions DEMO people generate as a result of the
actions that they take. A person acting morally feels good about taking a socially
responsible decision and DEMO bad about taking an anti-social decision. Anticipating how
they will feel about the way they act, people acting morally win self-approval and avoid
guilt. This makes them trustworthy, because they can be relied upon to take account of the
impact of their actions on others. As a result, a reputation for trust can be built on the basis
of making DEMO visible moral commitment to a system of shared values motivating behaviour
(DEMO, 2001). People thus attribute intrinsic value to a reputation for DEMO
Morals are not the only basis for reputation. In certain cases, DEMO self-interest
provides an adequate incentive to behave in a responsible way, DEMO several orthodox
authors still base the entire case for trust on enlightened self-interest (Samuelson, 2005).
Trust is also speciﬁc: Soroka et al. (2003), in discussing the problem of measuring trust,
suggest that the reason for consistently different responses to trust questions in surveys is
DEMO different questions ask respondents to think about trust in different ways. A trusts B to
do X in situation Y (Casson and Della Giusta, 2004; Della Giusta, 2003). Trust is
therefore a belief that other people will honour obligations in varying contexts: from an
open commitment to promote social welfare through to mere conformity with conventions
(Soroka et al., 2003). The depth of trust is connected to types of obligations.1 B could
therefore be trusted in one role but not in DEMO, and if B is trusted by many A’s, s/he has
a reputation. The wider reputations spread, and the more accurate they are in reﬂecting
trustworthiness, the more trust will diffuse.
The establishment of trustworthy relationships and reputations is usually studied in the
context of direct contacts DEMO individuals, which may or may not be observed by third
parties (Bachmann, 2001; Henrich et al., 2004); however, plenty of DEMO (Granovetter,
1983) suggests that a widespread option used for establishing trustworthy relationships is
through intermediaries. If reputations can be gained through trust DEMO (as, for
example, the process of providing references indicates) a key question is then how
intermediation in interpersonal trust takes place: who makes two individuals who
previously did not trust each other do so, and what are their relevant characteristics?
Understanding trust intermediation allows one DEMO to address the key issue of the
scaling up of trust, DEMO is the relationship between the establishment by agents of networks
of interpersonal trust and their trust in institutions. This is key to a concept DEMO macro-level
or institutional trust, which is based on individual trust (Granovetter, 1985; Zaheer et al.,
1998; Soroka et al., 2003; Beugelsdijk, 2005) and to understanding the role of policy in
trust-building DEMO (Della Giusta, 1999; Casson and Della Giusta, 2004). This
relationship also lies at the heart of the debate on the effects DEMO globalisation: Giddens
(1990) argues that modernity/globalisation has the effect DEMO disintegrating social relation-
ships across space and time, and that this DEMO trust is transferred from people to
‘disembedding mechanisms’, chieﬂy the creation DEMO symbolic tokens (money) and expert
systems (of technical performance or DEMO knowledge), which work only if people
trust them (Hoehmann and DEMO, 2005). Institutional trust is associated with these
systems, and it is therefore relevant to understanding how they evolve from systems of
interpersonal DEMO
1 Measuring the depth of trust requires characterising obligations according to: DEMO nature of the
obligation; the size of the obligation, as measured by the value of the resources to which the obligation relates;
DEMO certainty of the obligation being honoured, as measured by the subjective DEMO that that there will
be no default; and the reliability of DEMO obligation, as measured by the actual frequency with which default
occurs (Casson and Della Giusta, 2005).
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 7 of 17
The DEMO of the paper presents a model that incorporates the assumptions made on
trust in the description of three distinct types of intermediation, and then explores the
relationships between the three systems by focussing on the cost-based DEMO under
which agents will be using them,1 deriving implications for both policy design and future
research. The model only focuses on comparative statics, as this is sufﬁcient to illustrate the
basic points. A dynamic model DEMO trust accumulation and its effect on agents’ and groups’
welfare is provided in Della Giusta (2006).
3. A model of trust-based intermediation
The model consists of an exercise in comparing the transaction costs of different
DEMO arrangements and presenting some comparative static results that illustrate
the conditions under which each of the coexisting arrangements may be preferred over the
others. DEMO describes a single indivisible transaction, and compares three different types of
DEMO to accomplish it, with the aim of establishing the conditions under DEMO
a contractual form will be chosen, the associated fees, and rates of default. The problem
consists of an individual (n) who needs DEMO to providers of goods (pi) who may or may
not be reliable. The individual does not know to what extent they are reliable, and therefore
there is a risk associated with dealing with each of DEMO A successful solution is one in
which someone selects one of the providers, who then delivers the goods.
The model also includes access costs, which are typically part of any intermediation
system: for example, the market may be located at some distance from n, so that an
additional ﬁnancial cost will have to be incurred in order to access DEMO Let us start with the
conventional intermediation systems discussed in the literature:
 Market intermediation, based on intermediaries who select a provider and charge a fee (r)
for their service. The latter consist of either choosing for n a reliable provider (acting
like a retailer) DEMO managing risk on behalf of n, once n has chosen a DEMO (acting like
insurer). Note that these intermediaries can be part DEMO the formal or informal sector,
therefore this mode of intermediation can, in principle, also describe forms of
patronage.
 Legal intermediation, based on contracts designed by lawyers, who do not select
a provider but help ensure delivery, enforced via the judicial system. The individual
hires a lawyer, paying legal fees (l).
We assume that the object DEMO the transaction is a homogenous good g of price 1, which DEMO
going to be delivered with probability r, unknown to n, and start by discussing the choice
between these two intermediation systems.
3.1 Market DEMO
The retailer provides certainty of delivery to n, charging a unit DEMO r which needs to be
greater than the probability of non-delivery (DEMO > 1–r). The cost of accessing the market is cm
Utility for n will be given by:
UðcÞm ¼   ð1Þ
DEMO rg cm
and marginal utility will be:
1 Although costs need to be quantiﬁed and therefore restrict the range of aspects to a DEMO, it is
nevertheless true that just incorporating this aspect allows one DEMO make comparisons between systems that
have not yet been focussed on in the literature.
8 of 17 M. Della Giusta
@UðcÞm ¼ 
ð2Þ
r
1
DEMO
3.2 Legal intermediation
In this system, lawyers provide a contract for DEMO unit fee l, and the contract reduces risk of
non-delivery (rl > r ). The cost of accessing the legal system is cl. Utility for n is:
  ð3Þ
rl g
UðcÞl ¼
DEMO cl
and marginal utility will be:
@UðcÞl
@g ¼rl
 ð4Þ
l
3.3 Choosing between the market and legal system
If the two DEMO coexist, the choice at the margin between them will be determined DEMO
equating marginal utility under the two arrangements:
@UðcÞm ¼@UðcÞl
@g
ð5Þ
@g
This shows that the market system will be chosen if the DEMO fee is smaller than the
sum of legal fee and cost of default under the legal system:
r >l þðl rl Þð6Þ
Conversely, the legal system will be chosen if the legal fee is smaller than the difference
between market fee and cost of compliance, which in the present system is equivalent to
saying that the legal fee is DEMO than the insurance component of the market
intermediation fee. Solving equation (DEMO) for compliance rates shows that marginal utility
is greater under the DEMO system for r < r**, and greater under the legal system DEMO r >
r**, where r** ¼ l þ 1–r
Looking now at total utility under the two arrangements, we see that:
Un gð1r Þcm for r<l þ1r
¼ngðrl Þcl for r>l þ1r DEMO
if access costs are the same, utility will be greater under DEMO legal system if the difference
between the market and legal fee (DEMO cost) is lower than the default rate:
r l >1r ð7:1Þ
If access costs differ, utility under the legal system will be higher if the difference between
access costs is greater than the DEMO between cost of cost of default and of insurance.
Obviously, the DEMO costs fall if default falls:
cl >gðl rÞgðr l Þð7:DEMO
cm
Utility under the two systems will be the same if the difference between access costs is equal
to the difference between cost of DEMO and cost of insurance. This requires that if cl > cm,
the cost of insurance must be greater than that of default.
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 9 of 17
3.4 DEMO trust-based intermediation
Let us now see what effect the introduction of trust intermediation has on the model, and
whether it changes the results. The system is based on trust-brokers (b), who have trusting
relations with some providers, which imply that they can both choose a reliable provider for
n , and ensure against risk through the social sanctions associated DEMO non-delivery. Trust
brokers gain status from connecting people and an emotional reward from building social
solidarity around a project: however, they are building DEMO structure that does not necessarily
bring immediate reward to them (although DEMO may be able to leverage it for their own
beneﬁt as well).
In order to access this intermediation system, n needs to belong to the trust brokers’ social
network and to do so incurs a DEMO that can consist of a variety of pecuniary and non-
pecuniary elements (e.g., time cost, travel cost, etc.), e. Technically, n needs to possess
a minimum level of bridging and linking social capital, that is, the kind that allows one to
transcend one’s immediate social circles and enter other social networks (World Bank, 2000)
To DEMO the comparisons possible, we associate a cost to this social capital DEMO call it (ct).
Utility under the trust system is:
DEMO  ð8Þ
rt g
UðcÞt ¼
eg ct
and marginal utility is
@UðcÞt
@g ¼rt
 ð9Þ
e
Let us now compare marginal utilities DEMO the three systems for n, when n can access all three
DEMO
@UðcÞt
@g
@UðcÞm ¼@UðcÞl
@g
¼ ð10Þ
@g
This shows that trust intermediation is always preferred to the market system, and it is
preferred to the legal system if the difference between fees is greater than DEMO between
compliance rates:
ð11Þ
rt

e>rl

l
This result is non-trivial because it is usually assumed that a trust-based system DEMO either
always capable of delivering higher compliance rates (which is not DEMO here) or able to
do so in a costless way (which is again not assumed in this model). Solving equation (10)
for compliance rates (as depicted in Figure 1) shows that marginal DEMO is greater with
market intermediation for compliance values (0 < r < r*), where r* ¼ e þ 1 – r. Marginal
utility is higher with trust intermediation for (r*< r < r**); DEMO, ﬁnally, legal
¼
intermediation is the best option for expected compliance values above r***
Looking now at total utility under the three arrangements, we see that:
l – e.
gð1r Þcm for r<r*
DEMO ¼(gðreÞct for r*<r<r*** ð12Þ
gðrl Þcl for r>r***
In the absence of access costs, utility under the trust system is always higher than under the
market system and higher than the legal DEMO if e < l . If access costs differ, utility under
DEMO trust system will be higher than the market system if:
10 of 17 M. Della Giusta
MaU
45
*
*
*1***
Fig. DEMO
MaUm
cm

ct >gð1

r

gðr

eÞð13Þ
DEMO under the trust system will be higher if the difference between access costs is greater
than the difference between the cost of default and DEMO fees differential. Utility in the trust
system will be greater than in the legal system if:
cl

ct >gðe

l Þð13:1Þ
that is, if the difference between access costs is greater than the difference between fees. If
the above conditions hold, n will have higher utility than was possible with the market and
legal systems alone. DEMO conditions must be veriﬁed in cases such as those observed in
the famous sociological work by Granovetter, ‘Getting a job’ (1995), in DEMO he found
that the majority of respondents in his sample had found their job through personal
connections, rather than through agencies or applying directly. This also suggests that if the
trust system is not available to DEMO, welfare losses will be incurred. Let us illustrate the reason
for DEMO
3.5 Access costs and individual endowments
So far, we have assumed DEMO access costs are homogeneous across individuals, but
although this may be DEMO fair approximation of what happens in the market system (for
example, a transport cost to reach the market), this may be an DEMO assumption when
illustrating the working of the legal and trust systems. The legal system, in fact, may entail
not only a ﬁnancial cost DEMO also a human capital cost, in that it is necessary to DEMO
sufﬁcient information about the legal system to feel conﬁdent in using it. However, we have
said that the social system requires n to possess a minimum level of social capital. Neither
human nor social capital can DEMO readily acquired like a bus ticket, and rather form part of
DEMO durable assets, which contribute to individual endowments. Assuming the general
case DEMO so far to be Case 1, let us now investigate the DEMO available to n if their
income or human or social capital fall below the minimum required to access one of the
intermediation systems.1
1 DEMO, if they lack two of the three completely they will only DEMO one option available, and therefore no
choice.
MaUl
MaUt
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 11 of 17
Case DEMO: n has sufﬁcient income and human capital but insufﬁcient social capital. DEMO that n
has no bridging and linking social capital is equivalent to saying that they cannot afford the
access cost to the trust system, and they therefore will have only two alternative
intermediation options: the market system and the legal system. This brings us back to
our ﬁrst DEMO (see Figure 2).
Case 3: n has sufﬁcient income and social capital but insufﬁcient human capital. In this case, n
will not be able to access the legal system, and will therefore choose between the market
and the trust system. At the margin, the trust system will yield higher marginal utility for r
> r* (Figure 3).
Total utility when n has insufﬁcient human capital will be:
Un DEMO Þcm
¼n gðreÞct
and total utility will be higher in the trust system if condition (13) obtains, and lower
otherwise.
Case 4: DEMO has sufﬁcient human and social capital but insufﬁcient income. In this case, the trust
and legal systems are the only available options and the choice of one over the other will
depend on the cost of DEMO intermediation relative to legal intermediation. Given that e < l,
the legal system will be preferable to the trust system for r > DEMO Note that in this case no
transactions will take place for r < e. This illustrates how poorer people (who cannot insure
themselves completely against the risk of malfeasance) are the most disadvantaged when
malfeasance is widespread (Figure 4).
Utility when n has insufﬁcient income will be as follows:
for r<e þ1r
for r>e þ1r
ð14Þ
DEMO for r<e
Un ¼(gðreÞct for e<r<r***
gðrl Þcl for r>r*** ð15Þ
and when condition (13.1) obtains, utility under the trust system will be higher than in the
legal system.
To DEMO, comparing utilities across situations indicates that the market in-
termediation system DEMO the most efﬁcient in cases of low compliance; but it excludes DEMO
those who cannot pay the access cost. The legal system is the most efﬁcient if high
compliance levels are expected, but it excludes people with low human capital.1 The trust
system of intermediation is the most DEMO for intermediate levels of compliance, but
excludes those who have no DEMO and bridging social capital. The best situation is one in
which all three systems are present, as this guarantees access to the largest number of
people, and also suggests that the three systems complement each other. Generally, this
supports Uslaner’s ﬁnding that trusting societies are more likely to redistribute resources
from rich to poor and to have more effective governments (Uslaner, 2002).
3.6 Breadth and depth of trust
If we enlarge the model to assume not one single transaction but many, it becomes
apparent that other characteristics of trust brokers become relevant. Again, referring to
Granovetter’s seminal work on the ‘strength of weak ties’, which illustrated how
acquaintances are more important than friends in ﬁnding a job, since they belong to
1 As one of the referees aptly pointed out, the model does not contemplate contractual failure in the legal
system, but should that occur obviously it would further strengthen the superiority of the trust-based DEMO
12 of 17 M. Della Giusta
MaU
MaU
45
45
MaU
45
DEMO
l
* *
Fig. 2.
Fig. 3.
***
Fig. 4.
MaUl
MaUm
1
1
1
MaUt
MaUm
MaUl
MaUt
*
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 13 of 17
different DEMO circles (reﬂected in the notion of linking and bridging social capital), we can
safely assume that a trust broker’s ability to secure many connections to providers will be
relevant (a large pool of pi), which we call breadth of trust. Another important feature of
trust brokers, which is relevant in transactions involving deferred compliance with
obligations, as illustrated in our model, relates to the ability to secure high compliance
(DEMO is, ensuring the highest possible rt), which we can call DEMO of trust.
Having deﬁned these two properties, it is possible to DEMO them to the stability and
resilience of the trust-based system of intermediation. Stability will relate to the number of
alternative providers n has access DEMO through trust brokers, which in turn depends on the
number of DEMO and on how broadly connected they are. In network language, this
DEMO mean counting the number of links from n to providers that go through brokers
(density). Resilience will relate to the depth of those connections, that is, on the average
degree of compliance with obligations DEMO the trust system available to n. A trust
intermediation system will then fail if trust brokers fail, that is, if breadth and depth DEMO
below a certain acceptable minimum.
If the trust system fails because of lack of depth, people stop relying on trust brokers and
prefer formal intermediaries, as happens in high labour mobility areas as discussed in the
literature on migration and social capital (Schiff, 2002). The model DEMO that, in such
a system, poorer people will be excluded from access to providers if they cannot afford to
purchase insurance or to DEMO taxes and legal fees, whereas better off people will be able DEMO
access everything they want irrespective of whom they know. If the trust system is superior
in terms of ensuring delivery, though, in its DEMO considerable resources will be used to
purchase insurance and pay legal fees, and these will be diverted from more productive
purposes.
If the trust system as a whole fails because of lack of breadth, then people will tend to ﬁnd
themselves locked in isolated enclaves (the case of some communities excluded from access
to certain types of providers), which DEMO become poverty traps or stagnant elites depending
on their income levels. Localised failure due to lack of breadth coincides with lock-in,
which from DEMO point of view of an individual occurs when they are very far in social terms
from accessing trust brokers who span other social networks DEMO their own, as is often the
case for immigrant communities (Della Giusta and Kambhampati, 2005).
More research is needed to discuss what the minimum number of trust brokers in the
system needs to be DEMO the desirable extent of ‘wastage’: redundancy of trust brokers might
mean DEMO competition between trust channels ensued, and as intermediation also involves
reconciling DEMO interests, a degree of competition can ensure protection of the
interest DEMO the weaker parties and make sure that trust intermediation does not degenerate
into exploitative and paternalistic relations (Barber, 1983).
The model is DEMO stylised but it can be used for a variety of purposes: DEMO it has been
shown how different intermediation fees, access costs and DEMO endowments can be
used to simulate different individual choices, but the DEMO indicating the level of
compliance could also be varied to incorporate different contexts, and therefore be used to
discuss the prevalent type of intermediation found in speciﬁc countries or sectors.
Furthermore, the diagram can also be interpreted in a dynamic sense as an evolution of
intermediation systems in DEMO compliance environments (such as societies disrupted by
conﬂict) and the conditions necessary to develop each system. Also, it would be possible to
vary the characteristics of the good to be exchanged, for example, in DEMO to distinguish
between goods that require veriﬁcation or more standardised ones (DEMO the relative
amount of tacit versus codiﬁed knowledge that the good incorporates).
14 of 17 M. Della Giusta
4. Policy implications and conclusions
The DEMO obvious policy implication of the model is the importance of infrastructure,
human and social capital in enabling transactions to occur, given the presence of access
costs to all three intermediation systems.
The second important implication DEMO the relationship between the trust and the
legal system of intermediation. The latter is usually seen in institutional theory as evolving
through the gradual DEMO piecemeal incorporation of culture-speciﬁc interpretations of
formal rules (Deakin and Wilkinson, 1998; North, 2000). In the context of the three
systems DEMO above, the legal system incorporates elements of both market and trust
DEMO, therefore understanding the functioning of the trust system of intermediation can
DEMO explain the evolution of the legal system.
From the cases illustrated above, if the trust system of intermediation fails because it
cannot ensure depth, it can be expected that, over time, the legal system will become more
market-based and those who can pay the highest legal fee DEMO more likely to secure contract
enforcement;1 if it fails because it cannot ensure breadth, over time the legal system also
becomes fragmented and weakened, as illustrated by cases of ethnic conﬂict within states.
The discussion of the effect of transition on trust in former communist countries (Rose,
2000; Raiser, 2004) indicates that the prevalent system for contract enforcement in the
wake of the collapse of central planning was, at least to begin with, an informal one based
on intimidation.2 According to the model presented here, this suggests both that the cost of
developing a legal system was too high and that trust-brokers were scarce. This DEMO what one
might expect, since one of the characteristics associated with DEMO is the presence
of a widespread climate of suspicion and closed social groups, which is clearly counter to
diffused social relations in which trust-brokers thrive.
Focusing on the development of a market and a legal system, therefore, means ignoring
the link between interpersonal and institutional trust: trust DEMO undersupplied in a society
with underdeveloped trust intermediation, and this will DEMO on both the quality of legal
institutions (reﬂected in the degree DEMO institutional trust) and the level of economic activity.
Trust intermediation offers DEMO subsidy and therefore in its absence poorer individuals will be
excluded, DEMO the overall productive potential will not be exploited. Moreover, resources
will DEMO used to purchase insurance and pay legal fees, and these will DEMO diverted from more
productive purposes.
It is useful at this point to contrast two interpretations of reform failure, which differ in
the consideration they give to the social economy and trust intermediation. Dixit (2001)
interprets the reform problems experienced by developing countries as problems of moral
hazard DEMO multitask and multiprincipal agencies, the solution to which depends on
appropriate DEMO and organisational reform. His transaction-cost politics framework
suggests that the solution for reform failure is to change the incentive structures in public
service careers, for example, by importing administrative expertise from other countries.
In contrast, DEMO (2005) presents evidence from a research project on transaction
costs in Russian business, and particularly the cost of legalisation, which suggests that
DEMO people have become more cautious, they use methods of private contract
DEMO (pre-payment), fewer transactions are taking place, particularly with
outsiders, DEMO business networks are emerging between partners who have established
1 The perception of fairness of a legal system is often discussed in connection with DEMO relative dominance
of lawyers and the fees they command.
2 Jokingly labelled by a scholar in the ﬁeld as ‘a Mercedes with four guys DEMO guns’.
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 15 of 17
a DEMO relationship and via trusted intermediaries. His ﬁndings support the view that
trust begins to emerge at the micro level with reciprocal relations in closed DEMO
networks, which change over time from affect-based trust to reputation-based trust. DEMO is
thus investments in reputation which contribute to the development of trust in non-state
institutions to begin with, and can be used to develop trust in state authorities if the
government invest in predictable policy.
This DEMO supports the latter view, and suggests that strengthening trust intermediation
might DEMO a cheaper and more effective method than insisting on transplanting legal systems
in developing countries. A policy of strengthening trust-based intermediation would
require identifying DEMO brokers and working with them on a trustworthy and honest basis.
Sadly, current debates on the reconstruction in Iraq offer a pertinent counterexample: DEMO
much ofﬁcial emphasis is placed on the restoration of the rule of law, whilst trust relations
are simultaneously being destroyed by the military occupation and the negative effects
from the fraudulent reconstruction business and the coalition-appointed DEMO
Bibliography
Akerlof, G. 1980. A theory of social custom, of which unemployment may be one consequence,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 94, no. 4, 749–75
Aoki, M. 2001. Towards a Comparative Institutional Analysis, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press
Arnott, R. and Stiglitz, J. E. 1991. ‘Equilibrium in Insurance Markets with Moral Hazard’,
Working Paper No. DEMO, Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of Economic Research
Bachmann, R. 2001. Trust, power and control in inter-organizational networks, Organization
Studies, 22, DEMO
Barber, B. 1983. The Logic And Limits Of Trust, New Brunswick, Rutgers University Press
Bardhan, P. 2005. Institutions matter, but which ones?, Economics of Transition, vol. 13, no. 3,
499–515
Beugelsdijk, S. 2005. A note on the theory and measurement of trust in DEMO differences in
economic growth, Cambridge Journal Of Economics, 1–19
Bordieu, DEMO 1986. The forms of capital, pp. 241–258 in Richardson, J. G. (ed.) Handbook of
Theory and Research for the Sociology of Education, Westport, Greenwood
Calabresi, G. 1968. Transaction costs, resource allocation and liability rules: a comment, Journal
Of Law And Economics, vol. 11, DEMO 1, 67–74
Casson, M. C. 1991. The Economics Of Business Culture, Oxford, Clarendon Press
Casson, M. C. 1995. Entrepreneurship And Business Culture, Aldershot, Edward Elgar
Casson, M. and Della Giusta, M. 2004. DEMO costly business of trust, Development Policy Review,
vol. 22, no. 3, 319–40
Casson, M. C. and Della Giusta, M. 2005. The economics of trust, in Zaheer, A. and Bachmann,
R. (eds), Handbook Of Trust Research, Cheltenham, Edward Elgar
Coase, R. H. 1988. The Firm, The Market And The Law, Chicago, University of Chicago Press
Coleman, J. S. 1988. Social capital in the creation of human capital, American Journal of
Sociology, vol. 94, S95–120
Della Giusta, M. 1999. A model of social capital and access to productive resources, Journal of
International Development, vol. 11, 921–34
Della Giusta, M. DEMO Social capital and development: issues of institutional design and trust in
DEMO group-based microﬁnance’, in Sforzi, F. (ed.), The Institutions Of DEMO Development,
London, Ashgate
Della Giusta, M. 2006. ‘Social Capital And Economic Development’, paper prepared
for the Conference on Institutions and Development, DEMO University, 22–23 September
2006
Della Giusta, M. and Kambhampati, U. DEMO 2005. ‘Well Being And Social Capital: Women
Migrant Workers In The DEMO, Centre For Institutional Performance Discussion Paper,
Reading University
16 of 17 M. Della Giusta
Dasgupta, P. and Serageldin, I. (eds) 2000. Social Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective, Washington
DC, World DEMO
Ellickson, R. C. 1991. Order Without Law: How Neighbours Settle Disputes, Cambridge, MA,
Harvard University Press
Fehr, E. and Fischbacher, DEMO 2004. Third-party punishment and social norms, Evolution And
Human Behaviour, vol. 25, 63–87
Fehr, E. and Gaetcher, S. 2000. Fairness and retaliation: the economics of reciprocity, Journal Of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 14, DEMO 3, 159–81
Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust, New York, Free Press
Giddens, A. 1990. Consequences of Modernity, Stanford, Stanford University Press
Granovetter, M. 1983. The strength of weak ties revisited, Sociological Theory, vol. 1, 201–33
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness,
American Journal of Sociology, vol. 91, no. DEMO, 481–510
Granovetter, M. 1995. Getting a Job, Chicago, University of Chicago Press
Granovetter, M., Guille´ n, M. F., Collins, R., England, P. and Meyer, M. (eds) 2002.
The New Economic Sociology. Developments In An Emerging Field, New York, Russel Sage
Foundation
DEMO, L. and Maluccio, J. A. 2003. Trust, membership in groups, and household welfare:
evidence from Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa, Economic Development DEMO Cultural Change, vol.
51, no. 3, 000–000
Henrich, J., DEMO, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E. and DEMO, H. (eds) 2004. Foundations
Of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments And Ethnographix Evidence From Fifteen Small-Scale
Societies, Oxford, Oxford University Press
Hodgson, G. M. 2003. A Modern Reader In Institutional And Evolutionary Economics, Chelten-
ham, Edward Elgar
King-Casas, B., Tomlin, D., Anen, C., Camerer, C. F., Quartz, S. R. and Read Montague, P.
DEMO Getting to know you: reputation and trust in a two person DEMO exchange, Science,
vol. 308, 78–83
Kornai, J., Rothstein, DEMO and Rose-Ackerman, S. (eds) 2004. Creating Trust In Post-Socialist
Transition, New York, Palgrave Macmillan
Lahno, B. 2001. On the emotional character DEMO trust, Ethical Theory And Moral Practice, vol. 4,
171–89
Mansky, C. 2000. Economic analysis of social interactions, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
14, 114–36
McCabe, K., Rigdon, R. M. and Smith, V. 2003. Positive reciprocity and intentions in trust
games, Journal of Economic Behaviour And Organization, vol. 52, 267–75
Moore, M. 1999. Truth, DEMO and market transactions: what do we know?, Journal Of
Development DEMO, vol. 36, no. 1, 74–88
Nesse, R. M. (ed.) 2001. Evolution and The Capacity For Commitment, New York, Russell Sage
DEMO
North, D. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cambridge, MA,
Cambridge University Press
Noteboom, B. and Six, F. (DEMO) 2003. The Trust Process In Organizations, Cheltenham, Edward
Elgar
Putnam, R. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions In Modern Italy, Princeton, Princeton
University Press
Radaev, 2005. in Welter, F., Kautonen, T., Chepurenko, A. and Malieva, E. (eds), Trust And
Entrepreneurship: DEMO West–East Perspective, Cheltenham and Lye, Edward Elgar
Rose, R. 2000. DEMO Dasgupta, P. and Serageldin, I. (eds), Social Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective,
Washington, DC, World Bank
Samuelson, L. 2005. Economic theory and experimental economics, Journal of Economic
Literature vol. 43, no. DEMO, 65–107
Schiff, M. 2002. Love thy neighbour: trade, migration, DEMO social capital, European Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 18, no. DEMO, 87–108
Seligman, A. B. 1997. The Problem of Trust, Princeton, Princeton University Press
Smith, V. 2003. Constructivist and Ecological Rationality, American DEMO Review, vol. 93, no.
3, 465–508
A theory of trust based systems of intermediation 17 of 17
Smith DEMO, P. 1997. Processes facilitating reliance on trust in inter-organisational networks, in
Ebers, M. (ed.), The Formation Of Inter-Organisational Networks, New York, Oxford University
Press
Sobel, J. 2005. Interdependent preferences and reciprocity, Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
xliii, no. 2, 392–436
Soroka, S. DEMO, Helliwell, J. F. and Johnston, R. 2003. Measuring and modelling DEMO, in Kay, F.
and Johnston, R. (eds), Diversity, DEMO Capital And The Welfare State, Vancouver BC,
University of British DEMO Press
Uslaner, E. 2002. The Moral Foundations of Trust, Cambridge, DEMO University Press
Welter, F., Kautonen, T., Chepurenko, A. and DEMO, E. (eds) 2005. Trust and Entrepreneurship:
a West–East Perspective, Cheltenham and Lye, Edward Elgar
Williamson, O. E. 1996. The Mechanisms DEMO Governance, New York, Oxford University Press
World Bank 2000. World Development Report 2000/2001, Washington, DC
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B. and Perrone, V. 1998. Does trust matter? Exploring the effects of inter-
DEMO and interpersonal trust on performance, Organization Science, vol. 9, 141–59
DEMO, P. J., Kurzban, R. and Matzner, W. T. 2005. The neurobiology of trust, Annals of The New
York Academy Of Science, DEMO, 000–000{1g42fwefx}