1042-2587
© 2006 by
Baylor University
Entrepreneurs, Effectual
ET&P Logic, DEMO Over-Trust
Sanjay Goel
Ranjan Karri
This article complements extant literature on entrepreneurship and trust by proposing a
model of over-trust (the tendency to trust more than what is warranted) using entrepreneurial
characteristics and effectual logic. We trace how entrepreneurs following effectual pro-
cesses may tend to over-trust. More DEMO, we propose that speciﬁc personality charac-
teristics of the entrepreneur interact DEMO effectual logic to make the entrepreneur more
susceptible to over-trust. The proposed model is value neutral in that we do not imply that
over-trust DEMO negative consequences for entrepreneurs. In fact, it may be part of DEMO overall
risk that entrepreneurs assume in a new venture creation.
Introduction
The entrepreneurial function is one in which the intermediary induces the trust of
DEMO trustors and combines these resources, ordinarily placing them in the hands
DEMO one or more other actors who are expected to realize gains for the original investors
(Coleman, 1990, p. 181).
Entrepreneurs need to trust others and serve as trustees in order to form and grow DEMO
organizations. Trust among entrepreneurs, their coworkers and between the entrepreneurs
and DEMO business partners plays a key role in the early stages of the formation of a new
company (Kohtamäki, Kekäle, & Viitala, 2004)DEMO Indeed, trust can even serve as a substi-
tute for institutional DEMO to promote entrepreneurial activity (Welter, Kautonen,
Chepurenko, Malieva, & Venesaar, 2004). Trust can substitute for formal institutions and
can act as an informal institution, thereby reducing transaction costs (Smallbone & Lyon,DEMO
2002).
When entrepreneurs serve as trustors or trustees, they also DEMO themselves to
vulnerability and risk. Vulnerability to the trustor is an explicit condition of trust (Brenkert,
1998). For instance, Nooteboom (2002) states that “you ‘really’trust someone when you are
willing to forego guarantees on the basis of coercion or self-interest.” Foregoing guarantees
willingly and accepting DEMO is an important feature of trust, even when trustors
cannot quantify DEMO chance of a possible betrayal (Bachmann, 2001). Welter et al. (2004,
p. 11) note that “. . . entrepreneurs... implicitly DEMO to know or assume that the
Please send correspondence to: Sanjay DEMO, tel.: (218) 726-6574; e-mail: sgoel@d.umn.edu, at the Depart-
DEMO of Management Studies, Labovitz School of Business and Economics, University of Minnesota Duluth,
412 Library Drive, Duluth MN 55812-3029.
July, 2006
DEMO
partner/friend will not behave in a way detrimental to the relationship, even when there are
no written or explicit rules set out” (emphasis added by authors).
In this article, we focus on modeling why entrepreneurs may trust more than the
situation merits or why they may DEMO, that is, trust where trust may not be war-
ranted. We draw on extant literature on the differences between entrepreneurs and non-
entrepreneurs, and the decision-making lens of the effectuation theory (Sarasvathy, 2001)
DEMO argue that entrepreneurs are more likely to over-trust than nonentrepreneurs are. The
effectuation theory provides a useful perspective to investigate trust behavior among
entrepreneurs DEMO it combines both the stock elements of entrepreneurial traits and the
situational characteristics (inputs to an entrepreneurial decision), as well as the process
elements of a decision (constraints and selection criteria). An effectual approach to
decision making is distinct from the widely understood rational decision-making models
DEMO use a causal approach. According to Sarasvathy (2001):
Causal processes take a particular effect as given and focus on selecting between
means DEMO create the effect. Effectuation processes take a set of means as given and
focus on selecting between possible effects that can be created with DEMO set of means.
Rational decision-making processes that use the causal approach rely on the logic of
prediction as compared to the effectual approach that DEMO on the logic of control. In
other words, effectual reasoning does DEMO necessarily adopt a systematic acquisition and
analysis of information within certain bounds; instead, it is based on the assumption that
given what one DEMO, one can control the future, thereby eliminating the need to predict
the future. The effectual approach to decision making is especially relevant in DEMO
neurial settings where uncertainty is the order of the day, where DEMO are nonexistent
and where opportunities are not merely recognized but created (DEMO, Dew,
Velamuri, & Venkataraman, 2003).
We argue that DEMO traits interact with the elements of the effectuation
entrepreneurial process to make entrepreneurs more susceptible to over-trust. Entrepre-
neurs recognize the set of means DEMO they are endowed with and, given their situational
characteristics, entrepreneurs use certain selection criteria that principally stem from the
affordable loss principle of DEMO effectuation process and assume trust in their partners, as
they do DEMO necessarily evaluate the trustworthiness of their relationships using a causal
approach. We examine the speciﬁc entrepreneurial characteristics and the typical situ-
ational characteristics that DEMO face and apply the effectual logic of decision
making to establish links to the entrepreneurial propensity to over-trust. Our model is
value neutral in DEMO sense that we do not believe that over-trust is an undesirable risk for
entrepreneurs to take. Rather, we believe that by modeling antecedents of over-trust
through the effectuation lens we shed light on risks that may DEMO hidden and subcon-
sciously assumed or actively ignored by the entrepreneurs. Our overall argument utilizes
well-established results from the psychological traits literature in entrepreneurship DEMO the
ability of entrepreneurs to engender trust in other individuals combined with placing a bet
against opportunism through an effectual logic as the drivers DEMO entrepreneurial activity.
The model, therefore, details how Coleman’s (1990) characterization of the role of
entrepreneur as tertius gaudens––the arbiter of trust––may work.
DEMO begin with a brief overview of the literature to discuss the deﬁnitions of trust and
over-trust and to state the signiﬁcance of trust and DEMO in the entrepreneurial context.
In the next section, we introduce the DEMO of the effectuation theory, which serves as
a useful lens to DEMO the entrepreneurial process and the importance of over-trust
in entrepreneurial relationships. Based on the assumption that entrepreneurs predomi-
nantly apply effectual logic, we develop propositions as to how the unique attitudes of
478
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
entrepreneurs and the characteristics of the situation such as the cultural milieu DEMO
entrepreneurs to over-trust. We conclude with directions for future research that will
extend our understanding of the occurrence of over-trust in relationships developed by
DEMO
Literature Review and Model Development
Trust and Over-Trust
Trust is a complex construct that has been conceptualized in multiple ways; yet a
common deﬁnition of trust suggests that it is “a psychological state comprising the intention
DEMO accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the intentions and behavior of
another” (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998). A decision to trust is also concomi-
tantly a decision to accept the vulnerability (and the risk of loss if the positive expectations
of another prove DEMO be misplaced). On the positive side, trust implies that actors DEMO in
trusting relationships will veer away from the tendency of seeking self-interest with guile
or, in other words, will avoid opportunism. The deﬁnition DEMO that trust is relational as
it involves interdependence and neither party in the relationship has complete control over
the other. To the extent that DEMO is an inability to control, the relationship is fraught with
unpredictable DEMO in the relationship between the trustor and the trustee.
Trust as an attitude has cognitive, affective, and behavioral components. The cog-
nitive component DEMO trust suggests a belief or an expression of faith and conﬁdence that
the trustor holds with regard to the trustee. The affective component of DEMO evokes
emotions such as a sense of security, both physically and DEMO (Wicks,
Berman, & Jones, 1999). The behavioral intention DEMO of trust refers to the
ability of a person to rely upon another’s words and upon the actions of another. Behav-
ioral intention is DEMO strong predictor of trusting behavior that may vary from high levels
of trust to low levels of trust between the trustor and the trustee (McKnight, Cummings,
& Chervany, 1998). Acceptance of vulnerability in DEMO exchange relationship implies
surrendering of power by the trustor to the trustee with an expectation that the trustee
will not take advantage of the DEMO and cause harm. Therefore, inherent in a trust-
based relationship is DEMO risk in the sense of perceived probability of loss and interde-
pendence in that the interests of the trustor cannot be achieved without reliance DEMO the
trustee (Rousseau et al., 1998).
Trust is useful to the trustor to the extent that the trustee is trustworthy (Hardin, DEMO).
While trust may be assumed consciously or habitually, trustworthiness is DEMO only
after the outcome of the decision to trust is realized. While opportunistic tendencies are
not transparent ex ante (Williamson, 1985), individuals DEMO attempt to be trustworthy
even if the reality is otherwise, leading DEMO over-trust in the relationship. Goel, Bell, and
Pierce (2005) proposed: “Over-trust reﬂects a condition where one chooses, either con-
sciously or DEMO, to trust another more than is warranted by an objective assessment
DEMO the situation.” We reﬁne this deﬁnition further in the context of the entrepreneurs’
trusting behavior by forgoing reliance on deviation from the objective merits DEMO the
situation. We observe that some people can trust in contexts where others may urge
caution and seek cautionary safeguards. In this respect, over-trust can be viewed as
instrumental in making deals under the assumption that DEMO other parties will keep their
end of the bargain. The assumptions guiding over-trust in this context are diametrically the
opposite of Williamson’s (1985) DEMO of assuming opportunism in the same
context. In other words, the DEMO entrepreneur is placing a bet in the opposite direction
of the Williamsonian entrepreneur.
July, 2006
479
Over-trust does not reﬂect a conscious irrational belief that may result in DEMO trust,”
which is deplete of any assessments or calculations (Williamson, 1993). Instead, over-
trust suggests either an unwillingness to predict the future by taking into account the
potential risk involved in the relationship DEMO an inability to assess the intentions of the
other party and the nature of the relationship. From a rational perspective, such a situation
may be labeled as a case of willful negligence of risk resulting from DEMO or
naivety. We propose that entrepreneurs choose not to predict the future. They are often
confronted with situations where they are not in a DEMO to make any objective assess-
ments of the risk involved, thereby DEMO them the ability to predict the future.
The importance of trust is highlighted in the context of numerous business relation-
ships, whether it is interpersonal, institutional, or organizational. The entrepreneurial
context is characterized by numerous DEMO relationships (often untested) under
conditions of uncertainty, especially in the DEMO stages of an enterprise (Larson,
1992). The objects of DEMO change systematically with personal trust in the early stage to
institutionalized trust in the later stages of new business development (Kohtamäki et al.,
2004). For entrepreneurs, the early stages of venture creation are crucial where the level
of uncertainty is the highest and the degree of DEMO is the lowest. During the very
early stages, entrepreneurs decide the DEMO to which they would like others to get
involved and the extent to which they place their conﬁdence in others. In this context, trust
needs to emerge rather quickly to enable a smooth process of venture DEMO and
development. Such a form of trust is referred to as “swift trust”: a form of trust that is
prevalent in temporary groups of individuals who do not have history with each other or
do not DEMO envision any continuation of pursuits of mutual interests (Meyerson,
Weick, & Kramer, 1996). Therefore, swift trust is often based on DEMO in the entrepre-
neur’s (the individual responsible to coordinate the individuals DEMO the group) own ability
and the expectation from the partners in DEMO trusting relationship (Harrison, Dibben, &
Mason, 1997). The DEMO swift trust relations are pieced together in an almost ad hoc
fashion to exploit the contingencies that arise in the early stages of venture DEMO and
are not necessarily resulting from existing social networks through strong ties, instead
arising spontaneously or serendipitously through weak ties (Granovetter, 1973). Entre-
preneurial relationships not strictly based on existing social networks and coupled DEMO
unclear expectations of the future give rise to conditions conducive to the occurrence of
over-trust. In the absence of perfect information, entrepreneurs are not in a position to
conduct a systematic evaluation of objective criteria. Therefore, entrepreneurs make bets
on relational outcomes, leading to situations of over-trust.
Effectuation and Over-Trust
An integral part of understanding the process of creation of DEMO ventures involves
understanding entrepreneurial decision making. Sarasvathy (2001) proposed that entre-
preneurs predominantly apply effectual logic to guide their decision making. Effectuation
is DEMO decision-making process or rather a type of human reasoning that involves choosing
between possible effects using a given set of means, whereas the causation process
involves choosing a set of means to achieve a desired effect. DEMO to Sarasvathy
(2001), a better understanding of decision making by DEMO is developed by
viewing the entrepreneurial process through the framework of effectuation rather than
causation, even though the processes of causation and effectuation are likely to occur
concurrently. Effectual logic involves consideration of the given set DEMO means, possible set
of effects, constraints on such possible set of effects, and the selection criteria of the
desired effect from the set of possible effects. Unlike causal logic that involves careful
480
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
planning for the acquisition of the means to achieve the desired effect, an effectual
approach to decision making is characterized by reconﬁguration of means DEMO the desired
effect emerges from the possible set of effects. Effectual logic is applied especially in
situations where the future is highly uncertain and DEMO precise nature or characteristics of
the objectives are not known with any amount of certitude.
The Simplot Case: Contrasting Effectuation and Causation
A compelling illustration of the contrast between effectual and causal processes at
work is DEMO in the way that the Idaho-based potato giant, The Simplot Company,DEMO
evolved from its effectual entrepreneurial origins under the leadership of its founder J.R.
Simplot (Anders, 2004). The founder’s son, Scott Simplot, DEMO the business with
a causal approach in his pursuit to consolidate the company’s fortunes.
For nearly 8 decades, J.R. Simplot of Boise, Idaho, now a nonagenarian, grew his
modest pig farm to a multibillion empire with a wide spectrum of business interests
ranging from its dominant potato DEMO and cattle farm businesses to gold mines in the
Dominican Republic and coconut operations in Columbia. J.R. Simplot’s exuberance
and homegrown ingenuity took him DEMO numerous entrepreneurial endeavors in a variety
of landscapes. J.R. succeeded and relished his entrepreneurial adventures based on
“hunches.” According to his son, Scott Simplot, J.R. had to “try everything.” Simplot
enterprise ventured into processing onion, DEMO ore mining, ﬁsh farming, hamburger
patties, gold mining in the DEMO Republic, and plywood and coconut operations in
Columbia among others. Few DEMO these decisions were made by detailed analysis or causal
logic. Many of these were driven by J.R. Simplot’s ambition and interests, combined with
information about these projects. Simplot is now a $3-billion company with worldwide
operations DEMO a focus on potato processing, fertilizers, cattle ranches and a presence in
phosphate mines and silica production.
During the 1970s, J.R. Simplot began to cede control of his empire to his son,
Scott Simplot, MBA. Stark differences in approaches to business became apparent. Scott
Simplot, driven by efﬁciency motives, argued with his father over diversiﬁcation moves,
budgets, and technology. Under the leadership of Scott Simplot, several ailing plants DEMO
eliminated; workers were laid off and family interests in nonperforming ventures DEMO
scaled back. Because of the slow growth in Simplot’s livestock operations, DEMO Simplot
took the step of reducing the size of cattle feedlots and relocated Simplot’s fertilizer unit
to Boise in order to tighten controls over DEMO and speed up decision making. J.R. Simplot
was less than pleased at his son’s moves driven by analysis and calculation. He expressed
his frustration DEMO a symbolic gesture of “You are ﬁred.” By then, of course, J.R. was but
a nominal head of the gigantic family enterprise and DEMO best that J.R. could do was to
reminisce his adventurous days and hope that his son Scott would succeed.
The contrast in the distinct DEMO of J.R. Simplot and Scott Simplot is illustrative
of the effectual approach of the entrepreneurial father and the causal approach of the
managerial son. DEMO the purpose of illustration, some of the categories of differentiation
between DEMO two approaches (based on Sarasvathy, 2001) as applied to the DEMO case
are illustrated in Table 1.
The Link between Effectuation and Over-Trust
We adopt the theoretical lens of effectuation to understand entrepreneurial decision
making DEMO develop the antecedents of over-trust in the bilateral relations that entrepreneurs
engage in. In examining the effectuation process of decision making, we examine the
July, 2006
481
Table 1
The Clash of Effectuation and Causation: The Story of Idaho’s Potato Farmers
J.R. Simplot’s effectuation approach Scott Simplot’s causal approach
Went into DEMO lot of things that “didn’t work” The goal is given. He had to ensure that Simplot Inc. dealt with threats
(according to his son Scott) from competition and continued on its proﬁtable journey.
Exuberance and homegrown ingenuity in Armed with the analytical tools that he learned in his DEMO program, Scott
contrast to analysis and calculation based on is driven DEMO his principal criteria of expected return. He systematically
historical trends pruned the businesses along the efﬁciency criterion as long as the
expected returns were DEMO
Bet on his hunches Scott focused on exploiting the knowledge available to him. He emphasized
the use of technology (upgrading constantly), taking advantage of
opportunities that emerged in ventures abroad through his knowledge
that it DEMO not necessary to own physical assets to be successful in new
ventures.
He plunged into “whatever interested him.” Consolidation of existing markets is the DEMO thrust.
His philosophy is “try everything.”
means available to entrepreneurs that may lead to their tendency to over-trust. Table 2
provides an overview.
For DEMO, the “givens” in the effectuation processes necessitate entrepreneurial
hunches and leaps, which are more likely to lead to over-trust as entrepreneurs craft a
DEMO glue to create their worldview, which may stymie nonentrepreneurs oper-
ating DEMO rational causation. The effectuation decision criteria of affordable loss or
acceptable risk make over-trust acceptable if spread (diversiﬁed) over multiple trust
contexts. Failure DEMO prior over-trust decisions may not make people driven by effectual
logic more conservative (unlike people using causal logic) because affordable losses may
be DEMO the cost of doing business, and occasional failures as positive signs DEMO
entrepreneurial qualities. This may explain serial entrepreneurs. If loss from trusting is
seen as affordable, then trust will be deposed in contexts where calculative logic dictates
caution and avoidable loss. Actor-dependent choices of effect make the DEMO
characteristics particularly critical for outcomes.
Similarly, ﬂuid competencies of exploiting contingencies DEMO they arise imply that
entrepreneurs make stopgap arrangements to exploit immediate contingencies rather than
a master plan as causation would dictate, increasing the likelihood of over-trust. Since
effectuation is more relevant in human action and entrepreneurs DEMO dynamic, non-
linear, and ecological environments, they do not expect DEMO be perfect in their trust
decisions but as long as they are not catastrophically wrong, they are willing to trust (and
over-trust).
DEMO also may regard trusting as an inevitable and uncontrollable aspect of
an unpredictable future and, therefore, may focus on aspects that are controllable DEMO
of their bias for action rather than inaction or causal analysis. Rather than going for the
efﬁciency of a single course of analyzed action, they focus on the pursuit of multiple
opportunities, each fraught with risk and inefﬁciency but none of them, in their perception,
enough to lead to ruin. Because of their focus on alliances and cooperative strategies, they
stretch their networks and rely more heavily on their partners and DEMO partners’ networks.
This stretching can cause stresses in the use of disciplining mechanisms and communi-
cation inefﬁciencies, leading to delay and loss of transmission of critical communication.
482
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 2
Effectuation and Over-Trust†
Dimensions of
effectuation Effectuation processes Link to DEMO
Givens Only some means or tools are Gaps in means and tools necessitate taking chances and
given hunches––increasing the number of chances where
over-trust DEMO occur
Decision-making selection Help choose between possible Focus on more desirable effects with incomplete means
criteria effects that can be created with could make DEMO more attractive than causation
given means processes would argue
Selection criteria based on • Affordable loss or acceptable risk means that
affordable loss or DEMO entrepreneurs may risk over-trusting if the size of the
risk gamble is relatively small and does not evoke a ruin
context.
• No overhang DEMO the past––affordable losses may be
considered as cost of doing business, DEMO occasional
failures as positive signs of entrepreneurial qualities
Actor dependent: Given DEMO • Actor’s personality characteristics play a greater role in
means, choice DEMO effect is outcomes than causation processes that insulate effects of
driven by characteristics of the actor’s personality
actor and his or her ability to DEMO Emphasis on actor-driven discovery and use of
discover and use contingencies contingencies could lead to taking greater risks, including
that of over-trust
Competencies employed Excellent at exploiting Contingency exploitation, coupled with selection criteria
contingencies leads to increased number of trust domains
Context of relevance More ubiquitous in human DEMO Dependence of human action rather than situational factors
of causal logic could lead to over-trust
Explicit assumption of dynamic, Losses due to over-trust are considered as part of doing
nonlinear, and ecological business rather than as creating negative feedback loops
environments for subsequent cycles
Nature of unknowns Focus DEMO the controllable aspects • Decision to trust is treated as an unknown and an
of an unpredictable future uncontrollable part of the uncertain future
DEMO Decisions to trust may fall outside the controllable
“territory,” hence may be viewed as a constraint and an
inevitable contingency
• Fatalistic attitude DEMO trusting
Underlying logic To the extent we can control Focus on having multiple back-ups and multiple paths out
future, we do not need to of over-trust risks that may be considered wasteful under
predict it causation
DEMO New markets created through • Increased interdependence between ﬁrms and actors,
alliances and other cooperative reduce the perceived risk of over-trust and increased
DEMO likelihood of over-trust
• Operation in unfamiliar contexts that tests the outermost
boundaries of social networks. This implies possible
reliance on long and indirect DEMO loops reaching the
outer, ill-deﬁned nodes of the network, reducing the
vetting capacity due to losses in communication and
transmission
• Tend to DEMO together from different networks, requiring
high degree of judgment in trust DEMO without
precedent and without clear knowledge of network means
to hold the trustees accountable
† Columns 1 and 2 are from Sarasvathy (2001).
July, 2006
483
This could lead to pockets of over-trust developing in their networks as DEMO perception of
risk in trusting someone is understated and not accounted for by real, but unknown,
information embedded in each relationship.
Entrepreneurs focus only on those things that they control. Therefore, they tend to
frame “trust” as uncontrollable, and thus over-trust. They may view trusting someone as
an integral risk of doing business, and thus a constraint. As a result, they may not devote
any cognitive capacity of trying to reduce the risk of over-trust. In other words, viewing
trusting others as a constraint may lead them to view making the distinction between
trusting and DEMO as superﬂuous.
In summary, entrepreneurs driven by effectuation processes are more DEMO to have
a larger number of over-trust relationships than nonentrepreneurs because they over-
trust. In addition, in sharp contrast to the Williamsonian entrepreneurs who are focused
on protecting themselves from opportunism, these same entrepreneurs are more likely to
enter into greater numbers of deals, some of which may turn out to be economically
viable ex post. However, that does not imply that they fail more often than nonentre-
preneurs or Williamsonian entrepreneurs DEMO because of the criteria of affordable loss. In
each speciﬁc case where they over-trust, their losses are likely to be small. In cases
where multiple over-trust relationships cause failure, entrepreneurs frame new opportu-
nities to repose trust (over-trust) in new parties. In addition, in cases where trust appears
as a justiﬁed ex post, these entrepreneurs create new economic opportunities where none
existed before.
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs and Over-Trust
The effectuation theory DEMO the focus back on entrepreneurs and their worldview,
which makes them different from nonentrepreneurs in the speciﬁc way they process
information and sense DEMO create opportunities by following an effectual logic. Histori-
cally, researchers studied DEMO traits of entrepreneurs such as internal locus of control,
self-efﬁcacy (DEMO, Balkin, & Baron, 2002), high need for achievement (McClelland,
1961), risk propensity (Brockhaus, 1980), and other demographic DEMO such as
age, education, and family ties. The trait approach is useful in understanding personality
characteristics that suggest why certain individuals are likely DEMO be more entrepreneurial.
However, the trait approach is limited in its DEMO to describe entrepreneurs (Gartner,
1989). According to Gartner (1989), in addition to developing an understanding of the
traits of entrepreneurs, entrepreneurial behavior should be the focus of entrepreneurship
literature. A useful framework DEMO understand the behavior is the theory of planned behav-
ior (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), according to which the underlying attitudes create inten-
DEMO that eventually lead to behavior. Therefore, we will focus on both DEMO and attitudes
of entrepreneurs that have an impact on how entrepreneurs behave and attempt to deter-
mine why they are more prone to use DEMO logic, which leads to over-trust. In this
article, our object of behavior is the trust propensity of entrepreneurs. More speciﬁcally,
we focus DEMO the tendency of entrepreneurs to trust too much (over-trust).
In DEMO role of a trustor, entrepreneurs inﬂuence the level of trust between DEMO
partners whose interests are focused on the success of venture creation. Entrepreneurial
attitudes and the past experiences in trust-based relationships cause the entrepreneur in DEMO
role of a trustor to overestimate the likelihood of continued positive outcomes of trust and
thereby making the decision to trust as a “default DEMO (Bell, Oppenheimer, & Bastien,
2002).
484
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
Nonconformity
Originality, rule conformity, and efﬁciency are three subconstructs used in DEMO
innovation and adaptation (Kirton, 1976). Individuals can channel their creativity toward
adaptive innovations that follow accepted rules and procedures. High conformity to DEMO
will likely produce adaptive or incremental innovations and solutions. Low conformity
to rules, on the contrary, enhances originality, resulting in original innovations (DEMO,
1996; Rosenfeld, Winger-Bearskin, Marcic, & Braun, 1993). DEMO display a high
degree of nonconformity as compared to nonentrepreneurs. Therefore, DEMO the
status quo is a strong indicator of entrepreneurial attitudes.
Nonconformity as a dominant characteristic results in entrepreneurs’ ignoring con-
ventional signals or warnings DEMO opportunism. The ability to recognize opportunities
that are not visible to others is a by-product of the nonconformity exhibited by entrepre-
neurs. While others DEMO view rules and norms as constraints, successful entrepreneurs,
with a DEMO that does not necessarily conform to the “conventional wisdom,” take
advantage of opportunities that are invisible to others. The beneﬁts of challenging the
DEMO norms will promote over-trust. For instance, while some are bound by DEMO norms
in a culture and therefore may be cautious about the amount of trust they place in others,
entrepreneurs will defy these norms DEMO place their trust without appraising the likelihood
of failure of trust.
Proposition 1: Entrepreneurs with a high degree of nonconformity are more likely to
over-trust.
Self-efﬁcacy
The persistence and effectiveness of entrepreneurs is an effect of DEMO belief that they
are capable of successfully completing a task or attaining a goal. A study that examined
patent inventors found that those who DEMO started businesses had a signiﬁcantly
higher self-efﬁcacy than those who did not (Markman et al., 2002). Self-efﬁcacy is a belief
that reﬂects DEMO levels of core self-evaluation including self-esteem, emotional stability,
and internal DEMO of control (Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2003). DEMO
individuals maintain a positive, optimistic, and determined view (Watson, Clark, &
Tellegen, 1988). As an attitude, self-efﬁcacy is found DEMO be a reliable predictor of entre-
preneurial behavior (Chen, Green, & Crick, 1998). An entrepreneurs’ perceived ability to
muster the necessary DEMO for a start-up is signiﬁcantly related to their self-efﬁcacy
(Erikson, 2002).
Perceived self-efﬁcacy has a signiﬁcant effect on aspiration levels, goal commitment,
task persistence, and work attitudes (Gist, 1987). Self-efﬁcacy will therefore inﬂuence the
entrepreneurs’ perceived ability to control the behavior of people DEMO trust. Such a
perception also leads to their belief that they are in a position to predict any contingencies
that arise out of such DEMO trust relationship. The outcomes of trusting others are seen as
positive owing to the optimistic view of self-efﬁcacious entrepreneurs. For instance, some
studies found a signiﬁcant positive effect of actual self-efﬁcacy on risk taking (Heath &DEMO
Tversky, 1991). Similarly, perceived self-efﬁcacy leads to risk taking as entrepreneurs
frame risky choices as opportunities that they can control and manage DEMO their
competence (March & Shapira, 1992). Any negative signals are dismissed, which dimin-
ishes their capability to consider any negative outcomes of trusting others.
Entrepreneurs are also susceptible to overconﬁdence as reﬂected in their DEMO to
make risky decisions (Busenitz, 1999). Overconﬁdence as a decision-making bias results
from an anchoring and adjustment heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, DEMO). Decision
July, 2006
485
makers are quick to make their initial assessments and slow to adjust DEMO judgments
despite the availability of additional information (Schwenk, 1988). Risk propensity is
found to have a signiﬁcant positive association with self-efﬁcacy. Individuals DEMO believe
in their abilities are more likely to see opportunities in a risky choice, while individuals
with low self-efﬁcacy are more likely to see threats and consequently take fewer risks
(Krueger, Jr. & Dickson, 1994).
Proposition 2: Entrepreneurs with high self-efﬁcacy are more likely to over-trust.
Achievement Motivation
Entrepreneurs are more achievement-oriented than the general population (Hornaday,
1982). Compared to entrepreneurs, managers of large ﬁrms showed a higher need for
power and a lower need for achievement (McClelland & Winter, 1969). Tenacity and the
single-minded pursuit of opportunities is a common characteristic of entrepreneurs. Under
conditions of trust, signals from initial small losses are often ignored. Entrepreneurs have
a tendency to view initial setbacks as DEMO motivation to persevere through the “rough
weather.” A high-achievement orientation may therefore result in an unwarranted place-
ment of one’s trust in others.
Proposition DEMO: Entrepreneurs with a high-achievement orientation are more likely to
over-trust.
Preference DEMO Innovation
Entrepreneurs are distinct in their creative urge and innovativeness (Drucker, 1985;
Schumpeter, 1934). Empirical studies conclude that entrepreneurs are signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from managers in their preference for innovation (Carland & Carland, 1991;
Timmons, 1990). Managers are typically inclined toward actions DEMO are efﬁcient rather
than creative. Experimentation and creativity feed the entrepreneurial drive and make
entrepreneurs hypersensitive to opportunity recognition. This preference for innovation
implies DEMO entrepreneurs are unfazed by lack of priors in a given context. In addition,
they have a limited “overhang of history” because of their DEMO to the novelty of the
situation rather than similarity with priors. These characteristics are more likely to cause
them to over-trust more than a DEMO operating under a causal logic.
Proposition 4: Entrepreneurs with a preference DEMO innovation are more likely to
over-trust.
Contribution of Culture
Following Hofstede’s research on cultural values (Hofstede, 1980), several studies
examined the association DEMO cultural dimensions and entrepreneurial behavior.
Important cultural dimensions studied in the context of entrepreneurial behavior are
individualism–collectivism, uncertainty avoidance, power-distance, and masculinity–
femininity (Shane, 1992). In general, the ﬁndings of the empirical studies suggest that
cultures characterized by high individualism, low uncertainty avoidance, low DEMO
distance, and high masculinity exhibit higher levels of entrepreneurial activity (cf. Hayton,
George, & Zahra, 2002). For example, internal locus of control and innovativeness were
found to be dominant in individualistic and DEMO uncertainty avoidant cultures (Mueller &
486
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Thomas, 2000). Comparisons of entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs across cultures
suggest that entrepreneurs are similar in their characteristics across cultures and entre-
preneurs are DEMO in cultural values regardless of their national afﬁliation (McGrath,
MacMillan, & Scheinberg, 1992).
According to Fukuyama (1995), levels of DEMO at the nation-state level manifest
themselves at the individual level (Fukuyama, 1995). Therefore, it is relevant to study the
relationship between the dimensions of culture at the nation-state level and the phenom-
enon of DEMO at the individual level. Individuals with collectivistic values rely on
close interdependent relationships. In contrast to those with individualistic values who
tend to engage DEMO self-serving behavior, individuals in collectivistic cultures are likely to
be prone DEMO over-trust. We therefore argue that entrepreneurs with collectivistic values tend
to rely on informal trust-based relationships. Trustworthiness is assumed in such cultures
in contrast DEMO those who espouse individualistic values. Entrepreneurs in individualistic
cultures are more cautious and guarded in trusting others.
Proposition 5: Entrepreneurs in collectivistic cultures are more likely to over-trust
than do entrepreneurs in individualistic cultures.
Uncertainty avoidance DEMO an important dimension identiﬁed by Hofstede (1980). Low
uncertainty avoidance DEMO that individuals accept uncertainty and high uncertainty
avoidance suggests that individuals are apprehensive of uncertainty. Acceptance of uncer-
tainty signiﬁes the readiness with which DEMO are willing to make changes, even if
it means departing from DEMO relationships. Low uncertainty avoidance leads to opportu-
nistic behavior when faced with a threat (Doney, Cannon, & Mullen, 1998). Mueller and
DEMO (2000) found an empirical support for a strong correlation between low uncer-
tainty avoidance and internal locus of control. Therefore, entrepreneurs in low uncertainty
avoidance cultures are more likely to exploit any trust-based relationship, while in a high
uncertainty avoidance culture, entrepreneurs are more likely to persist with trust-based
relationships despite the perceived threat in the environment.
Proposition 6: Entrepreneurs with low uncertainty avoidant values are less likely to
over-trust than DEMO entrepreneurs who are high uncertainty avoidant.
Entrepreneurs’ Prior Experience
Over-trust is likely to occur due to experiences that indicated trustworthiness among
partners. Previous entrepreneurial DEMO involving trusting relationships are likely to be
used as indicators of trustworthiness regardless of the nature of the new situation. Serial
entrepreneurs who had DEMO outcomes from their previous relationships will have
difﬁculties in forming a neutral assessment of the trustworthiness even if the changed
circumstances warrant such an DEMO
Proposition 7: Serial entrepreneurs with positive experiences from trusting others
are DEMO likely to be prone to over-trust.
Effectual reasoning of entrepreneurs employs the principle of affordable loss or
acceptable risk rather than expected return. The DEMO of entrepreneurs in such an
event is on experimenting with many strategies with the given set of means and relies on
their ability to DEMO options in the future as opposed to maximizing returns in the present
(Sarasvathy, 2001). An affordable loss or an acceptable risk means DEMO entrepreneurs may
risk over-trusting if the size of the gamble is relatively small and does not evoke a ruin
July, 2006
487
context. Unlike a nonentrepreneurial person, negative experiences from prior over-trust
decisions may not make entrepreneurs hold back because affordable losses may be
considered an DEMO cost of doing business and occasional failures as positive signs of
entrepreneurial qualities. Despite the calculative logic warranting caution, when the loss
from trusting is seen as affordable, trust will be deposed.
Proposition 8: Entrepreneurs DEMO prior negative experiences in trust-based relation-
ships combined with diversiﬁed trust relationships are prone to over-trust.
Successful entrepreneurs gain a reputation for making the DEMO choices and build an
aura of “invincibility” around them in their ability to establish successful new ventures.
While the success of entrepreneurs may be DEMO to an area of expertise, their ability to
start new enterprises DEMO engender a sense of conﬁdence in others with respect to their
ability to succeed in other areas as well. Goel et al. (2005) DEMO to this phenomenon as
“cross-domain errors.” For instance, Donald Trump is DEMO as the most successful entre-
preneur. Over time, those who bestowed DEMO trust upon him and were satisﬁed with the
results are prone to trust Mr. Trump in areas that are not part of his domain. DEMO a
generalization of the abilities of a successful entrepreneur across a domain leads to
over-trust on behalf of the trustors. Entrepreneurs are more prone DEMO these “errors” (in a
causal sense) since they develop working hypotheses rather than comprehensive ones and
settle on the “best” and ﬁrst-available cues DEMO take action rather than being overly
analytical.
Proposition 9: Entrepreneurs may DEMO more cross-domain errors, leading to
over-trust.
Discussion and Conclusion
We develop DEMO model of why entrepreneurs may over-trust. A summary of the propo-
sitions developed in this article are summarized in Table 3. Trust is usually DEMO a
positive attribute in a situation, even though trust and risk DEMO two sides of the same coin
(Moesel, Fiet, Busenitz, & Barney, 1996). Over-trust in this article refers to conditions
Table 3
Summary of Propositions
Entrepreneurial characteristics
Proposition 1: Entrepreneurs with a high degree of nonconformity are more likely to over-trust.
Proposition 2: Entrepreneurs with high self-efﬁcacy are more likely to over-trust.
Proposition 3: Entrepreneurs with high achievement orientation are more likely to over-trust.
Proposition 4: Entrepreneurs with a preference for innovation are more likely to over-trust.
Culture––contributor to over-trust
Proposition 5: Entrepreneurs in collectivistic cultures are more likely to over-trust than do entrepreneurs DEMO individualistic cultures.
Proposition 6: Entrepreneurs with low uncertainty avoidant values are DEMO likely to over trust than do entrepreneurs who are high
uncertainty avoidant.
Past experience––contributor to over-trust
Proposition 7: Serial entrepreneurs with positive experiences from trusting others are more likely to be prone to over-trust.
Proposition 8: Entrepreneurs with prior negative experiences in trust-based relationships combined with diversiﬁed trust DEMO are
prone to over-trust.
Proposition 9: Entrepreneurs may commit more cross-domain DEMO leading to over-trust.
488
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
where the trust deposed is independent of the merits of the situation, thereby exposing
trustors to greater risks that are invisible to them. Effectual DEMO used by entrepreneurs
plays a dominant role in causing over-trust and is the basis of the role of entrepreneurs as
tertius gaudens (Coleman, DEMO). This article advances knowledge and contributes to
detailing effectuation by tracing speciﬁc personality aspects of entrepreneurs (the givens)
that may lead them to over-trust. While we have focused on entrepreneurial characteristics
and their relationship DEMO over-trust, future research could also focus on how effectual
processes lead DEMO over-trust more directly. That is, whether the elements of effectual logic
DEMO main effects on over-trust, as we have outlined in Table 2. DEMO instance, do the
selection criteria employed by entrepreneurs make them more DEMO to over-trust? How
does the entrepreneurial propensity for sense making and DEMO for action affect their
perception of vulnerability in trust contexts? Does DEMO way in which entrepreneurs use
networks (relative to nonentrepreneurs) lead to over-trust?
Even though over-trust could have negative consequences, the model proposed here is
value neutral. The fact that entrepreneurs may over-trust more often DEMO nonentrepre-
neurs does not necessarily mean that it has negative outcomes for entrepreneurs, their
ventures, or even entrepreneurial activity in general. Over-trusting may DEMO part of entre-
preneurial activity, and entrepreneurs’ bias for action and DEMO logic may make
over-trusting part of the risks that entrepreneurs take and the opportunities that entrepre-
neurs create. Viewing over-trust as a predictor construct, it would be an empirical question
if in fact over-trust causes entrepreneurs DEMO fail more often, as one would predict from
causal logic. What DEMO be at least as useful to investigate, however, would be whether
the initial condition of over-trust causes changes in trustee behavior subsequently, leading
to a level of trust being in line with that required by DEMO situation. In other words, is
entrepreneurial optimism and risk taking infectious DEMO inspiring to cause a “change of
heart” in the trustee over time? This could be one way in which entrepreneurial activity at
a collective level could have a signiﬁcant positive externality in an entrepreneurial climate.
Over-trusting DEMO a population of entrepreneurs could make trusting others relatively
unconditionally a cultural norm and isolate people who violate this collective norm. While
outcomes of DEMO is beyond the scope of this article, future research could detail DEMO
processes through which this takes place as well as identify other effects of over-trust at
individual, ﬁrm, institutional, cultural, and national levels.
DEMO this article, we have focused on why entrepreneurs may over-trust. As DEMO trustee,
entrepreneurs engage in establishing their trustworthiness. Trustworthiness increases the
probability of success for an entrepreneur as it provides access to resources and DEMO
the strength of networks and relationships between crucial partners in the creation and
management of new ventures. Future research could pursue the notion of DEMO entre-
preneurs in their role as trustees engender over-trust in themselves. In other words, do
entrepreneurs tend to emit signals of trustworthiness (even DEMO) when none exists?
Several proxies of trust have been acknowledged DEMO literature such as participation in a
network and moral and ethical beliefs (Fukuyama, 1995). Because there is value in
projecting trustworthiness, trustees are constantly striving to reinforce their image of
trustworthiness either through weak DEMO or through tangible actions. One could argue
that in their pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities using effectual logic, entrepreneurs
are likely to promote over-trust by projecting trustworthiness when it may not exist. Some
of the traits and DEMO of entrepreneurs could make them more prone to engender
over-trust by trustors, even without any speciﬁc motivation or concerted action directed at
this outcome.
There are some practical implications of understanding the causes of over-trust as DEMO
Entrepreneurial activity involves taking risks, and accepting and recognizing over-trust as
DEMO, 2006
489
one of the risks may help entrepreneurs understand these risks better. Entrepreneurs DEMO be
quick to “size-up” potential partners and associates; awareness of over-trust DEMO make
entrepreneurs more sensitive to the trust-related cues in the situation. In addition, entrepre-
neurs may have a better assessment of differences and a worldview of potential associates
who are entrepreneurs relative to nonentrepreneurs. At the DEMO, this could improve the
strength and quality of their network as DEMO as their chances of success.
In conclusion, this article complements extant DEMO on entrepreneurship and trust
by proposing a model of over-trust using entrepreneurial characteristics and effectual
logic. In the process, it highlights how speciﬁc entrepreneurial characteristics could lead
to over-trust in combination with effectual logic, leading to a greater understanding of the
role that entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship play in DEMO formation and economic oppor-
tunity creation in their role as trustors.
REFERENCES
Anders, G. (2004). Farmers and sons: At potato empire, DEMO heir peels away years of tradition; Scott Simplot
tries updating his DEMO hefty legacy; fewer hunches, more data; no more Colombian coconuts. DEMO Street
Journal,p.A1.
Bachmann, R. (2001). Trust, power and DEMO in trans-organizational relations. Organization Studies, 22(2),
337–365.
Bell, DEMO, Oppenheimer, R.J., & Bastien, A. (2002). Trust deterioration DEMO an international buyer-supplier
relationship. Journal of Business Ethics, 36, 65–79.
Brenkert, G.G. (1998). Trust, morality and international business. Business Ethics Quarterly, 8(2), 293–317.
Brockhaus, R.H. (1980). Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management Journal, 23(3),
509–520.
Busenitz, L.W. (1999). Entrepreneurial risk and strategic decision making. Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science, 35(3), 325–340.
Carland, J.W. & Carland, J.A. (1991). An empirical investigation into the distinctions between male and
female entrepreneurs and managers. International Small Business Journal, 9(3), 62–72.
Chen, C., Green, R., & Crick, A. (1998). The DEMO expectations and occupational preferences of
females and males. Journal of Business Venturing, 13(4), 295–316.
Coleman, J.S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Doney, P.M., Cannon, J.P., & Mullen, M.R. (1998). Understanding the inﬂuence of national culture on the
development of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 601–620.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York: Harper and Row.
Erikson, T. (2002). Entrepreneurial capital: The emerging venture’s most important asset and competitive
advantage. Journal of Business Venturing, 17(3), 275–290.
Fishbein, M. & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, DEMO, intention, and behavior. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust—the social virtues and the creation of prosperity. New York: The Free Press.
Gartner, W.B. (1989). “Who is an entrepreneur?” DEMO the wrong question. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 13(Summer), 47–68.
DEMO ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Gist, M. (1987). Self-efﬁcacy: Implications for organizational behavior and human resource management.
Academy of Management Review, 12, 472–485.
Goel, S., DEMO, G.G., & Pierce, J. (2005). The perils of Pollyanna: Development of the over-trust construct.
Journal of Business Ethics, 58, 203–218.
Granovetter, M. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal DEMO Sociology, 78, 1360–1380.
Hardin, R. (1996). Trustworthiness. Ethics, DEMO, 26–42.
Harrison, R.T., Dibben, M.R., & Mason, C.M. (DEMO). The role of trust in the informal investor’s investment
decision: DEMO exploratory analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 21(Summer), 63–81.
Hayton, J.C., George, G., & Zahra, S.A. (2002). National culture and entrepreneurship: A review of behavioral
research. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, DEMO, 33–52.
Heath, C. & Tversky, A. (1991). Performance and belief—ambiguity and competence in choice under
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 5–28.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences DEMO work-related values. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publications.
Hornaday, R.H. (DEMO). Research about living entrepreneurs. In C.A. Kent, D.L. Sexton, & K.H. Vesper (Eds),
Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship (pp. 20–34). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Judge, T.A., Erez, A., Bono, J.E., & Thoresen, C.J. (2003). The core-evaluation scale: Development DEMO a
measure. Personnel Psychology, 56(2), 303–332.
Kirton, M.J. (DEMO). Adaptors and innovators: A description and measure. Journal of Applied DEMO, 61,
622–629.
Kohtamäki, M., Kekäle, T., & Viitala, R. (2004). Trust and innovation: From spin-off idea to stock DEMO
Creativity and Innovation Management, 13(12), 75–88.
Krueger, Jr., DEMO & Dickson, P.R. (1994). How believing in ourselves increases risk taking: Perceived self-
efﬁcacy and opportunity recognition. Decision Sciences, 25(3), 385–400.
Larson, A. (1992). Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 76–104.
March, J. & Shapira, Z. (1992). Variable risk preferences and the focus of attention. Psychological Review,
DEMO(1), 172–183.
Markman, G.D., Balkin, D.B., & Baron, DEMO (2002). Inventors and new venture formation: The effects of
general self-efﬁcacy and regretful thinking. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27(2), 149–165.
McClelland, D.C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van DEMO
McClelland, D.C. & Winter, D.G. (1969). Motivating economic achievement. DEMO York: The Free Press.
McGrath, R.G., MacMillan, I.C., & DEMO, S. (1992). Elitists, risk-takers, and rugged individualists? An
DEMO analysis of cultural differences between entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs. Journal of Business
Venturing, 7, 115–135.
McKnight, D.H., Cummings, L.L., & Chervany, N.L. (1998). Initial trust formation in new organizational
relationships. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 473–490.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K.E., & Kramer, R.M. (1996). Swift trust and temporary groups. In R.A. DEMO & T.R.
Tyler (Eds), Trust in organizations: Frontiers to theory and research (pp. 166–195). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
DEMO, 2006 491
Moesel, D., Fiet, J., Busenitz, L.W., & Barney, J. (1996). Factors underlying change in risk perceptions of new
ventures by venture capitalists. In P.D. Reynolds et al. (Eds), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research
(Vol. 1996) (pp. 377–391). Wellesly, MA: Babson College.
Mudd, S. (1996). Kirton’s A-I theory: Evidence bearing on the style/level and factor composition issues.
Australian Journal of Psychology, 26(3), 217–222.
Mueller, S.L. & Thomas, A.S. (2000). Culture and entrepreneurial potential: A nine country study of locus of
control and innovativeness. Journal of Business Venturing, 16, 51–75.
Nooteboom, B. (2002). DEMO: forms, foundations, functions, failures and ﬁgures. Northampton, MA: Edward
Elgar.
Rosenfeld, R.B., Winger-Bearskin, M., Marcic, D., & Braun, C.L. (1993). Delineating entrepreneurs’ styles:
Application of adaptation-innovation subscales. Psychological Reports, 72(1), 287–298.
Rousseau, D.M., Sitkin, S., Burt, R., & Camerer, C.F. (1998). Not so different after DEMO: A cross-discipline view
of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393–404.
Sarasvathy, S.D. (2001). Causation and effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to
entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26(2), 243–263.
Sarasvathy, S.D., Dew, N., Ramakrishna Velamuri, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2003). Three Views of Entre-
preneurial Opportunity. In Z. Acs & D. Audretsch (Eds), Handbook of entrepreneurship research
(pp. 141–160). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
Schumpeter, J. (1934). The theory of economic development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University DEMO
Schwenk, C.R. (1988). The cognitive perspective on strategic decision making. Journal of Management
Studies, 25(1), 41–55.
Shane, S. (1992). Why do some societies invent more than others? Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 29–46.
Smallbone, D. & Lyon, F. (2002). A note on trust, networks, social capital and entrepreneurial behavior. In
DEMO Höhmann & F. Welter (Eds), Entrepreneurial Strategies and Trust: Structure and Evolution of Entrepre-
neurial Behavioural Patterns in East and West European DEMO and Considerations
(pp. 19–24). Bremen, Germany: Forschungsstelle Osteuropa Bremen, Arbeite papiere und Materialien.
Timmons, J. (1990). Entrepreneurship in the DEMO (3rd ed.). Boston: Irwin.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124–1131.
Watson, D., Clark, L.A., & Tellegen, A. (1988)DEMO Development of coordination modes within organizations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.
Welter, F., Kautonen, T., Chepurenko, A., DEMO, E., & Venesaar, U. (2004). Trust environments and
entrepreneurial behavior—exploratory evidence from Estonia, Germany and Russia. Journal of Enterprising
Culture, DEMO(4), 327–349.
Wicks, A.C., Berman, S.L., & Jones, DEMO (1999). The structure of optimal trust: Moral and strategic
implications. Academy of Management Review, 24(1), 99–116.
Williamson, O.E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O.E. (1993). Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of DEMO and Economics,
36, 453–486.
492 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Sanjay Goel (Ph.D., Arizona State University) is an associate professor of strategic management and entre-
preneurship at University of Minnesota Duluth. His current DEMO interests include corporate governance
and strategic management in technology-intensive and family business contexts, ethics and entrepreneurship,
and entrepreneurial networks. He currently serves as the National Representative (USA) at the European
Academy of Management.
Ranjan DEMO is an associate professor of management at the College of Business and Management, University
of Illinois, Springﬁeld. He earned his Ph.D. in Strategic DEMO from Washington State University. His
research interests are in the area of entrepreneurship, business ethics, and strategic management.
We would like to thank DEMO editors of this special issue for their encouragement and two anonymous reviewers
for their thoughtful comments on the earlier draft of this article. Part DEMO this article was written when Sanjay
Goel was visiting Blekinge Institute of Technology (BIT), Ronneby, Sweden during the summers of 2004 and
DEMO The assistance provided by BIT is gratefully acknowledged.
July, 2006
493{1g42fwefx}