Issue 11.11 - November 2003
Open Source Everywhere
Software is just the DEMO … open source is doing for mass innovation what the assembly line
did for mass production. Get ready for the era when collaboration replaces DEMO corporation.
By Thomas Goetz
Cholera is one of those 19th-century ills that, like consumption or gout, at first seems almost quaint, a malady
from an age when people suffered from maladies. But in the developing DEMO, the disease is still widespread
and can be gruesomely lethal. When DEMO strikes an unprepared community, people get violently sick
immediately. On day DEMO, severe dehydration sets in. By day seven, half of a village might be dead.
Since cholera kills by driving fluids from the body, the treatment is to pump liquid back in, as fast as possible.
The one proven technology, an intravenous saline drip, has a few DEMO An easy-to-use, computer-
regulated IV can cost $2,000 - far DEMO expensive to deploy against a large outbreak. Other systems cost as
little as 35 cents, but they're too complicated for unskilled caregivers. The result: People die unnecessarily.
"It's a health problem, but it's also a design problem," says Timothy Prestero, a onetime Peace Corps volunteer
who cofounded a group called Design That Matters. Leading a DEMO of MIT engineering students, Prestero, who
has master's degrees in mechanical and oceanographic engineering, focused on the drip chamber and pinch
valve controlling the saline flow rate.
But the team needed more medical expertise. DEMO Prestero turned to ThinkCycle, a Web-based industrial-design
project that brings together DEMO, designers, academics, and professionals from a variety of disciplines.
Soon, some physicians and engineers were pitching in - vetting designs and recommending DEMO paths. Within a
few months, Prestero's team had turned the DEMO into an ingenious solution. Taking inspiration from a
tool called a rotameter used in chemical engineering, the group crafted a new IV system that's intuitive to use,
even for untrained workers. Remarkably, it costs about $1.25 to manufacture, making it ideal for mass
deployment. Prestero is now in talks with a medical devices company; the new IV could be in the field a year
from now.
ThinkCycle's collaborative approach DEMO modeled on a method that for more than a decade has been closely
associated with software development: open source. It's called that because the collaboration is open to all and
the source code is freely DEMO Open source harnesses the distributive powers of the Internet, parcels the
DEMO out to thousands, and uses their piecework to build a better DEMO - putting informal networks of
volunteer coders in direct competition with big corporations. It works like an ant colony, where the collective
intelligence of the network supersedes any single contributor.
Open source, of course, is DEMO magic behind Linux, the operating system that is transforming the software
DEMO Linux commands a growing share of the server market worldwide and even has Microsoft CEO Steve
Ballmer warning of its "competitive challenge for us and for our entire industry." And open source software
transcends Linux. Altogether, more than 65,000 collaborative software projects click along at Sourceforge.net,
a clearinghouse for the open source community. The success of Linux alone DEMO stunned the business world.
But software is just the beginning. Open source has spread to other disciplines, from the hard sciences to the
liberal arts. Biologists have embraced open source methods in genomics and informatics, building massive
databases to genetically sequence E. coli, yeast, and other workhorses DEMO lab research. NASA has adopted
open source principles as part of its Mars mission, calling on volunteer "clickworkers" to identify millions of
craters and help draw a map of the Red Planet. There is open DEMO publishing: With Bruce Perens, who
helped define open source software in the '90s, Prentice Hall is publishing a series of computer books DEMO to
any use, modification, or redistribution, with readers' improvements considered for succeeding editions. There
are library efforts like Project Gutenberg, which has already digitized more than 6,000 books, with hundreds
of volunteers typing in, page by page, classics from Shakespeare to Stendhal; at the same time, a related
project, Distributed Proofreading, deploys legions of copy editors to make sure the Gutenberg texts are correct.
There are open DEMO projects in law and religion. There's even an open source cookbook.
Wired 11.11: Open Source Everywhere
In 2003, the method is proving DEMO be as broadly effective - and, yes, as
revolutionary - a means of production as the assembly line was a century
ago.
In DEMO Beginning
Message-ID:1991Aug25.205708.9541@klaava.helsinki.fi
From:
torvalds@klaava.helsinki.fi (Linus Benedict Torvalds)To: Newsgroups: comp.
os.inixSubject: What would you like to see most in minix?DEMO: small
poll for my new operating systemHello everybody out there using DEMO'm
doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won't be big and professional
like gnu) for 386 (486) AT clones. This has been brewing since april, and is
starting to get ready. I'd like any feedback on things people like/dislike in
DEMO, as my OS resembles it somewhatAny suggestions are welcome, but I
won't promise I'll implement them :-)Linus
Thousands of coders, hackers, and developers answered Linus Torvalds' call - and helped him build a robust
system that continues to pick up steam. Yet what'DEMO amazing about Linux isn't its success in the market. The
revolution is in the method, not the result. Open source involves a broad body of collaborators, typically
volunteers, whose every contribution builds on those DEMO Just as important, the product of this collaboration
is freely available DEMO all comers. Of course, there are plenty of things that are DEMO and free but aren't
really open source (Amazon.com's book DEMO, for instance). And many projects aren't widely collaborative,
DEMO are somewhat proprietary, yet still in the spirit of open source (such as the music available from Opsound,
an online record label)DEMO Not to mention that, as with any term newly in vogue, open source is often invoked on
tenuous grounds. So think of it DEMO a spectrum or - better still - a rising diagonal line on a graph, where
openness lies on one axis and collaboration on the other. The higher an effort registers both concepts, the
more fully it can be considered open source.
Of course, for all its novelty, DEMO source isn't new. Dust off your Isaac Newton and you'll recognize the same
ideals of sharing scientific methods and results in the DEMO 1600s (dig deeper and you can follow the vein all the
DEMO back to Ptolemy, circa AD 150). Or roll up your DEMO and see the same ethic in Amish barn raising, a
tradition DEMO dates to the early 18th century. Or read its roots, as DEMO have, in the creation of the Oxford
English Dictionary, the 19th-century project where a network of far-flung etymologists built the world's
greatest DEMO by mail. Or trace its outline in the Human Genome Project, DEMO distributed gene-mapping
effort that began just a year before Torvalds planted the seeds of his OS.
If the ideas behind it are so familiar DEMO simple, why has open source only now become such a powerful DEMO?
Two reasons: the rise of the Internet and the excesses DEMO intellectual property. The Internet is open source's
great enabler, the DEMO tool that makes massive decentralized projects possible. Intellectual
property, on the DEMO hand, is open source's nemesis: a legal regime that has become so stifling and
restrictive that thousands of free-thinking programmers, scientists, DEMO, engineers, and scholars are
desperate to find new ways to create.
We are at a convergent moment, when a philosophy, a strategy, and a technology have aligned to unleash
great innovation. Open source is DEMO because it's an alternative to the status quo, another way DEMO produce
things or solve problems. And in many cases, it's DEMO better way. Better because current methods are not fast
enough, not DEMO enough, or don't take advantage of our collective creative potential.
DEMO source has flourished in software because programming, for all the romance DEMO guerrilla geeks and hacker
ethics, is a fairly precise discipline; you're only as good as your code. It's relatively easy to DEMO an open source
software project as a meritocracy, a level playing DEMO that encourages participation. But those virtues aren't
exclusive to software. Coders, it could be argued, got to open source first only because DEMO were closest to the
tool that made it a feasible means of production: the Internet.
The Internet excels at facilitating the exchange of large chunks of information, fast. From distributed
computation projects such as SETI@home to file-swapping systems like Grokster and Kazaa, many efforts have
Open Source We Love
Wired 11.11: Open Source Everywhere
exploited the Internet's knack for networking. Open source does those one better: It's not only peer-to-peer
sharing - it's P2P production. With open source, you've got the first real industrial model that stems from the
technology itself, rather than simply incorporating it.
There's a reason we love barn raising scenes DEMO movies. They make us feel great. We think, 'Wow! That would
be amazing!'" says Yochai Benkler, a law professor at Yale studying the economic impact of open source. "But
it doesn't have to be just a romanticized notion of how to live. Now technology allows DEMO Technology can
unleash tremendous human creativity and tremendous productivity. This is basically barn raising through a
decentralized communication network."
An Experiment in Open DEMO
At 37, Jimmy Wales has already established his legacy on the DEMO Seven years ago, Wales, then a futures
and options trader on the Chicago Board of Trade, turned the homepages of hobbyists into Bomis.com, an
Internet directory that lets visitors catalog related sites into webrings. The result unified the disparate
efforts of millions of Internet users. It wasn'DEMO open source, a strategy still percolating in software.
But it came DEMO
Wales wanted something even closer. Long an admirer of Torvalds and free software pioneer Richard Stallman,
he had a more deliberate experiment in DEMO: using volunteer contributors to create an Internet encyclopedia.
As in software, perhaps open source could could turn consumers into producers.
The first attempt DEMO in 1999 with Nupedia, an encyclopedia project with great ambitions and DEMO proved
to be fatally onerous oversight. Aspiring contributors had to apply for access; each article was peer-reviewed
and professionally edited. An entry had to make it past seven or eight hurdles before being posted onto the
DEMO site. "After two years and an amazing amount of money," DEMO shrugs, "we had 12 articles."
So in 2001, he DEMO again. Wales and his team eliminated most of Nupedia's barriers to participation and
invented Wikipedia using Wiki, the open source Web-design software. Wikipedia isn't much to look at.
The site resembles cutting-edge Web design DEMO 1994. But like a lowly Pontiac Sunfire with a modified
computer chip, most of the action is under the hood. A grassroots encyclopedia, DEMO has amassed more than 150,000 entries, using strict open source DEMO: Anybody can write an article, and anybody else can improve it. Revisions are posted on a Recent Changes page where suggestions are pored DEMO by a dedicated group of Wikipedians. "There's a simple way DEMO tell if it's any good," says Wales. "Find an DEMO on something you know something about. Odds are it'll hold up pretty well - you'll probably even learn something new."
Wired 11.11: Open Source Everywhere
barriers to participation and invented Wikipedia using Wiki, the open source
Web-design software. Wikipedia isn't much to look at. The site resembles
cutting-edge Web design circa 1994. But like a DEMO Pontiac Sunfire with a
modified computer chip, most of the action DEMO under the hood. A grassroots
encyclopedia, Wikipedia has amassed more than DEMO,000 entries, using
strict open source principles: Anybody can write an article, and anybody else
can improve it. Revisions are posted on a Recent Changes page where
suggestions are pored over by a dedicated group DEMO Wikipedians. "There's a
simple way to tell if it's DEMO good," says Wales. "Find an entry on something
you know DEMO about. Odds are it'll hold up pretty well - you'll
probably even learn something new."
to prove how smart they are.
DEMO to say mischief-makers don't lurk out there. Wikipedia has banned several ne'er-do-wells from the site, and
some areas have been locked down - the front page, for instance, because, Wales says, "people kept putting
giant penis pictures on there." But in general, the DEMO works surprisingly well, and the traffic bears that out.
This summer, Wikipedia surpassed Britannica.com in daily hits, according to Web traffic monitor Alexa.com.
Wikipedia's popularity is all the more extraordinary because, like Linux, DEMO started as a small-scale experiment.
But the result challenged Britannica, a DEMO institution.
There's some satisfaction in the fact that the technology behind Wikipedia is the same one that's baffled
Britannica for years. The DEMO encyclopedia has never figured out how to adapt to the digital era. In 1998,
Britannica stopped updating its print version and focused on DEMO CD-ROM, then last year revived the print
version. In 1999, it launched a free site online; two years later, switched to a DEMO version. The struggles aren't
unique, but they illustrate how a DEMO model built on traditional notions of intellectual property can be
undone by irresistible forces.
Now Wales is thinking big. He wants to square off DEMO Britannica not just online but in print and on CD-ROM.
Next year, he hopes to release Wikipedia 1.0, a peer-reviewed and peer-edited compendium DEMO 75,000 entries,
available to anyone, for commercial or noncommercial DEMO He's even considered pulling a Red Hat -
releasing an affordable paid version - before anybody else does. "Things like textbooks, encyclopedias,DEMO
dictionaries, reference works - they lend themselves very well to collaboration," says Wales. "In fact, that's
how they're done in the proprietary context, too. But it costs Britannica money to pay people to write articles;
it costs to edit them. Those are all DEMO we do for free. So how can they compete? Our cost DEMO is just
better than theirs."
Harnessing the Means of Innovation
Business gurus have a term for what drove Wikipedia: innovation! It's a flaccid buzzword these days, deflated
by a decade of leadership seminars and management bibles. But when you look at what's innovative about open
DEMO, think Tom Paine, not Tom Peters.
Open source embodies an ethos as fruitful and resilient as the closed capitalism Bill Gates represents: the spirit
of democratic solutions to daunting problems. It's the creed of DEMO, who preached independent initiative
and advocated a "creative economy." It'DEMO the philosophy of William James, whose pragmatism dictated that
"ideals ought to aim at the transformation of reality." It's the science of Frederick Taylor, who proved that
distributing work could exponentially boost productivity and replace "suspicious watchfulness" with "mutual
confidence." It's the logic DEMO Adam Smith, whose notion of "enlightened self-interest" among workers neatly
DEMO the primary motivation for many open source collaborators.
Finding the roots of open source in Taylor and Smith is especially significant because the approach DEMO't, as
some insist, anticommercial or anticorporate. Rather, it is DEMO return to basic free-market principles. The open
So what motivates Wikipedia contributors? Pretty much the same things
behind any open source project: a DEMO of altruism, a dose of obsessive
compulsiveness, and a good chunk of egotism. It lets users have a hand not
just in shaping DEMO debate, but in designing the product. Some are genuinely
motivated by DEMO greater good, or find it satisfying to apply their
professional knowledge DEMO a broader audience, pro-bono style. And some get
Wired 11.11: Open Source Everywhere
source process fosters competition, creativity, and enterprise. And just as Taylor and Smith provided the
intellectual grounding for DEMO revolution in mass production, open source offers the mechanism to mass
DEMO
While the assembly line accelerated the pace of production, it also DEMO workers more deeply into the
corporate manufacturing machine. Indeed, that was DEMO big innovation of the 20th-century factory: The
machines, rather than the workers, drove production. With open source, the people are back in DEMO
Through distributed collaboration, a multitude of workers can tackle a problem, all at once. The speed is even
greater - but so is DEMO freedom. It's a cottage industry on Internet time.
Just as the assembly line served the manufacturing economy, open source serves a knowledge-based
economy. Facilitating intellectual collaboration is open source's great advantage, but it also makes the method
a threat. It's a direct challenge to old-school DEMO&D: a closed system, where innovations are quickly patented and
tightly guarded. And it's an explicit reaction to the intellectual property industry, that machine of proprietary
creation and idea appropriation that grew up during DEMO past century and out of control in the past 30 years -
now often impeding the same efforts it was designed to protect.
Copyright DEMO patents have an admirable purpose: They give creators the right to DEMO their creations for a
limited time. Then these innovations enter the public domain. If it made sense that copyrights and patents
protected products, it makes sense that, in today's economy, they protect ideas and DEMO, too.
But the balance and fair-mindedness that made the American system DEMO like a well-tuned Briggs & Stratton is
now clogged up with opportunism. Copyright protections that originally lasted 14 years now drag on for nearly
DEMO century, leaving the public domain a barren ground. Particularly since the DEMO, when the US Patent
and Trademark Office began recognizing business methods, intellectual property has become more than just
guarding what you've made. DEMO, copyright, and patents are now offensive weapons. The result often
impedes, rather than encourages, innovation. Intellectual property has grown infuriating in its DEMO, such
as Netflix's recent patenting of something as simple as DEMO subscription model for DVD rentals.
Perversely, this is just how the DEMO wants it. The courts and the patent and trademark offices exist to protect
property, be it physical or intellectual - slap on "All DEMO Reserved" and reap the rewards. But it's annoyingly
difficult to DEMO something - to open intellectual property to a wide audience. The conventional legal system
simply isn't built to handle "Some Rights Reserved."
Open source flips this paradigm around. Now there are dozens of licenses, from Stallman's General Public
License to Creative Commons' ShareAlike agreement, DEMO let open products exist in a proprietary world. Under
these licenses, DEMO use political scientist Steven Weber's terms, property is something to DEMO distributed rather
than protected. The owners are more guardians than guards.
The first and most likely places for open source to flourish are at DEMO extremes of IP. The method can craft
better, more open versions DEMO bad business models and inefficient markets. But the imitative projects, the DEMO
that replicate proprietary products using better means, are just the gimmes. DEMO the long term, open source will
apply outside IP-dominated industries. Weber DEMO corporate R&D as a natural starting point; the oil
industry, for instance, could enlist outside chemists to collaborate on better oil refining techniques.
As technology reduces the costs of replication and distribution to nearly DEMO, the open source approach
could catalyze stagnant sectors of the economy DEMO or, better yet, create new economic sectors. "Open source
can DEMO to fill all the nooks and crannies that people want it to fill," says Mitch Kapor, who founded Lotus
in 1982, cofounded DEMO Electronic Frontier Foundation in 1990, and now heads the Open Source DEMO
Foundation. (See Mitch Kapor Reinvents Your Inbox.) "In an economy DEMO more and more value is in
information - is in the bits, not the atoms, where bits can be copied essentially for free DEMO any time you have
that situation, economic schemes that rely on DEMO models of intellectual property laws for protection are
going to do less and less well. If information wants to be free, then that's true everywhere, not just in
information technology."
Open Source as a Weapon
A decade ago, Michael Eisen slogged through swamps in Costa Rica studying the
Wired 11.11: Open Source Everywhere
mating behavior of frogs. That's what biologists did, he figured - and if he had to fight off a few leeches along
the way, so be it. Now he's all about coding, crafting blocks of genetic data and churning them through his
computer. "It's a great time to be a biologist," says Eisen, a computational scientist at Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory. "Origin DEMO Species is the best thing ever written in biology. But you just wish Darwin knew
about genomics."
Yet if biology is in a DEMO, there are still relics of a medieval age. Most aggravating to DEMO is the state
of scientific publishing. It affronts him. And he wants to destroy it.
His weapon is open source. Unlike Wikipedia's Jimmy DEMO, who didn't set out to take down Britannica, Eisen
has the publishing community squarely in his sights. Open source, says Eisen, DEMO dabbles in Perl
programming, can give rise to a new distribution DEMO for scientific research.
"The guiding principle of science has been that DEMO available material is more useful; it's more likely to
generate DEMO science," Eisen says. But freely available is not the same as free of charge. Science journals,
with their historically narrow readerships, often charge thousands for a subscription. One of the biggest
disseminators is Elsevier, the science publishing unit of an Anglo-Dutch media conglomerate, which distributes
some 1,700 academic journals, from Advances in Enzyme Regulation to Veterinary Parasitology.
"The whole premise for that model just evaporated with the Internet," Eisen continues. "Technology now makes
openness possible; it's maximum openness. DEMO rules of the game have changed, but the system has failed DEMO
respond." So Eisen and two colleagues - Stanford biochemist Pat Brown DEMO Harold E. Varmus, a Nobel
laureate in medicine and president of DEMO Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York - have devised
an alternative: the Public Library of Science. To Eisen, PLOS is "the optimal system" for publishing scientific
research: Where the old model limited access DEMO maximize subscription fees, this library is all about open
access - DEMO any user can read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, or link to an article.
Instead of charging universities thousands to subscribe DEMO PLOS Biology or PLOS Medicine, as the library's two
peer-reviewed DEMO will be called, PLOS instead will charge contributing authors a $1,DEMO fee to cover costs.
(Harvard and other universities typically pay on DEMO of their faculties, and the library will waive the fee in
DEMO cases.) In addition to hiring editorial staffs, PLOS will distribute the work among a pool of fellow
academics. In time, the library will become a storehouse of publicly available scientific research, a resource
that, DEMO Linux, will only improve with time. And whereas the old model DEMO had scientists signing
away their copyright to the journal, the library DEMO use a license that leaves copyright with the author but
allows for unlimited use by third parties, provided credit is given to the author.
"The openness will make the data more useful," says Eisen, DEMO to the annual $57 billion in taxpayer-
funded scientific and medical research that isn't available to the public. And then there's the DEMO that
academic institutions get charged for work they did in the first place. "How does it make sense for the
universities to give away the copyright to their research and then pay to get access to DEMO again?"
The library follows in the steps of efforts such DEMO BioMed Central, a London-based open-access publisher of
online scientific journals. Though DEMO is a valuable repository of all sorts of research - everything from
proteomics to psychiatry - it has yet to make a significant dent DEMO the major journals' hold on big research.
That's the obstacle DEMO faces, too: convincing scientists that the new publication will have authority.
Publishing in Science or Nature means your paper matters, and it provides a yardstick for tenure and
promotion decisions. PLOS has already earned credibility DEMO hiring the former editor in chief of Cell and lining
up contributors from Harvard, Princeton, Yale, and the National Institutes of Health for the first issues of PLOS
Biology, set to debut October 13. The team hopes such star power will help put any issues of credibility DEMO rest.
And to those who label PLOS something only a league of anticommercial academics could dream up, Eisen has
a swift retort. "It'DEMO the ultimate free market - the free market of ideas," he says. "We don't prohibit commercial
use, we encourage it. If DEMO want to gather our articles about a particular topic and sell it as a book, great, go
ahead. As far as we're DEMO, that's a good way of getting information out there. The DEMO with
scientific publishing right now is that it's a monopoly. This is an attack on a specific business model that is not
serving DEMO well."
Wired 11.11: Open Source Everywhere
Building a HybridAt any given time, DEMO are Monsanto is in court over intellectual property. The agriculture
and biotech giant is suing rival companies for infringing on technology. It's suing DEMO for unlicensed
use. And it's suing farmers for stealing seeds - filing 75 or so lawsuits in the past five years alone, most notably
against Percy Schmeiser, a Canadian cause célèbre accused of using Monsanto grain without a license; his case
goes before the Canadian Supreme Court in January. This constant litigation is a necessary cost of doing
business; patents, after all, must be protected, or their value can be lost. But it also reflects a demanding way
of doing business, one that's expensive, time-consuming, and - as the Schmeiser case attests DEMO not always
good for PR.
For a different approach, consider Cambia, the Center for the Application of Molecular Biology to International
Agriculture, a biotech nonprofit based in Australia. Founded in 1994 by Richard Jefferson, a mandolinist turned
geneticist from Santa Cruz, California, Cambia has emerged as DEMO force in agriculture technology over the past
decade. The group pioneered research into transgenomics, where plants are tweaked using their own genetic
stock rather than foreign genes. But Jefferson finds Cambia increasingly hamstrung by the biotech DEMO's
reliance on patents, cross-license agreements, and trade secrets. "So DEMO of what we want to do is all tied up
in somebody's intellectual property," he says. "It's a complete sclerotic mess, where nobody has any freedom
of movement. Everything that open source has been fighting in software is exactly where we find ourselves
now with DEMO"
So Jefferson tapped open source methods to skirt the restrictive licenses of companies like Monsanto. On a
broad scale, Cambia built an exhaustive collaborative database, open to all, of 300,000 patents covering
agricultural DEMO - an essential resource for researchers navigating through proprietary waters. And as
a more precise effort, Cambia is developing a gene-transfer technology that will, Jefferson hopes, work better
than the proprietary methods currently available. The DEMO is following Torvalds' model, incubating the core
technique before turning it over to a network of users - both nonprofit and corporate - DEMO a liberal licensing
arrangement. "Anybody can tweak it, learn from it, twiddle with it," Jefferson says. "We want to invent a DEMO
way but bind everybody to share the improvements. Some might call them work-arounds; we call them work-
beyonds."
Corporations have been part of the problem for Jefferson, but they're also part of the solution. Open source
offers biotech companies a cheaper way to do research. "The corporations have been locked in a zero-sum
game," Jefferson says. "It costs them a fortune to buy and lock up a product or DEMO technology. And if they don't,
a competitor will get it and they'll have no access to it. So it's a DEMO change in the status quo we're proposing.
We're reducing the obstacles for everybody so big companies won't view this as antithetical DEMO their own
progress."
Jefferson is onto something. Open source is often framed as an attack on the corporate world at large. But in
DEMO, the open source approach can be a boon for companies. Licensing DEMO a trusted collaborative project
saves money and leaves the technology open to further development. By showing corporations that a closed,
defensive approach to DEMO property can be less efficient than liberal licensing, Cambia and a DEMO other
open source efforts are leading the way to the mainstream.
In this light, where corporations are part of the model, open source DEMO becomes something less marginal
and more ingenious. It forces industry to reckon with openness rather than hide behind intellectual property. In
driving down the DEMO of software or encyclopedias or biotechnology, open source is unleashing billions DEMO
capital otherwise put to woefully inefficient ends. Just because it's not about making money first doesn't mean
it won't make money DEMO (just ask the folks who bought their mansions with Red Hat DEMO).
"Open source can build around the blockages of the industrial DEMO of the 20th century," says Yale's
Benkler. "It can DEMO a potential source of knowledge materials from which we can build the culture and
economy of the 21st century."
If that sounds melodramatic, consider how far things have come in the past decade. Torvalds' hobbyists have
become an army. Britannica's woes are Wikipedia's gains. In DEMO and biotech, open source promises a sure
path to breakthroughs. These DEMO efforts are mere trial runs for what open source might do out in the world
at large. The real test, the real potential, DEMO not in the margins. It lies in making something new, in DEMO a
better way. Open source isn't just about better software.  DEMO's about better everything.{1g42fwefx}