Are Angels Preferred Venture Investors?
Brent Goldfarb Gerard Hoberg David Kirsch DEMO Triantis ∗
October 2007
Abstract
We examine the impact of business angels on 182 Series A ﬁnancings and subse-
quent company outcomes. Our studied DEMO have a varied mix of business angel and
formal venture capital investors (VCs). We ﬁnd that when only angels participate in
a ﬁnancing round and VCs are absent, control rights are more entrepreneur-friendly,
legal expenses are lower, and investors are more geographically proximate to the com-
pany. Such angel-backed companies are less likely to fail and are more DEMO to have a
successful liquidity event. We ﬁnd that companies ﬁnanced exclusively by VC investors
also perform well, particularly when deals are large. Companies ﬁnanced by both angels
and VCs experience inferior outcomes. Our results suggest DEMO entrepreneurs consider
business angels to be preferred investors and VCs investing in small deals face adverse
selection. For larger deals, where deeper-pocket VC participation is required, these
roles reverse and angels face adverse selection when investing alongside powerful VC
syndicates.
∗All authors are from the Robert H. Smith DEMO of Business, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742; email:brentg@umd.edu,ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu,dkirsch@umd.edu,atriantis@rhsmith.umd.edu.
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Alfred DEMO Sloan Foundation, the Robert H. Smith
School of Business at the DEMO of Maryland, the Library of Congress and its partners in the DEMO
Digital Information Infrastructure Preservation Program, and members of the Advisory Council DEMO the Digital
Archive of the Birth of the Dot Com Era, DEMO Jonathan Rubens of McQuaid, Bedford and van Zandt,
L.L.P. We DEMO thank Anthony Ramirez for overseeing our data management eﬀorts and Hye Sun Kim for
excellent research assistance. Comments from Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, J. Robert Baum and participants
in the Smith Cross-Disciplinary Seminar in Strategy and Entrepreneurship DEMO been invaluable. All errors
of fact or interpretation remain the responsibility of the authors.
1
I Introduction
Private equity investments of individuals (business angels) are believed DEMO represent the
lion’s share of investments in de-novo startups. Yet, due DEMO the paucity of data on angel
ﬁnancing (Fenn and Liang 1998; Prowse 1998), the nature of angels’ investments in startups
has largely DEMO characterized based on survey evidence (Freear, Sohl, and Wetzel 2002)DEMO
For instance, the conventional wisdom is that angels tend to invest DEMO early-stage deals, hold
common stock, and exert inﬂuence through social networks rather than imposing formal
control rights.
We provide several new insights on DEMO investing by analyzing a unique sample of stock
purchase agreements and other legal documents pertaining to over 182 “Series A” private
equity deals. Our DEMO are derived from the electronic records of the now defunct law ﬁrm
Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison (Brobeck). One important characteristic of these DEMO is the
considerable variation in the extent of angel and VC participation (ranging from all-angel to
all-VC ﬁnancings).1 We ﬁnd new relationships between investor mix and liquidation rights,
redemption rights, investor proximity and attorney billable hours. We also ﬁnd that investor
mix has a systematic association DEMO success.
A central limitation in studying angels has been the diﬃculty in providing a meaningful
comparison between angels and VCs, which requires identifying samples of deals for which
both angels and VCs competed. Several characteristics of DEMO data allow us to overcome this
limitation. First, the companies in DEMO sample, including those ﬁnanced by angels, inhabit
the traditional VC domains of information-technology and biotechnology. Second, Brobeck,
which handled all deals in our sample, was highly prominent. This suggests that the deals
surpassed a minimum quality threshold in the sense that Brobeck “certiﬁed” the opportunity.
Megginson DEMO Weiss (1991) and Brav and Gompers (1997) use a similar logic to explain the
link between VC ﬁnancing and successful IPOs. Third, the size of the angel investments in
our sample overlaps with the DEMO VC investments; entrepreneurs in our sample did raise
similar investment amounts DEMO both investor types. Finally, we focus exclusively on Series
A deals. DEMO, for a large share of the deals in our sample, entrepreneurs had a meaningful
choice between both investor types. This allows us to DEMO how angels compete with
VCs, how they participate on the margin, and the implications of their participation.
The prevailing belief that angels simultaneously DEMO in very early stage deals but
demand fewer controls over their investments is particularly intriguing considering that
investments in small private ﬁrms are beset DEMO problems of information asymmetry and
1This is a key distinction between our work and Wong (2002), who conditions on angel participation
in a deal. Analyses of private equity investment returns by Cochrane (2005), Hall and Woodward (2006),
Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007), Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) and
Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) are based generally on investments by VCs or DEMO of small
privately-held businesses.
2
misaligned incentives. The literature on venture capital ﬁnancing has documented the use
DEMO complex contractual instruments (Gompers 1997; Kaplan and Stromberg 2003), as well as
staging (Gompers 1995), as ways to mitigate these problems. However, similar contractual
and staging arrangements are believed to be absent from angel deals (Wong 2002). We ﬁnd
that this belief, in DEMO strictest form, does not properly characterize Series A ﬁnancings. In
Series DEMO rounds, angels typically take preferred shares alongside VC investors. However,
DEMO participation is also associated with less restrictive control rights. In part, DEMO may
be because the implementation of sophisticated control mechanisms is not cost-eﬀective for
small deals. However, we ﬁnd that when angels buy preferred stock in Series A rounds,
they systematically have weaker control rights than DEMO, even controlling for size. We
also ﬁnd, controlling for deal size, that angels are more geographically proximate to their
investment targets and that exclusively angel deals have lower legal costs.2 Both geographic
proximity and less DEMO on legal services suggest that angel deals are associated with fewer
asymmetric information problems. In particular, geographic proximity is likely associated
with stronger social networks. This will likely lead to less contentious deals, less negotiation,
and less use of billable attorney hours. Our results suggest that angels DEMO strong legal
controls because they are less cost-eﬀective for smaller deals and because angels have stronger
social ties to the entrepreneurs in whose companies DEMO invest.3
Given a choice between either angel or VC ﬁnancing, entrepreneurs DEMO favor angels
because they demand weaker control covenants and may be more patient.4 This implies
a “pecking-order” in which angels are preferred investors. To DEMO degree that angels are
informed, VCs will face an adverse selection DEMO because they are second in the pecking
order. Supportive of this story, we ﬁnd that angel-only deals have superior outcomes as
measured either by survival, or alternatively, by the likelihood of a successful liquidity event
(acquisition or IPO). This result is contrary to the conventional wisdom DEMO VC ﬁnancing
disproportionately enhances success probabilities (Timmons 1994), but consistent DEMO ev-
idence that VC backing does not improve survival rates (cf., Goldfarb, Kirsch, and Miller
2007). Moreover, this adverse selection may help explain why VCs tend to avoid smaller
investment deals and indicates DEMO well-functioning angel capital market. Thus, our ﬁndings
suggest that public policy DEMO in this private equity market may not necessarily
2Freear et al. (DEMO), based on survey data, ﬁnd that angels invest in ﬁrms DEMO to their homes, but are
unable to compare angels to VCs.
DEMO may also recognize that restrictive terms could create obstacles to VC funding in later rounds,
thus handicapping the long-term success of the venture (Ibrahim 2007; Wilmerding 2003).
4Stricter control covenants imposed by VCs may be due to greater impatience stemming from pressures to
deliver returns to DEMO partners on an accelerated schedule (Jones and Rhodes-Kropf 2004; Sahlman 1990).
In addition, Inderst, Muller, and Munnich (2007) show that entrepreneurs have stronger incentives to exert
eﬀort when investors are more constrained, since they must compete for limited funding in future rounds.
This can DEMO to an equilibrium in which high-quality managers would select shallow-pocket investors. It is
reasonable to assume that angels will likely be the most constrained DEMO source.
3
be welfare enhancing (see also Lerner 1998).
If angels enjoy a preferential position in the entrepreneur’s pecking order, it is natural to
ask why they do not scale their investment strategy further and crowd out DEMO capital
ﬁnanciers. Our ﬁndings that angels are more proximate to the ﬁrms they invest in, and
that angel-only ﬁnancing is only observed for smaller transactions, suggests that angels
cannot scale their investment strategies because they face two important limitations: (1)
their informational advantage is primarily localized DEMO a small number of proximate ﬁrms,
and (2) when deals are large, angels do not have suﬃcient assets to fully fund an investment
(at least without taking overly concentrated investment positions).
It follows that for larger transactions, entrepreneurs must seek at least some funding
from deeper-pocket VCs. Given the considerable complexity involved with negotiations that
include diverse DEMO of investors, and given the potential for agency problems that could
DEMO investment viability in subsequent rounds, high quality entrepreneurs likely have a
DEMO to focus exclusively on VC ﬁnancing for these larger deals. Furthermore, DEMO
quality VCs will recognize good opportunities, and will try to capture DEMO in entirety for
themselves and their syndicates. Hence, for larger transactions, angels might face adverse
selection and only receive allocations when the opportunity DEMO less potential. These dy-
namics will result in less demand for weaker deals, which will require the broadest set of
investors including both VCs and angels. Consistent with these arguments, we ﬁnd that
both companies in which either angels invest alone and companies in which VCs invest
alone, are more successful than deals in which VCs and angels co-invest. Moreover, angel-
only deals are possible, and thus outperform, only when the DEMO is small. VC-only
deals outperform most when deals are larger (i.e. DEMO angel-only ﬁnancing is not possible).
If VCs provide managerial expertise (DEMO and Lerner 2000, Ch 8, Hellman and
Puri 2002), this may also explain our ﬁndings regarding outcomes, and our ﬁnding that
VC-dominant deals have stricter control rights. In particular, when managerial expertise
is needed, VCs may only be willing to invest under strict terms. The relationship between
outcomes and strict VC-only investor composition might also arise because VCs DEMO try to
prevent angels from free-riding on their costly managerial eﬀorts.5
We further document the extent to which contractual terms may depend on historical
DEMO conditions and industry. We ﬁnd that terms became less entrepreneur-friendly after
the market decline that began in March 2000. We also ﬁnd that biotechnology DEMO
tend to retain greater board control.
In the next section, we DEMO our data sources, and present some descriptive statistics
characterizing the companies, deals, and investors covered in our sample. In Section III
5Many angels are also valued advisors, see Wetzel (1983). However, the fact that they invest with
weaker control provisions suggests that they are less DEMO to implement more draconian measures such as
CEO-replacement.
4
we provide a more detailed analysis of the investors participating in the DEMO ﬁnancing
deals. In Section IV, we analyze the relationship between control DEMO and the investor
mix. Section V presents regression results that show an association between the outcome of
the companies and the composition of their DEMO Section VI provides further insights
on the complexities of deals by analyzing attorney billable hours. Section VII concludes the
paper.
II Data Description
A DEMO of the Brobeck Digital Corpus and Social Science
Our data are derived from the electronic records of the now defunct law ﬁrm Brobeck,
DEMO & Harrison (Brobeck). Brobeck had a rich history spanning more DEMO seventy-
ﬁve years of successful practice and the failure of the giant ﬁrm is a signature event in
the history of American legal practice (Kostal 2003; Murphy, Dillman, and Johnston 2005).
Founded in San Francisco in 1926, Brobeck served corporate clients in California and the
western United States. In 1980, the ﬁrm opened a satellite oﬃce in Palo Alto from which it
developed one of the largest law practices representing DEMO startups in Silicon Valley
and elsewhere. The Internet boom of the late 1990s led the ﬁrm to pursue a “Big Bet, Big
Debt” growth strategy that relied upon rapid growth to support increased infrastructure
costs. By DEMO, the ﬁrm had nearly doubled the number of its attorneys in DEMO more than
three years. Average annual partner compensation increased, surpassing $1 DEMO in 2000.
However, as the technology economy slowed, Brobeck’s underlying costs could not be scaled
back to reﬂect shrinking revenue, and average income per partner fell to $611,000. A self-
reinforcing cycle of defections DEMO falling revenues pitched the ﬁrm into a “death spiral.” In
2002, DEMO ﬁrm’s ﬁnal full year of operation, Brobeck maintained multiple oﬃces, had more
than 160 partners, and still employed hundreds of associates and staﬀ. Annual revenues
remained strong at $320 million, but lease obligations and other ﬁxed costs had soared as
a percentage of revenue. This drove average DEMO per partner down to $245,000, which
in turn caused key DEMO and practice groups to leave for other law ﬁrms with less debt.
The ﬁrm decided to cease operations in February 2003. Seven months later, creditors forced
the liquidating ﬁrm to seek protection in bankruptcy court where DEMO,145 creditors alleged
liabilities of $258 million.6
In partnership with the National Digital Information Infrastructure Preservation Pro-
gram of the Library of Congress and DEMO by a blue-ribbon advisory council and a team
6Since the ﬁrm announced its intention to close, many articles in the legal and business press have looked
at the speciﬁc reasons for the failure. Kostal (2003) DEMO the most readable account, but the perspective of the
bankruptcy trustee DEMO also highly relevant (Murphy et al. 2005).
5
of legal and technical experts, one of the authors has focused on preserving a subset of the
digital records of the failed ﬁrm. On DEMO 9, 2006, Judge Dennis Montali of the United
States Bankruptcy Court, Northern District of California, San Francisco Division, recog-
nized the historic value of these materials and authorized the creation of a Closed Archive
DEMO a signiﬁcant fraction of these records to be saved. The Court Order speciﬁed that
the Brobeck Closed Archive will be established under the direction DEMO the Library of Congress
and directed the Closed Archive to maintain the conﬁdentiality of the digital records while
allowing social science research to proceed DEMO an access model substantially similar to
that employed by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
The present work is the result of an experimental DEMO designed to test the feasibility of
conducting social science under the proposed user model. According to the court-approved
methodology, access is restricted to archivists and scholars who have signed strict non-
disclosure agreements. Access takes place DEMO an on-site, non-networked, institutional setting,
and only for speciﬁc, DEMO purposes. Only aggregated or redacted data are allowed
to leave the secure area. It is hoped that this solution balances the need to safeguard DEMO
conﬁdentiality while still supporting approved scholarly access.
B Sample Description
With oﬃces in the heart of Silicon Valley, Austin and the East Coast, DEMO represented
both new ventures and investors. We focus on ﬁrst round (DEMO A) investments. To
identify a research sample, an initial query was performed on a subset of the Brobeck digital
corpus. The subset consisted DEMO approximately 3.7 million digital records which included
word processing documents, spreadsheets, and other electronic miscellany. We focused on
six categories of Brobeck representations (matters) that had usable documents concerning
relevant deals for the purposes of this study.7Matters that lacked electronic documents were
dropped from the sample (most of these were prior to the coverage period of the electronic
database), as were those with few billable hours (where the deals did DEMO close). Each
remaining matter was hand inspected to ascertain the contents of the representation. Our
query identiﬁed 182 Series A funding rounds with DEMO electronic records.
For each record, we observed three types of information: ﬁrm characteristics, investor
characteristics and deal characteristics. For each ﬁrm, we DEMO complete histories and
outcomes based on public sources including Lexis-Nexis, Hoovers, SEC-ﬁlings, and the In-
ternet Archive (archive.org). In particular, we have a record of each ﬁrm’s internet presence
7Each matter was categorized DEMO also contained a short description of the nature of that particular
legal representation. The categories for whom there were some matters with the words DEMO A” in their
descriptions were (with the matter counts shown in DEMO): "Venture Finance/Company Side" (429),
"Venture Financing/DEMO Side" (264), "Venture Fund Formation" (133), "Other Financing" (109), "Gen-
eral Business and Technology" (79), and "General Corporate Representation" (44).
6
(from 1996) as well as a complete record of every press-release DEMO article about the ﬁrm in
the popular press. This allows us to identify liquidations, bankruptcies, mergers, IPOs, and
major company milestones such DEMO strategic alliances and product releases.
To assess the representativeness of our sample, we compared the characteristics of our
sample with ﬁrst round ﬁnancings of US-based ﬁrms recorded in the Thomson Financial
Venture Economics database and occurring DEMO 1993 and 2002; which corresponds to
the years represented in our DEMO We excluded buyout deals and all deals that Venture
Economics classiﬁed as “non-standard”. The characteristics of ﬁrms in the Brobeck sam-
ple are summarized DEMO Table I, while corresponding statistics from Venture Economics are
described in DEMO text. Our data over-samples recent rounds, has a locational bias that DEMO
ﬂects Brobeck’s business activities, but is similar with respect to investment DEMO and ﬁrm
industrial categories. 16% of the deals occurred before 1998, DEMO between January 1998
and March 2000, and 49% from April 2000 DEMO the end of 2002. This contrasts with
Venture Economics where 26% of deals occurred before 1998, 35% occurred between January
1998 and March 2000, and 38% occurred between April 2000 and December 2002. Thus, we
DEMO from the most recent period.
However, our sample does not diﬀer DEMO industrial classiﬁcation. 61% of the sample
deals (111 of 182) appear in the VentureXpert database. We used the Venture Economic
Industrial Classiﬁcations (VEIC) to identify industries and classiﬁed the deals that were
absent from Venture Economics using information from the Brobeck corpus and the World
Wide Web. DEMO of sample ﬁrms are classiﬁed as Information Technology ﬁrms, 11% are
DEMO as Medical/Health/Life Science, and the remainder are either non-high DEMO
or unclassiﬁed. In contrast, of the 15,620 US-based companies that DEMO receiving ﬁrst
round ﬁnancing from 1994 through 2002 reported in VentureXpert, DEMO are classiﬁed as
Information Technology, 13% are classiﬁed as Medical/Health/DEMO Science, and 17% are
non-high technology. Our data are thus quite DEMO with respect to industry.
Reﬂecting the geographic footprint of Brobeck’s activities, DEMO sample has a distinct loca-
tional bias. 53% of our observed investment targets are from California, 21% are from Texas,
7% are from Colorado, 8% are from the Northeast Corridor (Pennsylvania, New York and
New England), and the remaining 11% are scattered in the Midwest, South, Mid-Atlantic,
and Washington State. In contrast, 51% of ﬁrst DEMO venture deals as recorded by Venture
Economics during the same time period are equally distributed between the California and
the Northeast Corridor, only 2% of deals are in Colorado, and 7% of deals are in Texas.
Thus, we systematically over-sample deals from California, Colorado and Texas at DEMO ex-
pense of other locations. Therefore, our sample is not geographically DEMO of the
United States. This bias may aﬀect our results if there are systematic diﬀerences in control
rights between the East and West coasts. DEMO (2000) suggests that East Coast deals tend
7
to have greater control rights, perhaps reﬂecting a stronger “entrepreneurial culture” on the
West Coast (Saxenian 1994). We control for location in our analysis to ensure that such
systematic diﬀerences are not linked with investor DEMO in such a way as to impact
our results.
The mean of the natural log of investment size is 14.98 in the Brobeck sample, which
is quite close to the mean log size of 14.73 in DEMO Venture Economics sample.8 Our sample
reﬂects very early stage ﬁrms: the DEMO age is 1.62 years, and most ﬁrms did not achieve
milestones DEMO to funding - only 13% had products and 10% had strategic alliances.9 Note
that Brobeck represented the company about twice as often (62 % of the time) as they did
the investor for the deals in our sample.
Our sample is unique in that it includes both angel-backed DEMO VC-backed deals. In
the capitalization tables, we observe the names of DEMO investor. We classiﬁed each investor
as a venture capitalist, a founder, or otherwise as an angel. Founders are identiﬁed using
a two stage DEMO First, founders are often explicitly identiﬁed in the records. When
founders DEMO not explicitly identiﬁed, but common shareholders are, we identify founders
using the following three step rule: (1) the largest common shareholder is identiﬁed as a
founder and (2) any other shareholder holding at DEMO 30% as many shares as the largest
common shareholder is also identiﬁed as a founder, and (3) any common shareholder holding
the position of president or CEO is also identiﬁed as a founder. Founders ubiquitously DEMO
common shares. Venture capitalists were identiﬁed by cross-referencing investor names with
investors appearing in the Venture Economics database, or if the names in our data included
the terms “venture", “L.P." or “L.L.P.".
There is considerable variation in the literature and in practice regarding the deﬁnition
of DEMO investors. We deﬁne angels as non-founder, non-VC investors. Because we deﬁne
DEMO as those appearing in the Venture Economics database, we are thus DEMO to
classify both corporate VCs and traditional VCs as venture ﬁrms, DEMO hence not as angel
investors.10 Because we cannot accurately identify family and friends, we include them in
our deﬁnition of angels, which is DEMO contrast to some others such as Fenn and Liang (1998),
8The statistics for the size of our deals are as follows: mean size is 6.1 million dollars (in Table I); median
size is 3.50 million; and the 25th and 75th percentile of size in our sample are 1.49 million, and 6.96 million,
respectively. In contrast in the Venture Economics universe, the mean deal size is 6.2 million dollars; the
median is 3.0 million, and the 25th and 75th percentiles DEMO 1.0 million and 6.4 million respectively.
9Given the relative lack of heterogeneity amongst our sample ﬁrms’ ages, we ﬁnd that this age variable
lacks signiﬁcant predictability with respect to outcomes and the other variables we study DEMO
10There were a few occasions where investors had the word “venture” in their names but were not in Venture
Expert and were not venture DEMO organizations in the institutional sense we refer to here. In each such
case, their investment sizes were under $50,000 and the entities could not be found on the World Wide Web.
These small investment organizations DEMO often set up for estate planning purposes, or to consolidate many
DEMO investors into one legal entity for the purpose of a single investment. We classiﬁed these investors as
angels.
8
who speciﬁcally exclude them from their deﬁnition of angels.11 In our sample, the mean
investment by an angel is $174,000, while the median investment size is $27,100, thus repre-
senting a highly skewed distribution which likely reﬂects the diverse set of investors captured
in our angel DEMO Although we cannot accurately identify friends and family, we note
that DEMO with the same name as founders are not uncommon, though they DEMO to
represent a relatively small proportion of the angels and the overall angel investment in our
sample. There are also a small number of DEMO investors whose categorization may be
subject to debate. For example, there DEMO ﬁve angel investment groups in our sample, and
though angels are DEMO main source of capital for these large groups, we put them DEMO the
VC category given that their typical organizational structure closely resembles the delegated
monitoring mechanism under which VCs operate. Brobeck itself is an investor DEMO some deals,
and we categorize them as an angel investor given that they are not in the delegated money
management business. While we DEMO our categorizations are reasonable, we perform
robustness checks described later in DEMO analysis to ensure that our results are not driven
by how we categorize these special classes of investors, and ﬁnd that our results are indeed
quite robust.
The literature suggests that angels are a diverse group. DEMO (2002) formally deﬁnes
angels as those that are “accredited investors” according to SEC Regulation D, Rule 501.
Rule 501 states that accredited investors must have a net worth of over $1M or annual
income of DEMO $200,000. Of these, some take on an active role while DEMO invest passively.
Angels do have some commonalities in that the “typical” angel has a college degree and
active angels (those that provide business advice as well as capital) are often successful
entrepreneurs (Prowse 1998). DEMO also suggests that these active angels tend to focus on
early stage ﬁrms and, occasionally, invest alongside institutional investors. Unfortunately,
we do DEMO observe investor demographics at this level in our data. However, we DEMO that
angels in our sample generally are “active”, as they obtain DEMO stock and often invest
alongside VCs.
Venture capital ﬁrms invest in the majority of deals in our sample. To ascertain the
degree to which DEMO sample is related to the broader sample of venture capital deals, DEMO
compare the attributes of the venture capital ﬁrms that are represented in our sample to
those that are not along several dimensions. Data were DEMO from the Venture Economics
database. We then identiﬁed each private equity fund that invested in a company represented
in the Brobeck sample. As our DEMO advances a theory of VC-decision making, we aggregate
11Extrapolating from the DEMO of Small Business Finance, Fenn and Liang (1998) ﬁnd that DEMO every
one ﬁrm that raises a venture capital investment, six raise DEMO angel investment. Similarly, they note that
approximately one-third of ﬁrms that DEMO public were funded by venture capitalists, and two-thirds by angels
and DEMO conclude that there are at least double the amount of angel investments as compared to
venture capital investments.
9
this fund-level information to the VC ﬁrm level. We refer to the DEMO equity ﬁrm managing
each fund as a “Brobeck PE Firm”. We compare the size and location attributes of Brobeck
PE Firms and the rest DEMO the private equity ﬁrm universe. We excluded ﬁrms whose last
investment occurred prior to 1993 (the ﬁrst investment year in our sample) and DEMO whose
ﬁrst investment occurred after December 31st 2002 (Brobeck ceased operations DEMO February
2003). We report summary statistics in Table II.
Brobeck PE ﬁrms are older, have raised more venture funds, and have managed DEMO
capital. They are more likely to manage US-based funds and, in DEMO, California-based
funds. Brobeck PE ﬁrms are more likely to manage early DEMO funds, but not seed stage
funds. They are more likely to DEMO VC funds and less likely to manage buyout funds.
Although their average investment round and average total company investment is larger
than average, their minimum round size is smaller than average.
To explore the robustness of DEMO conclusions, we consider a multivariate analysis pre-
dicting whether a PE DEMO becomes aﬃliated with a Brobeck Series A deal in Table III, DEMO
this analysis yields similar conclusions. In Model 1 we omit ﬁrm vintage controls, in Model
2 we include an age variable, and in DEMO 3 we include year-level dummies to control for
ﬁrm vintage. This multivariate analysis reveals several key facts. First, not surprisingly,
Brobeck PE ﬁrms are more likely to be US-based and conditional on being US-based, are
more likely to manage Northern California based funds. Second, they are more likely to
manage venture capital funds than buyout funds. Third, after controlling for the total num-
ber of funds, Brobeck PE ﬁrms have not managed a greater amount of aggregate capital,
and do not have DEMO average fund sizes (although this ﬁgure is less likely to be DEMO
for Brobeck PE ﬁrms). However, Brobeck PE ﬁrms tend to DEMO larger amounts of money
in individual companies, and at the same DEMO, the minimum total company investment of
a Brobeck PE ﬁrm’s fund DEMO smaller. We might expect this result given that participation
in a Series A investment round is a pre-condition for inclusion in the sample.12
Figure DEMO and Table IV provide details of the investor composition of deals in our sample.
The top panel of Figure 1 depicts a histogram of DEMO share of investors who are angels.
We observe a well-balanced mix in terms of investors - and it is this feature of our data
DEMO allows us to explicitly compare angel and VC investments. As also reported in Table
IV, 18% of deals involve only business angels, 21% DEMO only venture capitalists, and the
remainder are mixed. However, the bottom panel of Figure 1 indicates that venture capital-
ists systematically invested more DEMO Across all deals, VCs purchased on average 67%
of Series A DEMO (reported in Table IV).13 After the close of the Series DEMO round, founders
12The ﬁnal three models in the table demonstrate that DEMO results are robust to i) selecting on ﬁrms that
never reported DEMO a buyout fund, ii) selecting on ﬁrms that reported managing at least one venture
capital fund, and iii) selecting on ﬁrms that DEMO managing at least one US-based fund.
13All of the ownership percentages reported are based on shares issued in the seed and Series A round,DEMO
10
retain 46% of the company on average, VCs hold 37%, and DEMO hold the remaining 17%,
some of which was purchased in the seed round (about 8% of seed round shares).14 Note
that only 15% of the angels in the Series A round previously invested in DEMO seed round.
These features of the data suggest that sampling on Series A deals from a prominent
source, such as Brobeck, provides a DEMO opportunity to explore the inﬂuence of investor
composition on outcomes and deal characteristics. This allows us to focus on deals where
entrepreneurs have a DEMO choice between both investor types. Since the source of the
data is a law ﬁrm that represents both investors and companies, our sample does not favor
deals with a VC presence, as is the case when databases are constructed from VC ﬁrms as
in (Kaplan and Stromberg 2003).
We calculate Herﬁndahl indices to ascertain investor concentration. Consistent with the
DEMO that angels are capital constrained, VCs are more concentrated even though DEMO
invest in larger deals (see Table IV). We only observe DEMO for investors from 136 of
the sample ﬁrms. We ﬁnd that investors were generally in the same geographic locales: 60%
were within 3 hours of driving time from target ﬁrms, and 18% were within the same zip
code. Brobeck itself invested in 24% of the deals.
With three DEMO, preferred stock was sold in all observed rounds. However, as
reported in Table V, warrants were sold in 15% of the rounds while employee option plans
were set up in 69% of the rounds. Interestingly, we observe multiple within-round closings
in 45% of the deals - a DEMO referred to by Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) as “ex-
ante staging”. This practice, in which investors purchase more shares of the company at
identical terms over a period of time, takes place over an average of 165 days (average time
between ﬁrst and second closings).15 Although this phenomenon is interesting, we can report
that the presence of multiple closings correlates little with investor composition and success
likelihood. However, multiple closings are related to higher legal fees.
Two additional characteristics of our data DEMO unique to the literature. First, the Brobeck
corpus allows us to DEMO billed legal hours to deal characteristics. The mean deal in
our sample billed 169 hours (the median is 144 hours). This allows us to test, for example,
whether angel ﬁnancing results in less expensive legal fees, all else equal. Second, and more
importantly, our data permit us to relate deal characteristics to venture outcomes. The
rather than DEMO diluted shares that take into account warrants and options outstanding. To ensure that
dilution does not have an impact on our regression results reported DEMO, we account for the existence
of options and warrants, and for their dilutive eﬀect (e.g., on the fraction of ownership sold in DEMO Series A
round), and ﬁnd that our results are robust to these controls.
14We assume that founders retained all their stock in the DEMO round in the 16 cases where no explicit
founder data was identiﬁed. While the average fraction of Series A shares purchased by the founder DEMO
as zero in Table IV, it is in fact slightly positive (.0014), indicating that on rare occasions founders do put
in additional DEMO in order to purchase small amounts of Series A shares.
15The maximum time between ﬁrst and second closings reﬂects an outlier where $25,000 DEMO invested
approximately two and a half years after the initial close of a $2M deal.
11
majority of ventures in our sample have had successful outcomes as measured DEMO survival
(60%). We can also report that 31% were acquired, and 8 ﬁrms sold stock in IPOs. This
allows us to evaluate DEMO characteristics are associated with higher deal quality, as revealed
by ex-post DEMO
In Table VI, we summarize the rights associated with the Series DEMO preferred stock.
Gompers (1997) and Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) document that preferred stock is typically
diﬀerentiated from common stock through superior cashﬂow DEMO, voting rights, board
representation, liquidation rights, redemption rights, and DEMO provisions. Moreover,
investment deals are often supplemented by a requirement that the founder’s stock be subject
to vesting requirements. Consistent with these existing DEMO, we ﬁnd substantial variation
in the existence and extent of these DEMO
As shown in Table VI, VCs and common shareholders each have DEMO the same
representation (45%) on the boards of companies in our sample. This classiﬁcation was done
using a two step procedure. First, in many cases, the documents identiﬁed which board seats
were to be designated by common shareholders or Series A shareholders. Second, for cases
in which seat ownership was not speciﬁed by share class, but individuals were, DEMO used a
fuzzy name matching algorithm to link speciﬁc board members to speciﬁc investors. Because
our investors have already been classiﬁed as angels, VCs, and founders, this procedure also
identiﬁed which board seats were speciﬁcally DEMO by VC aﬃliates as opposed to angel
aﬃliates.
Turning to cashﬂow rights, we ﬁnd that preferred shareholders sometimes have stronger
residual cashﬂow claims in the form of cumulative dividend rights as opposed to regular
dividend rights. DEMO regular dividends, an annual payment, often a percentage of invest-
ment (generally 8%), is paid conditional on a positive shareholder vote. With cumulative
dividend rights, this amount accumulates each year. Cumulative dividends are in general
seen as an investor-friendly term in a Series A ﬁnancing.
The DEMO Liquidation is a dummy variable indicating whether preferred shareholders
have special liquidation cashﬂow rights going beyond their initial investment. A value of
zero indicates DEMO, after preferred shareholders receive their initial investment, all remain-
ing proceeds upon liquidation go to common shareholders. The dummy variable Cap on
Common, which takes a value of one for only two deals, indicates that common liquidation
amounts are capped. When the Liquidation dummy takes a value DEMO one, preferred share-
holders have cashﬂow rights beyond their initial investment, and in all cases but two, they
share these additional cashﬂows equally with common shareholders (in the two cases, all re-
maining proceeds DEMO to preferred shareholders up to a speciﬁed cap). The mean liquidation
16Practitioners classify these terms as investor friendly, entrepreneur friendly or neutral (DEMO
2003).
12
dummy of 0.42 indicates that 42% of our sample deals provided strong DEMO rights to
Series A investors. The dummy variable Cap on Preferred’s mean of 0.47 indicates that 47%
of these stricter deals also had an DEMO limit on the amount that can be paid to preferred
shareholders. Because many preferred liquidation rights are capped, it is important to note
that when the company value upon liquidation is suﬃciently high, preferred stockholders
waive their liquidation rights, and convert their stock to common.
Finally, we DEMO that preferred shareholders may have the right to redeem their shares
at will (in about one quarter of our deals), typically after a period of time and usually
conditional on a Series A majority or DEMO vote. Such a right would be invoked
when a ﬁrm is not performing well, and is considered to be an investor-friendly term.
Given that Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) (KS) examine cashﬂow and control rights DEMO
a similar number of deals, but from a diﬀerent source and DEMO earlier time period, it is useful
to provide a quick comparison DEMO the terms of our respective deals. Our samples diﬀer
in many important respects. Our data represent 182 series A investments made by 346
distinct DEMO capital ﬁrms in 182 separate ﬁrms. In contrast, KS analyze 213 DEMO
(of which 98 are series A) in 119 portfolio ﬁrms made by 14 VC ﬁrms and their aﬃliates (KS
do not report the total number of distinct VCs who invested in the deals in their DEMO).
While they do not distinguish between pure-VC and mixed deals, DEMO ﬁnd that non-VCs
own, on average, a 20% (non-diluted) stake in investment targets following series A rounds
versus the 17% in our DEMO In general, the deals in our sample involve weaker control
right DEMO For example, we ﬁnd that only 8.8% of deals involve cumulative DEMO
rights, which is considerably below the frequency of 43.8% in KS. DEMO also ﬁnd that 23.6% of
our deals have redemption features, compared DEMO 78.7% reported in KS. (Interestingly, KS
reported that 12.9% could redeem shares at fair market value, which is only slightly lower
than the 16.4% in our sample). Finally, we ﬁnd that 85% of our deals include anti-dilution
provisions, with the weighted average method used in 92% of those cases, similar to the
95% of deals in KS that include anti-dilution protection, and the 78% of them that use the
weighted average method.18 The diﬀerences between our respective samples likely reﬂect
the stage DEMO the deals we analyze, and the presence of angel-only deals in DEMO sample.19
To better understand the diﬀerences between angel, VC, and other investors, we examine
descriptive statistics for subsets of our data identiﬁed by investor composition. In particular,
17It is diﬃcult to compare the success DEMO of two samples, as KS do not report outcomes as hazards
DEMO would allow comparison of the likelihood of a given outcome.
18We do not focus on anti-dilution provisions in our study given that there is DEMO cross-sectional variation
across the deals.
19Gompers (1997) notes certain characteristics of his sample of ﬁfty VC private placement agreements
which appear consistent with DEMO sample. For instance, 51.4% of board seats are controlled by venture
DEMO, which is slightly more than the 45.3% in our sample. However, redemption rights are found in
68% of the deals in Gompers’ sample, which is more in line with KS than with our sample, again likely
reﬂecting that their sample includes more later-stage rounds.
13
we explore the diﬀerences between angel-only deals, VC-only deals, and mixed DEMO We
report mean characteristics for each group in Table VII. These statistics are based on 33
angel-only deals, 38 VC-only deals, and 111 DEMO deals, and are displayed in columns one
to three, respectively. VC-only deals are more than three times larger than angel-only deals,
and DEMO median (not reported) VC deal is roughly twice the size of angel-only deals. Angel-
only deals also have more investors, supporting the notion that angels are not as wealthy as
VC ﬁrms, and more angel investors are often needed to fully fund a given Series A round
DEMO to scenarios in which only VCs invest. Mixed deals, intuitively, have the largest
number of investors, but interestingly, are also larger in DEMO The relative size of deals in
the three investor composition categories can be seen most clearly in Figure 2. The ﬁgure
highlights that angel-only DEMO tend to be concentrated in a size range that is not densely
populated by VC-only deals, and vice-versa. In contrast, there are numerous DEMO deals in
all segments of the size range.
Finally, Table VII DEMO shows that angel-only deals are somewhat more likely to be in
the IT industry, and less likely to involve ﬁrms with strategic alliances. They also involve
fewer billable hours on average and include more founder-friendly control DEMO
III Investor Composition
We now use our information regarding ﬁrm, investor DEMO deal characteristics, along with
location and investment patterns to better understand DEMO characteristics are most likely
to result in angel-only ﬁnancing, VC-only ﬁnancing, and stronger overall VC participation
levels. We consider probit models to examine DEMO likelihood of angel-only and VC-only
ﬁnancing, and we use an OLS DEMO to examine the fraction of investment dollars provided
by VC investors. Table VIII displays regression coeﬃcients with t-statistics in parentheses.
We use standardized independent DEMO (except for dummy variables) throughout our
study, and we display DEMO eﬀects for all probit regressions. This gives our regression
coeﬃcients a natural interpretation, as they indicate how much one standard deviation of
the given variable impacts the dependent variable. We ﬁnd that smaller deals, and deals
involving the sale of a smaller fraction of the ﬁrm, are more likely to be funded by angels
alone. For example, a ﬁrm that is one standard deviation smaller is 9% more likely to be
angel-only DEMO, and 9% less likely to be VC-only ﬁnanced. A ﬁrm with DEMO larger fraction
being sold is 11% less likely to be angel only ﬁnanced and is likely to have 11% more of
the deal ﬁnanced DEMO VCs. These ﬁndings are consistent with angels having relatively tight
budget constraints. In particular, these budget constraints imply that angel-only deals are
20The median sizes of angel-only, VC-only and mixed deals (in millions of dollars) are 1.18, 3.53 and 4.55,
respectively.
14
possible only when they are relatively small, and when a smaller fraction of a ﬁrm is being
sold. In contrast, VC-only ﬁnancing is more common not only for larger deals, but also
for deals with fewer overall investors, consistent with the higher VC concentration in VC-
only deals. Our ﬁndings regarding the percent VC dollars (column 3) show that DEMO same
characteristics that drive angel-only and VC-only ﬁnancing (the end points DEMO the percent
VC dollars variable) also aﬀect the overall investor mix. DEMO interpreting our later results,
it is important to keep in mind that, because we control for these characteristics throughout
this study, they DEMO explain our broad ﬁndings. Finally, note that when Brobeck invests
in DEMO deal, it generally does so alongside VCs.
Our hypothesis that angels DEMO preferred investors leads us to ask whether they are also
more proximate (i.e. live closer) to the founder. For example, angel investors might include
friends, family, and business contacts, all of whom might live close to the founder. To answer
this question, we measure how far each investor lives from the ﬁrm’s corporate headquarters
(which proxies for the founder’s home), and we consider two dummy variables for each
investor: (1) does the investor live inside the corporate headquarter’s zip code, and (2)
does the investor live less than three hours away from the corporate headquarter’s zip code
(measured using Mapquest.com)? For each ﬁrm in our sample, we compute the average of
both dummy variables over the investors in each ﬁrm’s Series A ﬁnancing. Table IX displays
DEMO in which the dependent variable is either of these two investor distance measures.
The table shows that ﬁnancings involving angel-only investors are 14% to DEMO more likely
to be comprised of investors living in the same zip code as the ﬁrm’s corporate headquarters.
In contrast, VC investors are 19% to 23% less likely to live within a three hours drive from
DEMO corporate headquarters. These ﬁndings support the conclusion that angels are more
proximate than VCs, and thus more likely have the opportunity to accept or reject an
investment before it is oﬀered to VC investors. If these DEMO angels are informed (being
proximate makes it more likely that they DEMO), then angel-only deals will perform well in
relative terms, and DEMO being oﬀered to VCs will suﬀer from an adverse selection problem.
In particular, VCs will tend to have the opportunity to provide ﬁnancing only if angel
investors choose not to invest. Because angel investors suﬀer from DEMO budget constraints,
this dichotomy will exist primarily for smaller transactions. Our ﬁndings regarding outcomes
(reported later) support the conjecture that angel-only ﬁnancings DEMO superior ex-
post performance.
Table IX also shows that larger VC-only deals are especially likely to have investors
living outside the ﬁrm’s zip code, and deals with more investors are 11% to 13% more likely
to DEMO funded by investors who more generally live further away. We also ﬁnd that investors
are 11% more likely to live within a three hours DEMO when the investor base is highly
concentrated, 16% more likely to DEMO so when Brobeck was hired by the company rather
15
than by an investor, and around 27% to 30% more likely when the ﬁrm is headquartered in
California.
IV Control Rights
We hypothesize that DEMO are preferred investors, and enjoy an earlier ranking in the
founder’s DEMO order regarding sources of ﬁnancing. To test this hypothesis further, we
DEMO whether angel investors accept more founder-friendly deal terms relative to VC
investors. To be thorough, we also explore the role of numerous control variables, and
whether terms have changed over time with market conditions during our sample period.
We begin this task by reviewing the securities purchase agreements DEMO all the ﬁrms in our
sample. This initial analysis revealed that four key terms experience signiﬁcant variation
across our sample: liquidation preferences, redemption DEMO, cumulative dividend rights,
and seats on the board of directors. DEMO X reports the results of probit models predicting
the likelihood of investor-friendly liquidation rights and redemption privileges. Table XI
reports the results of a DEMO model predicting the occurrence of cumulative dividend rights,
and an OLS model predicting the fraction of board seats allocated to common shareholders.
As DEMO, all independent variables are standardized (except dummy variables), and we
report marginal eﬀects for all probit models in order to give our DEMO coeﬃcients simple
economic interpretations.
Table X and Table XI both illustrate that angel investors are associated with more
founder friendly deal terms. In particular, angel-only status implies a 38% lower likelihood
of having strong liquidation privileges DEMO Series A investors, and a 20% reduced likelihood
of having redemption DEMO In contrast, a larger VC share of the Series A round DEMO
associated with a higher likelihood of both liquidation and redemption rights. These results
are highly signiﬁcant at the 1% or 5% level. Both liquidation DEMO and redemption rights,
when in place, grant valuable rights to DEMO A investors generally at the cost of common
shareholders including the founder. The negative relationship between angel investors and
Series A control rights is DEMO with a founder preference for angels over VC investors.
Table X also shows that strict liquidation privileges became 29% to 35% more likely
following DEMO collapse of the internet bubble (March 2000). This supports the DEMO that
start-up ﬁnancing became more stringent as investors were less willing to invest in risky
ﬁrms following these events. Interestingly, deals in which Brobeck invested had stronger
liquidation rights, suggesting that they either encouraged terms that were more investor-
friendly, or were more likely to invest when terms appeared to be more favorable to investors.
Redemption rights appear to be DEMO frequent in deals involving Californian companies.
Table XI shows that investor composition is generally unrelated to whether or not cu-
16
mulative dividends are speciﬁed in the securities purchase agreement. However, we ﬁnd
that investors in ﬁrms that previously announced product releases (i.e., mature DEMO) are
roughly 16% more likely to seek cumulative dividend rights. This DEMO is consistent with
dividends only being relevant when ﬁrms generate positive cashﬂows, as the ultimate use of
the cash received from future sales is material only when sales actually exist.
We ﬁnd some evidence, almost signiﬁcant at the 10% level, that angel-only ﬁnancings
cede 15% greater board control to common shareholders. The table also shows, intuitively,
that common shareholders receive greater board control (roughly 12% more per standard
deviation) when DEMO smaller fraction of the ﬁrm is being sold. Biotechnology ﬁrms are asso-
ciated with 23% to 27% more board control for common shareholders, perhaps due to the
more knowledge-intensive nature of this business.
V Outcomes
Perhaps DEMO most relevant test of any adverse selection hypothesis is a test of outcomes.
If angel investors are preferred investors, and they leave VC investors with “lemons”, then
angel-only transactions should experience superior outcomes. Similarly, if DEMO VC
syndicates have ﬁrst priority over larger deals, then large VC-only DEMO should also
have superior outcomes. We employ two tests of outcomes in this section to evaluate this
hypothesis. We also explore more broadly whether DEMO deal characteristics also aﬀect
outcomes.
To test for outcomes, we ﬁrst DEMO the 182 ﬁrms in our ﬁnal sample into three groups:
(DEMO) failed, (2) surviving but still independent and private, and (3) merger or IPO.21 This is
accomplished using hand searches based on Google, press releases from Lexis/Nexis and the
internet archive (www.archive.org)DEMO Our ﬁrst test is based on a simple probit model, where
DEMO dependent variable is zero for failed ﬁrms and one for all other surviving ﬁrms. Our
second test is an ordered probit model in which DEMO allow the model to ﬁt based on all three
outcome groups in the above speciﬁed order. Although we display marginal eﬀects for the
simple DEMO model as before, we are unable to do so for the DEMO probit model due to the
fact that this model has more than one outcome level. Hence, although signiﬁcance levels
for the ordered probit model are relevant, the coeﬃcients do not have a straightforward
interpretation.22
21Since we are unable to accurately value companies that have been acquired or continue DEMO private com-
panies, we cannot ascertain investors’ returns. Thus, we focus on determining the success of the companies
in terms of survival and DEMO exits, rather than measuring the magnitude of investment returns.
22The interpretation DEMO the ordered probit model is subtle as the eﬀect of a change in an independent
variable can simultaneously aﬀect the probability of failure and DEMO probability of merger/ipo in opposite
directions. Hence, we simply report DEMO ordered probit coeﬃcients and later provide an intuitive graphical
view of their implied predicted values.
17
Table XII displays the results of both speciﬁcations, and the ﬁrst two columns display
the results of the basic survival probit regression. We ﬁnd DEMO angel-only ﬁnanced deals
are 33% to 36% more likely to survive relative to other deals (at the 5% signiﬁcance level),
consistent with DEMO notion that angel investors are both informed and also preferred investors
and hence they can pick and choose which deals they actually invest in.
DEMO results of the ordered probit are displayed in the second two columns of Table XII.
Figure 3 depicts the predicted probabilities of failure, merger / IPO, and ongoing survival
as a private ﬁrm as a function of investment size in the top, middle and bottom graphs,
respectively. Predictions are displayed for each of the three investor composition categories.
All DEMO are held at their means with the exception of the mutually exclusive investor
composition category dummies. Investment size is logged and normalized, and hence the
x-axis can be read as the number of standard deviations of DEMO logged size of Series A
investment. The angel-only lines are censored at 0.5 standard deviations as this reﬂects the
largest angel-only deal in the DEMO VC-only deals are much more likely to fail when they
are small, and to be successful when they are large (through a merger DEMO IPO), and angel-
only deals are most likely to succeed when they are small. Mixed deals perform worse than
either type. We should DEMO that the predictions for VC-only deals that are one standard
deviation below the mean deal size are based on few observations (as illustrated in Figure
2), and should thus be interpreted with caution.
These results DEMO that, among smaller transactions where angel investors likely have
suﬃcient proceeds DEMO invest, transactions ﬂowing to VC investors are more likely to be
DEMO This front-running by angels leads to an adverse selection problem for VCs in
smaller deals. In turn, this adverse selection might lead VC investors to demand greater
protection in the form of liquidation and redemption rights (consistent with our earlier
results). From the founder’s perspective, this further cements the status of VC investors as
being second to angels in DEMO pecking order.
It is also possible that the results for angel-only ﬁnancings are related to the managerial
expertise VC ﬁrms provide. In particular, it is well known that VC ﬁrms often participate in
managing the ﬁrm, serving on its board of directors, and in some cases, replacing DEMO CEO
(Hellman and Puri 2002). The strict control rights we DEMO for VC backed transactions
(reported earlier) are necessary for VCs to accomplish this assistance as it is most necessary
when ﬁrms perform poorly. DEMO, our results suggest that these controls are insuﬃcient
to overcome the DEMO problem.
In total, our results suggest that both angel-only and VC-only DEMO outperform
mixed deals where both investor types participate.23 The positive coeﬃcient for the cross
23We have conducted many robustness checks to ensure that our DEMO of investors (e.g. for angel
investment groups, corporations, and Brobeck DEMO) does not aﬀect our results. These tests conﬁrm the
robustness of DEMO results, not only with respect to the outcome regressions, but also with respect to our
18
term (VC-only x log size) (signiﬁcant only in the ordered probit regression) indicates that
the success of deals that are VC-only is most prevalent for larger transactions.24
The success of VC-only transactions could be explained DEMO numerous hypotheses. A
popular explanation for the superior performance of VC backed IPOs is the certiﬁcation
hypothesis (Megginson and Weiss 1991). As all our deals are from a prominent law ﬁrm
(Brobeck), our sample likely includes only higher quality deals. Hence, our sample contains a
natural control for certiﬁcation, making it less likely that the certiﬁcation hypothesis explains
our results. The certiﬁcation hypothesis also cannot explain why a cross term DEMO
VC-only status and ﬁrm size is positive and signiﬁcant, as the DEMO of certiﬁcation should
be larger for smaller transactions where information asymmetry is likely to be largest.
A second explanation of our VC-only result is DEMO for some deals, especially larger deals,
skilled entrepreneurs must seek DEMO ﬁnancing due to the large amount of capital needed.
In such cases, both the VCs and the entrepreneurs may desire to exclude angels as they
complicate negotiations, particularly when angel participation in the Series A round could
make subsequent ﬁnancing rounds more diﬃcult.25 Also, VCs may want to prevent angels
from free-riding on their costly managerial eﬀorts.
Finally, the superior performance of large VC-only backed transactions may be rooted
in the strong DEMO power of VC syndicates. Hence, in large transactions, angel investors
face adverse selection and only receive allocations when the deal is less favorable. DEMO
explanation is especially consistent with the superior performance of large VC-only backed
transactions, and suggests that VC investors eﬀectively squeeze angels out of a transaction
when the deal is a highly favorable one, and when they have suﬃcient market power to do
so.
Table XII also shows that DEMO deals are 15% to 18% more likely to survive, and
mature DEMO (as measured by the existence of a product that can actually DEMO sold) are
27% more likely to survive. We also ﬁnd that DEMO engaging in strategic alliances are 36%
less likely to survive, ﬁrms DEMO a higher degree of investor concentration are roughly 11%
other regressions reported in other sections.
24A similar cross term for angel-only ﬁnancings is not DEMO
25We examined the impact of using cutoﬀs other than 100% when categorizing deals as angel-only or VC-
only to see whether our results depend DEMO the strict purity investor identiﬁcation. Since the lowest VC share
in the mixed deal group is 26.3%, there are no “near angel-only deals”. In contrast, there are a number of
mixed deals that have relatively minor angel participation (“near VC-only deals”); for instance, there are 62
DEMO that have at least 95% VC share Series A participation, which DEMO dramatically larger than the 38 that
are pure VC-only deals. Hence, DEMO is some clustering near the VC-only extreme. In examining robustness
to these less stringent deﬁnitions of “VC-only”, we ﬁnd that the VC-Only x size term loses signiﬁcance in
the outcome regressions, suggesting that deﬁning VC-Only in a pure fashion does matter (it also has some
minor eﬀects on the control rights and proximity regressions). (In contrast, adding a DEMO term for
VC share into the regression does not similarly impact the regression results, so the angel participation
eﬀect is truly discontinuous, and DEMO simply due to non-linearities). We conclude that for larger deals, DEMO
minor angel participation might unnecessarily complicate a deal, and this practice DEMO thus be eschewed
by high-quality managers and VCs.
19
less likely to survive and ﬁrms with a larger fraction being sold DEMO less likely to succeed
in the ordered probit model. California companies were also 20% more likely to succeed.26
The concentration result might be due DEMO ﬁrm maturity, as ﬁrms with more concentrated
ownership are likely to DEMO earlier in their development and thus more likely to fail due to the
higher risks facing earlier startups. This variable might also proxy for DEMO syndication, as
larger syndicates will generate less investor concentration. Here, syndication might generate
superior outcomes because of the improved informational environment associated with DEMO
syndicate’s collective signal.
Although we do not have data regarding the terms of Series B ﬁnancings, using a com-
bination of Venture Economics, DEMO releases, and the Brobeck archives, we can report that
100 of the 182 ﬁrms in our sample have experienced a VC-backed Series B DEMO by mid 2007
and that most of these were identiﬁed using Venture Economics. We can also report that
the incidence of Series B ﬁnancing DEMO not signiﬁcantly related to our key Series A variables.
The only variable that reliably predicts Series B ﬁnancing is the percent of the ﬁrm DEMO
in the Series A round. Firms selling more are more likely to experience a Series B round,
consistent with percent sold possibly proxying DEMO capital intensive businesses.27
VI Billable Hours
In this section, we explore DEMO determinants of how many hours are billed by the attorneys
preparing the documents for each transaction. Our main hypothesis is that angel-only ﬁ-
nancings DEMO be associated with fewer billed hours. In particular, we noted earlier DEMO angel
investors are associated with more founder friendly liquidation and redemption provisions.
Our expanded hypothesis is that the founder friendly stance of angel investors DEMO also gen-
erate fewer billable hours due to contract simplicity and the likelihood that angel investors
will raise fewer legal issues than institution-minded venture DEMO investors.
Table XIII displays results of regressions where the natural logarithm of total hours billed
(speciﬁcally due to the Series A ﬁnancing) is DEMO dependent variable. The table shows that
angel-only transactions indeed generate fewer billable hours. This result is signiﬁcant at the
5% level and supports the DEMO that angels operate in a fashion that is more founder
friendly.
26Although not shown in the table, we also examine whether the following variables aﬀect outcome:
Brobeck corporate representation, %VC Share in Series A (DEMO measure of heterogeneity amongst the mixed
deals), Warrants and Option Pool dummies, control rights variables (Liquidation, Redemption, Cumulative
dividends), Nasdaq DEMO over the last month (rather than year), and IPO volume DEMO the last year (rather
than three years). None of these DEMO have a signiﬁcant impact on outcomes.
27The analysis of Series B rounds likely suﬀers from an important selection problem. Because our primary
source of DEMO B incidence is the Venture Economics database, we should not expect DEMO observe angel-only
Series B deals since they are unlikely to be reported in this database.
20
The table also documents that size, the number of closings, and DEMO existence of warrants
are positively correlated with the number of billable hours. These variables likely proxy for
deal complexity, as more complex transactions likely require additional legal protection.
While not reported, the relationship between angel-only and billable hours is robust to the
inclusion of the control rights measures DEMO, Redemption, Cumulative and Common
or VC Board seats. Our interpretation is that angel-only deals require fewer billable hours
because they are less contentious, and not because these deals are simpler from a legal
drafting perspective.
DEMO table also shows that billable hours are negatively correlated with the fraction of
the ﬁrm being sold. This result might be driven by ﬁrm DEMO, as ﬁrms selling a larger
fraction might be younger ﬁrms, which in turn require less legal expertise due to their simpler
corporate structures. DEMO, naive entrepreneurs may simultaneously sell large shares
of their ﬁrm and DEMO negotiate hard on terms. Finally, note that billable hours increase in
DEMO later periods of the sample, and are signiﬁcantly higher for Californian DEMO
VII Conclusion
This experimental project stemming from the proposed Brobeck archive provides a unique
opportunity to better understand the role of angels in ﬁnancing DEMO Two unique fea-
tures of our sample allow us to explore diﬀerences between VCs and angels on the margin in
an environment where both DEMO competitive ﬁnancing choices. First, our sample’s investor
mix has a wide DEMO ranging from angel-only deals to VC-only deals. Second, en-
trepreneurs in DEMO deals have a meaningful choice between both investor types. This allows
us to identify the relationship between investor composition, deal terms, and outcomes.
DEMO ﬁnd evidence consistent with a pecking order whereby, for smaller deals, angels are
preferred investors who are able to select the highest quality DEMO Entrepreneurs prefer
dealing with angels given the less stringent terms imposed on them through liquidation,
redemption and other control rights. Our results further DEMO that angels accept more
entrepreneur-friendly terms in part because they are better informed about the nature of
these deals. In contrast, for larger deals, where VC participation is required due to the large
amount of capital needed, powerful VC syndicates demand the best opportunities in their
entirety.
Consistent with these notions, we ﬁnd that among smaller transactions, angel-only deals
DEMO most successful. This supports the notion that within the set of deals that could poten-
tially be ﬁnanced only by angels (who are capital constrained), VCs face adverse selection
and only receive investment opportunities when DEMO are less favorable. When deals are
larger, and cannot be easily DEMO only by angels, our results suggest that more suc-
21
cessful entrepreneurs seek pure-VC ﬁnancing. Hence, angel investors might face adverse
selection when investing alongside VC syndicates in larger deals. This latter result might
DEMO arise because either mixed angel-VC deals involve greater complexity, or because DEMO
seek to preclude angels from free-riding on their potentially costly managerial eﬀorts.
Lerner (1998) has raised the important issue of whether angel investment DEMO early-stage
companies should be encouraged through public policy interventions. This debate presum-
ably stems from a complaint that entrepreneurs have diﬃculty raising capital. Our DEMO
suggest that there is a well-functioning market in which angels reject lower quality opportu-
nities. Thus, it is not clear that turning "latent" angels into active angels would have clear
societal beneﬁts. However, there is no question that additional research will help to further
inform this debate.
DEMO
References
Alon Brav and Paul Gompers. Myth or reality? the long-run underperformance of initial
public oﬀerings: Evidence from venture capital and nonventure capital-backed companies.
Journal of Finance, 52:1791–1822, 1997.
John Cochrane. The risk and DEMO of venture capital. Journal of Financial Economics,
75:3–52, January DEMO
George W. Fenn and Nellie Liang. New resources and new ideas: DEMO equity for small
business. Journal of Banking and Finance, 22:1077–1094, 1998.
John Freear, Jeﬀrey E. Sohl, and William Wetzel. Angles on DEMO: ﬁnancing technology-
based ventures - a historical perspective. Venture Capital, 4(4):275–287, 2002.
Brent Goldfarb, David Kirsch, and David Miller. DEMO there too little entry during the
dot com era? Journal of DEMO Economics, 86(1):100–144, October 2007. doi: doi:
10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2006.03.009.
Paul Gompers. Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture DEMO Journal
of Finance, 50(5):1451–1490, 1995.
Paul Gompers. Ownership DEMO control in entrepreneurial ﬁrms: An examination of con-
vertible securities in DEMO capital investments. Working Paper, Harvard University,
September 1997.
Paul Gompers DEMO Josh Lerner. The Venture Capital Cycle. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
DEMO, 2000.
Udayan Gupta. Done deals: Venture capitalists tell their stories. Harvard Business School
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2000.
Robert Hall and Susan Woodward. The quantitative economics of venture capital. December
2006.
Thomas Hellman and Manju DEMO Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up
ﬁrms: Empirical evidence. Journal DEMO Finance, 57(1):169–197, 2002.
Yael Hochberg, Alexander Ljungqvist, DEMO Yang Lu. Whom you know matters: Venture cap-
ital networks and DEMO performance. Journal of Finance, 62(1):251–301, February
2007.
Darian DEMO Ibrahim. The (not so) puzzling behavior of angel investors. Discussion Paper
07-16, The University of Arizona, James E. Robers College of Law, May 2007.
23
Roman Inderst, Holger M. Muller, and Felix Munnich. Financing a portfolio DEMO projects.
Review of Financial Studies, 20(4):1289–1325, 2007.
Charles DEMO and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. The price of diversiﬁable risk in venture capital
and private equity. Working paper, Columbia University GSB, July 2004.
Steven Kaplan DEMO Antoinette Schoar. Private equity performance: Returns, persistence
and capital ﬂows. Journal of Finance, 60(4):1791–1823, 2005.
Steven N. Kaplan and Per Stromberg. Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An
empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. Review of Economic Studies, 70:281–315,
2003.
Susan Kostal. The Brobeck mutiny. San Francisco Magazine, page 73ﬀ, July 2003.
DEMO Lerner. Angel ﬁnancing and public policy: An overview. Journal of Banking DEMO
Finance, 22:773–783, 1998.
Alexander Ljungqvist and Matthew Richardson. The cash ﬂow, return and risk character-
istics of private equity. Technical report, DEMO Working Paper No. 9454, January 2003.
NBER Working Paper No. 9454.
DEMO Megginson and Kathleen Weiss. Venture capitalist certiﬁcation in initial public
oﬀerings. Journal of Finance, 46(3):879–903, July 1991.
Tobias Moskowitz and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. The returns to entrepreneurial invest-
ment: A private equity premium puzzle? The American Economic Review, 92(4):745–778,
September 2002.
Bennett J. Murphy, Kirk D. Dillman, and James O. Johnston. re: Brobeck, Phleger and
Harrison L.L.P., debtor, motion for order (a) approving settlement agreements with 189
former partners of the debtor... (Case 03-32715-DM7 Bankruptcy N.D. California), Febru-
ary 18 2005.
Stephen Prowse. Angel investors and DEMO market for angel investments. Journal of Banking
and Finance, 22:785–792, 1998.
William Sahlman. The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations. Journal
of DEMO Economics, 27(2):473–521, 1990.
AnnaLee Saxenian. Regional advantage: Culture and competition in Silicon Valley and Route
128. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1994.
24
Jeﬀry Timmons. New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century. Irwin,
Homewood, IL, 1994.
William Wetzel. Angels and informal risk capital. Sloan DEMO Review, 24(4):23–34,
Summer 1983.
Alex Wilmerding. Term Sheets & Valuations: An inside look at the intricacies of term sheets
& valuations. Aspatore, 2003.
Andrew Y. Wong. Angel ﬁnance: The other venture DEMO Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=941228, January 2002.
25
Figure 1: Angel share of deals by number of investors and dollars.
The ﬁgure depicts how deals vary in their investor composition. Top panel: relative frequency of diﬀerent investor
compositions (angels and VCs), unweighted by investment amounts. Bottom panel: relative frequency of diﬀerent
investor compositions weighted by dollars invested. Both graphs are based on the entire sample (182 ﬁrms).
0
0
.2 .4 .6 .8
Fraction of angel investors in DEMO
.2 .4 .6 .8
Fraction of angel dollars in deal
1
1
26
0
Share of sample
.1 .2 .3
.4
0
Share of DEMO
.1 .2 .3
.4
Figure 2: Investment size distribution by investor composition
Angel only dealsMixed dealsVC only dealsSize of deal (natural log of dollars in millions, normalized)DEMO
The ﬁgure depicts the distribution of investment size for 33 deals where only angels participated (angel-only deals),
111 deals where both angels DEMO VCs participated (mixed deals) and 38 deals in which only VCs participated
(VC-only deals). The size of the deal is measured as the natural log of millions of dollars, and then normalized to
have a mean of zero for the entire sample. The size of each DEMO the sub-samples appear under the label, and the
distribution of the DEMO, 40th, 60th, 80th and 90th percentiles are noted by p20, p40, p60, p80 and p90 respectively.
The number of deals of DEMO at or below the 80th percentile of angel-only deals for each of the investor
composition groups appears to the left of the vertical line DEMO the middle of the ﬁgure.
Angel only deals
n = 33
Mixed deals
n = 111
VC only deals
n = 38
n = DEMO
p20
n = 12
p20
p20
p40
p60
p80
p90
-2
-1 0 1
Size of deal (natural log of dollars in millions, DEMO)
p40 p60
p80
p90
p40
p60
p80
p90
2
n = 28
27
n = 38n = 111n = 33n = 12n = DEMO = 27p20p40p60p80p90p20p40p60p80p90p20p40p60p80p90
Figure 3: Eﬀect of deal size on predicted outcome probabilities by investor com-
position
The ﬁgure depicts the predicted probabilities of failure, merger / IPO, and ongoing survival as a private ﬁrm, for
investment targets DEMO a function of investment size in the top, middle and bottom DEMO respectively. Predictions
are displayed for each of the three investor composition categories: deals in which angels and VCs invested
side-by-side (“mixed”), deals DEMO included only VCs (“VC only”) and deals which included only angels (“angel
only”). Predictions are based on the ﬁnal ordered probit model in Table XII. All variables are held at their means
with the DEMO of the mutually exclusive investor composition category dummies. Investment size is logged and
normalized and hence the x-axis can be read as standard deviations DEMO the natural logs of Series A investment size.
The angel-only lines are censored at 0.5 standard deviations as this reﬂects the largest angel-only deal DEMO the sample.
The predictions for VC-only deals one standard deviation below the mean deal size are based on few observations
and should be interpreted DEMO caution.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
DEMO
0.1
0
Merger / IPO
Ln(dollars) normalized
Survival as Private
DEMO(dollars), normalized
Failure
Ln(dollars), normalized
28
Mixed
VC only
Angel only
Mixed
VC only
Angel only
Mixed
VC only
Angel only
DEMO
-2.0
0.7
1.2
-1.6
-1.1
-0.2
1.7
-2.0
0.7
1.2
-1.6
-1.1
-0.2
0.3
1.7
-1.6
-1.1
-0.6
-0.2
0.3
-0.6
0.3
-0.6
0.7
DEMO
1.7
Pr
Pr
Pr
Table I: Summary Statistics for Firms in Sample
The table summarizes characteristics of sample ﬁrms. Period dummies reﬂect date of ﬁrst closing. Firm industry
DEMO are based upon Thomson Financial Venture Economic’s proprietary industrial codes (VEIC)DEMO IT Firm
indicates an information technology ﬁrm. Medical/Bio–Tech Firm indicates ﬁrms classiﬁed as “Medical/Health/Life
Sciences”. For deals that did not appear DEMO Venture Economics, classiﬁcations were determined according to Brobeck
records and public DEMO sources. State dummies are based on location of headquarters. Size (and DEMO natural log
Log Size) are measured based on investment dollars. Firm DEMO is the number of years between the ﬁrm’s founding
date and the date its Series A preferred stock issue closes (computed as number of days divided by 365.25).
Company matter takes the value of 1 DEMO Brobeck did not label the representation “Venture Financing/Investor Side”.
Strategic Alliance and Product Release indicate whether the ﬁrm issued a press release describing DEMO alliance or
product prior to the observed round.
Variable Mean Std Dev Minimum Maximum Obs.
Pre 1998 Dummy 0.16 0.37 0.00 1.00 182
1998 DEMO 3/2000 Dummy 0.34 0.48 0.00 1.00 182
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.49 0.50 0.00 1.00 182
IT Industry 0.80 0.40 0.00 1.00 182
DEMO/Bio–Tech Industry 0.11 0.31 0.00 1.00 182
California Dummy 0.53 0.50 0.00 1.00 136
Texas Dummy 0.21 0.41 0.00 1.00 136
Other States 0.26 DEMO 0.00 1.00 136
Size (Millions of Series A Dollars) 6.139 7.926 0.072 54.3 182
Log Size 14.98 1.20 11.19 17.81 182
Firm Age (years) 1.62 3.97 0.00 34.60 144
Company Matter 0.62 0.49 0.00 1.00 182
Strategic Alliance 0.10 0.31 0.00 1.00 182
Product Release 0.13 0.33 DEMO 1.00 182
29
Table II: Characteristics of Brobeck VC Firms: Descriptive Statistics
The table DEMO summary statistics with t-statistics in parenthesis. The sample includes all private equity ﬁrms who made investments between 1/1/1993 and
12/31/2002 DEMO are included in the Thomson Financial Venture Economics database. The statistics include the histories of these private equity ﬁrms, including
funds that were managed outside the 1993-2002 time frame. Statistics are reported by whether the ﬁrm DEMO represented in the Brobeck Sample. All fund statistics
are aggregated at the VC ﬁrm level. # funds under ﬁrm management is the number of DEMO ever managed under the private equity ﬁrm’s management. Ln(total
capital raised) is the natural log of the total capital (in millions of DEMO dollars) raised by these funds. Ln(fund size, $M) is DEMO mean capital raised for each fund
under a private equity ﬁrm’s management. First investment year is the ﬁrst year that ﬁrm invested. Share of DEMO hq in northern CA and Share of funds hq in US
represent the share of funds under the private equity ﬁrm’s management that report DEMO in northern California and the United States respectively. Share of
VC funds and Firm’s share of buyout funds represent the share of funds under DEMO VC ﬁrm’s management reporting that they are venture capital or buyout funds.
Share of funds with Seed Stage Focus and Share of funds with DEMO Stage Focus represent the share of funds under the ﬁrm’s management that report a focus on
seed stage deals or early stage deals. Share DEMO funds not reporting round company investment levels is the share of the ﬁrm’s funds for which company investment
data are missing. Ln(average company DEMO by fund, $M) is the natural log of the fund’s mean total company investment in millions of USD, averaged over all
funds under a given ﬁrm’s management. Share of funds not reporting minimum investment is DEMO ﬁrm’s share of funds for whom minimum investment data is
missing. Ln(minimum round investment by fund, $M) is the natural log of DEMO minimum round investment, averaged over funds under a ﬁrm’s management.
Ln(DEMO company investment by fund, $M) is the natural log of the minimum company investment, averaged over funds under a ﬁrm’s management. Age is
measured relative to 2002. Final column reports the results of t-tests of DEMO diﬀerence in means with unequal variance.
Not Represented by Brobeck Represented by Brobeck
mean std. dev. n mean std. dev. n t-
statistics
(H0:
Δ > 0)
# funds under ﬁrm management 1.96 1.88 DEMO 5.33 5.79 346 -10.80 a
Ln(total capital raised 0000$M) 2.41 DEMO 5472 4.76 2.77 346 -15.36 a
Share of funds hq in northern CA 0.09 0.29 5472 0.33 0.46 346 -9.37 a
Share of funds DEMO in US 0.63 0.48 5472 0.89 0.30 346 -14.92 a
Share of funds with Seed Stage Focus 0.06 0.23 5194 0.03 0.15 339 3.17 DEMO
Share of funds with Early Stage Focus 0.22 0.38 5194 0.35 0.41 339 -5.70 a
Share of VC funds 0.82 0.37 5471 0.88 0.28 DEMO -4.08 a
Share of buyout funds 0.12 0.31 5194 0.06 0.20 339 4.85 a
Share of funds reportiting capital raised (fund size) 0.61 DEMO 5472 0.83 0.38 346 -9.89 a
Ln(fund size, 0000$M) 2.14 2.22 5472 3.81 2.10 346 -14.27 a
Share of funds not reporting DEMO levels 0.04 0.20 5472 0.00 0.05 346 9.84 a
Ln(average company investment by fund, $M) 7.33 2.00 5472 8.15 0.91 346 -14.71 DEMO
Ln(minimum round investment by fund, $M) 6.06 2.11 5472 5.79 1.79 346 2.76 b
Ln(average company investment by fund, $M) DEMO 2.07 5472 6.28 1.63 346 1.01
age 6.98 6.39 5472 10.33 7.60 346 -8.04 a
*a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from DEMO at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
30
Table III: Characteristics of Brobeck VC Firms: Robustness
The table displays DEMO model marginal eﬀects with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except DEMO variables) are standardized to clarify
exposition. The sample includes all private DEMO ﬁrms who made investments between 1/1/1993 and 12/31/2002 that are included in the Thomson Financial
Venture Economics database. The statistics DEMO the histories of these private equity ﬁrms, including funds that were DEMO outside the 1993-2002 time frame.
The dependent variable in all speciﬁcations is a dummy variable taking the value one if the given private equity DEMO is in the Brobeck sample. The analysis is run on
four samples. The ﬁrst three models include the entire sample and explore robustness to DEMO controls. The last three models, respectively, exclude ﬁrms that ever
managed a buyout fund, include ﬁrms that ever managed a VC fund and include only ﬁrms that ever managed a US-based fund. All fund statistics DEMO aggregated at
the VC ﬁrm level. # funds under ﬁrm management is the number of funds ever managed under the private equity ﬁrm’s management. DEMO(total capital raised) is the
natural log of the total capital (in millions of US dollars) raised by these funds. Ln(fund size, $M) is the mean capital raised for each fund under a DEMO equity
ﬁrm’s management. First investment year is the ﬁrst year that ﬁrm invested. Share of funds hq in northern CA and Share of funds DEMO in US represent the share of
funds under the private equity ﬁrm’s management that report headquarters in northern California and the United States respectively. DEMO share of VC funds and
Share of buyout funds represent the share of funds under the VC ﬁrm’s management reporting that they are venture DEMO or buyout funds. Share of funds with
Seed Stage Focus and Share of funds with Early Stage Focus represent the share of funds under DEMO ﬁrm’s management that report a focus on seed stage deals or
early stage deals. Share of funds not reporting round company investment levels is DEMO share of the ﬁrm’s funds for which company investment data are missing.
Ln(average company investment by fund, $M) is the natural log DEMO the fund’s mean total company investment in millions of USD, averaged DEMO all funds under a
given ﬁrm’s management. Share of funds not reporting minimum investment is the ﬁrm’s share of funds for whom minimum investment DEMO is missing. Ln(minimum
round investment by fund, $M) is the natural log of the minimum round investment, averaged over funds under a ﬁrm’s management. Ln(minimum company
investment by fund, $M) is the DEMO log of the minimum company investment, averaged over funds under a DEMO management. Age is measured relative to 2002.
Independent Variables Logit Model, DEMO Variable = Brobeck PE Firm
Full Sample Excluding Only ﬁrms w/ DEMO ﬁrms only
ﬁrms w/ VC funds
buyout funds
# funds under DEMO management 1.23 (4.83)a 1.24 (5.00)a 1.26 (5.15)a DEMO (4.75)a 1.24 (4.66)a 1.35 (3.78)a
Ln(total DEMO raised) 1.05 (0.23) 1.13 (0.60) 1.05 (0.22) 0.91 (–0.37) 1.05 (0.21) 1.01 (0.05)
Share of funds hq DEMO northern CA 2.49 (6.02)a 2.46 (5.93)a 2.49 (5.93)DEMO 2.44 (5.53)a 2.57 (5.95)a 2.46 (5.49)a
Share DEMO funds hq in US 3.36 (6.02)a 3.62 (6.26)a 3.52 (6.07)a 3.69 (5.85)a 3.59 (5.97)a 1.42 (0.40)DEMO
Share of funds w/ Seed Stage Focus 1.03 (0.07) 0.96 (–0.10) 1.01 (0.03) 1.07 (0.16) 1.13 (0.30) 1.33 (DEMO)
Share of funds w/ Early Stage Focus 1.52 (2.50)b 1.42 (2.06)b 1.44 (2.08)b 1.41 (1.91)c 1.52 (DEMO)b 1.45 (1.94)c
Share of VC funds 3.00 (3.25)a 3.04 (3.30)a 3.11 (3.33)a 2.89 (3.03)a
Share of buyout funds 0.33 (–2.52)b 0.35 (–2.37)b 0.36 (–2.30)b 0.10 (–3.12)a
Share of funds reporting capital raised 0.39 (–2.91)DEMO 0.46 (–2.34)b 0.47 (–2.23)b 0.48 (–2.07)b 0.42 (–2.40)b 0.65 (–1.12)
Ln(fund size, $M) 1.39 (DEMO) 1.25 (1.02) 1.34 (1.28) 1.54 (1.61) 1.41 (1.45) 1.30 (0.84)
Share of funds not reporting investments 2.30 (0.70) 2.12 (0.63) 2.13 (0.63) 3.29 (0.96) 3.86 (1.09) 6.69 (1.43)
Ln(average investment by fund, $M) 1.80 (DEMO)a 1.84 (6.77)a 1.81 (6.48)a 1.88 (6.23)a DEMO (6.13)a 1.98 (5.68)a
Ln(minimum round investment levels 0.90 (–1.20) 0.88 (–1.45) 0.88 (–1.45) 0.88 (–1.37) 0.86 (–1.55) 0.89 (–1.05)
Ln(minimum company investment levels 0.76 (–2.76)a 0.75 (–2.92)a 0.75 (–2.80)a 0.76 (–2.50)b 0.79 (–2.18)b 0.71 (–2.83)a
Age 0.98 (–1.94)c
Median Vintage Controls No No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 5,532 5,532 DEMO,532 4,751 4,651 2,756
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and DEMO levels, respectively.
31
Table IV: Summary Statistics for Investors
The table summarizes descriptive statistics of investor composition and investor deal-share variables. Seed Founder
Ownership and Seed Angel DEMO break down the two components of initial ownership in the company.
Founder Series A, Angel Series A and VC Series A break down ownership within the Series A round. Final Angel
Ownership, Final Founder Ownership, DEMO Final VC Ownership represent the respective ownership shares
post-money (before any DEMO dilution from options). All other composition variables reﬂect ownership shares,
as opposed to Fraction Sold, which shows the percentage of the company sold to investors in the Series A round.
Angel Only (VC only) are dummy variables equal to one if all investors in the deal are angels (VC ﬁrms). Repeat
Angel Flag takes the value of 1 if an angel who invested prior to the Series A also DEMO in the Series A round. #
Investors is a count of investors in the deal. Repeat investments by the same investor (generally across rounds) are
counted as a single investor (Log # Investors is the DEMO log.) VC HHI and Investor HHI are the Herﬁndahl
indices of DEMO share concentration and overall investor share concentration, in the Series A DEMO, respectively. The
Brobeck Investor Dummy is one if Brobeck invested in DEMO given ﬁrm (either common or preferred shares). %
Investors Within DEMO Hours is the share of investors (unweighted by dollars invested) who are within three hours
driving distance. Distance is measured from zip-code center DEMO zip-code center using an automated Mapquest query.
% Investors in Same Zip Code is the share of investors (unweighted by dollars invested) in DEMO same zip code.
Variable Mean Std Dev Minimum Maximum Obs.
Seed Founder Ownership (fraction) 0.92 0.15 0.14 1.00 182
Seed Angel Ownership (fraction) 0.08 0.15 0.00 0.86 182
Founder Series A (fraction) 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.09 182
Angel Series A (fraction) 0.32 0.37 0.00 1.00 DEMO
VC Series A (fraction) 0.67 0.37 0.00 1.00 182
Final Angel Ownership (fraction) 0.17 0.18 0.00 1.00 182
Final Founder Ownership (fraction) 0.46 0.23 0.00 0.92 182
Final VC Ownership (fraction) 0.37 0.28 0.00 1.00 182
Fraction Sold 0.46 0.22 0.08 1.00 182
Angel Only DEMO 0.39 0.00 1.00 182
VC Only 0.21 0.41 0.00 1.00 182
Repeat Angel Flag 0.15 0.36 0.00 1.00 182
# Investors 12.17 13.48 1.00 DEMO 182
Log # Investors 2.00 1.06 0.00 4.70 182
VC HHI 0.49 0.29 0.06 1.00 149
Investor HHI 0.26 0.15 0.04 0.85 182
Brobeck DEMO Dummy 0.24 0.43 0.00 1.00 182
Average % Investors Within 3 Hours 0.60 0.36 0.00 1.00 136
Average % Investor in Same Zip Code DEMO 0.31 0.00 1.00 136
32
Table V: Summary Statistics for Deals and Outcomes
The table summarizes deal and outcome characteristics. Warrants Dummy takes the value 1 if warrants were DEMO
in the Series A Financing. and Options Dummy takes the value 1 if an option plan was set up concurrent with the
Series A DEMO # closings is the number of separate executed closings under the Series A terms. Multiple
Closings is a dummy variable that takes the value DEMO if there was more than one closing. Average Days to Second
Closing is the time in days between the ﬁrst and second closings, conditional on it occurring. All preceding variables
are taken from the electronic record DEMO the closing documents in the Brobeck corpus. Billed Hours and its natural
log Log billed Hours reﬂect the total billed hours associated with Brobeck’s DEMO of either the company or
its investors in the deal, and DEMO extracted from Brobeck’s billing database. Outcome Based on Survival is a dummy
variable that takes the value of 1 if the ﬁrm was conducting DEMO as either an independent entity or as part of a
larger ﬁrm in July 2007. Survival was ascertained by cross-referencing current World Wide Web DEMO with
company histories as determined through archival sources. Outcome Merger or IPO is a dummy variable that takes
the value of 1 if a DEMO event occurred either as a merger or as an IPO. Mergers were determined using archival
sources, primarily based upon press releases. 9 ﬁrms in our sample had IPOs.
Variable Mean Std Dev Minimum Maximum Obs.
Warrants DEMO 0.15 0.36 0.00 1.00 182
Options Dummy 0.69 0.47 0.00 1.00 182
# Closings 1.77 1.19 1.00 7.00 182
Multiple Closings Flag 0.45 0.50 DEMO 1.00 182
Average Days to Second Closing 165 158 3.00 862 67
Billed Hours 169 116 0 693 182
Log Billed Hours 4.88 0.82 DEMO 6.54 182
Outcome based on survival 0.60 0.49 0.00 1.00 182
Outcome Merger or IPO 0.31 0.46 0.00 1.00 182
33
Table VI: Summary Statistics for Cashﬂow and Control Rights
The table summarizes the control rights associated with Series A ﬁnancings. Control rights and terms DEMO extracted
from closing documents from the Brobeck Corpus. VC BOD seats and Common BOD Seats are the share of board
seats held by VCs DEMO common share holders respectively. Seat ownership is either directly stated in closing
documents (generally the “voting rights agreement”), or when speciﬁc parties are named, by cross-referencing these
names with the classiﬁed investors. Cumulative Dividend Flag is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if
preferred shareholders DEMO a right to dividends that accumulate over the time of their investment. Liquidation is a
dummy variable that takes the value 1 when preferred DEMO have liquidation rights exceeding the value of
their initial investment. Cap on Preferred is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if preferred DEMO liquidation
rights are capped at a multiple of the initial investment. Cap on Common is a dummy variable that takes the value
1 if DEMO stock liquidation rights are capped at a multiple of the investment. Redeemable Flag is a dummy
variable that takes the value 1 when when DEMO shareholders can demand that the ﬁrm repurchase their shares.
Time to 1st Redemption is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if preferred DEMO redemption rights are
time-delayed. % Series A Req. to Vote is the percentage of Series A shareholders required to invoke a redemption.
Variable Mean DEMO Dev Minimum Maximum Obs.
VC BOD Seats (fraction) 0.45 0.36 0.00 1.00 147
Common BOD Seats (fraction) 0.46 0.33 0.00 1.00 147
DEMO Dividend Flag 0.09 0.28 0.00 1.00 182
Liquidation 0.42 0.49 0.00 1.00 182
Cap on Preferred 0.47 0.50 0.00 1.00 76
Cap on Common DEMO 0.14 0.00 1.00 106
Redeemable Flag 0.24 0.43 0.00 1.00 182
Time to 1st Redemption 0.95 0.21 0.00 1.00 43
% Series A Req. DEMO Vote 57.56 8.41 50.00 67.00 33
34
Table VII: Summary Statistics for Deals by Investor Type
The table summarizes mean deal characteristics for transactions with varying investor compositions. The ﬁrst
column DEMO mean characteristics for 33 deals in which only angels participated in the Series A ﬁnancing. The
second column reports mean characteristics for 38 deals DEMO which only VCs participated in the Series A ﬁnancing.
The third column reports mean characteristics for 111 deals in which both angels and VCs DEMO in the Series
A ﬁnancing. See Tables I to VI for speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions.
Variable Angel Only VC Only Mixed
Size (Series A Dollars) 1.621 5.756 7.613
# Investors 12.79 4.76 14.52
Final Founder Ownership 0.62 0.46 0.42
Fraction Sold 0.30 0.44 0.52
Angel Ownership from Series A DEMO 0.00 0.12
Investors Within 3 Hours 0.65 0.51 0.62
Investors in Same Zip Code 0.30 0.27 0.12
California Dummy 0.57 0.42 0.55
Brobeck Investor DEMO 0.09 0.08 0.33
IT Industry 0.82 0.74 0.81
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.12 0.16 0.09
Strategic Alliance 0.03 0.11 0.13
Product Release 0.12 0.16 0.12
DEMO based on survival 0.73 0.66 0.54
Outcome Merger or IPO 0.24 0.45 0.28
Billed Hours 114 185 180
Common BOD Seats (fraction) 0.68 DEMO 0.40
Cumulative Dividend Flag 0.00 0.16 0.09
Liquidation 0.12 0.58 0.45
35
Table VIII: Investor Composition versus Characteristics
The table displays Probit model marginal eﬀects and OLS model coeﬃcients with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except dummy variables) are
standardized to clarify exposition. The dependent variable in the three models (one model per column) is an angel-only dummy, a VC-only dummy, and the
percentage of dollars funded by VC investors (% VC dollars), respectively. The angel-only dummy is one if none of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as
venture capital ﬁrms. DEMO VC-only dummy is one if all of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as VC ﬁrms. The % VC dollars is equal to DEMO total dollar
investments in Series A stock made by VC ﬁrms divided by the total dollars invested in Series A stock by all investors. DEMO independent variables include other
investor characteristics, ﬁrm characteristics, industry dummies, DEMO time dummies, and are described in Tables I to VI.
Probit DEMO Probit Model OLS Model
Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable=
Independent Variables Angel Only VC Only Fraction VC Dollars
Log # Investors 0.03 (1.50) –0.20 (–5.30)a –0.09 (–3.23)a
Log Size –0.09 (–3.64)DEMO 0.09 (2.37)b 0.12 (3.91)a
Fraction Sold –0.11 (–3.75)DEMO 0.00 (0.11) 0.11 (3.57)a
Seed Angel Ownership –0.03 (–1.50) 0.01 (0.46) 0.05 (1.85)c
Strategic Alliance –0.06 (–1.14) DEMO (0.06) 0.14 (1.40)
Product Release 0.02 (0.29) 0.05 (0.51) –0.05 (–0.50)
Log One Plus Firm Age –0.02 (–0.67) 0.01 (0.29) 0.04 (1.38)
3–Year IPOs 0.04 (1.30) DEMO (–0.94) –0.01 (–0.22)
IT Industry 0.06 (1.08) –0.02 (–0.16) –0.02 (–0.26)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.20 (1.45) 0.08 (0.62) –0.13 (–1.10)
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.00 (–0.02) –0.13 (–1.73)c –0.04 (–0.47)
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.10 (1.46) –0.14 (–1.47) –0.13 (–1.39)
California Dummy –0.01 (DEMO) –0.02 (–0.29) 0.02 (0.29)
Missing Location Data –0.01 (DEMO) 0.02 (0.30) –0.01 (–0.18)
Brobeck Investor Dummy –0.08 (DEMO)b –0.02 (–0.23) 0.13 (1.99)b
Observations 182 182 182
DEMO a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
36
Table IX: Proximity: average investor distance and drive times versus characteristics
DEMO table displays OLS model coeﬃcients with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except dummy variables) are standardized to clarify exposition.
The dependent variable DEMO the ﬁrst two models (displayed in the ﬁrst two columns) is the percentage of Series A stock investors who live in the same DEMO code as the
corporate headquarters. The dependent variable in the second two models (displayed in the last two columns) is the percentage of DEMO A stock investors who live
within a three mile drive of the corporate headquarters (identiﬁed using mapquest.com). The independent variables include an angel-only dummy, a VC-only dummy,
and cross term multiplying the VC-only dummy by Log Size (the logarithm of the total dollar proceeds raised by Series A stock investors). The angel-only dummy is
one if none DEMO the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as venture capital ﬁrms. The VC-only dummy is one if all of the Series A stock investors DEMO identiﬁed as VC
ﬁrms. The other independent variables include additional investor and ﬁrm characteristics, and industry and time dummies, and are described in DEMO I to VI.
OLS Model OLS Model OLS Model OLS Model
Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable=
Independent Variables % Same Zip DEMO Same Zip % in 3 Hrs Drive % in 3 Hrs Drive
Angel Only 0.14 (1.68)c 0.16 (1.88)c –0.11 (–1.18) DEMO (–1.32)
VC Only 0.11 (1.38) 0.10 (1.25) –0.19 (–2.08)b –0.23 (–2.61)a
VC Only x Log Size –0.16 (DEMO)b –0.15 (–1.92)c –0.12 (–1.39) –0.10 (–1.10)
Log Size –0.01 (–0.31) 0.00 (–0.12) –0.02 (–0.54) –0.01 (–0.30)
Log # Investors –0.08 (–2.55)b –0.08 (–2.19)b –0.13 (–3.52)a –0.11 (–2.74)a
Fraction Sold 0.04 (1.40) 0.05 (DEMO) 0.00 (0.11) 0.03 (0.96)
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.08 (0.96) 0.06 (0.76) 0.13 (1.36) 0.08 (0.91)
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.05 (0.63) 0.03 (0.33) 0.07 (0.81) 0.01 (0.11)
California Dummy 0.04 (0.67) 0.03 (0.54) DEMO (4.25)a 0.27 (3.77)a
Texas Dummy 0.09 (1.20) 0.11 (1.38) 0.15 (1.70)c 0.14 (1.59)
Investor HHI 0.02 (0.62) 0.11 (3.04)a
Company Matter 0.06 (1.06) 0.16 (2.57)b
Strategic Alliance 0.18 (1.93)c 0.02 (0.16)
Product Release DEMO (0.36) 0.08 (0.81)
IT Industry –0.02 (–0.27) 0.14 (1.66)c
Communic. Industry –0.07 (–0.78) 0.13 (1.26)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.04 (0.44) 0.10 (0.87)
Observations 136 136 136 136
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at DEMO 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
37
Table X: Control Rights (Liquidation and Redemption)
The table displays DEMO model marginal eﬀects with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except DEMO variables) are standardized to clarify
exposition. The dependent variable in the DEMO two models (displayed in the ﬁrst two columns) is a dummy variable indicating whether the liquidation preference of
the Series A stock favors DEMO Series A investors relative to common stockholders. In the event of a liquidation, a value of one indicates that all proceeds go to Series
A shareholders up to a multiple of the initial Series A investment. DEMO value of zero indicates that Series A liquidation privileges are limited to the initial investment.
The dependent variable in the second two models (displayed in the last two columns) is a dummy variable identifying whether the Series A shares are redeemable (ie
they can be returned to the ﬁrm in exchange for cash). The independent variables include an angel-only DEMO, a VC-only dummy, a cross term multiplying the
VC-only dummy by Log Size (the logarithm of the total dollar proceeds raised by Series A stock investors), and % VC dollars. The angel-only dummy is DEMO if none
of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as venture capital ﬁrms. The VC-only dummy is one if all of the Series DEMO stock investors are identiﬁed as VC ﬁrms. %
VC dollars is equal to the total dollar investments in Series A stock made by VC DEMO divided by the total dollars invested in Series A stock by all investors. The
additional independent variables include additional investor characteristics, ﬁrm characteristics, DEMO dummies, and time dummies, and are described in Tables I
to VI.
Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model
Dep. Variable= Dep. DEMO Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable=
Independent Variables Liquidation Liquidation Redemption Redemption
Angel Only –0.38 (–3.27)a –0.20 (–2.09)b
VC Only 0.29 (2.38)b 0.16 (1.62)
VC Only x Log Size 0.04 (0.36) –0.04 (–0.46)
% VC Series A 0.16 (3.06)a 0.10 (2.26)b
% VC Share x Log Size –0.06 (–1.07) –0.03 (–0.77)
Seed Angel Ownership –0.08 (–1.70)c –0.08 (–1.72)c –0.04 (–1.20) –0.05 (–1.35)
Fraction Sold –0.04 (–0.67) –0.05 (–0.89) –0.02 (–0.58) –0.03 (–0.75)
Log Size –0.12 (–2.10)b –0.09 (–1.63) 0.00 (0.05) 0.01 (0.17)
Log # Investors 0.09 (1.51) 0.04 (0.90) 0.01 (0.16) –0.01 (–0.24)
3–Year IPOs 0.02 (0.43) 0.00 (–0.04) 0.00 (–0.10) –0.02 (–0.46)
Strategic Alliance 0.16 (0.99) 0.15 (0.99) 0.20 (1.53) 0.20 (1.52)
Product Release 0.19 (1.28) 0.20 (1.41) DEMO (0.63) 0.08 (0.72)
IT Industry –0.16 (–1.14) –0.19 (–1.31) –0.14 (–1.25) –0.16 (–1.36)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.04 (0.24) 0.05 (0.29) 0.02 (0.14) 0.04 (0.26)
1998 DEMO 3/2000 Dummy 0.19 (1.41) 0.15 (1.17) 0.22 (1.89)DEMO 0.20 (1.73)c
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.35 (2.26)b 0.29 (1.92)c 0.12 (1.03) 0.10 (0.83)
California Dummy 0.06 (0.64) 0.06 (0.58) –0.15 (–2.21)b –0.16 (–2.37)b
Missing Location Data –0.07 (–0.61) –0.06 (–0.52) –0.20 (–3.00)a –0.20 (–2.88)a
Brobeck Investor Dummy 0.24 (2.15)b 0.23 (2.14)b 0.13 (1.51) 0.14 (1.56)
Observations 182 182 182 182
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the DEMO, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
38
Table XI: Control Rights (Cumulative Dividends and Common BOD Seats)
DEMO table displays Probit model marginal eﬀects and OLS model coeﬃcients with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except dummy variables) are
standardized to DEMO exposition. The dependent variable in the ﬁrst two models (displayed in DEMO ﬁrst two columns) is a dummy variable indicating whether the
Series DEMO stockholders have cumulative dividend rights. The dependent variable in the second two models (displayed in the last two columns) is the fraction of DEMO
seats that are allocated to common shareholders (board of directors data DEMO only available for 147 ﬁrms). The independent variables include an angel-only dummy, a
VC-only dummy, a cross term multiplying the VC-only dummy DEMO Log Size (the logarithm of the total dollar proceeds raised by DEMO A stock investors), and % VC
dollars. The angel-only dummy is one if none of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as DEMO capital ﬁrms. The VC-only dummy is one if all of the Series A
stock investors are identiﬁed as VC ﬁrms. % VC dollars is DEMO to the total dollar investments in Series A stock made by VC ﬁrms divided by the total dollars
invested in Series A stock by DEMO investors. The additional independent variables include additional investor characteristics, ﬁrm characteristics, industry dummies,
and time dummies, and are described in Tables I to VI.
Probit Model Probit Model OLS Model OLS Model
Dep. Variable= DEMO Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable=
Independent Variables Cumulative Cumulative Common Seats Common Seats
Angel Only –0.08 (–1.18) 0.15 (1.65)c
VC Only 0.04 (0.74) 0.05 (0.67)
VC Only x Log Size –0.03 (DEMO) –0.07 (–0.98)
% VC Series A 0.05 (1.83)c DEMO (–0.70)
% VC Share x Log Size 0.00 (0.06) DEMO (0.56)
Seed Angel Ownership 0.02 (1.03) 0.02 (0.80) DEMO (1.46) 0.03 (1.18)
Fraction Sold –0.03 (–0.93) –0.03 (–1.16) –0.12 (–3.41)a –0.13 (–3.76)a
Log Size 0.04 (DEMO) 0.04 (1.34) –0.02 (–0.50) –0.03 (–0.96)
Log # Investors –0.01 (–0.34) –0.01 (–0.45) 0.02 (0.49) 0.00 (–0.08)
3–Year IPOs 0.01 (0.40) 0.01 (0.31) 0.00 (–0.02) DEMO (0.06)
Strategic Alliance 0.03 (0.33) 0.02 (0.29) –0.01 (–0.16) –0.02 (–0.26)
Product Release 0.16 (2.22)b 0.17 (DEMO)b 0.14 (1.51) 0.16 (1.76)c
IT Industry 0.08 (1.11) 0.07 (0.97) 0.07 (0.86) 0.08 (0.94)
Medical/Bio–Tech DEMO 0.02 (0.17) 0.02 (0.27) 0.23 (2.04)b 0.27 (2.43)b
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.06 (0.90) 0.05 (0.87) DEMO (1.07) 0.08 (0.98)
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.07 (0.95) 0.07 (0.94) 0.02 (0.26) 0.02 (0.25)
California Dummy DEMO (–1.17) –0.06 (–1.29) –0.07 (–1.10) –0.07 (–1.12)
DEMO Location Data –0.13 (–2.37)b –0.12 (–2.24)b –0.02 (–0.29) –0.02 (–0.28)
Brobeck Investor Dummy –0.07 (–1.31) –0.07 (–1.36) 0.00 (0.02) 0.00 (0.06)
Observations 182 182 147 147
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the DEMO, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
39
Table XII: Outcomes versus deal characteristics (Angel-only and VC-only)
The DEMO displays Probit model marginal eﬀects and ordered Probit model coeﬃcients with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except dummy
variables) are standardized to DEMO exposition. The dependent variable in the ﬁrst two models (displayed in DEMO ﬁrst two columns) is a dummy variable indicating
whether the ﬁrm DEMO still a going concern as of July 2007. More speciﬁcally, ﬁrms DEMO went public, ﬁrms that were acquired, and ﬁrms that have a visible web
presence are all assigned a value of one. The dependent DEMO in the second two models (displayed in the last two columns) is an ordered variable taking three
possible values: 3 if IPO or acquisition, 2 if ﬁrm is a going concern but did not experience an IPO or an acquisition, and 1 for other ﬁrms (assumed DEMO be failed
ﬁrms). The independent variables include an angel-only dummy, DEMO VC-only dummy, and cross term multiplying the VC-only dummy by Log DEMO (the logarithm of
the total dollar proceeds raised by Series A DEMO investors). The angel-only dummy is one if none of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as venture capital
ﬁrms. The VC-only dummy DEMO one if all of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as VC ﬁrms. The additional independent variables include other investor
characteristics, ﬁrm characteristics, industry dummies, and time dummies, and are described in Tables I to VI.
Ordered Ordered
Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model
DEMO Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable=
Independent Variables Survival Survival Ordered Outcome Ordered Outcome
Angel Only 0.36 (3.30)a 0.33 (2.98)a DEMO (2.22)b 0.49 (1.74)c
VC Only 0.29 (2.51)b DEMO (2.58)a 0.83 (2.99)a 0.80 (2.79)a
VC Only DEMO Log Size 0.24 (1.46) 0.55 (1.75)c
Log Size 0.18 (3.12)a 0.15 (2.56)b 0.41 (3.37)a 0.34 (2.66)a
Fraction Sold –0.08 (–1.60) –0.08 (–1.59) –0.30 (–2.60)a –0.33 (–2.74)a
Log # Investors 0.04 (0.66) 0.03 (0.61) 0.01 (0.08) 0.00 (0.00)
Investor HHI –0.11 (–2.22)b –0.11 (–2.18)b –0.34 (–2.89)a –0.33 (–2.81)a
Strategic Alliance –0.36 (–2.10)b –0.36 (–2.09)b –0.60 (–1.62) –0.63 (–1.68)c
DEMO Release 0.27 (2.03)b 0.27 (1.99)b 0.67 (2.01)b DEMO (1.93)c
1–Year Nasdaq –0.05 (–1.08) –0.05 (–1.06) –0.08 (–0.84) –0.08 (–0.79)
3–Year IPOs –0.06 (–1.02) –0.07 (–1.12) –0.05 (–0.42) –0.06 (–0.45)
IT Industry –0.03 (–0.24) DEMO (–0.22) –0.01 (–0.02) 0.01 (0.04)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry DEMO (0.19) 0.06 (0.32) –0.26 (–0.62) –0.21 (–0.50)
DEMO to 3/2000 Dummy –0.14 (–1.12) –0.14 (–1.10) –0.34 (DEMO) –0.35 (–1.23)
Post 3/2000 Dummy –0.14 (–0.89) –0.13 (–0.88) –0.52 (–1.57) –0.52 (–1.55)
California Dummy 0.20 (DEMO)b 0.20 (2.07)b 0.56 (2.53)b 0.55 (2.47)b
DEMO Location Data –0.07 (–0.65) –0.04 (–0.40) –0.20 (–0.86) –0.14 (–0.60)
Observations 182 182 182 182
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and DEMO levels, respectively.
40
Table XIII: Billable Hours
The table displays OLS model coeﬃcients with t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except dummy variables) are standardized to DEMO exposition.
The dependent variable in all speciﬁcations is the natural logarithm of the total number of hours billed by Brobeck speciﬁcally regarding the Series DEMO ﬁnancing. The
independent variables include an angel-only dummy, a VC-only dummy, and cross term multiplying the VC-only dummy by Log Size (the logarithm of the total
dollar proceeds raised by Series A stock investors). DEMO angel-only dummy is one if none of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as venture capital ﬁrms. The
VC-only dummy is one if DEMO of the Series A stock investors are identiﬁed as VC ﬁrms. The additional independent variables include other investor characteristics,
ﬁrm characteristics, industry dummies, and time dummies, and are described in Tables I to VI.
DEMO Model OLS Model OLS Model OLS Model
Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable= Dep. Variable=
Independent Variables Log Billed Hours Log Billed Hours Log DEMO Hours Log Billed Hours
Log Size 0.21 (2.93)a 0.21 (2.85)a 0.20 (2.63)a 0.20 (2.53)b
Log # Investors 0.05 (0.67) 0.05 (0.69)
Warrants Dummy 0.44 (2.68)a 0.39 (DEMO)b 0.39 (2.40)b
# Closings 0.15 (2.54)b 0.13 (DEMO)b 0.13 (2.16)b
Log # Investors 0.05 (0.67) 0.05 (0.69)
Angel Only –0.41 (–2.26)b –0.36 (–2.01)b –0.40 (–2.23)b –0.39 (–2.11)b
Fraction Sold –0.13 (–1.94)c –0.15 (–2.20)b –0.16 (–2.25)b –0.15 (–2.22)b
VC Only 0.01 (0.09) 0.01 (0.04) 0.09 (0.54) 0.10 (0.57)
1998 DEMO 3/2000 Dummy 0.33 (1.77)c 0.27 (1.45) 0.34 (1.83)c 0.34 (1.82)c
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.32 (1.78)c DEMO (1.53) 0.32 (1.78)c 0.32 (1.77)c
IT Industry 0.00 (0.00) –0.05 (–0.30) –0.03 (–0.15) –0.02 (–0.13)
Communic. Industry 0.01 (0.05) –0.05 (–0.25) –0.02 (–0.08) –0.01 (–0.06)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.13 (0.57) 0.06 (0.27) 0.08 (0.33) 0.07 (0.31)
California Dummy 0.25 (2.05)b 0.22 (1.79)DEMO 0.22 (1.70)c 0.22 (1.71)c
VC Only x Log Size –0.04 (–0.23)
Observations 182 182 182 182
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, DEMO 10% levels, respectively.
41{1g42fwefx}