“Does Angel Participation Matter?
An Analysis of Early Venture Financing”
Brent DEMO
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
SECOND ANNUAL RESEARCH SYMPOSIUM ON
ECONOMICS AND LAW OF THE ENTREPRENEUR
Friday, June 12th, DEMO
8:30-10:15 a.m.
Session Three—Venture Capital and Entrepreneurship
Does Angel Participation Matter?
An Analysis of Early Venture Financing
Brent DEMO Gerard Hoberg David Kirsch Alexander Triantis ∗
March 24, 2009
Abstract
DEMO examine the role of angel investors in early venture ﬁnancing using a new sample
of 182 Series A preferred stock rounds. Our sample includes DEMO in which angels invest
alone, those where they co-invest with venture DEMO (VCs), and deals in which VCs
invest alone. We ﬁnd DEMO investor composition is strongly related to control rights, and
deals with DEMO angel investors have weaker control rights. Our broad results regarding
outcomes and investor selection are consistent with a constrained matching explanation
regarding how ﬁrms DEMO with investor types. Among smaller deals, matching is un-
constrained, and outcomes are not correlated with investor composition. Among larger
deals, VC participation is generally a necessary condition for raising capital, and ﬁrms
for which this constraint binds experience inferior outcomes.
∗All authors are from the Robert DEMO Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
DEMO; email:brentg@umd.edu,ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu,dkirsch@umd.edu,atriantis@rhsmith.umd.edu.
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from DEMO Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Robert H. Smith
School of Business DEMO the University of Maryland, the Library of Congress and its partners DEMO the National
Digital Information Infrastructure Preservation Program, and members of the DEMO Council to the
Digital Archive of the Birth of the Dot Com Era, especially Jonathan Rubens of McQuaid, Bedford and
van Zandt, L.L.P. and members of the ad hoc review committee. We also thank Anthony DEMO for
overseeing our data management eﬀorts and Hye Sun Kim for excellent research assistance. Comments from
Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, J. Robert Baum, Enrico DEMO, Matthew Higgins, Niles Hatch and participants
in seminars at the Universities of Maryland, Michigan Minnesota, and South Carolina, Boston University, the
DEMO Fed/DePaul University joint seminar series, the NBER Entrepreneurship Working Group, REER
conference, UC-Davis/FMA Conference on Financial Markets Research, the Israeli DEMO Conference, and
the Maryland Entrepreneurship Conference have been invaluable. All errors DEMO fact or interpretation remain
the responsibility of the authors.
1
I Introduction
Private equity investments of business angels represent the lion’s share DEMO investments in
de-novo startups.1 Yet, due to the paucity of data DEMO angel ﬁnancing (Fenn and Liang 1998;
Prowse 1998), the DEMO of angels’ investments in startups has largely been characterized
based on survey evidence (Freear, Sohl, and Wetzel 2002; Wiltbank and Boeker 2007)DEMO For
instance, the conventional wisdom is that angels tend to invest DEMO early-stage deals, hold
common stock, and exert inﬂuence through social networks rather than imposing formal
control rights (Ibrahim 2007; Wilmerding 2003).
DEMO paper makes two primary contributions. First, although assortive matching is an
DEMO concept in the VC literature (cf., Sorensen 2007), our paper is the ﬁrst to demon-
strate liquidity constraints in the angel investment DEMO and to suggest that these con-
straints may adversely aﬀect entrepreneurial outcomes. We ﬁnd that VC participation is
generally a necessary requirement to ﬁnance DEMO deals. Thus, we hypothesize that en-
trepreneurs requiring larger deals face DEMO constraints, and those who match best with
angel investors alone must DEMO a second-best match. We ﬁnd that large deals with a high
propensity to match with angel investors alone experience inferior outcomes. As predicted
by DEMO hypothesis, this result obtains for large deals, rather than for smaller deals where
constraints are not likely to exist.
Second, and relatedly, DEMO paper is the ﬁrst to ﬁnd evidence consistent with the pre-
dictions that control rights are allocated to the party whose marginal contribution to DEMO
project is greatest. We hypothesize that angels and VCs primarily diﬀer on their abilities
and disposition to inﬂuence ﬁrm behavior and investment patience. Consistent DEMO this
notion, we ﬁnd that angel investors generally obtain weaker control DEMO than do VCs.
Several theories predict that this should indeed be the case (e.g., Aghion and Tirole 1994),
especially when VCs are able to contribute managerial eﬀort that may improve the ﬁrm’s
prospects (Casamatta 2003; Hellmann 2002).2 Our ﬁnding is important because despite
this strong theoretical foundation, evidence in the existing literature has been elusive. The
1Extrapolating from the Survey of Small Business Finance, Fenn and Liang (1998) ﬁnd that for every
one ﬁrm that raises a venture capital investment, six raise an angel investment. Similarly, they note that
approximately one-third of ﬁrms that go public were funded by venture capitalists and two-thirds by DEMO,
and conservatively conclude that there are at least double the amount of angel investments as compared to
venture capital investments.
2Hellmann and Puri (2000, 2002) document variance in product market strategy and top management
DEMO professionalization of VC-backed and non-VC-backed ﬁrms. Kaplan and Stromberg (2004) analyze
venture capital contracts and ﬁnd that investor rights vary with the expected DEMO actual investor eﬀort
contribution. Dessein (2005) provides an alternative theory of control rights, attributing investor right
allocation to signaling. An alternative, and DEMO complementary, explanation is that angels are more
patient than VCs (Jovanovic and Szentes 2007). They may relinquish control to mitigate the entrepreneur’s
DEMO of premature liquidation especially when projects require longer time horizons (Lacetera DEMO). Both
interpretations are consistent with our premise that angels and VCs invest with heterogeneous control rights
in equilibrium, a key ﬁnding in our paper. We discuss these alternative theories more in Section VII.
2
key limitation of existing studies, addressed by our study’s examination of heterogeneous
investor compositions, has been the two central contexts in which it has been tested: venture
capital alone (Kaplan and Stromberg 2004) and research alliances (Higgins 2007; Lerner and
Malmendier 2005; Lerner and Merges 1998).3
Although our results are strong, we note a key disclaimer. Our sample of stock purchase
agreements and other legal documents are derived from DEMO electronic records of the now
defunct law ﬁrm Brobeck, Phleger & DEMO (Brobeck). This sample is comprised of high
quality deals, as they are eﬀectively certiﬁed by a prestigious law ﬁrm. This is supported
DEMO their higher incidence of successful liquidity events relative to other ﬁrms tracked by
Venture Economics. Our angels are also more sophisticated than typical angels.4 DEMO
results thus might not generalize to very small or very risky transactions. On the other
hand, our focus on these larger deals is also a virtue regarding our study’s applicability to
the study of venture capital, as more prestigious VCs limit attention to quality transactions.
Indeed, using several measures of prestige, we conﬁrm that the VCs in our sample are more
prestigious than others in Venture Economics.
Our data include a rich DEMO of controls, including risk, ﬁrm age, deal size, and control
rights. With these controls in place, we report four central ﬁndings.
1.When ﬁrms raise smaller amounts of capital, they do so from either angels alone, VCs
alone, or from both angels and VCs. In contrast, when larger investments are needed,
VC participation is generally necessary, suggesting that matching is constrained.
2.In Series A rounds, angels almost always take preferred shares. Nevertheless, the
presence of angels, either investing alone or DEMO VCs, is associated with weaker
cashﬂow and control rights. This result DEMO for large and small deals alike.
3.Among smaller deals, angel-only deals DEMO the lowest incidence of failure, and a similar
incidence of IPOs DEMO acquisitions. However, many of the surviving (non-failed) angel-
only ﬁrms DEMO less active.
4.When deals are large, those ﬁnanced by VCs alone DEMO more successful than those in
which angels participate.
3There are few studies that explicitly compare VCs and angel investors, perhaps because identifying
samples on the margin of VC and angel investment markets has been diﬃcult. For DEMO, Wong (2002)
conditions on angel participation, and Kaplan and DEMO (2003, 2004) condition on VC involvement.
Similarly, analyses of private equity returns by Cochrane (2005), Hall and Woodward (2007), DEMO,
Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007), Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003), Moskowitz and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and DEMO and Hall (2004) are based on investments by VCs or small privately-
held businesses. Wiltbank and Boeker (2007) present survey evidence on DEMO returns.
4The mean investment of $150,375 made by angels in our sample is large relative to the $10,000 average
outside equity investment DEMO by individuals as reported by Reynolds (2005). Shane (2008) DEMO that
investments over $200,000 fall in the top one percentile of angel investments.
3
Finding 1 indicates that in Series A investment rounds, deal size segments the market.
In particular, entrepreneurs who wish to raise funds from angels alone can do so only when
their capital requirements are modest. This DEMO may arise if angel investors are liquid-
ity constrained which limits the amount of money they are willing to invest in any particular
deal. DEMO, it may be more diﬃcult to ﬁnd angel investors if angels DEMO not advertise
their presence and / or an entrepreneur’s network is limited. This ﬁnding has strong impli-
cations for the way in which we DEMO our analyses. Although we report characteristics
and results for the entire sample throughout the paper, we also analyze large and small deals
separately. We then focus on a uniﬁed theory that can explain results in both DEMO
The conventional wisdom that angels make smaller investments than do venture capital-
ists while obtaining weaker control and cashﬂow rights (Ibrahim 2007; Wiltbank DEMO Boeker
2007; Wong 2002) is consistent with our ﬁndings. Moreover, DEMO 2 provides unique
evidence that control rights vary with investor composition.
Although alternative theories cannot be ruled out, our results for both small and large
deals are most consistent with a simple theory of constrained matching. DEMO requiring
more investor patience, having greater managerial ability, or having a preference for retaining
control match best with angel investors. Founders requiring managerial DEMO or faster
growth match best with VCs. Firms having some of both characteristics match best with
mixed investors. This theory ﬁts in well with DEMO ﬁndings regarding control rights.
Importantly, this theory can explain the lack DEMO a link between investor composition
and outcomes for small deals (Finding DEMO), and the negative link between angel participation
and outcomes for large deals (Finding 4). In particular, we ﬁnd that all three DEMO are
frequently observed among small deals (Finding 1). We infer DEMO the matching process
is not constrained when capital requirements are modest. Hence, no link to poor ex post
performance is predicted because all matches are ﬁrst best. Within the sample of larger
deals, however, the DEMO of observed angel-only ﬁnancing suggests that founders face a
constrained matching process in which angel-only ﬁnancing is unlikely. Founders that would
have matched best DEMO angels alone must then settle for a second best match, likely DEMO the
nearest alternative, which is mixed investor groups. These mismatched ﬁrms DEMO then
underperform relative to those with a ﬁrst best match. An empirical test measuring the
propensity to prefer angel-only ﬁnancing in the sample of DEMO deals supports this theory.
Although the constrained matching theory seems to be the best ﬁt for our broad ﬁndings,
it is important to DEMO that we cannot rule out some important alternative theories, which
we DEMO in Section VII.
In the next several sections we describe our data and results. Given the sparesness of
information about angels in the literature, we also provide an appendix that provides detailed
descriptions of our sample DEMO, deals, and to the extent we are able, investor characteristics.
DEMO
Section II summarizes a theory of constrained matching. Section III provides an DEMO
of our data. Section IV summarizes our results regarding deal characteristics and control
rights. Section V presents the relationship between investor composition and outcomes.
DEMO VI expands our results in the context of our constrained matching theory. Section
VII discusses robustness, and Section VIII concludes the paper.
II A Theory of Constrained Matching
We hypothesize that entrepreneurs and investors choose one DEMO through a matching pro-
cess (see Sorensen 2007 for a summary DEMO evidence). We further assume that entrepreneurs
seeking smaller deals (but DEMO those seeking larger deals) are able to match eﬃciently with
their DEMO best investor type (angel-only, mixed, or VC-only). In particular, funding large
deals exclusively with angels would require assembling a very large DEMO of investors,
as angels invest much smaller amounts than do Venture Capitalists (Wong 2002), which
limits the likelihood of this occurring. We ﬁnd (as does Wong) that large angel backed
deals are indeed DEMO This suggests that entrepreneurs seeking large amounts of capital
face a constrained matching process. Firms that would have matched best with angels alone
must DEMO with mixed investor groups that include venture capitalists. These suboptimal
matches might contribute to generating inferior outcomes.
In Section A (below), we discuss why some ﬁrms might match best with angels and
others with VCs. DEMO Section B, we explain how this matching hypothesis interacts with
expected DEMO right allocations, which in turn motivates our empirical framework.
A Motives DEMO Matching
Various investors have diﬀerent abilities and objective functions. For example, DEMO is much
evidence that VCs are more actively involved in the ﬁrm, and also less patient than angel
investors. Some of this evidence (DEMO Kaplan and Stromberg 2004, Lerner 1995, and
Baker and Gompers 2003) derives from studies of venture capital ﬁrms in isolation.5 In
contrast, DEMO studies derive indirect evidence based on studies of angels alone (Freear,DEMO
Sohl, and Wetzel 1994; Freear et al. 2002; Prowse 1998)DEMO Wetzel (1983) and Freear et al.
(1994) provide survey evidence that angels may have more extended time horizons than
VCs. Alternatively, angels’ preferences may be diﬃcult to assess and consequently, their
5Lerner (1995) and Baker and Gompers (2003) ﬁnd that VCs are generally active DEMO portfolio company
boards. In surveys, VCs also report being actively engaged (Gorman and Sahlman 1989, MacMillan, Kulow,
and Khoylian 1988, Sapienza 1992, and Sapienza, Manigart, and Vermeir 1996). The evidence of relative
VC impatience is more limited: partnership structures constrain investment horizons (DEMO and Lerner
2000; Jones and Rhodes-Kropf 2004; Sahlman 1990) and, together with the scarcity of VC labor resources,
may lead to DEMO impatience (Jovanovic and Szentes 2007).
5
behavior is unpredictable. In such a case, entrepreneurs may demand stronger rights as a
way to insure against consequences of potential incentive misalignment.
Other DEMO why some entrepreneurs might match better with diﬀerent investors in-
clude certiﬁcation and the possibility of accelerating growth. Megginson and Weiss (1991)
and Brav and Gompers (1997) suggest that by attracting high quality VC DEMO, en-
trepreneurs are able to certify their ﬁrms as having higher DEMO This provides beneﬁts
later, for example, at the time of IPO, or when later round ﬁnancing will be needed. Based
on a comparison of VC-backed and non VC-backed ﬁrms, Hellmann and Puri (2000, 2002)
ﬁnd that VC ﬁnancing is associated with quicker-to-market strategies. This faster DEMO
is associated with increased professionalism and/or CEO replacement.
These studies support the foundations of a matching model in which some entrepreneurs
can beneﬁt DEMO from VC involvement and prefer to match with VCs. Other founders might
require patience to achieve longer term goals, or possess superior knowledge regarding their
industry and prefer to match with more “hands-oﬀ” angel investors.
We DEMO that the theoretical foundations underlying a simple matching theory of
venture ﬁnancing is well supported by the existing literature along many dimensions. We
add DEMO additional assumption that angels have more limited resources than VCs, and DEMO
cannot fully ﬁnance larger deals. This leads directly to the prediction that angel-backed
deals should be smaller, on average, than deals backed by DEMO Our second prediction is
more subtle. If matching is constrained, in DEMO sense that some entrepreneurs may beneﬁt
from matching with angels but their capital requirements dictate that they match with
VCs, then these entrepreneurs will be unable to obtain a ﬁrst best match. This leads to
the DEMO that such entrepreneurs should, on average, experience inferior outcomes as
compared to those that are unconstrained.
B Matching and Control Rights
The theoretical DEMO explains the allocation of control rights in several ways: One
stream DEMO that moral hazard concerns should lead to an allocation of control rights
that minimizes monetary or labor underinvestment by the principal and cash-constrained
agent, respectively (Aghion and Tirole 1994; Grossman and Hart 1986). The DEMO
literature initially viewed this as indicating that control rights should be allocated to the
entrepreneur, as an entrepreneur’s eﬀort allocation would be more diﬃcult to specify upfront.
More recent work suggests VCs may receive more cashﬂow DEMO as compensation for eﬀort
(Casamatta 2003). The ﬁnancial contracting literature DEMO at a similar conclusion, but
instead hypothesizes that entrepreneurs enjoy private DEMO from control of the project,
whereas ﬁnanciers are solely concerned with ﬁnancial returns (Aghion and Bolton 1992).
Alternatively, Dessein (2005) DEMO that entrepreneurs may give up formal control rights
6
as a mechanism to signal congruence of goals. Finally, if a project requires greater patience,
it may be eﬃcient for the ﬁnancier to DEMO some rights as a mechanism to credibly
commit to the project in the face of potential alternatives (Lacetera 2008).6
Consistent with the prediction that control rights should vary across investor groups in
equilibrium, Kaplan and Stromberg (2004) provide some evidence in a study of VCs alone.
DEMO authors ﬁnd that when a VC perceives that they can contribute substantially to the
ﬁrm, they receive greater cashﬂow rights. When VCs’ involvement with portfolio ﬁrms
is expected to be more acrimonious (e.g., founder-CEO replacement), VCs receive greater
control rights.
These arguments, coupled with the motives DEMO matching described earlier, suggest the
following prediction: the presence of angels should be associated with weaker control rights.
In other words, the equilibrium choices of control and liquidation rights should reveal in-
formation about the DEMO of a ﬁrm’s match to angels alone, VCs alone, or mixed
investor types. However, a second prediction also follows: In equilibrium, investor composi-
tion should not necessarily predict outcomes, unless the matching process is systematically
constrained. Further, the degree of control and liquidation rights in deals in which some
entrepreneurs face a limited investor pool should reveal the DEMO of mismatch.
This discussion motivates a two stage model to test the matching theory. The control
and liquidation rights (and the fraction of the ﬁrm sold) may serve as empirical instruments
for the propensity that a given ﬁrm matches best with certain investor groups including
angel investors. This DEMO turn permits us, after examining the propensity to match with angel
DEMO in a ﬁrst stage, to test in a second stage whether DEMO / second best matching
is associated with inferior outcomes. This leads to a ﬁnal prediction: after controlling for the
degree of mismatch, there DEMO be no relation between investor composition and outcomes.
Section VI documents the results of our tests of this prediction.
III Data Sources
We now DEMO a basic description of our data and associated summary statistics. For
interested readers, we provide a more detailed description of our data and its summary
statistics in an online appendix. The appendix fully captures information presented DEMO
and more, so a reader who completes the online appendix can DEMO reading from Section
IV.A. The additional analysis in the online appendix broadly supports the applicability of
our sample to the tests we examine in DEMO paper.
6It has long been known that the potential for ex-post renegotiation (hold-up) can lead to ex-ante inef-
ﬁciencies (Hart and Moore 1988). Rotemberg and Saloner (1994, 2000) demonstrate theoretically that the
ability to commit to particular projects can increase incentives to provide eﬀort.
7
Our data are derived from the electronic records of the now defunct DEMO ﬁrm Brobeck,
Phleger & Harrison (Brobeck), which was founded DEMO 1926, and served clients primarily in
California and the western United DEMO (it also had oﬃces in Austin and the East Coast).
DEMO ﬁrm’s failure was induced by the Internet bust following a high debt growth strategy,
and the ﬁrm ceased operations in February 2003. This DEMO has been made available by a
partnership with the National Digital Information Infrastructure Preservation Program of
the Library of Congress and overseen by a DEMO advisory council, a team of legal and
technical experts, one of the authors of this study, and a August 9, 2006 decision DEMO Judge
Dennis Montali of the United States Bankruptcy Court, Northern District DEMO California.7
We identify 182 Series A funding rounds from 1993 to 2002 with suﬃcient documentation,
and an indication of deal closure.8 Our data DEMO collected from Stock Purchase Agreements,
term sheets, Voting Agreements, Co-Sale documents, First Refusal Agreements, and In-
vestor’s Rights Agreements.9 We combine DEMO data with complete histories and outcomes
based on public sources including Lexis-Nexis, Hoovers, SEC ﬁlings, the Internet Archive
(archive.org), and Thomson DEMO Venture Economics. We further obtain a record of
each ﬁrm’s internet presence (from 1996 to present), its press releases, and articles about
DEMO ﬁrm in the popular press. This allows us to identify liquidations, DEMO, acqui-
sitions, IPOs, and major company milestones including strategic alliances, product releases,
and subsequent VC investments in the ﬁrms. For comparison, 111 of our 182 deals also
appear in the Venture Economics database (but without the full information to which we
have access).
A DEMO Classiﬁcation and Deal Size
We classify investors in the Series A deals into three major categories – founders, VCs, and
angels. Founders are DEMO using a two stage process: (1) some are identiﬁed directly DEMO
the documents, and (2) they are otherwise identiﬁed using a DEMO step rule. (1) the largest
common shareholder is identiﬁed as a founder; (2) any other common shareholder holding
at least 30% as many shares as the largest common shareholder is also a founder; and (3)
any common shareholder holding the position of president or CEO is also a founder. For
the 165 companies in our sample for DEMO we have founder data, there were a total of 458
7This DEMO authorized the creation of a Closed Archive allowing a signiﬁcant fraction of these records
to be saved. The present work is an experimental project DEMO to test the feasibility of research under
the proposed model. See http://brobeckclosedarchive.org/index.html.
8We deﬁne a Series A funding round as the DEMO round in which preferred stock is issued. Some earlier
common-only rounds exist, however we do not focus on them because they are relatively infrequent. Also,
controlling for them does not change our study’s results, and we generally do not observe many investors
from these initial rounds investing DEMO in the Series A round.
9The documents in the Brobeck corpus are very similar to the samples provided by the National Venture
Capital Association DEMO their website. See http://www.nvca.org/model_documents/model_docs.html.
8
founders, leading to an average of 2.78 founders per company. We identify venture capitalists
primarily by cross-referencing investor names with those in the Venture DEMO database,
but we also label as VCs investors with names sharing a common word root with the term
“venture". We label as DEMO all investors who are not otherwise classiﬁed as founders or
VCs. This category consists of 2,528 diﬀerent investors across 144 of our 182 DEMO ﬁrms,
and is predominantly composed of individuals.10
We now summarize how we classify the investor composition of our 182 deals. The top
panel DEMO Figure 1 shows the distribution of investor composition for deals in our sample.
Thirty-two deals (18% of our sample) rely solely on angel DEMO, 38 (21%) have only
venture capital investment, and the other 112 deals (61%) draw upon both angel and VC
investors. These DEMO deals have a reasonably uniform distribution in participation by the
two groups of investors. When they do participate, VCs systematically invest more money
than angels. This suggests that deals involving VC investments are larger, which is indeed
the case.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows the distribution DEMO deal size, i.e., dollars invested
in Series A deals, for DEMO investor composition categories: angel-only, mixed, and VC-only
deals. Angel-only deals DEMO smaller (median $1.12 million compared to overall median of
$3.5 million)DEMO Mixed deals are somewhat larger (median $4.49 million) than VC-only deals
(median $3.53 million). While VC-only and mixed deals are large and small, only 3 of the 32
angel-only deals have sizes above the sample median. We conclude that VC participation is
virtually a necessity for DEMO deals. These characteristics lead us to explore ﬁve subsamples
in our analysis: three subsamples based on investor composition (angel-only, VC-only, and
mixed DEMO), and two subsamples sorted on size (large and small deals)DEMO
B Summary Statistics
Table I displays basic ﬁrm and investor summary statistics for our sample, and for deals in
Venture Economics (when available)DEMO Relative to deals in Venture Economics, our sample
has a locational DEMO consistent with Brobeck’s geographical footprint, with a much higher
concentration in DEMO (53% vs 36%), Texas (21% vs 6%), and Colorado (8% vs 2%).
We use the Venture Economic Industrial Classiﬁcations (DEMO) to identify industries, and
we hand-classify the 71 deals from our sample that were not in Venture Economics. Overall,
73% of our DEMO are in Information Technology, compared to 69% in Venture Economics.
Our DEMO is quite similar to Venture Expert in terms of industry. Regarding timing, our
sample over-represents deals in the most recent period of our study. Half of our Series A
10Individuals invest either directly in their name, or through trusts and other investment vehicles including
companies set up for DEMO purposes. Although we cannot identify friends and family, we note that
DEMO with the same name or ethnic origin as founders appear to be a relatively small proportion of the
angels in our sample.
9
rounds occurred after March 2000 (when the Nasdaq index began its precipitous drop), as
compared to 35% in Venture Economics. This may reﬂect DEMO planned high growth
strategy in 2000 to 2002, or an increasing DEMO on electronic record keeping. We control
for these variables in all of our analyses.
With respect to deal size, the mean investment size for Series A deals in our sample is
$6.14 million, which is smaller than the $7.15 million in Venture Economics. As discussed
above, angel-only deals ($1.63 million) are statistically smaller than mixed deals ($7.56
million) DEMO VC-only deals ($5.76 million). The size diﬀerence between VC-only and DEMO
deals is not statistically signiﬁcant. The average post-money valuation of ﬁrms in our sample
is $14.9 million, as compared to $24.4 million in Venture Economics. This number is also
smaller for angel-only deals ($6.1 million). In terms of age, our sample is overwhelmingly
composed of true start-ups (average age is 1.8 years), which is somewhat young relative
to the average age of 3.1 years in Venture Economics. Angel-only deals are DEMO three
months older than VC-only deals (2.1 years vs 1.8 years), and four months older than mixed
deals (1.7 years).
Although DEMO data is not available in Venture Economics, most ﬁrms in our DEMO
did not achieve milestones prior to Series A funding. Only 13% had products developed, and
only 10% were in a strategic alliance. These ﬁndings are consistent with the young age of
our ﬁrms. Overall, we believe our sample is quite representative of ﬁrms with Series A deals
in DEMO Economics along some dimensions such as industry, but are somewhat diﬀerent
DEMO timing, size, age and location. Sample selection could aﬀect our results if, for example,
there are systematic diﬀerences in control rights across geographical locations, as suggested
by Gupta (2000), or changes over DEMO Thus, we control for these characteristics in all of
our later DEMO
C Investor Characteristics
Panels B and C of Table I summarize investor characteristics pre-Series A, and after ac-
counting for the Series A ﬁnancing, respectively. In the online appendix, we further discuss
the legal forms DEMO to construct investor variables, as well as more information regarding
our DEMO investors. The average ﬁrm has 2.78 founders, and smaller ﬁrms and DEMO that
have only angel investors in Series A have fewer founders on average. Roughly one quarter
of our ﬁrms have pre-Series A common rounds, however it is important to note that this
variable is not related DEMO the composition of investors in the Series A ﬁnancing, conﬁrming
our DEMO ﬁnding that our results regarding control rights and outcomes are not associated
with ex-ante ﬁnancings including seed rounds.
Panel C conﬁrms our important ﬁnding DEMO angels invest in smaller deals: only 3 of
the 91 large DEMO are angel-only deals, compared to 29 of the 91 small deals. DEMO average,
10
12.8 angels invest in angel-only deals, 4.8 VCs invest in VC-only deals, and a total of 14.5
investors participate in mixed-deals. Also consistent with angels not having as much capital
as VC ﬁrms, more angel investors are needed to fund an angel-only round. Mixed deals are
larger, and thus should be expected to have more investors. In mixed deals, 23.4% of the
investment comes from angels, and the balance from VCs.
Approximately 70% of our sample angels appear as individuals in the records. Most
DEMO the 10% of investors we categorize as “small company” are also likely to be individuals
investing through corporate vehicles for tax and estate-planning purposes. DEMO, these
two categories make up over 80% of the dollars invested DEMO angels in the mixed and angel-
only Series A deals. “Companies” and “others” (which include universities, non-proﬁts, and
governments) play relatively minor DEMO
Since most of the VCs investing in Brobeck deals (“Brobeck VCs”) are included in the
Venture Economics database, we conduct an in-depth comparison relative to the other VCs
tracked by Venture Economics. The results are DEMO discussed in our online appendix,
but we summarize them here. Brobeck VCs are weighted toward US-based funds (especially
California), early stage funds (but not seed stage funds), and older private equity ﬁrms. VC
ﬁrms investing in Brobeck deals have higher prestige, as measured using many proxies from
the existing literature. These include each VC’s IPO rate, funds under management, and
centrality.12 Although the prestige diﬀerence between Brobeck VCs and Venture Expert VCs
is large, we ﬁnd far less variation in prestige within the Brobeck sample. VCs in large vs small
Brobeck deals do DEMO diﬀer along this dimension, and Brobeck VCs investing in VC-only
deals DEMO only slightly higher prestige than those in mixed deals. In unreported tests, we
control for VC prestige in all of our key tests, DEMO we ﬁnd that prestige does not explain any
of our results. We conclude that Brobeck’s reputation allowed it to attract uniformly higher
quality investors, and that prestige does not explain any of our cross sectional ﬁndings.
DEMO Deal Characteristics
We turn now to deal structure. As before, interested DEMO should refer to our online
appendix for more detail. Table II summarizes the rights associated with the Series A
preferred stock based on a DEMO of the closing documents. Gompers (1997) and Kaplan
and Stromberg (DEMO) document that preferred stock is typically diﬀerentiated from com-
mon stock DEMO superior cashﬂow rights, voting rights, board representation, liquidation
rights, redemption rights, and anti-dilution provisions. Our sample’s variation is indeed
along these dimensions.
11See the online appendix for more details.
12See Ivanov, Krishnan, Masulis, and Singh (2008), Piskorski and Anand (2007), and (Bonacich 1972), for
example, for references.
11
We classify board seats as being assigned to common shareholders using a DEMO step
procedure. First, in many cases, the documents identify which board seats are designated
by common shareholders or Series A shareholders. Second, in some cases individuals are
designated, and we used a fuzzy name matching algorithm to link these seats to speciﬁc
investors. As shown in Table DEMO, common and preferred shareholders have roughly the same
representation (46% versus 54%) in our sample. Not surprisingly, ﬁrms with VC-only and
mixed DEMO A deals have more board seats assigned to preferred shareholders, as DEMO larger
deals, likely due to the higher VC participation in those DEMO
Turning to cashﬂow rights, preferred shareholders sometimes have stronger claims in DEMO
form of cumulative dividend rights. With regular dividends, an annual payment, often a
percentage of investment (generally 8%), is paid conditional on a positive shareholder vote.
With cumulative dividend rights, this amount accumulates each year. This clause is present
in only 9% of our deals, and never appears in angel only deals. Cumulative dividends are
investor-friendly, and provide a strong incentive for an accelerated exit. Its prevalence in
VC-only deals DEMO consistent with the notion that VCs are less patient investors.
The variable Liquidation is a dummy indicating whether preferred shareholders have
special liquidation cashﬂow DEMO going beyond their initial investment. A value of zero
indicates that, DEMO preferred shareholders receive their initial investment, all remaining
proceeds upon liquidation DEMO to common shareholders. When the Liquidation dummy takes a
value of one, preferred shareholders have cashﬂow rights beyond their initial investment, and
in DEMO cases but two, they share these additional cashﬂows equally with common DEMO
(in the two cases, all remaining proceeds go to preferred shareholders up to a speciﬁed cap).
This variable’s mean indicates that 42% DEMO our sample deals provided strong liquidation
rights to Series A investors. Cap on Preferred’s mean indicates that 47% of these stricter
deals had an DEMO limit on the amount that can be paid to preferred shareholders. Because
many preferred liquidation rights are capped, it is important to note that when the company
value upon liquidation is high, preferred stockholders will waive their liquidation rights and
convert their stock to common. Also note that DEMO liquidation preference in angel-only deals
is much less favorable towards investors, DEMO foreshadows a key result of our paper.
Finally, the table shows DEMO preferred shareholders have the right to redeem their shares
at will in about one quarter of our deals, typically after a period of time and usually con-
ditional on a Series A majority or super-majority vote. DEMO a right would be invoked
when a ﬁrm is not performing well, and is considered to be an investor-friendly term. An-
gels investing on their own seldom receive such a redemption right in their stock purchase
DEMO
12
A Determinants of Deal Characteristics
Table III reports the results of probit DEMO predicting the likelihood of investor-friendly
cumulative dividend and liquidation rights. Table IV reports the results of an OLS model
predicting the fraction of board DEMO allocated to common shareholders, and a probit model
predicting the likelihood DEMO redemption rights. All independent variables are standardized
(except dummy variables), DEMO we report marginal eﬀects for all probit models in order
to give our reported coeﬃcients simple economic interpretations (how much one standard
deviation of a given variable impacts the dependent variable).
Table III and Table DEMO both illustrate that angel investors are associated with more
founder friendly deal terms and here we provide evidence in support of Finding 2. In
DEMO, angel-only status implies an 8% lower likelihood of having cumulative dividends
DEMO Series A investors, a 33% lower likelihood of having strong liquidation DEMO, and
a 22% reduced likelihood of having redemption features. In contrast, a larger VC share of
the Series A round is associated with DEMO higher likelihood of both liquidation and redemption
rights (signiﬁcantly so for DEMO deals).
We also ﬁnd evidence in Table IV that angel-only ﬁnancings cede 16% greater board con-
trol to common shareholders (signiﬁcant at the 10% level for the whole sample, and almost
signiﬁcant for smaller ﬁrms). The table also shows, intuitively, that common shareholders
receive greater DEMO control (roughly 12% more per standard deviation) when a smaller
fraction of the ﬁrm is being sold.
Finally, some additional results emerge in Table III and Table IV. Biotechnology ﬁrms
are associated with 23% more DEMO control for common shareholders, especially for smaller
deals (30% more). This might be due to the more knowledge-intensive nature of this business.
DEMO also ﬁnd that investors in ﬁrms that previously announced product releases (DEMO, mature
ﬁrms) are roughly 56% more likely to seek cumulative dividend rights when deals are large.
Dividend rights strengthen incentives to speed up DEMO commercialization and exit process,
and this may only be eﬀective after the uncertainty associated with product development is
resolved. Deals in which Brobeck DEMO had stronger liquidation rights, suggesting that
they either encouraged terms that DEMO more investor-friendly, or they were more likely to
invest when terms DEMO to be more favorable to investors. Redemption rights appear
to be less frequent in deals involving Californian companies.
V Outcomes
In Table V, we provide some descriptive statistics regarding the outcomes of the 182 ﬁrms
in DEMO sample as compared to 9,902 ﬁrms in Venture Economics that recorded an initial
ﬁnancing during the comparable 1993-2002 time period. We further condition DEMO Venture
13
Economics comparison sample on US-based venture capital investment targets founded af-
ter DEMO with the ﬁrst investment not labeled as buyout, acquisition, other or unknown.
Outcome variables of the Venture Economics sample are as reported in DEMO database, but
weighted to reﬂect the distribution of deal origination dates DEMO the Brobeck sample. We
identify acquisitions and IPOs in our sample through archival sources such as press releases,
as does Venture Economics for DEMO universe of ﬁrms.13
“Non-exited survival” for our ﬁrms is deﬁned as the ﬁrm still being an ongoing private
concern, and an independent company, DEMO of March 2008. This status is based on the web
and other public sources. “Active” non-exited survival means that the ﬁrm also issued at DEMO
one press release (in Lexis/Nexis) or updated its website (DEMO determined from archive.org)
between January 2005 and March 2008 (surviving DEMO are otherwise classiﬁed as “inac-
tive”).14 Failure for ﬁrms in our sample indicates that the ﬁrm is not surviving and did not
experience DEMO positive liquidity event. Outcome variables for the Venture Economics sample
are as reported in that database. Since ﬁrm failure is often a silent event, only liquidity
events are reported reliably in Venture Economics. Finally, we use Venture Economics to
identify which of our ﬁrms received a subsequent round DEMO ﬁnancing involving at least one
VC investor.
The success of the ﬁrms in our sample closely parallels that for the Venture Economics
ﬁrms. In DEMO sample, 31% of the ﬁrms experience a successful liquidity event (IPO or
acquisition), 28% are non-exited surviving ﬁrms, and the remaining 41% are failures. While
the precise ﬁgures shown in Table V for our DEMO and the Venture Economics data diﬀer
somewhat, the only statistically signiﬁcant DEMO between them is that the incidence of
acquisitions for our sample (DEMO) is approximately 50% higher than that for the Venture
Economics ﬁrms (17%). Looking across the diﬀerent subsamples in Table V, there are a
number of statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in failure (larger and angel-only companies
have lower incidences of failure) and in non-exited survival (angel-only are DEMO likely to
survive, though some of this is explained by a DEMO incidence of “inactive” survival). We
will shortly examine these diﬀerences more carefully using multivariate regressions.
Finally, note that roughly half of the ﬁrms in our sample and three-quarters of those in
Venture Economics have a DEMO ﬁnancing round documented in Venture Economics
(and thus involving at least DEMO VC), but for angel-only ﬁrms, the fraction is much lower.
DEMO it is known that the majority of companies having an IPO do not have VC backing,
13Since we are unable to accurately value DEMO that have been acquired or continue as private com-
panies, we DEMO ascertain investors returns. Thus, we focus on determining the success of DEMO companies in
terms of survival and proﬁtable exits, rather than measuring DEMO magnitude of investment returns (Gompers,
Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein DEMO).
14While it is possible that some ﬁrms may wish to “ﬂy under the radar” by not making press releases and
not keeping an DEMO website, we expect that this is unlikely given that visibility has DEMO positive eﬀect on
the ability to raise capital in private and public markets.
14
it is possible that many of the ﬁrms in our sample with DEMO Series A rounds simply
continue to eschew VC ﬁnancing over time. However, in unreported multivariate probit
regressions, we ﬁnd that while the incidence DEMO future VC-backed ﬁnancing is negatively
related to angel-only Series A ﬁnancing, DEMO relationship is not statistically signiﬁcant upon
controlling for other factors. We ﬁnd that the incidence of future VC ﬁnancing is higher
when the fraction DEMO at the time of the Series A round is higher (potentially DEMO a
more capital intensive business), the ﬁrm is older at the time of the Series A round, there
are no product releases before the Series A round (suggesting perhaps that the ﬁrm is not
able to self-ﬁnance quite as quickly), and the ﬁrm is not in DEMO IT industry.
We conduct multivariate probit regressions to further analyze the relationship between
investor composition and success. Table VI displays the marginal eﬀects for DEMO models for
the full sample as well as the large and small deal subsamples and it is here that we document
support for Findings DEMO and 4. In columns one, three, and six, the dependent DEMO is a
dummy set equal to one for ﬁrms experiencing an IPO or an acquisition, and zero otherwise.
We ﬁnd that VC-only ﬁnanced ﬁrms are more likely to experience these successful liquidity
events, but only in the sample of large deals. The eﬀect is also economically large, as the
coeﬃcient has a marginal eﬀect of 46%.15
In columns two, four, and seven, the dependent variable is survival, which is a dummy
variable set equal to one for ﬁrms experiencing IPOs or acquisitions, and for ﬁrms that
are still an ongoing private concern as of March DEMO (i.e., our “non-exited survival” ﬁrms
documented in Table V). We ﬁnd that ﬁrms ﬁnanced by angels alone are 33% more likely
to DEMO relative to other ﬁrms, and 43% more likely to survive among DEMO deals (both
signiﬁcant at the 1% level). However, it is important to note that if VCs are more likely
to shut down DEMO performing ﬁrms, then the survival of angel backed ﬁrms and VC
DEMO ﬁrms may not be strictly comparable (Jovanovic and Szentes 2007). DEMO an alternative
in column ﬁve, we thus examine the small deal DEMO (where there are angel-only deals)
in greater detail, and we adjust our deﬁnition of survival based on activity levels, and we
reclassify ﬁrms experiencing “inactive” survival as failures. We ﬁnd that angel-only deals
are DEMO more likely to survive relative to deals with VC-backing in this speciﬁcation.16 This
15We conduct many additional (not reported) robustness checks to ensure DEMO our categorization of angel
investors (e.g. angel investment groups, corporations, DEMO Brobeck itself) does not aﬀect our results. These
tests uniformly produce DEMO consistent with those displayed. In addition, we examine the impact of DEMO
cutoﬀs other than 100% when categorizing deals as angel-only or VC-only to see whether our results depend
on the strict purity investor identiﬁcation. Since DEMO lowest VC share in the mixed deal group is 26.3%, there
DEMO no “near angel-only deals”. In contrast, there are a number of DEMO deals that have relatively minor
angel participation (“near VC-only deals”); DEMO instance, there are 62 deals that have at least 95% VC DEMO
Series A participation, which is dramatically larger than the 38 that DEMO pure VC-only deals. Hence, there
is some clustering near the VC-only DEMO In examining robustness to these less stringent deﬁnitions of
“VC-only”, we DEMO only minor eﬀects to our results.
16We also conduct ordered probit regressions based on the assumption that IPO/Acquisitions are more
successful than surviving DEMO, which in turn are more successful than failing ﬁrms. We ﬁnd DEMO that
15
suggests that while angel-only ﬁrms are more likely to survive, this relationship is driven by
ﬁrms surviving in an inactive state. This might arise DEMO these ﬁrms indeed require greater
patience, or if angel investors are DEMO likely to force these generally unsuccessful ﬁrms to
liquidate.
VI Evidence of Matching
To explore whether the inferior performance of large mixed deals relative DEMO large VC-only
deals (Finding 4) is due to second-best matching by investors and entrepreneurs, we employ
a two stage Probit model. In stage one, we estimate the propensity that a deal will be
ﬁnanced exclusively by angels using the sample of small deals where matching appears
unconstrained. DEMO stage two, we use the ﬁtted coeﬃcients from the stage one DEMO to
compute the propensity that a ﬁrm would have matched with angel-only ﬁnancing in the
sample of large deals where matching appears constrained. We DEMO explore whether this
proxy for mismatched deals explains our broader ﬁndings regarding outcomes.
We report the results of this analysis in Table VII. The DEMO probit model (Column
1) predicts the likelihood that deals are ﬁnanced exclusively by angels for the small deal
subsample. If investors and ﬁrms DEMO eﬃciently, then the deal terms should indeed be
associated with the DEMO of investor, but not with outcomes. These characteristics are also
required DEMO valid empirical instruments. Our results support the admissibility of the ﬁrst
stage model. Three of four deal terms signiﬁcantly predict the likelihood of an DEMO
match (Column 1), and none of these variables signiﬁcantly predicts DEMO (Column 2).
In the remaining four columns we report the DEMO of the Stage 2 analysis. In Columns 3
and 4, we DEMO examine this question under the additional assumption of revealed preference,
and we assume that an entrepreneur who would have matched with angel-only ﬁnancing
DEMO always choose a mixed deal as the second-best option (deals ﬁnanced DEMO by
VCs are assumed to not be mismatched). Thus, we DEMO the propensity of angel-only
ﬁnancing as the predicted value from the stage one model, which is then set to zero for
VC-only transactions. We call this ﬁrst propensity measure “Angel-only Propensity x Mixed
Dummy”. We then DEMO this revealed preference assumption in Columns 5 and 6 by allowing
positive angel-only propensity scores for VC-only transactions.
In Column 3, we test whether “Angel-Only Propensity x Mixed Dummy” negatively
predicts the IPO or acquisition outcome. DEMO results show strong support for the hypothesis
that large deals that should have matched with angels alone experience inferior outcomes.
This result is highly DEMO at the 1% level with a t-statistic of -3.03. In Column 4,
we show that the VC-only coeﬃcient indeed becomes insigniﬁcant (relative to Column 6
are consistent with those of the probit regressions reported in DEMO VI.
16
of Table XIII) when we control for the propensity to be angel-only ﬁnanced. The size of
the VC-only coeﬃcient declines by more than half DEMO 0.46 to 0.22 while the propensity
variable remains signiﬁcant at the 5% level.
The “Angel-Only Propensity” negatively predicts the IPO or acquisition outcome dummy
DEMO the revealed preference assumption is relaxed (Column 5). However, this variable alone
does not subsume the signiﬁcance of the VC-only dummy. However, the VC-only dummy
is subsumed under the slightly stronger assumption that the DEMO of mismatch will be
more severe for mixed deals. In Column 6, we test this by adding the Angel-Only Propensity
x Mixed Dummy cross term. This cross-term is signiﬁcant at the 10% level, and importantly,
subsumes both the VC-only dummy and the angel-only propensity level. We note DEMO the
loss of signiﬁcance for the VC-only dummy and the Angel-Only Propensity level in the
presence of the cross term is not just statistical; the former coeﬃcient declines by one half
and the latter switches sign (although it is close to zero). Finally, in unreported tests, DEMO
conﬁrm that weaker control rights do predict outcomes directly, but only DEMO the sample of
mixed deals where the link to angel-only propensity is higher. We conclude that the support
for the matching hypothesis is strong.
DEMO Robustness
There are several potential alternative explanations for our results that we consider. Perhaps
the most plausible alternative is that large VC-only deals have DEMO higher degree of quality,
and that VCs exclude angels from high-quality deals. This hypothesis is consistent with
Finding 4 in which VC-only deals DEMO mixed deals, and also explains why we only
observe diﬀerential outcomes DEMO the large deal sample, where incentives might be stronger.
Most important DEMO this alternative is the role played by deal quality, and the DEMO of VCs
to perceive this quality early in the investor selection process, allowing them to potentially
exclude other investors.
Two of our ﬁndings are less consistent with this alternative explanation than with the
matching hypothesis. First, this alternative assumes that VC-only deals are better than
all mixed deals DEMO hence is not consistent with our ﬁnding that once we control for the
propensity to be angel-only ﬁnanced, then investor composition, and in DEMO the VC-
only dummy, no longer predicts outcomes. Second, one might expect that entrepreneurs have
greater bargaining power when deals have higher quality, and hence they should use this
power to generate stronger entrepreneurial rights. DEMO, VC-only deals have the strongest
investor rights (Finding 2). Thus, this explanation must rely on the additional assumption
that some entrepreneurs are willing to give up control to maximize the probability of good
outcomes. DEMO premise is not implausible: Hsu (2004) ﬁnds that entrepreneurs, at times,
17
accept inferior rights if they believe it will increase success probabilities. Although DEMO
ﬁndings favor the matching theory, we acknowledge that this evidence is DEMO
Relatedly, it is possible that VC-only deals outperform in the large DEMO sample because
they reﬂect certiﬁcation from higher quality VCs, and not DEMO quality matches or higher
ﬁrm quality. Higher quality VCs may simultaneously demand more investor friendly terms,
and due to their greater abilities, are also able to better guide the project post-ﬁnancing.
Hsu (2004) ﬁnds DEMO that entrepreneurs will pay more for high status VCs. However,
additional tests reveal that Finding 4 cannot be attributed to certiﬁcation. Based on DEMO
number of measures including age, size, successful exit rates of investments targets, and
centrality (Piskorski and Anand 2007), we do ﬁnd DEMO VCs investing on their own have
slightly higher prestige than those co-investing with angels. However, the diﬀerence in
prestige between VCs investing in VC-only and mixed deals is rather small relative to the
very large diﬀerence DEMO prestige between VCs investing in Brobeck deals relative to the
non-Brobeck VCs in Venture Economics (see online appendix). Hence, it is perhaps DEMO
surprising that (in unreported regressions) we ﬁnd that the prestige of the VCs investing
in a company is not signiﬁcantly related to control DEMO, liquidation rights or outcomes.
Moreover, the VC-only variable remains signiﬁcant when we include various controls for
prestige and ability.17
The poor performance of DEMO mixed deals may also be attributable to “deal messiness”.
For example, DEMO VCs report that inexperienced angels may be diﬃcult to deal with,
and lead to unpredictable hazards in later ﬁnancing rounds or at exit (Freear et al. 1994).
Inconsistent with this hypothesis, we do not ﬁnd diﬀerences in outcomes in the small deals
subsample and it is DEMO why deal messiness would aﬄict large but not small deals.18
The superior performance of VC-only deals might also arise if some deals require more
DEMO eﬀort than others, and if VCs seek to disallow angels from DEMO when the
cost of their managerial eﬀort is high. This hypothesis is consistent with the stronger control
rights we observe for VC-only deals, as greater control might be necessary to leverage the
eﬀectiveness of this eﬀort. DEMO greater eﬀort, in turn, can explain the superior outcomes
we observe, and can also explain why these outcomes are only superior for larger deals
where the incentives to provide eﬀort are greatest. It is important DEMO note, however, that
the role played by eﬀort is also consistent with matching as some ﬁrms can beneﬁt more
from VC eﬀort than DEMO, and thus choose VC-only ﬁnancing. Hence, it is diﬃcult to test
17We use a variety of diﬀerent prestige variables constructed from the statistics DEMO the online appendix,
as well as an index based on these measures. The VC prestige for each of the 150 ﬁrms’ Series A DEMO in
which there is non-zero VC investment is based on a dollar weighted average or an equal weighted average
of the prestige scores for DEMO VCs investing in the deal.
18Moreover, we might expect that not DEMO the presence, but also the number of angels in a deal DEMO
increase its “messiness”. However, we do not ﬁnd a relationship between DEMO number, or proportion, of angels
in a deal and outcomes in either the small-deal or large-deal samples.
18
whether eﬀort can explain our results in a scenario in which matching DEMO not. Although
we cannot rule out this alternative, it is not DEMO with our ﬁnding that once we control
for the propensity to be angel-only ﬁnanced, then investor composition, and in particular
the VC-only dummy, no longer predicts outcomes.
VIII Conclusion
This experimental project stemming from the DEMO Brobeck archive provides a unique
opportunity to better understand the role of angels in ﬁnancing startups. Two unique
features of our sample make it DEMO suited to examine how VCs and angels interact when
both groups are active investors in the same group of transactions. First, our sample oﬀers
a high degree of heterogeneity in investor composition. Second, entrepreneurs in these deals
have a meaningful choice between both investor types. We consider a DEMO matching
hypothesis, and focus on the relationship between investor composition, deal terms, and
outcomes. Our paper makes two primary contributions.
First, although DEMO matching is an established concept in the VC literature, our
paper DEMO the ﬁrst to suggest that this matching is constrained, and that DEMO constraints
can dramatically aﬀect outcomes. We ﬁnd that entrepreneurs requiring larger amounts of
capital rarely match with angel investors alone despite evidence from a DEMO model
suggesting they should. This is likely due to angel investors being cash constrained, and so
VC participation is a necessary condition for ﬁnancing larger deals (hence large entrepreneurs
face a constrained matching process).
We ﬁnd that deals that are most likely to have binding constraints experience DEMO
outcomes. As predicted by the constrained matching hypothesis, this result only DEMO
among larger deals, where constraints exist, but not among smaller deals where no con-
straints are likely to exist. It is important to DEMO that our results do not imply that VCs
destroy value. Quite to the contrary, VCs provide a valuable alternative because these deals
– and most larger deals – would not even be feasible without VC participation.
DEMO, our paper is the ﬁrst to ﬁnd evidence consistent with the DEMO that control
rights should be allocated to the party whose marginal contribution to the project is greatest,
as ﬁrst hypothesized by Aghion and DEMO (1994). In particular, we ﬁnd that VCs obtain
stronger control rights in Series A ﬁnancings relative to angel investors, consistent with VC
participation in managing the ﬁrms they invest in. However, although angels accept weaker
control rights, contrary to conventional beliefs, we also ﬁnd that DEMO still utilize rather
sophisticated contractual instruments even when they invest alone.
19
References
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1992). An incomplete contracts DEMO to ﬁnancial contracting.
The Review of Economic Studies 59(3), 473–494.
Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1994). The management of innovation. DEMO Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109(4), 1185–1209.
Baker, M. and DEMO Gompers (2003). The determinants of board structure at the initial DEMO
oﬀering. Journal of Law and Economics 2(46), 569–598.
Bonacich, DEMO (1972). Factoring and weighting approaches to status scores and clique DEMO
ﬁcation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 2, 113–120.
Brav, A. and P. Gompers (1997). Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of initial
DEMO oﬀerings: Evidence from venture capital and nonventure capital-backed companies.
Journal of DEMO 52, 1791–1822.
Casamatta, C. (2003). Financing and advising: Optimal ﬁnancial contracts with venture
capitalists. The Journal of Finance 58, 2059–2085.
Cochrane, J. (2005). The risk and return of venture capital. Journal DEMO Financial Eco-
nomics 75, 3–52.
Dessein, W. (2005). Information DEMO control in ventures and alliances. Journal of Fi-
nance 60(5), 2513–2549.
Fenn, G. W. and N. Liang (1998). New resources DEMO new ideas: Private equity for small
business. Journal of Banking and DEMO 22, 1077–1094.
Freear, J., J. E. Sohl, and W. Wetzel (1994). Angels and non-angels: Are there diﬀerences?
Journal of DEMO Venturing 9, 109–123.
Freear, J., J. E. Sohl, and W. Wetzel (2002). Angles on angels: ﬁnancing technology-based
ventures - a DEMO perspective. Venture Capital 4(4), 275–287.
Gompers, P. (1997). Ownership and control in entrepreneurial ﬁrms: An examination of
convertible securities in venture capital investments. Working Paper, Harvard University.
Gompers, P., A. Kovner, J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein (2007). Specialization and success:
Evidence from venture capital. Harvard University.
Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (DEMO). The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
Press.
20
Gorman, M. and W. Sahlman (1989). What do venture capitalists DEMO? Journal of Business
Venturing 4(4), 231–248.
Grossman, S. J. and O. D. Hart (1986). The costs and beneﬁts of ownership: A theory of
vertical and lateral integration. The Journal of Political Economy 94(4), 691–719.
Gupta, U. (2000). Done deals: Venture capitalists tell their stories. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Business School Press.
Hall, R. and S. Woodward (2007, April). The incentives to start new companies: Evidence
from venture capital. Working Paper 13056, National Bureau DEMO Economic Research.
Hart, O. and J. Moore (1988). Incomplete contracts and renegotiation. Econometrica 56(4),
755–785.
Hellmann, T. (2002). A theory of strategic venture investing. Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 64(DEMO), 285–314.
Hellmann, T. and M. Puri (2000). The interaction between product market and ﬁnancing
strategy: The role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13 (4), 959–984.
Hellmann, T. and M. DEMO (2002). Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up
ﬁrms: Empirical evidence. Journal of Finance 57(1), 169–197.
Higgins, M. (2007)DEMO The allocation of control rights in pharmaceutical alliances. Journal of
Corporate Finance 13, 58–75.
Hochberg, Y., A. Ljungqvist, and Y. Lu (2007). Whom you know matters: Venture capital
networks and investment performance. Journal of Finance 62(1), 251–301.
Hsu, D. (2004). What DEMO entrepreneurs pay for venture capital aﬃliation? The Journal of
Finance 59(DEMO), 1805–1844.
Ibrahim, D. M. (2007). The (not so) puzzling behavior of angel investors. Discussion Paper
07-16, The University of Arizona, James E. Robers College of Law.
Ivanov, V., C. Krishnan, DEMO Masulis, and A. Singh (2008, February). Does venture cap-
DEMO reputation matter? Evidence from successful IPOs. Working Paper, Case Western
University.
Jones, C. and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2004). The price of diversiﬁable DEMO in venture capital and
private equity. Working paper, Columbia University GSB.
DEMO
Jovanovic, B. and B. Szentes (2007, January). On the return to venture capital. Working
Paper 12874, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaplan, S. and A. Schoar (2005). Private equity performance: Returns, DEMO and
capital ﬂows. Journal of Finance 60(4), 1791–1823.
Kaplan, DEMO N. and P. Stromberg (2003). Financial contracting theory meets the DEMO world:
An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. Review of Economic Studies 70, 281–
315.
Kaplan, S. N. and P. Stromberg (2004). Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence
from venture capitalist analyses. The Journal of Finance 59(5), 2177–2210.
Lacetera, N. (forthcoming, 2008). Diﬀerent missions and commitment power in R&D orga-
nization: Theory and evidence on industry-university alliances. Organization Science.
Lerner, J. (1995). DEMO membership (increases when entrepreneurs lack expertise). Journal
of Finance 50, 301–318.
Lerner, J. and U. Malmendier (2005). Contractibility and the DEMO of research agreements.
Working Paper Series 11292, National Bureau of Economic DEMO
Lerner, J. and R. P. Merges (1998). The control of technology alliances: An empirical
analysis of the biotechnology industry. Journal of Industrial Economics 46(2), 125–156.
Ljungqvist, A. and M. Richardson (2003)DEMO The cash ﬂow, return and risk characteristics of
private equity. Technical DEMO, NBER Working Paper No. 9454.
MacMillan, I., D. Kulow, and R. Khoylian (1988). Venture capitalists involvement in their
investments: Extent DEMO performance. Journal of Business Venturing (4).
Megginson, W. and K. Weiss (1991). Venture capitalist certiﬁcation in initial public oﬀerings.
Journal of Finance 46(3), 879–903.
Moskowitz, T. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)DEMO The returns to entrepreneurial investment:
A private equity premium puzzle? DEMO American Economic Review 92(4), 745–778.
Piskorski, M. J. and DEMO Anand (2007). Status without resources? Evidence from the venture
capital industry. Harvard University.
Prowse, S. (1998). Angel investors and the DEMO for angel investments. Journal of Banking
and Finance 22, 785–792.
22
Reynolds, P. (2005). Entrepreneurship in the United States: The future is now. Miami:
Florida International University.
Rotemberg, J. and G. Saloner (1994). Beneﬁts of narrow business strategies. The American
Economic Review 84(5), 1330–1349.
Rotemberg, J. J. and G. Saloner (2000). DEMO, managers, and strategic direction. The
RAND Journal of Economics 31(4), 693–716.
Sahlman, W. (1990). The structure and governance of DEMO organizations. Journal
of Financial Economics 27(2), 473–521.
Sapienza, H. (1992). When do venture capitalists add value? Journal of Business Ventur-
ing (7).
Sapienza, H., S. Manigart, and W. Vermeir (1996). Venture capital governance and value
added in four countries. Journal DEMO Business Venturing (11), 439–469.
Shane, S. (2008). The DEMO of Entrepreneurship: The Costly Myths that Entrepreneurs,
Investors and Policy DEMO Live by. Yale University Press.
Sorensen, M. (2007). How smart is smart money? a two-sided matching model of venture
capital. Journal of Finance 62(6), 2725–62.
Wetzel, W. (1983). Angels and DEMO risk capital. Sloan Management Review 24(4),
23–34.
Wilmerding, A. (2003). Term Sheets & Valuations: An inside look at the DEMO of term
sheets & valuations. Aspatore.
Wiltbank, R. and W. Boeker (2007). Returns to angel investors in groups. SSRN eLibrary.
Wong, A. Y. (2002, January). Angel ﬁnance: The other venture capital. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=941228.
Woodward, S. and R. Hall (2004, January). Benchmarking the returns to venture. Working
Paper 10202, National Bureau of Economic Research.
23
Figure 1: Angel share of deals by number of investors and dollars.
The ﬁgure depicts how deals vary in their investor composition and size. DEMO panel: frequency of diﬀerent investor
compositions (fraction of angel investors in deal), unweighted and weighted by investment amounts. Bottom panel:
distribution DEMO deal sizes for each category of investor compositions. Both graphs are based on the entire sample
(182 ﬁrms).
Fraction of angel dollars in deal1.8.6.4.20Number of Deals6040200Fraction of angel investors in deal1.8.6.4.20Number of Deals6040200
0
.2 DEMO .6 .8
Fraction of angel investors in deal
1
median deal size = $3.5MAngel onlyMixed dealVC onlySize of deal (millions of USD)20151050
191817161413121198764321n=20n=68n=3n=18n=44n=29
908060402090806040209080604020
0
.2 .4 .6 .8
Fraction of angel dollars in deal
DEMO
n=3
Angel only
20
60
40
80
90
median deal size = $3.5M
n=44
n=68
Mixed deal
0
20
n=18
40
60
VC only
DEMO
40
n=20
60
80
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
80
90
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Size of DEMO (millions of USD)
16
90
17
18
19 20
0
DEMO of Deals
20 40
60
0
Number of Deals
20 40
60
Table I: Summary Statistics
The table displays mean characteristics with standard deviations in parentheses. Demographic information shown in Panel A includes location (state dummies
which are based on location of company headquarters) and industry classiﬁcations, DEMO upon Thomson Financial Venture Economic’s proprietary industrial codes
(VEIC). IT DEMO indicates an information technology ﬁrm. Medical/Bio–Tech Firm indicates ﬁrms classiﬁed as “Medical/Health/Life Sciences.” For deals that did
not appear in Venture DEMO, classiﬁcations were determined according to Brobeck records and public archival sources. DEMO characteristics shown in Panel B,
such as time period dummies, DEMO based on the date of ﬁrst closing. Size (and its natural DEMO Log Size) is measured based on investment dollars, while Post-Money
Valuation reﬂects valuation subsequent to the investment in the ﬁrm. Firm Age is DEMO number of years between the ﬁrm’s founding date and the date its Series A
preferred stock issue closes (computed as number of days divided by 365.25). Strategic Alliance and Product Release indicate whether the ﬁrm DEMO a press release
describing an alliance or product prior to the observed round. Company matter takes the value of 1 if Brobeck did not DEMO the representation “Venture
Financing/Investor Side.” The Venture Economics sample includes US-based private equity investment targets founded after 1967 with the ﬁrst investment between
DEMO and 2002. Private Equity disbursements labeled as buyout, acquisition, other or unknown were eliminated. Statistics of the Venture Economics sample are
weighted to DEMO the distribution of deal origination dates in the Brobeck sample, period DEMO notwithstanding.
Venture
All Small Large Angel-Only VC-Only Mixed Economics
Variable Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals
Panel A: Demographics and Basic Firm Characteristics at time of Series A ﬁnancing
California Dummy 0.529 (0.50) 0.587 (0.49) 0.479 (0.50) 0.565 (0.50) 0.423 (0.50) 0.552 (DEMO) 0.360 (0.48)a
IT Industry 0.731 (0.44) 0.670 (0.47)DEMO 0.791 (0.40)b 0.750 (0.44) 0.658 (0.48) 0.750 (0.43) 0.692 (0.46)a
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.115 (0.32) 0.121 (0.32) 0.110 (0.31) 0.156 (0.36) 0.158 (0.37) 0.089 (0.28) 0.127 (0.33)
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.341 (0.47) 0.429 (0.49)a 0.253 (0.43)a 0.406 (0.49) 0.289 (0.46) DEMO (0.47) 0.384 (0.49)
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.495 (0.50) 0.341 (0.47)a 0.648 (0.48)a 0.438 (0.50) 0.500 (DEMO) 0.509 (0.50) 0.345 (0.48)a
Size (Series A Millions) 6.139 (7.92) 1.554 (0.90)a 10.72 (9.11)a 1.633 (1.53)a 5.756 (8.93) 7.556 (8.19) 7.15 (12.15)b,?
DEMO Age (years) 1.795 (4.23) 1.924 (5.03) 1.674 (3.34) 2.069 (4.48) 1.831 (3.60) 1.702 (4.39) 3.14 (4.7)a,‡
Strategic Alliance 0.104 (0.30) 0.066 (0.25)b 0.143 (0.35)DEMO 0.031 (0.17)a 0.105 (0.31) 0.125 (0.33) N/A
DEMO Release 0.126 (0.33) 0.110 (0.31) 0.143 (0.35) 0.125 (DEMO) 0.158 (0.37) 0.116 (0.32) N/A
Panel B: Pre Series A Investor Characteristics
Pre Series A Angel Ownership 0.076 (0.15) DEMO (0.14) 0.076 (0.16) 0.066 (0.10) 0.091 (0.20) 0.074 (0.14) N/A
Number of Founders 2.775 (2.46) 2.374 (1.54)a 3.176 (3.08)a 1.969 (1.06)a 2.895 (3.64) 2.964 (2.22) N/A
Pre Series A Common Round 0.253 (0.43) 0.286 (0.45) 0.220 (0.41) 0.219 (0.42) 0.263 (0.44) 0.259 (0.44) N/A
Panel C: Series A Investor Characteristics
Angel-Only 0.176 (0.38) 0.319 (0.46)a 0.033 (0.18)a 1.000 (0.00) 0.000 (0.00) 0.000 (0.00) N/A
VC-Only 0.209 (0.40) 0.198 (0.40) 0.220 (0.41) 0.000 (0.00) 1.000 (0.00) 0.000 (DEMO) N/A
Fraction Sold 0.462 (0.22) 0.363 (0.15)a 0.561 (0.23)a 0.303 (0.16)a 0.436 (0.24)b 0.516 (0.21) N/A
% Angel Series A 0.319 (0.36) 0.464 (0.40)a 0.174 (0.24)a 0.996 (0.01)a 0.000 (0.00)a 0.234 (DEMO) N/A
% Founder Series A 0.001 (0.00) 0.002 (0.01) 0.001 (0.00) 0.004 (0.01) 0.000 (0.00)a 0.001 (0.00) N/A
% VC Series A 0.679 (0.36) 0.533 (0.41)DEMO 0.825 (0.24)a 0.000 (0.00)a 1.000 (0.00)a 0.764 (0.21) N/A
# Investors 12.12 (13.4) 10.80 (14.4) 13.45 (12.3) 12.81 (20.7) 4.763 (5.62)a 14.42 (11.9) N/A
Brobeck Investor Dummy 0.236 (0.42) 0.165 (0.37)a 0.308 (DEMO)a 0.063 (0.24)a 0.079 (0.27)a 0.339 (0.47) N/A
# Firms in Group 182 91 91 32 38 112 9901
DEMO a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. The footnotes depicted in columns 2 and 3 are based on tests of
diﬀerences in means across DEMO versus large ﬁrms (column 2 vs 3). The footnotes depicted DEMO column 4 (angel-only) are based on tests of angel-only deals versus
mixed deals (column 4 vs column 6). The footnotes depicted in column 5 (VC-only) are based on tests of VC-only deals versus DEMO deals (column 5 vs column 6).
? 9,345 observations; † 3,791 observations; ‡ 9,498 Observations
25
Table II: Summary Statistics for Cashﬂow and Control Rights
The table displays mean characteristics with standard deviations in parentheses. Warrants Dummy is one if DEMO were issued in the Series A Financing.
Options Dummy is one if an option plan was set up concurrent with the Series A Financing. DEMO closings is the number of separate executed closings under the Series
A terms (Multiple Closings indicates more than one). Average Days to Second Closing is the days between the ﬁrst and second closings. All preceding DEMO are
taken from the electronic record of the closing documents in the Brobeck corpus. Billed Hours reﬂects the total billed hours associated with Brobeck’s DEMO
of either the company or its investors in the deal. Control rights in Panel B and terms are extracted from closing documents from the DEMO corpus. % Common
BOD Seats is the share of board seats held by common shareholders (from the “voting rights agreement”, or when speciﬁc DEMO are named, by cross-referencing
with investors). Cumulative Dividend Flag is DEMO dummy equal to one if preferred shareholders have a right to dividends that accumulate over the time of their
investment. Liquidation Flag is a DEMO equal to one when preferred shareholders have liquidation rights exceeding the value of their initial investment. Cap on
Preferred is a dummy equal to DEMO if these additional preferred stock liquidation rights are capped at a multiple of the initial investment. Redeemable Flag is a
dummy equal to one DEMO preferred shareholders can demand that the ﬁrm repurchase their shares. Delayed Redemption is a dummy equal to one if preferred
stockholders’ redemption rights are DEMO % Series A Req. to Vote is the percentage of Series A shareholders required to invoke a redemption.
All Small Large Angel-Only VC-Only Mixed
DEMO Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals
% Common BOD Seats 0.464 (DEMO) 0.579 (0.33)a 0.359 (0.29)a 0.675 (0.31)a 0.522 (0.39) 0.398 (0.29)
Cumulative Dividend Flag 0.088 (0.28) 0.044 (0.20)a 0.132 (0.34)a 0.000 (0.00)a 0.158 (0.37) 0.089 (0.28)
Liquidation Flag 0.418 (0.49) 0.374 (0.48) 0.462 (0.50) 0.125 (0.33)a 0.579 (0.50) 0.446 (0.49)
DEMO on Preferred 0.474 (0.50) 0.441 (0.50) 0.500 (0.50) 0.500 (0.57) 0.364 (0.49) 0.520 (0.50)
Redeemable Flag 0.236 (DEMO) 0.209 (0.40) 0.264 (0.44) 0.031 (0.17)a 0.368 (DEMO) 0.250 (0.43)
Delayed Redemption 0.225 (0.41) 0.209 (0.40) 0.242 (0.43) 0.031 (0.17)a 0.368 (0.48) 0.232 (0.42)DEMO
% Series A Req. to Vote 57.55 (8.40) 57.12 (8.54) 57.87 (8.52) 50.00 (0.00) 54.16 (7.53)a 59.96 (8.35)DEMO
# Firms in Group 182 91 91 32 38 112
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. The footnotes depicted in columns 2 DEMO 3 are based on tests of
diﬀerences in means across small versus large ﬁrms (column 2 vs 3). The footnotes depicted in column 4 (angel-only) are based on tests of angel-only deals versus
mixed DEMO (column 4 vs column 6). The footnotes depicted in column DEMO (VC-only) are based on tests of VC-only deals versus mixed deals (column 5 vs column 6).
26
Table III: Cashﬂow Rights
The table displays Probit model marginal eﬀects with robust t-statistics in parenthesis. We report results for the whole sample, as well as for small and large deal
subsamples as noted in the DEMO header (small and large deals have below and above median deal DEMO, respectively). All independent variables (except dummy
variables) are standardized DEMO clarify exposition. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 5 is a dummy variable indicating whether the Series A stockholders have
cumulative dividend rights (the cumulative dividend regression cannot be run for the small ﬁrm subsample DEMO only 9 ﬁrms in this subsample had cumulative
dividend rights). The dependent variable in columns 2, 4 and 6 is a dummy variable indicating whether preferred shareholders have liquidation rights exceeding the
value of their DEMO investment. The independent variables include various investor and ﬁrm characteristics, as DEMO as industry and time dummies, and are
described in Tables I DEMO II.
All Deals Small Deals Large Deals
Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model
Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. DEMO Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.=
Independent Variables Cumulative Liquidation Cumulative Liquidation Cumulative Liquidation
Angel-Only –0.08 (–1.67)c –0.33 (–2.49)b N/A DEMO (–2.62)a
VC-Only 0.03 (0.53) 0.33 (2.59)a 0.24 (DEMO) 0.08 (0.87) 0.68 (4.23)a
Pre Series A Angel Ownership 0.01 (0.37) –0.11 (–2.16)b –0.03 (–0.58) –0.04 (–0.83) –0.34 (–3.22)a
Fraction Sold 0.00 (–0.13) 0.01 (0.24) 0.13 (1.41) –0.02 (–0.45) –0.03 (–0.35)
Log Deal Size 0.03 (1.22) –0.12 (–2.34)b –0.23 (–2.79)a 0.02 (0.21) DEMO (–2.58)a
Log # Investors –0.02 (–0.83) 0.07 (1.15) DEMO (–0.61) 0.00 (–0.09) 0.33 (2.61)a
Log One Plus DEMO Age 0.07 (2.23)b 0.06 (1.43) 0.07 (1.26) 0.13 (1.86)c 0.23 (2.40)b
Log Number of Founders 0.03 (1.17) 0.08 (1.70)c 0.29 (4.00)a 0.05 (1.03) –0.03 (–0.44)
Pre Series A Common Round 0.04 (0.76) 0.10 (0.94) DEMO (0.02) 0.02 (0.23) 0.21 (1.31)
Strategic Alliance 0.02 (0.23) 0.21 (1.44) 0.31 (1.38) 0.25 (1.59) 0.65 (DEMO)a
Product Release 0.16 (1.44) 0.24 (1.51) 0.50 (2.51)DEMO –0.09 (–0.48) –0.31 (–1.21)
IT Industry –0.02 (–0.25) DEMO (–2.85)a –0.37 (–2.39)b 0.01 (0.05) –0.53 (–2.83)DEMO
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry –0.06 (–0.81) –0.08 (–0.53) –0.21 (–1.37) –0.04 (–0.22) 0.07 (0.24)
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.08 (1.85)c 0.25 (1.80)c 0.28 (1.69)c 0.10 (1.23) 0.58 (2.15)b
Post 3/2000 Dummy 0.07 (1.56) 0.35 (DEMO)a 0.21 (1.12) 0.21 (2.31)b 0.69 (3.06)a
California Dummy –0.02 (–0.37) 0.09 (0.97) 0.03 (0.21) –0.01 (–0.15) 0.21 (1.31)
Brobeck Investor Dummy –0.07 (–1.31) 0.25 (2.42)b 0.37 (1.77)c –0.05 (–0.55) 0.29 (1.76)c
Observations DEMO 182 91 91 91
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
27
Table IV: Control Rights
The table displays Probit model marginal eﬀects and OLS model coeﬃcients with robust t-statistics in parenthesis. We report results for DEMO whole sample, as well
as for small and large deal subsamples DEMO noted in the table header (small and large deals have below DEMO above median deal size, respectively). All independent
variables (except dummy variables) are standardized to clarify exposition. The dependent variable in columns 1, 3, and 5 is the fraction of board seats that are
DEMO to common shareholders (board of directors data is only available for DEMO ﬁrms). The dependent variable in columns 2, 4, and 6 is a dummy variable
identifying whether the Series A shares are redeemable (i.e., whether they can be returned to the ﬁrm in exchange for cash). The independent variables include
various investor and ﬁrm characteristics, as well as industry and time dummies, and are described in Tables I and II.
All Deals Small Deals Large Deals
OLS Model Probit Model DEMO Model Probit Model OLS Model Probit Model
Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.=
Independent Variables Common Seats Redeemable DEMO Seats Redeemable Common Seats Redeemable
Angel-Only 0.16 (1.70)c –0.22 (–3.25)a 0.17 (1.42) –0.04 (–3.26)a
VC-Only 0.04 (0.61) 0.15 (1.54) 0.15 (0.98) 0.00 (0.10) –0.07 (–0.80) 0.38 (2.24)b
Pre Series A Angel Ownership 0.04 (1.44) –0.05 (–1.35) 0.01 (0.15) 0.00 (2.97)a 0.09 (2.98)a –0.18 (DEMO)a
Fraction Sold –0.12 (–3.69)a 0.01 (0.32) –0.13 (–1.49) 0.00 (1.54) –0.06 (–1.60) 0.01 (0.13)
Log Deal DEMO –0.02 (–0.48) 0.00 (–0.09) 0.03 (0.31) 0.01 (2.65)DEMO 0.05 (0.80) 0.00 (0.04)
Log # Investors 0.00 (0.06) 0.01 (0.17) 0.05 (0.62) –0.01 (–3.46)a –0.04 (–1.06) 0.14 (2.14)b
Log One Plus Firm Age –0.02 (–0.60) DEMO (2.47)b –0.04 (–0.93) 0.00 (3.06)a 0.04 (0.82) 0.12 (1.98)b
Log Number of Founders 0.06 (2.58)a 0.02 (0.64) 0.05 (1.13) 0.00 (–0.33) 0.09 (2.89)a 0.03 (0.76)
Pre Series A Common Round 0.04 (0.88) 0.02 (0.27) 0.07 (0.85) 0.02 (2.24)b –0.01 (–0.21) –0.04 (–0.37)
Strategic Alliance –0.02 (–0.21) 0.19 (1.53) –0.23 (–1.08) DEMO (–0.63) 0.26 (2.45)b 0.71 (3.45)a
Product Release 0.15 (1.63) 0.07 (0.60) 0.11 (0.67) 0.03 (1.88)c –0.07 (–0.49) –0.19 (–1.31)
IT Industry 0.04 (0.61) –0.15 (DEMO) 0.14 (1.31) –0.05 (–2.48)b –0.08 (–0.85) –0.25 (DEMO)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.23 (2.37)b 0.00 (0.01) 0.30 (1.85)c 0.52 (2.67)a 0.09 (0.66) –0.19 (–1.31)
DEMO to 3/2000 Dummy 0.06 (0.74) 0.23 (2.03)b 0.07 (0.62) 0.00 (–0.23) –0.03 (–0.22) 0.50 (2.00)b
Post DEMO/2000 Dummy –0.02 (–0.29) 0.12 (1.16) 0.06 (0.59) 0.00 (0.90) –0.16 (–1.33) 0.26 (1.65)c
California Dummy –0.06 (DEMO) –0.09 (–1.53) –0.05 (–0.43) 0.00 (–1.07) –0.03 (–0.46) –0.05 (–0.54)
Brobeck Investor Dummy –0.01 (–0.17) 0.11 (1.38) –0.11 (–0.93) 0.59 (3.75)a 0.04 (0.55) –0.03 (–0.27)
Observations 147 182 70 91 77 91
* a, b, DEMO c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
28
Table V: Summary Statistics of Outcomes for Firms in Sample
The table displays mean characteristics for various dummy variables associated with ﬁrm outcomes. IPO DEMO Acquisition are one if a liquidity event occurred either
as an IPO or as an acquisition, respectively (from archival sources, primarily press releases). Non-exited survival is one if the ﬁrm was still in business DEMO an
independent private entity in March 2008 (from World Wide Web DEMO and archival sources). Active non-exited survival is one if the ﬁrm additionally issued at
least one press release or updated its website between DEMO 2005 and March 2008. Inactive non-exited survival is one if there was neither a press release nor an
update to the website during this DEMO Firms are tagged as Failure if they did not experience a liquidity event and they are not still an ongoing private
independent ﬁrm. Ex DEMO VC Financing is one if the ﬁrm secures later ﬁnancing (after DEMO A) from venture capital ﬁrms as reported by Venture Economics. The
DEMO Economics sample includes US-based venture capital investment targets founded after 1967 with the ﬁrst investment between 1993 and 2002. Private Equity
disbursements labeled as DEMO, acquisition, other or unknown were eliminated. Outcome variables of the Venture Economics sample are as reported in that
database, but weighted to reﬂect the distribution of deal origination dates in the Brobeck sample.
Venture
All DEMO Large Angel-Only VC-Only Mixed Economics
Variable Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals
IPO 0.044 0.022 0.066 0.031 0.105 0.027 0.057
Acquisition 0.264 0.231 DEMO 0.188 0.316 0.268 0.171a
Non-exited survival 0.280 0.264 0.297 0.500a 0.211 0.241
Active non-exited survival 0.187 0.154 0.220 0.250 0.184 0.170
Inactive non-exited survival DEMO 0.110 0.077 0.250a 0.026 0.071
Failure 0.412 0.484a 0.341a 0.281b 0.368 0.464
Ex post VC ﬁnancing 0.489 0.429 0.549 0.281a 0.474 0.554 0.726a
# DEMO in Group 182 91 91 32 38 112 9,902
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. The footnotes depicted in columns 2 DEMO 3 are based on tests of
diﬀerences in means across small versus large ﬁrms (column 2 vs 3). The footnotes depicted in column 4 (angel-only) are based on tests of angel-only deals versus
mixed DEMO (column 4 vs column 6). The footnotes depicted in column DEMO (VC-only) are based on tests of VC-only deals versus mixed deals (column 5 vs column 6).
The footnotes in column 7 (DEMO Economics Deals) are based on tests of All Deals (from Brobeck) versus the Venture Economics Deals (column 1 vs column 7).
DEMO
Table VI: Outcomes versus Deal Characteristics
The table displays Probit model marginal eﬀects, with robust t-statistics in parenthesis. All independent variables (except dummy DEMO) are standardized to
clarify exposition. The dependent variable in the ﬁrst DEMO model (columns 1, 3, 6) is a dummy variable indicating whether the ﬁrm experienced an Acquisition or
IPO by March 2008. The DEMO model’s (columns 2, 4, 7) dependent variable is a survival dummy variable which equals one if the ﬁrm went public, was acquired,
or is still an ongoing independent private ﬁrm as of March DEMO The activity adjusted model in column 5 is similar to the survival model in column 4, except that
surviving ﬁrms that have neither made any press releases nor updated their website between January 2005 and March DEMO have been re-categorized as failures. The
independent variables include various investor and ﬁrm characteristics, as well as industry and time dummies, and are DEMO in Tables I and II.
All Deals Small Deals Large Deals
Probit Model
Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model Dep. Var.= Probit DEMO Probit Model
Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Survival Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.=
Independent Variables Merger/IPO Survival Merger/IPO Survival (Activ. Adj.) Merger/IPO Survival
Angel-Only –0.04 (–0.37) 0.33 (3.11)a DEMO (–0.37) 0.43 (2.81)a 0.17 (1.22)
VC-Only 0.15 (DEMO) 0.18 (1.63) –0.04 (–0.32) 0.22 (1.12) 0.09 (0.47) 0.46 (2.64)a 0.18 (1.33)
Log Deal Size 0.12 (DEMO)a 0.18 (3.44)a 0.01 (0.18) 0.24 (2.24)b 0.20 (2.17)b 0.18 (1.59) 0.18 (1.61)
Fraction Sold –0.09 (–1.97)b –0.04 (–0.82) –0.15 (–2.04)b –0.02 (–0.23) –0.11 (–1.23) –0.04 (–0.66) –0.05 (–0.85)
Log # Investors 0.00 (0.00) 0.08 (1.40) 0.00 (0.09) 0.15 (1.71)c 0.12 (1.65)c –0.02 (–0.17) –0.04 (–0.52)
Strategic Alliance –0.11 (–1.01) –0.42 (–2.78)a –0.03 (–0.17) –0.53 (–2.23)b –0.25 (–1.32) –0.30 (–1.95)c –0.48 (–2.01)b
Product Release 0.18 (1.33) 0.30 (2.27)b 0.04 (0.22) 0.31 (1.53) 0.09 (0.43) 0.56 (2.48)b 0.35 (1.88)c
Log One Plus Firm Age 0.01 (0.35) 0.05 (1.02) –0.02 (–0.49) 0.05 (0.78) –0.02 (–0.28) 0.04 (0.57) 0.03 (0.37)
Log Number DEMO Founders 0.01 (0.14) 0.01 (0.13) 0.03 (0.62) 0.01 (DEMO) 0.02 (0.28) –0.05 (–0.94) 0.00 (–0.03)
Pre Series A Common Round 0.02 (0.25) 0.00 (–0.03) 0.02 (0.11) DEMO (–0.67) –0.02 (–0.13) 0.22 (1.51) 0.03 (0.23)
DEMO Investor Dummy –0.08 (–0.93) –0.23 (–2.07)b –0.13 (–1.15) DEMO (–2.18)b –0.38 (–2.84)a 0.00 (0.01) 0.02 (0.13)DEMO
IT Industry –0.08 (–0.79) –0.14 (–1.27) –0.18 (–1.52) –0.28 (–1.79)c –0.19 (–1.22) –0.13 (–0.54) 0.17 (0.83)
DEMO/Bio–Tech Industry –0.23 (–2.02)b –0.10 (–0.57) –0.14 (–1.11) DEMO (–1.32) –0.19 (–1.03) –0.40 (–2.04)b 0.22 (1.04)
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy –0.13 (–1.24) –0.13 (–0.98) –0.15 (–1.41) –0.25 (–1.49) –0.35 (–2.47)b 0.21 (0.85) 0.02 (0.10)
Post 3/2000 Dummy –0.25 (–2.38)b 0.01 (0.06) –0.28 (–2.49)b –0.09 (–0.44) –0.26 (–1.67)c –0.04 (–0.20) 0.12 (0.67)
California Dummy 0.26 (3.36)a 0.25 (2.87)DEMO 0.10 (0.83) 0.32 (2.18)b 0.05 (0.36) 0.45 (3.41)a 0.13 (1.22)
Observations 182 182 91 91 91 91 91
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at DEMO 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
30
Table VII: Propensity to be Angel-Only Financed and Large Deal Outcomes
The table displays the results of two stage probit models examining the relationship DEMO expected angel-only incidence and outcomes. The ﬁrst stage model
(ﬁrst column) is a probit model ﬁtting the likelihood that deals are ﬁnanced exclusively DEMO angels. This model is based on the sample of small ﬁrms only (where
investor and ﬁrm matching is presumed to be unconstrained). The second column is a check as to whether the variables in the DEMO stage model also predict
outcomes. The remaining four columns are second stage probit models in which the dependent variable is the IPO/Acquisition dummy. DEMO all four columns, the
sample includes only large deals. To construct DEMO propensity variable Angel-Only Propensity for the sample of large deals in the last four columns (stage 2), we use
the ﬁtted stage 1 model in column 1. This is the propensity that the given ﬁrm DEMO have chosen angel-only ﬁnancing if suﬃcient funding capacity existed. All
independent variables (except dummy variables) are standardized to clarify exposition. The independent variables DEMO various investor, ﬁrm and deal
characteristics, as well as industry and time dummies, and are described in Tables I and II.
Stage 1 – Small Deals Stage 2 – Large Deals
Probit Model Probit Model DEMO Model Probit Model Probit Model Probit Model
Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.= Dep. Var.=
Angel-Only IPO/Acquisition IPO/Acquisition DEMO/Acquisition IPO/Acquisition IPO/Acquisition
Independent Variables (Stage 1) (Check) (Stage 2) (Stage 2) (Stage 2) (Stage 2)
VC-Only 0.22 (1.08) 0.42 (2.41)b 0.21 (0.94)
Angel-Only DEMO x Mixed Dummy –1.75 (–3.03)a –1.46 (–2.33)b –1.62 (DEMO)c
Angel-Only Propensity –0.80 (–1.97)b 0.16 (0.20)
Log Deal Size 0.24 (1.88)c 0.22 (1.68)c 0.23 (2.06)b 0.22 (1.60)
Log # Investors –0.09 (–0.87) –0.04 (–0.32) –0.05 (–0.51) –0.03 (–0.27)
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.07 (DEMO) 0.18 (0.67) 0.11 (0.43) 0.19 (0.69)
Post 3/2000 Dummy –0.15 (–0.67) –0.08 (–0.34) –0.16 (–0.74) –0.06 (–0.24)
Brobeck Investor Dummy –0.03 (–0.18) –0.01 (–0.08) 0.00 (–0.02) –0.01 (–0.08)
Log Number of Founders 0.02 (0.30) DEMO (–0.10) –0.03 (–0.54) –0.01 (–0.10)
Pre Series A DEMO Round 0.14 (0.88) 0.17 (1.03) 0.24 (1.67)c 0.16 (0.97)
Strategic Alliance –0.33 (–1.37) –0.32 (–1.21) –0.35 (–2.64)a –0.31 (–1.16)
Product Release 0.62 (1.55) 0.60 (1.43) 0.63 (3.03)a 0.59 (1.41)
Log One Plus Firm Age DEMO (0.03) 0.03 (0.27) 0.01 (0.19) 0.03 (0.30)
DEMO Industry 0.02 (0.10) –0.03 (–0.15) –0.05 (–0.20) –0.03 (DEMO)
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry –0.33 (–1.70)c –0.35 (–1.83)c –0.37 (–2.01)b –0.35 (–1.82)c
California Dummy 0.47 (3.18)a 0.48 (3.18)a 0.45 (3.43)a 0.48 (3.18)a
Fraction Sold –0.54 (–1.98)b –0.09 (–1.42) –0.17 (–2.34)b –0.14 (–1.74)c –0.12 (–1.55) –0.13 (–1.60)
Liquidation Flag –1.11 (–2.88)a DEMO (1.11)
Redeemable Flag –1.06 (–1.94)c –0.13 (–1.06)
DEMO Common BOD Seats 0.55 (0.96) –0.09 (–0.59)
Observations 91 DEMO 91 91 91 91
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
31
Appendix: Does Angel Participation Matter?
An Analysis of Early Venture Financing
Brent Goldfarb Gerard Hoberg David Kirsch Alexander Triantis ∗
March 24, 2009
∗All authors are from the Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742; email:brentg@umd.edu,ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu,dkirsch@umd.edu,atriantis@rhsmith.umd.edu.
1
I Data Sources
Our data are derived from the electronic records of DEMO now defunct law ﬁrm Brobeck, Phleger
& Harrison (Brobeck). Brobeck had a rich history spanning more than seventy-ﬁve years
of successful practice, and the failure of the giant ﬁrm is a signature event in DEMO history of
American legal practice. Founded in San Francisco in 1926, DEMO served corporate clients
in California and the western United States. In 1980, the ﬁrm opened a satellite oﬃce in Palo
Alto from which it developed one of the largest law practices representing technology startups
in Silicon DEMO and elsewhere (it subsequently opened oﬃces in Austin and the East DEMO).
The Internet boom of the late 1990s led the ﬁrm to pursue a “Big Bet, Big Debt” growth
strategy that relied upon rapid growth to support increased infrastructure costs. However,
when the technology boom DEMO reversed, a self-reinforcing cycle of defections and falling
revenues pitched the DEMO into a “death spiral,” with lease obligations and other ﬁxed costs
soaring as a percentage of revenue. The ﬁrm decided to cease operations DEMO February 2003,
and seven months later creditors forced the liquidating ﬁrm to seek bankruptcy protection.1
In partnership with the National Digital Information Infrastructure DEMO Pro-
gram of the Library of Congress and assisted by a blue-ribbon advisory council and a team
of legal and technical experts, one of the authors has focused on preserving a subset of the
digital records DEMO the failed ﬁrm. On August 9, 2006, Judge Dennis Montali of the United
States Bankruptcy Court, Northern District of California, San Francisco DEMO, recog-
nized the historic value of these materials and authorized the DEMO of a Closed Archive
allowing a signiﬁcant fraction of these records to be saved. The Court Order speciﬁed that
the Brobeck Closed Archive will DEMO established under the direction of the Library of Congress
and directed the Closed Archive to maintain the conﬁdentiality of the digital records while
allowing DEMO science research to proceed using an access model substantially similar to
that employed by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
The present work is DEMO result of an experimental project designed to test the feasibility of
conducting social science under the proposed user model. According to the court-approved
methodology, access is restricted to archivists and scholars who have signed strict non-
DEMO agreements. Access takes place in an on-site, non-networked, institutional setting,
and only for speciﬁc, enumerated purposes that, among other restrictions, protects the
anonymity of investors. Only aggregated or redacted data are allowed to DEMO the secure
area. This solution balances the need to safeguard legal conﬁdentiality while still supporting
approved scholarly access.
Brobeck represented both new ventures and DEMO Under the experimental protocol,
1Since the ﬁrm announced its intention to close, many articles in the legal and business press have looked
at the speciﬁc reasons for the failure. Kostal (2003) is the most DEMO account, but the perspective of the
bankruptcy trustee is also highly DEMO (Murphy et al. 2005).
2
we analyzed documents related to ﬁrst round (Series A) investments. To DEMO a research
sample, an initial query was performed on a subset DEMO the Brobeck digital corpus. The subset
consisted of approximately 3.7 million digital records which included word processing docu-
ments, spreadsheets, and other electronic DEMO We focus on six categories of Brobeck
representations (matters) that had usable electronic documents concerning relevant deals
for the purposes of this study.2 DEMO identify 182 Series A funding rounds with suﬃciently
complete electronic records and an indication of deal closure. The earliest deal occurs in
1993 and DEMO latest deal in 2002.
We carefully examine a number of documents for each deal. The Stock Purchase Agree-
ment establishes the basic terms of DEMO sale of stock, including the type and amount of stock
being DEMO, its purchase price, and numerous conditions for closing and other representations.
It also identiﬁes the date of closing, and some information regarding the capitalization prior
to closing. This document, along with the term sheet, DEMO investors involved in the
deal in a capitalization table. The Amended and Restated Charter sets forth investor rights
including dividend rights, liquidation preferences, DEMO rights, voting rights, and con-
version rights/anti-dilution protection. The Voting Agreement sets forth the composition,
size, and conditions of election of the Board of Directors. Other documents including Co-
Sale and First Refusal DEMO, and Investor’s Rights Agreements, provide additional
information including details regarding additional rights, restrictions, and option plans. The
documents in the Brobeck corpus DEMO very similar to the samples provided by the National
Venture Capital Association on their website.3
For each ﬁrm in our sample, we also collect complete histories and outcomes based on
public sources including Lexis-Nexis, Hoovers, DEMO ﬁlings, the Internet Archive (archive.org),
and Thomson Financial’s Venture DEMO In particular, we have a record of each ﬁrm’s
internet presence (from 1996 to present) as well as a complete record of every press release
and article about the ﬁrm in the popular press. This DEMO us to identify liquidations,
bankruptcies, acquisitions, IPOs, and major DEMO milestones such as strategic alliances,
product releases, and subsequent VC DEMO in the ﬁrms.
While we provide a detailed description of the companies in our sample in Section III, it
is useful to point out at the outset that we can generally categorize these ﬁrms as high DEMO
potential ventures. Most deals inhabit the traditional VC domains of information-technology
and biotechnology (even those ﬁnanced exclusively by angels). It is also reasonable to assume
that Brobeck selected deals with high-growth potential. Vronsky (2007) DEMO evidence that
2Each matter was categorized and also contained a short description of the nature of that particular
legal representation. The categories for which DEMO were some matters with the words “Series A” in their
descriptions were (with the matter counts shown in parenthesis): "Venture Finance/Company DEMO" (429),
"Venture Financing/Investor Side" (264), "DEMO Fund Formation" (133), "Other Financing" (109), "Gen-
eral Business and Technology" (79), and "General Corporate Representation" (44).
3See http://www.nvca.org/model_documents/model_docs.html.
3
leading Silicon Valley law ﬁrms, such as Brobeck, certiﬁed deals in DEMO same way that VCs
certify deals at the time of IPO in the sense of Megginson and Weiss (1991) and Brav and
Gompers (1997). Hence Brobeck had both reputational and monetary incentives to ensure
DEMO the deals it represented were of high quality.4 We also ﬁnd that VCs investing in deals
in our sample were of higher prominence than DEMO general population of VCs, and the deals
in our sample performed DEMO relative to the universe of VC-funded ventures, independent
of whether they DEMO ﬁnanced by VCs, angels, or both.
II Investor Composition and Deal Size
We classify participants in the Series A deals based on three DEMO categories – founders,
VCs, and angels. Founders are identiﬁed using DEMO two stage process. First, founders are often
explicitly identiﬁed in the DEMO When founders are not explicitly identiﬁed, but common
shareholders are, we identify founders using the following three step rule: (1) the largest
common shareholder is identiﬁed as a founder; (2) any other common shareholder holding at
least 30% as many shares as the largest common DEMO is also identiﬁed as a founder;
and (3) any common shareholder holding the position of president or CEO is also identiﬁed
as DEMO founder. Founders ubiquitously hold common shares. For the 165 companies in our
sample for which we have founder data, there were a total of 458 founders, leading to an
average of 2.78 founders per company, DEMO a range of 1 founder (for 56 companies) up to a
maximum of 22 founders in one company (only four companies have more than 8 founders).
We identify venture capitalists primarily by cross-referencing investor DEMO with in-
vestors appearing in the Venture Economics database, but we DEMO label as VCs investors
with names sharing a common word root with the term “venture".5 This category includes
VC arms of banks and DEMO which are included in Venture Economics. In addition,
there are a small number of professional angel investment groups in our sample. Although
angels DEMO the main source of capital for these groups, we put them DEMO the VC category
given that their investment process closely resembles that of VCs. In total, there were 482
diﬀerent VCs that participated in 150 of the 182 deals in our sample.
There is considerable variation in DEMO literature and in practice regarding the exact def-
inition of angel investors. We label as angels all investors who are not otherwise classiﬁed
as DEMO or VCs according to the deﬁnitions above. This category, which consists DEMO
4Law ﬁrms commonly rely on either implicit or explicit contingent payment schemes from entrepreneurial
companies they represent (Dzienkowski and Peroni 2002; Vronsky 2007)DEMO Leading law ﬁrms seek to refer
strong deals if they wish to work with prominent VCs (Bernstein 1995).
5There were a few occasions where investors had the word “venture” in their names but were not DEMO
Venture Economics and were not venture capital organizations in the institutional sense we refer to here. In
each such case, their investment sizes were under $50,000. These small investment organizations are often
set up for DEMO planning purposes. We classiﬁed these investors as angels.
4
2,528 diﬀerent investors across 144 of our 182 sample ﬁrms, is predominantly composed of
individuals, who invest either directly in their name, DEMO through trusts and other investment
vehicles, such as companies set up DEMO individuals for investment purposes.6 Although we
cannot accurately identify friends and family, we note that investors with the same name or
ethnic origin as founders appear to represent a relatively small proportion of the angels and
DEMO overall angel investment in our sample.7 We also include as angels universities, govern-
ments, and other non-VC entities, including Brobeck itself. Since some of the investors we
categorize as angels may be viewed as belonging DEMO distinct classes that should be separated
from the stereotypical individual angel investors, we later conduct robustness tests to ensure
that these non-individual investors do not have a signiﬁcant impact on any of our key results,
DEMO we ﬁnd that our results are indeed robust. We provide more detailed information on
both the angels and VCs in our sample in Section DEMO However, the high-potential nature
of deals in our sample, as well as the large average amounts invested by angels, suggest that
our sample includes sophisticated angels.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of investor composition for DEMO in our sample. The
histogram in the top panel shows the share of investors who are angels. Thirty-two of our
deals (18% of the 182 deals) rely solely on angel investments, 38 (21%) have DEMO venture
capital investment, and the other 112 deals (61%) draw DEMO both angel and VC investment,
with a reasonably uniform distribution of the mix between the two groups of investors.
Note, however, that DEMO bottom panel of Figure 1, which is based on dollars invested
DEMO than number of investors, indicates that venture capitalists systematically invest more
DEMO This suggests that deals involving VC investments are larger, which is DEMO the
case. Figure 2 shows the distribution of deal size, i.e., dollars invested in Series A deals,
for three investor composition categories: angel-only, mixed, and VC-only deals. Angel-
only deals are predominantly smaller DEMO, with a median of $1.12 million, relative to
the overall median of $3.5 million for our whole sample of Series A deals. Mixed DEMO
tend to be somewhat larger (median of $4.49 million) than VC-only deals (median of $3.53
million). While there are numerous VC-only and mixed deals with investment size below
the overall sample median, only 3 of the 32 angel-only deals have investment size larger
than the sample DEMO In further support of Finding 2, the presence of VCs appears DEMO
be virtually a necessity for closing large deals. Moreover, these general DEMO of our
data suggest that there are ﬁve subsamples of our overall data that deserve closer scrutiny,
6Wong (2002) formally deﬁnes angels DEMO those that are “accredited investors” according to SEC Regulation
D, Rule DEMO Rule 501 states that accredited investors must have a net worth of over $1M or annual income of
over $200,000. While most angels DEMO our sample are accredited investors, we do ﬁnd occasional unaccredited
investors DEMO in deals.
7Some researchers such as Fenn and Liang (1998) speciﬁcally exclude family and friends from their
deﬁnition of angels. Our general deﬁnition DEMO angels, however, is intended to capture investors who are not
professional managers of venture capital.
5
as they may indicate distinctly diﬀerent deal types in each category: three subsamples based
on investor composition (angel-only, VC-only, and mixed deals), and two subsamples sorted
on size (large and small deals).
III Firm Characteristics
Table I reports means (standard deviations in parentheses) for DEMO characteristics of
the 182 ﬁrms in our overall sample, as well DEMO across the ﬁve subsamples. We assess the
representativeness of our overall sample by comparing the characteristics of our ﬁrms against
those of 9,901 DEMO ﬁrms with a ﬁrst recorded investment occurring between 1993 and
2002 (DEMO sample period) for ﬁrms founded between 1967 and 2002 (reﬂecting founding dates
in our sample) that are recorded in the Thomson Financial Venture Economics database.
We exclude deals labeled as buyout, acquisition, other or DEMO Out of the 182 deals
in our sample, 111 also appear DEMO the Venture Economics database (but without the full
information to which DEMO have access). We weight statistics from the Venture Economics
sample to reﬂect the (below described) over-representation of recent deals in our sample.
DEMO Panel A, one can see that our sample has a locational DEMO consistent with Brobeck’s
geographical footprint, with a much higher concentration of DEMO associated with ﬁrms based
in California (53% vs 36%) and Texas (21% vs 6%). In the “other states” category, 7% of DEMO
Brobeck ﬁrms are from Colorado, 8% are from the Northeast Corridor (Pennsylvania, New
York and New England), and the remaining 11% are scattered in the Midwest, South, Mid-
Atlantic, and Washington State, DEMO over 20% of the Venture Economics deals are from
the Northeast Corridor and only 2% are from Colorado. However, there are no statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in location across the two size subsamples and the three investor
DEMO subsamples.
We use the Venture Economic Industrial Classiﬁcations (VEIC) to identify industries,
and classify the 71 deals from our sample that were DEMO also in Venture Economics using
information from the Brobeck corpus, the DEMO Wide Web and press accounts. We classify
73% of our sample ﬁrms as Information Technology ﬁrms, as compared to 69% for the
Venture Economics ﬁrms. Another 12% of our sample ﬁrms are Medical/Health/Life Science
DEMO versus 13% of the Venture Economics ﬁrms. The remainder of our ﬁrms are either
non-high technology or unclassiﬁed. Overall, our sample ﬁrms are quite representative in
terms of the concentration in technology and life science industries DEMO for new ventures
tracked by Venture Economics. Furthermore, there are no DEMO diﬀerences in industry
classiﬁcation across the size and investor composition subsamples.
In Panel B of Table I, we show that our sample over-represents deals from the most
recent subperiod of our study. Half of our Series DEMO rounds occurred after March 2000 (when
6
the Nasdaq index began its precipitous drop), as compared to 35% DEMO the subset of Venture
Economics ﬁrms we examine (with a comparable DEMO during the boom period of 1998
to 2000). This may reﬂect a deliberate surge in Brobeck’s business from 2000 to 2002, or
alternatively, an increasing reliance on electronic record keeping. Note also that smaller
deals are more concentrated in the earlier periods, which likely reﬂects the propensity to
favor larger deals over time (in part due to the fact that deal size is in nominal dollars).
However, we do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant increasing or decreasing trends in the occurrence of
angel-only DEMO VC-only deals over time.
With respect to deal size, the mean DEMO size for Series A deals in our sample is
$6.14 Million, DEMO is statistically smaller than the mean of $7.15 Million for the Venture
Economics ﬁrms. While not shown in the table, key percentiles of the deal size distribution
for the Brobeck ﬁrms (and Venture Economics ﬁrms in parenthesis) are: 25th percentile is
$1.49 Million ($1.5 Million); median is $3.50 million ($3.89 Million); and 75th percentile
is $6.96 Million ($8.0 Million), so there is a marked similarity between the low end of the
distribution of deal size within our sample relative to DEMO Venture Economics sample, but
the right tail of the Venture Economics DEMO is longer. As was also shown in Figure 2,
angel-only deals are much smaller than mixed deals. There is no statistically signiﬁcant size
DEMO between VC-only and mixed deals. Because we also have information regarding
the fraction of each ﬁrm that is sold at the time of the DEMO A deal, we also can report that
the average post-money valuation DEMO ﬁrms in our sample is $14.9 million, as compared to
$24.4 DEMO in Venture Economics. This number is also smaller for angel-only deals (DEMO
million) versus either VC-only or mixed deals (roughly $16.5 million for both groups).
In terms of age, our sample is overwhelmingly composed of ﬁrms that are true start-ups
with very recent incorporation dates. The DEMO age is 1.8 years (we can only identify
incorporation dates for DEMO of the ﬁrms in our sample). In contrast, ﬁrms experiencing
DEMO A rounds in Venture Economics over the same time period have an average age of 3.1
years (97% of ﬁrms have available data). Hence, it appears that Brobeck represented ﬁrms
that were somewhat less mature than Venture Economics ﬁrms.8 In the Venture Economics
sample, deal size and valuations are correlated with ﬁrm age. Hence the diﬀerences in age
in DEMO samples is consistent with the diﬀerences in deal size and post-money valuations.
8To calculate age for companies in the Brobeck sample we ﬁrst looked DEMO documents in the Brobeck
collection, which often included incorporation dates. When DEMO were absent from the Brobeck records,
we consulted public sources such as company websites, the Internet Archive (www.archive.org) and press
releases. Finally, we relied on Venture Economics if the ﬁrm was venture backed and we were unable to date
the company based on other sources. To DEMO if this caused any biases, we compared the age in Venture
DEMO to that from the other sources for 102 of the companies for which we observe age from both
sources. Based on Venture Economics, these companies were approximately six months older at time of
ﬁnancing than based DEMO the other sources. However, this diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. Hence,DEMO
biases in the data sources do not explain the age diﬀerences between the Brobeck sample and the Venture
Economics sample.
7
We ﬁnd that angel-only deals are just under two months older than DEMO deals on
average (2.1 years vs 1.8 years), and three DEMO older than mixed deals (1.7 years). Thus,
the fact DEMO Venture Economics does not track angel-only deals does not explain the higher
average age for the Venture Economics ﬁrms relative to the ﬁrms in DEMO sample. We observe
age for 28 of the 32 angel-only deals. At time of funding, the youngest quartile of ﬁrms is less
than 4.6 months old, the median ﬁrm is 9 months old, while the DEMO quartile is over 1.5 years
old. The oldest angel-only backed ﬁrm is 24 years old, reﬂecting a skewed distribution. For
the 95 mixed deals for which we observe age, the youngest quartile, median, oldest quartile,
and maximum age are two months, 6.5 months, 1.2 years DEMO 34.5 years, respectively.
Finally, for the 32 venture only deals, DEMO four statistics are 5 weeks, 4 months, 1.75 years
and 15 years, respectively. A cautionary note is in order. Based on public sources, it is
often not possible to ascertain the date of founding with precision. The Venture Economics
database commonly assigns January 1st as a founding DEMO when only the founding year is
known. To maintain comparability, we DEMO this convention.
Our sample is thus quite representative relative to ﬁrms with Series A deals in the
Venture Economics database in terms of industry, but there are also systematic diﬀerences
with regards to timing, size, DEMO and location. Biases associated with sample selection could
aﬀect our results if, for example, there are systematic diﬀerences in control rights between
the DEMO and West coasts, as suggested by Gupta (2000), or changes in the structure of
deals following the peak in new technology venture DEMO in 2000. We thus control for
ﬁrm characteristics in the multivariate regressions we present later, both to ensure that the
unique characteristics of our sample do not drive any of our results, as well as to see whether
the cross-sectional variation in these characteristics within our sample are DEMO
related to the structure of deals and company success.
Panel B of Table I also shows three additional ﬁrm characteristics for which there are DEMO
comparable Venture Economics statistics. We ﬁnd that most ﬁrms did not achieve milestones
prior to Series A funding, with only 13% having products and 10% being involved in strategic
alliances. These ﬁndings are consistent with the DEMO age of our ﬁrms. Finally, for the
ﬁrms in our sample, Brobeck represented the company 62% of the time, almost twice as
often as they represented one or more of the investors for the deals DEMO our sample (and this
is relatively consistent across our subsamples).
DEMO Investor Characteristics
We now provide more detailed information regarding the investors and investor composition
of our deals. Panel A of Table II shows statistics DEMO the pre-Series A ownership
distribution. We obtain this information from the Series A capitalization tables, but the
8
archive also contains explicit information describing pre-Series A ﬁnancing using common
shares DEMO about a quarter of the cases (as shown in the last DEMO of Panel A). Not surprisingly,
founders retain most of the ownership of the company (approximately 90%) prior to the
infusion of DEMO capital in the Series A round, with statistically insigniﬁcant diﬀerences
in DEMO ownership across subsamples. As we report earlier, there are on average DEMO
founders per ﬁrm, but Panel A shows that smaller ﬁrms and DEMO that have only angel
investors in the Series A round have fewer founders on average. Perhaps smaller scale ﬁrms
require fewer principals to achieve DEMO ﬁrm’s objectives, but it could also be that companies
with fewer DEMO are unable to attract the same level of capital as ﬁrms with deeper
management teams. As expected, the pre-Series A investment largely comes from angels
(they obtain 7.6% of the common shares, compared to 2.9% DEMO VCs).9
Panel B of Table II provides information related to the Series A round investors. The ﬁrst
two rows summarize key statistics reﬂected DEMO in Figures 1 and 2, most prominently
that only 3 of DEMO 91 large deals are angel-only deals, while 29 of the 91 DEMO deals do not
involve any VCs.
In terms of percentage ownership, DEMO sell on average almost half of their ﬁrm
(46.2%) to investors during the Series A round, and somewhat more in larger deals (DEMO).
Founders rarely invest money in their own ﬁrms in a Series A round (less than .1% of the total
investment). In mixed deals, 23.4% of the investment comes from angels, and the balance
DEMO VCs. Finally, Panel B shows that, on average, 12.8 angels DEMO in angel-only deals,
4.8 VCs invest in VC-only deals, and DEMO total of 14.5 investors participate in mixed-deals.
Since angels typically do not have as much capital as VC ﬁrms, more angel investors are
needed to fund an angel-only round.10 Mixed deals are larger, and thus should be expected
to have more investors.
We ﬁnd that only 9.3% of DEMO investing in Series A deals had previously invested
in the same companies, though this proportion is twice as high for angel-only deals. It is
even more uncommon to see the same VCs participating in both pre-Series DEMO and Series-A
rounds for a given company (7.1% on average). DEMO B also shows that Brobeck invested
in approximately one quarter of the deals it handled (either in common or preferred shares),
and DEMO so in the larger deals.
Additional investor characteristics are shown in Panel C of Table II. The post-money
9All of the ownership percentages reported DEMO based on shares issued in the seed and Series A round,
rather than fully diluted shares that take into account warrants and options DEMO To ensure that
dilution does not have an impact on our regression results reported in the paper, we account for the existence
of options and warrants, and for their dilutive eﬀect (e.g., on the fraction of ownership sold in a Series A
round), and ﬁnd that DEMO results are robust to these controls.
10In our sample, the mean DEMO by an angel is $150,375, while the median investment size DEMO $25,000,
thus representing a highly skewed distribution which reﬂects the diverse set of investors captured in our angel
category.
9
ownership ﬁgures follow from the pre-Series A and Series-A ownership fractions of DEMO dif-
ferent investors, together with the fraction of the company sold DEMO the Series A round. On
average, founders retain majority ownership of DEMO company following the Series-A round
only in angel-only deals and small deals. Of course, as we shall see later, this does not
necessarily DEMO into retaining full control of the ﬁrms given that founders hold com-
mon shares while outside investors predominantly hold preferred shares with more powerful
DEMO rights, including board seats.
Finally, in Panel B, we report DEMO measures based on the zip code of investors
relative to the zip codes of the corporate headquarters, using an automated Mapquest query
(we DEMO zip codes for investors only in 136 of the deals). We ﬁnd that investors were
generally in similar geographic locales as the ﬁrms DEMO invested in: 60% were within 3 hours
of driving time from DEMO ﬁrms they invested in, and 18% were within the same zip DEMO
Investors are closer to the ﬁrm in smaller deals, and most DEMO to be in the same zip code
for angel-only deals.11
Given the restrictions we face in the use of our data, there is limited additional informa-
tion that we can provide to better characterize the angels DEMO our sample. For instance, we
are unable to conduct searches that DEMO provide additional information regarding angels’
backgrounds (education, and technical and managerial experience), their prior investment
experience, their age and wealth, and DEMO relationships to the founders and to the other
angels and VCs that invest with them in the deals. The only ﬁner information we can
DEMO is a summary of angel types, which we show in Figure DEMO Approximately 70% of
investors appear as individuals in the records documenting the Series A rounds. We believe
that most of the 10% of investors DEMO are categorized as “small company” are also individ-
uals, investing through DEMO vehicles for tax and estate-planning purposes. Together,
these two categories make up over 80% of the dollars invested by angels in the mixed DEMO
angel-only Series A deals, and even a larger fraction in the DEMO deals. “Companies”
and “others” (which include universities, non-proﬁts, and governments) play relatively minor
roles relative to individual investors. Note also that while DEMO invested in a quarter of
the deals, their overall stake (dollar weighted participation) in these companies is very small.
Figure 3 shows that angels who invest on their own are more likely to be individuals
(82%) than those who invest alongside VCs (66%), though the DEMO is much smaller
(88% versus 82%) if smaller companies and individuals are bundled together as a single
category. We have also separately calculated DEMO mean angel investment in angel-only and
mixed deals, which are $78,DEMO and $55,771, respectively, for small deals, and the medians DEMO
both cases are very close to the overall angel median investment size of $25,000 (since there
11We also consider (unreported) probit models examining the likelihood that a given deal will be angel-
only and DEMO ﬁnanced given its other characteristics, and we conﬁrm the univariate results DEMO in
the paper.
10
are few large angel-only deals, it is not relevant to provide the analogous comparison for large
deals). Though we have limited information about DEMO angels in angel-only versus mixed
deals, it does not appear that DEMO is any signiﬁcant diﬀerence between angels investing in
either of these types of deals.
Since most of the VCs investing in Brobeck deals are DEMO in the Venture Economics
database, we can provide a more in-depth DEMO of the VCs that invest in the 150
Brobeck deals involving VCs relative to the other VCs tracked by Venture Economics. Table
III documents DEMO attributes of these VC ﬁrms, and highlights any diﬀerences between
VCs DEMO in small versus large deals, or in VC-only versus mixed deals. DEMO data, except
the centrality measures, are obtained directly from the Venture Economics database.12 For
each private equity fund that invested in one of DEMO sample deals, we aggregate the fund-level
information to the VC ﬁrm DEMO (and identify this as a “Brobeck VC Firm”). For the DEMO
of Venture Economics VC ﬁrms, we exclude ﬁrms whose last investment DEMO prior to
1993 or whose ﬁrst investment occurred after 2002 (i.e., outside of our sample period), which
yields 5,585 “Non-Brobeck” VC DEMO
Panel A of Table III shows that VCs participating in Brobeck deals are more likely to
manage US-based funds, in particular California-based funds. They are also more likely
to manage early stage funds, but not seed stage funds. In addition, these private equity
managers are more likely to manage VC funds and less likely to manage buyout funds.
Private equity DEMO investing in VC-only deals are more likely to manage US funds and
with slightly less of an early stage VC focus, as compared to those investing in mixed
deals in our sample (while VCs in small and large deals are fairly similar across all these
dimensions). We DEMO that Brobeck VC ﬁrms are older, and particularly those investing in
DEMO deals.13
Because age is likely related to long-term success as well as greater VC experience, it
appears that VC ﬁrms investing in Brobeck deals have higher prestige. Panel B of Table III
includes other variables that DEMO proxy for prestige. For example, we ﬁnd that VC ﬁrms
that DEMO in Brobeck deals have a higher incidence of IPOs and acquisitions across all of
the companies they invested in through all of their funds.14 DEMO also ﬁnd that Brobeck PE
ﬁrms have raised more venture funds, DEMO managed more capital (per fund and overall),
and have a higher centrality measure. While VCs participating in large vs small Brobeck
12We DEMO Mikolaj Jan Piskorski for sharing centrality measures based on Venture Economics data.
Piskorski and Anand (2007) calculate eigenvector centrality (Bonacich 1972) through DEMO We matched
Piskorski and Anand’s 1999 centrality measures to VC ﬁrms in our sample.
13We have also conducted a multivariate analysis predicting whether a DEMO ﬁrm becomes aﬃliated with
a Brobeck Series A deal, and this DEMO yields similar conclusions to those indicated by the univariate
statistics.
14Ivanov, DEMO, Masulis, and Singh (2008) ﬁnd a positive relationship between IPO rates and VC
reputation.
11
deals do not diﬀer across these dimensions, those investing in VC-only deals in our sample
have higher success through liquidity events, more funds under management, and more total
capital raised than those in mixed deals. Overall, this suggests that VC ﬁrms investing in
Brobeck deals, and particularly DEMO deals where there are no angels, appear to have high
prestige. DEMO is consistent with our belief that Brobeck’s reputation allowed it to attract
higher quality clients – both more prominent VCs, and higher quality start ups.
V Deal Characteristics
We turn now to speciﬁcs about deal structure, including the types of securities issued and
the terms involved. Preferred stock DEMO sold in all but three of the Series A rounds in our
sample. Table IV shows that warrants were also sold in 15% of DEMO rounds, and more so in
the smaller deals (20%). Employee option plans were set up in 69% of the rounds, and were
more prevalent in the large deals (80% of the time) than DEMO the small deals (only 57% of the
time), perhaps due DEMO the need to attract a larger and more diverse talent pool for these
larger deals. Interestingly, we observe multiple within-round closings in 45% of the deals.
This phenomenon, in which investors purchase more shares of the company at identical
terms over a period of time, is referred to by Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) as “ex-ante
staging”, and appears to be much less prevalent for VC-only deals. This might be due to DEMO
tighter control held by the few VC investors in these deals, DEMO the deeper pockets of these
VCs, allowing them to commit to DEMO funding along with stronger terms. This might
also lead to a more easily structured subsequent Series B round as soon as it is required
DEMO merited. We ﬁnd that the average time between ﬁrst and second closings is 153 days,
though it is much longer for large deals (198 days on average).15
One of the interesting facets of our DEMO is that we are able to observe the number of
hours billed by attorneys for each deal. Panel A of Table IV shows that DEMO Series A deals
resulted in an average of 169 billed hours per deal. We ﬁnd that larger deals lead to more
billed hours, as do mixed deals (and VC-only deals) relative to angel-only deals. Since DEMO
might not expect that the mere scale of a deal should be related to the amount of legal
work, we surmise that the higher billed hours of larger deals may reﬂect that these deals are
more DEMO to involve VCs, who may demand more complex contract terms and DEMO more
persistent in negotiating the terms of the deal.
To explore this issue further, we perform (unreported) multivariate regressions of (the
log DEMO) billed hours against a number of factors that might contribute to DEMO complexity
of the deal, such as investor composition, number of investors, fraction of the ﬁrm sold,
15Although this phenomenon is interesting, DEMO can report that the presence of multiple closings correlates
little with outcomes.
12
presence of warrants and option plans, number of closings, and time, industry and location
dummies. We do ﬁnd evidence that including warrants and DEMO multiple closings leads to
a higher number of billed hours, as DEMO the presence of VCs in the deal, consistent with the
notion DEMO more complex and/or contentious deals lead to higher billed hours. However,
we also ﬁnd that size continues to be signiﬁcant even after DEMO for these factors, at
least within the subsample of larger ﬁrms. DEMO suggests that there may be some other
determinants of complexity that are also related to size, perhaps including greater potential
reputation and legal risk for a law ﬁrm when dealing with larger companies (otherwise, there
DEMO less benign explanations for why larger clients are associated with higher billed hours).
We now turn to documenting the relationship between investor composition DEMO cashﬂow
and control rights. In Panel B of Table IV, we DEMO the rights associated with the
Series A preferred stock based on a review of the closing documents for all the ﬁrms in our
sample. DEMO (1997) and Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) document that preferred stock is
typically diﬀerentiated from common stock through superior cashﬂow rights, voting rights,
board representation, liquidation rights, redemption rights, and anti-dilution provisions.
Moreover, investment deals are often supplemented by a requirement that the founder’s
stock be subject to vesting requirements. Consistent with these existing studies, we ﬁnd
substantial variation in the existence and extent of cash ﬂow and control DEMO, particularly
liquidation preferences, redemption rights, cumulative dividend rights, and seats on the
board of directors.16
We classify board seats as being assigned DEMO common shareholders using a two step
procedure. First, in many cases, the documents identiﬁed which board seats were to be
designated by common DEMO or Series A shareholders. Second, for cases in which
seat ownership DEMO not speciﬁed by share class, but individuals were, we used a fuzzy name
matching algorithm to link speciﬁc board members to speciﬁc investors. DEMO shown in Table
IV, common and preferred shareholders have roughly the DEMO representation (46% versus
54%) on the boards of companies across our whole sample. Not surprisingly, ﬁrms with
VC-only and mixed Series A deals have more board seats assigned to preferred shareholders,
as do larger DEMO, likely due to the larger size and higher concentration of VC DEMO
in those deals.
Turning to cashﬂow rights, preferred shareholders sometimes have DEMO residual cash-
ﬂow claims in the form of cumulative dividend rights as opposed to regular dividend rights.
With regular dividends, an annual payment, DEMO a percentage of investment (generally
8%), is paid conditional on DEMO positive shareholder vote. With cumulative dividend rights,
this amount accumulates each year. The cumulative dividend clause is included in relatively
16Practitioners classify these DEMO as investor friendly, entrepreneur friendly or neutral (Wilmerding
2003).
13
few Series A deals (9% of our deals), and never appears when the deal has only angel in-
vestors. Cumulative dividends are seen DEMO an investor-friendly term, and provide a strong
incentive for the ﬁrm DEMO accelerate to a successful exit event. We ﬁnd that the term is most
prevalent in VC-only deals, consistent with the notion that VCs are less patient investors
and that they can exert stronger inﬂuence on deal DEMO when they invest on their own.
The variable Liquidation is a dummy variable indicating whether preferred shareholders
have special liquidation cashﬂow rights going beyond DEMO initial investment. A value of
zero indicates that, after preferred shareholders DEMO their initial investment, all remain-
ing proceeds upon liquidation go to DEMO shareholders. The dummy variable Cap on
Common, which takes a value DEMO one for only two deals, indicates that common liquidation
amounts are DEMO When the Liquidation dummy takes a value of one, preferred share-
DEMO have cashﬂow rights beyond their initial investment, and in all cases DEMO two, they
share these additional cashﬂows equally with common shareholders (in the two cases, all re-
maining proceeds go to preferred shareholders up to a speciﬁed cap). The mean liquidation
dummy of 0.42 indicates DEMO 42% of our sample deals provided strong liquidation rights
to Series A investors. The dummy variable Cap on Preferred’s mean of 0.47 indicates that
DEMO of these stricter deals had an upper limit on the amount that can be paid to preferred
shareholders. Because many preferred liquidation rights are DEMO, it is important to note
that when the company value upon DEMO is suﬃciently high, preferred stockholders
waive their liquidation rights, and convert their stock to common. Note that the liquidation
preference speciﬁed in angel-only DEMO is much less favorable towards the investors, indicat-
ing that while DEMO enjoy some beneﬁts of ownership of preferred, rather than common,
DEMO, their cashﬂow rights are still relatively weak.
Finally, we ﬁnd that preferred shareholders have the right to redeem their shares at will
in DEMO one quarter of our deals, typically after a period of time DEMO usually conditional
on a Series A majority or super-majority vote. Such a right would be invoked when a ﬁrm
is not performing well, and is considered to be an investor-friendly term. Angels investing
on their own DEMO demand such a redemption right in their stock purchase agreements.
Given that Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) (KS) examine cashﬂow and control rights DEMO
a similar number of deals, but from a diﬀerent source and DEMO earlier time period, it is useful
to provide a quick comparison DEMO the terms of our respective deals. Our samples diﬀer in
important respects. Our data represent 182 series A investments in 182 portfolio ﬁrms made
DEMO 482 distinct venture capital ﬁrms. In contrast, KS analyze 213 investments (of which
98 are series A) in 119 portfolio ﬁrms made by 14 VC ﬁrms and their aﬃliates (KS do not
report the total number of distinct VCs who invested in the deals in their sample)DEMO While
they do not distinguish between pure-VC and mixed deals, KS DEMO that non-VCs own, on
average, a 20% (non-diluted) stake in investment targets following series A rounds, which
14
compares to the 16% for mixed deals in our sample. In general, the deals in our sample
involve weaker control right provisions.17 For example, we ﬁnd that only 8.8% of deals
involve cumulative dividend rights, which is considerably below the frequency of 43.8% in
KS. We also ﬁnd DEMO 23.6% of our deals have redemption features, compared to 78.7%
reported DEMO KS. (Interestingly, KS reported that 12.9% could redeem shares at fair market
value, which is only slightly lower than the 16.4% in our sample). Finally, we ﬁnd that
85% of our deals include anti-dilution provisions, with the weighted average method used in
92% of those cases, similar to the 95% of deals in KS that include anti-dilution protection,
and the 78% of them that use the weighted average method.18 DEMO diﬀerences between
our respective samples likely reﬂect the stage of the deals we analyze, and the presence of
angel-only deals in our sample.19
17It is diﬃcult to compare the success rates of the two samples, as KS do not report outcomes as hazards
which would allow comparison of DEMO likelihood of a given outcome.
18We do not focus on anti-dilution provisions in our study given that there is little cross-sectional variation
across the DEMO
19Gompers (1997) notes certain characteristics of his sample of ﬁfty VC private placement agreements.
These appear consistent with our sample. For instance, 51.4% of board seats are controlled by VCs, which
is between the 47.8% we ﬁnd for the VC-only deals and the 60.2% we ﬁnd for DEMO deals in our sample.
However, redemption rights are found in 68% DEMO the deals in Gompers’ sample, which is more in line with
DEMO than with our sample, again likely reﬂecting that their sample includes DEMO later-stage rounds.
15
References
Bernstein, L. (1995). The Silicon Valley lawyer as transaction DEMO engineer. Oregon Law
Review 74, 239.
Bonacich, P. (1972). DEMO and weighting approaches to status scores and clique identi-
ﬁcation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 2, 113–120.
Brav, A. and P. Gompers (1997). Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of initial
public oﬀerings: Evidence DEMO venture capital and nonventure capital-backed companies.
Journal of Finance 52, 1791–1822.
DEMO, J. and R. Peroni (2002). The decline in lawyer independence: Lawyer equity
investments in clients. Texas Law Review 81, 405.
Fenn, G. W. and N. Liang (1998). New resources and new ideas: Private equity for small
business. Journal of Banking and Finance 22, DEMO
Gompers, P. (1997). Ownership and control in entrepreneurial ﬁrms: DEMO examination of
convertible securities in venture capital investments. Working Paper, Harvard DEMO
Gupta, U. (2000). Done deals: Venture capitalists tell their DEMO Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Business School Press.
Ivanov, V., C. DEMO, R. Masulis, and A. Singh (2008, February). Does venture cap-
ital reputation matter? Evidence from successful IPOs. Working Paper, Case DEMO
University.
Kaplan, S. N. and P. Stromberg (2003). Financial contracting theory meets the real world:
An empirical analysis of venture capital DEMO Review of Economic Studies 70, 281–
315.
Megginson, W. and K. Weiss (1991). Venture capitalist certiﬁcation in initial public oﬀerings.
Journal of Finance 46(3), 879–903.
Piskorski, M. J. and B. Anand (DEMO). Status without resources? Evidence from the venture
capital industry. Harvard DEMO
Vronsky, P. M. (2007). Venture Capital Law Firms: An DEMO of Equity Investment and
Networks. SSRN eLibrary.
Wilmerding, A. (2003). Term Sheets & Valuations: An inside look at the intricacies of term
sheets & valuations. Aspatore.
16
Wong, A. Y. (2002, January). Angel ﬁnance: The other DEMO capital. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=941228.
17
Figure 1: Angel share of deals by number of investors and dollars.
The ﬁgure depicts how deals vary in their investor composition. Top panel: frequency of diﬀerent investor
compositions (fraction of angel investors in deal), unweighted by investment amounts. Bottom panel: frequency of
diﬀerent investor compositions weighted by dollars invested. Both graphs are based on the entire sample (182 ﬁrms).
Fraction of angel dollars in deal1.8.6.4.20Number of Deals6040200Fraction of angel DEMO in deal1.8.6.4.20Number of Deals6040200
0
.2 .4 .6 .8
Fraction of angel investors in deal
1
0
.2 .4 .6 .8
Fraction of angel DEMO in deal
1
18
0
Number of Deals
20 40
60
0
Number of Deals
20 40
60
Figure 2: Investment size distribution by investor composition
The ﬁgure depicts the distribution of investment size for 32 deals where only angels participated (angel-only deals),
111 deals where both angels and VCs participated (mixed DEMO) and 38 deals in which only VCs participated
(VC-only deals). The size of the deal is measured in millions of dollars. The DEMO of the 20th, 40th, 60th,
80th and 90th percentiles are noted by 20, 40, 60, 80 and 90 respectively. The number of deals of magnitude above
or below the 50th percentile of all DEMO for each of the investor composition groups appears to either side of the
median deal size vertical line.
median deal size = $3.5MAngel onlyMixed DEMO onlySize of deal (millions of USD)20151050
191817161413121198764321n=20n=68n=3n=18n=44n=29
908060402090806040209080604020
median deal DEMO = $3.5M
n=44
n=68
Mixed deal
1
20
40
60
n=18
n=20
VC only
0
20
40
60
2
3
4
5
6
80
DEMO
90
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Size of deal (millions of USD)
16
17
90
18
19 20
19
n=29
n=3
Angel only
20
60
40
80
90
Figure 3: Composition of Angels
The ﬁgure depicts the average frequency of angel investor types using a deal weighted average (over all deals having
at least one angel, angel-only deals, and mixed deals) and a dollar weighted average over all deals having at least one
angel. A DEMO is an investor that is incorporated. A small company is an investor that is not incorporated, for
example, investors containing the suﬃxes LLC, LLP or LTD. Angels categorized as others include universities,
non-proﬁt organizations, government, and institutions. Unknown are ambiguous investors that we were not able to
classify. Non-Venture Investor Types
90.0%
80.0%
70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
DEMO
10.0%
0.0%
individual
company
small company
Brobeck
other
unknown
Overall
AngelOnly Deals
Mixed Deals
Dollar Weighted
20
Table I: Summary Statistics for Firms in Sample
The table displays mean characteristics with standard deviations in parentheses. Demographic information shown in Panel A DEMO location (state dummies
which are based on location of company headquarters) and industry classiﬁcations, based upon Thomson Financial Venture Economic’s proprietary industrial codes
(VEIC). IT Firm indicates an information technology ﬁrm. Medical/Bio–Tech Firm indicates ﬁrms classiﬁed as “Medical/Health/Life Sciences.” For deals that did
DEMO appear in Venture Economics, classiﬁcations were determined according to Brobeck records DEMO public archival sources. Firm characteristics shown in Panel B,
such as time period dummies, are based on the date of ﬁrst closing. Size (and its natural log Log Size) is measured based on investment DEMO, while Post-Money
Valuation reﬂects valuation subsequent to the investment in the DEMO Firm Age is the number of years between the ﬁrm’s founding date and the date its Series A
preferred stock issue closes (computed as number of days divided by 365.25). Strategic Alliance and Product Release DEMO whether the ﬁrm issued a press release
describing an alliance or product prior to the observed round. Company matter takes the value of 1 DEMO Brobeck did not label the representation “Venture
Financing/Investor Side.” The Venture Economics sample includes US-based private equity investment targets founded after 1967 with DEMO ﬁrst investment between
1993 and 2002. Private Equity disbursements labeled as buyout, acquisition, other or unknown were eliminated. Statistics of the Venture Economics DEMO are
weighted to reﬂect the distribution of deal origination dates in the Brobeck sample, period dummies notwithstanding.
Venture
All Small Large Angel-Only VC-Only Mixed Economics
Variable Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals
Panel A: Demographics
California Dummy 0.529 (0.50) 0.587 (0.49) 0.479 (0.50) 0.565 (0.50) 0.423 (0.50) 0.552 (0.50) 0.360 (0.48)a
Texas DEMO 0.206 (0.40) 0.190 (0.39) 0.219 (0.41) 0.217 (0.42) 0.231 (0.43) 0.195 (0.39) 0.060 (0.24)a
Other States Dummy 0.265 (0.44) 0.222 (0.41) 0.301 (0.46) 0.217 (0.42) DEMO (0.48) 0.253 (0.43) 0.581 (0.49)a
IT Industry 0.731 (0.44) 0.670 (0.47)b 0.791 (0.40)b 0.750 (0.44) 0.658 (0.48) 0.750 (0.43) 0.692 (0.46)a
Medical/Bio–Tech Industry 0.115 (0.32) 0.121 (0.32) 0.110 (0.31) 0.156 (0.36) 0.158 (0.37) 0.089 (0.28) 0.127 (0.33)
Panel B: Firm Characteristics at time of Series A ﬁnancing
Pre 1998 Dummy 0.165 (0.37) DEMO (0.42)a 0.099 (0.30)a 0.156 (0.36) 0.211 (0.41) 0.152 (0.36) 0.272 (0.44)a
1998 to 3/2000 Dummy 0.341 (0.47) 0.429 (0.49)a 0.253 (0.43)a 0.406 (0.49) DEMO (0.46) 0.339 (0.47) 0.384 (0.49)
Post 3/2000 DEMO 0.495 (0.50) 0.341 (0.47)a 0.648 (0.48)a 0.438 (DEMO) 0.500 (0.50) 0.509 (0.50) 0.345 (0.48)a
Size (DEMO A Millions) 6.139 (7.92) 1.554 (0.90)a 10.72 (9.11)DEMO 1.633 (1.53)a 5.756 (8.93) 7.556 (8.19) 7.15 (12.15)b,?
Log Deal Size 14.98 (1.20) 14.02 (0.77)a DEMO (0.66)a 13.94 (0.87)a 14.98 (1.07) 15.27 (1.16) 15.08 (1.22)?
Post Money Valuation (Millions) 14.82 (22.9) DEMO (3.27)a 24.69 (29.1)a 6.068 (4.64)a 16.37 (23.7) 16.80 (25.1) 24.4 (42.1)a,†
Firm Age (years) DEMO (4.23) 1.924 (5.03) 1.674 (3.34) 2.069 (4.48) 1.831 (3.60) 1.702 (4.39) 3.14 (4.7)a,‡
% Missing Age Data 0.148 (0.35) 0.176 (0.38) 0.121 (0.32) 0.125 (0.33) 0.158 (0.37) 0.152 (0.36) 0.032 (0.18)a
Strategic Alliance DEMO (0.30) 0.066 (0.25)b 0.143 (0.35)b 0.031 (0.17)DEMO 0.105 (0.31) 0.125 (0.33)
Product Release 0.126 (0.33) DEMO (0.31) 0.143 (0.35) 0.125 (0.33) 0.158 (0.37) 0.116 (0.32)
Company Matter 0.621 (0.48) 0.648 (0.48) 0.593 (DEMO) 0.719 (0.45) 0.500 (0.50) 0.634 (0.48)
# Firms in Group 182 91 91 32 38 112 9901
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. The footnotes depicted in columns 2 and 3 are based on tests of
diﬀerences in means across small versus large DEMO (column 2 vs 3). The footnotes depicted in column 4 (angel-only) are based on tests of angel-only deals versus
mixed deals (DEMO 4 vs column 6). The footnotes depicted in column 5 (DEMO) are based on tests of VC-only deals versus mixed deals (column 5 vs column 6).
? 9,345 observations; † 3,791 observations; ‡ 9,498 Observations
21
Table II: Summary Statistics for Investors
The table displays mean characteristics with standard deviations in parentheses. Pre Series A investor characteristics are in Panel DEMO Pre Series A Founder, Angel,
and VC Ownership break down DEMO components of initial ownership in the company. Pre Series A Common Round is a dummy variable that is one if a pre Series A
DEMO based on common stock is observed. Series A investor characteristics are in Panel B. Angel-Only (VC-only) are dummy variables equal to one if DEMO
investors in the deal are angels (VC ﬁrms). Fraction Sold DEMO the percentage of the company sold to investors in the Series A round. % Founder Series A,
% Angel Series A and % DEMO Series A break down investment in the Series A round. # Investors is a count of investors in the deal. Repeat investments by the DEMO
investor (generally across multiple closings) are counted as a single investor (Log # Investors is the natural log.) Repeat Angel Flag takes DEMO value of 1 if an angel
who invests in the Series A round had previously invested in the ﬁrm. The Brobeck Investor Dummy is DEMO if Brobeck invested in the ﬁrm (either common or
preferred shares)DEMO % Investors Within 3 Hours is the share of investors (unweighted DEMO dollars invested) who are within three hours driving distance. Distance is
DEMO from zip-code center to zip-code center using an automated Mapquest query. % Investors in Same Zip Code is the share of investors (unweighted by
dollars invested) in the same zip code. In Panel C, Final DEMO Ownership, Final Founder Ownership, and Final VC Ownership represent the respective ownership
shares post-money, i.e., after the Series A round closes (before any subsequent dilution from options).
All Small Large Angel-Only VC-Only Mixed
DEMO Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals
Panel A: Pre Series A DEMO Characteristics
Pre Series A Founder Ownership 0.895 (0.21) 0.902 (0.16) 0.888 (0.26) 0.927 (0.12) 0.832 (0.35) 0.907 (0.17)
Pre Series A Angel Ownership 0.076 (0.15) 0.076 (0.14) 0.076 (0.16) 0.066 (0.10) 0.091 (0.20) 0.074 (0.14)
Pre DEMO A VC Ownership 0.029 (0.10) 0.022 (0.08) 0.036 (0.12) 0.007 (0.04) 0.077 (0.19)b 0.018 (0.06)
Number of DEMO 2.775 (2.46) 2.374 (1.54)a 3.176 (3.08)a 1.969 (DEMO)a 2.895 (3.64) 2.964 (2.22)
% with Founder Data DEMO (0.29) 0.890 (0.31) 0.923 (0.26) 0.844 (0.36) 0.921 (0.27) 0.920 (0.27)
Pre Series A Common Round 0.253 (DEMO) 0.286 (0.45) 0.220 (0.41) 0.219 (0.42) 0.263 (0.44) 0.259 (0.44)
Panel B: Series A Investor Characteristics
Angel-Only 0.176 (0.38) 0.319 (0.46)a 0.033 (0.18)a 1.000 (0.00) DEMO (0.00) 0.000 (0.00)
VC-Only 0.209 (0.40) 0.198 (0.40) 0.220 (0.41) 0.000 (0.00) 1.000 (0.00) 0.000 (0.00)DEMO
Fraction Sold 0.462 (0.22) 0.363 (0.15)a 0.561 (0.23)a 0.303 (0.16)a 0.436 (0.24)b 0.516 (0.21)
% Angel Series A 0.319 (0.36) 0.464 (0.40)a 0.174 (0.24)a DEMO (0.01)a 0.000 (0.00)a 0.234 (0.21)
% Founder DEMO A 0.001 (0.00) 0.002 (0.01) 0.001 (0.00) 0.004 (DEMO) 0.000 (0.00)a 0.001 (0.00)
% VC Series A DEMO (0.36) 0.533 (0.41)a 0.825 (0.24)a 0.000 (0.00)DEMO 1.000 (0.00)a 0.764 (0.21)
# Investors 12.12 (13.4) 10.80 (14.4) 13.45 (12.3) 12.81 (20.7) 4.763 (5.62)a 14.42 (11.9)
Log # Investors 1.994 (1.06) 1.762 (1.15)DEMO 2.227 (0.92)a 1.711 (1.30)a 1.044 (0.99)a 2.398 (0.73)
Repeat Angel Flag 0.093 (0.29) 0.121 (0.32) 0.066 (0.25) 0.188 (0.39) 0.000 (0.00)a 0.098 (0.29)
Repeat VC Flag 0.071 (0.25) 0.055 (0.22) 0.088 (0.28) 0.000 (0.00)a 0.105 (0.31) 0.080 (0.27)
Brobeck Investor Dummy 0.236 (0.42) 0.165 (0.37)a 0.308 (0.46)a 0.063 (0.24)a 0.079 (0.27)a 0.339 (0.47)
% Investors within 3 Hours DEMO (0.36) 0.657 (0.35) 0.558 (0.37) 0.649 (0.35) 0.514 (0.47) 0.619 (0.32)
% Investors in Same Zip Code 0.179 (0.30) 0.248 (0.36)a 0.120 (0.23)a 0.302 (0.39)a 0.272 (0.40)b 0.119 (0.22)
Panel C: Other Characteristics
Final Angel Ownership 0.173 (0.17) 0.206 (0.18)a 0.140 (0.16)a DEMO (0.20)a 0.039 (0.09)a 0.160 (0.13)
Final Founder DEMO 0.461 (0.23) 0.560 (0.18)a 0.362 (0.23)a 0.615 (DEMO)a 0.448 (0.27) 0.422 (0.20)
Final VC Ownership 0.366 (0.27) 0.233 (0.22)a 0.498 (0.26)a 0.007 (0.04)a DEMO (0.28)b 0.418 (0.21)
# Firms in Group 182 91 91 32 38 112
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant DEMO in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. DEMO footnotes depicted in columns 2 and 3 are based on tests of
diﬀerences in means across small versus large ﬁrms (column 2 vs 3). The footnotes depicted in column 4 (angel-only) are based on DEMO of angel-only deals versus
mixed deals (column 4 vs column 6)DEMO The footnotes depicted in column 5 (VC-only) are based on tests of VC-only deals versus mixed deals (column 5 vs column 6).
22
Table III: Summary Statistics for VC Firms in Sample
The table displays mean characteristics with standard deviations in parentheses. The sample includes all private DEMO ﬁrms which made investments between
1/1/1993 and 12/31/2002 that are included in the Thomson Financial Venture Economics database. The statistics DEMO the histories of these private equity ﬁrms,
including funds that were managed outside the 1993-2002 time frame. Statistics are reported by whether the DEMO was represented in the Brobeck Sample (columns 1
and 2, conditional on inclusion in Venture Economics), whether the ﬁrm was associated with DEMO small or large deal (columns 3 and 4), and whether DEMO ﬁrm was
associated with a mixed or VC-only deal (columns 5 DEMO 6). All fund statistics are aggregated at the VC ﬁrm level. Share of funds hq in northern CA and Share of
funds hq DEMO US represent the share of funds under the private equity ﬁrm’s management that report headquarters in northern California and the United States
respectively. Share DEMO funds with Seed Stage Focus and Share of funds with Early Stage Focus represent the share of funds under the ﬁrm’s management that report
DEMO focus on seed stage deals or early stage deals. Share of VC funds and Firm’s share of buyout funds represent the share of funds DEMO the VC ﬁrm’s management
reporting that they are venture capital or buyout funds. # funds under ﬁrm management is the number of funds ever DEMO under the private equity ﬁrm’s
management. Log total capital raised is the natural log of the total capital (in millions of US dollars) DEMO by these funds. Log fund size, $ M) is the mean capital
raised for each fund under a private equity ﬁrm’s management. These DEMO two variables reﬂect a smaller sample size than some variables as only 87% of our sample
VCs report these statistics. Age is measured relative DEMO 2002. IPO rate, and Acquisition rate are the share of the DEMO investment targets that reach the mutually
exclusive categories IPO or merged/acquired, respectively. Rates are calculated as the share of investment targets in these outcome categories, as reported in Venture
Economics. Centrality is eigenvector centrality (DEMO 1972).
Brobeck Non-Brobeck Small deal Large Deal VCs in VC in
VC ﬁrms VC ﬁrms VCs VCs mixed deals VC-only
deals
Panel A: Demographics
Share of funds hq in northern CA 0.414( 0.49) 0.095 ( 0.29)a 0.403( 0.48) 0.418 ( 0.49) 0.410( 0.49) DEMO ( 0.49)
Share of funds hq in US 0.909( 0.29) 0.639 ( 0.48)a 0.916( 0.28) 0.906 ( 0.29) 0.891( DEMO) 0.972 ( 0.17)a
Share of funds w/ Seed Stage Focus 0.038( 0.13) 0.061 ( 0.23)a 0.022( 0.10) 0.044 ( DEMO)c 0.043( 0.15) 0.021 ( 0.05)b
Share of funds w/ Early Stage Focus 0.417( 0.40) 0.223 ( 0.39)a 0.417( DEMO) 0.417 ( 0.40) 0.443( 0.40) 0.326 ( 0.37)a
Share of VC funds 0.935( 0.20) 0.818 ( 0.37)a 0.927( 0.22) 0.938 ( 0.19) 0.945( 0.20) 0.901 ( 0.21)c
Share DEMO buyout funds 0.035( 0.15) 0.118 ( 0.31)a 0.056( 0.20) 0.029 ( 0.12) 0.031( 0.14) 0.053 ( 0.15)
Panel B: Prestige/Prominence
# funds under ﬁrm management 7.658( 6.84) 2.040 ( 2.18)a 7.073( 6.23) 7.858 ( 7.04) 7.178( 6.74) 9.358 ( 6.95)a
Log total capital raised 5.300( 2.91) 2.482 ( DEMO)a 4.980( 2.82) 5.410 ( 2.94) 5.137( 2.82) 5.877 ( 3.17)b
Log fund size 3.924( 2.05) 2.191 ( 2.24)a 3.713( 1.94) 3.996 ( 2.08) 3.841( 2.01) 4.220 ( 2.17)
Age 13.137( 8.13) 7.041 ( 6.43)a 13.350( 7.97) DEMO ( 8.19) 12.431( 8.21) 15.64 ( 7.31)a
IPO rate DEMO( 0.13) 0.118 ( 0.21)a 0.154( 0.16) 0.149 ( 0.13) 0.141( 0.13) 0.182 ( 0.13)a
Acquisition rate 0.313( 0.17) 0.221 ( 0.27)a 0.322( 0.20) 0.310 ( 0.16) 0.303( DEMO) 0.347 ( 0.14)a
Centrality 0.074( 0.14) 0.002 ( 0.02)DEMO 0.105( 0.19) 0.063 ( 0.12)b 0.065( 0.14) 0.106 ( 0.16)b
Observations 482 5585 123 359 376 106
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. These are based on tests of diﬀerences in means across Non-Brobeck
VC ﬁrms and Brobeck VC ﬁrms (footnotes displayed in column 2), VCs aﬃliated with small versus large deals (displayed in column 4), and VCs aﬃliated with
VC-only deals versus mixed deals (displayed in column 6).
23
Table IV: Summary Statistics for Deals
The table displays mean characteristics with standard deviations in parentheses. Warrants Dummy is one if warrants were issued DEMO the Series A Financing.
Options Dummy is one if an option plan was set up concurrent with the Series A Financing. # closings is DEMO number of separate executed closings under the Series
A terms (Multiple DEMO indicates more than one). Average Days to Second Closing is the days between the ﬁrst and second closings. All preceding variables are
taken DEMO the electronic record of the closing documents in the Brobeck corpus. Billed Hours reﬂects the total billed hours associated with Brobeck’s representation
of either DEMO company or its investors in the deal. Control rights in Panel B and terms are extracted from closing documents from the Brobeck corpus. % DEMO
BOD Seats is the share of board seats held by common shareholders (from the “voting rights agreement”, or when speciﬁc parties are named, by cross-referencing
with investors). Cumulative Dividend Flag is a dummy equal DEMO one if preferred shareholders have a right to dividends that accumulate over the time of their
investment. Liquidation Flag is a dummy equal to DEMO when preferred shareholders have liquidation rights exceeding the value of their initial investment. Cap on
Preferred is a dummy equal to one if these DEMO preferred stock liquidation rights are capped at a multiple of the initial investment. Cap on Common is a
dummy equal to one if common DEMO liquidation rights are capped at a multiple of the investment. Redeemable Flag is a dummy equal to one when preferred
shareholders can demand that DEMO ﬁrm repurchase their shares. Delayed Redemption is a dummy equal to one if preferred stockholders’ redemption rights are
time-delayed. % Series A Req. to DEMO is the percentage of Series A shareholders required to invoke a redemption.
All Small Large Angel-Only VC-Only Mixed
Variable Deals Deals Deals Deals Deals DEMO
Panel A: Deal Characteristics
Warrants Dummy 0.154 (0.36) 0.198 (0.40)b 0.110 (0.31)b 0.250 (0.44) 0.079 (0.27) 0.152 (DEMO)
Options Dummy 0.687 (0.46) 0.571 (0.49)a 0.802 (0.40)a 0.594 (0.49) 0.658 (0.48) 0.723 (0.44)
Multiple Closings Flag 0.445 (0.49) 0.407 (0.49) 0.484 (0.50) 0.375 (0.49) 0.237 (0.43)a 0.536 (0.50)
# Closings 1.769 (1.19) 1.736 (1.29) 1.802 (1.09) 1.750 (1.36) 1.553 (1.40) DEMO (1.05)
Average Days to Second Closing 153.4 (157) 103.7 (89.4)a 197.9 (190)a 138.2 (93.5) 232.9 (149) 144.5 (166)
Billed Hours 169.0 (115) 147.3 (103)a 190.7 (123)a 109.1 (70.9)a 185.4 (155) 180.6 (105)
DEMO Billed Hours 4.878 (0.82) 4.737 (0.85)a 5.017 (0.76)a 4.488 (0.78)a 4.901 (0.88) 4.977 (0.78)
Panel B: Control Rights
% Common BOD Seats 0.464 (0.33) 0.579 (0.33)a 0.359 (0.29)a 0.675 (0.31)a 0.522 (0.39) 0.398 (0.29)
Cumulative Dividend Flag 0.088 (0.28) 0.044 (0.20)a 0.132 (DEMO)a 0.000 (0.00)a 0.158 (0.37) 0.089 (0.28)
Liquidation Flag 0.418 (0.49) 0.374 (0.48) 0.462 (0.50) 0.125 (0.33)a 0.579 (0.50) 0.446 (0.49)
Cap on Preferred 0.474 (DEMO) 0.441 (0.50) 0.500 (0.50) 0.500 (0.57) 0.364 (0.49) 0.520 (0.50)
Cap on Common 0.019 (0.13) 0.035 (0.18) 0.000 (0.00) 0.000 (0.00) 0.000 (0.00) 0.032 (0.17)DEMO
Redeemable Flag 0.236 (0.42) 0.209 (0.40) 0.264 (0.44) 0.031 (0.17)a 0.368 (0.48) 0.250 (0.43)
Delayed Redemption 0.225 (0.41) 0.209 (0.40) 0.242 (0.43) 0.031 (0.17)a 0.368 (0.48) 0.232 (0.42)
% Series A Req. to Vote 57.55 (8.40) 57.12 (8.54) 57.87 (8.52) 50.00 (0.00) 54.16 (DEMO)a 59.96 (8.35)
# Firms in Group 182 91 91 DEMO 38 112
* a, b, and c denote signiﬁcant diﬀerences in means at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. The footnotes depicted in columns 2 and 3 are based on tests of
diﬀerences DEMO means across small versus large ﬁrms (column 2 vs 3). DEMO footnotes depicted in column 4 (angel-only) are based on tests of angel-only deals versus
mixed deals (column 4 vs column 6). The footnotes depicted in column 5 (VC-only) are based on tests of DEMO deals versus mixed deals (column 5 vs column 6).
24{1g42fwefx}