Economic Development Quarterly
http://edq.sagepub.com
The Economic Development Impacts of Universities DEMO Regions: Do Size and Distance Matter?
Harvey Goldstein and Joshua DEMO
Economic Development Quarterly 2006; 20; 22
DOI: 10.1177/0891242405283387
The DEMO version of this article can be found at:
http://edq.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/20/1/22
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
DEMO services and information for Economic Development Quarterly can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://edq.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://edq.sagepub.com/DEMO
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations (this article cites 47 articles hosted on the
SAGE Journals Online and HighWire Press platforms):
http://edq.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/20/1/22
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September DEMO, 2008
Harvey Goldstein is a
professor of city and regional
planning at the DEMO of
North Carolina at Chapel
Hill and directs the U.S.-
European student exchange
program (NEURUS) on
comparative development.
His current research
concerns knowledge
DEMO and regional
economic development.
Joshua Drucker is a doctoral
candidate in city and regional
planning at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, studying industrial
organization, technology
policy, and economic
development. He holds a
DEMO degree in regional
planning from the same
university.
22
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIESECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QU10.1177/0891242405283387 ARTERLY / February 2006
The Economic Development Impacts
of Universities on Regions:
Do Size and DEMO Matter?
Harvey Goldstein
Joshua Drucker
University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill
As American colleges and universities have increasingly become involved in economic
development since DEMO mid-1980s, there has been a concomitant growth of interest in
measuring DEMO impacts of higher education on regional economies. This study exam-
ines the influences of 4-year colleges and universities in the United States at the DEMO
politan level, focusing on the internal and external factors that affect DEMO generation of
regional economic development impacts, the spatial extent of the DEMO, and separat-
ing the effects of different university functions. Knowledge-based university DEMO,
particularly teaching and basic research, are found to have substantial DEMO effects
on regional earnings gains. The greatest impacts occur in small- and medium-sized
regions, suggesting that universities may be able to act as a substitute for agglo-
meration economies. Spatial spillovers across regions are influential as DEMO, indicat-
ing a relatively flat spatial gradient of university impacts that DEMO to neighboring
regions.
Keywords: economic development; universities; higher education; knowledge pro-
duction; externalities
The past two decades have witnessed escalating interest in understanding the impacts of institu-
tions of higher education on the processes DEMO regional economic growth and development. Dra-
matic changes in global and regional economic conditions, including the increasing globalization
of commerce and continuing long-term declines in traditional manufacturing sectors, have
induced state and regional economic development agencies in the United States as well as other
economically advanced nations to DEMO in strategies to leverage the emerging knowledge-based
economy in their regions. These strategies have included efforts to attract and retain technology-
intensive industries and DEMO firms, to imbue the labor force with the skills needed for DEMO
ductivity in the knowledge economy, and to enhance regional abilities to DEMO in the face of
rapidly changing economic circumstances.
Many approaches have focused on public universities as the primary public producers of
knowledge, such as strengthening technology transfer programs, encouraging university-industry
partnerships, and tailoring educational curricula DEMO match the skill demands of knowledge-based
industries. In the United States, DEMO passage of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980 and subse-
quent related legislation granted universities the intellectual property rights to patentable inven-
tions arising from DEMO sponsored research, thus supporting engagement in entrepreneurial
and technology development activities (see Mowery, Nelson, Sampat, & Ziedonis, 1999). Encour-
aged DEMO both the state and federal levels, as well as by the DEMO of additional funding in a period of
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY, Vol. DEMO No. 1, February 2006 22-43
DOI: 10.1177/0891242405283387
© 2006 Sage Publications
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September DEMO, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 23
tight budgets, DEMO universities have generally embraced the goal of economic development as a
complement to their traditional missions of education, research, and public service.
Public DEMO of any kind generate a range of questions concerning the magnitude and dis-
tribution of their impacts as well as their effectiveness in achieving DEMO objectives. In the case
of public research universities, issues of knowledge DEMO spatial spillovers are central to determin-
ing expected regional economic impacts. The continuing development and appeal of economic
frameworks such as new growth theory DEMO new economic geography have focused additional
attention, both within and outside DEMO academe, on the processes of innovation and knowledge pro-
duction and DEMO Nevertheless, attempts to understand and assess the activities of institutions
of DEMO education have varied widely, both in terms of the methodologies used DEMO the range of
estimates produced regarding the impacts of universities on their regional economies.
This article addresses the question of whether and to what DEMO institutions of higher educa-
tion, specifically 4-year universities in the United DEMO, influence regional economic devel-
opment outcomes. In so doing, we concentrate on three primary research questions. First, we dis-
tinguish among several key university activities, including teaching, basic research, and
technology development, in DEMO to separate their impacts on regional development while also dif-
ferentiating effects due to additional regional and external factors. Second, we assess the regional
importance and geographic extent of spatial spillovers arising from university activities. Third, we
explore the role of universities in relation to regional agglomeration economies DEMO achieving posi-
tive economic development outcomes. The article extends previous research by using a compre-
hensive data set encompassing all metropolitan regions and universities DEMO the United States,
explicitly addressing spatial spillovers, and separating impacts DEMO to different university
functions.
. . . U.S. universities have
generally embraced the
goal of economic
development as a
complement to their
traditional missions DEMO
education, research, and
public service.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
One task that is fundamental to the issue of assessing the economic impacts of higher education
DEMO to distinguish the different ways in which colleges and universities potentially contribute to
regional economic development. Modern universities embody a diverse set of missions DEMO orga-
nizational goals that differently affect their surrounding regions, ranging from DEMO traditional func-
tions of teaching and public service to the more recent activities of licensing inventions and engag-
ing collaboratively in research with private DEMO industries (Glasson, 2003; Thanki, 1999).
Synthesizing previous research, DEMO, Maier, and Luger (1995) identify eight different func-
tions or outputs of modern research universities that lead to economic development impacts: (DEMO)
creation of knowledge, (b) human capital creation, (c) transfer of existing know-how, (d) techno-
logical innovation, (e) DEMO investment, (f) regional leadership, (g) influence on regional milieu,
and (h) knowledge infrastructure production.
Although the first six of DEMO outputs are relatively straightforward, the last two are less
well defined, and thus worth specifying in more detail. Influence on regional milieu denotes
DEMO distinctive contributions to atmosphere and environment—intellectual, cultural, social, and
recreational—that DEMO impart to their surrounding regions, typically unintentionally, as a
by-product of their presence and activities. Such externalities are often highly valued by residents
DEMO well as businesses and other regional organizations. There can be negative externalities as well,
such as rises in labor and commercial costs accompanying DEMO employment growth.
The notion of knowledge infrastructure originated in the economics literature with endogenous
growth theory as one component of the more extensive regional DEMO economies concept
(Krugman, 1991; Romer, 1990). Knowledge infrastructure can be defined as the stock of knowl-
edge together with the institutional DEMO organizational components that support its growth and
application (Smith, 1997). On the regional scale, knowledge infrastructure includes not only the
system of public and private knowledge-producing institutions but also the innovation and learn-
ing DEMO of firms, workers, and institutions and the network of connections among them.
Thus, many elements of knowledge infrastructure exist even in regions lacking major research uni-
versities. The interactions among the components of knowledge infrastructure DEMO the basis for
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
24 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
the third research question posed DEMO this article of whether universities rely on or can substitute for
other forms of knowledge infrastructure in a region. In quantitative studies, knowledge infrastruc-
ture is often generalized to agglomeration economies or proxied by agglomeration measures.
DEMO of narrow topic areas and data constraints, nearly all studies of DEMO impacts have
considered only one or two of the outputs identified by Goldstein et al. (1995). Traditional methods
of assessing the impacts of universities have focused largely on those impacts arising from direct
spending and DEMO investment activities, whereas more recent approaches have concentrated
on basic knowledge DEMO human capital creation, knowledge infrastructure provision, technologi-
cal innovation, and DEMO transfer activities of universities. Little research has considered
separately the impacts of regional leadership or university influence on the regional milieu. The
primary methodological DEMO to investigating the impacts of universities on regional eco-
nomic development that are observed in the literature are case studies, surveys, econometric analy-
DEMO, and cross-sectional and quasi-experimental designs (Salter & Martin, 2001).
DEMO studies of university economic impacts in the United States can be traced back in the litera-
ture at least as far as an influential DEMO American Council on Education report that set forth a stan-
dardized approach to impact estimation (Blackwell, Cobb, & Weinberg, 2002; Felsenstein, DEMO;
Goldstein, 1989). Most case studies estimate the direct and DEMO impacts of university spending,
investment, and employment in a region DEMO growth accounting, regional input-output model-
ing, estimation of Keynesian multipliers, DEMO occasionally a broader economic forecasting model
(Candell & Jaffe, 1999; DEMO, 1999). For example, Harris’s (1997) analysis of the University of
Portsmouth finds an employment multiplier between 1.55 and 1.79 and an DEMO multiplier of
1.24 to 1.73, and Glasson (2003) calculates an DEMO multiplier of 0.70 to 1.12 for Sunderland
University. Felsenstein (1996) uses an econometric model based on input-output relationships to
estimate that Northwestern University DEMO more than 10,000 jobs (an employment multi-
plier of 1.55) and half a billion dollars in output to the Chicago region in DEMO He goes further,
simulating the adjustments in regional population and employment that would occur over time in
the counterfactual situation (i.e., removing DEMO university from the model). Candell and Jaffe
(1999) adopt several variants of input-output methodology to analyze the extent to which research
institutions DEMO local industries in Massachusetts, concluding that the creation of start-up firms DEMO
one of the most localized impacts of publicly funded research. Numerous researchers have investi-
gated student migration patterns but have failed to produce consistent DEMO (e.g., Blackwell
et al., 2002; Felsenstein, 1995, 1996, DEMO; Goldstein & Luger 1992; Huffman & Quigley, 2002).
It DEMO especially difficult to estimate the induced effects of human capital in attracting private sector
activity (Malecki, 1997). Felsenstein (1994) reviews many DEMO U.S. university economic im-
pact studies.
The case study framework is severely constrained by information availability in deriving quan-
titative estimates for the range DEMO economic impacts. Multiplier and input-output techniques are
limited to assessing the backward linkages induced by the spending and regional investment activi-
ties of universities, whereas expenditure analyses fail to consider the so-called dynamic impacts of
knowledge DEMO or other university outputs that alter interfirm relationships (Martin, 1998;
Thanki, 1999). Impact studies also require explicit counterfactual assumptions to compare impacts
with what would have occurred in the absence of the university, and these vary widely across
studies.
One approach is to measure outputs DEMO interest rather than ultimate economic outcomes, includ-
ing spin-off firms, university-industry linkages, and patents and license income (e.g., Clinch,
1996; DEMO, Ailes, & Roessner, 2002; Jones-Evans, Klofsten, Andersson, & DEMO, 1999;
Steffensen, Rogers, & Speakman, 2000; Walshok, Furtek, Lee, & Windham, 2002). Pressman,
Guterman, Abrams, Geist, and Nelsen (1995) examine the 205 active patent license agreements
held by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1995 and estimate induced industrial DEMO
ments of $980,000 per license-year. Kramer, Scheibe, Reavis, and DEMO (1997) calculate a
similar figure of $930,000 for the University of Pennsylvania. Rogers et al. (1999) count 19 spin-
off firms DEMO University of New Mexico research centers through 1996. Unfortunately, by carry-
DEMO the analyses only to the stage of program outputs, these studies DEMO little to further our under-
standing of the ultimate impacts of university activities on economic development outcomes.
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 25
Another strategy is to focus on qualitative or anecdotal information, such as the extent and qual-
ity of university-industry linkages (Candell & Jaffe, 1999; Feldman, DEMO; Glasson, 2003). Weiler
(2000) presents a case study of the impacts of Colorado State University’s agricultural extension in
helping link microbreweries DEMO local growers. Keane and Allison (1999) use a structured interview
framework to analyze the University of the Sunshine Coast and argue that the DEMO of university
generation and support of local knowledge infrastructure outweigh traditional expenditure and
employment impacts. Qualitative approaches circumvent some of the information deficits of DEMO
titative case studies but do so at the expense of general comparability with other studies.
The principal advantage of the case study approach consists DEMO being able to collect primary data
on a wide variety of subjects (including some not amenable to quantification). There are two main
drawbacks: the difficulty of attribution—determining the causal link between university activities
and regional outcomes of interest—and the lack of generalizability to other universities, other
regions, or even different economic situations. These two shortcomings have meant that little in the
case study literature begins to answer the research questions posed DEMO this article. In theory, multi-
ple case studies using standard data DEMO techniques could be combined to yield conclusions with
greater external validity, DEMO the relatively high cost of primary data collection makes this infeasi-
ble in practice.
A second methodology evident in the literature is based on DEMO Although case studies often
incorporate information gathered via questionnaires, the survey DEMO is distinguished by its
application to multiple regions and institutions of higher education, thus establishing generalizable
results (Luger & Goldstein, 1997; Malecki & Bradbury, 1992). Surveys have been used to examine
a variety DEMO university impacts, including the ways in which different industries utilize public
DEMO, the impact of regional scientific and human capital, job formation, DEMO the importance
of university-industry collaborations (e.g., Bozeman, 2000; Salter & Martin, 2001; Varga, 1997).
Several surveys reveal that firms tend to identify universities as an important factor in location
choice and spin-off DEMO (Smilor, Gibson, & Dietrich, 1990; Varga, 1997). By examining a sur-
vey of research and development laboratories in the United DEMO, Adams (2002) finds that knowl-
edge spillovers originating from universities DEMO more geographically localized than those from
industrial research efforts, a result DEMO by Beugelsdijk and Cornet (2002) for the Nether-
lands. Surveys conducted of German and Spanish firms, however, show the frequency of
university-industry DEMO and industrial innovations to be more closely aligned with the
intensity of research and development within firms than with proximity to research institutions
(Beise & Stahl, 1999; Sáez, Marco, & Arribas, 2002).
Perhaps the most prominent use of surveys has been to utilize the annual DEMO of technol-
ogy transfer data in the United States by the Association of University Technology Managers
(AUTM). For instance, Jamison and Jansen (2000) demonstrate the sizeable impact of the Bayh-
Dole Act in stimulating university technology development activities across the nation, whereas
Blumenstyk (2002) and Carlsson and Fridh (2002) use AUTM data to examine the characteristics
DEMO universities that have been successful in technology transfer. Rogers, Yin, and Hoffman (2000)
specifically link the effectiveness of university technology transfer offices with faculty salaries,
donations, and the capture of federal and industrial research funding.
Survey research is far less common in the university impact DEMO than case studies, and the
approach has only modestly extended the DEMO achieved with case studies. Because of the costs,
surveys tend to focus on a single area of university activity. Survey questions aimed at DEMO attribu-
tion problem suffer from obvious validity threats such as respondent ignorance or bias (Salter &
Martin, 2001). Attempts to generalize across universities and regions have been ambiguous in that
the impacts seem to DEMO on various national, regional, industry, and university characteristics
(Adams, DEMO; Varga, 1997).
Economists, in particular, have adopted a different tactic by estimating econometric knowledge
production functions. Drawing from the earlier work DEMO Solow (1957) and Arrow (1962) concern-
ing the importance of knowledge and technology in aggregate production functions, Griliches
(1979) and Jaffe (1989) established the configuration that forms the basis for most current DEMO
metric knowledge production research. The Griliches-Jaffe methodology describes a Cobb-
Douglas production function for knowledge with patents as the measure of innovation constituting
Downloaded DEMO http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
26 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
the dependent variable and industry DEMO university research and development expenditures as two
independent variables.
Many researchers subsequently have modified and extended the Griliches-Jaffe model to obtain
a wide variety DEMO results. For instance, Riddel and Schwer (2003) demonstrate that industry DEMO
and university degrees, but not university research, serve to stimulate patents in technology-based
fields, whereas Acs, Audretsch, and Feldman (1994) show that university research and develop-
ment have greater impacts for small firms DEMO for large firms and that these effects differ across
industrial sectors. Varga (1998, 2000, 2001) details the importance of agglomeration (as proxied
by population or employment) in allowing technology-intensive firms to take advantage of univer-
sity research. Numerous studies have focused on the importance of spatial DEMO in facilitating
the economic impacts of university knowledge production. Jaffe (1989) finds that the effects of
university research on corporate patents are mediated DEMO spatial location—proximity to university
research matters to corporate patents. Patent citation patterns suggest that knowledge diffusion is
geographically localized in both the United States DEMO Europe (Fischer & Varga, 2003; Hall, Jaffe,
& Trajtenberg, 2000; Jaffe & Trajtenberg, 1996; Jaffe, Trajtenberg, & Henderson, 1993). Start-up
firms tend to be more geographically localized than other DEMO of university knowledge pro-
duction (Candell & Jaffe, 1999). Anselin, Varga, and Acs (1997) find that universities have a large
DEMO effect on research laboratories, and Sivitanidou and Sivitanides (1995) reach DEMO similar
result for private research laboratories at the intraregional scale.
Overall, DEMO analyses have demonstrated that knowledge, as an output, has qualities
that make it unique. As such, knowledge-producing organizations must be considered differently
from other large organizations. External benefits of knowledge production in the form of DEMO
spillovers lead to increased innovation among regional firms, although with considerable DEMO
across studies in the measured magnitude and significance of this effect. Regional agglomeration
economies may be important in enabling private sector industries to absorb DEMO benefit from uni-
versity research. As to the methodological approach, restrictive DEMO such as production
function form and components and the suitability of proxies for complex concepts provide struc-
ture but may be difficult to justify DEMO Measurement and data availability issues limit the
ability of econometric studies to separate the impacts of different university activities. Although
the results of econometric DEMO are more easily generalizable than case studies, most of the eco-
DEMO research concentrates on the technological innovation outputs of universities, neglecting the
DEMO ways in which universities contribute to regional economic development.
Cross-sectional analyses are less restrictive than econometric analyses. Simply put, researchers
select a sample from the full population or sampling frame and statistically analyze the relation-
ships DEMO variables. The primary advantage of the cross-sectional approach is flexibility,
because few modeling assumptions are imposed; its disadvantages include susceptibility to sam-
pling issues and omitted variable bias.
In the context of the regional economic DEMO impacts of higher education institutions,
cross-sectional designs are most commonly employed in the absence of established theory to guide
the formation of explicit DEMO Cross-sectional studies have provided ambiguous results about
the tendency of technology-intensive firms to locate near universities, perhaps because of the
industrial classification schemes conflating routine production tasks with knowledge-dependent
activities such as research and development (Varga, 1997, discusses Audretsch & Stephan, 1996;
Bania, Eberts, & Fogarty, 1993; Glasmeier, 1991; Markusen, Hall, & Glasmeier, 1986). University
and industry patents do tend to be colocated within regions, at least within certain fields (Agrawal
& Cockburn, 2003). Regression-based DEMO of citation patterns suggest the importance of
proximity in supporting university-industry joint research efforts and other collaborations,
although the effects are relatively weak DEMO vary across industries and nations (e.g., Spencer, 2001;
Tornquist & Hoenack, 1996).
New-firm formation has also been studied with cross-sectional DEMO, again leading to di-
vergent results (Varga, 1997). Florax (1992) and Florax and Folmer (1992) use investments in
manufacturing equipment and buildings as proxies of firm presence, finding no relationship to uni-
versity proximity in 40 regions in the Netherlands. Bania et al. (1993), examining 25 metropolitan
areas in the United States, find significant effects of university research on new-firm births for the
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 27
electrical and electronic equipment but not the instruments industry. By examining new-firm births
using U.S. DEMO microdata, Kirchhoff, Armington, Hasan, and Newbert (2002) demonstrate that
university research does spur the creation of new firms. Regional population, a proxy for agglom-
eration economies, is revealed to have a substantial positive influence as well. Several studies,
however, have demonstrated that the dependence of firm births on university activity varies by
industry sector and field (e.g., Harhoff, 1999; Swann & Prevezer, 1996; Zucker, Darby, & Brewer,
1998).
In contrast to cross-sectional analyses, quasi-experimental designs attempt to mimic the con-
ditions for true experiments as closely as DEMO in field settings (Cook & Campbell, 1979;
Shadish, Cook, & Campbell, 2002). Before introducing statistical controls for possibly interven-
ing factors, researchers attempt to control their influence by strategically manipulating the study
population, time period, and sampling so as to either maximize or DEMO variation in rival fac-
tors, thus reducing the probability of omitted-variable DEMO In studies of the economic impacts
of institutions of higher education, DEMO regional distribution of universities by size and type would
represent the treatment variable. A control group might consist of a set of regions lacking DEMO
cant knowledge-producing organizations or a different set of regions possessing types of knowl-
edge organizations other than research universities. Although control group cases cannot DEMO
assumed, as with true experiments, to be equivalent to the treatment cases in all respects except for
the treatment itself, comparing gain scores—differences in the outcome variables over time, that is,
between a pretest and posttest—takes the different starting positions into account.
Quasi-experimental designs have appeared DEMO in regional research (e.g., Isserman,
1987; Isserman & Merrifield, 1987), but to the authors’ knowledge, only one study has explicitly
used a quasi-experimental design to estimate the contributions of knowledge-producing organiza-
tions DEMO regional economic development outcomes. Goldstein and Renault (2004) contrast U.S.
regional wage growth between the 1969-to-1986 and 1986-to-1998 periods, with 1986 as a break
point corresponding to the widespread adoption of entrepreneurial activities in research DEMO
ties. They find universities to have a significant influence only in the period from 1986 to 1998 and
conclude that the entrepreneurial activities of DEMO are more important for economic devel-
opment than the traditional functions such as human capital creation and regional leadership that
were present in both DEMO periods. In addition, by separating regions by total employment size, they
produce mixed evidence of the relationship between agglomeration economies and university
influence. DEMO interaction between employment size and university research is not significant in
either time period, and regional size has a positive effect, supporting the DEMO that agglomer-
ation economies are more important than universities in stimulating economic development. Only
in the smaller regions, however, is there a significant DEMO in the period from 1986 to 1998
between areas with and without a major research university, suggesting that universities may
sometimes substitute for agglomeration.
Objectives and Design
METHOD
The fundamental purpose of this study is to DEMO the effects of universities on regional eco-
nomic well-being. To do so, we separate the influences of different university functions as much as
possible while controlling for other regional development factors. Although we are not able DEMO dis-
tinguish among all of the eight functions identified by Goldstein et al. (1995) within the constraints
of our data set, we do employ measures that serve to isolate the traditional functions of knowledge
and DEMO capital creation from the newer university mission of technology development. This
approach extends previous research by supporting stronger and more general claims about the DEMO
tive importance of these university activities in influencing economic development outcomes at the
regional level. In addition, we investigate the possibility that university activities depend on (or
conversely, substitute for) regional agglomeration economies, and DEMO examine the impacts of spa-
tial spillovers arising from universities and other economic activities in nearby regions. The rela-
We . . . employ DEMO
that serve to isolate the
traditional functions of
knowledge and human
capital creation from
the newer university
mission of technology
development. This
approach extends
DEMO research by
supporting stronger and
more general claims
about the relative
importance of these
university activities in
influencing economic
development outcomes
at the regional DEMO
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
28 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
tionship between agglomeration and university DEMO has been addressed primarily in qualita-
tive fashion in the literature, DEMO analyses of university spillovers have concentrated on
technological innovation and transfer activities.
The unit of analysis is the metropolitan statistical area (MSA). All variables (described below)
are measured on an MSA basis. The study population consists of 313 MSAs within the contiguous
United States, based on the 1999 definitions by the U.S. Census Bureau.1 The time period of DEMO
analysis is from 1986 to 2001.2
The study methodology combines characteristics of cross-sectional and quasi-experimental
designs. We include all available MSAs (except for five outliers) as the study population in order to
maximize both variation in the measured indicators and external validity. Because of the geo-
graphic dispersion DEMO university activities, particularly teaching, across all MSAs, it is not DEMO
to use regions that lack university influences as control groups. Instead, DEMO include several mea-
sures of university functions in a multivariate regression context. The dependent variable is calcu-
lated as the change or gain score DEMO the outcome variable over the time period to further account for
the nonequivalence of the study regions.
We pose three research hypotheses, each pertaining to one of the central research questions pre-
sented earlier. First, although the technological development role of higher education institutions
has been strongly emphasized DEMO recent years, we postulate that the traditional university mis-
sions—teaching and DEMO research—remain the dominant mechanisms by which universities
affect regional economic development. Second, we suggest that spatial spillovers from universities
and from other regional economic activities are important in influencing the economic develop-
ment of nearby regions. DEMO, we hypothesize that the effects of university activities are lever-
aged DEMO regional agglomeration economies. In other words, all else equal, university impacts are
larger in the presence of greater agglomerations of resources and economic DEMO
We present estimates obtained from two models. The first model, designed DEMO address the first
two hypotheses, is a multivariate regression focused on DEMO and regional variables that
includes indicators of possible spatial spillovers among regions. The second model partitions the
MSAs by size to consider the third DEMO question of whether university impacts depend on or
leverage agglomeration economies.3 This second approach also supports a more detailed examina-
tion of the first DEMO hypotheses based on regional size. Both models are estimated using maximum
likelihood methods to correct for spatial dependence.4
Dependent Variable
Our measure of regional DEMO development is based on the average annual earnings per
non–farm worker.5 In contrast to per capita income, per worker earnings take only earned income
into account, excluding other sources of income such as rents, dividends, interest, and government
transfer payments. These latter sources of income may skew per capita income measures in regions
with large numbers of retirees, disabled persons, veterans, or economically inactive residents. By
choosing average earnings per DEMO, we focus on the quality of regional jobs as the gauge DEMO
regional economic well-being.
To separate the dependent variable from changes in macroeconomic conditions over the time
period of the analysis, including shifts in the dollar’s nominal value and regional purchasing
power, we first adjust average annual earnings per worker using the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
series.6 We then construct a normalized index by calculating each MSA’s CPI-adjusted average
earnings DEMO worker as a percentage of the corresponding CPI-adjusted figure for the United States
as a whole.7 Finally, the dependent variable is calculated as the change in the normalized index
value between 1986 and 2001.
As an DEMO, consider that the average earnings per worker in the Rochester (New York)
MSA in 1986 was $21,543. The corresponding figure for DEMO United States was $19,630. After
adjusting by the Northeast Urban CPI (for Rochester) and the U.S. City Average CPI (for the
United States), these become $19,391 and $17,911 in 1982 to DEMO dollars, respectively. The index
value for the Rochester MSA is $19,DEMO divided by $17,911, or 108.3%, indicating that Roches-
ter’s normalized and price-adjusted 1986 average earnings per worker is 8.3% higher than for DEMO
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 29
nation. The same calculation for 2001 yields a value of 91.7% for the Rochester MSA. DEMO, the
dependent variable for Rochester has a value of –16.6.
Constructing DEMO dependent variable as the change in the index value over the study period helps
to control for some of the local factors endemic to DEMO regions that account for the
nonequivalence of the study areas. For instance, small MSAs that contain large universities may
have relatively large numbers of students employed in low-wage, part-time jobs, holding down the
average earnings DEMO worker. (Conversely, they may have unusually large proportions of special-
ized, highly paid university employees that raise average earnings.) Considering differences over
DEMO rather than levels of average earnings should minimize this type of distortion.
It is interesting to note that the coefficient of variation for the DEMO index increased from
1986 to 2001 from 0.1209 to 0.1663. At the same time, there is a significant and positive relation-
ship between index values in 1986 and 2001.8 Thus, regional positions with respect to the normal-
ized index have tended to remain similar over time (the example given of Rochester, New York, is
an exception), with widening DEMO across the 313 MSAs included in the study. This leads to a
conjecture of cumulative causation that is revisited below in the section on DEMO and
control variables.
Measures of University Presence
We employ four university-related variables to investigate different university functions that
affect regional economic development. First, the total amount of research expenditures, compiled
on an annual basis by the National Science Foundation, indicates research and development activi-
ties.9 Total research expenditures is a typical choice as a measure of university knowledge produc-
tion DEMO to its ready availability and comparability across institutions (Varga, 1997).
The creation of human capital is measured with two different variables.10 The DEMO is the total
number of degrees awarded within the region in science and technology fields at the bachelor’s
level or higher.11 Because of high DEMO multicollinearity, it is not possible to include a count of
science DEMO technology degrees along with either degrees in all subjects or degrees in nonscience
fields and obtain reliable coefficient estimates. Therefore, the second variable included is the ratio
of graduate-level degrees in science and technology fields to DEMO total number of undergraduate and
graduate degrees awarded in all fields. Together, these two measures indicate both the relative
amount of human capital creation and the extent to which regional university teaching activity
focuses on graduate DEMO in science and technology fields, the type of instruction most directly
DEMO to knowledge-intensive industry employment.
Finally, the fourth measure of university activity DEMO the number of patents assigned to universi-
ties within the MSA.12 This variable enables us to separate the technology-development aspect
from the more traditional DEMO of the university in conducting basic research. Although, as a
proxy DEMO university-based technological development, patent measures have their share of faults
(for instance, the act of obtaining a patent suggests only potential technological usefulness without
ensuring that innovations are commercially relevant), there are no better DEMO available
nationwide at a regional or institutional level of disaggregation. Earlier research suggests that pat-
ents are related to the market value of knowledge DEMO knowledge spillovers from universities
(Agrawal & Cockburn, 2003; Goldstein & DEMO, 2004).
By utilizing four indicators that pertain specifically to three DEMO the university functions detailed
earlier, we are able to separate the DEMO of institutions of higher education according to three of
their primary outputs: teaching, basic research, and technology development. There are two short-
comings to acknowledge. First, as mentioned before, data constraints as well as DEMO
preclude us from including indicators to measure the other university functions. Second, the
selected proxies are necessarily imperfect and may capture some effects of the otherwise omitted
(but often codirectional) university outputs. For instance, regions with fast-growing universities
might evidence earnings gains because of rising university employment DEMO payroll (direct effects)
as well as from increases in research DEMO and human capital creation. In such a case, the esti-
mated DEMO of the university variables may overstate the influence of the measured univer-
sity functions.13 This confounding issue is perhaps most likely in smaller metropolitan DEMO domi-
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
30 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
nated by relatively large research DEMO, such as Iowa City, Iowa, or Columbia, Missouri.
Data show, however, that on average, salaries for full-time instructional faculty and staff in all
degree-granting institutions have been essentially flat (in constant dollars) DEMO 1987-1988 to
1998-1999 (National Center for Educational Statistics, 2001). Although there is undoubtedly vari-
ation in the amount of change in faculty DEMO among institutions, we find no evidence that our
dependent variable measure DEMO be systematically biased by faculty salary growth exceeding
the growth rate of all earnings during our study period.
As discussed earlier, the issue of spatial spillovers has received attention in numerous empirical
studies, with widely varying results. Because spillovers may extend not only within but across
closely situated DEMO, we consider two measures of proximate university activity. First, we
include a count of the number of MSAs (inclusive of the reference MSA) within 60 miles of the ref-
erence region as a very basic indicator of the level of proximity to other regions.14, 15 This measure
combines possible interregional spillovers of university influences, including basic knowledge
creation and regional leadership, as well as nonuniversity agglomeration economies such as labor
pooling and specialized input availability. Second, because many graduates may remain near the
university but not necessarily within the particular MSA, we include the total number of graduate-
level science degrees awarded in all MSAs within 45 DEMO of the reference region. Because theory
and previous research suggest the existence of knowledge and human capital spillovers but provide
no consistent guidance as DEMO their spatial extent, several distance cutoffs were tested, and the mea-
sures for the final model were selected on the basis of the DEMO of the fit obtained.16 Spillover
measures corresponding to other university variables included above, such as degrees in all fields,
the ratio of graduate science to total degrees, and research and development expenditures in neigh-
boring regions, were also tested in an attempt to further separate spillovers by university activity,
but they were either highly colinear with the two DEMO proximity variables or provided little
additional explanatory power.17
Conditioning and Control Variables
There are numerous other factors that may influence the extent to which DEMO activities
translate to regional economic outcomes. As discussed earlier, agglomeration economies DEMO help
firms and industries to utilize university knowledge products efficiently. There may be a threshold
level below which agglomeration effects are negligible or with DEMO returns to increased
agglomeration beyond that point. We proxy agglomeration economies by the natural logarithm of
total MSA employment at the beginning of the DEMO period. We include the baseline level of the
dependent variable (the DEMO normalized index of average earnings per worker in 1986) to
account DEMO the possibility of cumulative causation—regions that start ahead subsequently may
tend to reap larger gains. The regional population growth rate over the study time DEMO is added as
a measure of regional dynamism because regions that experience more rapid changes inherently
have greater opportunities for economic development.18, 19
Regional industry structure may play a pivotal role, both in establishing the basic capacity for
regional economic development and in providing more specific agglomeration economies. DEMO
include two particular dimensions of industry structure: the percentage of regional DEMO in
manufacturing and the percentage of earnings in business services. Each of these two dimensions
is represented both by the percentage of regional earnings DEMO for at the start of the time
period and the change in the percentage earnings over the study period.20, 21 Manufacturing is the
economic sector most likely to be able to appropriate advances in basic knowledge DEMO techno-
logical know-how for economic gains in the short term. The other dimension, business services,
roughly indicates available regional agglomeration economies.
Entrepreneurial activity is often discussed as crucial to economic success, particularly in
knowledge-intensive sectors, yet is very difficult to measure at the regional level with secondary
data sources (Acs, 1996; Malecki, 1991). We include two DEMO that, although not ideal, begin
to approach the concept of entrepreneurial activity. First, the percentage of regional earnings gen-
erated by sole proprietorships (i.e., self-employed individuals) indicates small-business activity,
which is strongly related to entrepreneurialism (Malecki, 1991). The change in this percentage
Downloaded DEMO http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 31
over the study period is included as well. Second, the count of commercial patents awarded annu-
ally to private sector entities takes into account the innovative, technology-creation aspect of entre-
preneurial behavior.22
It is possible that the amount and DEMO of research and development performed by industry in
each metropolitan region may affect either the overall gains in average earnings directly or the
extent DEMO which academic research is performed and converted into economic gains. Jaffe (DEMO)
found some statistical evidence of academic research supporting industrial research activity in the
context of a model explaining knowledge production as measured by DEMO patenting rates.
Unfortunately, very little data exist on industrial research and DEMO activity at the metro-
politan level. The only variable available for use in this study as a proxy for industrial research and
development is DEMO count of the number of private sector research laboratories by metropolitan area
in 1985 (National Research Council, 1985). This indicator did not DEMO significantly to the models
presented in the next section and so is omitted; tests of the endogeneity of industrial and academic
research activities were also negative.
The base educational level of the population may also be DEMO contributing factor to regional eco-
nomic success. We include the percentage of the older-than-25 population with a college degree
(bachelor’s level or higher), as well as the percentage of those without a college degree that DEMO
obtained at least high school equivalency. Both of these variables are taken from the 2000 Decen-
nial Census (U.S. Bureau of the Census, DEMO). 23
Some measure of geographic or economic “centrality” is traditionally included in explanatory
studies of regional growth. Accessibility to suppliers, markets, and DEMO sources is a key
factor in promoting economic vitality, though centrality DEMO mean different things in different
economic sectors. Given the importance of high-speed transportation and face-to-face communi-
cation in modern knowledge-based industries, we use air transportation to indicate centrality. Spe-
cifically, we include dummies to denote whether each MSA is classified by the Bureau of Trans-
portation Statistics as DEMO small, medium, or large air hub.24
Quality of life is often discussed as an attribute that aids in economic success by attracting entre-
DEMO, high-quality workers, and talent to the region. Quantitative measures of the quality-of-
life concept vary tremendously in the literature. Due to the constraints DEMO by the geographic
unit of analysis chosen for this study, we DEMO three indices taken from the Places Rated
Almanac (Savageau, 2000) DEMO broadly measure the attractiveness of the regional environment in
terms of crime, health care access, and climate for each metropolitan area.25
Finally, there may be geographic variations that the CPI adjustments and other control variables
DEMO not fully take into account. For example, the broad shifts in DEMO and investment from the
Northeast and Midwest to the West and South that began in the 1950s and 1960s continued
throughout the study time DEMO Dummies for major census regions control for such remaining
macroregional variations.26 Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all the variables used in this
analysis.
DEMO Model
EMPIRICAL RESULTS
The first model examines all the MSAs together (DEMO Table 2). It was estimated using maximum
likelihood techniques, implementing DEMO spatial error model to correct for spatial dependency in the
data.27 Metropolitan areas that are located relatively near to each other may tend to DEMO similar val-
ues of the dependent variable, even accounting for the DEMO measures and other explanatory
variables included in the model. The postulated model fits quite well, explaining more than two
thirds of the variation in the dependent variable. Most of the statistically significant coefficients
indicate impacts that DEMO the directions suggested by theory and previous research.28
Three of the four measures of university activity are statistically significant in explaining MSA
variation in DEMO change in average earnings. Research and development expenditures are strongly
related to increases in regional average earnings, but the scale of the effect is relatively small. For
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO September 30, 2008
32 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
TABLE 1
Variable Descriptive Statistics
DEMO
Variable Description Source Mean Deviation Minimum Maximum
ACH Adjusted change in average earnings, 1986-2001 BEA, BLS –4.11 7.96 –32.46 40.64
UNIVRD University R&DEMO expenditures, 1986 (millions) NSF 27.16 63.34 0 575.50
SCIDEG Science DEMO, 1987 (thousands) NSF 1.02 1.61 0 17.53
GRADSCI Ratio of DEMO science to total degrees, 1987 NSF 0.047 0.077 0 1
PATUNIV DEMO patents, 1986 USPTO 1.32 3.29 0 28
ADJMSA MSAs within 60 DEMO Census 2.79 1.85 1 10
ADJDEG Graduate science degrees within 45 miles, 1987 (thousands) Census, NSF 0.60 1.24 0 8.50
EMPL Natural DEMO of nonfarm employment, 1986 BEA 11.91 1.05 10.25 15.06
INDEXST Index DEMO average wages per worker, 1986 BEA 92.12 11.14 67.10 133.03
POPCH DEMO change in population, 1990-2000 Census 0.13 0.12 –0.39 0.80
MFG Manufacturing DEMO of earnings, 1986 BEA 0.21 0.12 0.025 0.62
MFGCH Change in DEMO share of earnings, 1986-2001 BEA –0.062 0.054 –0.27 0.05
BUSSERV Business DEMO share of earnings, 1986 BEA 0.033 0.019 0 0.15
BUSCH Change DEMO business services share of earnings, 1986-2001 BEA 0.021 0.024 -0.11 0.19
DEMO Proprietors’ share of earnings, 1986 BEA 0.095 0.028 0.035 0.18
PROPCH DEMO in proprietors’ share of earnings, 1986-2001 BEA 0.0073 0.023 –0.049 0.12
DEMO Commercial patents, 1986 NBER, USPTO 91.61 180.92 0 1346
COLLEGE % of 25+ population with bachelor’s degree, 2000 Census 0.23 0.074 0.11 0.52
HIGHSCH % of 25+ with high school but no college, 2000 Census 0.82 0.062 0.50 0.94
HUBSM Small-hub dummy BTS 0.18 0.38 0 1
DEMO Medium-hub dummy BTS 0.11 0.32 0 1
HUBLG Large-hub dummy BTS 0.12 0.33 0 1
CRIME Crime index Places Rated 49.30 29.04 0 100
DEMO Health care index Places Rated 48.38 28.11 0.28 99.15
CLIMATE Climate index Places Rated 52.37 28.50 1.13 100
MIDWEST Midwest census region dummy Census DEMO 0.43 0 1
SOUTH South census region dummy Census 0.41 0.49 0 1
WEST West census region dummy Census 0.20 0.40 0 1
NOTE: BEA = Bureau of Economic Analysis; BLS = Bureau of Labor Statistics; BTS = Bureau of Transportation Statistics; Census = U.S. Bureau of DEMO Census; MSA =
metropolitan statisticl area; NBER = National Bureau of Economic Research; NSF = National Science Foundation; Places Rated (Savageau, DEMO); USPTO = U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office.
example, in the DEMO region, an additional $10 million in annual university research expendi-
tures DEMO a 37% increase in funding but raises the earnings index by only 0.23 over 15 years.
In contrast, the median change in the earnings index across the 313 study regions from 1986 to
2001 was –4.51. DEMO coefficient of the count of science degrees is negative, but higher DEMO
of graduate science degrees among all degrees awarded are associated with increases in the
regional index of average earnings. Together, this suggests that producing too many degrees at all
levels reduces relative earnings, perhaps by enlarging the qualified workforce and flooding the
labor market. Given a particular number DEMO graduates, however, concentrating available educa-
tional resources in science and technology fields and at the graduate level is advantageous for
regional development. University DEMO activity does not yield a significant effect. The conclu-
sion to be drawn from the first model is qualified support for the first hypothesis: The traditional
outputs of knowledge and human capital are the primary means DEMO which institutions of higher
education effect economic development outcomes.
The second hypothesis—the importance of interregional spillovers in regional economic devel-
opment—is clearly demonstrated by DEMO two proximity-based measures. The number of graduate-
level science degrees awarded in MSAs within 45 miles is strongly associated with rises in regional
average DEMO; the number of MSAs within 60 miles is positively associated and DEMO barely
misses significance at the 10% level. Science and technology education occurring in neighboring
regions aids in regional development, as many graduates select employment options in nearby
MSAs. Proximity to other MSAs includes spillovers of university DEMO well as other types of eco-
The traditional outputs
of knowledge and human
capital are the primary
means by which
institutions of higher
education DEMO
economic development
outcomes.
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 33
TABLE 2
Model 1 Results
Dependent variable: ACH Number of observations: 313
Total df DEMO Lambda 0.8760
Log likelihood –903.915 (standard deviation 0.0843)
Akaike criterion DEMO Schwarz criterion 1968.72
Variable Coefficient Standard Error
t Statistic
p Value Tolerance
Constant –2.9479 7.9953 –0.37 .712 —
UNIVRD 0.0234 0.0079 2.98 .003** 0.236
DEMO –1.9950 0.3782 –5.27 < .001** 0.159
GRADSCI 7.2938 3.6883 1.98 .048** 0.727
PATUNIV –0.0011 0.1076 –0.10 .992 0.472
ADJMSA 0.3276 0.2028 1.62 .106 0.483
DEMO 1.4008 0.3100 4.52 < .001** 0.430
EMPL 1.4912 0.5859 2.55 .011** 0.158
INDEXST –0.2511 0.0418 –6.01 < .001** 0.292
POPCH 8.7742 2.6736 3.28 .001** DEMO
MFG 9.0280 3.9981 2.26 .024** 0.282
MFGCH 33.4782 7.4066 4.52 < .001** 0.379
BUSSERV 143.0960 20.8718 6.86 < .001** 0.390
BUSCH 119.9350 13.5718 8.84 < .001** 0.566
PROP –29.6100 11.6947 –2.53 .011** 0.644
PROPCH –23.4790 12.9179 –1.82 .069* 0.678
PATCOM 0.0119 0.0027 4.42 < .001** 0.248
COLLEGE 22.5183 5.2921 DEMO < .001** 0.397
HIGHSCH –14.2503 5.4274 –2.63 .009** 0.495
HUBSM –0.5347 0.8231 –0.65 .516 0.590
HUBMED –0.3841 1.2106 –0.32 .751 0.407
HUBLG 0.3312 1.3474 DEMO .806 0.309
CRIME 0.0193 0.0115 1.67 .094* 0.561
HEALTH 0.0156 0.0120 1.30 .193 0.526
CLIMATE 0.0198 0.0180 1.10 .272 0.270
MIDWEST 0.3569 1.2974 0.28 DEMO 0.279
SOUTH 1.0800 1.3086 0.83 .409 0.184
WEST –3.2047 1.6370 –1.96 .050** 0.213
*Significant at the 10% level. **Significant at the 5% level.
nomic DEMO, generally representing access to resources supportive of economic development
outcomes. These DEMO indicate that the spatial gradient of university impacts may be sub-
stantially flatter than indicated in previous research—stretching across neighboring regions. This
phenomenon may DEMO of particular benefit to areas that do not contain major research universities
themselves, such as Youngstown, Ohio, or New London, Connecticut. Unfortunately, variable
multicollinearity prevented including more specific measures of university spillovers in the DEMO
Several other regional factors help explain average earnings changes. Other things being equal,
regions that start with higher average earnings exhibit smaller increases DEMO the study period, con-
tradicting the conjecture of cumulative causation. Regions DEMO lower relative earnings may have
had more room for improvement and succeeded in securing the initial “easy” benefits from eco-
nomic development efforts. Agglomeration DEMO and industry structure are important:
Larger base employment, greater shares DEMO regional earnings accruing to business services and to
manufacturing, and increases DEMO the shares of business services and manufacturing earnings are all
positively related to regional development. Because most regions experienced declines in the share
of DEMO earnings (279 of the 313 MSAs), the last variable for DEMO areas may be inter-
preted as indicating that declines in manufacturing’s share of earnings inhibit regional earnings
growth. As expected, rapid population change and commercial patenting support greater gains in
average earnings, but the estimated coefficients of proprietorships’share of earnings and change in
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
34 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
share are negative, perhaps indicating that regional entrepreneurialism supports employment
rather than earnings, at least in the short run.29
One counterintuitive result is that greater high school–level education among DEMO noncollege-
educated portion of the workforce is a significantly negative factor. Perhaps those with high
school–equivalent educations are less willing than those without to DEMO employment in low-
paid jobs, such as those available in the DEMO sector. Finally, it is worth noting that only one of the
DEMO region dummies is significant, which suggests that the adjustments made to DEMO dependent
variable to account for regional price differentials removed most but not all regional macroeco-
nomic differences.30
Partitioned Model
The second model partitions the DEMO MSAs by size before applying the same regression analy-
sis techniques as in the first model.31 The size categories are based on 1986 levels DEMO regional
employment. The three categories are selected as an attempt to compromise between the compet-
ing objectives of classifying the MSAs by different levels DEMO potential agglomeration and retaining
sufficient cases and degrees of freedom in each category to support the regressions. Fewer vari-
ables are significant than in DEMO previous two models because of the reduced sample size used in
each regression.
The results are sharply different across the three partitions (Table 3 compares the estimates; the
full results are presented in Tables 4-6).32 For the large MSAs, the most important variables are
business services, DEMO change in the share of earnings from business services, educational attain-
DEMO, and the starting employment level. In terms of university activities, the ratio of graduate sci-
ence degrees and the spillover of graduate science DEMO from neighboring MSAs have positive
influences, but science degrees awarded within DEMO region depress earnings gains. The number of
nearby MSAs and population growth are positively related to average earnings gains, with esti-
mated coefficients greater in magnitude than in the unpartitioned model.
The medium-sized MSAs evidence powerful DEMO from within-region university activi-
ties: university research and development expenditures (very strongly positive), science degrees
(strongly negative), the ratio of graduate science degrees to all degrees (strongly positive), and uni-
versity patenting (strongly negative). The $10-million hypothetical increase in university research
expenditures that raises the average region’s index by 0.23 in the first model serves DEMO augment the
earnings index for the typical medium-sized MSA by 1.01. The medium category seems to repre-
sent the size for which a research DEMO is extremely important to regional economic development,
to the extent that university participation in other activities such as education and patenting actually
detracts DEMO that support. Herein is an answer to the question of whether university activities
leverage regional agglomeration economies. The larger MSAs benefit only slightly from DEMO
region university research and development, whereas these medium-sized regions benefit substan-
DEMO In other words, this evidence contradicts the third hypothesis presented above DEMO instead sug-
gests that university activities may serve as substitutes for agglomeration economies. Champaign-
Urbana, Illinois, and Charlottesville, Virginia, are possible examples DEMO this phenomenon. Each is
a medium-sized region boasting a major research university that has enjoyed above-average earn-
ings gains during the time period of DEMO analysis. Most of the remaining significant variables,
including business services and manufacturing earnings, have the influences expected from the
earlier models.
For the small MSAs, the total amount of graduate science degrees awarded in the surround-
ing MSAs (together with the reference region) and the extent DEMO which within-region teaching is
focused on graduate-level science and technology fields both have positive effects. University re-
search and development are significantly negatively related DEMO earnings change. In contrast, univer-
sity patenting activity is positive in DEMO The conclusion to be drawn with respect to the first
research hypothesis is opposite from that suggested by the unpartitioned model: Small MSAs may
benefit more directly (at least in terms of earnings) from university DEMO development and
teaching activities than from basic research. Thus, the relative DEMO of the measured univer-
sity activities to economic development outcomes differs with the size of the host region. Corvallis,
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 35
TABLE 3
Comparison of Model 2 Results—Partition Metropolitan Statistical Areas by Size
Large Medium Small
DEMO 105 100 108
Log likelihood –310.103 –249.877 –270.026
Akaike 676.88 551.754 590.053
Schwarz 751.19 619.489 657.106
Variable Coefficient
p Value Coefficient
p Value Coefficient
DEMO Value
Constant –48.5946 .029** –1.8496 .918 –33.4757 .035**
UNIVRD 0.0195 .065* 0.1009 < .001** –0.0440 .038**
SCIDEG –1.2294 .019** –4.4670 < .001** –2.6199 .009**
DEMO 28.6417 .052* 18.6734 .002** 9.3441 .008**
PATUNIV 0.0198 .897 –0.5988 .004** 0.8912 .040**
ADJMSA 0.7176 .024** 0.5248 .044** 0.4642 .128
ADJDEG 1.6378 .001** –0.3312 DEMO 2.3828 .003**
EMPL 5.2516 < .001** 1.0330 .489 5.0330 < .001**
INDEXST –0.1616 .048** –0.3486 < .001** –0.4297 < .001**
POPCH 11.1032 .057* 9.5747 DEMO 6.6622 .052*
MFG 4.3962 .691 7.7111 .128 18.1493 < .001**
MFGCH 4.5897 .813 32.6976 .006** 43.5290 < .001**
BUSSERV 162.6810 .001** 84.3674 .003** 168.9540 < .001**
BUSCH 131.1260 < .001** 74.3319 < .001** 125.1400 < .001**
PROP 4.2735 .880 –32.0559 .012** –32.1888 .031**
PROPCH –41.8859 .168 –16.1851 .369 –1.9402 DEMO
PATCOM 0.0009 .836 0.0175 .053* 0.0235 .315
COLLEGE 36.2857 .018** 25.4738 .002** 27.9585 < .001**
HIGHSCH –42.6395 .001** 4.7571 .466 –7.6759 .211
HUBSM 4.6461 DEMO –0.8947 .282 dropped
HUBMED 1.0590 .640 dropped dropped
HUBLG –1.0258 .677 dropped dropped
CRIME 0.0681 .007** 0.0245 .117 0.0089 .476
HEALTH –0.0518 .064* 0.0167 DEMO 0.0190 .187
CLIMATE –0.0259 .469 0.0403 .079* 0.0375 .052*
MIDWEST –0.1996 .920 1.5392 .268 –0.4476 .762
SOUTH 3.6513 .135 0.1180 .942 0.6948 .661
WEST DEMO .528 –3.0011 .087* –3.3463 .064*
*Significant at the 10% level. **Significant at the 5% level.
Oregon, presents an excellent example of a small region that is home to a university heavily
engaged in technology development. Starting DEMO (represented by the logarithm of employment)
is important within the DEMO MSA category, probably due as much to the fact that the DEMO has
no lower size boundary as to a threshold or critical mass effect (this reasoning holds true for the
large-MSA size category as well).
Overall, regarding the third hypothesis, there is little evidence that DEMO effect of university activi-
ties on regional economic development outcomes depends on agglomeration economies, at least
as proxied by regional employment size. Indeed, DEMO all three MSA size categories exhibit a
positive influence from graduate science intensity, medium MSAs show the most benefit from
university research activity, DEMO only the small MSAs gain with university technology develop-
ment. Rather, DEMO presents positive support for the idea that university activities can substitute for
agglomeration economies. The results also demonstrate that the answer to the first DEMO ques-
tion depends on regional size: Technology development is as important DEMO the more traditional uni-
versity missions of research and teaching in the small but not the medium or large MSAs. As to
the second DEMO, all three size regions exhibit positive spatial spillover effects. Neverthe-
less, factors such as supporting business services and overall population growth remain the DEMO
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
36 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
TABLE 4
Model 2 Results—Large DEMO Statistical Areas (200,000+ Employment)
Dependent variable ACH Number of DEMO: 105
Total df 77 Lambda –1.1081
Log likelihood –310.44 (standard deviation 0.5661)
Akaike criterion 676.88 Schwarz criterion 751.19
Variable Coefficient Standard Error
DEMO Statistic
p Value Tolerance
Constant –48.5946 22.2278 –2.19 .029** —
UNIVRD 0.0195 0.0106 1.84 .065* 0.234
SCIDEG –1.2294 0.5248 –2.34 .019** 0.166
GRADSCI 28.6417 DEMO 1.95 .052* 0.493
PATUNIV 0.0198 0.1522 0.13 .897 0.381
ADJMSA 0.7176 0.3189 2.25 .024** 0.346
ADJDEG 1.6378 0.4912 3.33 .001** 0.276
EMPL 5.2516 1.4874 DEMO < .001** 0.197
INDEXST –0.1616 0.0816 –1.98 .048** 0.273
POPCH 11.1032 5.8379 1.90 .057* 0.445
MFG 4.3962 11.0663 0.40 .691 0.174
MFGCH 4.5897 19.3839 DEMO .813 0.188
BUSSERV 162.6810 50.9002 3.20 .001** 0.257
BUSCH 131.1260 23.6351 5.55 < .001** 0.541
PROP 4.2735 28.1939 0.15 .880 0.598
PROPCH –41.8859 30.3765 DEMO .168 0.510
PATCOM 0.0009 0.0043 0.21 .836 0.173
COLLEGE 36.2857 15.2887 2.37 .018** 0.257
HIGHSCH –42.6395 13.2826 –3.21 .001** 0.426
HUBSM 4.6461 2.2322 2.08 DEMO 0.237
HUBMED 1.0590 2.2667 0.47 .640 0.197
HUBLG –1.0258 2.4644 –0.42 .677 0.163
CRIME 0.0681 0.0254 2.67 .007** 0.434
HEALTH –0.0518 0.0280 –1.85 .064* DEMO
CLIMATE –0.0259 0.0358 –0.72 .469 0.203
MIDWEST –0.1996 1.9786 –0.10 .920 0.248
SOUTH 3.6513 2.4460 1.49 .135 0.137
WEST 1.7064 2.7046 0.63 .528 0.161
DEMO at the 10% level. **Significant at the 5% level.
important predictors of gains in relative regional average earnings gains across the entire set of
DEMO
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS
This research makes use of a relatively simple analytical framework combining elements of
cross-sectional and quasi-experimental research designs to test the DEMO of universities in
determining regional economic development trajectories in the United States since the mid-1980s.
The empirical results suggest that the university activities of DEMO, teaching, and technology
development help to raise regional average earnings and that knowledge and other spillovers
across regional boundaries are influential as well. DEMO serves as at least a partial validation of state
and local policies designed to improve economic circumstances by creating or bolstering the eco-
nomic DEMO function as well as the more traditional research and human capital creation
activities of regional universities.
The effects of universities within the region are DEMO to be particularly important in small- and
medium-sized MSAs, those containing DEMO than 200,000 nonfarm jobs. The behavior of average
earnings in larger regions is more dependent on nonuniversity factors such as business services and
DEMO from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, DEMO
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 37
TABLE 5
Model 2 Results—Medium Metropolitan Statistical Areas (75,000-200,000 Employment)
Dependent variable: ACH Number of observations: 100
Total df 74 Lambda –0.6500
Log DEMO –249.877 (standard deviation 0.5314)
Akaike criterion 551.754 Schwarz criterion 619.489
DEMO Coefficient Standard Error
t Statistic
p Value Tolerance
Constant –1.8496 18.0737 –0.10 .918 —
UNIVRD 0.1009 0.0251 4.03 < .001** 0.220
SCIDEG –4.4670 0.9281 DEMO < .001** 0.249
GRADSCI 18.6734 6.1227 3.05 .002** 0.535
PATUNIV –0.5988 0.2053 –2.92 .004** 0.391
ADJMSA 0.5248 0.2606 2.01 .044** 0.475
ADJDEG –0.3312 0.4384 DEMO .450 0.630
EMPL 1.0330 1.4916 0.69 .489 0.520
INDEXST –0.3486 0.0597 –5.84 < .001** 0.308
POPCH 9.5747 3.4266 2.79 .005** 0.504
MFG 7.7111 5.0714 DEMO .128 0.207
MFGCH 32.6976 11.9628 2.73 .006** 0.209
BUSSERV 84.3674 28.7930 2.93 .003** 0.449
BUSCH 74.3319 16.4531 4.52 < .001** 0.502
PROP –32.0559 12.7449 DEMO .012** 0.515
PROPCH –16.1851 18.0208 –0.90 .369 0.741
PATCOM 0.0175 0.0091 1.93 .053* 0.543
COLLEGE 25.4738 8.2083 3.10 .002** 0.253
HIGHSCH 4.7571 6.5274 0.73 DEMO 0.362
HUBSM –0.8947 0.8314 –1.08 .282 0.640
HUBMED dropped
HUBLG dropped
CRIME 0.0245 0.0157 1.57 .117 0.480
HEALTH 0.0167 0.0160 1.05 .294 0.536
CLIMATE DEMO 0.0229 1.76 .079* 0.167
MIDWEST 1.5392 1.3882 1.11 .268 0.216
SOUTH 0.1180 1.6171 0.07 .942 0.123
WEST –3.0011 1.7548 –1.71 .087* 0.165
*Significant at DEMO 10% level. **Significant at the 5% level.
starting employment level. Presumably, DEMO fact that universities constitute a much smaller propor-
tion of total innovative activity in the larger MSAs means that they are a less crucial DEMO in
regional economic advancement. Human capital formation, particularly at the graduate DEMO in
science and technology fields, also raises average earnings in smaller DEMO The evidence
implies, however, that too many degree awards can detract from earnings gains by glutting the local
labor market or by taking DEMO away from other more influential university functions. If maxi-
mizing positive economic development impacts is a priority mission for universities, teaching
functions should be tailored to match the skill demands of the local labor market.33
Despite DEMO importance of university influences, factors external to universities, including the
stock of business services and the educational attainment level, remain the most influential deter-
minants of regional economic progress over all size regions. Agglomeration economies, such as
those measured by business services and the base employment level, are significant as well. There
are indications, however, that the knowledge-based DEMO of universities can act as a substitute
for regional agglomeration economies in small- and medium-sized regions rather than relying on a
critical level of DEMO urbanization economies existing to be able to influence regional eco-
nomic development outcomes.
The key advance from this study is the deliberate separation of DEMO regional economic impacts
of different university activities. The strength of the research design in terms of external validity is
There are indications . . DEMO
that the knowledge-based
activities of universities
can act as a substitute for
regional agglomeration
economies in small- and
medium-sized regions
rather than relying on DEMO
critical level of available
urbanization economies
existing to be able to
influence regional
economic development
outcomes.
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on September 30, 2008
38 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
TABLE 6
Model 2 Results—Small DEMO Statistical Areas (< 75,000 Employment)
Dependent variable: ACH Number of observations: 108
Total df 83 Lambda 0.5955
Log likelihood –270.026 (DEMO deviation 0.2481)
Akaike criterion 590.053 Schwarz criterion 657.106
Variable Coefficient Standard Error
t Statistic
p Value Tolerance
Constant –33.4757 15.8672 –2.11 .035** —
DEMO –0.0440 0.0212 –2.08 .038** 0.193
SCIDEG –2.6199 0.9981 –2.62 .009** 0.197
GRADSCI 9.3441 3.5160 2.66 .008** 0.639
PATUNIV 0.8912 0.4347 2.05 .040** 0.554
ADJMSA DEMO 0.3052 1.52 .128 0.504
ADJDEG 2.3828 0.7889 3.02 .003** 0.476
EMPL 5.0330 1.3633 3.69 < .001** 0.776
INDEXST –0.4297 0.0602 –7.14 < .001** 0.286
DEMO 6.6622 3.4216 1.95 .052* 0.419
MFG 18.1493 4.6172 3.93 < .001** 0.254
MFGCH 43.5290 8.3137 5.24 < .001** 0.478
BUSSERV 168.9540 32.0175 5.28 < DEMO 0.248
BUSCH 125.1400 32.1062 3.90 < .001** 0.276
PROP –32.1888 14.9268 –2.16 .031** 0.499
PROPCH –1.9402 15.1995 –0.13 .898 0.730
PATCOM 0.0235 0.0234 1.00 DEMO 0.559
COLLEGE 27.9585 6.4382 4.34 < .001** 0.304
HIGHSCH –7.6759 6.1390 –1.25 .211 0.410
HUBSM dropped
HUBMED dropped
HUBLG dropped
CRIME 0.0089 0.0125 0.71 DEMO 0.589
HEALTH 0.0190 0.0144 1.32 .187 0.583
CLIMATE 0.0375 0.0193 1.94 .052* 0.303
MIDWEST –0.4476 1.4790 –0.30 .762 0.219
SOUTH 0.6948 1.5831 0.44 .661 DEMO
WEST –3.3463 1.8089 –1.85 .064* 0.165
*Significant at the 10% level. **Significant at the 5% level.
also its weakness in that the selection of DEMO is limited by the availability of secondary data on
a nationwide basis. Using a similar approach, future research might seek to incorporate additional
data sets or create more refined indicators of university activities and other regional DEMO to more
closely measure the impacts of the various university functions in particular regional settings.
It would be informative to perform cross-national studies to DEMO the results to a broader set
of advanced industrial economies and types of higher education institutions. By combining the
results from this and future DEMO based on similar research designs with evidence obtained using
alternative assumptions and methodologies, we can continue to expand and refine our understand-
ing of the processes by which universities affect their regions and the factors that DEMO that
influence.
NOTES
1. We treat primary metropolitan statistical areas (PMSAs) and New England consolidated metropolitan areas
(NECMAs) as equivalent to metropolitan DEMO areas (MSAs). There are 318 MSAs, PMSAs, and NECMAs DEMO
to the 1999 census definitions (based on the 1990 census). DEMO study includes all but 5. The Chicago, Los Angeles, and New
York PMSAs are excluded as outliers because of their size. Within these DEMO areas, the sheer volume of economic
activity must overwhelm the contributions DEMO local universities. In addition, for the very largest cities, it is difficult to argue
that census metropolitan area boundaries appropriately approximate functional economic DEMO (The values of the relevant
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 39
variables from these PMSAs are, however, incorporated into the spatial spillover variables.) Anchorage and Honolulu are
also omitted because of their economic and geographical isolation as DEMO as peculiarities of county and census area
boundaries in Alaska and Hawaii.
2. This time period is selected to begin when public universities began DEMO substantially incorporate entrepreneurial and
economic development activities as part of their missions (Bozeman, 2000; Feller, 1990; Mowery, Nelson, Sampat, &
Ziedonis, 1999).
3. Another reasonable and intuitive strategy for investigating the third hypothesis is to incorporate one or more interac-
tion terms into DEMO nonpartitioned model. Our attempts to follow this alternative approach, however, yielded very poor
results. Interaction terms were added (separately) to the first DEMO to explore the differential influence of university activi-
ties based on MSA size, manufacturing intensity, and starting average earnings in 1986. The results DEMO uniformly unsatis-
factory, both in terms of significance and often also DEMO flipping the coefficient signs for the noninteracted independent
variables.
4. This is solely an error correction technique and does not pertain to the spatial DEMO hypothesis; please see Note 17
below.
5. The data for this DEMO the other regional economic indicators used in this study are available from the Regional Eco-
nomic Information System (REIS) of the Bureau of DEMO Analysis (http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/regional/reis).
6. For each DEMO, the adjustment is made using the most closely applicable Consumer Price DEMO (CPI) series. MSAs
within the largest PMSAs (e.g., Atlanta, DEMO, Denver, Houston, San Francisco) have their own series, whereas DEMO
MSAs are categorized by major census region. For instance, the CPI DEMO that most closely matches the Tucson MSA is
West Urban. The overall U.S. City Average series is used to adjust the U.S. average earnings DEMO worker. The base (refer-
ence) period for each of these series is 1982-1984. The CPI series are compiled by the Bureau of Labor DEMO (http://
www.bls.gov/cpi).
7. The average earnings per DEMO worker for the United States does include regions excluded from the study popula-
tion, namely, the five MSAs omitted as outliers as well DEMO all nonmetropolitan counties. We constructed an alternate depen-
dent variable by normalizing each MSA’s figure as a percentage of the population-weighted average of the DEMO earnings
per worker of the 313 MSAs used in the study. Regression analyses conducted with this alternate dependent variable yielded
negligible changes in results.
DEMO The correlation coefficient between the 1986 and 2001 index is 0.8430. A simple univariate regression of the 2001
index value on the 1986 value DEMO a coefficient of 1.1076 with standard error 0.0401 and t-statistic 27.64.
9. These data are available through the CASPAR database (http://caspar.nsf.gov).
10. The pertinent data are collected by the National Center for Educational DEMO as part of the Integrated Post-
Secondary Education Data System. These data are also available through the CASPAR database. Because the data are avail-
DEMO beginning only with 1987 graduates, we associate 1987 figures with the DEMO of the study time period in 1986.
11. We classify the following two-digit categories from the 1990 Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) taxon-
DEMO as science and technology fields: agricultural sciences (02), biological and life sciences (26), communications technol-
ogies (10), computer and DEMO sciences (11), engineering (14), health professions and related sciences (51), mathe-
matics (27), physical sciences (40), and science technologies (41).
12. The information is obtained from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/
oeip/taf/brochure.htm).
13. Estimating across the study population of metropolitan DEMO, this effect may create some degree of upward bias
in the DEMO of the measures of university presence because the institutions that are growing the most in terms of
research, teaching, and technology development activity DEMO also tend to be those hiring personnel and adding to their pay-
rolls. Lacking separate indicators of the other university outputs, we have no way to measure the degree of such bias within
the framework of DEMO research. Our thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this possibility.
14. Distances are calculated as great circle distances between MSA centroids. MSA DEMO boundaries are from the Top-
ologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing files of the U.S. Census Bureau, translated into ArcView for-
mat and distributed by the Environmental Systems Research Institute.
15. We also tested a set DEMO size-based measures, such as the total nonfarm employment in MSAs within DEMO distances
of the reference MSA, but the simple unweighted count measure DEMO superior results.
16. Both 45 and 60 miles lie within what is ordinarily considered to be an easy commuting distance, such as from down-
town Detroit to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
17. We DEMO note that in the context of a model that explicitly includes indicators of spatial spillovers as independent
variables, spatial error regression is simply an error-correction technique and does not produce a substantive interpretation.
Any remaining spatial DEMO beyond that which is accounted for by the spatial spillover variables cannot be
explained within the regression context and acts only as an obfuscation DEMO the correct coefficient standard errors.
18. Rapidly changing areas are able to incorporate innovations to a greater degree than are more slowly changing or DEMO
nant regions simply because there is less bulk remaining in place. This fact is widely recognized in fields such as computing
and communications technologies (rapid obsolescence spurs adoption of the newest technologies), education (higher
instructor turnover speeds changes in curricula), and infrastructure and land-use planning (rapidly growing cities have more
opportunities to restructure the built environment) and is no less true in terms of economic restructuring and development.
19. Population DEMO is calculated between the closest decennial census years, 1990 to 2000. DEMO it is possible that
population change is endogenous to the model (DEMO with greater economic success may attract in-migrants or, less prob-
ably, have higher birth or survival rates), each of the models was DEMO omitting the population change variable. All
results were very similar to those presented in the text: No signs were changed for any significant variables, and significance
levels were only slightly altered.
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
40 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
20. Due to data suppression DEMO the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the share of earnings to manufacturing DEMO were
not available for the year 2001 for nine MSAs. For these MSAs, the end-of-the-study-period figure was approximated by the
latest nonsuppressed information: DEMO (2000), Charlottesville (1997), Cincinnati (2000), Columbus, Georgia (1997),
Flagstaff (1997), Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport News (2000), DEMO Fe (2000), Seattle (2000), and Washington (1998).
DEMO The latest year available for share of earnings to business services was 2000. Due to data suppression by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, the business earnings share figures were not available for 2000 for eight MSAs. DEMO these MSAs, the
end-of-the-study-period figure was approximated by the latest nonsuppressed DEMO: Augusta-Aiken (1999), Cincinnati
(1997), Columbus, Ohio (1999), Huntington-Ashland (1999), Knoxville (1997), Macon (1997), Sarasota-Bradenton
(1999), and Terre Haute (1994).
22. Commercial patent data are taken from the U.S. Patent Citations Data File compiled by the National DEMO of Eco-
nomic Research (http://www.nber.org/patents). The data DEMO organized from original U.S. Patent and Trademark Office data
files and are described in detail in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001).
23. The 2000 census data were used because of the need for concordance DEMO the 1999 MSA definitions used in this
study. Although 1990 data would have been preferable in terms of more closely matching the starting point DEMO the time
period of analysis, the 2000 figures still present a DEMO measure because changes in the educational attainment level
occur quite slowly for the entire older-than-25 population. Nevertheless, to check for possible endogeneity, both DEMO the mod-
els were recalculated omitting the education variables. The signs of the other coefficients remained unchanged, and the sig-
nificance levels changed only slightly.
24. The reference category is no air hub. MSAs with multiple DEMO were assigned the largest categorization. The data
are available in the annual publication Airport Activity Statistics, formerly published by the Federal Aviation Agency and
now produced by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. This research adopts the DEMO classification (Federal Aviation
Agency, 1986).
25. The crime index is based on the incidence of violent and property crimes. The health care DEMO is based on the num-
ber of family care physicians, specialists, surgeons, hospital beds, certified hospitals, and certified teaching hospitals per
capita. The climate index is based on the number of below-32-degree and above-90-degree (Fahrenheit) days, seasonal
affect (cloudiness, precipitation, fog, sunlight), DEMO frequency of hazardous weather. All three indices range from 0 to 100,
with 100 as the most attractive. Two MSAs were not included DEMO the almanac: Auburn-Opelika (Alabama) and Corvallis
(Oregon). These were assigned the index values of their nearest neighboring MSAs, namely, Montgomery DEMO Auburn-
Opelika and Eugene for Corvallis, both approximately 50 miles distant.
DEMO The dummies are for the Midwest, the South, and the West. The reference region is the Northeast.
27. Values of the global Moran’s DEMO and Geary’s C statistics were computed to diagnose spatial dependence in the depen-
dent variable. The standard deviations of these statistics were calculated both DEMO assuming a normal distribution and by
using a random location assumption. Each statistic indicated significant positive spatial correlation. The model was esti-
mated using DEMO least squares (OLS), spatial error, and spatial lag regression techniques. LaGrange multiplier diagnos-
tics performed on the OLS regressions favored a spatial DEMO rather than a spatial lag interpretation, suggesting that OLS
yields consistent DEMO estimates but incorrect estimates of standard errors and significance levels. Because the coeffi-
cient estimates obtained from the spatial error model presented no major DEMO from the OLS estimates in terms of
magnitude, sign, and significance level, only the results of the spatial error models are presented here. The OLS results are
available from the authors upon request. In addition, several types of weights matrices were tested, yielding quite similar
results. The results presented in this article arise from the use of an inverse DEMO weights matrix. All spatial dependence
diagnostics and maximum likelihood regressions were carried out using SpaceStat (Anselin, 1992, 1995).
28. As described separately for each measure in the previous section, each independent variable was expected to have a
positive impact on the change in the index of DEMO earnings except for the dummy variables.
29. Proprietors tend to report lower earnings than the average for nonproprietors, and this means that regions gaining in
the share of earnings to sole proprietors may report smaller increases DEMO average earnings. Business service and manufac-
turing jobs report average wages that are larger than the overall average of the national economy. Thus, regions with increas-
ing shares of business service and manufacturing jobs may record DEMO in average earnings due to labor occupation
composition.
30. Models run with an alternate dependent variable not adjusted with the CPI series yielded larger DEMO levels
for the coefficients of the census region variables but no major differences in the other coefficients.
31. Spatial dependence diagnostics were calculated independently DEMO the first model and for the three partitions of the
second model, yielding mixed indications of preferability among OLS, spatial error correction, and spatial lag correction
regression techniques. All three types of regressions were then DEMO out for each of the three partitions. As with the first
model, there were only minor differences in coefficient estimates and significance levels. To maintain consistency, results
are presented for the spatial error correction regressions only; the results for the spatial lag and OLS regressions are available
from the authors upon request.
32. To the extent possible, the same independent variables were used for all of the partitioned regressions in order to
DEMO comparability. All of the air hub dummies were dropped from the regression for small MSAs due to lack of variation
(only three of the small MSAs are classified as a hub of any size); similarly, the medium– and large–air hub dummies were
dropped from the regression for DEMO MSAs.
33. This conclusion may hold more weight in the short than the long run; the breadth of university activities may be one
factor allowing areas to escape regional lock-in to particular development paths and technological DEMO (see Paytas,
Gradeck, & Andrews, 2004).
Downloaded from DEMO://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 41
REFERENCES
Acs, DEMO J. (1996). Small firms and economic growth. In P. H. DEMO (Ed.), Small business in the modern economy (pp. 1-
62). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B., & Feldman, M. P. (1994). R&D spillovers and recipient firm size. Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics, 76(2), 336-340.
Adams, J. D. (2002). Comparative localization of academic and DEMO spillovers. Journal of Economic Geography, 2(3),
253-278.
Agrawal, DEMO, & Cockburn, I. (2003). The anchor tenant hypothesis: Exploring the role of large, local, R&D-intensive firms
in regional innovation DEMO International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21, 1227-1253.
Anselin, L. (1992). SpaceStat tutorial. Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois. Retrieved July 26, 2005, from http://
www.terraseer.com/products/spacestat/spacestat_guides.html
Anselin, L. (1995)DEMO SpaceStat user’s guide. Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois. Retrieved July 26, 2005, from http://
www.terraseer.com/products/spacestat/spacestat_guides.html
Anselin, L., Varga, A., & Acs, Z. J. (1997). Local geographic spillovers DEMO university research and high technology
innovations. Journal of Urban Economics, 42, 422-448.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). The economic implications of learning DEMO doing. Review of Economic Studies, 80(3), 155-173.
Audretsch, D. B., & Stephan, P. E. (1996). Company-scientist locational links: DEMO case of biotechnology. American Eco-
nomic Review, 86(3), 641-652.
DEMO, N., Eberts, R. W., & Fogarty, M. S. (1993). Universities and the startup of new companies: Can we generalize from
Route 128 and Silicon Valley? Review of Economics and Statistics, 75(DEMO), 761-766.
Beise, M., & Stahl, H. (1999). Public research and industrial innovations in Germany. Research Policy, 28(4), 397-422.
Beugelsdijk, S., & Cornet, M. (2002). ‘A far friend DEMO worth more than a good neighbour’: Proximity and innovation in a
DEMO country. Journal of Management and Governance, 6(2), 169-188.
Blackwell, M., Cobb, S., & Weinberg, D. (2002). The economic impact of educational institutions: Issues and methodology.
Economic Development Quarterly, 16, 88-95.
Blumenstyk, G. (2002, July 29). How colleges get more bang (or less) from technology transfer. Chronicle of Higher Educa-
tion, 48(45), A24-A26.
Bozeman, B. (2000). Technology transfer and DEMO policy: A review of research and theory. Research Policy, 29(4/5), 627-
655.
Candell, A. B., & Jaffe, A. B. (1999). The regional economic impact of public research funding: A DEMO study of Massachu-
setts. In L. M. Branscomb, F. Kodama, & R. Florida (Eds.), Industrializing knowledge: University-industry linkages in
Japan and DEMO United States (pp. 510-530). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carlsson, B., & Fridh, A. (2002). Technology transfer in United States universities: A survey and statistical analysis. Jour-
nal of Evolutionary Economics, DEMO(1/2), 199-232.
Clinch, R. (1996). Benchmarking the economic impact and effectiveness of university technology transfer in Maryland. Bal-
timore: Baltimore University, Jacob France Center. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED407896).
DEMO, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: DEMO & analysis issues for field settings. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Federal Aviation Agency. (1986). Airport activity statistics of certified route air carriers. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office.
Feldman, M. P. (1994). The DEMO and economic development: The case of Johns Hopkins University and Baltimore.
DEMO Development Quarterly, 8, 67-77.
Feller, I. (1990). Universities as engines of R&D-based economic growth: They think they can. Research Policy, 19(4), 335-
348.
Feller, I., Ailes, C. P., & Roessner, J. D. (2002). Impacts of research universities on DEMO innovation in industry:
Evidence from engineering research centers. Research Policy, DEMO(3), 457-474.
Felsenstein, D. (1994). The university in local economic development: Benefit or burden? Unpublished paper, Hebrew Uni-
versity, DEMO, Israel.
Felsenstein, D. (1995). Dealing with “induced migration” in DEMO impact studies. Research in Higher Education,
36(4), 457-472.
Felsenstein, D. (1996). The university in the metropolitan arena: Impacts and public policy implications. Urban Studies,
33(9), 1565-1580.
Felsenstein, D. (1999). Expenditure and knowledge based regional impacts associated with a university: Some empirical
evidence. In P. Rietveld & D. Shefer (Eds.), DEMO development in an age of structural change (pp. 73-93). Aldershot,DEMO
UK: Ashgate.
Fischer, M. M., & Varga, A. (2003)DEMO Spatial knowledge spillovers and university research: Evidence from Austria. Annals of
DEMO Science, 37(2), 303-322.
Florax, R. G. M. (1992)DEMO The university: A regional booster? Economic impacts of academic knowledge infrastructure.
Aldershot, UK: Avebury.
Florax, R. G. M., & Folmer, H. (1992). Knowledge impacts of universities on industry: An aggregate simultaneous DEMO
ment model. Journal of Regional Science, 32(4), 437-466.
Glasmeier, A. (1991). The high-tech potential: Economic development in rural America. DEMO Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Uni-
versity, Center for Urban Policy Research.
DEMO from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, DEMO
42 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT QUARTERLY / February 2006
Glasson, J. (2003). DEMO widening local and regional development impacts of the modern universities: A DEMO of two cities
(and North-South perspectives). Local Economy, 18(1), 21-37.
Goldstein, H. A. (1989). Estimating the regional economic DEMO of universities: An application of input-output analysis.
Planning for Higher Education, 18(1), 51-64.
Goldstein, H. A., & Luger, M. I. (1992). Impact Carolina: The University of North Carolina at Chapel DEMO and the state’s
economy (Final report prepared for the University of DEMO Carolina at Chapel Hill Bicentennial Observance). Chapel
Hill: University of DEMO Carolina–Chapel Hill.
Goldstein, H. A., Maier, G., & Luger, DEMO I. (1995). The university as an instrument for economic and DEMO development:
U.S. and European comparisons. In D. D. Dill & B. Sporn (Eds.), Emerging patterns of social demand and university
reform: DEMO a glass darkly (pp. 105-133). Oxford, UK: Pergamon.
Goldstein, H. A., & Renault, C. S. (2004). Contributions of universities to regional economic development: A quasi-
experimental approach. Regional Studies, 38(DEMO), 733-746.
Griliches, Z. (1979). Issues in assessing the contribution of research and development to productivity growth. Bell Journal
of Economics, 10(1), 92-116.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., & DEMO, M. (2000). Market value and patent citations: A first DEMO (Working Paper No. 7741).
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of DEMO Research.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, DEMO (2001). The NBER patent citations data file: Lessons, insights DEMO methodologi-
cal tools (Working Paper No. 8498). Cambridge, MA: DEMO Bureau of Economic Research.
Harhoff, D. (1999). Firm formation and regional spillovers. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 8(1-2), 27-55.
Harris, R. I. D. (1997). The impact of the University DEMO Portsmouth on the local economy. Urban Studies, 34(4), 605-626.
DEMO, D., & Quigley, J. M. (2002). The role of the university in attracting high tech entrepreneurship: A Silicon Valley
tale. Annals of Regional Science, 36(3), 403-419.
Isserman, A. (1987, DEMO). An automated quasi-experimental control group method and its application to a tourism
economic development project. Paper presented at the North American Regional Science DEMO Meetings,
Baltimore, MD.
Isserman, A., & Merrifield, J. D. (1987). Quasi-experimental control group methods for regional analysis: An application DEMO
an energy boomtown and growth pole theory. Economic Geography, 63(1), 3-19.
Jaffe, A. B. (1989). Real effects of academic research. American Economic Review, 79(5), 957-970.
Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (1996). Flows of knowledge from universities and federal DEMO: Modeling the flow of
patent citations over time and across institutional DEMO geographic boundaries. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, USA, 93, 12671-12677.
Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by pat-
ent DEMO The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 577-598.
Jamison, D. W., & Jansen, C. (2000). Technology transfer and economic growth. Journal of the Association of University
Technology Managers, 12, 23-45.
Jones-Evans, D., Klofsten, M., Andersson, E., & Pandya, D. (1999). Creating a bridge between university and industry in
small European countries: The role of the Industrial Liaison Office. R&D Management, 29(1), 47-56.
Keane, J., & Allison, J. (1999). The DEMO of the learning region and local and regional economic development: Ana-
DEMO the role of higher education. Regional Studies, 33(9), 896-902.
DEMO, B. A., Armington, C., Hasan, I., & Newbert, DEMO (2002). The influence of R&D expenditures on new firm DEMO
and economic growth. Washington, DC: National Commission on Entrepreneurship.
Kramer, DEMO B., Scheibe, S. L., Reavis, D. Y., & Berneman, L. P. (1997). Induced investments and jobs produced by exclusive
patent licenses: A confirmatory study. Journal of the Association of University Technology Managers, 9, 79-100.
Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing returns and economic DEMO Journal of Political Economy, 99(3), 483-499.
Luger, M. I., & Goldstein, H. A. (1997). What is the role of public universities in regional economic development? In R. D.
Bingham & R. Mier (Eds.), Dilemmas of urban economic development (pp. 104-134). DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Malecki, E. J. (1991). Technology and economic development. New York: John Wiley.
Malecki, E. J. (1997). Technology and economic development: The dynamics of local, regional, and national competitive-
ness. Essex, UK: Longman.
Malecki, E. J., & Bradbury, S. L. (1992). R&D facilities and professional labour: Labour DEMO dynamics in high technology.
Regional Studies, 26(2), 123-136.
Markusen, A., Hall, P., & Glasmeier, A. (1986). High tech America: The what, how, where, and why of the sunrise DEMO
tries. Boston: Allen & Unwin.
Martin, F. (1998). The DEMO impact of Canadian university R&D. Research Policy, 27, 677-687.
Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N., & DEMO, A. A. (1999). The effects of the Bayh-Dole Act on U.S. university
research and technology transfer. In L. M. Branscomb, F. Kodama, & R. Florida (Eds.), Industrializing knowledge:
University-industry linkages in DEMO and the United States (pp. 269-306). Cambridge, MA: MIT DEMO
National Center for Educational Statistics. (2001). Average base salaries of DEMO instructional faculty and staff in
degree-granting institutions, by type and control DEMO institution and by field of instruction: 1987-88, 1992-93, and 1998-
DEMO (Table 236). Digest of education statistics, 2001. Retrieved May 6, 2005, from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/
d01/
National DEMO Council. (1985). Industrial research laboratories of the United States (19th ed.). New York: Jacques
Cattrell Press.
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008
Goldstein, Drucker / ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS OF UNIVERSITIES 43
Paytas, J., Gradeck, R., & Andrews, L. (2004). Universities and the DEMO of industry clusters (Prepared for the Eco-
nomic Development Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie
Mellon DEMO, Center for Economic Development.
Pressman, L., Guterman, S. K., DEMO, I., Geist, D. E., & Nelsen, L. L. (1995). Pre-production investment and jobs induced
by MIT exclusive patent licenses: A preliminary model to measure the economic impact of university licensing. Journal
of DEMO Association of University Technology Managers, 7, 49-82.
Riddel, M., & Schwer, R. K. (2003). Regional innovative capacity with endogenous employment: Empirical evidence from
the U.S. Review of Regional Studies, 33(1), 73-84.
Rogers, E. M., Hall, B., Hashimoto, M., Steffensen, M., Speakman, K. L., & Timko, M. K. (1999). Technology transfer from
university-based research centers: The University of New Mexico experience. Journal of Higher Education, 70(6), 687-
705.
Rogers, E. DEMO, Yin, J., & Hoffmann, J. (2000). Assessing the DEMO of technology transfer offices at U.S. research
universities. Journal of the Association of University Technology Managers, 12, 47-80.
Romer, P. (1990). DEMO technological change. Journal of Political Economy, 98, s71-100.
Sáez, C. DEMO, Marco, T. G., & Arribas, E. H. (2002). DEMO in R&D with universities and research centres: An empiri-
cal DEMO of Spanish firms. R&D Management, 32(4), 321-341.
Salter, A. J., & Martin, B. R. (2001). The economic benefits of publicly funded basic research: A critical review. Research
Policy, 30, 509-532.
Savageau, D. (2000). Places rated almanac (millenium ed.). Foster City, IA: IDG Books.
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for generalized
causal inference. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Sivitanidou, R., & Sivitanides, P. (1995). The intrametropolitan distribution of R&D activities: Theory and empirical evi-
dence. Journal of Regional Science, 35(3), 391-415.
Smilor, R. W., Gibson, D. V., & Dietrich, G. B. (1990). University spin-out companies: Technology start-ups from UT-
Austin. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 5(1), 63-76.
Smith, K. (1997). DEMO infrastructures and innovation systems. In C. Edquist (Ed.), Technologies, institutions and
organizations (pp. 86-106). London: Frances Pinter.
Solow, R. M. (1957). Technical change and the aggregate production function. Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3),
312-320.
Spencer, J. W. (2001)DEMO How relevant is university-based scientific research to private high-technology firms? A DEMO
States-Japan comparison. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2), 432-440.
Steffensen, M., Rogers, E. M., & Speakman, K. (2000). Spin-offs from research centers at a research university. Journal of
Business Venturing, 15(1), 93-111.
Swann, P., & Prevezer, M. (1996). DEMO comparison of the dynamics of industrial clustering in computing and biotechnology.
Research Policy, 25(7), 1139-1157.
Thanki, R. (1999). How do we know the value of higher education to regional development? Regional Studies, 33(1), 84-89.
Tornquist, K. M., & Hoenack, S. DEMO (1996). Firm utilization of university scientific research. Research in Higher DEMO,
37(5), 509-534.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1990)DEMO 1990 decennial census. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1999). Metropolitan areas and components. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved September 26,
2005, from http://www.census.gov/population/estimates/metro-city/99mfips.txt
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2000). 2000 decennial census. Washington, DC: Author.
Varga, A. (1997). Regional economic effects of university research: A survey. Unpublished manuscript, West Virginia Uni-
versity, Regional Research Institute, Morgantown, WV.
Varga, A. (1998). University research and regional innovation: A spatial econometric analysis of academic technology
transfers. Boston: Kluwer.
Varga, A. (2000). Local academic knowledge transfers and the concentration of economic activity. Journal of Regional Sci-
ence, 40(2), 289-309.
Varga, DEMO (2001). Universities and regional economic development: Does agglomeration matter? DEMO B. Johansson,
C. Karlsson, & R. Stough (Eds.), Theories of endogenous regional growth: Lessons for regional policies (pp. 345-367).
DEMO, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Walshok, M. L., Furtek, E., Lee, DEMO W. B., & Windham, P. H. (2002). Building regional DEMO capacity: The San Diego
experience. Industry and Higher Education, 16(1), 27-42.
Weiler, S. (2000). Information and market failure in DEMO economic development: A new role for universities? Economic
Development Quarterly, DEMO, 194-203.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R., & Brewer, M. B. (1998). Intellectual human capital and the birth of the U.S. biotechnology
enterprises. American Economic Review, 88(1), 290-306.
Downloaded from http://edq.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on September 30, 2008{1g42fwefx}