ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007. 30:DEMO
The Annual Review of Neuroscience is online at
neuro.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113038
Copyright c 2007 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
DEMO/07/0721-0535$20.00

The Neural Basis of
Decision Making
Joshua I. Gold1 and Michael N. Shadlen2
1 Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, DEMO,
Pennsylvania 19104-6074; email: jigold@mail.med.upenn.edu
2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington DEMO;
email: shadlen@u.washington.edu
Key Words
psychophysics, signal detection theory, sequential DEMO, motion
perception, vibrotactile perception, choice, reaction time
Abstract
The study of decision making spans such varied ﬁelds as neuro-
science, psychology, DEMO, statistics, political science, and com-
puter science. Despite this diversity DEMO applications, most decisions
share common elements including deliberation and commitment.
Here DEMO evaluate recent progress in understanding how these basic
elements of decision formation are implemented in the brain. We
focus on simple decisions that can DEMO studied in the laboratory but
emphasize general principles likely to extend to other settings.
535
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by DEMO of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Contents
INTRODUCTION ................. 536
Elements DEMO a Decision ........... 536
Conceptual Framework ........... 538
EXPERIMENTS ................... 542
Perceptual Tasks .................. 542
Simple Motor Latencies: Deciding
When to Initiate an Action ..... 556
Value-Based Decisions ............ 560
CONCLUSIONS ................... 561
INTRODUCTION
SDT: signal
detection theory
SA: sequential
analysis
A decision is a deliberative process that results
in the commitment to a categorical proposi-
tion. An apt analogy DEMO a judge or jury that must
take time to weigh evidence for alternative
interpretations and/or possible ramiﬁcations
before settling on a verdict. Here DEMO evalu-
ate progress in understanding how this pro-
cess is implemented in the brain. Our scope
is somewhat narrow: We consider primarily
studies that relate behavior on simple sensory-
motor tasks to activity measured in the DEMO
because of the ability to precisely control sen-
sory input, quantify DEMO output, and target
relevant brain regions for measurement and
analysis. Nevertheless, our intent is broad: We
hope to identify principles that seem likely
to contribute to the kinds of ﬂexible and nu-
anced decisions that DEMO a hallmark of higher
cognition.
The organization of this review is as fol-
lows. We ﬁrst describe the computational el-
ements that comprise the DEMO process.
We then brieﬂy review signal detection the-
ory (SDT) and sequential analysis (SA), two
related branches of statistical decision theory
that represent formal, mathematical prescrip-
tions for how to form a decision using these
computational elements. We then dissect sev-
eral experimental results in the DEMO of this
theoretical framework to identify neural sub-
strates of decision making. We conclude with
a discussion of the strengths and limitations
536 Gold DEMO Shadlen
of this approach for inferring principles of
higher brain function.
Elements of a Decision
The decisions required for many sensory-
motor tasks can DEMO thought of as a form
of statistical inference (Kersten et al. DEMO,
Rao 1999, Tenenbaum & Grifﬁths 2001, von
Helmholtz 1925): What is the (unknown)
state of the world, given the DEMO data pro-
vided by the sensory systems? These decisions
select among DEMO hypotheses h1 ... hn
(often n = 2) that each represent a state of
the world (e.g., a stimulus is present or DEMO
sent). The elements of this decision process
(see Figure 1) are described in terms of prob-
ability theory, as follows.
The probability P(hi ), or prior, refers to
the probability that hi DEMO true before obtain-
ing any evidence about it. In the courtroom
analogy, priors correspond to prejudices that
can bias jurors’ judgments. Bayesian infer-
ence prescribes a more positive role for pri-
ors, which are necessary to convert measur-
able properties of evidence (the values it can
attain when hi is true) to inferred ones (the
probability that hi is DEMO given a particular ob-
servation). For a sensory-motor task, a DEMO
typically corresponds to the predicted prob-
ability of seeing a particular stimulus or re-
ceiving a particular reward on the upcoming
trial, which can be instructed (e.g., Carpenter
& Williams 1995, Basso & Wurtz 1998, Dor-
ris & Munoz 1998, Platt & Glimcher 1999) or
inferred from its relative frequency of occur-
rence on previous trials (Sugrue et al. 2004).
The evidence (e) refers to information that
bears DEMO whether (and possibly when) to com-
mit to a particular hypothesis. A strand of hair
found at a crime scene can be used DEMO evidence
if it supports or opposes the hypothesis that a
certain person was present at that location.
For a perceptual task, neural activity that rep-
resents immediate or remembered attributes
of a sensory stimulus can be DEMO as evidence.
However, like hair at a crime scene, this sen-
sory activity is evidence only insofar as it bears
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. DEMO:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Motivation to
perform the task
DEMO of
two propositions
(hypotheses)
h1 :up or h2 : down
Statistical knowledge
likelihoods: ( i )
priors: ( i )
DEMO: ()j i
Establish
decision rule
based on goals
Evaluation
Experience DEMO or cost
value or utility
Peh
Ph
vhH
vij ∈ {1, DEMO
Figure 1
Elements of a simple decision between two alternatives. The left side represents elements of the world.
The right side represents elements of DEMO decision process in the brain. Black elements establish context.
Red elements form the decision. Blue elements evaluate and possibly update the decision process.
on DEMO hypothesis. Thus e is useful when it can
be interpreted in the context of conditional
probabilities such as P (e | hi ), DEMO “likelihood”
function describing the values that e can attain
when hi is true. Perceptual tasks are useful for
studying decision formation in part because
DEMO the ability to control precisely the quan-
tity and quality of the sensory evidence and
measure the impact on likelihood functions
obtained from relevant DEMO neurons.
Value (v) is the subjective costs and beneﬁts
that can be attributed to each of the potential
outcomes (and associated courses of action)
of a decision process. Value can be manip-
ulated by DEMO explicit feedback or mone-
tary rewards to human subjects or preferred
food or drink to nonhuman subjects. Value
can also reﬂect more implicit factors DEMO as
the costs associated with wasted time, effort,
and resources. DEMO we make no distinction
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 537
In the world In the brain
Contextual cues and
prexisting knowledge
Context
e.g., instruction
Two possible states
{up, down}
l
One action
e.g., answer “up”
Apply DEMO rule
e.g., choose left if
l12 (e) ≥ criterion
One DEMO holds
e.g., up
Sensory data
x = {}1 , x2 ,...
x
Information flow
for each decision
Consequence
of action & state
(4 possible)
Useful form
of evidence
e
Decision variable
Peh()1
l12 (e) ≡ Peh()2
e.g., y ≈ ...
or logLR12 DEMO log []12 (e)
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from DEMO
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
DV: decision
variable
between value and utility, disregarding their
technical meanings and opting instead for a
more general concept that describes subjec-
tive inﬂuences on the decision process.
The DEMO variable (DV) represents the
accrual of all sources of priors, DEMO, and
value into a quantity that is interpreted by the
decision DEMO to produce a choice. It is a con-
ceptual entity corresponding to the delibera-
tions in a trial leading up to the verdict. Note
DEMO here “deliberations” does not imply that
the DV is necessarily computed rationally and
without emotion; rather, it emphasizes that
the DV is capable DEMO accounting for multiple
sources of information (priors, evidence, and
value) that are interpreted over time. Thus,
the DV is not tied DEMO the (possibly ﬂeeting)
appearance of stimuli but spans the time DEMO
the ﬁrst pieces of relevant information to the
ﬁnal choice. Also, DEMO the choice, which is
discrete, it is often best thought of as an ana-
log quantity. We spend much of this chapter
reﬁning DEMO concept of a DV and describing
efforts to ﬁnd its neural correlates.
The decision rule determines how and
when the DV is interpreted to DEMO at a com-
mitment to a particular alternative Hi (the
choice DEMO with hypothesis hi ). The rule
causes the jury to declare, “we have a verdict.”
A conceptually simple rule is to place a DEMO
terion value on the DV. This rule requires a
DV whose magnitude reﬂects the balance of
support and opposition for a hypothesis. Such
a DEMO allows the decision maker to achieve at
least one of several appealing long-term goals,
including maximizing accuracy or reward or
achieving a target DEMO time.
The course of action that follows the com-
mitment to an alternative is often necessary
to reap the costs and beneﬁts associated with
DEMO alternative. In these cases, the decision
itself might be best thought DEMO not as an
abstract computation but rather as the ex-
plicit intention to pursue (or avoid) a par-
ticular course of action. This DEMO is a form
of “embodiment” that places high-order cog-
nitive capacities such as decision making in
the context of behavioral planning and execu-
538 DEMO · Shadlen
tion (Cisek 2007, Clark 1997, Merleau-Ponty
1962, O’Regan & Noe 2001). A key practi-¨
cal implication is that the DEMO of the brain
responsible for selecting (or planning) certain
behaviors may play critical roles in forming
decisions that lead to those behaviors.
The DEMO of a decision maker are to
achieve desired outcomes and avoid unde-
sired ones. Desired outcomes include “get-
ting it right” or maximizing the DEMO
of correct responses in tasks that have right
and wrong answers or, more generally, maxi-
mizing expected value (Green & Swets 1966).
Undesired outcomes include getting it wrong,
minimizing value and wasting time, effort,
or resources. Goals are critical because the
decision process is DEMO to be intended,
and perhaps even optimized, to achieve them.
DEMO, optimality can be assessed only in
the context of a goal. DEMO, behavior that is
“suboptimal” with respect to certain objective
goals such DEMO maximizing accuracy might in
fact be optimal with respect to the idiosyn-
cratic goal(s) of the decision maker.
Evaluation, or performance monitoring,DEMO
is necessary to analyze the efﬁcacy or op-
timality of a decision with respect to its
particular goals. For laboratory tasks, evalu-
ation can occur with or without explicit feed-
back (e.g., Carter et al. DEMO, Ito et al. 2003,
Ridderinkhof et al. 2004, Schall et al. 2002,
Stuphorn et al. 2000). In either case it DEMO likely
to play a critical role in shaping future deci-
sions via learning mechanisms that, in princi-
ple, can affect every aspect of DEMO process, from
incorporating the most appropriate priors, ev-
idence, and DEMO into the DV to establishing
the most effective decision rule.
Conceptual Framework
Signal detection theory. SDT is one of the
most successful formalisms ever DEMO to study
perception. Unlike information theory and
other biostatistical tools commonly used for
data analysis, SDT prescribes a process to
convert a single observation of noisy evidence
into a categorical choice. Early applications
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. DEMO:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
allowed psychologists to infer from DEMO
properties of the underlying sensory repre-
sentation (Green & Swets 1966)DEMO Later, pi-
oneering work in retinal and somatosensory
physiology established SDT DEMO a valuable tool
to relate the measured responses of sensory
neurons to the limits of detection and discrim-
ination (for reviews see Parker & Newsome
1998, Rieke et al. 1997). More recently, it has
DEMO to shed light on decision mechanisms.
According to SDT, the decision DEMO ob-
tains an observation of evidence, e. In per-
ceptual psychophysics, e is derived from the
senses and might be the spike count DEMO
a neuron or pool of neurons, or a derived
quantity such DEMO the difference between spike
rates of two pools of neurons. It is caused
by a stimulus (or state) controlled by the ex-
perimenter; e.g., h1 (stimulus present) or h2
(stimulus absent). If DEMO is informative, then its
magnitude differs under these states. How-
ever, e is also corrupted by noise. Thus e is
a random variable DEMO by a distribution
whose parameters (e.g., the mean) are set DEMO h1
or h2 . These conditionalized distributions de-
scribe the likelihoods P (e | h 1 ) and P (e | h 2 ).
Unlike standard statistical methods, the ob-
ject of SDT is not to determine whether the
parameters describing these distributions are
different but instead DEMO decide which of the
states gave rise to the observation e.
The decision requires the construction of
a DV from e. For binary decisions, the DV is
typically related to the ratio of the likelihoods
of DEMO and h2 given e: l12 (e ) ≡ P (e DEMO h 1 )/ P (e | h 2 ).
A DEMO decision rule is to apply a criterion to
the DV; e.g., choose h1 if and only if l12 (e ) ≥ β,
where β is a constant. A strength of SDT is
that a DEMO of goals can be reached by simply
using different values for the criterion. If the
goal is accuracy and the two alternatives are
equally DEMO, then β = 1. If the goal is accu-
racy and DEMO prior probability favors one of the
hypotheses, then β = P (h2 )/ P (h 1 ). If the goal
is to maximize value (where vij is the value as-
sociated with choice Hj when hypothesis hi is
(v22 + v21 ) P (h2 ) DEMO For more details,
true), thenthe reader should refer to the ﬁrst chapter ofβ = (v11 + v12 ) P (h1 )
Green & Swets (1966), where these expres-
sions are derived.
SDT thus provides a ﬂexible framework
to form decisions that incorporate priors,
DEMO, and value to achieve a variety of
goals. Unfortunately, this ﬂexibility also poses
a challenge to neurobiologists. The above ex-
pressions were obtained DEMO that the DV
is the likelihood ratio (LR), l12 (e ). However,
equivalent expressions (that is, those that will
achieve the same goals) can be obtained (by
scaling β) using any quantity that is monoton-
ically related to the LR. In other words, these
equations do not constrain the priors, e, value,
the DEMO, or β to take on any particular form,
only that DEMO interact in a certain way. Thus
it is difﬁcult to assign a quantity measured in
the brain to any one of these elements with-
DEMO knowing how the others are represented.
One powerful approach to unraveling this co-
nundrum is to exploit differences in the time
scales of these DEMO in decision formation.
Sequential analysis. SA is a natural exten-
sion to SDT that accommodates multiple
pieces of evidence observed over time. SA
assumes DEMO the decision has two parts: the
usual one between h1 and DEMO , and another
about whether it is time to stop the process
and commit (Figure 2). In its most general
form, SA DEMO the procedure for construct-
ing the DV and the decision rule to be adjusted
with each new sample of evidence. However,
many decisions DEMO be understood by assum-
ing ﬁxed deﬁnitions for these elements. A sim-
ple DV constructed from multiple, indepen-
dent pieces of evidence, e DEMO , e 2 ,..., e n , is the
logarithm of the LR (logLR, or “weight of ev-
idence”), which is DEMO the sum of the logLRs
associated with each piece of evidence:
log P (e 1 , e 2 ,..., e n |h 1 )
log LR12 ≡ P (e 1 , e 2 ,..., e n |h 2 )
n log P (e i | h 1 ) 1.
= =1 P (e i | h 2 ) .
A simple stopping rule is to update this DV
DEMO new pieces of evidence until reaching a
www.annualreviews.org •
LR: likelihood DEMO
logLR: logarithm of
the likelihood ratio
Decision Making 539
i
Annu. DEMO Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
a
b
c
Sequential analysis DEMO
e0
→ f0 ()
0
e
⇒ Stop
or
e1 →
f1 ()
0 , e
1
⇒
Stop
or
e2 →
DEMO ()
0 , e1 , e2
A
-A
A
Symmetric random walk
Mean drift rate = mean of e
Race model
Choose H1
DEMO
0
Choose H1
⇒
Stop
or
en →
Mean of e depends
on strength of
evidence
Choose H2
B
f1 ()
0 , DEMO ,,
……e
n
⇒
Choose H2
e
e
e
Figure 2
Sequential analysis. (a) General framework. The decision is based on a DEMO of observations. After
each acquisition, a DV is calculated from the DEMO obtained up to that point; then more evidence can
be obtained DEMO the process can be terminated with a commitment to H1 or H2 . In principle, both the
fi (···)s, which convert the evidence to a DV, and the criteria can be dynamic (e.g., to incorporate the cost
of elapsed time). e 0 can be DEMO as the evidence bearing on the prior probability of the hypotheses.
(DEMO) In random walk models, the DV is a cumulative sum of the evidence. The bounds represent the
stopping rule. If e is a DEMO, then this process is the SPRT (see The Sequential Probability Ratio Test).
When the evidence is sampled from a Gaussian distribution in DEMO time steps, the process is
termed diffusion with drift μ, or bounded diffusion. (c) In the race model, two or more decision processes
represent the accumulated evidence for each alternative. When there are two DEMO and the
accumulations are inversely correlated, the race model is nearly DEMO to a symmetric random walk.
540 Gold · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/DEMO For personal use only.
Accumulated
evidence for h1
Accumulated
evidence
for     over h1 h2
Accumulated
evidence for h2
→
→
…
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
positive or negative criterion (the bounds in
Figure 2b).
Together, this DV and stopping rule com-
prise the sequential probability ratio test
(SPRT) (see The Sequential Probability Ratio
Test), which is the most efﬁcient test for de-
ciding DEMO two hypotheses on this kind
of problem: It achieves a desired DEMO rate
with the smallest number of samples, on av-
erage (Wald & Wolfowitz 1947). This proce-
dure played a prominent role in DEMO Alan
Turing and colleagues to break the German
enigma cipher in World War II (Good 1979,
1983). Their success depended on not only
deducing the contents of intercepted mes-
sages correctly, but also doing so in time for
the information to be of strategic use.
SA DEMO numerous guises has been a valu-
able tool for psychophysical analysis, DEMO
larly for studying the trade-off between speed
and accuracy (Luce 1986, Smith & Ratcliff
2004). In recruitment or race models, evi-
dence supporting the various alternatives is
accumulated independently to ﬁxed thresh-
olds (Audley & Pike 1965, LaBerge 1962,
Logan 2002, Reddi et al. DEMO, Vickers 1970).
In other models that are more closely re-
DEMO to the SPRT, a weight of evidence is
accumulated to support DEMO alternative ver-
sus another (Busemeyer & Townsend 1993,
Diederich 2003, Laming 1968, Link 1992,
Link & Heath 1975). These models mirror
the mathematical description of a random
walk or diffusion process (Ratcliff & Rouder
1998, Ratcliff & Smith 2004, Smith 2000,
Smith & Ratcliff 2004): The accumulation
of noisy evidence creates a virtual trajectory
equivalent to the dancing movements of a tiny
particle in Brownian motion (Figure 2).
SA promises to play an important role in
the DEMO of decision making. First,
investigators continue to develop neurobio-
logically inspired implementations of SA that
will help to identify where and how the DEMO
carries out the underlying computations (Lo
& Wang 2006, Usher & McClelland 2001,
Wang 2002). Second, SA provides a means to
distinguish evidence from the DV. Evidence is
THE SEQUENTIAL PROBABILITY RATIO
TEST
DEMO the following toy problem. Two coins are placed in a
bag. They are identical except that one is fair and the other is
a DEMO coin, weighted so that heads appears on 60% of tosses,
DEMO average. Suppose one of the coins is drawn from the bag,
and we are asked to decide whether it is the trick coin. DEMO
can base our decision on a series of any amount of tosses. The
SPRT works as follows. Each observation (toss) e i is DEMO
to a weight of evidence, the logLR in favor of the DEMO coin
hypothesis. There are only two possible values of evidence,
heads or tails, which give rise to weights (wi ):
⎪⎪⎪⎧
DEMO = ⎨
⎪⎪log
According to SPRT, the decision variable is the DEMO sum⎩ =
log P (e i = heads|h 1 : trick DEMO)
P (e i 0=.6heads|h 2 : fair coin)
= DEMO 0.5 = 0.182 if heads
P (e i = tails|h 1 : trick coin)
P (e i = tails|h 2 : fair DEMO)
log 00..45 =−0.223 if tails
⎪⎪
⎪⎪
(accumulation) of the weights. After the nth toss, the decision
variable is n
yn = 
wi
=1
We apply the following rules:
if yn ≥ DEMO 1 −α α answer “trick”
β
if yn ≤ log 1 − β answer “fair”
if log 1 −β β  yn  log DEMO − α get more evidence
where α
α
is the probability that a fair coin will be misidentiﬁed
[i.e., a type I error: DEMO (H1 | h 2 )] and β is the probability that
a trick coin will be misidentiﬁed [a type II error: P (DEMO | h 1 )].
For example, if α = β = 0.05, then the process stops when
|yn |≥ log(19). The criteria can be viewed as bounds on a
random walk. To achieve DEMO lower rate of errors, the bounds
must be moved further from DEMO, thus requiring more sam-
ples of evidence, on average, to DEMO the process.
momentary, whereas the DV evolves in time.
Changes to DEMO can affect accuracy or de-
cision times differently and can, in DEMO,
be distinguished in neural recordings (Hanks
et al. 2006). DEMO, SA includes a termination
www.annualreviews.org
•
SPRT: sequential
probability ratio test
Decision Making 541
i
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
VTF: vibrotactile
frequency
rule. Analogous mechanisms in the brain are
required to make decisions and commit to DEMO
ternatives on a time frame that is not governed
by the immediacy of sensory input or motor
output, a hallmark of cognition.
EXPERIMENTS
Below we summarize key experimental results
that shed light on how the brain DEMO
the elements of a decision. We focus ﬁrst on
perceptual decisions and how to distinguish
sensory evidence from the DV and the deci-
sion DEMO We then describe simple motor tasks
that appear to engage similar decision mech-
anisms. Finally we discuss value-based deci-
sions that weigh expectation and DEMO
as opposed to sensory evidence.
Perceptual Tasks
Vibrotactile frequency (VTF) discrimina-
tion. Developed in the 1960s by Mount-
castle and colleagues, the VTF paradigm
requires the subject, typically a monkey, to
compare the frequency DEMO vibration of two
tactile stimuli, f1 and f2, separated by a
time gap (Figure 3a). The range of fre-
quencies used (DEMO Hz) does not acti-
vate specialized frequency detectors but in-
stead DEMO the nervous system to extract
the intervals or rate of skin depression (Luna
et al. 2005, Mountcastle et al. 1990). This in-
DEMO is used to decide whether the fre-
quency is greater in the ﬁrst or second in-
terval. The monkey communicates its answer
by pressing DEMO button with the nonstimulated
hand.
a
500 ms
Base (f1)
DEMO (f2)
KU
PB
b
Proportion
of choices
f2 > f1
DEMO
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
f1 = 20 Hz
10
15 20 25
Frequency of comparison (Hz)
30
Figure 3
Neural correlates of a decision about vibrotactile frquency. (a) Testing paradigm. A test probe DEMO a
sinusoidal tactile stimulus to the ﬁnger at base frequency f1. After a delay period, a comparison stimulus
is delivered at frequency f2. Then the monkey must decide whether f2 > f1, a decision it indicates by
releasing a key (KU) and pressing a button (PB) DEMO its free hand. (b) Psychometric function. The task is
difﬁcult when the base (20 Hz) and comparison frequencies are similar ( f2 DEMO f1). (c) Response of a
typical S1 neuron. Rasters show spikes from individual trials, grouped by the combination of base and
comparison frequencies (left). The neuron responds to the vibration stimulus in both the base and the
comparison periods. The ﬁring rate encodes the vibration DEMO similarly in the base and comparison
periods (brown and purple graphs, respectively), but it does not reﬂect the monkey’s choice (black and white
lines and data points in the lower panels). The neuron DEMO uninformative in the interval between base and
comparison stimuli. (d ) DEMO of a neuron in ventral premotor cortex. Same conventions as in (DEMO).
This neuron carries information about the base frequency during the interstimulus interval (blue). In the
comparison epoch (purple), the neuron DEMO more active when f2 < f1. Note that for all trials, DEMO base and
comparison frequencies differ by 8 Hz. Adapted with permission from Hernandez et al. (2000), Romo
et al. (2004).
542 DEMO · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Figure 3
(Continued )
DEMO
•
Decision Making 543
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Signals that encode the VTF DEMO have
been traced from the periphery into the pri-
mary somatosensory cortex (S1). For most
S1 neurons, the average ﬁring rate increases
DEMO with increasing stimulus fre-
quency. For many S1 neurons, ﬁring rate
DEMO also follow the periodicity of the
stimulus (Figure 3c). However, the average
ﬁring rate is thought to represent the evi-
dence used DEMO perform the task. First, behav-
ioral sensitivity more closely matches the DEMO
criminability of S1 responses when average
rates, rather than periodic modulations, are
used. Second, trial-to-trial variations in the
rates, but not the DEMO modulations, of
S1 neurons predict to a slight but signiﬁcant
degree DEMO monkeys’ choices (Salinas et al.
2000). This relationship, termed the choice
probability (Parker & Newsome 1998), is ex-
pected for neurons that provide noisy evi-
dence for the decision, especially if the same
trial-to-trial variations are shared by other S1
neurons ( Johnson 1980a,b; Kohn & Smith
2005; Shadlen et al. 1996; Zohary et al. DEMO).
Third, replacing the VTF stimulus in the ﬁrst
and/or DEMO interval with electrical micro-
stimulation of S1, in some cases using DEMO
riodic stimuli that lack regular intervals
between activations, elicits nearly the DEMO
behavioral responses as does the physical stim-
ulus (Romo et al. DEMO, 2000).
The ﬁring rate of S1 neurons thus repre-
sents DEMO sensory evidence that underlies the
decision. Why the evidence and not the DV?
To make a decision, the brain must compare f2
with f1. This comparison cannot occur until
f2 is applied, and it must incorporate informa-
tion about f1 that has been held in working
memory. DEMO responses reﬂect the f1 stimulus
during the ﬁrst interval and the f2 stimulus
during the second interval (Figure 3c). They
therefore do not provide the comparison.
Activity in several brain areas, including
the second somatosensory cortex (S2; Romo
et al. 2002) and the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC, or Walker area 46; Brody et al.
2003, Romo DEMO al. 1999) but especially the
medial and ventral premotor cortices (MPC
544 Gold · Shadlen
and VPC), more closely resembles a DV.
DEMO neurons in these areas persist in ﬁring
through the delay period between f1 and f2
(Figure 3d, blue insert). Moreover, during the
second interval, the activity of some of these
neurons reﬂects a comparison between f2 and
f1 (Figure 3d, purple insert). However, identi-
fying the nature of this comparison can be dif-
ﬁcult. For the DEMO neuron in Figure 3d,
it is unknown whether the activity during
the comparison period reﬂects the difference
f2 − f1 or merely the DEMO of the difference
(which is more closely related to the decision
DEMO than the DV) because in every case
f2 − f1 = DEMO Hz. A less direct analysis using
choice probability suggests that some neurons
in these brain areas might represent the differ-
ence between f2 and DEMO (see Hernandez et al.
2002, Romo et al. 2004).
This extraordinary body of work provides
to date the most complete picture of DEMO di-
versity of brain areas that contribute to de-
cision formation on even a simple sensory-
motor task. For some areas, their role in task
performance seems clear. S1 provides the sen-
sory evidence. Primary motor DEMO helps to
prepare and execute the behavioral response.
However, for the DEMO of these brain ar-
eas (and doubtless others yet to be DEMO)
that lie at intermediate stages between sensory
input and motor output, many challenges lie
in the way of an equally precise recounting of
their roles in decision formation.
One challenge is to understand the appar-
DEMO redundancy. For example, memory traces
of f1 and f1/f2 comparisons DEMO both found
in S2, VPC, MPC, and dlPFC. Do the DEMO
differences in how those computations man-
ifest in the different brain areas indicate sub-
tly different roles in these processes? Or is
there simply a continuous ﬂow of informa-
tion through these circuits, such that each per-
forms a unique role but has continuous access
to the computations DEMO by the other
circuits?
Another challenge lies in linking neural ac-
tivity to a particular element of the decision
process. For example, in several brain regions,
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
but especially in the dlPFC, delay-period ac-
tivity resembles a working memory trace of
the evidence provided DEMO f1. An alternative
explanation is that the delay-period activity
represents the DV: a prediction of the deci-
sion, given f1. Speciﬁcally, if f1 is low, the
answer is (or might seem) likely to be f2 > f1.
If f1 is high, f2 < f1 might seem more likely.
This DV would later be updated by the f2
evidence. DEMO with this idea, manipu-
lating properties of the f1 stimulus can DEMO
choices under some conditions (Luna et al.
2005). Contrary to DEMO idea, dlPFC delay-
period activity reﬂects f1 when using a stim-
DEMO set in which the value of f1 cannot be
used to predict f2 (Romo et al. 1999). How-
ever, little is known DEMO the task-related ex-
pectations that might be represented during
the delay period.
Random-dot motion (RDM) direction dis-
crimination. Similar to the VTF paradigm,DEMO
the RDM paradigm (Figures 4 and 5) was
developed to study the relationship between
sensory encoding and perception. Unlike the
VTF task, the RDM task requires a single
stimulus presentation and thus eliminates the
need DEMO working memory. The monkey de-
cides between two possible (opposite) direc-
tions of motion that are known in advance.
Task difﬁculty is controlled DEMO varying the
percentage of coherently moving dots. The
direction decision is typically indicated with
an eye movement.
The evidence used to form the direction
DEMO has been traced to neurons in the
middle temporal area (MT/DEMO) tuned for the
direction of visual motion. SDT analyses of
the DEMO and variability of MT responses
provided a foundation for understanding be-
havioral accuracy (Britten et al. 1992, 1993;
Shadlen et al. 1996)DEMO Choice probabilities in-
dicated that individual MT neurons weakly
but signiﬁcantly predict the monkey’s direc-
tion decisions, including errors (Britten et al.
1996)DEMO Lesion and microstimulation studies,
exploiting the systematic organization of MT
with respect to motion location and direction,
further established a causal link DEMO MT ac-
tivity and task performance (Ditterich et al.
2003; Newsome & Pare 1988; Salzman et al.´
1990, 1992).
Two aspects DEMO the task facilitate the study
of the neural mechanisms of decision forma-
tion. The ﬁrst aspect is that the time needed
to make the DEMO is particularly long for
perceptual tasks, typically many 100s of ms.
DEMO researchers have characterized neural
correlates of the decision process as it un-
folds in time. For a version of the RDM
task in which DEMO viewing time (t) is con-
trolled by the experimenter, performance DEMO
proves as roughly √t (Figure 4b), the rela-
tion expected DEMO at each successive moment the
brain acquired (i.e., integrated) an DEMO
dent sample of noisy evidence. Performance
on other perceptual tasks, including DEMO a
version of the RDM task, can show little or
no DEMO with prolonged viewing du-
ration (Ludwig et al. 2005, Uchida et al. 2006,
Uka & DeAngelis 2003, Watson 1986). In this
sense the RDM task may be less representa-
tive of perception than DEMO cognitive decision
making, which can involve multiple sources of
evidence acquired DEMO a ﬂexible time scale.
The second beneﬁt of the RDM task is
the imposed link between the direction de-
cision and a particular course DEMO action, the
eye-movement response. This link enables in-
vestigators to treat DEMO decision as a prob-
lem of movement selection. Thus, the search
DEMO the DV has focused on parts of the brain
involved in the selection and preparation of
eye movements, including the lateral intra-
parietal area (LIP), superior colliculus (SC),
frontal eye ﬁeld (FEF), and dlPFC (Horwitz &
Newsome 1999, 2001; Kim & Shadlen 1999;
Shadlen & Newsome 1996, 2001).
In one experiment (DEMO 4), motion
viewing was interrupted at a random time
during decision formation by turning off the
RDM stimulus and applying a brief electrical
DEMO to the frontal eye ﬁeld (FEF) (Gold &
Shadlen 2000, 2003). The microstimulation
caused a short-latency saccade whose ampli-
tude and direction were determined by the
RDM: random-dot
motion
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 545
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of DEMO on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
a
Fixation
Motion
Evoked
saccade
DEMO
saccade
25.6
5
Up
Fix
12.8 0 Down
-5
100 200 400 800 -5 0 5 10
Viewing duration (ms) X position (º)
d
1.5 51.2% coh
25.6%
6.4%
1.0
0%
0.5
0
100 DEMO 500
Viewing duration (ms)
Figure 4
Representation of an evolving DEMO by the motor system. (a) Interrupted direction discrimination task.
The monkey decides the net direction of motion, here shown as up versus down. Task difﬁculty is
governed by the fraction of dots that move coherently DEMO one movie frame to the next (% coherence).
The motion DEMO is interrupted prematurely, and on a fraction of trials, a brief current is applied to the
FEF to evoke a saccade. The monkey DEMO a second, voluntary movement to a choice target to indicate
his DEMO (b) Decision accuracy improves as a function of motion-viewing duration. Psychophysical
threshold is deﬁned as the motion coherence supporting 82% correct. Threshold falls DEMO √t (slope of
line ﬁt on log-log plot = –0.46; 95% CI: –0.59 to –0.33). These data are from trials in which no
stimulation occurred. Similar data were obtained on stimulated trials. (c) DEMO of eye movement
trajectories. Fixation point is at the origin. The two larger circles are the choice targets. The random-dot
stimulus (not shown) DEMO centered on the ﬁxation point. The symbols mark eye position in 2-ms steps.
FEF stimulation during ﬁxation, in the absence of motion and choice targets, elicited a rightward saccade
(trace marked “Fix”). Stimulation while DEMO upward and downward motion induced saccades that
deviated in the direction of the subsequent, voluntary eye movements. (d ) The average amount of
DEMO depends on motion strength and viewing time. The amount of deviation toward the chosen
target was estimated using the evoked saccades from 32 stimulation DEMO (14,972 trials). This result shows
that the oculomotor system DEMO privy to information about the evolving decision, not just the ﬁnal DEMO
of the decision process. Adapted from Gold & Shadlen (2000, 2003) with permission.
546 Gold · Shadlen
b
6.4
c
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/DEMO For personal use only.
Amount of deviation (º)
Threshold (% coh)
Y position (º)
Time
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
site of stimulation, a deﬁning feature of the
FEF (Bruce et al. 1985, Robinson & Fuchs
DEMO). This evoked saccade tended to deviate
in the direction governed by the eye move-
ment associated with the monkey’s ultimate
choice. The amount DEMO deviation, even when
measured early in the decision process, par-
alleled the evolution of a DV that explained
accuracy as a function of DEMO strength and
viewing time. This result is inconsistent with
the notion that a central decision maker com-
pletes its operation before activating the mo-
DEMO structures to perform the necessary ac-
tion. Instead, it implies that, at least under
some conditions, information ﬂow from sen-
sory neurons to motor structures is more or
less continuous (Spivey et al. 2005).
To measure the correspondence more pre-
cisely in time of neural activity DEMO elements
of the decision process, a reaction-time (RT)
version of the RDM task was developed. This
task allowed the monkey to indicate DEMO choice
as soon as a commitment to one of the alterna-
tives is reached. Figure 5b shows examples of
choice and RT functions for DEMO monkey. Mean
RT increases as task difﬁculty increases. For
easy stimuli, DEMO varies with stimulus strength
even when choice accuracy is perfect. It ul-
timately approaches an asymptote that rep-
resents time that is not used DEMO the decision
per se. This nondecision time (328 ms in this
DEMO set) includes visual and motor latencies
and possibly other processing stages DEMO are
less understood (see below). For difﬁcult stim-
uli, the nondecision time is relatively short
compared with the RT, implying long deci-
sion times. In contrast, this nondecision time
often takes up the lion’s share of RT for sim-
pler tasks, an important caveat for interpreting
many RT studies.
Studies of neural mechanisms underlying
the decision process on DEMO RT task have fo-
cused on area LIP. LIP is anatomically po-
sitioned midway through the sensory-motor
chain, with inputs from MT and MST and
outputs to the FEF and SC (Andersen et al.
1990, DEMO; Asanuma et al. 1985; Blatt et al.
1990; Fries 1984; Lewis & Van Essen 2000a;
Lynch et al. 1985; Pare & Wurtz 1997). This´
area has been implicated in other high-order
processes DEMO in the selection of saccade
targets, including working memory, alloca-
tion of attention, behavioral intention, spa-
tial inference, and representation of bias, re-
ward, expected value, and elapsed time (Assad
& Maunsell DEMO, Chafee & Goldman-Rakic
2000, Dorris & Glimcher 2004, Eskandar
& DEMO 1999, Friedman & Goldman-Rakic
1994, Janssen & Shadlen 2005, Leon &
Shadlen 2003, Platt & Glimcher 1999, Sugrue
et al. 2004)DEMO Moreover, neural activity in
LIP—particularly in its ventral subdivision,
termed DEMO (Blatt et al. 1990, Lewis & Van
Essen 2000b)—reﬂects decision formation on
a ﬁxed-duration version of the RDM task
(Shadlen & Newsome 1996, 2001).
Figure 5c,d illustrates the responses of
LIP neurons during the RT paradigm. In
these experiments, one of the choice targets
(Tin) is in the response ﬁeld (RF) of the
LIP DEMO; the other target (Tout) and the
RDM stimulus lie outside DEMO neuron’s RF
(Figure 5a). Thus, these neurons are stud-
ied under conditions in which they are apt to
signal the monkey’s choice (via the associated
action). What is more interesting is that their
DEMO reﬂects the decision process that leads
to that choice.
Aligning the responses to stimulus onset
(t = 0 on the left side of Figure 5c) pro-
vides a glimpse into the brain’s activity in
the epoch when the animal is forming the
decision but has yet to commit DEMO to a
choice. Initially, there is a brief dip in the
DEMO rate followed by a rise in activity that
is independent of the direction and strength
of motion or the monkey’s ultimate choice.
Then, after ∼220 ms, the average response
begins to reveal differences in the evidence
and outcome of the decision. On trials that
end in a Tin DEMO, the ﬁring rate rises like a
ramp, on average. On trials that end in a Tout
choice, the ﬁring rate meanders or tends to
decline. This dependence on choice is evident
even when the stimulus DEMO ambiguous (0%
coherence).
RT: reaction time
MST: medial
superior DEMO
area
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 547
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal DEMO only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Aligning the responses to saccade DEMO
tion (Figure 5c, right) reveals a correlate of
commitment: a threshold rate of ﬁring be-
fore Tin choices. When separated by motion
DEMO, the curves overlap considerably just
prior to the saccade and thus DEMO it im-
possible to identify a single point of conver-
gence because each motion strength leads to
a broad distribution of RTs. When these DEMO
responses are grouped by RT instead of mo-
c
a
Fixation
Saccade
Targets
RF
Motion
tion strength, they achieve a common level
of activity ∼70 ms before saccade initiation
(arrow in Figure 5d ). Thus DEMO decision
process appears to terminate when the neu-
rons associated with the chosen target reach
a critical ﬁring rate. When the monkey
chooses Tout, another set of neurons—the
ones with the chosen target in their RFs—
DEMO the termination of the decision
process.
b
Behavior
1
0.8
0
2.5 5 10 20 40
Motion strength (% coh)
d
70
60
50
40
RT (ms)
400
500
600
700
800
900
30
–1000 –500 0
Time from saccade (ms)
0.6
0.4
900
800
700
600
500
400
70
60
50
40
30
20
Motion
on
DEMO
strength
51.2
12.8
0
Eye
movement
Select  Tin
45
MT
5
DEMO -200 0200 400 600 800
Time (ms)
548 Gold · DEMO
Select  Tout
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by DEMO of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
Firing rate (sp s–1)
Firing rate (sp s–1)
Mean RT (ms)
Percent correct
Reaction time (RT)
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
The pattern of LIP activity DEMO pre-
dictions of diffusion/race models (Figure
2b,c). The DEMO rise appears
to reﬂect an accumulation of noisy evidence.
This evidence comes from a difference in ac-
tivity of pools of MT neurons with DEMO
site direction preferences (Figure 5c, shaded
insert), which is thought to approximate the
associated logLR (Gold & Shadlen 2001).
However, DEMO caveats should be noted. The
dashed curves of Figure 5c (right) do not end
in a common lower bound and instead look
like DEMO average of paths of evidence for, say,
right when the DEMO choice neurons win in a
race model (Mazurek et al. 2003)DEMO Also, the
DV is represented only from ∼220 ms after
motion DEMO until ∼70–80 ms before saccade
initiation. Reassuringly, these times taken to-
DEMO nearly match the nondecision time
from ﬁts of the diffusion model to the choice-
accuracy behavioral data. Whereas the initial
∼220-ms latency is long DEMO comparison with
latencies of neural responses in MT (which
show direction DEMO ∼100 ms after onset
of a RDM stimulus; Figure 5c, insert) and LIP
(which can indicate the presence of a target in
<60 ms; Bisley et al. 2004), behavioral mea-
surements also indicate that evidence does not
affect decisions until after this critical waiting
time (Huk & Shadlen 2005, Kiani et al. 2006).
Studies using electrical microstimulation
have helped to establish further the causal
roles of MT and DEMO in representing the ev-
idence and DV, respectively (Ditterich et al.
2003, Hanks et al. 2006). Earlier studies us-
ing a ﬁxed-duration version of the RDM task
showed that microstimulation of direction-
selective MT DEMO causes monkeys to bias
their decisions in favor of the preferred direc-
tion of the stimulated neurons (Salzman et al.
1990, 1992). DEMO result could be attributed
to a perturbation of the evidence, the DEMO, or
both. The RT task makes it possible to distin-
guish DEMO alternatives (Figure 6). MT mi-
crostimulation has strong effects on DEMO sub-
sequent choices and RTs, biasing the monkey
toward more, faster choices in the preferred
direction of the stimulated neurons and fewer,
DEMO choices in the opposite direction. This
ﬁnding is consistent with an additive offset of
the evidence, which causes an increased rate
of rise of its integral, the DV. Conversely, LIP
microstimulation has small effects on DEMO
and modest effects on RT, which is consistent
with an additive DEMO of the DV that does
not affect its rate of rise but rather pushes it
closer to (or further from) the threshold for
DEMO the decision (Hanks et al. 2006).
A further test of DEMO idea that LIP neu-
rons represent the DV used weak motion
←
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−
Figure 5
Neural mechanism of a decision about direction of DEMO (a) Choice-reaction time (RT) version of the
direction discrimination task. The subject views a patch of dynamic random dots and decides the DEMO
direction of motion. The decision is indicated by an eye movement to a peripheral target. In the RT task,
the subject controls the DEMO duration by terminating each trial with an eye movement whenever
ready. The gray patch shows the location of the response ﬁeld (RF) of DEMO LIP neuron. (b) Effect of
stimulus difﬁculty on accuracy and decision time. Solid curves are ﬁts of the diffusion model (see Palmer
et al. 2005), which accounts simultaneously for choice and decision time. (c) Response of LIP neurons
during decision formation. Average ﬁring rate from 54 LIP neurons is shown for three levels of difﬁculty.
Responses are grouped DEMO motion strength and direction of choice, as indicated. Left: The responses are
aligned to onset of random-dot motion. Averages are shown during decision DEMO (curves truncated
at the median RT or 100 ms before the DEMO movement). Shaded insert shows average responses from
direction selective neurons in area MT to motion in the preferred and antipreferred directions. After a
DEMO, MT responds at a nearly constant rate. Right: The responses are aligned to the eye movement.
The LIP ﬁring rates approximate the integral DEMO a difference in ﬁring rate between MT neurons with
opposite direction preferences. (d ) Responses grouped by RT. Only Tin choices are shown. All trials
reach a stereotyped ﬁring rate ∼70 ms before saccade initiation (arrow). Adapted with permission from
Shadlen et al. (2006) and Roitman & Shadlen (2002); insert from online database used in Britten et DEMO
(1992), http://www.neuralsignal.org database nsa2004.1.
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making DEMO
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
a
Stimulate rightward MT neurons
DEMO large effect on choice and RT:
equivalent to added rightward motion
Momentary evidence in MT
Evidence
for right
(R – L)
0
Mean
DV in LIP
+A
0
0
Motion strength
–A
Strong
leftward
DEMO
rightward
b
Stimulate right choice LIP neurons
Momentary evidence in MT
+A
DV in LIP
Bound for right choice
Small effect on choice,
DEMO effect on RT:
not equivalent to added rightward motion
Evidence
for right
(R – L)
0
mean
0
–A
Stim adds constant
Bound for left choice
0
Motion strength
Strong
leftward
Strong
rightward
Figure DEMO
Effects of microstimulation in MT and LIP. In both areas microstimulation (DEMO curves) causes a change in
both choice and RT. The schematic DEMO the consequences of adding a small change in spike rate to the
evidence or to the DV. The graphs on the right are theoretical DEMO obtained using the bounded
diffusion model. They resemble the pattern of data in Hanks et al. (2006). (a) MT microstimulation
mimics a change in stimulus strength (evidence). (b) LIP microstimulation mimics an additive offset to
the DV (or, equivalently, the height of the bounds).
550 Gold · Shadlen
Bound for right choice
stim adds DEMO
Bound for left choice
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
DEMO time
Proportion
rightward choices
Reaction time
Proportion
rightward choices
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
perturbations in the background of DEMO RDM
display (Huk & Shadlen 2005). Each pertur-
bation was DEMO subtle boost or decrement in
motion energy lasting just 100 ms. The ef-
fects on RT and choices were consistent with
a process of DEMO The motion pulses
affected choices that occurred up to 800 ms
after the pulse, and they affected RTs through
a sustained effect on the DV (like MT micro-
stimulation). LIP neurons also registered
these brief motion perturbations with long-
lasting changes in ﬁring rate consistent with a
DEMO of integration.
We do not know how or where this in-
tegral is computed. It might be computed
in LIP itself, or it might be computed else-
where and merely reﬂected in LIP. A model
of DEMO can achieve integration by mix-
ing feedback excitation—using N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) channels with relatively
long conductance times—within neuronal
pools that share a common DEMO with an in-
hibitory antagonism between pools represent-
ing opposite directions (DEMO 2002). This
hybrid of biophysical and large-scale neural
modeling was originally designed to simulate
working memory. That the model can also
form a DEMO in a manner consistent with many
aspects of the physiological results, DEMO
ing deviations from perfect integration (Wong
et al. 2005, Wong & Wang 2006), suggests
that this kind of persistent activity might serve
DEMO roles in the brain. Indeed, the ques-
tion of how neurons DEMO neural circuits can in-
tegrate is not limited to the study of decision
making and working memory but extends to
motor control and navigation DEMO well (Major
& Tank 2004). Progress in this area is DEMO
to shed light on cognitive functions that oper-
ate on time scales longer than biophysical and
signaling time constants in single cells.
We also DEMO little about how the criterion
is applied to the DV. Neurons that achieve a
threshold level of activity in anticipation of
a saccadic eye DEMO on RT tasks have
been found not just in LIP but also in FEF
and SC (Hanes & Schall 1996, Ratcliff et al.
DEMO). However, how this criterion is set and
what happens when DEMO is reached are unknown.
Because the criterion controls the trade-off
between speed and accuracy (Palmer et al.
2005), parts of the basal ganglia sensitive to
both reward and movement onset have been
suggested as possible DEMO (Lo & Wang
2006). An alternative possibility is that a DEMO
gle neural circuit can represent the DV and
its conversion to a binary choice, which would
suggest that the criterion is an intrinsic prop-
erty of LIP, FEF, or SC (Machens et al. 2005,
Wang 2002, Wong & Wang 2006).
Heading discrimination. Optic ﬂow is the
pattern of motion that occurs when we move
through the environment (Gibson 1950). A
natural candidate for the momentary evidence
used to DEMO heading direction from optic ﬂow
is in the medial superior temporal cortex (area
MST). MST neurons are tuned for expansion,
rotation, DEMO and other large-ﬁeld mo-
tion patterns that comprise optic ﬂow (Duffy
& Wurtz 1991, 1995, 1997; Graziano et al.
1994; Lagae et al. 1994; Saito et al. 1986;
Tanaka et al. 1986; DEMO & Saito 1989).
Indeed, for a one-interval heading direction-
discrimination DEMO using a RDM ﬂow ﬁeld,
signal-to-noise measurements of MST activ-
ity correlate with behavioral sensitivity in a
manner similar to results from MT DEMO the
RDM direction task (Britten & van Wezel
2002, Heuer & Britten 2004).
However, microstimulation experiments
have provided only weak evidence for a causal
role of MST neurons for the heading deci-
sion (Britten & van Wezel 1998). Microstim-
ulation can cause the monkey to DEMO choices
for one heading direction, but often it is in
the DEMO opposite the preferred heading
of the stimulated neurons. This might be ex-
plained by a lack of a clustered organization of
neurons tuned to DEMO optic ﬂow patterns
(Britten 1998). A more tantalizing explana-
tion DEMO from the fact that many MST neu-
rons receive visual and vestibular inputs that
both contribute to heading sensitivity (Gu
et al. 2006) DEMO, for about half these neurons,
have opposite direction preferences. Thus,DEMO
www.annualreviews.org •
Decision Making 551
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use DEMO
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
microstimulation intended to bias judgments
DEMO a particular direction using visual cues
might instead activate a local circuit domi-
nated more by vestibular tuning in the op-
posite direction. Consistent DEMO this idea,
choice probabilities (the weak correlations be-
tween the DEMO discharge of MST neurons
and the trial-to-trial variations in the mon-
key’s decisions) also appear to depend on the
vestibular tuning of the neuron (DeAngelis
et al. 2006).
We do not know where the DV is repre-
sented for this task. One possibility is MST it-
self, which contains many neurons with spik-
ing activity that persists even in DEMO absence
of a stimulus. However, the lack of build-
up activity DEMO the decision is formed and
weak choice probability support the idea that
MST represents only the momentary evi-
dence (Heuer & Britten 2004). Another pos-
sibility is the ventral intraparietal area (VIP),
which DEMO direct input from MT and
MST and contains many neurons with re-
sponse properties similar to MST on op-
tic ﬂow and heading tasks (Bremmer et al.
2002a,b; Zhang et al. 2004; Zhang & DEMO
2004). However, as in MST, it is difﬁcult to
tell if VIP represents a DV or the momen-
tary evidence used by DEMO brain structures to
decide whether, say, an object is nearing the
head and needs to be avoided (Colby et al.
1993, Duhamel DEMO al. 1998, Graziano et al.
1997). In our view, the DV for the heading
task is likely to be represented in structures
DEMO provide high-level control of the behav-
ioral (eye movement) response; DEMO, area LIP.
If the monkey were trained to reach for but-
DEMO, likely candidates would be parietal and
prefrontal cortical areas that provide DEMO
gous control of reaching movements.
Disparity discrimination. MT neurons are
selective for not only motion direction but
also the binocular disparity of images pre-
DEMO to the two eyes, a cue for depth
(Maunsell & Van Essen 1983, Uka &
DeAngelis 2006). Recent studies using a
DEMO depth-discrimination task with
552 Gold · Shadlen
a RDM stimulus viewed stereoscopically
showed that the sensitivity of MT neurons
to noisy perturbations in disparity DEMO the
behavioral sensitivity of the monkey (Uka &
DeAngelis 2003). Electrical microstimulation
experiments, aided by the clustered organiza-
tion of MT with respect to disparity, further
established their causal role in providing ev-
idence for decisions about depth (DeAngelis
et al. 1998, 1999; Krug et al. 2004).
Can MT neurons that provide evidence
about depth provide, in a different con-
text, evidence about direction? To test this,DEMO
monkeys were trained on a RDM direction-
discrimination task in which the dots could
be presented with task-irrelevant disparities.
Electrical microstimulation at sites with DEMO
disparity tuning tended to have the largest
effects on performance. Microstimulation at
sites with strong disparity tuning had weaker
effects on performance, even when those sites
were strongly tuned for direction (DeAngelis
& Newsome 2004). The results suggest that
the DV tended to discount MT neurons
whose DEMO were sensitive to disparity,
possibly because that variable was irrelevant
to the direction task. This kind of context-
dependent read-out implies a critical DEMO for
learning in establishing the ﬂow of informa-
tion from neurons that represent the evidence
to neurons that form the DV (Freedman &
DEMO 2006, Law & Gold 2005).
Less is known about the DEMO of MT neu-
rons in decisions that require both depth
and motion information. Nevertheless, a task
requiring a decision about the direction of
rotation of a transparent, sparsely textured
cylinder has provided a striking result for
MT choice probabilities. An observer view-
ing such a cylinder sees the DEMO (e.g.,
dots) on the front and back surfaces move
in opposite directions. The opposing motion
gives rise to a distinct pattern of DEMO rates
among direction-selective MT neurons that
can be unambiguously associated with trans-
parency. However, if not for the depth cues,
the cylinder can appear to rotate in a clock-
wise or counterclockwise direction depending
Annu. DEMO Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
on whether the two motion DEMO are as-
sociated with the front and back or vice versa
(DEMO 1979).
MT neurons that are both disparity and
direction selective furnish evidence to remove
this ambiguity (Bradley et al. 1998). For exam-
ple, an MT neuron preferring near disparities
and rightward motion responds best when the
nearer plane is moving to the right. Such a
neuron DEMO positive evidence for the in-
terpretation that a vertical cylinder is rotating
in accordance with a right-hand rule (front
surface to the right) (Dodd et al. 2001). A
strong trial-to-trial correlation exists between
the DEMO discharge of these neurons and
the monkeys’ rotation judgments (Krug et DEMO
2004). In fact, this choice probability is larger
than for DEMO of the decision tasks reviewed in
this article, leading us to DEMO that it is a
sign of feedback from elements in the brain
that have rendered a decision, as opposed to
feedforward variations of noisy evidence that
underlie difﬁcult decisions near psychophysi-
cal threshold.
Face/object discrimination. DEMO se-
lective for images of faces and other com-
plex objects are found in the ventral stream
“what” or “vision for perception” pathway
(Goodale & Milner 1992, Ungerleider &
Mishkin 1982). Recent studies have DEMO to
examine how these neurons contribute to per-
ceptual decisions by comparing brain activity
and behavior (Allred et al. 2005, Baylis et al.
DEMO, Dolan et al. 1997, Freedman et al. 2002,
2003; DEMO et al. 2000, Op de Beeck
et al. 2001, Rainer et al. 2004). In one study,
monkeys performed a one-interval discrimi-
DEMO of face versus nonface images masked
by white noise (Afraz et DEMO 2006). Electri-
cal microstimulation applied during stimulus
viewing to clusters of neurons in the infero-
temporal (IT) cortex that showed a preference
DEMO faces biased decisions toward face versus
nonface. The magnitude of the bias was com-
parable to that found using MT microstimu-
lation on direction DEMO disparity tasks, equiv-
alent to a change in stimulus strength on DEMO
order of psychophysical threshold. This ﬁnd-
ing provided the ﬁrst direct evidence that face-
selective IT neurons play a causal role in the
perception DEMO faces. It suggests that IT activity
represents the evidence used to solve the task
but does not rule out the possibility that IT
represents DEMO DV or even the outcome of the
perceptual categorization (Sheinberg & DEMO
gothetis 1997, 2001).
In a related study, measurements of blood
oxygen level differences (BOLD) in fMRI
were used to identify correlates DEMO a DV that
reads out object categorization evidence from
IT (Heekeren DEMO al. 2004). Human subjects
were trained to perform a one-interval dis-
crimination between faces and houses masked
by noise. The two sets of DEMO were used
because distinct regions of IT are activated
for unmasked images from the two categories
(Haxby et al. 1994, Kanwisher et al. DEMO). A
candidate DV was found in the dlPFC. Activ-
ity in this area was strongest when the sensory
evidence was strongest and tended DEMO covary
with the magnitude of the difference in the
BOLD signal measured on single trials in the
“face” and “house” areas. Such fMRI experi-
DEMO provide an essential link between mon-
key neurobiology and human brain function,
although they lack the spatial and temporal
resolution to characterize fully DEMO neuronal
dynamics that distinguish evidence from the
DV.
Electroencephalography (EEG), DEMO is
not burdened by the same temporal resolu-
tion problem, has DEMO measured in human
subjects for similar one-interval categoriza-
tion tasks requiring a discrimination be-
tween pictures of faces and pictures of cars
(Philiastides et al. 2006, Philiastides & Sajda
2006, VanRullen & Thorpe 2001). DEMO sig-
nal kernels could best differentiate the car and
face stimuli on single trials. An early potential
that appeared ∼170 ms after stimulus onset
DEMO selective for faces and only weakly predic-
tive of errors, a DEMO correlate of sensory
evidence. A later potential appearing ∼300 ms
after stimulus onset appeared to reﬂect the
difﬁculty of the decision linking the sensory
DEMO
•
Decision Making 553
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
evidence to the subject’s choice, a quality of
the DV. However, localization of the signals is
hampered by the limitations of EEG record-
ing and the powerful technique used DEMO this
study to combine signals across electrodes.
Olfactory discrimination. To date, DEMO
have been few experiments on the neurobi-
ology of decisions in animals beside the mon-
key. However, the availability of techniques
to study molecular and cellular mechanisms
in rodents hints at tremendous possibilities
if they could DEMO trained on decision-making
tasks. Several recent studies have begun to
make progress by using tasks that exploit two
of their natural strengths: foraging behavior
and olfactory processing.
In one study, rats were trained to discrim-
inate between a pair of odors using a one-
interval task with mixtures DEMO the two odors
(Uchida & Mainen 2003). The patterns of DEMO
tivation in the olfactory bulb were distinctive
when the stimulus was behaviorally discrim-
inable and less distinctive otherwise, a ﬁrst
step toward identifying signals comprising the
sensory evidence. However, the rats appeared
to form their decisions in a single sniff and
did not beneﬁt from more time (Kepecs et al.
2006, Uchida et al. 2006). Such a short time
scale clouds the distinction between evidence
and DV and thus exposes possible DEMO
of this model for the study of decision making.
However, it DEMO unlikely that rats can-
not accrue evidence in time. A recent study
demonstrated a trade-off between speed and
accuracy in a similar odor-discrimination task
(see also Abraham et al. 2004, Rinberg et al.
2006). A window of integration of ∼400
ms was identiﬁed, which rivals the inte-
gration times for monkey’s performing the
RDM direction-discrimination task. Com-
bined with DEMO recent discovery of the ol-
factory receptor genes (Buck 1996, Buck &
Axel 1991) and subsequent progress in under-
standing the stable, topographic organization
of the olfactory bulb (e.g., Rubin & Katz 1999,DEMO
Meister & Bonhoeffer 2001, Mombaerts et al.
1996) these results suggest a promising future
554 Gold · Shadlen
for combined psychophysical and physiologi-
DEMO experiments on olfactory decision making
in rodents.
Detection. Detection experiments are
the archetypical SDT paradigm, yet they
present serious challenges to neurobiologists
trying to understand the underlying decision
process. According to SDT, detection begins
with a sample of evidence generated by
either a signal plus noise or noise DEMO The
DV based on this sample is monotonically
related to the LR in favor of h 1 : “S present”
and against h 2 : “S absent”. The decision
is H1 : “Yes” if the DV exceeds a criterion,
which is set to achieve some desired goal,
DEMO H2 : “No” otherwise. This procedure
seems straightforward but glosses over an
important question: When should the DV
incorporate evidence if there is temporal
uncertainty about when the stimulus will
appear? Obtaining samples at the wrong time
might miss the signal [i.e., high P (H2 | h DEMO )].
In contrast, accumulating samples over time
will accumulate noise alone in all epochs
that do not contain the signal, causing more
misses in signal-present conditions and more
false alarms [ P (H1 | h 2 )] in signal-absent con-
ditions. The consequence of these errors will
be a loss of sensitivity (Lasley & Cohn 1981).
This problem has several possible solu-
tions. One is to use an integrator that DEMO,
causing irrelevant information to affect the
decision process for only a limited amount of
time (Smith 1995, 1998). Other approaches
include DEMO a time derivative of the evi-
dence to identify changes or using knowledge
of the spatial and temporal structure of the
stimulus to guide DEMO more directed search for
the evidence. Some studies in the psychophys-
ical literature hint of such mechanisms (e.g.,
Henning et al. 1975, DEMO & Rogowitz
1983, Verghese et al. 1999, Schrater et al.
2000), but to date there is little understanding
of their general role DEMO detection.
Despite these challenges, several recent
studies have begun to shed DEMO on de-
tection mechanisms. In one study, monkeys
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. DEMO:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
a
10
Time
False alarms
DEMO
d
0
010 20
Motion coherence
0600
Time (ms)
35
DEMO
Time (ms)
30
Figure 7
Motion detection. (a) Detection DEMO The monkey views a RDM stimulus without any net direction of
motion and must release a bar when the motion becomes coherent. Task difﬁculty DEMO controlled by the
intensity of the motion step (% coherence). (b) Probability of deciding Yes plotted as a function of
stimulus intensity. (c, d ) Average ﬁring rates from neurons in MT and DEMO The responses are aligned to
onset of the motion step and grouped by RT. Yes decisions are predicted by a rise in ﬁring rate DEMO both
areas. The horizontal dashed line is a criterion derived to match the animal’s performance. The missed
detections (motion step, but decision = DEMO) are explained by a failure of the ﬁring rate to reach DEMO
but with responses aligned to the lever release at 750 ms, DEMO do not; a possible explanation is a variablelevel. According to SDT, the false alarms (no motion step, but decision = Yes) should reach this level,
relationship between the end of the decision process DEMO the time of the lever release. Adapted with
permission from Cook & Maunsell (2002a,b).
were trained to detect the onset of partially
coherent motion in a RDM display (Figure 7)
(Cook & DEMO 2002b). Activity in both
MT and VIP was correlated with trial-by-
trial detection performance and RT. However,
single-unit responses were far less DEMO de-
tectors of the stimulus than were the mon-
key subjects. This ﬁnding contrasts results
from discrimination experiments and seems
likely to result, in part, from the temporal
uncertainty problem described above. Never-
theless, population DEMO using a leaky ac-
cumulator model provide some insight into
the decision process. For MT, population re-
sponses on hit trials deviated from baseline
at a time that was closely coupled with mo-
tion onset and DEMO rose steadily with a rate
of rise that was correlated with RT. Responses
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 555
c
MT
35
377
411
446
DEMO
Threshold
312
561
694
Missed
Receptive
field
Fixation
point
Static cue
Coherent
motion
at one
patch
(750 ms)
b
1
VIP
374 406 440
483
549
309
702
Missed
False alarms
0% Coherent
(500 - 8000 ms)
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by DEMO of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
Firing rate (sp s–1)
Firing rate (sp s–1)
Proportion
“yes” responses
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
on miss trials were similar DEMO failed to attain
the same level of activation as hits. In con-
trast, responses on false alarm trials deviated
little from baseline. These results suggest that
MT provides a preliminary form of evidence.
In contrast, VIP population responses were
less coupled to motion onset and were more
stereotypical DEMO respect to the behavioral re-
sponse, suggesting they represent either the
DEMO or simply the outcome of the decision
process.
Similar detection experiments were con-
ducted using the VTF stimulus (Figure 8)
(de Lafuente & Romo 2005). As for the dis-
crimination task, S1 activity DEMO to rep-
resent the sensory evidence and not the DV
or choice. Increasingly intense stimuli (deeper
skin depressions) lead to high ﬁring rates DEMO
are more easily differentiated from neural ac-
tivity when no stimulus is present (Figure 8c,
d ). Moreover, trial-to-trial variations in the
responses to a weak stimulus are correlated,
albeit weakly, with the monkey’s yes and no
decisions. This weak choice probability is sim-
ilar DEMO magnitude to that found for MT neu-
rons on the RDM direction-discrimination
task (Britten et al. 1996).
In contrast to S1, MPC DEMO are mod-
ulated by not only stimulus intensity but also
the monkey’s behavioral report (Figure 8e).
These results suggest that MPC represents
the DV that converts the evidence into a
choice. However, inspection of Figure 8e
suggests that different stimulus intensities
cause primarily differences in latency, the ex-
pected behavior of a neuron that simply re-
sponds stereotypically after DEMO decision has
ended. Nevertheless, even if MPC neurons
represent the decision DEMO and not the
DV, they do not do so in a DEMO matter.
The responses are not simply associated with
the button press. Moreover, electrical mi-
crostimulation of MPC without presentation
of the tactile stimulus leads to similar per-
ceptual reports. These results have been used
to support DEMO bold (and currently unveriﬁ-
able) assertion that MPC responses provide
a neural correlate of the subjective percep-
tion of the tactile stimulus (see also Ress et al.
2000, Ress & Heeger 2003 for a similar asser-
tion about activity in early visual cortex, mea-
sured using fMRI, for a contrast-detection
task).
Simple Motor Latencies: Deciding
When to DEMO an Action
In this section, we consider easy decisions that
do DEMO tax perceptual processing but instead
simply trigger a movement. Commonly used
−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
→
Figure 8
Vibrotactile detection. (a) Task. The VTF probe DEMO placed on the ﬁnger pad. After a random delay, a
20-Hz DEMO indentation is applied on half the trials. The monkey must decide whether the stimulus
was present. Detection is indicated by removing a ﬁnger of DEMO other hand from a key and pushing a
button. (PD, probe down; KD, key down; PU, probe up; MT, movement DEMO the response button).
(b) Psychometric function. The monkey is more likely to decide Yes at larger vibration amplitudes. The
false alarm rate DEMO ∼8%. (c) Response of a typical S1 neuron. The top half of the raster shows trials in
which vibration was applied. Red marks DEMO missed-detection errors. The bottom half of the raster
shows trials in which no stimulus was shown. Red marks indicate false-alarm errors. (d ) Distributions of
ﬁring rates in S1 during the stimulus period. Each curve represents DEMO frequency distribution associated
with vibration at one intensity (indicated by color)DEMO The vertical line shows a possible criterion that the
brain could apply to decide yes or no. (e) Response of a typical MPC DEMO Same conventions as in
panel c. The neuron responds strongly when the monkey reports Yes even when there is no stimulus
present (false alarms). Notice that on some trials on the top half of the DEMO, the neuron seems to
indicate a detection decision before the stimulus DEMO applied. These trials appear as correct detections, but
they are probably DEMO mistakes. ( f ) Average ﬁring rate of S1 and MPC neurons as a function of
stimulus intensity. The ﬁring rates are for the DEMO of stimulus presentation. Only correct responses
(Yes when amplitude >0) DEMO included. Adapted with permission from de Lafuente & Romo (2005).
DEMO Gold · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 557
DEMO Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
S0
558 Gold · Shadlen
DEMO 1954). By comparison, the time
it takes to register visual DEMO in visuo-motor
areas such as LIP, FEF, and SC can be <50 ms
(Bisley et al. 2004, Pouget et al. 2005,
Schmolesky et al. 1998) and to elicit saccadic
eye movements via electrical microstimula-
tion of FEF or SC is <40 ms (Bruce et DEMO 1985,
Robinson 1972, Robinson & Fuchs 1969,
Schiller & DEMO 1972, Tehovnik 1996). To-
gether, these measurements do not account
for much of the length and variability of RTs,
prompting speculation DEMO the underlying
decision process is more sophisticated than
a mere trigger, DEMO necessarily including
procrastination to allow for censorship of an
action and indeterminacy to make actions less
predictable (Carpenter 1981).
A simple model can account for these mo-
tor latencies (Figure 9). Latency distributions
typically have a single mode with a longer
tail toward larger values. The DEMO
of reciprocal latency thus appears Gaussian
(Carpenter 1981, 1988; Carpenter &
Williams 1995). Accordingly, the cumulative
distribution of reciprocal latencies plotted on
←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Figure 9
A simple model for “go” reaction times. (a) The
LATER model. Instead of accumulating random
draws of momentary evidence, DEMO DV is a ramp
with a slope drawn from a Gaussian distribution.
The movement starts when the ramp reaches the
threshold (ST ). DEMO distribution of predicted RT
is skewed; the reciprocals would obey a DEMO
distribution. (b) Reciprobit plot. Predicted
cumulative distribution of RTs is a line on
transformed axes. The abscissa scale is RT−1 ; the
ordinate DEMO is the z-transformed (i.e., inverse
Normal) probability. Extrapolation of the DEMO
predicts a point intersecting the vertical line at
RT =∞. The height of this point corresponds to
(the probability that the slope of the ramp isc) Shape of the reciprobit plot as a diagnostic aid.≥0.
If the threshold changes, the median RT shifts, but
the graph retains DEMO same extrapolated value at
there is a change in the rate of rise (mean orRT =∞. The graphs swivel about this point. If
standard deviation), the median RT shifts and the
graph simply translates along DEMO abscissa. Adapted
with permission from Sinha et al. (2006).
tasks DEMO a saccadic eye movement to a
visual target that might appear at an unpre-
dictable time or location but is unambiguous
once it appears. DEMO into the underlying
decision process have come primarily by an-
alyzing the distributions of latencies from vi-
sual instruction to saccade initiation.
Motor latencies DEMO these tasks average
∼200 ms but can range from ∼90 ms to
>400 ms (Carpenter 1988, Sparks 2002,
a
b
Reaction time
distribution
Threshold ST
Rate of
rise (r)
Start level S 0
Latency
Infinite-time
intercept
95
90
c
50
Changing causes reciprobit shiftμ
Median
DEMO = mean(r)
10
5
100 200 500 1000inf
Reaction time (ms)
Changing causes reciprobit swivelS
0
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For DEMO use only.
Percent cumulative
frequency
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
a probability scale (a reciprobit plot) is nearly
linear (Figure 9b). To produce this distribu-
DEMO, assume that a DV begins at level S0 at
t = DEMO then rises linearly with slope r. The
saccade is initiated when the DV reaches
ST at t = t1 . Critically, r is not determined
precisely but is rather a random number
drawn from a Gaussian DEMO with
mean μ and standard deviation σ . Because on
any trial ri = (ST − S0 )/ti , the reciprocals of
the response latencies (1/ti ) obey a Gaussian
distribution. The harmonic mean of the RT
is the threshold height (ST − S0 ) divided
by μ. This model is called LATER (linear
accumulation to threshold with ergodic rate),
which emphasizes that the DV is simply the
accumulation of a constant. It makes testable
predictions about how the distribution of DEMO
should change for two different mechanisms:
changes in the threshold height (ST − S0 )or
the mean rate of rise (μ)(DEMO 9c).
This formulation has some shortcomings.
It typically deals with only one alternative
and short RTs, conditions under which evi-
dence accumulation can be reduced to a single
number. Moreover, several possible sources of
variability are not explored as alternate hy-
potheses for resulting RT distributions, in-
cluding latencies outside the decision process
(e.g., sensory and motor delays), changes in
the variance of the rate of rise (r), DEMO vari-
ance in the starting point or threshold. These
factors can cause real data not to conform
neatly to the prescriptions for lines, swivels,
and shifts illustrated in Figure 9. When they
do, however, DEMO overall simplicity of LATER
is appealing, and it has been used DEMO explain
several interesting phenomena.
One study tested the idea that prior prob-
ability affects the threshold for initiating an
action (Carpenter & Williams 1995). Priors
were manipulated by changing the probabil-
ity that the target DEMO be shown to the right
or left of ﬁxation. Not surprisingly, DEMO laten-
cies for eye movements to the target at the
more probable location were faster, on aver-
age, than to the other location. DEMO
in the distributions of RT for different pri-
ors conformed to the “swivel” prediction, sug-
gesting a change in the threshold (relative to
DEMO starting point) and not in the rate of rise
of the DEMO The threshold appeared to change
as a linear function of the logarithm of the
prior, which suggested that the DV has units
log(P ). This idea is important because it im-
plies a form of probabilistic reasoning, with
the DV representing a level of certainty that
the prepared movement should be executed.
Further studies have shown that different de-
DEMO strategies that favor urgency, certainty,
or prior expectations seem to DEMO off in these
units of log(P) (Reddi et al. 2003, Reddi &
Carpenter 2000).
Several physiological results provide qual-
iﬁed DEMO for the LATER model. First,
the rate of rise (r) in the activity of FEF
movement cells (Bruce & Goldberg 1985)
prior to a saccade is variable and predicts RT,
whereas the DEMO level of activation (ST ) is rel-
atively ﬁxed regardless of DEMO (Hanes & Schall
1996). However, other studies of the FEF,
the SC, and primary motor cortex have found
that prestimulus activity (S0 ) is more predic-
tive than r of trial-to-trial variability of RTs
(Connolly et al. 2005, Dorris et al. 1997,
Dorris & Munoz 1998, Everling & Munoz
2000, Lecas et al. 1986, DEMO & Requin
1993). Second, priors affect the responses of
build-up DEMO in the SC (Basso & Wurtz 1997,
1998; Dorris & Munoz 1998). In general, the
higher the probability is of making a saccade
to a particular target, the higher the level
is of activity that occurs just before the tar-
get appears (S0 ) and the shorter the RT is.
Third, behavior on a countermanding task,
in which the subject must occasionally with-
hold a planned saccade, is consistent with a
race between two independent LATER pro-
cesses representing “stop” DEMO “go” (Hanes
& Carpenter 1999, Logan et al. 1984). These
two processes have correlates in the activity
of ﬁxation- and saccade-related cells, respec-
tively, in the FEF and SC (Hanes et al. 1998,DEMO
Munoz & Wurtz 1993, Pare & Hanes 2003).´
www.annualreviews.org
•
DEMO Making 559
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Value-Based Decisions
Decisions that are DEMO primarily on the
subjective value associated with each of the
possible alternatives are the focus of the
nascent ﬁeld of neuroeconomics (for reviews
see Glimcher 2005, Sanfey et al. 2006, Sugrue
et al. 2005). DEMO multitude of approaches, in-
cluding behavior and imaging in human sub-
DEMO and behavior and electrophysiology in
non-human primates, are being used to DEMO
amine how the brain assigns, stores, retrieves,
and uses value to make decisions. Here we
limit our remarks to a few key DEMO from
perceptual decisions that seem relevant to the
study of value-based decisions.
Neurobiological correlates of value have
been described in orbitofrontal and cingulate
cortex DEMO the basal ganglia, areas of the brain
traditionally associated with reward-seeking
DEMO (Kawagoe et al. 2004; Lauwereyns
et al. 2002; McCoy et DEMO 2003; Schultz 1992,
1998; Schultz et al. 1997; Tremblay & Schultz
1999, 2000; Watanabe 1996; Watanabe et al.
2003). DEMO neurons in orbitofrontal cor-
tex appear to represent value independently
from evidence, choice, and action (Padoa-
Schioppa & Assad 2006). Anterior cingulate
cortex is thought to represent negative value
(Carter et al. 1998, DEMO & Willoughby
2002, Yeung & Sanfey 2004). Recent stud-
ies DEMO shown additional representations of
reward size or probability in parietal and pre-
frontal association areas in the same neu-
rons implicated in perceptual decision DEMO
ing (Kobayashi et al. 2002, Leon & Shadlen
1998, Platt & Glimcher 1999). In LIP and
dlPFC, the representation of value DEMO to
be dynamic, adjusted on the basis of the re-
cent DEMO of choices and their consequences
(Barraclough et al. 2004, Dorris & Glimcher
2004, Sugrue et al. 2004).
It is tempting to try to analyze these phe-
nomena in the context of the elements of DEMO de-
cision listed above. An obvious place to start
would be to try to distinguish representations
of the DV from representations of its raw
DEMO (reward/value/utility). Regions like
560 Gold · Shadlen
LIP DEMO represent the DV on perceptual tasks
might represent the DV on value-based tasks,
as well. Indeed, according to SDT and SA,
value can, in principle, be treated the same
way as priors and DEMO evidence in forming
a decision and can be applied to either the DV
or the criterion. Thus a neural circuit that rep-
resents a DEMO by integrating sensory evidence
on a perceptual task might be equally suited
to integrate value in a different context.
Of course, this line of inquiry has serious
challenges. Little is known about the units in
which DEMO is represented in the brain, al-
though some studies suggest that DEMO
like expected utility—the product of subjec-
tive reward value and probability—might be
represented directly (Breiter et al. 2001, Dor-
ris & Glimcher 2004, Knutson et al. 2005,
Padoa-Schioppa & Assad 2006, Platt & Glim-
cher 1999, Schultz 2004). Moreover, unlike
for sensory evidence on DEMO perceptual task, the
time course of a value representation is not
DEMO deﬁned or manipulated, making it dif-
ﬁcult to identify.
Scholars also DEMO whether the basic
mechanisms we have described for perceptual
decisions even apply to value-based decisions.
This debate is concerned with randomness.
Choices on both DEMO and value-based
tasks often appear to be governed by a random
process. For perceptual tasks, this randomness
is typically explained by considering the evi-
dence as a mixture of signal plus noise. The
DV and decision DEMO are both formulated to
minimize the effects of this noise in pursuit
of a particular goal. However, for value-based
decisions, the randomness is DEMO assumed to
be part of the decision process itself. That is, DEMO
subjective measure like utility is used to assign
the relative desirability of each choice. The
decision rule is then probabilistic: a random
selection weighed by these relative measures
(Barraclough et al. 2004, Corrado et al. DEMO,
Glimcher 2005, Lee et al. 2005, Sugrue et al.
2005).
One argument supporting this idea comes
from the theory of games (Glimcher 2005,
von Neumann & Morgenstern 1944). In
Annu. Rev. DEMO 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
competitive games, subjects outsmart their
opponents by making choices that appear to
an opponent as random. Not DEMO so would
make them vulnerable to an opponent able to
exploit predictability. A second argument is
that randomness facilitates exploration, which
is essential for discovery of nonstationary fea-
tures of the environment and is thus found
DEMO many learning algorithms (Kaelbling et al.
1996). A third argument DEMO from the sim-
ple observation that average behavior is ap-
parently random under many circumstances,
such as when following a matching law in DEMO
aging (Herrnstein 1961).
A recent study provided an intriguing anal-
DEMO to support this idea (Corrado et al. 2005).
The study DEMO the sequences of choices
made by monkeys on a simple oculomotor
foraging task (Sugrue et al. 2005). The mon-
keys made eye movements to one of two vi-
sual targets, each of which was rewarded on a
dynamic, variable-interval schedule. Consis-
tent with previous reports, the DEMO typ-
ically exhibited matching behavior, in which
the fraction of choices DEMO one of the targets
matched the fraction of total rewards they
earned for that choice. A model that suc-
cessfully described the monkeys’ behavior DEMO
could generate realistic choice sequences was
based on a deterministic, noise-free DEMO
tion of the DV (in this case describing ex-
pected reward) based on the recent history
of rewards, followed by a random (DEMO)
process that generates a choice based on the
DV. Critically, DEMO values of the parame-
ters of the model that provided the best ﬁt
to the data were very close to optimal in
terms of DEMO the average reward re-
ceived per trial. However, alternative mod-
els DEMO assumed that noise was present in
the DV instead of (or DEMO addition to) the
decision rule were not tested, so it is difﬁ-
cult to assess which model is the more likely
implementation.
In DEMO, it is not clear why core princi-
ples of decision making DEMO apply to percep-
tual tasks should be abandoned to account for
these phenomena. The key issue is whether
behavior that appears, on average, DEMO be ran-
dom reﬂects a decision mechanism that ex-
plicitly generates randomness or instead en-
acts a rule to achieve a goal but is DEMO with
noisy input (Herrnstein & Vaughan 1980, Lau
& Glimcher 2005). The former is certainly
possible: We can explicitly decide to try to
generate random behavior. However, the lat-
ter mechanism is central to our perceptual
abilities. It can, in principle, deal with the
appropriate DEMO of input—in this case infor-
mation about value, expected outcomes, and
dividends/costs associated with exploration—
and produce the best possible choice. Thus,DEMO
a series of value-based choices might appear
random for the same reason that a series of
perceptual decisions appears random under
conditions of uncertainty.
DEMO the speed-accuracy trade-off.
It arises because each observation, e, is equiv-
ocal; e by itself cannot be used to distinguish
perfectly the alternative hypotheses. Thus,
the decision maker is left in a quandary. Gath-
DEMO more observations might improve accu-
racy, but at the cost of DEMO What is the right
thing to do? The correct answer is, it depends.
If speed is valued, gather less evidence. If ac-
curacy is valued, gather more evidence. If both
are valued, attempt to DEMO quantities like
the rate of reward (Gold & Shadlen 2002).
DEMO point is that even perceptual decisions
have, at their core, value judgments. Noisy in-
put leads to imperfect output. Because no uni-
versal DEMO exists for which imperfec-
tions are acceptable and which are not, DEMO
relative values must be weighed and then used
to shape the decision process. It thus seems
reasonable to posit that value-based decisions
can exploit DEMO same mechanisms. This re-
mains to be seen.
CONCLUSIONS
In this review we have evaluated progress in
understanding how the brain forms decisions.
Our DEMO was intentionally narrow, consider-
ing only decisions on simple sensory-motor
tasks DEMO are amenable to behavioral and
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 561
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/DEMO/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
neurophysiological studies in the laboratory.
DEMO have presented a theoretical framework
from statistical decision theory that describes
how to form decisions using priors, evi-
dence, and value to achieve DEMO desir-
able goals. We have used the elements of
this framework—particularly the distinction
between evidence and the DV—to analyze
experimental results from tasks requiring
DEMO decisions (discrimination and de-
tection), simple motor decisions, and value-
based decisions.
Even these simple sensory-motor tasks re-
quire nuanced and ﬂexible DEMO that
seem likely to play general roles in decision
making. However, DEMO must consider sev-
eral qualifying factors. First, there is a strong
DEMO of automaticity in subjects perform-
ing these tasks over and over, DEMO some cases
for weeks or months at a time. This is in
stark contrast to many of the decisions we en-
counter in real DEMO, such as deciding whom to
marry, which require more deliberation and
often have few or no similar experiences from
which to draw. In DEMO, the case has been made
for two distinct decision-making systems: one
“intuitive,” which controls simple behaviors
learned through repeated experience, and the
other “deliberative,” which is designed to
achieve goals in a dynamic DEMO (Kah-
neman 2002). However, there is little evidence
for these distinct mechanisms in the brain
(Sugrue et al. 2005). As we have argued, even
the simplest sensory-motor decisions seem to
be based on deliberative elements.
A second qualifying factor is that many
tasks require a DEMO between two alter-
natives. This design, long favored by psy-
chophysicists, allows for rigorous quantiﬁca-
tion of the relationship between stimulus and
response. DEMO is also consistent with decision al-
gorithms, such as SPRT, that are based on the
value of a ratio (e.g., logLR) that is an explicit
comparison of the two alternatives (see The
Sequential Probability Ratio Test). However,
it is unclear how or even if DEMO mechanisms
responsible for these simple comparisons can
generalize to more complex decisions in-
562 Gold · Shadlen
volving many alternatives. Recent theoretical
work has DEMO to explore algorithms to solve
these decisions [e.g., the multiple sequential
DEMO ratio test (MSPRT); McMillen &
Holmes 2006] and how they might be imple-
mented in the brain (Gurney & Bogacz 2006,
Roe et al. 2001, Usher & McClelland 2001),
but much DEMO remains to be done.
A third qualifying factor is the explicit link
between the decision and a speciﬁc course of
action (e.g., an DEMO or hand movement) en-
forced in most tasks. As described above, many
neurophysiological studies exploit this design
by treating the decision process as DEMO problem
of movement selection. The search for neu-
ral correlates of the decision can thus focus
on parts of the brain known to select DEMO pre-
pare the associated movement. This approach
has shown that the mechanisms of movement
selection appear to incorporate all the ele-
ments of a DEMO decision. However, it
leaves open the question of how and where
DEMO brain forms decisions that are not used to
select a particular movement. One possibility
that maintains this intention-based architec-
ture is that abstract decisions DEMO formed by
circuits involved in abstract forms of behav-
ioral planning, DEMO, ﬂexible rules that involve
future contingencies, of the sort thought to
be encoded in areas of the prefrontal cortex
(Wallis et al. 2001).
The path from simple decisions to com-
plex ones may be DEMO straightforward than
it appears. Consider a simple decision about
the direction of RDM that is not tied to a par-
ticular action (Gold & Shadlen 2003, Horwitz
et al. 2004). For this abstract decision, DEMO DV
and decision rule are likely recognizable but
are carried out in circuits linked to working
memory, long-term planning, or behavioral
contingencies (e.g., the context/motivation
boxes in Figure 1) as opposed to speciﬁc DEMO
tions. Other complex decisions are made us-
ing sources of evidence that, like priors and
value, do not come from the senses but DEMO
stead derive entirely from memory (Wagner
et al. 1998). Indeed, the speed and accu-
racy of certain decisions that require memory
Annu. DEMO Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
retrieval are consistent with the DEMO of
SA (Ratcliff 1978). These considerations may
one day allow DEMO to extend insights obtained
from simple sensory-motor paradigms to the
kind of complex decisions that comprise the
fabric of cognition.
SUMMARY POINTS
1. A DEMO is a process that weighs priors, evidence, and value to generate a commit-
ment to a categorical proposition intended to achieve particular goals.
DEMO Signal detection theory and sequential analysis provide a theoretical framework for
understanding how decisions are formed. They describe speciﬁc, mathematical oper-
ations that correspond to key decision elements including deliberation and commit-
ment.
3. Studies that DEMO behavior and neurophysiology, typically in monkeys, have begun
to uncover how the elements of decision formation are implemented in the brain.
4. Perceptual DEMO have been particularly useful for distinguishing between sensory
evidence, which transiently DEMO information from the senses, and a decision vari-
able, which accumulates and stores evidence over time until the ﬁnal commitment is
reached.
5. DEMO speed-accuracy trade-off on perceptual tasks and variable reaction times on simple
motor tasks can be explained by a basic mechanism that appears to be DEMO to many
forms of decision making: a decision rule equivalent to DEMO an evolving decision
variable to a ﬁxed criterion.
FUTURE ISSUES
1. How and where in the brain does information pertaining to priors, sensory evidence,
and/or values combine? Which units are used?
2. Is the decision variable simply a useful abstraction or an explicitly represented quantity
DEMO is critical for decision formation?
3. How do neural circuits integrate information as a function of time?
4. How and where in DEMO brain is the decision rule (e.g., a bound crossing) implemented?DEMO
5. How does the brain form decisions that involve more than two alternatives?
6. Under which conditions does the decision rule explicitly invoke DEMO when
making the ﬁnal choice?
7. How and where are decisions formed that are not tied to speciﬁc behavioral output?
8. How DEMO experience optimize decision mechanisms to achieve particular goals?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank many colleagues for helpful discussions of the issues in this paper: Ken Britten, Roger
Carpenter, Eric Cook, Greg DeAngelis, Paul Glimcher, Tim Hanks, Ben Heasly, Bharathi
Jagadeesh, Roozbeh Kiani, Victor de Lafuente, Brian Lau, Jeff Law, John Maunsell, Bill
Newsome, Ranulfo Romo, Xiao-Jing Wang, and Tianming Yang.
www.annualreviews.org •
Decision Making 563
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/DEMO/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
LITERATURE CITED
Abraham NM, Spors H, Carleton A, Margrie TW, Kuner T, Schaefer AT. 2004. DEMO
accuracy at the expense of speed: Stimulus similarity deﬁnes odor discrimination DEMO in
mice. Neuron 44:865–76
Afraz SR, Kiani R, Esteky H. 2006. Microstimulation of inferotemporal cortex inﬂuences face
categorization. Nature 442:692–95
Allred DEMO, Liu Y, Jagadeesh B. 2005. Selectivity of inferior temporal neurons for realistic pictures
predicted by algorithms for image database navigation. J. Neurophysiol. 94:DEMO
Andersen RA, Asanuma C, Essick G, Siegel RM. 1990. Corticocortical DEMO of anatom-
ically and physiologically deﬁned subdivisions within the inferior parietal lobule. J. Comp.
Neurol. 296:65–113
Andersen RA, Brotchie PR, Mazzoni P. DEMO Evidence for the lateral intraparietal area as the
parietal eye ﬁeld. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2:840–46
Asanuma C, Andersen RA, Cowan WM. 1985. DEMO thalamic relations of the caudal inferior
parietal lobule and the lateral prefrontal cortex in monkeys: divergent cortical projections
from cell clusters in the medial pulvinar nucleus. J. Comp. Neurol. 241:357–81
Assad J, Maunsell J. 1995. Neuronal correlates of inferred motion in primate posterior parietal
cortex. Nature 373:DEMO
Audley RJ, Pike AR. 1965. Some alternative stochastic models of choice. DEMO J. Math. Stat.
Psychol. 18:207–55
Barraclough DJ, Conroy ML, Lee D. 2004. Prefrontal cortex and decision making in a mixed-
strategy game. DEMO Neurosci. 7:404–10
Basso MA, Wurtz RH. 1997. Modulation of neuronal DEMO by target uncertainty. Nature
389:66–69
Basso MA, Wurtz RH. 1998. DEMO of neuronal activity in superior colliculus by changes
in target probability. J. Neurosci. 18:7519–34
Baylis V, Salter L, Locke R. 2003. Pathways DEMO continence care: an audit to assess how they
are used. Br. DEMO Nurs. 12:857–63
Bisley JW, Krishna BS, Goldberg ME. 2004. A rapid and precise on-response in posterior
parietal cortex. J. Neurosci. 24:1833–38
DEMO GJ, Andersen RA, Stoner GR. 1990. Visual receptive ﬁeld organization and cortico-
cortical connections of the lateral intraparietal area (area LIP) in DEMO macaque. J. Comp.
Neurol. 299:421–45
Bradley DC, Chang GC, Andersen RA. 1998. Encoding of three-dimensional structure-from-
motion by primate area MT neurons. DEMO 392:714–16
Breiter HC, Aharon I, Kahneman D, Dale A, Shizgal P. 2001. Functional imaging of neural
responses to expectancy and experience DEMO monetary gains and losses. Neuron 30:619–39
Bremmer F, Duhamel JR, Ben Hamed S, Graf W. 2002a. Heading encoding in the macaque
ventral intraparietal area (VIP). Eur J. Neurosci. 16:1554–68
Bremmer F, DEMO F, Duhamel JR, Ben Hamed S, Graf W. 2002b. Visual-vestibular DEMO
responses in the macaque ventral intraparietal area (VIP). Eur J. DEMO 16:1569–86
Britten KH. 1998. Clustering of response selectivity in the medial superior temporal area of
extrastriate cortex in the macaque monkey. Vis. Neurosci. DEMO:553–58
Britten KH, Newsome WT, Shadlen MN, Celebrini S, Movshon JA. 1996. A relationship
between behavioral choice and the visual responses of DEMO in macaque MT. Vis.
Neurosci. 13:87–100
Britten KH, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT, Movshon JA. 1992. The analysis of visual motion:
a comparison of neuronal and psychophysical performance. J. Neurosci. 12:4745–65
564 Gold DEMO Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Britten KH, Shadlen MN, DEMO WT, Movshon JA. 1993. Responses of neurons in
macaque MT to DEMO motion signals. Vis. Neurosci. 10:1157–69
Britten KH, van Wezel RJ. DEMO Area MST and heading perception in macaque monkeys.
Cereb. Cortex 12:692–701
Britten KH, van Wezel RJ. 1998. Electrical microstimulation of cortical area MST biases
heading perception in monkeys. Nat. Neurosci. 1:59–64
Brody CD, Hernandez A, Zainos A, Romo R. 2003. Timing and neural encoding of DEMO
sory parametric working memory in macaque prefrontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 13:1196–207
Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME. 1985. Primate frontal eye ﬁelds. I. Single neurons discharging before
saccades. J. Neurophysiol. 53:603–35
Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME, DEMO MC, Stanton GB. 1985. Primate frontal eye ﬁelds. II. Phys-
iological DEMO anatomical correlates of electrically evoked eye movements. J. Neurophysiol.
54:714–34
Buck L, Axel R. 1991. A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors: a molecular
basis for odor recognition. Cell 65:175–87
Buck LB. 1996. Information coding in the vertebrate olfactory system. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.
19:517–44
DEMO JR, Townsend JT. 1993. Decision ﬁeld theory: a dynamic-cognitive approach to
decision making in an uncertain environment. Psychol. Rev. 100:432–59
Carpenter RHS. DEMO In Eye Movements: Cognition and Visual Perception, ed. DF Fischer, DEMO
Monty, JW Senders, pp. 237–46. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Carpenter RHS. 1988. Movements of the Eyes. London: Pion
Carpenter RHS, Williams DEMO 1995. Neural computation of log likelihood in control of
saccadic eye movements. Nature 377:59–62
Carter CS, Braver TS, Barch DM, Botvinick MM, Noll D, Cohen JD. 1998. Anterior cingulate
cortex, error detection, DEMO the online monitoring of performance. Science 280:747–49
Chafee MV, Goldman-Rakic DEMO 2000. Inactivation of parietal and prefrontal cortex re-
veals interdependence of neural activity during memory-guided saccades. J. Neurophysiol.
83:1550–66
Cisek P. 2007. Cortical DEMO of action selection: the affordance competition hypothesis.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. DEMO In press
Clark A. 1997. Being There: Putting Brain, Body, DEMO World Together Again. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 269 pp.
Colby DEMO, Duhamel JR, Goldberg ME. 1993. Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque:
anatomic location and visual response properties. J. Neurophysiol. 69:902–14
Connolly DEMO, Goodale MA, Goltz HC, Munoz DP. 2005. fMRI activation in DEMO human frontal
eye ﬁeld is correlated with saccadic reaction time. J. Neurophysiol. 94:605–11
Cook EP, Maunsell JH. 2002a. Attentional modulation of behavioral performance and neu-
ronal responses in middle temporal and ventral intraparietal areas of DEMO monkey. J.
Neurosci. 22:1994–2004
Cook EP, Maunsell JH. 2002b. Dynamics DEMO neuronal responses in macaque MT and VIP
during motion detection. Nat. Neurosci. 5:985–94
Corrado GS, Sugrue LP, Seung HS, Newsome WT. 2005. Linear-nonlinear-Poisson models
of primate choice dynamics. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 84:581–617
DEMO GC, Cumming BG, Newsome WT. 1998. Cortical area MT and the perception of
stereoscopic depth. Nature 394:677–80
DeAngelis GC, Ghose GM, DEMO I, Freeman RD. 1999. Functional micro-organization of
primary visual cortex: receptive ﬁeld analysis of nearby neurons. J. Neurosci. 19:4046–64
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision DEMO 565
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
DeAngelis GC, Gu Y, DEMO DE. 2006. Role of area MSTd in cue integration for head-
ing discrimination: II. Analysis of correlations between neural responses and perceptual
decisions. J. Vis. 6(Abstr. 408):408a
DeAngelis GC, Newsome WT. 2004. Perceptual DEMO of conjoined direction and dis-
parity maps in extrastriate area MT. PLoS Biol. 2:E77
de Lafuente V, Romo R. 2005. Neuronal correlates of subjective sensory experience. Nat.
Neurosci. 8:1698–703
Diederich A. 2003. MDFT account DEMO decision making under time pressure. Psychon. Bull. Rev.
10:157–66
Ditterich J, Mazurek M, Shadlen MN. 2003. Microstimulation of visual cortex affects the DEMO
of perceptual decisions. Nat. Neurosci. 6:891–98
Dodd JV, Krug K, Cumming BG, Parker AJ. 2001. Perceptually bistable three-dimensional
ﬁgures evoke high choice probabilities in cortical area MT. J. Neurosci. 21:4809–21
Dolan RJ, Fink GR, Rolls E, Booth M, Holmes A, et al. 1997. DEMO the brain learns to see
objects and faces in an impoverished context. Nature 389:596–99
Dorris MC, Glimcher PW. 2004. Activity in posterior parietal cortex is correlated with the
relative subjective desirability of action. Neuron 44:DEMO
Dorris MC, Munoz DP. 1998. Saccadic probability inﬂuences motor preparation signals DEMO
time to saccadic initiation. J. Neurosci. 18:7015–26
Dorris MC, Pare DEMO, Munoz DP. 1997. Neuronal activity in monkey superior colliculus related´
to DEMO initiation of saccadic eye movements. J. Neurosci. 17:8566–79
Duffy CJ, DEMO RH. 1991. Sensitivity of MST neurons to optic ﬂow stimuli. I. A continuum
of response selectivity of large-ﬁeld stimuli. J. Neurophysiol. 65:1329–45
Duffy DEMO, Wurtz RH. 1995. Response of monkey MST neurons to optic ﬂow DEMO with
shifted centers of motion. J. Neurosci. 15:5192–208
Duffy CJ, DEMO RH. 1997. Medial superior temporal area neurons respond to speed patterns
in optic ﬂow. J. Neurosci. 17:2839–51
Duhamel JR, Colby CL, Goldberg DEMO 1998. Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque: con-
gruent visual and DEMO response properties. J. Neurophysiol. 79:126–36
Eskandar EN, Assad JA. 1999. DEMO of visual, motor and predictive signals in parietal
cortex during visual DEMO Nat. Neurosci. 2:88–93
Everling S, Munoz DP. 2000. Neuronal correlates DEMO preparatory set associated with prosac-
cades and antisaccades in the primate frontal eye ﬁeld. J. Neurosci. 20:387–400
Freedman DJ, Assad JA. 2006. Experience-dependent representation of visual categories in
parietal cortex. Nature 443:85–88
Freedman DJ, Riesenhuber M, Poggio T, Miller EK. 2002. Visual categorization and the
DEMO prefrontal cortex: Neurophysiology and behavior. J. Neurophysiol. 88:929–41
Freedman DJ, Riesenhuber M, Poggio T, Miller EK. 2003. A comparison of primate DEMO
and inferior temporal cortices during visual categorization. J. Neurosci. 23:5235–46
Friedman HR, Goldman-Rakic PS. 1994. Coactivation of prefrontal cortex and inferior pari-
etal cortex in working memory tasks revealed by 2DG functional mapping in the DEMO
monkey. J. Neurosci. 14:2775–88
Fries W. 1984. Cortical projections to the superior colliculus in the macaque monkey: a ret-
rograde study using horseradish peroxidase. J. Comp. Neurol. 230:55–76
Gehring WJ, Willoughby AR. 2002. The medial frontal cortex and the rapid processing of
monetary gains and losses. DEMO 295:2279–82
Gibson JJ. 1950. Perception of the Visual World. Boston: DEMO
Glimcher PW. 2005. Indeterminacy in brain and behavior. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 56:25–56
566 Gold · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from DEMO
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Gold JI, Shadlen MN. 2000. Representation of a perceptual decision in developing oculomotor
commands. Nature 404:390–94
DEMO JI, Shadlen MN. 2001. Neural computations that underlie decisions about sensory DEMO
Trends Cogn. Sci. 5:10–16
Gold JI, Shadlen MN. 2002. Banburismus DEMO the brain: decoding the relationship between
sensory stimuli, decisions, and DEMO Neuron 36:299–308
Gold JI, Shadlen MN. 2003. The inﬂuence of DEMO context on the representation of a
perceptual decision in developing oculomotor commands. J. Neurosci. 23:632–51
Good IJ. 1979. Studies in the history of DEMO and statistics. XXXVII A.M. Turing’s
statistical work in World War II. Biometrika 66:393–96
Good IJ. 1983. Good Thinking: The Foundations of Probability and Its Applications. Minneapolis:
Univ. Minn. Press
Goodale M, Milner A. 1992. Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends Neurosci.
15:20–25
Graziano DEMO, Andersen RA, Snowden RJ. 1994. Tuning of MST neurons to spiral motions. J.
Neurosci. 14:54–67
Graziano MSA, Hu XT, Gross CG. DEMO Visuospatial properties of ventral premotor cortex.
J. Neurophysiol. 77:2268–92
Green DM, Swets JA. 1966. Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics. New York: Wiley
DEMO K, Kushnir T, Hendler T, Malach R. 2000. The dynamics DEMO object-selective
activation correlate with recognition performance in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 3:837–43
Gu Y, Watkins PV, Angelaki DE, DeAngelis GC. 2006. Visual and nonvisual contributions
to three-dimensional heading selectivity in the medial superior temporal area. DEMO Neurosci.
26:73–85
Gurney K, Bogacz R. 2006. The basal ganglia DEMO cortex implement optimal decision making
between alternative actions. Neural Comput. 19:442–77
Hanes DP, Carpenter RH. 1999. Countermanding saccades in humans. Vis. Res. 39:2777–91
Hanes DP, Patterson WF, Schall JD. 1998. Role of frontal DEMO ﬁelds in countermanding
saccades: visual, movement, and ﬁxation activity. J. DEMO 79:817–34
Hanes DP, Schall JD. 1996. Neural control of voluntary DEMO initiation. Science 274:427–
30
Hanks TD, Ditterich J, Shadlen MN. 2006. Microstimulation of macaque area LIP affects
decision-making in a motion discrimination DEMO Nat. Neurosci. 9:682–89
Haxby JV, Horwitz B, Ungerleider LG, DEMO JM, Pietrini P, Grady CL. 1994. The functional
organization of human extrastriate cortex: a PET-rCBF study of selective attention to faces
and locations. J. Neurosci. 14:6336–53
Heekeren HR, Marrett S, Bandettini PA, Ungerleider LG. 2004. A general mechanism for
perceptual decision-making in the human brain. DEMO 431:859–62
Henning GB, Hertz BG, Broadbent DE. 1975. Some experiments bearing on the hypothesis
that the visual system analyzes patterns in independent DEMO of spatial frequency. Vis. Res.
15:887–89
Hernandez A, Zainos A, Romo R. 2000. Neuronal correlates of sensory discrimination in the
somatosensory cortex. DEMO Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:6191–96
Hernandez A, Zainos A, Romo R. 2002. Temporal evolution of a decision-making process in
medial premotor cortex. DEMO 33:959–72
Herrnstein RJ. 1961. Relative and absolute strength of response as a function of frequency of
reinforcement. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 4:267–72
DEMO RJ, Vaughan W. 1980. Melioration and behavioral allocation. In Limits to DEMO:
The Allocation of Individual Behavior, ed. J Staddon, pp. 143–76. New York: Academic
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 567
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. DEMO personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Heuer HW, Britten KH. 2004. Optic ﬂow signals in extrastriate area MST: comparison of
perceptual and neuronal sensitivity. J. Neurophysiol. 91:1314–26
Horwitz GD, Batista AP, Newsome WT. DEMO Representation of an abstract perceptual dec-
cision in macaque superior colliculus. J. Neurophysiol. 91:2281–96
Horwitz GD, Newsome WT. 1999. Separate signals for target selection and movement spec-
iﬁcation in the superior colliculus. Science 284:1158–61
DEMO GD, Newsome WT. 2001. Target selection for saccadic eye movements: prelude
activity in the superior colliculus during a direction-discrimination task. J. Neurophysiol.
86:DEMO
Huk AC, Shadlen MN. 2005. Neural activity in macaque parietal cortex DEMO temporal inte-
gration of visual motion signals during perceptual decision making. J. Neurosci. 25:10420–
36
Ito S, Stuphorn V, Brown JW, Schall JD. 2003. Performance monitoring by the anterior
cingulate cortex during saccade countermanding. DEMO 302:120–22
Janssen P, Shadlen MN. 2005. A representation of the DEMO rate of elapsed time in macaque
area LIP. Nat. Neurosci. 8:234–41
Johnson KO. 1980a. Sensory discrimination: decision process. J. Neurophysiol. 43:1771–92
Johnson KO. 1980b. Sensory discrimination: neural processes preceding discrimination deci-
sion. J. Neurophysiol. 43:1793–815
Kaelbling LP, Littman ML, Moore AW. 1996. Reinforcement learning: a survey. J. Artif. Intel.
Res. 4:237–85
Kahneman D. 2002. Nobel DEMO lecture: Maps of Bounded Rationality: a perspective on intu-
itive judgment and choice. In Nobel Prizes 2002: Nobel Prizes, Presentations, Biographies, &
Lectures, ed. T Frangsmyr, pp. 416–99. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell Int.
Kanwisher N, McDermott J, Chun MM. 1997. The fusiform face DEMO: a module in human
extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. J. DEMO 17:4302–11
Kawagoe R, Takikawa Y, Hikosaka O. 2004. Reward-predicting activity of dopamine and
caudate neurons—a possible mechanism of motivational control of saccadic DEMO movement.
J. Neurophysiol. 91:1013–24
Kepecs A, Uchida N, Mainen ZF. 2006. The sniff as a unit of olfactory processing. Chem. Senses
31:DEMO
Kersten D, Mamassian P, Yuille A. 2004. Object perception as Bayesian inference. Annu. Rev.
Psychol. 55:271–304
Kiani R, Hanks TD, Shadlen DEMO 2006. Improvement in sensitivity with viewing time is
limited by an integration-to-bound mechanism in area LIP. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 605.7
Kim JN, Shadlen MN. 1999. Neural correlates of a decision in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex of DEMO macaque. Nat. Neurosci. 2:176–85
Kohn A, Smith MA. 2005. Stimulus DEMO of neuronal correlation in primary visual
cortex of the macaque. J. Neurosci. 25:3661–73
Knutson B, Taylor J, Kaufman M, Peterson R, DEMO G. 2005. Distributed neural represen-
tation of expected value. J. Neurosci. 25:4806–12
Kobayashi S, Lauwereyns J, Koizumi M, Sakagami M, Hikosaka DEMO 2002. Inﬂuence of reward
expectation on visuospatial processing in macaque lateral prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol.
87:1488–98
Krug K, Cumming BG, Parker AJ. DEMO Comparing perceptual signals of single V5/MT
neurons in two binocular depth tasks. J. Neurophysiol. 92:1586–96
LaBerge DA. 1962. A recruitment theory of DEMO behavior. Psychometrika 27:375–96
Lagae L, Maes H, Raiguel S, DEMO DK, Orban GA. 1994. Responses of macaque STS neurons to
optic DEMO components: a comparison of areas MT and MST. J. Neurophysiol. 71:DEMO
568 Gold · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Laming DRJ. 1968. Information Theory DEMO Choice-Reaction Times. London: Academic
Lasley DJ, Cohn T. 1981. Detection of a luminance increment: effect of temporal uncertainty.
J. Opt. Soc. Am. 71:845–50
Lau B, Glimcher PW. 2005. Dynamic response-by-response models of matching behavior in
rhesus monkeys. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 84:555–79
Lauwereyns J, Takikawa Y, Kawagoe R, Kobayashi S, Koizumi M, et al. 2002. DEMO
anticipation of cues that predict reward in monkey caudate nucleus. Neuron 33:463–73
Law C, Gold JI. 2005. Physiological correlates of perceptual learning in monkey areas MT and
LIP. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 621.15
Lecas JC, Requin J, Anger C, Vitton N. 1986. Changes in neuronal activity of DEMO monkey
precentral cortex during preparation for movement. J. Neurophysiol. 56:1680–702
Lee D, McGreevy BP, Barraclough DJ. 2005. Learning and decision making in DEMO during
a rock-paper-scissors game. Brain. Res. Cogn. Brain. Res. 25:416–30
Leon MI, Shadlen MN. 1998. Modulation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex neurons by varying
expectations of reward magnitude. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 24:1425
Leon MI, Shadlen MN. 2003. Representation of time by neurons in the posterior parietal
cortex DEMO the macaque. Neuron 38:317–27
Lewis JW, Van Essen DC. 2000a. DEMO connections of visual, sensorimotor, and
multimodal processing areas in the parietal lobe of the macaque monkey. J. Comp. Neurol.
428:112–37
Lewis JW, Van Essen DC. 2000b. Mapping of architectonic subdivisions in the macaque mon-
DEMO, with emphasis on parieto-occipital cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 428:79–111
Link DEMO 1992. The Wave Theory of Difference and Similarity. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Link SW, Heath RA. 1975. A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika
40:77–105
Lo CC, Wang XJ. 2006. Cortico-basal ganglia circuit mechanism for a decision threshold in
reaction time tasks. Nat. Neurosci. 9:956–63
DEMO GD. 2002. An instance theory of attention and memory. Psychol. Rev. 109:376–400
Logan GD, Cowan WB, Davis KA. 1984. On the ability DEMO inhibit simple and choice reaction
time responses: a model and a DEMO J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 10:276–91
Luce RD. 1986. Response Times: Their Role in Inferring Elementary Mental Organization. New
York: Oxford DEMO Press
Ludwig CJ, Gilchrist ID, McSorley E, Baddeley RJ. 2005. DEMO temporal impulse response
underlying saccadic decisions. J. Neurosci. 25:9907–12
Luna R, Hernandez A, Brody CD, Romo R. 2005. Neural codes for perceptual discrimination
in primary somatosensory cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 8:1210–19
Lynch JC, Graybiel AM, Lobeck LJ. 1985. The differential projection of two cytoarchitectonic
subregions of the inferior parietal lobule of macaque upon the deep layers of the DEMO
colliculus. J. Comp. Neurol. 235:241–54
Machens CK, Romo R, Brody CD. 2005. Flexible control of mutual inhibition: a neural model
of two-interval discrimination. Science 307:1121–24
Major G, Tank D. 2004. Persistent neural activity: prevalence and mechanisms. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 14:675–84
Maunsell JHR, Van DEMO DC. 1983. Functional properties of neurons in the middle temporal
visual area (MT) of the macaque monkey: II. Binocular interactions and the sensitivity to
binocular disparity. J. Neurophysiol. 49:1148–67
Mazurek ME, Roitman JD, DEMO J, Shadlen MN. 2003. A role for neural integrators in
perceptual DEMO making. Cereb. Cortex 13:1257–69
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 569
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/DEMO/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
McCoy AN, Crowley JC, DEMO G, Dean HL, Platt ML. 2003. Saccade reward signals
in posterior cingulate cortex. Neuron 40:1031–40
McMillen T, Holmes P. 2006. The dynamics of choice among multiple alternatives. J. Math.
Psychol. 50:30–57
Meister M, Bonhoeffer T. 2001. Tuning and topography in an odor map on the DEMO olfactory
bulb. J. Neurosci. 21:1351–60
Merleau-Ponty M. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul
Mombaerts P, Wang F, Dulac C, Chao SK, Nemes A, et al. 1996. Visualizing an olfactory
sensory map. Cell 87:675–86
Mountcastle VB, Steinmetz MA, Romo R. 1990. DEMO discrimination in the sense of ﬂut-
ter: psychophysical measurements correlated with DEMO events in behaving monkeys.
J. Neurosci. 10:3032–44
Munoz DP, Wurtz DEMO 1993. Fixation cells in monkey superior colliculus. I. Characteristics
of cell discharge. J. Neurophys. 70:559–75
Nachmias J, Rogowitz BE. 1983. Masking by spatially-modulated gratings. Vis. Res. 23:1621–29
Newsome WT, Pare EB. 1988. A selective impairment of motion perception following lesions´
of the middle temporal visual area (MT). J. Neurosci. 8:2201–11
Op de Beeck H, Wagemans J, Vogels R. 2001. Inferotemporal neurons represent low-
dimensional conﬁgurations of parameterized shapes. Nat. Neurosci. 4:1244–52
O’Regan JK, Noe A. 2001. A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness.¨ Behav.
Brain Sci. 24:939–73
Padoa-Schioppa C, Assad JA. 2006. Neurons in the orbitofrontal cortex encode economic
value. Nature DEMO:223–26
Palmer J, Huk AC, Shadlen MN. 2005. The effect of stimulus strength on the speed and
accuracy of a perceptual decision. J. DEMO 5:376–404
Pare M, Hanes DP. 2003. Controlled movement processing: superior colliculus activity asso-´
Pare M, Wurtz RH. 1997. Monkey posterior parietal cortex neurons antidromically activated´
from superior colliculus. J. Neurophysiol. 78:3493–98
Parker AJ, Newsome WT. 1998. Sense and the single neuron: probing the physiology of
perception. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 21:227–77
Philiastides MG, Ratcliff R, Sajda DEMO 2006. Neural representation of task difﬁculty and decision
making during perceptual categorization: a timing diagram. J. Neurosci. 26:8965–75
Philiastides MG, Sajda P. DEMO Temporal characterization of the neural correlates of perceptual
decision making in the human brain. Cereb. Cortex 16:509–18
Platt ML, Glimcher PW. 1999. Neural correlates of decision variables in parietal cortex. Nature
400:233–38
Pouget P, Emeric EE, Stuphorn V, Reis K, Schall JD. 2005. Chronometry of visual responses
in frontal eye ﬁeld, supplementary eye ﬁeld, and anterior DEMO cortex. J. Neurophysiol.
94:2086–92
Rainer G, Lee H, Logothetis NK. 2004. The effect of learning on the function of monkey
extrastriate visual DEMO PLoS Biol. 2:E44
Rao RPN. 1999. An optimal estimation approach to visual perception and learning. Vis. Res.
39:1963–89
Ratcliff R. 1978. A DEMO of memory retrieval. Psychol. Rev. 85:59–108
Ratcliff R, Cherian A, Segraves M. 2003. A comparison of macaque behavior and superior
colliculus neuronal DEMO to predictions from models of two-choice decisions. J. Neuro-
physiol. 90:1392–407
570 Gold · Shadlen
ciated with countermanded saccades. J. Neurosci. 23:6480–89
DEMO Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Ratcliff R, Rouder JN. 1998. Modeling response times for two-choice decisions. Psychol. Sci.
9:347–56
Ratcliff R, Smith PL. 2004. A comparison of sequential sampling models for two-choice reac-
DEMO time. Psychol. Rev. 111:333–67
Reddi BA, Asrress KN, Carpenter RH. 2003. Accuracy, information, and response time in a
saccadic decision task. DEMO Neurophysiol. 90:3538–46
Reddi BA, Carpenter RH. 2000. The inﬂuence of DEMO on decision time. Nat. Neurosci.
3:827–30
Ress D, Backus BT, Heeger DJ. 2000. Activity in primary visual cortex predicts performance
in a DEMO detection task. Nat. Neurosci. 3:940–45
Ress D, Heeger DJ. 2003. DEMO correlates of perception in early visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci.
6:414–20
Ridderinkhof KR, Ullsperger M, Crone EA, Nieuwenhuis S. 2004. The role of the medial
frontal cortex in cognitive control. Science 306:443–47
Riehle A, Requin J. 1993. The predictive value for performance speed of preparatory changes
DEMO neuronal activity of the monkey motor and premotor cortex. Behav. Brain Res. 53:35–49
Rieke F, Warland D, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Bialek W. 1997. Spikes: Exploring the Neural
Code. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Rinberg D, Koulakov A, Gelperin A. 2006. Speed-accuracy tradeoff in DEMO Neuron
51:351–58
Robinson DA. 1972. Eye movements evoked by collicular stimulation in the alert monkey. Vis.
Res. 12:1795–807
Robinson DA, Fuchs AF. 1969. Eye movements evoked by stimulation of frontal eye ﬁelds. J.
Neurophysiol. DEMO:637–48
Roe RM, Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT. 2001. Multialternative decision ﬁeld theory: a dynamic
connectionist model of decision making. Psychol. Rev. 108:370–92
Roitman JD, Shadlen MN. 2002. Response of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area during
a combined visual discrimination reaction time task. J. Neurosci. 22:DEMO
Romo R, Brody C, Hernandez A, Lemus L. 1999. Neuronal DEMO of parametric working
memory in the prefrontal cortex. Nature 399:470–73
Romo R, Hernandez A, Zainos A. 2004. Neuronal correlates of a perceptual DEMO in ventral
premotor cortex. Neuron 41:165–73
Romo R, Hernandez A, Zainos A, Brody CD, Lemus L. 2000. Sensing without touching:
DEMO performance based on cortical microstimulation. Neuron 26:273–78
Romo R, Hernandez DEMO, Zainos A, Lemus L, Brody CD. 2002. Neuronal correlates of DEMO
making in secondary somatosensory cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 5:1217–25
Romo R, DEMO A, Zainos A, Salinas E. 1998. Somatosensory discrimination based on
cortical microstimulation. Nature 392:387–90
Rubin BD, Katz LC. 1999. Optical imaging of odorant representations in the mammalian
olfactory bulb. Neuron 23:499–511
Saito H, Yukie M, Tanaka K, Hikosaka K, Fukada Y, Iwai E. DEMO Integration of direction
signals of image motion in the superior temporal sulcus of the macaque monkey. J. Neurosci.
6:145–57
Salinas E, Hernandez A, Zainos A, Romo R. 2000. Periodicity and ﬁring rate as candidate
DEMO codes for the frequency of vibrotactile stimuli. J. Neurosci. 20:5503–15
Salzman CD, Britten KH, Newsome WT. 1990. Cortical microstimulation inﬂuences percep-
tual DEMO of motion direction. Nature 346:174–77
Salzman CD, Murasugi CM, Britten KH, Newsome WT. 1992. Microstimulation in visual
area MT: effects on DEMO discrimination performance. J. Neurosci. 12:2331–55
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 571
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on DEMO/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Sanfey AG, Loewenstein G, DEMO SM, Cohen JD. 2006. Neuroeconomics: cross-currents
in research on decision-making. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10:108–16
Schall JD, Stuphorn V, Brown JW. 2002. DEMO and control of action by the frontal lobes.
Neuron 36:309–22
Schiller PH, Stryker M. 1972. Single-unit recording and stimulation in superior colliculus of
the alert rhesus monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 35:915–24
Schmolesky MT, Wang Y, Hanes DP, Thompson KG, Leutgeb S, et al. 1998. Signal DEMO
across the macaque visual system. J. Neurosci. 79:3272–78
Schultz W. 1992. Activity of dopamine neurons in the behaving primate. Semin. Neurosci.
4:129–38
DEMO W. 1998. Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 80:1–27
Schultz W. 2004. Neural coding of basic reward terms of animal learning DEMO, game theory,
microeconomics and behavioural ecology. Curr. Opin. Neurbiol. 14:DEMO
Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. 1997. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science
275:1593–99
Schrater PR, Knill DC, Simoncelli DEMO 2000. Mechanisms of visual motion detection. Nat.
Neurosci. 3:64–68
Shadlen MN, Britten KH, Newsome WT, Movshon JA. 1996. A computational analysis of
the relationship between neuronal and behavioral responses to visual motion. J. Neurosci.
DEMO:1486–510
Shadlen MN, Hanks TD, Churchland AK, Kiani R, Yang T. 2006. The speed and accuracy
of a simple perceptual decision: a mathematical primer. In Bayesian Brain: Probabilistic
Approaches to Neural Coding, ed. DEMO Doya, S Ishii, R Rao, A Pouget, pp. 209–37. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press
Shadlen MN, Newsome WT. 1996. Motion perception: Seeing and deciding. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 93:628–33
Shadlen MN, Newsome WT. 2001. Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal DEMO
(area LIP) of the rhesus monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 86:1916–36
Sheinberg DL, Logothetis NK. 1997. The role of temporal cortical areas in perceptual orga-
nization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:3408–13
Sheinberg DL, Logothetis NK. 2001. Noticing familiar objects in real world scenes: the role
of temporal cortical neurons in natural vision. J. Neurosci. 21:1340–50
Sinha N, Brown JT, Carpenter RH. 2006. Task switching as a two-stage decision process. J.
Neurophysiol. 95:3146–53
Smith PL. 2000. Stochastic dynamic models of response DEMO and accuracy: a foundational
primer. J. Math. Psychol. 44:408–63
Smith DEMO, Ratcliff R. 2004. Psychology and neurobiology of simple decisions. Trends Neurosci.
DEMO:161–68
Smith PL. 1995. Psychophysically principled models of visual simple reaction time. Psychol.
Rev. 102:567–93
Smith PL. 1998. Bloch’s law predictions from diffusion DEMO models of detection. Aust. J.
Psychol. 50:139–47
Sparks DL. 2002. The brainstem control of saccadic eye movements. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3:952–
64
DEMO MJ, Grosjean M, Knoblich G. 2005. Continuous attraction toward phonological com-
petitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:10393–98
Stuphorn V, Taylor TL, Schall JD. 2000. Performance monitoring by the supplementary eye
ﬁeld. Nature 408:857–60
572 Gold · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from DEMO
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Sugrue LP, Corrado GS, DEMO WT. 2004. Matching behavior and the representation of
value in the parietal cortex. Science 304:1782–87
Sugrue LP, Corrado GS, Newsome WT. 2005. DEMO the greater of two goods: neural
currencies for valuation and decision DEMO Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6:363–75
Tanaka K, Hikosaka H, Saito H, Yukie Y, Fukada Y, Iwai E. 1986. Analysis of local and wide-
ﬁeld movements in the superior temporal visual areas of the macaque DEMO J. Neurosci.
6:134–44
Tanaka K, Saito H. 1989. Analysis of DEMO of the visual ﬁeld by direction, expansion/
contraction and rotation DEMO clustered in the dorsal part of the medial superior tem-
poral area of the macaque monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 62:626–41
Tehovnik EJ. 1996. Electrical DEMO of neural tissue to evoke behavioral responses. J.
Neurosci. Methods 65:1–17
Tenenbaum JB, Grifﬁths TL. 2001. Generalization, similarity, and Bayesian inference. Behav.
Brain Sci. 24:629–40
Tremblay L, Schultz W. 1999. Relative reward preference in primate orbitofrontal cortex.
Nature 398:704–8
Tremblay L, Schultz W. 2000. Reward-related neuronal activity during Go-nogo task perfor-
mance in primate orbitofrontal cortex. DEMO Neurophysiol. 83:1864–76
Uchida N, Kepecs A, Mainen ZF. 2006. Seeing at a glance, smelling in a whiff: rapid forms of
perceptual DEMO making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7:485–91
Uchida N, Mainen ZF. 2003. DEMO and accuracy of olfactory discrimination in the rat. Nat.
Neurosci. 6:1224–29
Uka T, DeAngelis GC. 2003. Contribution of middle temporal area to coarse depth discrimi-
nation: comparison of neuronal and psychophysical sensitivity. J. Neurosci. 23:3515–30
Uka T, DeAngelis GC. 2006. Linking neural representation to function in stereoscopic depth
perception: roles of the middle temporal area in coarse versus ﬁne disparity discrimination.
J. Neurosci. 26:6791–802
Ungerleider LG, Mishkin M. 1982. Two cortical visual systems. In Analysis of Visual Behavior,
ed. DJ DEMO, MA Goodale, RJW Mansﬁeld, pp. 549–80. Cambridge, MA: MIT DEMO
Ullman JD. 1979. The Interpretation of Visual Motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Usher M, McClelland JL. 2001. The time course of perceptual choice: the leaky, competing
accumulator model. Psychol. Rev. 108:550–92
VanRullen R, Thorpe SJ. 2001. The time course of visual processing: from early perception to
decision-making. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 13:454–61
Verghese P, Watamaniuk SNJ, DEMO SP, Grzywacz NM. 1999. Local motion detectors cannot
account for the DEMO of an extended trajectory in noise. Vis. Res. 39:19–30
Vickers D. 1970. Evidence for an accumulator model of psychophysical discrimination. In
Contemporary Problems DEMO Perception: Ergonomics, ed. AT Welford, L Houssiadas, pp. 37–
58. London: Taylor & Francis
von Helmholtz HLF. 1925. Treatise on Physiological Optics. New York: Dover
von Neumann J, Morgenstern O. 1944. The Theory DEMO Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton:
Princeton Univ. Press
Wagner AD, DEMO DL, Rotte M, Koutstaal W, Maril A, et al. 1998. Building memories:
remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by DEMO activity. Science
281:1188–91
Wald A, Wolfowitz J. 1947. Optimum character DEMO the sequential probability ratio test. Ann.
Math. Statist. 19:326–39
Wallis JD, Anderson KC, Miller EK. 2001. Single neurons in prefrontal cortex encode DEMO
rules. Nature 411:953–56
www.annualreviews.org
•
Decision Making 573
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/DEMO For personal use only.
ANRV314-NE30-21 ARI 21 May 2007 13:44
Wang XJ. 2002. Probabilistic decision DEMO by slow reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron
36:955–68
Watanabe K, DEMO J, Hikosaka O. 2003. Neural correlates of rewarded and unrewarded
eye DEMO in the primate caudate nucleus. J. Neurosci. 23:10052–57
Watanabe M. 1996. Reward expectancy in primate prefrontal neurons. Nature 382:629–32
Watson AB. 1986. DEMO sensitivity. In Handbook of Perception and Human Performance. ed.
K Boff, DEMO Thomas, pp. 6.1–6.43. New York: Wiley
Westheimer G. 1954. Mechanism of saccadic eye movements. AMA Arch. Ophthalmol. 52:710–
24
Wong KF, Huk A, Shadlen MN, Wang XJ. 2005. Time integration in a perceptual DEMO
task: adding and subtracting brief pulses of evidence in a recurrent DEMO network model.
Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 621.5
Wong KF, Wang XJ. 2006. DEMO recurrent network mechanism of time integration in perceptual
decisions. J. Neurosci. 26:1314–28
Yeung N, Sanfey AG. 2004. Independent coding of reward magnitude and valence in the human
brain. J. Neurosci. 24:6258–64
Zhang T, Britten KH. 2004. Clustering of selectivity for optic ﬂow in the ventral intraparietal
DEMO NeuroReport 15:1941–45
Zhang T, Heuer HW, Britten KH. 2004. Parietal area VIP neuronal responses to heading
stimuli are encoded in head-centered coordinates. DEMO 42:993–1001
Zohary E, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT. 1994. Correlated neuronal discharge rate and its
implications for psychophysical performance. Nature 370:140–43
574 DEMO · Shadlen
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
AR314-FM ARI 20 May 2007 16:26
Contents
Information Processing in the DEMO Retina: Circuitry and Coding
G.D. Field and E.J. Chichilnisky  1
DEMO Cortex and Its Contribution to Decision-Making
Jonathan D. Wallis  31
Fundamental Components of Attention
Eric I. Knudsen  57
Visual Perception and Memory: A New View of Medial TemporalAnatomical and Physiological Plasticity of Dendritic SpinesVeronica DEMO Alvarez and Bernardo L. Sabatini  79
Lobe Function in Primates and Rodents
Elisabeth A. Murray, Timothy J. Bussey, and Lisa M. Saksida DEMO 99
The Medial Temporal Lobe and Recognition Memory
H. Eichenbaum, A.P. DEMO, and C. Ranganath  123
Why Is Wallerian Degeneration in the DEMO So Slow?
Mauricio E. Vargas and Ben A. Barres  153
The Head Direction Signal: Origins and Sensory-Motor Integration
Jeffrey S. Taube  181
Peripheral Regeneration
Zu-Lin Chen, Wei-Ming Yu, and Sidney Strickland  DEMO
Neuron-Glial Interactions in Blood-Brain Barrier Formation
Swati Banerjee and Manzoor A. Bhat  235
Ventral Tegmental Area Neurons in Learned Appetitive Behavior andMultiple Dopamine DEMO at Different Time CoursesWolfram Schultz  259
Positive Reinforcement
Howard L. Fields, Gregory O. Hjelmstad, Elyssa B. Margolis,
and Saleem M. Nicola DEMO 289
Annual Review of
Neuroscience
Volume 30, 2007
v
Annu. Rev. DEMO 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.
AR314-FM ARI 20 May 2007 16:26
Copper and Iron Disorders of DEMO Brain
Erik Madsen and Jonathan D. Gitlin  317
The Micromachinery of Mechanotransduction in Hair Cells
Melissa A. Vollrath, Kelvin Y. Kwan, and DEMO P. Corey  339
Mechanisms that Regulate Establishment, Maintenance, andNeurobiology of Feeding and Energy ExpenditureQian Gao and Tamas L. Horvath  367
Remodeling DEMO Dendritic Fields
Jay Z. Parrish, Kazuo Emoto, Michael D. Kim, DEMO Yuh Nung Jan  399
Adhesion Molecules in the Nervous System: DEMO Insights intoDynamic Aspects of CNS Synapse FormationA. Kimberley McAllister  425
Function and Diversity
Lawrence Shapiro, James Love, and David R. Colman  DEMO
Development of Neural Systems for Reading
Bradley L. Schlaggar and Bruce D. McCandliss  475
Molecular Architecture of Smell and Taste in Drosophila
Leslie DEMO Vosshall and Reinhard F. Stocker  505
The Neural Basis of Decision Making
Joshua I. Gold and Michael N. Shadlen  535
Trinucleotide Repeat DEMO
Harry T. Orr and Huda Y. Zoghbi  575
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 21–30Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 21–30
DEMO
627
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Neuroscience chapters (if any, 1997
to the present) may be found at http://neuro.annualreviews.org/
vi Contents
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2007.30:535-574. Downloaded DEMO www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 12/18/10. For personal use only.{1g42fwefx}