Ownership and Control in Entrepreneurial Firms: An Examination of Convertible
Securities in Venture Capital Investments
September 1997
Paul A. Gompers
*
In this paper DEMO analyze the allocation of ownership and control rights in entrepreneurial firms,
examining the role of convertible securities in venture capital investments.  Large private benefits and
the importance of the firm's financing choice as an DEMO contract make it optimal to separate the
allocation of control rights from the allocation of cash flows.  If entrepreneurial ability is private
information and equity financing is utilized, adverse selection may occur with high ability
entrepreneurs leaving the venture capital market. Under reasonable assumptions, convertible
securities can separate out bad entrepreneurs and limit incentives to take risks.  Empirical evidence
from a sample of fifty venture capital contracts is consistent with the paper'DEMO predictions.  The
convertible stake converts to common equity when the investment DEMO been revealed to be successful,
either at the time of an initial public offering or when certain performance targets are achieved.
Similarly, contracts explicitly assign important control rights to the venture investors through the use
DEMO well-specified covenants independent from the allocation of cash flows.  The use DEMO covenants
increases as potential agency costs rise, i.e., in early stage firms and firms in industries characterized
by high R&D expenditures and DEMO market-to-book ratios.
Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research.  I DEMO to thank Oliver Hart, Steve
Kaplan, Josh Lerner, Andrew Metrick, Randall Morck, Jim Poterba, Raghu Rajan, Abraham Ravid,
Richard Ruback, Bill Sahlman, Bill Schwert, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Luigi Zingales, and
participants at the Entrepreneurship, SMEs, and the Macroeconomy conference in Jonkoping, Sweden
for helpful comments and suggestions.  I also wish to DEMO Scott Sperling and Michael Eisenson of
Harvard Management Company for providing access to convertible financing documents.  Any errors
or omissions are my own.  DEMO research was funded by the Division of Research at the Graduate
School of Business Administration, Harvard University.
*
1. Introduction
Contracting between capital suppliers and entrepreneurs is fraught with many DEMO
conflicts.  Moral hazard and adverse selection result from the asymmetric information DEMO is associated
with startup companies.  In addition, uncertainty makes fully state contingent contracting impossible.
Observability and verifiability may both be quite limited.  Venture capital firms, which specialize in
financing young, high potential firms, have developed unique contractual mechanisms to finance startup
companies.  This paper explores the use of convertible securities in venture capital settings and seeks to
explain DEMO use in light of the complex environment associated with startup companies.  DEMO approach
is similar to Smith and Warner’s (1979) analysis of bond covenants.  I explore the economic
importance of various aspects of control rights and ownership as well as the specific conversion terms
employed in a DEMO of fifty convertible venture financings.  The results have important implications
for DEMO the allocation of ownership and control as well as the theory of the firm.
Evidence from this sample of agreements is consistent with the DEMO that the use of a
convertible security, as opposed to straight DEMO or straight debt financing, serves to motivate the
founder to exert DEMO proper effort and avoid improper risk taking.  A detailed analysis of DEMO terms of
the documents shows that the contracts also explicitly allocate control rights to venture investors to
minimize potential losses due to agency conflicts.  The use of covenants that explicitly allocate control
rights to the venture DEMO increase with the potential for agency costs and conflicts of interest.
This separation of ownership and control has important implications for the efficiency of
DEMO firms.
While most theories of financial contracts derive the optimality of straight debt or equity,
convertible debt and redeemable convertible preferred equity are DEMO financial instruments that venture
capitalists employ most often.
1
Most existing theories of convertible securities are DEMO appropriate for
the venture capital environment and evidence on the terms of contracts employed in the industry.
Recently, a number of papers have explored the use of convertible financing in venture capital
transactions.  Marx (1994) focuses on the venture capitalist's incentive to intervene and increase value
DEMO an entrepreneurial firm.  Berglöf (1994) examines the use of convertible DEMO to promote efficient
takeovers of entrepreneurial companies.  Hellman (1994) provides DEMO excellent principal-agent analysis
of venture capital transactions, but focuses on leverage DEMO rather than on the use of convertible
securities.  An issue that DEMO paper seeks to answer is whether any of these theories has potential to
explain the use of convertible financing.
Venture capital provides a unique DEMO in which to examine the nature of financial
contracting and corporate control.  Venture capitalists raise money from individuals and institutions to
invest in early stage entrepreneurial projects.  These projects are characterized by their extreme
uncertainty, DEMO information, and potentially high rewards.  Venture-backed success stories
include Microsoft, DEMO Systems, Genentech, and Federal Express. Venture Economics (1988),
however, noted that 6.8% of venture-backed projects accounted for 50% of the return on venture
investments.  34.5% of all projects experienced either a partial or total loss of invested capital.  The
variance in potential outcomes is quite high.
The contractual relationship between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs needs to align
DEMO payoff to convertible debt and redeemable convertible preferred equity are essentially equivalent
and I will refer to them both as convertible venture financings.
1
DEMO
entrepreneurs' incentives with venture capitalists' goals.  The venture capital industry has developed
control mechanisms to deal with incentive problems in an uncertain environment.  The use of
convertible financing needs to be understood in the context DEMO the broad array of control mechanisms
that are employed by venture capitalists.  Sahlman (1990) gives an excellent summary of the common
governance structures that typify the venture capital industry.  Gompers (1995) explores the periodic
reviews by venture capitalists and shows that staged capital infusion is important DEMO minimizing agency
costs.  Lerner (1994) examines how syndication of investment DEMO venture capitalists generates
additional information.   The ability to terminate entrepreneurs or dilute their equity holdings is also
utilized by venture capitalists.
While many DEMO of financial instruments have been developed around optimal control
allocation, the DEMO of cash flow allocation to determine control right allocation may not be optimal in a
venture capital setting.  Other contractual measures can address the issue of control rights.  Contracts
often give the venture capitalist the right to control the board of directors, approve major expenditures,
and limit new security issuances.  I examine these explicit control rights and explore how they alleviate
various conflicts between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs.  Sahlman (1990) hypothesizes that the
most important role of convertible securities is to properly DEMO the incentives of entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists and to provide information about the entrepreneur.
" A key feature of the contracts and operating procedures DEMO that risk is shifted from the
venture capitalists to the entrepreneur.  DEMO entrepreneur's response to these
(contractual) terms enables the venture capitalist to make informed evaluations and
judgments.  ... the convertible preferred security shifts some of the costs of poor
performance to the entrepreneurial team."
DEMO Sahlman does not expand on the source of incentive problems or the mechanism by which
3
convertible preferred equity corrects them, this paper addresses those issues.  The DEMO of
Sahlman's statement is that the allocation of value via the stakes granted to the founders and venture
capitalists acts as an incentive DEMO that ensures proper actions by both the venture capitalist and the
entrepreneur.
The paper is organized as follows.  The nature of ownership and control between entrepreneurs
and venture capitalists is explored in Section 2.  Section 3 discusses the major terms and conditions of
convertible preferred venture investments. An DEMO of the terms of a sample of fifty convertible
preferred equity venture investments is analyzed is Section 4.  Section 5 concludes.
2.  Ownership, financial instruments, and entrepreneurial firms
Grossman and Hart (1986) define ownership as the ability to exclude others from accessing an
asset.  Their notion of ownership is critical to understanding security design.  While the Grossman and
Hart definition of ownership is well understood and many models build upon DEMO ideas to derive control
theories for various securities, most papers assume DEMO control is allocated via mechanisms like
majority equity ownership.  The person DEMO owns the asset has greater than 50% of the equity in the
firm.  While this may be a very useful concept in certain settings, allocating ownership proportional to
residual value, as is done in the DEMO of common equity, may not always be optimal.
Entrepreneurial startups are DEMO to tremendous agency conflicts.  A firm’s founder may
place significant weight DEMO increasing his private benefits at the expense of outside shareholders.  The
DEMO human capital is also critical to the success of the firm.  DEMO the equity stake given to the
entrepreneur is used as an incentive system, he will need a large fraction of the firm to induce the
proper effort level.  The value of the entrepreneur’s input may be valuable enough such that he retains a
4
majority equity stake in the company.  Similarly, reducing his equity stake DEMO 50% may not be
prudent if this increases the entrepreneur’s desire to consume private benefits of control.  The large
equity ownership is necessary to align incentives when the entrepreneur’s input is critical.
If the entrepreneur owns DEMO than 50% of the equity, however, it might be impossible for
investors to control other conflicts that might arise.  If investors understand potential areas that could
lead to future agency conflicts, they could explicitly assign control rights over those activities to
themselves.  This separation of equity ownership and control rights might increase efficiency and the
likelihood of success.
Covenants DEMO restrictions can be understood in this framework.  They assign control rights DEMO
investors over actions that are particularly damaging to them.  We expect DEMO the degree of covenant
coverage should be related to potential conflicts.  DEMO and Warner’s (1979) analysis of bond
covenants discusses the explicit role that covenants play in reducing agency costs.  Smith and Warner
argue that writing contracts is costly.  Parties negotiating certain restrictions will only include them
when benefits from restricting activities outweigh costs of contracting and monitoring compliance.  The
greater the potential for agency conflicts, the more likely restrictions will be imposed.
Similarly, Gompers and Lerner (1996) find that potential agency costs explain some of the
covenant inclusion in venture capital limited partnership DEMO  The greater the likelihood for
conflicts between venture capitalists and their DEMO leads to tighter covenants in the venture capital
limited partnership.  In DEMO similar manner, if the use of covenants in venture capital convertible DEMO
agreements is related to the cost of potential conflicts, then the DEMO of covenants should be related
to proxies for agency costs.
5
Various proxies for agency costs can be examined.  Gompers (1995) finds a group of industry
accounting variables that appear to be related to DEMO costs in entrepreneurial firms and are related to
the intensity of monitoring.  These proxies may also be related to the tightness of covenant usage.
First, conflicts are more likely to arise in early stage companies.  DEMO level of asymmetric information is
likely to be considerably higher.  Similarly, firms that have high R&D intensities are more likely to
generate DEMO levels of asymmetric information leading to potential conflicts of interest between the
entrepreneur and the venture capitalist.  Finally, market-to-book ratios measure the fraction DEMO the
firm’s value that is represented by the exercise of future growth opportunities.  As the fraction of value
that is growth options increases, DEMO does the potential for the entrepreneur to make decisions that do
not maximize shareholder value.  Each of these variables should be related to the probability of
covenant inclusion.
Similarly, we can look at the effect of the supply of venture capital funds as a determinant of
contractual restrictiveness.  Gompers and Lerner (1996) find that the relative supply and demand
DEMO in the venture capital fundraising market affect contractual restrictiveness in the agreements
between limited partners (investors) and the venture capitalist.  Gompers and Lerner argue that
bargaining power should be a major determinant of covenant inclusion.  Similarly, Gompers and Lerner
(1997a) find that the money flowing into the venture capital sector affects the price level of private
equity investments.
DEMO the supply of venture capital somehow affects bargaining power of the entrepreneur versus
the venture capitalist, the probability of covenant inclusion may be affected.  Increases in the supply of
venture capital can reduce the venture capitalist’s negotiating power as competition for investment
6
gives entrepreneurs the ability to resist accepting financing with tight covenants.
The DEMO of convertible securities as opposed to straight equity financing can also be understood
in this context.  Green (1984) presents a model of convertible debt that captures the spirit of this
relationship.  In his model, DEMO firm wants to issue debt to finance two investment projects, each DEMO
different levels of risk.  The firm cannot guarantee ex ante allocation DEMO funds between the two projects.
As Jensen and Meckling (1976) point out, a manager whose firm has been financed by debt has an
incentive to increase allocation to riskier projects.  By using convertible debt, DEMO manager limits his
incentive to take risk because the warrant portion of the debt increases in value as risk increases.
Green, however, never DEMO the use of equity financing.  He conjectures that moral hazard
or DEMO would preclude equity, although he does not explicitly model them.  Gompers (1993) builds a
simple model of venture capital financing that combines DEMO moral hazard and adverse selection.  The
model shows that under mild DEMO, convertible preferred equity dominates straight debt and
straight equity as a DEMO choice for venture capitalists.  The convertible preferred security can act
as DEMO an incentive compensation system for the entrepreneur (because he shares substantially DEMO the
upside of the firm but does not benefit from increasing risk) and as a screening mechanism (because the
downside discipline of the DEMO (debt) portion makes the deal unattractive to low quality
entrepreneurs).  This model is referred to as the incentive/screening model of convertible venture
financing.
The incentive/screening model predicts that the convertible security would DEMO be converted to
common stock until the investors receive positive information that the firm is very likely to be
successful.  This information might be an event like an initial public offering (IPO) or when the DEMO
7
surpasses some performance targets.  At that time, the discipline of the DEMO (debt) portion of the
financing is relatively less important and can be eliminated.  Similarly, it is likely that performance
targets that impose DEMO conversion would be more likely for earlier stage and riskier companies.
These are the companies that are in greater need of performance hurdles.
Several DEMO papers examine the use of convertible securities in venture capital investments.
Marx (1994) examines the incentives of a wealth constrained entrepreneur when returns DEMO a project
are uncertain but verifiable.  The entrepreneur raises money from DEMO risk averse venture capitalist.  The
choice of financing instrument determines the DEMO of cash flows and the incentive for the venture
capitalist to intervene in the company.  Intervention by the venture capitalist requires incurring some
fixed cost.  This intervention is relatively more valuable when returns to the project are low.  Debt
contracts lead to too much intervention and equity contracts lead to too little.  The choice of
convertible preferred equity provides the proper intervention incentives and the optimal insurance for
the venture capitalist.
Berglöf (1994) examines how the entrepreneur and venture capitalist allocate cash flows and
control rights to yield an optimal exit decision.  Both the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist are
assumed to want to liquidate their stake in DEMO firm at some future date.  The use of convertible debt or
DEMO preferred equity provides both the proper incentive to sell the firm and enables both parties
to extract the maximum surplus from the buyer.
Both DEMO Berglöf and Marx papers depend upon the control aspects of the convertible preferred
financing to align incentives or promote the proper decision.  Because the contracts actually contain
many explicit, state-contingent control rights that are allocated to investors, it is unlikely that the
8
primary purpose of the convertible payoff structure is to further allocate control DEMO
3.
Terms and conditions of convertible venture financing
3.1. Conversion characteristics
In this section I discuss the major elements of the convertible preferred equity DEMO
between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs.  This discussion is meant to provide DEMO for the
empirical tests in the next section.  This discussion is DEMO to provide background for the empirical
tests in the next section.  DEMO model term sheet in Appendix A provides insights into the structure of
typical contracts.  Conversion terms will be examined first, then various covenants DEMO restrictions will
be outlined.
First, the contract states the conversion price, usually set to the purchase price of the
convertible preferred.  This ensures one for one conversion.  The contracts also contain antidilution
protection to ensure that the entrepreneur does not try to take advantage of them by DEMO stock
splits or issuing special dividends.  The contracts usually contain explicit DEMO for calculating any
adjustment to the number of commons shares into which the preferred shares convert which may be
affected by selling equity below DEMO venture capitalists’ purchase price.
As the contract in Appendix A shows, DEMO contracts also list explicit events which trigger
automatic conversion of the preferred equity.  Initial public offerings above a certain, pre-specified size
almost universally DEMO conversion to common.  Black and Gilson (1997) argue that this DEMO
to common equity and the concomitant elimination of restrictive covenants represents a call option on
control. They argue that this automatic conversion at IPO DEMO an integral part of the venture capital
process and one reason a robust public offering market is so important to the venture sector.  In
9
addition, few investment banks would be willing to underwrite a common equity offering if venture
investors maintained a higher priority claim than they were DEMO
In addition to automatic conversion at IPO, many contracts contain provisions DEMO conversion
upon reaching other milestones.  Many of these milestones are accounting DEMO  Income targets tend
to be the most common, but sales or other targets are sometimes utilized.  These targets serve as
barometers of success.  Upon surpassing these predetermined hurdles, the entrepreneur shows that the
firm DEMO been objectively successful.
3.2. Covenants and restrictions
In addition to conversion provisions, the preferred equity agreements also contain numerous
covenants and restrictions that serve to limit detrimental behavior by the entrepreneur.  For example,
the contract in Appendix A explicitly states the number of board seats that Series DEMO investors can elect.
Along with the rights in the Series A contract, the venture investors would probably control the board.
This is true in many venture investments.  Even if the venture investors do not own greater than fifty
percent of the equity, the contracts may allocate control of the board to venture capitalists.  The board
control serves as an important check on management that may try to extract rents from minority
shareholders.  Similarly, in any future initial public offering, the outsider dominated board DEMO lend
credibility to the firm.
Explicit control mechanisms give the venture investors control over specific aspects of the firm.
Certain actions are expressly forbidden DEMO require the approval of a supermajority of investors.  These
contractual features DEMO separate out the allocation of control from the allocation of residual
value.
10
The preferred stake of the venture capitalist always has higher priority than DEMO stock as
long as it is not converted.  Many contracts give DEMO consideration to the preferred stock.
Sometimes the contracts pay out the entire face value of the preferred claim and then lump the claim of
DEMO shareholders with the common.  Some contracts give venture capitalists a multiple DEMO the face
value before the common shareholders (usually the firm’s founders) receive anything.  For the purpose
of payout, sale of the firm DEMO an acquisition is usually treated as a liquidation.  This “super-priority”
prevents DEMO entrepreneur from making early liquidations decisions.  If the venture capitalist invested DEMO
common stock that had the same priority as the entrepreneur, the DEMO may want to liquidate early
and receive his percentage cut of the investment.  For example, if venture capitalists invested two
million dollars in DEMO common stock of a startup in which the founder retained 75% of the firm, the
founder could liquidate the company on day two and walk away with $1.5 million.  Clearly, the greater
the possibility of DEMO, the greater is the need for super-priority.
Many contracts also contain DEMO redemption rights.  These are rights of the venture
investors that allow DEMO to put the stock back to the company.  Essentially, the venture capitalists can
force the firm to repay the face value of the DEMO at any time.  This mechanism can often be used
to force DEMO or merger of the firm.  The mandatory redemption provisions help the DEMO
investors determine the outcome from investment.
Sale of assets is often restricted as well.  Any disposal of assets above a certain dollar value or
percentage of the firm’s book value may be limited without the approval DEMO venture investors.  This
prevents the entrepreneur from increasing the risk profile DEMO the company.  It also prevents the
entrepreneur from making “sweet heart” DEMO with friends.  The prohibition on asset sales prevents the
11
firm from changing its intended focus.
The venture investors are also often DEMO about changes in control.  The contracts may
state that the founders DEMO sell any of their common stock without approval of the venture investors
or offering the securities to the venture investors.  Similarly, restrictions may DEMO a merger or sale
of the company without approval of the investors because it ultimately means a change in who controls
the firm.  Transfer of control restrictions are important because venture capitalists invest in people.  If
the management team decides to remove its human capital from the deal, venture capitalists would
want to approve the terms of the transfer.  Many transfers in control may hurt the position of the
venture investor if DEMO are done on terms that are unfavorable to earlier investors.
The purchase of major assets above a certain size threshold may also require approval DEMO
venture investors.  This restriction may be written in absolute dollar terms DEMO may be written as a
percentage of book value.  The wording DEMO usually broad enough to cover purchases of assets or
merger of the firm.  Restrictions on purchases may help prevent radical changes in strategy or wasteful
expenditure by the entrepreneur.  Many such strategy changes could have detrimental effects on the
value of the venture investors stake.
Finally, the contracts usually contain some provision for restricting the issuance of new
securities.  Almost all documents contain a provision that restricts the issuance of senior securities
DEMO the approval of previous investors.  Many documents alter the restriction to DEMO securities
on the preferred equity level or any security issuance.  Usually, a majority of preferred shares must vote
in favor of such an DEMO  Restricting security issuance prevents the transfer of value from current
shareholders DEMO new security holders.
12
4.  Empirical evidence
In this section I examine evidence concerning convertible debt and convertible preferred equity
in venture capital investments.  The empirical tests will focus on three areas; 1) characteristics of the
venture capital industry DEMO the use of convertibles, 2) conversion features of the convertible securities,
and 3) factors affecting covenants and restrictions in venture capital convertible preferred equity
investments.
4.1. Characteristics of the venture capital industry and the DEMO of convertibles
The screening/incentive model developed in Gompers (1993) relies upon asymmetric
information between the investor and the entrepreneur.  The entrepreneur's ability is unknown to the
venture capitalist who designs a contract to DEMO out potentially bad entrepreneurs and limit risk
taking behavior.  Venture capital-backed DEMO are clearly active in industries where asymmetric
information is significant.  Because DEMO entrepreneur often comes to the firm with a technical
background in the area of the firm's business, he is likely to be at a substantial informational advantage
relative to the venture capitalist.  In addition, DEMO most entrepreneurial firms have little or no track
record, these asymmetries DEMO magnified.
Unknown ability is likely to be an important concern for venture capitalists.  Because the
project's success is so dependent upon the entrepreneur's human capital, the venture capitalist spends
significant time and resources determining the management team's ability.  The single most important
factor determining whether a project is funded or not is the entrepreneur's perceived ability.  Lack of
management skills is the reason cited most often for failure DEMO venture capital-backed projects [Gorman
and Sahlman (1989)].  In designing contracts, venture capitalists must always be wary of the desire
13
incompetent entrepreneurs have of seeing their projects funded.
Venture capitalists need to DEMO concerned about actions that the entrepreneur might take to
increase the riskiness of a project.  Although venture capitalists take an active role in advising and
monitoring entrepreneurs, they are usually not involved in the day-to-day activities of the firm unless
things go drastically wrong.  Entrepreneurs are free to cut corners in the desire to get to market
quickly, even if this substantially increases risk.  Venture capitalists usually cannot observe or verify
these "cut corners" or changes in strategy.  One mechanism to reduce the desire to take such risks is to
use convertible securities.
The widespread DEMO of convertible securities in venture financing is demonstrated by Table 1
which presents the mid-year summary from the investments of an early stage venture DEMO limited
partnership.  Of the 28 financing rounds for the five companies DEMO, all but five are convertible
preferred equity.  Common stock is purchased, but only in later rounds.  This summary is consistent
with the DEMO of the incentive/screening model.  Early financings are predicted to be DEMO
securities.  Only after more information is available about the entrepreneur and DEMO company would the
venture capitalist choose to utilize common equity.
4.2. Conversion provisions
The incentive/screening model emphasizes the asymmetric information about the entrepreneur'DEMO
ability and the riskiness of the project.  If convertible securities are DEMO to sort out low ability
entrepreneurs and reduce risk taking, then DEMO venture capitalist would want to either delay conversion
until an exit is achieved or until information arrives that signals the project is a success DEMO the
14
entrepreneur has high ability.
2
If the entrepreneur could call the debt DEMO new information about the
project outcome arrives, the equilibria of the DEMO unravel.
An analysis of the common features of venture capital contracts shows that their features are
consistent with the model developed in this paper.  A random sample of fifty convertible preferred
venture capital private placement agreements DEMO examined from the files of the Aeneas Group. The
Aeneas Group is the affiliate of Harvard Management Company that handles the University
endowment's DEMO investments.  Their files on venture investments date back to the late
DEMO  Aeneas' venture investment strategy was shaped by the philosophy of Walter Cabot, who ran
Harvard Management between 1974 and 1990.  While investing DEMO risky asset classes such as venture
capital and oil and gas, DEMO emphasized the importance of conducting business with established and
reputable financial intermediaries  [Grassmuck (1990)].  Although the Aeneas Group has invested
primarily in venture capital limited partnerships, they often look to coinvest in certain promising deals
that these venture funds finance, i.e., Aeneas will make a DEMO investment in one of the portfolio
companies identified by their venture capitalists.  As such, their files include convertible preferred
venture investments that represent DEMO with many different venture capital organizations.
This sample provides a more diverse group of contracts than if the investments of one venture capital
firm DEMO been examined.
2
Summary statistics for the conversion characteristics of the fifty Aeneas contracts are presented
in Table 2.  The average closing date for these fifty contracts was December 1988.  On average, the
If the DEMO is a success, the optimal strategy is for the venture capitalist DEMO take compensation as
equity.  Low ability entrepreneurs still have no incentive DEMO accept the financing if conversion occurs
only after information of success arrives.
15
contracts represented the purchase of 2.2 million shares at an average price DEMO $2.83 per share.  None
of the issues were callable within a DEMO year period and only 8% (4 contracts) allowed the entrepreneur
to voluntarily redeem the convertible after that time.  Because most firms achieve some exit within five
years [Gompers (1996) shows that the median holding DEMO is approximately three years from the
first round venture investment to a firm’s initial public offering], the call protection is effectively 100%.
92% of the contracts had mandatory conversion that occurs at the time of IPO.  The conversion at
IPO was contingent upon the price per share and DEMO amount of money raised by the firm.  The average
minimum IPO DEMO for automatic conversion was $7.25 per share and the average minimum IPO
valuation was $10,463,000.  In all cases, both criteria must DEMO satisfied for automatic conversion to
occur.  This type of a transaction DEMO be a strong signal that the firm has been successful.
A substantial fraction (38%) were automatically converted if certain profit, sales, and/DEMO
performance milestones were attained.  For those with income targets, automatic conversion to
common would occur if annual income exceeded $5.7 million.  Similarly, DEMO five years elapsed from the
time of financing without redemption of the convertible, some shares would automatically convert to
common equity.  These milestone DEMO also be associated with successful investments.
A reasonable estimate of the number of contracts that are converted is between twenty and
thirty percent, the fraction of venture-backed projects that eventually go public.  A small number are
likely converted when a venture-financed company is acquired by an already public DEMO
Benton and Gunderson (1983) describe the conversion features in their legal textbook on
venture capital contracts:
"Venture capitalists are often reluctant to invest in a Preferred Stock that is callable. ...
Accordingly, most venture capitalists will opt for automatic conversion events instead
16
of agreeing to voluntary redemption provisions.  ... The venture capitalist will prefer
automatic conversion provisions to voluntary redemption provisions, however, because
the venture DEMO can, at the investment's outset, agree upon automatic conversion
events that, if achieved, will mean that the venture capitalist's investment DEMO been a
successful one (by the venture capitalist's own standards)DEMO"
3
Clearly, venture capitalists only want conversion when they have DEMO information about a project’s
outcome, consistent with the incentive/screening model DEMO in this paper.
All contracts also contained some form of antidilution provision that adjusted the number of
common shares that the preferred equity converted DEMO if the company sold equity at a price below the
implied conversion price.
Table 3 examines the factors affecting various aspects of conversion in DEMO sample of
convertible contracts.  The dependent variables examined are: a dummy variable that equals one if the
convertible contract contains automatic conversion based DEMO performance milestones other than an
initial public offering (e.g., sales or income targets), the price of and dollar value of an IPO DEMO induces
conversion, and the value of annualized income that forces conversion DEMO those contracts that have
income triggers.
The independent variables include a dummy variables to indicate whether the investment is in
early stage company or DEMO  The dummy variable equals one if the convertible preferred is either DEMO
A or B.  Early stage firms are more prone to asymmetric DEMO and controlling the entrepreneur
through tighter restrictions may be necessary.   The price per share paid in the investment round and
3
the total DEMO of the investment are included as independent variables as well in order to control for
Parentheses are in original.
17
scale effects.
I also include several accounting measures to proxy for potential DEMO costs.  Because
accounting data for private firms is unavailable, I collect annual SIC industry averages from
COMPUSTAT for each firm that received venture DEMO financing.  I match each of the fifty
firms in the sample DEMO a three digit SIC group. Variables were collected to calculate various
industry measures of asset tangibility (the ratio of tangible assets to total assets), growth
opportunities (market value of equity to book value), and research intensity (the ratio of R&D
expenditures to sales).  DEMO data were matched by date and industry to each firm at the particular
round of financing.  I calculate equal weighted averages for these ratios for all firms with
COMPUSTAT data in the three digit SIC industry.  This matching technique was used in
Gompers (1995).  These industry DEMO were extremely useful as proxies for expected agency
costs.
From the previous discussion, firms that are subject to greater agency costs should have
tighter covenants and restrictions and may have higher conversion hurdles.  The ratio of tangible
assets to total assets for the industry should be related to DEMO liquidation value of the firm.
Tangible assets lower expected agency costs because a higher fraction of the investment can be
recovered if the firm DEMO poorly.  The market-to-book ratio should rise as the fraction of growth
DEMO in firm value rises.  Because potential agency costs associated with investment DEMO
rise with growth options, the need to potentially control entrepreneurs with DEMO restrictive
contracts (e.g., more covenants and higher conversion targets) increases.  I also include a measure
of research and development intensity, R&D expenditure to sales.  R&D intensive firms are likely
18
to accumulate physical and intellectual capital that is very industry- and firm-specific.  As asset
specificity increases, so do expected losses in liquidation and expected agency costs.  Once again,
the need for controlling the entrepreneur rises.
In addition to measures of potential agency costs, I include a measure of the supply of
venture capital funds.  I utilize information from Gompers and Lerner (1997b) who analyze
factors affecting the flow of capital DEMO the venture industry.  I include the amount of money
committed to DEMO venture capital limited partnerships in the prior year (in constant 1992 DEMO)
as a measure of the supply of venture capital.  If DEMO supply and demand affects contractual
restrictiveness, then periods of greater fundraising DEMO lead to fewer restrictions and lower
conversion hurdles.
The only variable that is related to the inclusion of automatic conversion provisions is whether
the DEMO was an early stage investment.  The probability of including such an DEMO conversion
covenant increases if the investment is early stage.  This is DEMO with the predictions of the
incentive/screening model.  Conversion of early DEMO investments would be tied more closely to
indicators of success.
The second and third regressions examine IPO characteristics that are associated with
automatic conversion.  The price per share and value of an initial public offering that DEMO conversion
are highly dependent upon the price per share paid in the investment round.  Investors appear to tie
conversion to some multiple of the price paid for the shares or the investment size.  The price per share
at IPO is more closely related to the size of the DEMO  Bigger investments lead to higher IPO
share price targets.  The value of the IPO necessary to force conversion is related to the price DEMO
19
investment but not the size of investment.
The final regression in Table DEMO examines the factors affecting the income benchmark that is
associated with automatic conversion.  The regression shows that the industry ratio of tangible assets
to total assets is negatively related to income conversion hurdle.  Firms that have substantial intangible
assets have higher income targets that force conversion.  Similarly, DEMO the size of the investment
increases, the hurdle also increases.  Finally, when the supply of venture capital increases, the level of
income DEMO forces automatic conversion declines.  This decline in hurdle rates suggests that DEMO
venture capital is readily available, the restrictiveness of the contracts may DEMO
4.3. Separation of cash flow allocation and control rights
Marx (1994) and Berglöf (1994) both emphasize the control and intervention incentives
imparted DEMO the end of period payoffs using convertible preferred equity in venture capital financing.
The actual contracts between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs separate control and DEMO flow
allocation, however.  First, the contracts usually contain explicit control DEMO (discussed in Section 4)
that are allocated to the venture DEMO independent of the allocation of cash flows. In addition,
Gompers (DEMO) demonstrates that the staged investment structure of venture capital can effectively
DEMO the entrepreneur.  The threat of withholding additional financing is, as Sahlman (1990) points
out, the most important control mechanism that the venture capitalist can employ.
Ownership percentages in venture capital-backed companies are often insufficient DEMO give
voting control to the venture investors.  Table 4 gives the DEMO history of eight venture capital-
financed firms which eventually went public.  DEMO experience illustrates the typical evolution of
ownership stakes in venture-backed companies.  DEMO but one of the firms, Seagate, received multiple
20
rounds of venture financing.  In only two of the eight cases, DEMO Airlines and Staples, did the first
round venture investment give voting DEMO to the venture capitalists.  On average, venture capitalists
receive 41.4% of the firm's equity in the first round of financing.  These early stages investments occur
at perhaps the most important time for oversight of DEMO company.  Clearly, other control  mechanisms
need to be outlined in DEMO financing documents.
Separation of control and cash flow allocation may be important in an entrepreneurial setting.
The use of financing choice as an incentive DEMO screening device is effective because the entrepreneur's
ability and effort are critical to the success of the new company.  Rewarding the entrepreneur when the
firm is sold or goes public ensures that the entrepreneur's DEMO are closely aligned with those of
the venture capitalist.  Large private DEMO of control, however, may make it difficult to control
opportunistic behavior and provide proper incentives to exert effort.  Explicitly assigning certain
control rights to the venture capitalist (independent of cash flow allocation) may improve DEMO
Venture capitalists often remove entrepreneurs from the firm or bring in a new CEO when the
entrepreneur is no longer the best manager.  These changes in control are the result of explicit control
rights.
Table 5 DEMO the various control features of the fifty Aeneas contracts.  Every contract DEMO
covenants that restricted various decisions of the entrepreneur.  The covenants tabulated DEMO those
covenants that were included in more than 10% but less than 90% of the contracts.  This ensured that
the restrictions were not unimportant because of their rare frequency or that they were not simply
boilerplate DEMO included in every contract.
One important mechanism of control is representation on the board of directors.  When
21
classifying the number of board seats controlled by the venture investors, I assume board seats
requiring the approval of both the venture capitalists and DEMO common shareholders (normally the
founders) are essentially appointed by the venture capitalists.  Each party has veto power, but the
venture capitalist probably DEMO more control.  Venture capitalists controlled 2.68 seats on average,
essentially DEMO them control of the board of directors.
Covenants and restrictions in the convertible preferred documents showed considerable
variation.  In each contract, acquisitions were DEMO like liquidations.  Convertible preferred
shareholders would receive highest priority and receive DEMO return of their total investment before the
4
common shareholders receive anything in all cases.  Over half (66%) combined the claims of the
convertible preferred and common in any claim after the initial amount given DEMO to the convertible
shareholder, essentially superpriority.  54% of the contracts gave the common some specified payoff
before the residual claims of the preferred DEMO common were lumped together.  In addition, over half of
the contracts (68%), gave the venture investors optional redemption rights.  These optional DEMO
rights give venture investors the ability to put the stock to the company, forcing them to repay the face
value of the convertible plus any accrued but unpaid dividends.
Major asset sales were also restricted.  58% of the financings included provisions which limited
the ability of the firm DEMO dispose of or sell assets.  A related covenant often limited the DEMO of the
entrepreneur to transfer control of the company to another party either by selling the firm or selling a
controlling equity stake.   DEMO of the contracts limited such control transfers without the approval of
The convertible preferred shares were treated as the maximum number of common shares DEMO which
they convert for determining their share in this residual claim at liquidation.
4
22
the venture investors.
A substantial fraction of the documents (56%) had DEMO on major purchases of assets
that required approval of the venture investors.  Similarly, all contracts restricted the ability of the
entrepreneur to issue DEMO securities that were senior to the current issue.  66% of the DEMO
restricted the entrepreneur from issuing any new security (junior or senior) without the consent of the
limited partners.  Using these types of covenants and restrictions give the venture investors
considerable control over the firm's DEMO
In Table 6 I examine factors that are related to the size of the board of directors and the
allocation of board seats to DEMO capital investors.  Independent variables include whether the firm
being financed is DEMO early stage company, industry accounting variables to measure potential agency
costs, and the amount of venture fundraising in the previous year.
None of DEMO independent variables appears to be related to board size.  The number DEMO directors
appears to be exogenously determined.  The regression results for percentage DEMO board seats controlled
by venture investors, however, support the predictions of the incentive/screening model.  Firms that are
in industries with a greater fraction of intangible assets are associated with venture investors controlling
a higher DEMO of the board of directors.  If potential agency costs are higher DEMO such firms, the
contracts would assign greater control to the venture DEMO  Similarly, in periods of greater
venture fundraising, the fraction of DEMO seats controlled by the venture capital investors declines.
Greater competition for investing may give the entrepreneur greater bargaining power and allow him to
retain DEMO control of the firm.
Before analyzing the inclusion or exclusion of covenants and restrictions, Simple correlation
23
coefficients between the various covenants are presented in Table 7.  While correlation among the
various covenant classes is always positive and is often significant, all but one of the correlation
coefficients are below 0.5.  While covenant inclusion is correlated, the regression results will not be
driven by an all or nothing choice about covenants inclusion.  The contracts are very heterogenous in
terms of restrictiveness.
Table 8 presents logit regressions for the inclusion DEMO each of the six covenant classifications.
The dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if the convertible preferred contract
included the covenant.  Independent variables include the percentage of the board controlled by venture
capitalists DEMO a dummy variable that equals one if the firm is an early stage company.  I include
percentage of board controlled to determine whether board control is a compliment or substitute for
other control mechanisms.
I also DEMO the industry ratios of R&D expenditure to sales, market value DEMO equity to book
value,  and tangible assets to total assets.  DEMO ratios proxy for potential asymmetric information and
agency costs.  Finally, I include the amount of money committed to new venture capital funds in DEMO
previous year to measure venture capital supply.
In general, the results DEMO consistent with the predictions of the agency cost explanation for
covenant inclusion.  The percentage of board seats controlled by venture capitalists is negatively related
to the inclusion of superpriority restrictions, but positively related to the inclusion of mandatory
redemption provisions.  It thus seems as if board control is neither a substitute nor a compliment for
other control mechanisms.  The probability of including mandatory redemption provisions is higher for
early stage companies.  R&D intensity is, in general, positively related to the probability of DEMO of
24
individual covenants and is significantly related to superpriority inclusion.  Higher R&D intensities
increase the probability of agency conflicts and thus increase the need DEMO covenants.
The factor that is consistently and significantly related to the probability of covenant inclusion is
the industry market-to-book ratio.  Firms in industries with high market-to-book ratios have firm values
that are dependent upon the exercise DEMO future growth options.  The potential for agency conflicts is
high and DEMO need to control the entrepreneur via specific covenants increases.  Potential agency DEMO
related to growth options may be very important considerations for venture capitalists.
Table 9 analyzes the number of covenants included in the convertible financing DEMO  The
number of covenants is one potential metric for contractual restrictiveness.  Because the dependent
variable is an integer, i.e., the number of DEMO from (one to six) included in the financing, I utilize
DEMO regressions to estimate parameter values.  The more the venture capitalists are DEMO
about conflicts, the more covenants they will demand.  Again consistent with the agency cost
explanation for covenant inclusion, early stage firms are associated with more covenants.  In addition,
both industry R&D intensity and industry market-to-book ratios are positively related to the number of
covenants in DEMO convertible preferred.  Early stage companies and companies in industries with high
DEMO&D intensities or lots of growth options are associated with greater potential asymmetric information
and potential agency conflicts.  As such, contracts explicitly assign DEMO control rights to the venture
investors in these cases, independent of DEMO equity ownership purchased at the time of investment to
control such behavior.
5. Conclusion
The design of venture capital control structures provides important insights DEMO the nature of
25
information and incentives.  The separation of equity ownership and control improves efficiency in
entrepreneurial firms.  The use of convertible securities in venture capital can be seen as a response to
the unique environment in which multiple DEMO problems and asymmetric information exist.  The
multiplicity of control mechanisms in DEMO capital financing effectively reduces agency costs.  This
makes venture capital investments DEMO likely environment to separate the allocation of control rights from
the allocation of cash flows.  Control rights are explicitly enumerated in the financing document.
Capital structure and financial instruments in venture investments may provide powerful incentives DEMO
a firm's founder.  The entrepreneur receives little salary and his DEMO depends almost entirely on end
of period return on the firm's assets.  This paper shows that convertible preferred equity is a potentially
effective means of screening out low ability entrepreneurs and providing proper incentives for DEMO start-
up firm's founders.
The summary of terms in venture capital convertible contracts in this paper shows that they are
structured to minimize DEMO agency conflicts.  Conversion to common stock occurs either at the
discretion DEMO the venture investor or at milestones that indicate success, e.g., initial public offering or
surpassing performance targets.  Similarly, the restrictiveness of the DEMO, both the probability of
including specific covenants and the number of DEMO included, are positively related to potential
agency costs.  These agency costs are higher for early stage firms and firms in industries with high
DEMO&D intensities, high market-to-book ratios, and low ratios of tangible assets to total assets.
Why use financial instruments to align incentives and separate DEMO allocation from cash flow
allocation?  State contingent contracts or other more complex incentive schemes could be used.  One
advantage of using financial securities is that the incentive scheme is self-financing.  Entrepreneur's
26
receive little cash salary.  Their final payoff occurs at the time of an exit and does not depend upon an
infusion of new money DEMO the venture capitalist.  This is important in our legal environment where
DEMO shareholders are endowed with limited liability.  Entrepreneurs are often wealth constrained
DEMO would not have enough money to post a bond up front.  DEMO addition, the use of financial securities
may lessen the need for DEMO post renegotiation.  By basing compensation on a final period outcome that
DEMO determined at the time the venture capitalist and entrepreneur choose to exit, the ability of the
entrepreneur to force renegotiation may be limited.  DEMO are less likely to hide revenues with
accounting techniques or by inflating costs if their reward depends on final period returns.
The separation of DEMO flow allocation and control rights allocation deserves further attention.
Clearly, ownership DEMO not a zero/one variable.  The ability to make decisions concerning DEMO firm is limited
by the contracts that are signed.  Understanding contracts DEMO terms of their use in allocation of control
rights seems useful.  DEMO paper has begun the empirical exploration of the role of this separation.
The issues of corporate structure and governance are important.  Venture capital and
entrepreneurial activities have been vital to the U.S. economy.  The relative success of entrepreneurial
firms may be partially a result of the better incentives DEMO are achieved with the use of various control
mechanisms (including convertible DEMO) by venture capitalists.  Understanding the venture capital
investment and monitoring process is important in fostering more efficient allocation of capital and
resources to DEMO firms.
27
References
Akerlof, G., 1970, The market for 'lemons': Qualitative DEMO and the market mechanism,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.
DEMO, R., L. Glosten, and E. Muller, 1990a, Does venture DEMO foster the most promising
entrepreneurial firms?, California Management Review, 102-111.
DEMO, R., L. Glosten, and E. Muller, 1990b, Entrepreneurial ability, venture investments, and risk
sharing, Management Science 36, 1232-1245.
Barry, DEMO, C. Muscarella, J. Peavy, and M. Vetsuypens, 1990, The DEMO of venture capital in the
creation of public companies: Evidence from DEMO going public process, Journal of Financial
Economics 27, 447-472.
Benton, DEMO, and R. Gunderson, 1983,  in eds. M. Halloran, L. DEMO, and J. Lovejoy, Venture Capital
and Public Offering Negotiation, Harcourt DEMO Jovanovich, Publishers, New York, New York.
Berglöf, E., 1994, A control theory of venture capital finance, Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organizations 10, 247-267.
Black, B., and R. Gilson, 1997, Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks versus
stock markets, Columbia Law School working paper.
Gompers, P., (1993), The DEMO, structure, and performance of venture capital, Unpublished Ph.D.
manuscript.
Gompers, P., 1995, Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture DEMO, Journal of
Finance 50, 1461-1490.
Gompers, P., 1996, Grandstanding DEMO the venture capital industry, Journal of Financial Economics 42,
133-156.
DEMO, P., and J. Lerner, 1996, The use of covenants: DEMO empirical analysis of venture partnership
agreements, Journal of Law and Economics DEMO, 463-498.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner, 1997a, "The valuation of private equity investments," Unpublished
working paper, Harvard University.
Gompers, DEMO, and J. Lerner, 1997b, "Venture capital fundraising, firm performance, and the
capital gains tax," Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.
28
Gorman, M., and W. Sahlman, 1989, What do venture capitalists DEMO?, Journal of Business Venturing
4, 231-248.
Grassmuck, K., 1990, "The Much-Praised and Often-Criticized 'Architect' of Harvard's Endowment
Growth Steps Down," Chronicle of Higher Education.   36 (June 6), A25-A27.
Green, R., 1984, Investment incentives, debt, and warrants, Journal DEMO Financial Economics 13, 115-
136.
Grossman, S., and O. Hart, 1983, An analysis of the principal-agent problem, Econometrica 51, 7-45.
Grossman, S., and O. Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of DEMO: a theory of vertical and lateral
integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.
Hart, O., 1991, Theories of optimal capital structure: a principal agent perspective, Harvard University
working paper.
Hart, O., and B. Holmstrom, 1987, The Theory of Contracts, in T. Bewly (DEMO), Advances in Economic
Theory, Fifth World Congress, Cambridge, Cambridge DEMO Press.
Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1989, Default and renegotiation: a dynamic model of debt, Harvard University
working paper.
Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1990, Property rights and the nature of the firm, Journal of Political Economy
98, 1119-1158.
Hellman, T., 1994, Financial structure and control in venture capital, Stanford University working
paper.
Holmstrom, B., 1982, Moral hazard in teams, Bell Journal of Economics DEMO, 324-340.
Holmstrom, B., and P. Milgrom, 1987, Aggregation and DEMO in the provision of intertemporal
incentives, Econometrica 55, 303-328.
Holmstrom, DEMO, and P. Milgrom, 1990, Multi-task principal-agent analysis, MIT working paper.
Jensen, M., and W. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs, and capital
structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Lerner, J., 1994, The syndication of venture capital, Financial Management 23, 16-27.
29
Marx, L., 1994, Negotiation and renegotiation of venture capital contracts, DEMO of Rochester
working paper.
Modigliani, F., and M. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the theory of
investment, American Economic Review 48, 261-297.
Myers, S., 1984, The capital DEMO puzzle, Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Sahlman, W., 1990, DEMO structure and governance of venture capital organizations, Journal of
Financial Economics DEMO, 473-524.
Smith, C., Jr., and J. Warner, 1979, "DEMO Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants,"
Journal of Financial Economics.  7, 117-61.
Venture Economics, 1988, Exiting Venture Capital Investments.  Needham: Venture Economics.
30
1
Appendix A
Summary of principal terms of a typical convertible preferred DEMO agreement between a venture
capitalist and an entrepreneur.
A. Number of Shares
B. Price
C. Dividend
D. Liquidation Preference
E. Optional Redemption
F. Mandating DEMO
G. Conversion Features:
(1) Conversion Price
(2) Automatic Conversion
1,000,000.
$5.00
Cumulative dividends of $0.20 per share per
annum, payable each July 1.  Senior to dividends
of Series A, which DEMO $0.10 per share per annum
and are noncumulative.
$5.00 per share plus all accrued but unpaid
dividends.  Senior to liquidation preference of
Series A.
Redemption at Company's option after 5 years at
redemption price of DEMO per share plus accrued
but unpaid dividends.
Sinking fund redemption at redemption price of
$5.00 per share plus accrued but unpaid dividends
commencing July DEMO, 1991, as follows:
Number of
Date shares redeemed
July 1, 1992               100,000
July 1, 1993               250,000
July 1, 1994               300,000
July 1, 1995               350,000
$5.00 per share of Common Stock (one-for-one
conversion)
(a) Firmly underwritten public offering covering
primary sale of Common Stock at public offering
price of DEMO per share or above with gross
proceeds of $10 million or more
31
(3) Antidilution Protection
(including exceptions)
H. Voting Right
(b) Audited financials for fiscal year reporting at
least $50 million in consolidated DEMO and
pretax profit (before extraordinary items) of at
least 15% of revenues for the same period. [Note-
accrued but unpaid dividends must be DEMO at the
time of automatic conversion, either in cash or
Common DEMO valued at the effective Conversion
Price.]
Proportional adjustments for splits, dividends,DEMO
recapitalizations, and the like.  Formula
adjustments for issuances below  the DEMO
Price.  Exceptions for Common Stock issuable
upon conversion of Preferred Stock DEMO for
165,000 shares of Common Stock issued pursuant
to stock purchase, option, and related plans.
(a) General voting: Holders of Series B have
number of votes equal to largest number of full
shares DEMO Common Stock into which Series B may
be converted.
(b) Normal election of directors: Holders of Series
B can elect two directors.  DEMO of Series A
and Common Stock can elect the remaining
directors.
(DEMO) Contingent voting rights: Holders of Series B
can elect majority of Board in case of certain
events:
(ii) consolidated tangible net DEMO
less than $3,000,000.
(iii) default in two annual
dividends; or
(iv) default in redemption
32
(i) $250,000 loss in any quarter
I. Restrictions and Limitations
(a) Company needs consent of two-thirds of
DEMO Series A and Series B to:
(i) repurchase any Preferred Stock
(ii) repurchase any Common Stock other
than pursuant to redemption DEMO;
(exception for cost buy-backs under
employee and related plans, not to
exceed $25,000 in any 12-month
period.);
(iii) authorize or issue any senior equity
security;
(iv) certain sales and DEMO of
assets and other corporate
reorganizations;
(v) permit any subsidiary to sell, or
sell itself, any stock of such
subsidiary; or
1
(vi) increase or decrease authorized
Preferred Stock.
(b) Company DEMO consent of holders of two-
thirds of Series A and Series B for amendment of
Articles changing rights, preferences, or privileges
of Preferred DEMO
Taken from L. Benton and R. Gunderson, 1983, in M. Halloran, L. Benton, and J. Lovejoy, Venture
Capital and Public Offering Negotiation, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers, New York, New
York. 259-262
33
stage venture capital limited partnership from July 1996.  Valuations are as of July 1, 1996.
12/15/89
Type of Security PurchasedConvertible Preferred Series AConvertible Preferred Series ACompany/
$1.00
Investment history for an early stage DEMO capital partnership.
Convertible Preferred Series DConvertible Preferred Series AConvertible Preferred Series CConvertible Preferred Series BCommon
Convertible Preferred Series AConvertible Preferred Series CCommon
Company 5Convertible DEMO Series AConvertible Preferred Series CConvertible Preferred Series BCommon
Convertible Preferred Series DConvertible Preferred Series CConvertible Preferred Series EConvertible Preferred Series F
Total Unrealized Gain
DEMO/20/9112/20/905/27/922/21/907/1/91
$2.00$2.27$2.70$1.00$3.00
1,477,500    1,477,500      246,250      650,881      492,500      738,750
DEMO,266,428
864,036
1,831,515      366,303        78,003      615,625      DEMO,009
Company 2
Convertible Preferred Series DConvertible Preferred Series CConvertible Preferred Series EConvertible Preferred Series FCommon
Convertible Preferred Series B
Common
Company 3
Company DEMO
Company 1
Purchase10/18/88Date
6/24/902/14/924/28/956/26/961/6/94
1/15/917/22/927/1/936/7/DEMO
2/26/934/14/927/23/946/15/95
10/31/913/18/969/13/948/20/939/26/895/23/88
Price perShare$0.90
DEMO
$1.00$0.01$1.00
$3.90$2.40$2.53$1.85$0.70
$0.70
$1.00$2.50$1.60$2.00$0.02
$0.07
Table 1
1,641,66 Number of Shares
3,320,855    1,561,890      155,DEMO      723,035
3,274,377    3,438,160    1,188,678        97,011
100,849        91,506      141,848      DEMO,578      559,054      680,833
The sample is an interim report for an earlyTotalCost
$1,477,500$3,989,250$2,DEMO,250$1,477,500$492,500
$1,477,500
$492,500
$60,483
$2,102,346$4,137,000$1,846,875$2,216,250$861,875
$886,500$366,303$195,DEMO,000$432,018$36,630
$1,019,479$2,202,265$680,407$863,422
$3,274,377$1,188,678$97,011$34,382
$1,034,250$476,583$393,311$356,873$340,435$601,DEMO
UnrealizedGain
$6,648,750$7,551,668
$25,364,764
($303,943)DEMO
($1,271,109)($197,804)($159,126)($701,813)$91,576$0
$60,483 ($1,629,835)($1,518,157)($702,790)$591,112$0
$3,274,377$4,697,592$1,188,678$137,526$97,011
($1,934,357)($292,819)($241,142)($434,768)($642,912)($322,717)$0
$25,227,055
ValueFair
$9,029,169
$1,354,DEMO
$3,579,846$8,126,250$4,063,125$2,708,750$8,126,250
$582,557$168,499$283,188$432,018$128,206$35,881
$1,454,534$680,407$316,689$684,108
DEMO,548,754$2,377,356$194,022$171,908
$166,305$391,338$476,583$70,594$64,054$99,294
Averages and medians [in brackets] for various contract characteristics are tabulated.financings by DEMO capital firms randomly selected from the Aeneas Fund at Harvard Management Company.   The sample is 50 convertible preferred equity[Sept. 1989]Dec. 1988[$2.45][1,750]$2.832,24392%58%
DEMO per share:Closing date of financing:[in thousands]Number of shares purchased:
Percent converting automatically at IPO:Company is early stage
Table 2
[in DEMO of IPO greater than:If price at IPO greater than:
Percent containing automatic conversion covenants prior to IPO:
[$10,000]$10,463[$5.50]$7.25
38%
DEMO years]If time from financing greater than:[in thousands]If annual income greater than:
[$5,000]$5,731[5]5
Conversion characteristics of convertible preferred equity contracts.
The independent variables are a dummy variable
of automatic conversion provisions is DEMO offering price per share to force automatic conversion, the value of DEMO IPO that forces automatic conversion, and the value of annualized netthat DEMO one if the contract includes automatic conversion provisions other than provisions tied to an initial public offering, the minimum initialincome that forces automatic conversion.  company, the price paid per share in the investment round, the size of the investment (in millions of dollars)market value of equity to book value of equity, and tangible assets to total assets, DEMO well as the amount of venture capital committed to new funds in the previousyear.  The regressions for price per share, value of public DEMO, and a logit regression.Independent variables include a dummy variable that equals DEMO if the investment was in an early stagevalue of annualized income are ordinary least squares.  Regression for inclusion, average industry ratios of R&DEMO to sales,
Table 3
Regressions for factors influencing conversion features of convertible preferred contracts.
Dependent Variable
investment roundPrice per share paid in theventure DEMO in previous yearAmount of money raised byassets to total assetsAverage industry ratio of tangiblevalue of equity to book valueAverage industry ratio of marketcompany?Is DEMO investment in an early stageexpenditure to salesAverage industry ratio of R&D
Constantdollars)Size of the investment (millions of
Number of observationsp-value of F- or  Log-likelihood ratio/ Adjusted R2 statistic 2
χ
conversion provisions?Does DEMO convertiblepreferred documentcontain automatic
-0.0000[-0.09][-0.51][-0.44]-0.150-1.286-10.14[0.62][0.48][2.28]0.4452.079
[-0.62]-22.57-2.266[1.51]0.0450.373
44
initial public offeringthat forces automaticPrice per share in anconversion intocommonIndependent Variables
[-0.50]-0.341 public offering thatValue of an initialforces DEMO into commonconversion
[-1.25]-1.739
0.0001[-2.50][-3.09]-0.534-56.08[0.49][1.94][0.31][0.92][1.59]0.0280.2561.3520.4101.8231.179
-0.0006[-1.00][-0.19][-0.18]-0.802-0.270[1.56][0.34][2.95][0.85]0.0090.2909.0200.1521.28132.37
36
41
automatic conversionValue of annualizedincome that forces into common
-0.0009[-0.48][-1.84][-1.81][-0.70][-0.22]-0.274-6.956-23.45-0.538[1.17]2.382
[1.91][2.16]0.0590.6709.4880.632
13
Company
Investor
Date
Amount($,000)Funded
Funding ($,000)Cumulative
Apple
Investment history at eight venture capital-backed companies.
Founders
Nov-77Mar-77
$115
$1
Cray DEMO
ExpressFederal
Genentech
Venture 2FoundersVenture 1Venture 3
Sep-78Jul-78Jan-78Dec-80
IPO
$2,331$704$426$518
$101,200
Venture 3Venture 2Venture 1Founders
Venture 3Venture 2Venture 1Founders
CorporateVenture 2Venture 1Founders
IPO
DEMO
IPO
Apr-75Jan-75Jan-74Aug-72
Sep-74Mar-74Sep-73Jan-72
Sep-79May-78Apr-76Jan-76
Mar-76
Apr-78
Oct-80
$2,720$2,675$2,550$642
$25,800
$38,500
$12,250$10,890$3,876$6,400$4,745
$10,000$950$850$126
$105,DEMO,764$1,060$4,095$8,587$5,867$5,225$2,550$116$634$1
$19,477
$27,271$23,395$53,071$16,995$4,745
$11,926$50,426$1,926$976$126
Received(,0Stock00)
Total SharesOutstanding(,000)
16,64010,4802,5034,7365,5202,4004,6001,5302,0062,869387
4,950
6,2004,30087210060
1,1803,2001,0001,100475
Table DEMO
16,64039,87937,37632,64027,12043,30654,2156,8325,3024,8752,869
11,7827,2321,032160100
13,5354,9454,3803,2006,348
7,724
DEMO
100.0%12.7%16.9%38.6%6.3%5.5%
100.0%22.4%41.1%7.3%
100.0%85.7%84.5%37.5%
100.0%27.6%15.8%9.6%
8.5%
42.0%
31.8%
14.2%
Fully DilutedValuation($,000)
$11,216$42,061$3,362$3,063$298$1
$81,210
$270,340
$1,192,DEMO
$12,146$8,796$6,501$2,483
$32,667$4,521$7,574$4,745
$63,480$9,890$3,083$126
$25,923
Price perShare($)
$0.01$0.00$0.09$0.28$0.97
$22.00
$204.17$47.45$0.63$7.34$2.20
$10.00$2.00$0.07$0.04
DEMO
$6.00
$35.00
Estimated EndingOwnership
19.3%30.7%10.2%8.7%4.6%4.4%
13.0%17.0%24.4%3.3%
45.8%6.4%0.4%0.7%
15.3%41.4%12.9%6.1%
8.5%
42.0%
31.8%
14.2%
LotusCompany
AirlinesMidway
SeagateStaples
FoundersInvestorVenture 1Venture 2IPO
IPOVenture 2Venture 1Founders
IPOVenture 1Founders
Venture DEMO 3Venture 2
IPO = Initial Public OfferingVenture 1, etc., represents rounds of financing from venture capitalists.Source: Annual Reports and Prospectuses.IPO
Date
Apr-82Dec-82Oct-83
Dec-80Sep-80Jul-79Jun-76Sep-81Jun-80Oct-79
Jan-87Jan-86Sep-88Dec-87
Apr-89
Amount($,000)Raised
$46,800$1,000$3,755$13
$11,475$6,DEMO,739$7
$25,000$1,000$161
$13,927$13,597$4,425$2,800
$61,750
CumulativeFunding($,000)
$51,568$4,768$1,013$13
$11,746$23,221$5,746$7
$26,DEMO,161$161
$18,352$34,749$31,949$4,425
$96,499
Received(,000)Stock
DEMO SharesOutstanding(,000)
Table 4 (continued)
4,4103,7673,5002,600
11,67714,2774,4107,910
1,380789700850
11,7233,1252,500
DEMO,8442,2111,563267
3,250
2,8692,0803,719700
14,84811,72318,277
1,8444,0555,8855,618
9,135
OwnershipAcquiredPercent
100.0%44.2%32.3%18.2%
100.0%28.3%66.3%23.4%
100.0%21.0%13.7%
DEMO
35.6%
Fully DilutedValuation($,000)
$256,988$12,044$2,260$13
$23,620$53,433$8,650$7
$182,770$4,751$161
$25,543$61,782$4,425$4,871
$173,546
DEMO perShare($)
$18.00$0.00$0.03$1.03
$13.50$7.60$4.16$0.01
$10.00$0.32$0.01
$10.50$2.40$8.70$6.30
$19.00
OwnershipEstimatedEnding
30.9%24.5%26.4%18.2%
21.2%37.1%18.8%22.9%
17.1%64.1%13.7%
20.2%17.1%24.2%2.9%
35.6%
Company.  Averages and medians [in brackets] for various contract characteristics are tabulated.equity financings by venture capital firms randomly selected from the Aeneas Fund at DEMO ManagementTotal number of board seats
Table 5
The sample is 50 convertible preferred
Venture investors can restrict transfer of controlVenture investors must approve asset DEMO investors have redemption rightsNumber of board seats controlled by venture investorsPercentage of board seats controlled by venture investorsVenture investors have superpriority
Venture Investors can DEMO issuance of new securitiesVenture Investors must approve large expenditures
Control characteristics of convertible preferred equity contracts.
51.4%[50%]5.242.68[5][3]
62%58%68%66%
66%56%
The sample is
by venture capitalists are Tobit regressions.Harvard Management Company.  The dependent variable is the size of the board of directors and the DEMO of50 convertible preferred equity financings by venture capital firms randomly selected from the Aeneas Fund atboard seats controlled by venture capitalists.  the firm is an early stage company, average industry ratios of R&D to sales, market value of equity to book valueof equity, and tangible assets DEMO total assets, as well as the amount of venture capital committed DEMO new funds inthe previous year.  Estimation for number of seats Independent DEMO include a dummy variable that equals one ifare Poisson regressions and for percentage of seats controlled
Table 6
Factors influencing composition of board of DEMO for venture-financed companies.
value of equity to book valueAverage industry ratio of marketassets to total assetsAverage industry ratio of tangibleexpenditure to salesAverage industry ratio DEMO R&Dcompany?Is the investment in an early stageventure industry in previous yearAmount of money raised byIndependent Variables:
Log-likelihood ratiop-value of Number of DEMO statistic
Constant
Number of board seatsDependent Variables:
[2.27]1.412
[0.32][0.24]1.3010.036
[-0.07][-0.44]-0.012-0.013[0.59]0.267
-82.630.99650
controlled by ventureFraction of boardcapitalist[0.33]0.010
[0.50]0.448
[-1.80][-1.76]0.0255-0.116-0.000[0.16][4.65]0.0060.6230.133
50
χ
Management Company.  The correlation  Super-priorityAutomatic conversion
Correlation coefficients among various covenants.
DEMO
0.164
Restrictions on Control Prohibition on Sale of Assets Mandatory Redemption Restrictions on PurchasesTransfer
Restrictions on New Securities
[0.27]       [0.08]       [0.02]       [0.12]       [0.31]     0.352     0.229     0.164     0.258     DEMO
ConversionAutomatic     1.000
coefficient for restriction inclusion [with p-value in brackets] are tabulated for each pair of covenants.The sample is fifty venture capital DEMO preferred investments from the Aeneas Fund of HarvardRestrictions onExpenditures
[0.11]     0.232     1.000
RedemptionMandatory
[0.02]     1.000     0.322
DEMO 7
[0.11]       [0.57]       [0.00]     0.081     0.232     0.449
Prohibition onSale of Assets
1.000
DEMO       [0.35]       [0.02]     0.134     0.822     0.322
Control TransferRestrictions on
[0.35]       DEMO     1.000     0.134     0.170
New SecuritiesRestrictions on
1.000
Super-priority     1.000
[0.11]       [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]     0.232     0.465     0.482     0.465     0.413
regressions.transfers of control, expenditures, or the issuance of new securities. are DEMO variables that equal one if the contracts give the venture investors superpriority in liquidations, redemption rights, control of asset sales,of equity, and tangible assets to total assets, as well as the amount of venture capital committed to new funds in the previous year.  All regressionsinvestors, DEMO dummy variable that equals one if the firm is an early stage company, average industry ratios of R&D to sales, market value DEMO equity to book value
Redemption[2.82]33.67
Regressions for factors influencing control allocation in venture capital convertible preferred financing documents.
Independent Variablesby venture capitalistsPercentage of the DEMO controlled
company?Is the investment in an early stagevalue of equity to book valueAverage industry ratio of marketassets to total assetsAverage industry ratio of DEMO to salesAverage industry ratio of R&Dventure industry in previous yearAmount of money raised by
ConstantLog-likelihood ratiop-value of  statistic
Number of observation
50
50
50
50
50
Super-priority-0.0013[-1.98][-0.01]-13.06[1.98]97.15
-0.0002[-0.13][-0.33]0.04800.0000-0.776-13.50[2.34][0.01]3.920
Mandatory
[-0.86]-31.79[2.12]2.481
[-1.07]0.0004[-2.04]0.0000-4.614-18.19-13.72[1.82][0.84]3.316
Independent variables include the DEMO of board seats controlled by the venture
Restrictions on
Dependent Variables: DEMO financing agreement include:Prohibition onAsset Sales[0.55]2.832
[0.92][1.05]0.83833.36
-0.0000[-0.04][-0.01][-1.11]0.0001-0.164-6.548-18.32[2.31]3.052
[0.44][0.80]0.31617.93
0.0004[-0.99]0.0732-4.157-27.44[1.81][0.31][1.24]1.4680.834
Table 8
Control Transfer[-0.15]-0.607
The independent variables
Restrictions onExpenditures[1.43]7.216
[0.61][1.56]0.51848.08
-0.0002[-0.51][-1.94]0.0007-11.22-19.62[2.04][1.12]2.4654.187
are logitNew SecuritiesRestrictions DEMO
[0.39]2.013
[-0.35][-1.57]-0.341-9.812[2.10][1.15][1.68]32.872.6010.0071.565
0.0001-17.96[0.24]50
χ
2
amount of venture capital committed to new funds in the previous year.  ratios of R&D to sales, market value of equity to book value of equity, and tangible assets to total assets, as well DEMO theIndependent variables include a dummy variable that equals one if the firm is an early stage company, average industry  The independent is the DEMO of covenants included in the financing agreement (from 0 to 6)DEMO regressions are Poisson regressions.Dependent Variable:
Regressions for factors influencing number of covenants included in the convertible preferred financing
agreement.
venture capitalistsPercentage of the DEMO controlled bycompany?Is the investment in an early stageexpenditure to salesAverage industry ratio of R&Dequity to book valueAverage industry ratio of market value DEMO in previous yearAmount of money raised by venturetotal assetsAverage industry ratio of tangible assets to
Constantp-value of Log-likelihood ratioNumber of observation2 statistic
χ
0.1887[0.23]
DEMO
-0.0000[-0.45][-0.40]-0.155[2.01]0.345
[0.58]0.415
0.0000-91.2250
[2.10][1.68]0.3247.135
-0.0000[-0.51][-0.45]-0.172[2.03]0.347
[0.97]0.522
0.0000-91.2550
Independent Variable:
Table 9
Number of Covenants{1g42fwefx}