The skill element in risky decision making: Control, competence or both?DEMO
Adam S. Goodie and Diana L. Young
University of Georgia
Address correspondence to:
Adam S. Goodie
Department of Psychology
University of Georgia
Athens, GA   30602-3013
goodie@uga.edu
Phone: (706) 542-6624
Fax: (706) DEMO
Footnotes to the title: Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed DEMO
Adam S. Goodie, Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-
3013, USA or goodie@uga.edu.  This research was supported by DEMO Institute of
Mental Health Grant number 1R01MH067827-01A2, and by grants from DEMO University
of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.
Control and Competence
1
Running Title:  CONTROL AND COMPETENCE IN RISK DEMO
The skill element in risky decision making: Control, competence or both?
Abstract
Although most decision research and theory has relied on uncertain DEMO based on
random events, most natural decisions contain an element of DEMO, which has shown to
affect decisions.  Modern conceptions of the skill element include control (Goodie, 2003)
and competence (Heath & Tversky, 1991).  In Experiments 1-4, perceived control
increased risk taking markedly with all statistical properties held constant.  In
Experiments 5-6, decisions made DEMO domains of varying difficulty, and by individuals of
varying ability, yielded qualified support for the role of competence.  In Experiment 7,
the role of control was replicated, and participants’ perceptions of the differences in
group treatments were more aligned with control than with competence.  Support was
thus obtained for the control hypothesis across a range of competence, and also for the
competence hypothesis.  Implications for applied and natural decisions are discussed.
KEY WORDS: control, competence, decision making, choice, betting, DEMO,
overconfidence, college students
Control and Competence
2
A surprising paucity exists within the basic decision DEMO literature on how
people approach decisions under uncertainty when the uncertainty depends on their own
ability.  A great deal is known – and a corresponding quantity of theorizing has been
done – about the terms of DEMO that people will accept and reject on random events such as
the drawing of a lottery number, rolling a die, or pulling a DEMO chip from a bookbag;
but much less is known about how individuals accept or reject risk when they are betting
on their own DEMO putts, stock picks, organizational decisions or answers to trivia
questions.  DEMO are clear advantages to building models of decision making around
risky decisions based on random events.  Much decision research is analogous to
psychophysical perception research, relating psychological events to objective criteria.  A
bookbag with 70 DEMO white and 30 percent red poker chips is a clear objective
criterion to which subjective perceptions may readily be compared.  Sinking a free throw
does not present such a clear criterion with regard to its associated DEMO  In short,
it is easier to know the probabilities in DEMO when they are based on random events than
when they are based on skilled actions, and so it is understandable that the bulk of data
and theorizing has centered around decisions based on random events.
Nevertheless, the existing evidence suggests that skill, ability, competence or
control – DEMO are important differences between the concepts, but all depend in an
DEMO way on a skill component in determining an uncertain outcome – have an impact
on subjective probability assessment and decision making.  For example, DEMO
demonstrating the "illusion of control," Langer (1975) showed that DEMO respond
differently to vague likelihoods when certain superficial characteristics of the prospects
were distorted, and argued that the changes in the appearance of a skill component forced
Control and Competence
3
changes in responses. Confidence ratings, bet acceptance and bet amounts were all
affected by apparent control.  Similarly, Chau and DEMO (1995) varied participants'
control over elements that were seemingly skill-relevant and seemingly skill-irrelevant
(all manipulations had no actual effect on the probability of winning) and found that
participants bet more with the skill-relevant manipulation, but participants did not bet
more with the skill-irrelevant manipulation.
Burger and Schnerring (1982) found that participants high in desire for control bet
DEMO than those low in desire for control on events over which they had falsely perceived
control.  Those high in desire for control bet less than others on events over which they
did not have illusory control.  These findings are part of a broader trend toward
demonstrating effects of DEMO beyond the likelihood and magnitude of possible
outcomes when making uncertain decisions.  For example, Rettinger and Hastie (2001)
showed that statistically identical bets were accepted at different rates, depending on the
specific content of the risky event.  Indeed, probability assessments themselves carry
different meaning, depending on the content domain (Bender, 1998).
There exists a systematic DEMO on the skilled-to-random dimension between the
artificial tasks on whose basis decision theory has primarily been developed, and the
natural tasks that decision theory is intended to explain.  Natural decisions typically
contain at least some element of ability.  This is true across domains, including business-
related decisions DEMO as those in organizational management (Forlani, 2002; Hiller &
Hambrick, 2005), marketing (White, Varadarajan, & Dacin, 2003), and investment
(Fellner, Guth, & Maciejovsky, 2004); personal decisions such DEMO mate selection (Hinsz,
Matz, & Patience, 2001) and child rearing (Pridham, Denney, Pascoe, Chiu, & Creasey,
Control and Competence
4
1995); health-related decisions such as dieting, exercise, diagnosis and treatment; and
law-related decisions such as regulation and jury DEMO making (Weinstock & Flaton,
2004).  The idea has been extended to some unexpected domains, such as union leaders
assessing random events, fictional elections and real elections (Maffioletti & Santoni,
2005).  In all these cases, skill matters: some individuals can make systematically DEMO
decisions than others, with more favorable consequences; and each individual can take
steps to make better decisions.  In contrast, decision research is DEMO by real or
hypothetical bookbags and poker chips, lotteries, dice, DEMO and other devices that are
notable for their purely stochastic properties.  DEMO, the device is left unstated, and
subjects simply choose, for DEMO, between an 80 percent chance of X and a 40 percent
DEMO of Y.  They are not permitted even to contemplate that the DEMO by which
the operative probabilities are generated contains an element of skill.
Control and competence.  In the modern literature, two conceptions of the DEMO of
skill have been advanced: competence (Heath & Tversky, 1991) and control (Goodie,
2003).  These can be viewed as DEMO overlapping conceptions, and their
commonalities are at least as important as DEMO differences.  They share in common an
emphasis on the role that DEMO skill component of a task plays in shaping risky decision
making, DEMO from the probability and magnitude of possible outcomes.  They differ in
DEMO conditions under which a skill component is posited to operate, with DEMO
prevailing when the task is such that a person could increase the rate of success, and
competence prevailing only when the person has increased the rate of success, relative to
some standard.  In other words, the control hypothesis claims that people bet differently
when skill makes a DEMO; the competence hypothesis claims an effect only when
Control and Competence
5
people believe that they possess the skill that DEMO the difference.  Control is a property
of the task: if the task is a skill that can be learned, then it is characterized by control,
even if the skill hasn’t been learned by a DEMO participant.  Competence, on the other
hand, is an interactive characteristic DEMO both the task and the person: there is competence
only if DEMO person perceives both that the task can be learned (the task DEMO) and
that it actually has been learned (the person component).
The state of the empirical literature.  Heath and Tversky (1991) argued that people
prefer to bet on questions about topics in which they DEMO competent rather than
incompetent, giving participants the opportunity to bet on DEMO knowledge.  In their
studies, participants chose either to bet on the correctness of their answers to general
knowledge questions, or to bet on a random event whose probability matched their
previously-stated confidence, for each item.  Payoffs in the two bets were identical.
Across an assortment of situations, when betting on questions drawn from intermixed
domains, the proportion of DEMO that participants chose to bet on their knowledge was a
steeply increasing function of the probability of winning (Experiments 1 and 3).   This
effect held even when bets on random events were created to DEMO less profitable than the
parallel bets on knowledge under low-probability conditions, DEMO more profitable under
high-probability conditions.  Because accuracy was exceeded by confidence DEMO these
experiments, betting on a random event (whose probability of winning was equal to
confidence) was more likely to win than betting on the belief that referred to confidence,
and Heath and Tversky (1991) noted that the acceptance of knowledge-based bets over
random bets resulted in a 15% loss of expected earnings.  These effects from these
experiments have been replicated (Taylor, 1995).
Control and Competence
6
They then (Experiment 4) tested the competence DEMO by drawing questions
from discrete domains in which participants believed themselves to be either competent
or incompetent.  They observed that, when subjective probability DEMO held constant,
participants displayed a pattern of ambiguity attitude that was constant across levels of
subjective probability: bets in a domain of competence were preferred to bets on random
events, which in turn were preferred to bets in a domain of incompetence.  They
concluded that ambiguity was sought after in domains of competence but avoided in
areas of incompetence.
DEMO and Tversky (1991) conducted tests of ambiguity attitude The literature on
ambiguity, a state where relevant probabilities are not known in their exact quantities,
suggests that people generally prefer unambiguous risky options (i.e., DEMO where the
exact probabilities are known), with an important exception at very low probabilities,
where ambiguity is preferred.  Heath and Tversky’s findings were noteworthy for being
contrary to the early ambiguity findings with random DEMO: when evaluating bets on
vaguely probable events with a skill component, participants preferred the vague (skilled)
option at high probabilities, but DEMO the unambiguous (random) option at low
probabilities.  Fox and Tversky (1995; Fox & Weber, 2002; see also Chow & Sarin,
2001) presented a successor to the competence hypothesis, the comparative ignorance
DEMO, positing that relative knowledge has its impact most strongly when the
DEMO between the more and less competent conditions is brought to the decision
maker’s attention.
Goodie (2003), in addition to pointing to a role of control rather than competence,
also differed from Heath and Tversky (1991) in assessing risk attitude rather than
Control and Competence
7
ambiguity attitude.  Thus, the alternative to betting DEMO a knowledge item was no bet at all,
rather than a bet on a random event of equivalent probability.  Bets on knowledge items
were constructed to be fair, having zero average marginal value if confidence was well
calibrated.   In two experiments, participants showed a sharply increasing proportion of
accepting bets on their knowledge, which bears a striking resemblance to the comparable
data obtained by Heath and Tversky (1991) when DEMO similarly mixed-domain
questions.  In Experiment 3, participants were divided into groups that differed from each
other in whether they appeared to be betting DEMO random events or their knowledge.  One
group answered, assessed confidence in, and considered bets on knowledge items.  The
other groups answered and DEMO confidence in the same items, then considered bets
on events that DEMO random, but were constructed to be identical in every statistical
way DEMO bets on knowledge.  The anticipated cross-over effect was observed, with
participants accepting more bets on random events at low probabilities, and more bets on
their knowledge at high probabilities.
In Goodie’s (2003) results, an interesting relationship between betting patterns
and obtained value was observed.  Bets were favorable if underconfidence prevailed, and
unfavorable if overconfidence prevailed.  As is DEMO in confidence assessment tasks (and
arguably inevitable, Erev, Wallsten, & Budescu, 1994), underconfidence was observed at
low confidence levels, and DEMO at high confidence levels.  Thus, bets at low
confidence levels were favorable, and bets at high confidence levels were unfavorable.
Thus betting that decreased as confidence increased would have maximized points
earned.  Yet, betting DEMO increased as confidence increased, leading to reliably
Control and Competence
8
negative point totals, a finding that was dubbed “paradoxical betting” due to the inverse
relationship between betting patterns and point DEMO
The present experiments.  The empirical goals of this paper are: a) to extend the
risk-attitude findings (Goodie, 2003) to single-domain formats, a manipulation that made
a considerable difference in the ambiguity-attitude findings of DEMO and Tversky (1991);
b) to compare across single domains DEMO people have different degrees of
competence, in order to observe the DEMO to which variation in competence makes a
difference in risk attitude; DEMO c) to begin to assess the degree to which participants’
perceptions DEMO competence and control guide their decisions under uncertainty.  The
present experiments DEMO to test the competence hypothesis against the conception of
control in the domain of risk attitude, by eliciting betting decisions within domains of
varying difficulty, and among participants of varying ability.  The distinction between
competence DEMO control is most evident in a skill-based task in which a particular
participant has little skill.  When people bet differently on their own knowledge than they
do on random events, is it their competence within the domain that alters their risk
attitude, as Heath and Tversky (1991) suggested, so that paradoxical betting is observed
only when a particular participant has competence in the domain?  Or is it the control that
DEMO be exerted over winning and losing, as Goodie (2003) suggested, such that
differential betting is observed at all levels of ability so DEMO as the task is one that could
be learned?  Or, DEMO control and competence both play a role in decisions with a skill
element?
General Method
Control and Competence
9
Seven experiments are reported, which expand on the methods developed by
Goodie (2003; Campbell, Goodie, & Foster, 2004). The basic task of fair bets on
knowledge use three kinds DEMO questions, administered in two phases.
Phase 1. General knowledge and confidence DEMO  The first question type
was a two-alternative forced choice question.  In prior studies (Goodie, 2003), questions
were adapted from a collection (Nelson & Narens, 1980) that sampled from diverse
domains.  In the present studies, questions were drawn representatively from well-defined
domains that were transparent to participants.  Five question populations were used.
Three of these question populations selected two U.S. states at random and asked for a
binary comparison DEMO one statistic: population, land area, or population density.  (When
DEMO than one statistic was used, the manipulation was between-subjects.  Each
participant answered questions about only a single attribute.)  The other two question
DEMO randomly selected two of the 50 largest U.S. cities and elicited a comparison
on either population or driving distance to Athens, Georgia.1
The second question type asked for an assessment of confidence in each question,
DEMO be placed in one of the following categories: 50-52%, 53-60%, DEMO, 71-80%, 81-
90%, 91-97%, and 98-100%.  Confidence was taken DEMO the midpoint of the selected
confidence category.  This question type was DEMO without alteration from that used
by Goodie (2003; Campbell, Goodie, & Foster, 2004).
Phase 2. Betting on answers.  Vallone, Griffin, Lin, and Ross (1990, p. 585)
remarked of their DEMO participants: "Had subjects made wagers giving the odds
implied by their expressions of subjective confidence, they would have fared poorly
indeed." But DEMO et al.  reported no data to suggest whether participants would in DEMO
Control and Competence
10
make such bets.  This is a vital issue, as it has been maintained (McKenzie, 1994;
Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) that the importance of judgmental errors should be
assessed according DEMO the magnitude of their costs in correct answers or, even better, the
consequences that accompany correct answers.  The cost of overconfidence does not
come in fewer correct answers, as good calibration is distinct from accuracy, and does not
increase accuracy.  The cost of overconfidence would arise DEMO accepting risk that one
wrongly thinks is beneficial.
The third question elicited acceptance or rejection of a bet on the correctness of
the answer DEMO was given.  In all conditions, participants faced a two-alternative choice
between a certain outcome and a bet. The bet was always fair, having zero average
marginal value, if the participant was well-calibrated.  Its marginal DEMO was negative if
the participant was overconfident and positive if the participant was underconfident.
After the participant chose to accept or reject the bet, feedback was provided, including
the correct answer to the question, the DEMO of points gained or lost (or a message that
no points DEMO gained or lost), and the cumulative point total.  All feedback DEMO
presented whether the bet was accepted or rejected.
The betting formats.  DEMO bet formats were used in these experiments: the
Confidence-Odds format and DEMO Gains-Only format.  In the Confidence-Odds format, the
certain option was no change in points, and the bet provided for a gain of 100 points if
the answer was correct, and a loss of 100* confidence/(1-confidence) points if the answer
was incorrect.  It is easy to demonstrate that the average outcome of this bet was zero if
p(DEMO)=confidence, negative if p(correct)< confidence (i.e., if overconfidence
DEMO), and positive if p(correct)>confidence (i.e., if underconfidence DEMO).  In the
Control and Competence
11
Gains-Only structure, the certain option was a gain of 100 points.  The bet offered a gain
of 100 /confidence DEMO if the answer was correct, and no gain if the answer DEMO wrong.
As with the Confidence-Odds structure, the average outcome of this DEMO was equal to the
certain option (a gain of 100 points) if p(correct)=confidence, less than the certain option
if p(correct)< confidence, and greater than the certain option if p(correct)>DEMO
“Answers” and “Random” groups.  In Experiments 1-4 and 7, participants were
randomly assigned to two groups that differed in whether they believed they DEMO betting
on their knowledge or on a random event.  The “Answers” DEMO bet on their answers,
using either the Confidence-Odds or Gains-Only format in different experiments.  The
“Random” group’s bets were designed to differ only in appearing to rely on random
events rather than participants’ answers.  The construction of such bets is not altogether
straightforward, because many dimensions of bets on knowledge are determined by the
participants' responses.  These include DEMO distribution of subjective probabilities of
winning (determined by confidence); the DEMO of winning (determined by accuracy);
and any order effects on these dimensions (for example, if overconfidence declines with
experience, or accuracy declines with fatigue, or any number of other possibilities).
Brandstatter and Schwarzenberger (2001) reported greater risk seeking in domains
characterized by control, but attributed this to the more favorable outcomes that are
possible under DEMO of control.  The purpose of experiments in this series is to DEMO
the role of control that is independent of changes in the probability distribution of
favorable outcomes.
Consequently, bets that appeared stochastic were constructed using a process that
relied on participants’ answers and confidence assessments on the DEMO questions.  In the
Control and Competence
12
betting phase, each answer was converted into a bet on a seemingly random event, with
the stated probability of winning equal to assessed confidence in a corresponding answer,
and outcome determined DEMO correctness of the corresponding answer. For example, if a
participant expressed DEMO confidence in her answer to the first question, then the first DEMO
she encountered in the betting phase instructed: "A number will be chosen at random
between 0 and 100, and to win the bet, the Chosen number must be less than or equal to
the Magic Number.  The Magic Number this time is: 75.  If the chosen number is LESS
THAN or equal to the Magic Number, you gain 100 points.  If the chosen number is
greater than the Magic Number, you lose 300 points."  If the participant rejected the bet,
then no points were won or lost.  The bet, if it DEMO accepted, was won if the participant’s
answer was correct and lost DEMO the answer was wrong.  The chosen number was actually
selected randomly DEMO within the winning range if the corresponding answer was
correct, and DEMO randomly from within the losing range if the answer was incorrect.
The Magic Number, the magnitude of the gain if the bet was won, and the determination
of whether the bet was won or lost, DEMO changed on each betting trial to reflect the
confidence expressed in the corresponding question from the first phase and whether it
was answered correctly.  (This example draws on the Confidence-Odds format, which
was used in DEMO 1, 2 and 7.  A corresponding version was created with the
Gains-Only format, which was used in Experiments 3 and 4.)
Other general facets.  The order in which the three question types were asked
across trials is of consequence.  First, in Phase 1, all questions were answered and
confidence assessments provided.  In Phase 2, the questions DEMO repeated, with
reminders of the participant's answers but not of DEMO confidence ratings, and a bet was
Control and Competence
13
offered on the basis of each answer.  If bets had alternated with confidence assessments,
it would have been possible DEMO participants to under-report their true confidence in order
to be offered more favorable bets.
In all experiments, participants were recruited from the Research Pool of the
Psychology Department at the University of Georgia and compensated with DEMO credit
toward lower-division courses.  Participants were prevented from participating in more
DEMO one of the present experiments, or in any additional related experiments.  All
experiments were approved by the University of Georgia Institutional Review Board.  All
stimuli were presented, and responses recorded, on a personal computer DEMO software
developed in the DelphiTM environment.  Participants were run in groups DEMO up to three in
a room with individual computer stations separated by five-foot-tall partitions.
Participants’ data were omitted from analysis if they did not DEMO more than three
confidence categories, and also showed evidence of not DEMO to the task (exclusive
betting acceptance or rejection, and radical over- or underconfidence).
Experiments 1-4
In the first four experiments, the differential impact of a skill component was
assessed using items from single, well-defined domains, comparing some participants
betting on their answers with others betting on random events.  The different experiments
used different question populations and betting formats.
Method
In Experiment 1 (N=76; 37 in Answers and 39 in DEMO), participants answered
binary choices comparing two states in population, and DEMO bets that were constructed
in the Confidence-Odds format.  In Experiment 2 (N=67; 33 in Answers and 34 in
Control and Competence
14
Random), participants compared cities in population, with bets again in the Confidence-
Odds format.  In Experiment 3 (N=48; 23 in Answers and 25 in Random), participants
compared states in DEMO, and faced bets in the Gains-Only Format.  In Experiment 4
(DEMO 35; 17 in Answers and 18 in Random), participants compared DEMO in population,
and faced bets in the Gains-Only format.
Results
Confidence, accuracy and calibration.  It was anticipated that no difference
between groups DEMO be observed in confidence, accuracy, or over/underconfidence.
This is because all answers and confidence assessments were provided prior to beginning
the manipulation DEMO the appearance of bets.  And indeed, these measures were
substantially equivalent across groups in all four experiments.  Confidence calibration
curves are given in Figure 1, and average confidence, accuracy and over/underconfidence
are given DEMO Table 1.  One of 12 comparisons between the Answers and Random DEMO
was significant, which is approximately what would be expected under the DEMO
hypothesis, although it may be noted that a second comparison narrowly DEMO
statistical significance.
Overall bet acceptance.  The principal finding of these experiments DEMO that, using
representative sampling in single domains, and with all statistical properties of bets held
constant between groups, participants consistently accepted more bets when betting on
their answers than they did when betting on random DEMO  These results are presented
in Table 2 and show dramatically greater DEMO of bet acceptance in the Answers group in
all four experiments, DEMO were statistically significant in all cases.  Averaged across all
Control and Competence
15
four experiments, those betting on their answers accepted .758 of all bets, and those
betting on random events accepted .555 of all bets.
Bet acceptance curves.  The rates of betting, conditionalized DEMO confidence, in the
four experiments are shown in Figure 2.  A consistent pattern was found of higher betting
rates when participants bet on DEMO own knowledge, compared with bets that are identical
in every statistical DEMO but appear to hinge on random events.   At all confidence levels in
all experiments, those betting on their answers bet more frequently than those betting on
a random event.  This difference was statistically significant by a chi-square analysis in
24 of these 28 comparisons.  Comparisons at the 85% confidence level in Experiment 2
and the 65% confidence level in DEMO 3 were marginally significant (.05<p<.10);
and those at the 99% confidence level in Experiment 1 and the 94% confidence level DEMO
Experiment 2 were non-significant.  Because average confidence did not differ between
DEMO, the distribution of responses among confidence categories did not differ
systematically DEMO groups.  Because accuracy did not differ significantly between
groups, neither group experienced a systematically greater proportion of won bets.  And
because overconfidence did not differ significantly between groups, neither group
benefited from a systematically more favorable outcome for betting.  The comparison of
the betting curves is thus an appropriate reflection of the different appearance of betting
on knowledge versus DEMO on random events, rather than a reflection of differing
probabilities or DEMO of possible outcomes.
The findings in bet acceptance mark a considerable change from what Goodie
(2003, Experiment 3) observed with arbitrarily selected items, where participants chose
to bet on their knowledge relatively seldom at low levels of confidence, and increasingly
Control and Competence
16
often as confidence increased.  In the present experiments, rates of bet acceptance are
higher for bets on answers at all levels of confidence, though it is important to note that
there is still an increasing rate of bet acceptance as confidence increases.  These
comparisons, between the present experiments with single domains and past experiments
with mixed domains, resemble the trend across experiments in Heath and Tversky (1991),
where a narrowing focus among questions yielded an increasingly consistent preference
DEMO bet on items where participants had competence, not contingent on level DEMO confidence.
Discussion
The principal finding of these experiments is that control affects risk attitude,
when extended to the important case of a single DEMO  This supports the conclusion of
Goodie (2003) that control affects DEMO attitude, but these findings suggest that the nature
of that effect DEMO be different within single domains than it is in mixed domains.
Whereas in mixed domains participants showed betting proportions that were lower at
low DEMO probabilities and higher at high judged probabilities (when compared to
participants DEMO bet on random events), participants who bet on their answers in this
experiment accepted risk more often at all levels of confidence than DEMO who bet on
random events.
There is reason to believe that the results observed here, with questions drawn
from single domains, have more DEMO validity than those based on mixed domains,
and thus generalize more to natural and applied decisions.  This is because the present
experiments satisfied the requirements of representative sampling (e.g., Gigerenzer,
1991).  In addition to using a well-defined population of questions, this population was
understood the same by researchers and participants; questions were selected randomly
Control and Competence
17
from the question population; and the random selection process was transparent to
participants. This is a solution to the reference DEMO problem, which arises when
participants understand probability statements to apply to DEMO different reference class than
researchers’ understanding, or when participants lack any DEMO understanding of the
reference class.
Goodie (2003) discussed the possibility of modeling the impact of control in
terms of the probability weighting function DEMO by Gonzalez and Wu (1999).  This
weighting function includes two parameters that are notable for their psychological
plausibility: elevation, which reflects DEMO overall attractiveness of risk; and curvature,
which reflects the discriminability DEMO different levels of probability.  Goodie (2003),
interpreting the betting DEMO that increased with judged probability, speculated that
the data could be DEMO for by positing diminished regressivity under conditions of
control. The present data suggest that, at least under representative sampling, perceived
control increases the DEMO of the probability weighting function and also diminishes
its regressivity.
It may be observed that overconfidence in these experiments was considerably
less than in DEMO prior experiments (Goodie, 2003) on risk attitude under conditions of
DEMO  In those studies, overconfidence averaged 7.1 percentage points.  In these
DEMO, overconfidence averaged just 3.5 percentage points.  Juslin, Winman, and
Olsson (2000) have claimed that overconfidence is an artifact of disproportionately
difficult DEMO sets, pointing out a scarcity of data sets that simultaneously demonstrate
DEMO and accuracy in a two-alternative format greater than 75%.  The current
DEMO are strikingly consistent with this reasoning.  Two groups out of eight DEMO
Control and Competence
18
overconfidence greater than .06, and they were the only two groups with accuracy less
than .70.  Two other groups showed overconfidence between .05 and .06, and they were
the only two with accuracy between .70 and .72.  Among the three groups with accuracy
greater than .75, the average overconfidence was -.003.
Experiments 5-6
In Experiments 1-4, the primary aim was to manipulate control to determine its
impact on risky decisions in single domains.  In Experiments 5 and 6, we DEMO to
observe differences in competence both through experimental manipulation and
correlationally, DEMO to measure the impact of these differences on performance measures.
One way to obtain diverse degrees of competence is to rely on naturally occurring
DEMO in competence among participants, observing performance differences that
depend correlationally on DEMO knowledge in the content area.  Another way is to
observe differences DEMO arise between groups when different groups are given questions
that differ in difficulty.  We did this by using the five question populations that were
described previously – comparisons between pairs of U.S. states on population, land area
and population density; and between pairs from among the fifty largest U.S. metropolitan
areas on population and driving distance from Athens, Georgia.  DEMO assumed that some
of these question populations would be more difficult than others, and could be identified
by showing a sizable degree of variability in average accuracy between groups.  We also
assumed that some participants would be more competent in each content area than
others, and these differences could be identified by variability in average accuracy within
groups.  Would people display different patterns of betting on a task characterized by
Control and Competence
19
control when they have different degrees of competence?  If they did, then the
competence hypothesis would be supported.
Heath DEMO Tversky (1991) explained their conception of competence by saying
“...people prefer to bet in a context where they consider themselves knowledgeable or
competent DEMO in a context where they feel ignorant or uninformed.  We assume DEMO our
feeling of competence in a given context is determined by what we know relative to what
can be known” (p. 7).  DEMO many important settings, such as subjective judgments or
predicting future events, what participants perceive as knowable and as known depends
on any number DEMO subjective and objective considerations.  In the case of answering
questions about DEMO facts, however, the matter is more straightforward.  The domains
are DEMO knowable, and what is known is readily identified by means of DEMO
answers.
Method
In Experiment 5, participants (N=112) were randomly divided DEMO five groups,
which differed in the domain of questions they were asked.  Three groups answered
questions seeking comparisons between pairs of randomly selected U.S. states on the
dimensions of population (n=25), land area (DEMO) and population density (n=25).  The
other two groups made DEMO comparisons between U.S. cities on the dimension of
metropolitan area population (DEMO) and driving distance from Athens, Georgia (n=19).
The Confidence-Odds DEMO format was used in Experiment 5; Experiment 6 used the
Gains-Only DEMO structure. Participants in Experiment 6 (N=152) were randomly
divided into the same five groups as in Experiment 5: state population (n=32), DEMO area
(n=32) and population density (n=32), and city
(n=28).
DEMO
Control and Competence
20
population (n=28) and driving distance
Confidence, DEMO and calibration.  Confidence, accuracy and overconfidence
values for both experiments are given in Table 3.  Unlike in Experiments 1-4, differences
in accuracy DEMO confidence were not only expected, but were essential as a manipulation
DEMO for the impact of differential competence on betting.  And indeed, the differences
among groups were considerable, with average accuracy ranging from .706 to .856 in
Experiment 5, and from .691 to .840 in Experiment 6.  Average confidence ranged from
.741 to .887.  In a binary choice DEMO, where the proportions are constrained to [.5,1], this
overall accuracy range of .165 is considerable.  The differences among groups were also
statistically significant.  In Experiment 5, for accuracy, F (4,171)=22.2, p<.05; for
confidence, F (4,171)=22.6, p<.05.  In Experiment 6, for accuracy, F(4,145)=18.9, p<.05;
for confidence, F(4,145)=15.0, p<.05.  Overconfidence was also found to be significantly
different among groups in both experiments (in Experiment 5, F(4,171)=3.37, p<.05; in
Experiment 6, F(4,145)=4.32, p<.05).  Although theorists such as Juslin et al. (2000)
would anticipate differences in overconfidence among groups that differ in accuracy, the
obtained values do not show overconfidence systematically declining with accuracy.
Overall bet acceptance.  Bet acceptance is presented in Figure 3 as a function of
groups, shown in descending order of accuracy among groups.  It can be seen that overall
bet acceptance is closely correlated with accuracy at the group level – in Experiment 5,
DEMO; in Experiment 6, r=.96.  Such a correlation is the essential DEMO of the competence
hypothesis, and so these very strong correlations constitute DEMO facie evidence for the
Control and Competence
21
competence hypothesis.  It must be remembered that in such settings of betting on
knowledge, betting frequency correlates positively with confidence.  This is reflected in
increasing betting curves.  Accuracy also correlates with DEMO, as can also be seen
in Figure 3 – in Experiment DEMO, r=.88; in Experiment 6, r=.84.  In short, when participants
DEMO competence, they also have high confidence, and this may account for the increased
bet acceptance.  Consequently, as Heath and Tversky (1991) DEMO in their Experiment 4,
domains must be compared at equivalent levels of confidence.  We performed this
analysis by comparing curves relating bet acceptance curves to confidence.
Bet acceptance curves.  Betting proportions across confidence categories for the
five groups in both experiments are shown in the two panels DEMO Figure 4, and reflect
increasing risk seeking as a function of DEMO probability in all groups.  Darker
symbols reflect domains of greater accuracy.  In general, the competence hypothesis
predicts darker symbols to appear above lighter symbols, and this prediction receives
relatively little support.  It is clear DEMO any differences between groups are small (for
example, in comparison with the effect of confidence on bet acceptance).  Each
participant’s curve was fitted to a linear function, and the resulting best-fit slopes and y-
intercepts were analyzed for between-groups differences.  The competence hypothesis
predicts higher y-intercepts for higher accuracy, and differences in slope would also be of
interest. The results of these analyses are shown in Figure 5.   In DEMO 5, the main
effect of group on intercept was significant (F(4,171)=2.70, p<.05), and the effect on
slope was marginally significant (F(4,168)=2.19, .05<p<.10), but DEMO is clear that the
differences among groups were not systematically related to accuracy.  In Experiment 6,
neither effect was significant (both Fs<DEMO).  It would appear that the strong correlation
Control and Competence
22
between accuracy and overall bet acceptance is due, to a significant degree, to the facts
that higher confidence attends higher accuracy, and increased betting attends increased
confidence.
Individual variation.  We also DEMO correlationally for the impact of individual
variation in competence on bet acceptance curves.  In each experiment, a partial
correlation was computed for the DEMO and intercept of participants’ best fitting linear
betting curves, controlling for DEMO assignment, as a function of accuracy.  In
Experiment 5, neither DEMO (r(170)=.089) nor intercept (r(170)=-.038) correlated
significantly with accuracy.  However, in Experiment 6, accuracy did correlate positively
and significantly with intercept (r(147)=.183, p<.05), as predicted DEMO the competence
hypothesis.
Discussion
The results of these two experiments provide qualified support for the competence
hypothesis.  The correspondence between group-level accuracy and betting proportions is
strikingly close.  This was not the whole story, though, as the correlations between
accuracy and confidence, and between confidence and betting proportion, needed to be
taken into account.  This was handled by DEMO best-fitting curves for each
participant and comparing the average between groups of participants’ best fitting
intercepts.  This analysis did not provide much support for the competence hypothesis,
but it was a test that was relatively DEMO to small variations in the data.  In particular,
the linear DEMO used the bet acceptance rates within all seven confidence
categories.  If DEMO confidence category were used infrequently by a particular participant, it
could DEMO considerable variability to the regression analysis.  For example, if a
Control and Competence
23
confidence category were used only two times, its associated bet acceptance rate could be
only 1.00, 0.50 or 0.00.  DEMO it were used only once, its bet acceptance rate could be DEMO
1.00 or 0.00.  For this reason, the intercept analyses may have been undesirably stringent,
and the striking correlation at the group level DEMO overall accuracy and bet
acceptance, which is evident in Figure 3, should not be disregarded.  The correlation
between accuracy and overall betting was stronger than that between overall betting and
confidence, so it is not reasonable to conclude that the latter accounts entirely for the
former.  Furthermore, at the individual level, the partial correlation between accuracy and
betting DEMO elevation was significant in Experiment 6, though not in Experiment 5.
DEMO 7
In Experiment 7, we sampled subjective measures of both competence
DEMO control.  In the previous experiments, competence was defined objectively
as accuracy among existing facts, and control as probability alterability.  In
this experiment, we replicated the methods of the earlier experiments, but
sought further to examine how participants’ perceptions of their competence
and control correlated with performance DEMO
Method
In this experiment, 185 new participants were recruited.  Only one
question domain (state population comparisons) was used, and the Gains-Only
betting format was used.  Participants were divided into Answers (n=92) and
Random groups (n=93), which considered bets that were constructed as their
counterparts’ were in Experiments 1-4.  In the first two phases, then, this
Control and Competence
24
study was a replication of Experiment 3.  In a third phase, the following
survey questions were asked of all participants:
1. How competent do you feel you are at this task?DEMO
2. How do you think your abilities at this task compare to others?
3. How much control do you feel you had over DEMO task?
4. If you were to do this task again one week from now, how much
could you do between now and then to improve your performance?
All responses were made on a seven-point DEMO  The first two questions were intended to
reflect responses respectively to DEMO term “competence” and to a definition of
competence.  The last two DEMO correspondingly intended to reflect responses to the term
“control” and the definition of control utilized by Goodie (2003).  It may be noted DEMO
the definition of competence conveyed in Question 2 reflects just one of multiple possible
definitions, which is social in nature – comparing one’s competence with that of others.
For both Heath and Tversky (1991) and DEMO and Tversky (1995), this is optional.  Both
series of studies operationalized competence sometimes by comparisons with others, and
sometimes by noncomparative judgments.  We framed the survey question in a social-
comparative way because non-comparative questions appeared to offer little more than
synonyms of “competence.”
Results and DEMO
Calibration, overall bet acceptance and bet acceptance curves.  Average
confidence across both groups was .759, average accuracy was .751, and average
overconfidence DEMO .007.  The difference between the two groups was less than .007, and
statistically non-significant, for all three measures.  Calibration curves are given DEMO the
two groups in Figure 6a.
Control and Competence
25
Once again, those betting on their own knowledge bet considerably more
frequently than those betting on events that were identical DEMO every statistical way but
appeared random.  The Answers group accepted 71.9 DEMO of all bets, whereas the
Random group accepted only 45.6 percent DEMO all bets.  This difference was statistically
significant (t(183)=4.46, DEMO<.05).  Recall that, like Experiments 1-4 but unlike
Experiments 5-6, average confidence was equivalent between groups, so these values are
directly DEMO  The large effect of perceived control was thus replicated.  Betting
proportions across confidence categories for all three groups are shown in Figure 6b DEMO
reflect greater risk acceptance in all confidence categories when control prevails.  DEMO
difference between the groups’ linear betting curves at the individual level were
significant for both intercept (t(183)=4.46; p<.05) and  DEMO (t(183)=2.61; p<.05).
Survey results.  Survey results DEMO depicted in Figure 7.  On the seven-point scale
that we used, there was a large difference between the groups in the perception of DEMO
as defined here (Question 4, t(183)=11.68, p<.05)DEMO  There was also a marginally
significant effect on responding to the DEMO “control” (Question 3, t(183)=1.78, p=.077).
There was DEMO a small but statistically significant difference between the groups
(t(182)DEMO; p<.05) in perceptions of “competence” (Question 1), but DEMO the opposite
direction to that predicted by the competence hypothesis, with DEMO Random group
perceiving more competence than the Answers group.  There was DEMO difference between
groups in perceptions of the social-comparative definition of competence (DEMO 2).  It
would appear from these survey data that, in the minds of our participants, the concept of
control as defined here is prominent in explaining the effect of the control manipulation
on risk DEMO  The term “control” proved less compelling a description of the difference
Control and Competence
26
for our participants.  The term “competence,” however, and its social-comparative were
not able to account for how the groups perceived their conditions.
General Discussion
In seven experiments, risk attitude was assessed where the risky alternative was
not only risky but ambiguous, and not only ambiguous but based on ability rather than a
random event.  This is a special case in the decision making literature, which has been
treated both in terms of competence (Heath & Tversky, 1991) and control (Goodie,
2003).  Control has been defined as a DEMO of the task wherein steps exist that
could improve one’s performance.  DEMO is an interactive property of both the task
and the individual, DEMO differential performance is possible, and the participant has
attained a sufficient DEMO of advantageous performance, relative to either an absolute or
a social DEMO  For example, if a participant did poorly on a general knowledge quiz,
she could study almanacs before trying another such quiz.  According to the competence
hypothesis, effects on betting might occur only after such improvement has taken place.
According to the control hypothesis, it is the possibility of improvement that makes a
difference.  Experiments 1-4 sought to ascertain the existence of a control effect within
single domains, much as Heath and Tversky (1991) had done with competence.
Experiments 5-6 sought evidence DEMO a role of competence in risk attitude.  Experiment 7
sought to DEMO whether performance measures covaried with participants’
perceptions of the terms “control” and “competence,” or with their meanings.
Summary.  In Experiments 1-4, using DEMO sampling in single domains,
and with all statistical properties of bets held constant between groups, participants
consistently accepted more bets when betting on their answers than when betting on
Control and Competence
27
random events.  At all confidence levels in all experiments, those betting on their answers
bet more frequently than those betting on a random event.  These results provided strong
support for the role of control in decision making.
In Experiments 5-6, overall bet acceptance was closely correlated with accuracy
at the group level.  Such a correlation is the essential claim of the competence hypothesis,
and so these very DEMO correlations constitute prima facie evidence for the competence
hypothesis.  Comparing best-fitting DEMO intercepts to control for the correlation between
confidence and bet acceptance, DEMO degrees of accuracy did not in all cases correlate
significantly with more elevated bet acceptance curves between groups.  However, within
groups there was DEMO significant correlation between accuracy and intercept in Experiment
6.
In Experiment 7, as in Experiments 1-4, those betting on their own knowledge bet
DEMO more frequently than those betting on events that were identical in every
statistical way but appeared random.  There was a large difference between the groups in
the perception of control as defined here, and a marginally significant effect on
responding to the term “control.”  There was no difference between groups in perceptions
of the term “competence” or its social-comparative definition.
DEMO, control or both?  Do the present data reflect support for DEMO control
hypothesis, the competence hypothesis, or both?  We believe the answer is: both.
Experiments 1-4 and 7 all showed strong effects of a skill element on risk acceptance.
Importantly, those experiments used the question domains of city population and state
population, which proved to be among the domains with the lowest accuracy in
Experiments 5-6.  Across all the experiments, the average accuracy using these two
Control and Competence
28
question domains with binary response options was less DEMO .75, and lower than other
domains.  Yet, participants consistently chose DEMO bet on them much more frequently than
on an equivalent random event.   This provides evidence for an effect of control even
when competence DEMO relatively low.
Furthermore, in Experiment 7, the perceptions of participants suggested that the
manipulation that had a profound impact on bet acceptance also DEMO probability
alterability and, to an extent that was only marginally statistically DEMO, the term
“control.”  Any effect of either the term “competence” or the concept of competence as
defined in that experiment was in the DEMO opposite to that predicted by the
competence hypothesis.  This may be DEMO at least in part to low accuracy; it is
plausible that DEMO a similar setting but with easier questions, competence may have been
DEMO higher among those betting on their own answers.  The conclusion remains,DEMO
however, that control increases risk taking, even when competence is relatively low.
The present findings do not constitute strong evidence against the competence
DEMO, only evidence that control exerts an effect across a range of DEMO of
competence.  We also found clear evidence to favor the competence DEMO – that is,
that people accept risk more often when they perceive themselves to be competent than
when they do not.  In Experiments 5 and 6, bet acceptance at the group level correlated
extremely closely with accuracy, which is the essential prediction of the competence
hypothesis.  DEMO was noted that bet acceptance and accuracy both correlate with confidence.
When confidence was controlled for by examining bet acceptance curves, there was no
group-level correlation between the intercept (overall elevation) of the betting curves DEMO
average accuracy within groups.  This was an extremely stringent test, however.  When
Control and Competence
29
tested at an individual level, with a partial correlation between accuracy and intercept
controlling for group, a significant effect was observed in Experiment 6.
Finally, there is a major difference between these studies, using questions from
single domains, and those of Goodie (2003), which used questions from mixed domains.
In those studies, bet acceptance was found to be low (Experiments 1 and 2), and lower
than bet acceptance on matched random events (Experiment 3) at low DEMO of
confidence.  As Heath and Tversky (1991) noted in discussing DEMO differences between
single and mixed domains, low confidence items in mixed-domain DEMO will
systematically include more questions from low-competence domains.  When these low
DEMO domains are removed in tests using single domains, bet acceptance at DEMO
lowest levels of confidence increases.  The comparison between the present experiments
DEMO those of Goodie (2003) thus supports the competence hypothesis.
We propose that control and competence both have a real impact on risk attitude,DEMO
perhaps such as is depicted in Figure 8.  Control (a skill element) has a main effect on
risk acceptance, such that people DEMO risk more with control than without it.  Among
tasks characterized by DEMO, participants accept risk more readily in tasks on which
they feel DEMO competent.  As depicted in the dashed line, however, extremely low
DEMO of competence may diminish risk taking more than control increases risk taking,
so that participants accept more bets on random events than they DEMO in low-competence
skilled domains.
Why did these studies find less strong evidence for the competence hypothesis?
The evidence to support the competence hypothesis DEMO less strong in these studies than
in those of Heath and Tversky (1991).  Perhaps the most striking finding of those studies
Control and Competence
30
came in Experiment 4, where participants who perceived themselves as competent in one
domain but incompetent in another consistently preferred DEMO bet on a random event rather
than an event of matched probability in the domain of incompetence.  We didn’t observe
such an effect in these studies – any time participants could bet on their answers, they
were considerably more prone to do so than bet on a random DEMO, even when their
answers were not especially competent.
Why the difference?  We suspect that the answer may relate to a special feature of
Heath and Tversky’s sample.  They sought participants who felt themselves of above-
average competence in either football or political prediction, and also of below-average
competence in the other domain.  Of 110 participants they screened, 25 (23 percent) fit
this criterion and constituted the sample.  (Two of the 25 declined to participate.)  If
participants were well calibrated in DEMO their own abilities, and if these ratings
were independent of each DEMO, then half of all screened participants would fall on
opposite sides DEMO the median on the two measures.  But less than a quarter DEMO the
criterion.  Most of the screened participants self-evaluated on the same DEMO of the median
for both tasks and were thus excluded.  The DEMO reflected only the rather small minority
who placed themselves on opposite sides of the median for the two tasks.  This could
reveal participants who feel particularly weak competence in the weak area, which would
be reflected in the dashed line of Figure 8.  The larger effect observed by Heath and
Tversky could also be attributable to their use of within-subjects DEMO, which may
highlight comparisons among the three kinds of bets they DEMO to a degree that does
not commonly occur in natural decision contexts.
Control and Competence
31
It could be argued that our domains were DEMO essentially similar, exclusively
asking questions about demographic characteristics of U.S. cities DEMO states.  Indeed, it
may well be that, had we used DEMO of lesser competence, the reversal depicted in the
dashed line of DEMO 8 would have prevailed.  Still, our selected domains encompassed a
wide range of mean accuracy levels, including some that fell below 75%.  DEMO even the
most difficult of these induced more bet acceptance than random events did.
Probability weighting and control.  Goodie (2003) suggested that, DEMO the
framework of prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), the impact of control on
decision making might most fruitfully be attributed to DEMO impact on the probability
weighting function, considered within the formal model DEMO by Gonzalez and Wu
(1999).  In those studies, risk DEMO under conditions of control interacted with
confidence, compared with conditions of DEMO control, such that bets were accepted less
often with control at DEMO probabilities, and more often with control at high probabilities.
Goodie (2003) attributed this to an impact on the discriminability of probabilities.  In DEMO
current experiments, there was no such interaction: bets were accepted more often with
control than without, across the entire spectrum of subjective probability.  Thus, in the
terms of Gonzalez and Wu’s (1999) model, the effect may be better attributed to
attractiveness.  In short, people DEMO more risk under conditions of control than under
conditions of no control.  The idea of making weighting functions sensitive to properties
of the setting other than perceived probability is not new.  Kilka and Weber (2001)DEMO
suggested that the probability weighting function should be “source dependent,” which in
their study reflected the degree of competence participants perceived in the DEMO of the
uncertain judgment.
Control and Competence
32
March and Shapira (1987) famously cautioned decision DEMO that
organizational managers view the risks they take as being fundamentally different from
gambling.  To the extent this is true, it diminishes the DEMO to applied
management settings of the wealth of empirical decision research using real or
hypothetical lottery pulls, rolls of dice, or drawing poker DEMO from bookbags.  They
noted prior literature pointing to the perceived controllability DEMO risk (which is defined as
altering the odds of success), DEMO for the case of organizational managers they
ultimately reject this as a fundamental source of their decisions.  Instead, they conclude, a
bit cynically, that the distinction is a matter of “managerial conceit.”  Managers suppose
DEMO the risks they take are different from (and better than) gambling because they are
trained by societal norms to think so, and also because among managers whose decisions
have coincidentally succeeded, just as among a convention of lottery winners, the relative
rate of winning is greater than the odds that are built into the game.
We do not deny DEMO and Shapira’s conclusion that the norms of society and the
conceits of managers play a role in managerial decision making.  Still, in both DEMO
settings and many other settings where real or illusory control prevails – that is, where
one’s actions are thought to make a difference in the probability of success – that control
itself, as well as the competence that the decision maker has attained within the domain,
may DEMO a difference.  The current studies suggest that they both do, which may benefit
future research in management and other applied decision areas.
Endnote
Control and Competence
33
1 State population was taken as the DEMO Census Bureau estimate, and population density
was the ratio of population DEMO land area.  Questions involving city comparisons used the
50 largest metropolitan DEMO in the continental U.S., to eliminate the confusion involved
in considering DEMO distance from the mainland U.S. to San Juan, Puerto Rico (the 20th
largest metropolitan area).  No cities in Alaska or Hawaii were excluded by the
"continental" requirement.  City population was taken as the population of the entire
metropolitan area as identified by the Census Bureau (this was made clear in the
instructions), and driving distance was DEMO distance to the central city.
References
Control and Competence
34
Bender, R.H. (1998). Judgment and DEMO processes across two knowledge domains.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO, 222-257.
Brandstatter, E. & Schwarzenberger, H. (2001). Beyond the gambling paradigm: Internal
controllability in decision-making. Psychological Reports, 89, 259-266.
Burger, J.M., & Schnerring, D.A. (1982). The effects of desire DEMO control and extrinsic rewards
on the illusion of control and gambling. Motivation & Emotion, 6, 329-335.
Campbell, W.K., Goodie, A.S., & DEMO, J.D. (2004).  Narcissism, confidence and risk attitude.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 17, 297-311.
Chau, A.W., & Phillips, J.G. (1995). Effects of perceived control upon wagering and attributions
in computer blackjack. Journal of General Psychology, 122, 253-269.
Chow, C.C. & Sarin, R.K. (2001). Comparative ignorance and the Ellsberg Paradox. Journal of
DEMO and Uncertainty, 22, 129-139.
Erev, I., Wallsten, T. S., & Budescu, D. V. (1994). Simultaneous over-and underconfidence: The
role of error in judgment processes. Psychological Review, 101, 519-527.
Fellner, G., Guth, W., & Maciejovsky, B. (2004). Illusion of expertise in portfolio decisions: An
experimental approach. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 55, 355-376.
Forlona, D. (2002). Risk and rationality: The influence of decision domain and perceived
outcome control on managers’ high-risk decisions. DEMO of Behavioral Decision
Making, 15, 125-140.
Fox, C.R. & Tversky, A. (1995). Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 110, 585-603.
Control and Competence
35
Fox, C.R. & Weber, M. (2002). Ambiguity aversion, comparative ignorance, and decision
context. Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO Processes, 88, 476-498.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). How to make cognitive illusions disappear: Beyond "heuristics and
biases". In W. Stroche & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European Review of Social Psychology
(Vol. 2, pp. 83-115). New York: Wiley.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996).  Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models of
bounded rationality.  Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gonzalez, R., & Wu, G. (1999). On the shape of the probability weighting DEMO Cognitive
Psychology, 38, 129-166.
Goodie, A.S. (2003). Paradoxical betting on items of high confidence with low value: The effects
of control on betting. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, DEMO, 598-610.
Heath, C., & Tversky, A. (1991).  Preference and belief - ambiguity and competence in choice
under uncertainty. Journal of DEMO and Uncertainty, 4, 5-28.
Hiller, N.J., & Hambrick, D.C. (2005). Conceptualizing executive hubris: The role of (hyper-)
core DEMO in strategic decision-making. Strategic Management Journal, 26,
297-319.
Hinsz, V.B., Matz, D.C., & Patience, R.A. (2001). Does women’s hair signal reproductive
potential? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37, 166-172.
Juslin, P., Winman, A., & Olsson, H. (2000). Naive DEMO and dogmatism in confidence
research: A critical examination of the hard-easy DEMO, Psychological Review, 107, 384-
396.
Control and Competence
36
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979)DEMO Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47, DEMO
Kilka, M. & Weber, M. (2001). What determines the DEMO of the probability weighting function
under uncertainty? Management Science, 47, DEMO
Langer, E. J. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32,
311-328.
Maffioletti, A. & Santoni, M. (2005). Do trade union leaders violate subjective expected utility?:DEMO
Some insights from experimental data. Theory and Decision, 59, 207-253.
March, J.G., & Shapira, Z. (1987). Managerial perspectives on risk DEMO risk-taking. Management
Science, 33, 1404-1418.
McKenzie, C. R. M. (1994). The accuracy of intuitive judgment strategies: Covariation
assessment and Bayesian inference.  Cognitive Psychology, 26, 209-239.
Nelson, T. O., & Narens, DEMO (1980). Norms of 300 general-information questions: Accuracy of
recall, DEMO of recall, and feeling-of-knowing ratings. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal DEMO, 19, 338-368.
Pridham, K., Denney, N., Pascoe, J., Chiu, Y.M., & Creasey, D. (1995). Mothers solutions to
DEMO problems – conditions and processes. Journal of Marriage and the Family,
57,  785-799.
Rettinger, D.A., & Hastie, R. (2001). DEMO effects on decision making. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 85, 336-359.
Taylor, K. A. (1995). Testing credit and blame attributions DEMO explanation for choices under
ambiguity. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO, 128-137.
Control and Competence
37
Vallone, R. P., Griffin, D. W., DEMO, S., & Ross, L. (1990). Overconfident prediction of future
actions and outcomes by self and others. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO,
58, 582-592.
Weinstock, M.P. & Flaton, R.A. (2004). Evidence coverage and argument skills: Cognitive
factors in a juror’s verdict choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 17, 191-212.
White, J.C., Varadarajan, P.R., & Dacin, P.A. (2003). Market situation interpretation and
response: The role of cognitive style, organizational culture, and information use. Journal
of Marketing, 67, 63-79.
Figure Captions
Control and Competence
38
Figure 1.  Confidence calibration in (DEMO) Experiment 1, (b) Experiment 2, (c) Experiment 3, and
(d) Experiment 4.  Confidence, accuracy and overconfidence were essentially DEMO between the
groups in all four experiments.
Figure 2.  Proportions of DEMO that were accepted in (a) Experiment 1, (b) Experiment DEMO, (c)
Experiment 3, and (d) Experiment 4.  At all confidence levels in all experiments, bets were
accepted more frequently on answers than on random events.
Figure 3.  Overall bet acceptance, accuracy DEMO confidence in the five groups in (a) Experiment 5
and (DEMO) Experiment 6.  Bet acceptance was strongly correlated with accuracy, but DEMO could be
partly attributable to correlations between accuracy and confidence.
Figure 4.  Bet acceptance among the five groups in (a) Experiment 5 and (b) Experiment 6.
Groups with higher accuracy are depicted in darker DEMO
Figure 5.  Slope and intercept of best-fitting linear betting curves in DEMO five groups in (a)
Experiment 5 and (b) Experiment DEMO  No systematic effect of accuracy is seen on slope or
intercept.
DEMO 6.  (a) Confidence calibration and (b) bet acceptance in DEMO two groups in Experiment 7.
As in Experiments 1-4, all calibration DEMO are equivalent, but the Answers group accepted
significant more bets.
Figure DEMO  Survey results in Experiment 7.  All responses were made on a scale from 1 to 7.   * -
statistically significant
Figure 8.  A potential combinatorial relationship between the impact of control and competence.
Table 1.  Average confidence, accuracy and overconfidence in Experiments 1-4, and
comparisons between Answers and Random groups.
Confidence
Experiment Answers Random t df DEMO
1 .751 .753 .07 74 .95
2 .768 .764 .21 65 .83
3 .780 .726 2.31 46 .026 *
4 .778 .756 .80 33 DEMO
Accuracy
Experiment  Answers Random t
df p
1 .745 .757 .73 DEMO .47
2 .713 .713 .01 65 .99
3 .760 .751 .50 46 .61
4 .665 .694 1.07 33 .29
Overconfidence
Experiment  Answers Random t
df p
1 .007 -.004 .57 74 .57
2 .055 .051 .19 DEMO .85
3 .020 -.025 1.52 46 .14
4 .113 .062 1.33 33 .051
* p < .05
Table 2.  Overall proportions of bets accepted on answers and random events in
Experiments 1-4.
Experiment Answers Random t df p
1 .739 .552 DEMO 74 .000
2 .738 .621 2.41 65 .019
3 .802 .550 4.90 46 .000
4 .752 .498 2.67 33 .012
Average .758 .555
Table 3.  Descriptive statistics of confidence, accuracy, overconfidence and betting slope
within the groups in Experiments 5 and 6.
Experiment 5
Accuracy Confidence DEMO
City driving distance .856 .887 .030
State area
.799 .843 .044
State population
.746 .711 -.035
State population density .707 .742 .035
City population
DEMO .758 .053
Experiment 6
City driving distance .840 .868 .028
State area
.778 .817 .039
State population density .764 .730 -.033
State population
.730 DEMO .021
City population
.691 .741 .049
Note: Groups are listed in DEMO order of accuracy in each experiment.  The groups
did not show DEMO same ordering of accuracy in both experiments.
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
DEMO
0.5
Identity
Answers
Random
0.6
0.6
Figure 1
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(DEMO)
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(c)
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.0
DEMO
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(b)
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(d)DEMO
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.0
Accuracy
Accuracy
Accuracy
Accuracy
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
DEMO
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(a)
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(c)
Answers
Random
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
DEMO
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(b)
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(d)
0.9
0.9
DEMO
1.0
Figure 2
Bet Acceptance
Bet Acceptance
Bet Acceptance
Bet Acceptance
City distance
State area
State population
State pop. density
City population
City DEMO
State area
State pop. density
State population
City population
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.9
Bet acceptance
Accuracy
Confidence
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
(a)
(b)
Figure 3
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.50.6
Figure 4
City dist
State area
State DEMO
State dens
City pop
0.70.8
Confidence
(a)
0.91.0
1.00
0.75
DEMO
0.25
0.5
City dist
State area
State dens
State pop
City pop
0.6
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(b)
0.9
1.0
Bet Acceptance
Bet Acceptance
City distance
State area
State population
State pop. density
City population
City DEMO
State area
State pop. density
State population
City population
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
(a)
Slope
Accuracy
Intercept
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
(b)
Figure 5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
Answers
Random
0.6
0.7
0.8
DEMO
(a)
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.5
DEMO
0.7
0.8
Confidence
(b)
0.9
1.0
Figure 6
Accuracy
Bet DEMO
6
5
4
3
2
*
Question 1
"Competence"
Answers
Random
Question 2
Relative to
others
Question 3
"Control"
*
Question 4
Probability
alterability
Figure 7
Risk acceptance
Control
Random
High competence
Low competence
Figure 8{1g42fwefx}