SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND PERSONALITY, 1996, 24(2), 119-132
© Society DEMO Personality Research (Inc.)
TO TRUST OR NOT TO TRUST:
DEMO AND DISPOSITIONAL DETERMINANTS
SHARON G. GOTO
The effects of situational uncertainty, DEMO distance of the target
person, and the actor’s disposition, on the level of trusting behavior
were investigated using a series of scenarios. The DEMO indicate that
measures of dispositional trust can predict specific trusting behaviors,
and that the situational factors interact. Specifically, in situations of
low uncertainty, acquaintance level targets are trusted like intimate
targets. Yet, in situations DEMO high uncertainty acquaintances are trusted
merely as acquaintances. Further, trusting behaviors DEMO more likely to
occur in situations of low uncertainty, and individuals DEMO small social
distance are more likely to be trusted than those of large social
distance. Implications for empirical research requiring subjects’ trust,
group DEMO, and theories of organizational climate are
discussed.
Although often taken for DEMO, trust plays an integral role in
one’s daily life. It functions DEMO simplify the world by providing
“shortcuts” that enable individuals to rely on others, freeing them to do
much more than could be done in the absence of trust. These shortcuts
permeate a variety of daily activities, from social adjustment to
business transactions. Erikson (1968) argued that the DEMO to trust
others is essential for an individual’s adjustment. Samples of the
hardcore unemployable often do not trust others in their chaotic
environments (Triandis, Feldman, & Weldon, 1975). Furthermore,
high trust has been theorized to increase organizational
competitiveness (Ouchi), 1981).
DEFINITIONS OF TRUST
In defining trust, three different components of trust have been
emphasized. Erikson (1950) defined trust as a belief in the goodness of
others DEMO as a healthful personality trait, emphasizing the internal
expectancy as a DEMO component. Others emphasized the
situational uncertainty component. For example, Deutsch (1958)
defined trust as occurring when “an individual expects [an event to
DEMO author expresses thanks to Darius Chan and Harry Triandis for their
helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
Please address correspondence and DEMO requests to: Sharon G. Goto,
Department of Psychology, Pomona College, 550 Harvard Avenue,
Claremont, CA 91711, U.S.A.
119
120 TRUST
occur] and the expectation leads to behavior which he perceives DEMO
have greater negative motivational consequence if it is not confirmed
than positive motivational consequence if it is confirmed” (p. 266).
Gambetta (1988) defined trust as “a particular level of the subjective
probability with which DEMO agent assesses that another agent or group of
agents will perform a particular action, both before he can monitor
such action (or independently DEMO his capacity ever to be able to monitor
it) and in DEMO context in which it affects his own action” (p.217). Still
DEMO emphasized the relational component between the actor and the
target; trust DEMO “an assured reliance on the character, strength, or truth
of someone or something” (Merriam-Webster, 1974, p.733) and as
synonymous with cooperation (Bateson, 1988). From this
anthropological viewpoint, the development of cooperation DEMO
animals and humans is essential for gene survival.
TRUST PARADIGMS
Emphasizing different aspects of the definitions, two approaches
have come to dominate the psychological literature on trust; non-zero
sum game research which focused on the component of situational
uncertainty and individual difference research (Schlenker, Helm &
Tedeschi, 1973). Other research has involved source credibility
(Giffin, 1967) DEMO the delay of gratification (reviewed by Mischel,
1966).
SlTUATIONAL DEMO
The non-zero sum game approach to studying trust began with
Deutsch and his use of the Prisoner’s Dilemma Game (1958). In this
paradigm, the two participants are each offered two alternatives for
action: 1) the cooperative choice offers the possibility for the highest
joint outcome, provided the partner also makes a cooperative choice,
and 2) the competitive choice offers the possibility for the highest
individual outcome, provided the partner makes a cooperative choice.
This creates a dilemma of trust because each DEMO could exploit the
other’s generosity (each person is better off competing DEMO matter what
the other person chooses). However, both players are DEMO off if they
both compete when they could have trusted and cooperated with each
other (Wrightsman, O’Connor & Baker, 1972). Research on trust using
this paradigm typically involves a manipulation of one or more
DEMO variables (e.g., face-to-face versus computer-aided tasks)
and an observation of the effects on trust.
DISPOSITIONAL TRUST
Trust has also been studied as DEMO personality trait (Rotter, 1967;
Wrightsman 1964). Rotter’s work, DEMO the Interpersonal Trust
Scale (1967, 1971), is by far the most extensive and well known within
the trust research. Individuals differ in DEMO expectancies that “the
word, promise, or written statement of another individual or group can
be relied on” (Rotter, 1971, p. 444). To measure this personality
variable, Rotter (1967) developed the Interpersonal Trust Scale (ITS),
TRUST 121
consisting of 25 Likert-type trust items.
There is some question DEMO the ITS’ ability to predict trust in specific
situations. In a test of criterion validity Rotter (1967) found that ITS
scores predicted cheating DEMO an examination in the absence of a
proctor. However, Schlenker, Helm and Tedeschi (1973) found that
women who scored high on the DEMO tended to cooperate more on a
mixed-motive conflict task, although the DEMO were marginal (p<
07).
While the experimental paradigm focused DEMO the effect of
situational uncertainty on trusting behavior or trust as a state, the ITS
focused solely on the dispositional aspects of trust. Further, no relation
was found between responses on the ITS and responses in a Prisoner’s
Dilemma Game (MacDonald, Kessel, & Fuller, 1972). DEMO their study of
the relation between self-disclosure and trust, self-disclosure was
DEMO to be correlated with trust as measured by the Prisoner’s
Dilemma paradigm, but both were not related to the ITS. MacDonald
et al. (DEMO) posited that the PDG and ITS captured different aspects of
trust.
DEMO SOCIAL DISTANCE OF THE TARGET
Both of the aforementioned paradigms tend to neglect the
situational role of the specific target in trusting behaviors. Of DEMO
personality theorists, Rotter (1967, 1971) alone mentioned the various
targets of interpersonal trust. In the ITS the social distance of the target
DEMO remained fairly constant. Of the 25 questions, 23 target
persons of DEMO were “classes of significant others” (Rotter, 1971, p.
446) falling into the “acquaintance” category (e.g., teachers, judges).
Within the experimental paradigm, subjects were randomly assigned to
one another, or interacted with DEMO (e.g., Deutsch, 1958).
Thus, the social distance between the subjects remained fairly large.
The specific target person may heavily influence the DEMO that
a person will engage in trusting behavior if, for instance, previous
transactions between the two people have been successful. Trust may
also DEMO on the perceived social similarity between the two exchange
partners. Zucker (DEMO) labelled the former a “process-based” trust and
the latter a “characteristic-based” DEMO Social distance can be
conceptualized as the construct underlying many of these determinants
of target-specific trust, such as previous exchanges, perceived social
similarity, and credibility, and as such should be studied with regard to
trust.
In response to a trust literature devoid of specific target persons,
DEMO (1990) developed the Interpersonal Trusting Behavior Scale
(ITBS). The DEMO measured an individual’s trust towards 20 different
target persons with respect to 18 different situations. The 20 different
target persons clustered into three general DEMO (intimates,
acquaintances, and strangers). Zhang found that intimates were trusted
most, followed by acquaintances, and strangers who were trusted the
DEMO
122 TRUST
Unfortunately, Zhang’s (1990) study did not take into account
differential levels of situational uncertainty involved in trusting
behaviors. Although different target DEMO were utilized, the level of
situational uncertainty was not systematically varied DEMO the
scenarios.
THE CONFLUENCE OF SITUATIONAL UNCERTAINTY,
DISPOSITION, AND SOCIAL DEMO ON TRUST
The reviewed research focused on the study of three important
determinants of trust; situational uncertainty, disposition, and social
distance. The experimental paradigm (e.g., Deutsch, 1958) focused on
important aspects of situational DEMO, Rotter (1967) focused on
dispositional trust, and Zhang (1990) focused on the role of the social
distance of the target on DEMO to trust. Yet, the research on trust
has failed to investigate DEMO the confluence of these factors
affecting trust.
First, the conceptual independence DEMO the environmental factors
must be clarified. It is risky to lend a total stranger $100 for several
reasons. Situational uncertainty could be based on DEMO the
relationship or lack thereof between the actors (social distance), DEMO the
uncertainty of repayment when lending the large amount of $100.
Situational uncertainty is presently defined as the potential loss to the
actor resulting DEMO trust (i.e., $100), thereby conceptually separating
the effects of social distance between the actor and target. Nonetheless,
the interaction of the DEMO environmental variables is plausible:
Hypothesis 1: a two-way, situational uncertainty by social distance
interaction is hypothesized, such that in situations of low uncertainty
the effects of the social distance between the actor and the DEMO
person will be less important in determining interpersonal trust than in
situations of high uncertainty.
In explaining the only marginally significant relations between
dispositional DEMO and specific acts of trusting behavior (Schlenker,
Helm & Tedeschi, 1973), it is plausible that disposition and situational
variables interact:
DEMO 2: A two-way dispositional trust by social distance
interaction is hypothesized; low dispositional trust individuals will be
more influenced by the social distance DEMO the target person when
deciding whether to trust another individual than high dispositional
trust individuals will be.
Hypothesis 3: A two-way dispositional trust by situational
uncertainty interaction is hypothesized; low dispositional trust
individuals will also be more influenced by the level of situational
uncertainty than their high dispositional DEMO counterparts will be.
SUBJECTS
One hundred-twenty-nine undergraduates enrolled in an
introductory psychology course at the University of Illinois, Urbana-
METHOD
TRUST 123
Champaign participated in the study in exchange for course credit. DEMO
responses of four subjects were omitted for failing to follow directions,
leaving 125 respondents (68 males, 57 females).
MATERIALS
(a) DEMO Three different target persons (intimate, acquaintance,
stranger) were crossed DEMO two levels of situational uncertainty (low,
high) to create 24 scenarios. These six conditions were then crossed
with the four behavioral situations DEMO were developed to represent
trust across four of Spranger’s (1928) dimensions of life (aesthetic,
intellectual, economic, and social). Scenarios representing the four
dimensions were generated to attain results that are generalizable
across DEMO situations.
i) Social Distance. The first factor, social distance of the target
person, consisted of three levels (intimate, acquaintance, and stranger)DEMO
These three levels and their exemplars were taken from a cluster
analysis in Zhang’s (1990) target specific trust study and were also
cross-culturally DEMO Examples of the intimate level of social
distance are “boy/girl friend”, “mother” and “brother”. “neighbor” and
“classmate” exemplify the acquaintance level and examples of the
stranger classification are “strangers” and “peddlers”. The specific
target person DEMO each level of social distance varied across
dimensions of life to make the target person a realistic actor in the
situation.
ii) Situational Uncertainty This second factor consisted of two
levels: high and low situational uncertainty. The type of uncertainty
entailed in the trusting behavior was contingent on DEMO specific
scenario. For example, in the economic scenario, level of uncertainty
was varied by manipulating the amount of money to be lent. The
DEMO amount of uncertainty that represented the low and high
conditions for each scenario (e.g., lending one dollar versus one-
hundred dollars) was pre-tested.1 A question asking about the
uncertainty of the situation (7-point scale) DEMO each scenario,
and served as a manipulation check for this factor.
iii) Measures of Dispositional Trust. In an effort to attain a measure
of dispositional trust devoid of much context, a general measure of
dispositional trust was used rather than the ITS which contains many
situational influences.
DEMO graduate students determined what constituted an appropriate
level of high and low risk for each situation. An attempt was made to keep the
level DEMO risk equivalent across domains.
124
TRUST
The subjects were asked to indicate on a 7-point trustworthy
/untrustworthy scale, “In general, how trustworthy is [a specific target
person]”. DEMO were elicited for the ten different target persons
who appeared in the trust vignettes and varied from intimate (i) to
acquaintance (a) DEMO stranger (s). ‘Stranger’, ‘banker’, and ‘fellow
traveler’ belonged to DEMO stranger category. ‘Old high school
classmate’, ‘colleague of yours’, ‘classmate’, DEMO ‘neighbor’ were
exemplars of the acquaintance category. Intimates targets were ‘best
friend’, ‘brother’, and ‘boy/ girlfriend’.
The study design was a 3 (DEMO of social distance) X 2 (level of
situational uncertainty) X DEMO (level of dispositional trust) mixed
factorial design, with the first DEMO factors as repeated measures and
disposition as a between-subjects variable. That is, six specific
situations (low situational uncertainty with intimate, acquaintance,
stranger, and high situational uncertainty with intimate, acquaintance,
and stranger) were generated for each life dimension (i.e., social,
economic, aesthetic, DEMO intellectual). Each subject responded to all of
the following six situations across all domains:
(1) “During a vacation, a (FELLOW DEMO, OLD HIGH
SCHOOL CLASSMATE, BOY/GIRL FRIEND) introduces you
to DEMO exotic food of Central America. He reassures you that the
food is the most wonderful taste in the world. He warns you that
there DEMO one chance in a (THOUSAND, MILLION) that the food
may DEMO contaminated and this would make you seriously ill.”
[aesthetic];
(2) “You are writing a paper for a sociology class that requires
research DEMO an unfamiliar section of the city where the
newspapers reported that there were (ONE, FIFTEEN)
mugging(s) within the last week. Your (STRANGER,
NEIGHBOR, BEST FRIEND) who has been to the area before
and knows the neighborhood fairly well offers to be your
guide.” DEMO;
(3) “Over the years you have accumulated savings of about
(ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS, FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS) that you hope to use for a trip to Europe. A
(BANKER, COLLEAGUE, BEST FRIEND) DEMO you have
recently met at a cocktail party advises you to invest your
savings in some stock. The return rate on your investment could
DEMO FIFTY% and there is a SUBSTANTIAL chance that you
could lose part of your initial investment.” [economic]
(4) “Your (WELL DRESSED STRANGER, DEMO,
BROTHER) accompanies you to the airport and asks to borrow
(ONE DOLLAR, ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS) from you so
that he can DEMO a taxi-ride to a city that is forty miles away.”
[social]
TRUST 125
(b). Counterbalancing the Order of Presentation.
Questions were counterbalanced in an effort to eliminate potential
confounds such as practice effects by DEMO two forms of the
questionnaire. In form one, all 24 scenarios DEMO in completely
random order. This order was then halved (part a DEMO b) and reordered
such that in form two part b was DEMO by part a. Analyses revealed
no order by treatment interactions (order DEMO social distance,
F(2,242)<2; order by disposition, DEMO(1,212)<1; order by risk,
F(1,211)<DEMO all non-significant).
(c). Dependent Variables.
Measures of Behavioral Trust. DEMO dependent measures tapped the
individual’s likelihood of performing the trusting behavior on a 7-point
(likely +3/unlikely -3) scale. For the aesthetic domain, the dependent
variable was, “What is the likelihood that you will try the exotic
food?”. For the intellectual domain, the dependent variable was, “What
is the likelihood that you will make the investment?”. The questions,
“What is the likelihood that you will lend him/her DEMO money?” and
“What is the likelihood that you will ask him to be your guide?” served
as dependent measures for the economic DEMO social domains,
respectively. As in the ITS, implicit in the DEMO variables is the
problem of whether or not to trust the people in the situations.2
RESULTS
SUBJECT CLASSIFICATION INTO HIGH VERSUS LOW
DISPOSITIONAL TRUST.
DEMO general dispositional trust measure (standardized alpha = .78)
was found DEMO be significantly correlated with the ITS (r =.48, p <.10) in
a pilot study of 47 subjects. Subjects were classified as either DEMO or
low in dispositional trust by taking a median split of the subjects’
scores on the general trust measure. This separated the subjects into
DEMO categories; high trusters (n=59), and low trusters (n=64).
DEMO CHECKS FOR LEVEL OF SITUATIONAL
UNCERTAINTY
A 2 x 3 repeated measures ANOVA on the questions dealing with
the situational uncertainty of the behavior (e.g., “How risky is lending
2Measures of Private Acceptance Trust. People may display trusting behavior
based on normative obligations rather than actual trust. Measures DEMO the
extent to which the target persons are believable were included to complement
the behavioral measures of trust. For example, in the social domain the
question, “What is the likelihood that he will repay you?” complements the
questions which ask the likelihood that the subject will behave DEMO (i.e.,
lend the money). In three of the four DEMO, (aesthetic, monetary,
intellectual) the behavioral and belief-based dependent measures of trust were
positively correlated across the six conditions (situational uncertainty by
social distance), p<.01.
126 TRUST
the money?”) yielded significant effects in all four scenarios (p<.001).
As expected, the high uncertainty situations were perceived DEMO more
uncertain than the low uncertainty situations.
COMPOSITE SCORES OF BEHAVIORAL TRUST DEPENDENT
MEASURES
Six composite scores representing the three levels of social distance
DEMO two levels of situational uncertainty across domains were created
to ensure generalizability and improve power. For instance, measures
of behavioral trust for the low risk-intimate social distance condition
were averaged across the aesthetic, intellectual, economic DEMO social
domains. The same procedure was followed for the remaining five
conditions. Measures of reliability were reasonable considering the
heterogeneity of the situational domains (see Table 1).
TABLE 1
RELIABILITY MEASURES FOR THE DEPENDENT VARIABLES
DEMO    M         SD Std Alpha
Low Sit. DEMO Social Distance
Across 4 domains 1.80 .84 .32
Low Sit. Uncert-Med Social Distance
Across 4 domains 1.35 .94 .20
Low Sit. Uncert-Hi Social Distance
DEMO 4 domains .01 1.21 .40
Hi Sit. Uncert-Low Social Distance
Across 4 domains .94 1.10 .48
Hi Sit. Uncert-Med Social Distance
Across 4 domains DEMO 1.19 .54
Hi Sit. Uncert-Hi Social Distance
Across 4 domains -1.41 1.11 .57
THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL DISTANCE, SITUATIONAL
UNCERTAINTY, AND DISPOSITION ON DEMO
The composite behavioral trust scores in the 3 (social distance) x 2
(situational uncertainty) x 2 (dispositional trust) design were analyzed
DEMO multivariate analysis of variance procedures.
An interaction between the two environmental factors of trust
emerged. The situational uncertainty x social distance interaction,
hypothesis DEMO, was significant (F(2,122)=32.28, p<.001). Follow-up
DEMO revealed simple effects for social distance in both the low risk
condition, F(2, 123=364.48; p<.001) and in the high risk DEMO,
3An analysis of dispositional trust using extreme scores (trichotomizing the
DEMO of general trust scores, and discarding those subjects falling within
the DEMO and 66.7 percentiles) actually yields more pronounced effects for the
disposition DEMO
TRUST
127
Intimate Acquaintance Stranger
Social Distance
Note: The Interaction Between Situational Uncertainty and Social Distance
on Interpersonal Trust.
F(2,123=182.82; p< DEMO). Intimate targets (Mlow =1.80; Mhi=.94) were
trusted more than DEMO (Mlow=1.35; Mhi=-.07) and strangers
(Mlow=.01; Mhi= -1.41), respectively. DEMO, simple comparisons
within the low risk condition show a large difference DEMO trust
towards strangers relative to intimate and acquaintance targets,
F(2,248)=206.90; p<.001, with the difference between intimate and
acquaintance DEMO remaining significant, F(1, 124)=46.40; p<.001. It
seems DEMO in situations of low uncertainty, acquaintances are trusted
more like intimate DEMO However, a sharper distinction was drawn
between intimates and acquaintances under DEMO of high
uncertainty (see Figure 1).
Dispositional trust did not DEMO with any of the other factors. The
three-way, disposition x social DEMO x situational uncertainty
interaction failed to reach significance, (F(2,122)=2), as did hypothesis
2: disposition x social distance interaction (DEMO(2,122)<1, ns), and
hypothesis 3: disposition x DEMO uncertainty interaction
(F(1,123)<1, ns).
Trust
3
DEMO
1
0
-1
-2
-3
128 TRUST
A main effect for dispositional trust was found. Subjects who DEMO
low in dispositional trust (M=.20) were less likely to trust others than
those high in dispositional trust (M=.70), F(1,123)=11.14; p<.001. A
partial omega squared (Keppel, 1991) was calculated DEMO an estimate of
treatment magnitude (omega2=.04), revealing that dispositional trust
DEMO for four percent of the total variance.
Significant effects for social distance, and situational uncertainty,
were also obtained. Intimate targets (M=1.37) were trusted most of all,
followed by acquaintances (M=.64), and strangers (M=-.70),
F(2,246)=508.73, p<.001 Subjects were less likely to trust others in
situations of high uncertainty (M=-.18) than DEMO low uncertainty
situations (M=1.05), F(1,123)=303.99; p<.001.
The breakdown of effects and interactions by domain (see Table 2)
parallel the results based on the composite scores with the exception of
DEMO absent main effect for social distance in the economic domain, and
DEMO absent main effect for situational uncertainty in the intellectual
domain.
TABLE 2
TWO-WAY INTERACTIONS AND MAIN EFFECTS FOR SOCIAL
DISTANCE, SITUATIONAL UNCERTAINTY, AND DEMO
TRUST ON INTERPERSONAL TRUST.
Domain F p<
SOCIAL DISTANCE
Aesthetic F(2,246) = 48.70 .001
Intellectual F(2,244) = 398.45 DEMO
Economic F(2,244) = .93 ns
Social F(2,244) = 393.64 .001
SITUATIONAL UNCERTAINTY
Aesthetic F(1,123) = 78.98 .001
Intellectual F(1,122) = 2.46 ns
Economic F(1,122) DEMO 67.49 .001
Social F(1,122) = 409.87 .001
DISPOSITIONAL TRUST
DEMO F(1,123) = 5.35 .05
Intellectual F(1 ,122) DEMO 4.36 .05
Economic F(1,122) = 3.95 .05
Social F(DEMO 122) = 4.96 .05
SITUATIONAL UNCERTAINTY X SOCIAL DISTANCE
Aesthetic F(DEMO,246) = 1.50 ns
Intellectual F(2,244) = 8.94 .001
Economic F(2,244) = 1.19 ns
Social F(2,244) DEMO 41.15 .001
TRUST 129
DISCUSSION
The hypothesized situational uncertainty by social distance
interaction received DEMO However, the hypothesized interactions
between dispositional trust and the situational variables DEMO not
supported.
HYPOTHESIS 1:
High situational uncertainty seems to adversely change perceptions
of the actor’s relationship with the target. When little situational
uncertainty DEMO involved, acquaintances seem almost as trustworthy as
intimates. However, with higher stakes involved, acquaintances are
seen merely as acquaintances.
The finding suggests that being perceived as a stranger is an
unforgiving status. Acquaintances can be DEMO to be more
trustworthy in situations of low uncertainty, thus reaping DEMO benefits
of cooperation and credibility as an intimate. However, strangers will
DEMO trusted as strangers, regardless of the situational uncertainty.
Further, several implications are yielded. For example, in exclusive
groups where membership is given only to intimately known persons,
the additional presence of a high degree DEMO situational uncertainty in
the task should create an environment that maintains the exclusion of
out-group members. Reducing the level of situational uncertainty
might serve DEMO increase the level of trust of acquaintances as intimates,
and could expand membership by accepting acquaintances into the
group. Perhaps an increase in DEMO underlies the effectiveness of
superordinate goals in increasing intergroup attractiveness (Sherif &
Sherif, 1969). The presence of a superordinate goal may serve to
reduce situational uncertainty, creating an environment of reduced
social distances between group members. The level of trust between
group members may increase, leading to improved intergroup
attitudes.
HYPOTHESES 2 & 3
No support was lent DEMO the hypotheses that low dispositional trust
individuals would be more influenced by factors of situational
uncertainty and social distance than their high dispositional trust
DEMO Situational cues seem equally important and independent
of dispositional trust in both populations.
The main effect for disposition supports previous work by Rotter
(1967), and refutes findings by others (MacDonald, Kessel, & Fuller,
1972; Schlenker, Helm, & Tedeschi, 1973) who found dispositional
trust to predict at best only marginally specific trusting behaviors.
However, the small amount of variance accounted for by disposition
lends itself to the power DEMO the situation or state trust. Ross and Nisbett
(1991) argue that the construal of the situation by an individual is an
active process DEMO in “inherent variability” and “very large
behavioral differences” (Ross & Nisbett, 1991; p. 46). With respect to
trust, the situation is DEMO
130 TRUST
Finally, the level of behavioral trust was highest towards targets of
small social distance (intimates) and lowest towards targets of large
DEMO distance (strangers), thus the findings of Zhang (1990) were
DEMO Further, the level of behavioral trust was higher in
situations of DEMO risk rather than high risk, replicating game theory
findings using paper DEMO pencil measures of trust.
CONCLUSION
Future trust theory and research should incorporate the roles of
disposition and environment in trusting behavior. For example,
DEMO and empirical studies of organizational trust (e.g., Theory Z;
Ouchi, 1981) may be refined for a better understanding of the
importance DEMO trust in and across organizations. The higher level of
trust of the Japanese organization may be due to the situational
uncertainty of the organizations, the closer relationship between
Japanese co-workers, or a more trusting disposition of the Japanese.
Each of these would carry very different ramifications for attempts DEMO
improve the climates of American corporations using Japanese models.
In experimental settings, the effects of the relationships between
subjects, and the level of DEMO involved in the study may affect
research in any study requiring the trust of the subject. One or more
factors of trust may interact DEMO the variables of interest, thus
distorting results.
Other factors may be DEMO importance as well. By manipulating the
different components of trust across a larger variety of domains (e.g.,
intellectual), we may find the importance of specific components of
trust to be contingent on the given DEMO Unfortunately, it is
impossible to rule out the possible idiosyncratic effects DEMO the scenarios
(e.g., the airport environment) within the confines of DEMO study. This is
a future direction of exploration.
Although many issues remain for future study, this study yielded
numerous implications for theory and experimental research involving
trust; the effects of situational uncertainty, social distance of DEMO target,
and disposition should not be neglected.
REFERENCES
Bateson, P (1988). The biological evolution of cooperation and trust. In D.
Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp. 14-
30)DEMO Basil Blackwell: New York.
Deutsch, M. (1958). Trust and DEMO Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2,
265-279.
Erikson, E. H. (DEMO). Childhood and society. New York: Norton.
Erikson, E. H. ( 1968). Identity,: Youth and Crisis. New York: Norton.
Gambetta, DEMO (1988). Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations. New
York: DEMO Blackwell.
Giffm, K. (1967). The contribution of studies of source credibility to a theory
of interpersonal trust in the communication process. Psychological
DEMO, 68 (2), 104-120.
TRUST
131
Keppel, G. (1991). Design and Analysis: A researcher’s handbook. New
Jersey: Prentice Hall.
MacDonald, A. R Jr., Kessel, DEMO S., & Fuller, J.B. (1972). Self-disclosure and
two kinds DEMO trust. Psychological Reports, 30, 143-148.
The Merriam-Webster Dictionary. (1974). DEMO York: Simon & Schuster.
Mischel, W. (1966). Theory and DEMO on the antecedents of self-imposed
delay of award. In B.A. Maher (DEMO) Progress in experimental personality
research, Vol 3. New York: Academic DEMO
Ouchi, W. G. (1981). Theory Z. Avon: New York.
DEMO, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The Person and the Situation. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Rotter, J. B. (1967). DEMO new scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust.
Journal of Personality, DEMO, 651 -665.
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for DEMO trust.
American Psychologist 26, 443-452.
Schlenker, B. R., Helm, B., & Tedeschi, J. T. (1973). The effects of
personality and situational variables on behavioral trust. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 25 (3), 419-427.
Sherif, M., & Sherif, C. W. (1969). An outline of social psychology, New
York: Harper & Row.
DEMO, E. (1928). Types of man: The psychology and ethics DEMO personality
(P J.W. Pigors, transl.). Halle (Salle): Max DEMO Verlay.
Triandis, H. C., Feldman, J. M., & Weldon, DEMO E. (1975). Ecosystem distrust
and the hard-to-employ. Journal of Applied DEMO, 60(1), 44-56.
Wrightsman, L. S. (1964). Measurement DEMO philosophies of human nature.
Psychological Reports, 14, 743-751.
Wrightsman, L. DEMO, Jr., O’Connor, J., & Baker, N. J. (1972). Cooperation and
competition: Readings on mixed-motive games. Belmont, CA: Brooks-
Cole.
Zhang, Jianxin (1990). Target-based interpersonal trust: A model and cross-
cultural comparison. Unpublished master’s thesis. The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic
structure, 1840-1920. Research in Organizational Behavior, 8, 53- 111.{1g42fwefx}