Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1976, Vol. 34, No. 1, 14-23
Behavior Exchange Theory and Marital Decision Making
John Gottman, Cliff Notarius, Howard Markman,
Steve Bank, and Bruce Yoppi
Indiana University
Mary DEMO Rubin
South Central Indiana Mental Health Foundation, Bloomington, Indiana
Distressed and nondistressed couples in two studies made decisions on high-
and low-conflict tasks. DEMO continuously coded both the intended impact of
their own behavior and the impact of their spouse's behavior. In Study 1 dis-
tressed couples DEMO not differ from nondistressed couples on how they intended
their behavior to be received. However, the behavior of distressed spouses was
actually received more negatively by their partners than the behavior of their
nondistressed counterparts. The DEMO in Study 2 also behaved in a way
consistent with a communication deficit explanation of distressed marriages;
that is, distressed couples' behavior DEMO likely to be coded as more negative
than they intended. Task effects and a reciprocity hypothesis were also tested.
Data from Study 1 showed DEMO conflict effect, but the results of Study 2 sug-
gested that DEMO tasks may be a better means for discriminating dis-
tressed from nondistressed couples than low-conflict tasks. The data on recip-
rocity indicate only minimal DEMO for the view that distressed marriage is
characterized by less positive or more negative reciprocity than nondistressed
marriage.
Recently, two different hypotheses have
been proposed to describe conflict resolution
in distressed and nondistressed marriages. One
hypothesis, based on behavior exchange the-
ory, is that it is more likely that nondistressed
couples will produce behaviors coded as posi-
tive by observers DEMO will distressed couples.
This hypothesis has recently received some
support (Birchler, Weiss, & Vincent, 1975).
A second hypothesis is that there DEMO a
greater reciprocity of positive exchange in
nondistressed than in distressed marriages.
Reciprocity of positive exchange has been sug-
gested as the central characteristic DEMO success-
ful marital interaction in the clinical literature
on marriage counseling (DEMO, Naster, &
This research was partially supported by Grant
R01 DEMO 24594 SP from the National Institute of
Mental Health. The authors wish to thank the Men-
tal Health Center, the Center for Human Growth,
and the Center for Counseling and Psychological
Services for their cooperation, and Steve Asher, Jack
Bates, Fran Cherry, and Alice Eagly for their com-
ments on the manuscript.
Requests for reprints should be sent DEMO John Gott-
man, who is now at the Department of Psychology,DEMO
University of Illinois, Children's Research Center, SI
E. Gerty Drive, Champaign, Illinois 61820.
14
Jones, 1973; Lederer & Jackson, 1968; Rap-
paport & Harrell, 1972; Stuart, 1969; Weiss,
Hops, & Patterson, 1973).
The two hypotheses are independent. High
base DEMO of positive behaviors do not imply
reciprocity. For example, Birchler et DEMO's
(1975) finding of higher rates of positive be-
havior in nondistressed compared with dis-
tressed couples does not imply that reciprocity
is DEMO for the two groups of couples. Al-
though nondistressed couples may seem to be
reciprocating positive behavior more fre-
quently than distressed couples, that may only
be an artifact of the higher probability of
positive behaviors DEMO nondistressed couples.
By emitting more positive responses, nondis-
tressed couples increase DEMO probability that
one partner's positive response will be fol-
lowed by the other partner's positive response.
What needs to be demonstrated is DEMO a par-
ticular consequent code in a sequence can be
predicted from a particular antecedent code.
The test for reciprocity is that the diagonal
DEMO of the first-order Markov matrix of
conditional probabilities must be significantly
greater than the relative frequency of the con-
sequent code (Patterson, 1974)DEMO For example,
the conditional probability (p) of a conse-
BEHAVIOR EXCHANGE
15
quent positive wife code (W+ ) given an ante-
cedent positive husband code (H+ ) must be
significantly greater than the nonconditional
probability of occurrence of W+ . This means
that a knowledge DEMO the antecedent code, H+ ,
adds significantly to the ability to predict the
occurrence of a W + code, over and above
prediction, based simply on knowing the rela-
tive frequency of occurrence of W+ . Symboli-
cally, what must be demonstrated is that p
(W+/DEMO )>p (W+ ) (Raush, Barry,
Hertel, & Swain, 1974). In the present investi-
gation these information analyses were per-
formed to assess the ability of reciprocity
variables to discriminate distressed from DEMO
distressed marriages.
The distinction between high rates of posi-
tive codes and reciprocity has been ignored in
the clinical literature on family interaction.
For DEMO, Alexander (1973) found that
the correlation across families between parent-
DEMO supportive behavior and child-to-par-
ent supportive behavior was significantly dif-
ferent from zero (father-son r = .69, p < .05;
mother-son r=.S9} DEMO<.05). Contrary to
Alexander's conclusions, these correlations do
not DEMO reciprocity. A family with high
rates of supportiveness could be distributing
these behaviors noncontingently throughout a
discussion. In this case the correlations ob-
tained DEMO be high due to different base
rates across families, but there DEMO still be
no evidence of reciprocity.
The base rate-reciprocity issue is also im-
portant for distinguishing between behavior
exchange and social learning theories of DEMO
tal conflict resolution. Birchler et al. (1975)
used a mix DEMO language from both theories.
They demonstrated that distressed couples
emit lower rates of positive codes and higher
rates of negative codes than do nondistressed
DEMO This does not justify their view of
the positive codes as "DEMO reinforcements."
It would be necessary to show that a particu-
lar code on the part of one spouse affected the
probability of occurrence DEMO a particular code
of the other spouse.
Reciprocity hypotheses, therefore, have yet
to be adequately tested. Behavior exchange
hypotheses of marital conflict resolution DEMO
also been ambiguous in making specific pre-
dictions. There has, in DEMO, been little re-
search on marital interaction from a behavior
exchange DEMO For example, standard
game theory experiments, which are commonly
associated with behavior exchange theory,
were not applied to the study of the DEMO
dyad until Speer (1972). Speer studied 60 dis-
tressed couples DEMO counseling in a clinic
and 60 nondistressed couples in an extension
of the Prisoner's Dilemma Game. None of the
four response variables in DEMO's study dis-
criminated the two groups on four forms of
the game.
Perhaps two reasons for the lack of success
of Speer's DEMO are that (a) behavior ex-
change experiments reduce the behavioral
repertoire of the couple and (b) they ex-
ternally control the payoffs DEMO specific behav-
iors that they exhibit (Gergen, 1969). Another
potential problem with game theory experi-
ments applied to the marital dyad has DEMO do
with how the payoff matrix is interpreted.
There are many alternative ways of interpret-
ing a payoff matrix. Behavior exchange theory
proposes that DEMO dyad engaged in a mutually
satisfying relationship will exchange behaviors
that have low cost and high reward to both
members (Thibaut & Kelley, DEMO). One in-
terpretation of the reward-cost notion is that
producing a specific behavior has a specific
reward and a specific cost to the DEMO pro-
ducing the behavior (Gergen, 1969, p. 36). An
DEMO interpretation of the payoff matrix
is that in a satisfying dyadic relationship, a
person will receive behaviors that have high
reward for himself or herself. This implies
that a person will perceive a relationship as
satisfying DEMO the extent that he or she codes
the behaviors received as a positive.
Another issue regarding the way payoffs are
assigned is the comparison DEMO for alterna-
tive relationships. Presumably, a behavior that
will be coded DEMO positive in one relationship
could be coded as negative in another rela-
tionship in which the receiver's comparison
level is much higher. The DEMO that we do not
know a spouse's comparison level for alterna-
tives suggests a phenomenological method for
measuring payoff. To test this interpretation
DEMO the payoff matrix, then, it is necessary to
design a measurement procedure in which the
positivity of the behavior received would be
coded DEMO by the receiver. In this pro-
16
GOTTMAN, NOTARIUS, MARKMAN, BANK, YOPPI, AND RUBIN
cedure, DEMO is the couple who codes the behav-
iors exchanged, not independent DEMO It
is possible that what is coded as a warm smile
by two observers is perceived as a sarcastic
smirk to a spouse, and conversely, a "put-
down" or "interruption" that is coded as nega-
tive in Birchler et al. (1975, p. 352) is not
always seen as negative by the couple.
The concept of the couple DEMO their own
behavior raises the question of whether dis-
tressed couples differ from nondistressed cou-
ples in the intended positivity of their mes-
sages. DEMO to the widely accepted
communication deficit explanation of marital
distress, distressed DEMO are presumed to
intend their messages to be received as far
more positive than they are in fact received.
However, it could be that distressed couples
intend their messages to be more negative, or
less positive, than nondistressed couples. If
the messages were then received as more nega-
tive, or less positive, distressed couples would
be communicating well; their spouses would
receive the messages as intended. A communi-
cation deficit explanation DEMO marital distress
would seem more appropriate if intended posi-
tivity of messages differed markedly from the
coding of the messages received. In this case
DEMO received would not be coded as the
sender intended them to be coded.
In the present investigation, couples inter-
acted using a "talk DEMO," a device we con-
structed in which only one person could speak
at a time. After speaking, the speaker coded
the "intended DEMO" of his or her message.
Before speaking, the listener coded the "actual
impact" of the message. The talk table need
not constrain DEMO behavioral repertoire of the
interacting dyad as in Speer (1972); DEMO talk
table is apparently an inexpensive, simple way
to study behavior DEMO in marriages, es-
pecially compared with detailed ratings of
videotapes (as in Birchler et al., 1975). How-
ever, before this can DEMO confidently asserted,
the talk table must demonstrate its ability to
elicit different patterns of exchange in differ-
ent kinds of couples.
One purpose DEMO the present investigation
was to assess the effect of the experimental
task on the coding of the interaction. The ef-
ect of situational context DEMO marital and
family interaction has been either ignored
or minimized (Riskin & Faunce, 1972). For
example, Haley (1964, 1967) placed DEMO im-
portance on the tasks he chose for families to
work on. Jacob and Davis (1973) reported
considerable stability across experimental
tasks to DEMO structure of talk and interruptions
in father-mother-child interactions. One po-
tentially important dimension of contextual
variation that has been ignored is the degree
to DEMO the decision-making task induces
conflict. For example, all of Jacob and DEMO'
(1973) tasks were low-conflict tasks. It would
seem theoretically important to ascertain
whether the variables derived from behavior
exchange theory can discriminate DEMO
tressed couples from distressed couples in low-
conflict as well as high-conflict tasks. The
present investigation employed two sets of
tasks that induced either DEMO or low conflict.
The tasks ranged in content from a consensual
ranking of a list of preferred dog breeds to
the discussion of an DEMO unresolved marital
problem.
STUDY 1
Method
Subjects and selection. Thirty couples responded to
an advertisement asking for couples who either
classified their relationship as "mutually satisfying"
or "experiencing marital difficulties." All couples
were offered DEMO for participating, and it was made
clear that no therapy would DEMO offered. In addition,
other distressed couples were recruited from local
campus and community mental health centers. Of
the IS distressed couples who participated DEMO the
study, 11 were referred from clinical sources and 4
responded DEMO the advertisement.
Two major definitions of marital distress have
been used, DEMO of satisfaction and whether or
not the couple comes to the attention of public
agencies such as marriage counselors or divorce
courts. Diverse measures DEMO marital satisfaction have
been shown to tap the same basic factor (DEMO,
Locke, & Thomes, 1971). The Locke-Wallace Marital
Relationship Inventory (MRI) is the most widely
used of these inventories; it has excellent discrimina-
tive validity in cross-sectional studies (Navran, 1967)
and DEMO predictive validity in longitudinal studies
(Terman & Wallin, 1949). Using the cutoff scores on
the MRI recommended by Burgess et al. (1971, pp.
330-331), only high-scoring nondistressed couples
and low-scoring distressed couples were included in
the analyses. Specifically, distressed couples in which
at least one spouse's MRI score was less than 85
were included, and nondistressed couples in which
both husband and wife MRI scores were greater than
DEMO were included. A distressed couple was selected
for analysis only if at least one spouse was dissatisfied
BEHAVIOR EXCHANGE
with the marriage (low MRI), and a nondistressed
couple was selected for analysis only if both spouses
were satisfied with the DEMO (high MRI). Using
these cutoff scores, in Study 1 10 distressed couples
and 6 nondistressed couples were selected for analysis
from the DEMO of 30 couples, all of whom had
completed the experimental procedures.1 DEMO
alpha for the sample of Study 1 on the MRI was .88.
The two groups of couples did not significantly
differ in age, educational level, or the number of
years married. Couples were, on the DEMO, 24.95
years old and had been married an average of 3.22
DEMO
Procedure. Interview teams were composed of one
male graduate student in clinical psychology and one
female undergraduate. There were four such teams,
and DEMO couple was interviewed by one of these
teams. Spouses individually filled out a problem in-
ventory, a demographic information sheet, and the
MRI. DEMO problem inventory asked each spouse to
rate the perceived severity of a list of problem
areas. The couple was then asked to agree jointly
DEMO the three most salient current problem areas or
areas of disagreement in their marriages. Next, the
couple was asked to describe each of the problem
areas separately and to provide a specific description
like a play-by-play DEMO of an incident, providing
situational context and a typical conversation illus-
DEMO each problem. This was done in order to es-
tablish a rapport with the interviewing team and to
provide specificity to the problem to DEMO discussed on
the talk table. The talk table is a double sloping
table. A toggle switch on the side of the table oper-
ated DEMO the couple lit a button on the side of the
spouse who had the floor to speak. There were two
rows of five buttons. DEMO five buttons on the left
were used by the speaker to code the "intended im-
pact" of his or her message; the five buttons on the
right were used by the receiver to code the "impact"
of the message received. The buttons were labeled
"super negative," "negative," "neutral," "positive,"
and "super positive." Although partners could see one
another, a metal shield blocked the DEMO from the
view of the other person so that neither spouse could
see the codes assigned by their partners throughout
the experiment.
In order DEMO familiarize themselves with its use,
each couple was then asked to converse for a few
minutes using the talk table. When the couple DEMO
cated they were comfortable with the talk table, the
experimental tasks DEMO
Each couple then completed three low-conflict
tasks: (a) The choice DEMO (Haley, 1964)
is a consensus decision-making task that requires an
agreed-upon ranking of personal preferences using
lists such as new cars or DEMO of dogs, (b) Three
Thematic Apperception Test cards (Locke, DEMO)
required the couple to create jointly one story for
each set of cards, (c) One of two tasks was ad-
ministered first individually and then again for
consensual ranking; one task (called NASA) involved
rank ordering 15 items for their survival value for
a life-and-death DEMO to the moon. Correct answers
17
had been supplied by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (Hall, 1971). The other task
designed DEMO this study (called the food task) in-
volved rank ordering 10 items according to their
nutritional value. Correct answers had been sup-
plied DEMO a nutrition specialist at Indiana University.
A pilot study with 147 undergraduates, conducted to
determine whether there was a sex bias to the tasks,
revealed no significant sex differences in knowledge
on either of the DEMO The couple also completed two
high-conflict tasks: (a) The Inventory DEMO Marital
Conflict (IMC) (Olson & Ryder, 1970) has been
DEMO used in marital research. The IMC is a
high-conflict consensus decision-making task, in which
the couple is presented with three short vignettes of
marital conflict and required to agree on which spouse
in the vignette is DEMO responsible for the problem,
(b) The couple was also asked to discuss a current
problem that they had agreed in the interview DEMO
most salient and asked to try to come to a mutually
satisfactory resolution of this problem. Within each
session the five tasks were randomly DEMO Dis-
tressed couples were told that a report would be writ-
ten that they could read and discuss with the inter-
viewing team and DEMO could be sent to the couple's
therapist with their written permission.
Results and Discussion
Multivariate analysis of variance of spouses'
coding of DEMO partners' behavior (impact),
combined over all five tasks, with distressed-
nondistressed as a between-subjects factor and
husband-wife as a within-subjects factor DEMO
sulted in a significant effect for the distress
factor, Wilks-Lambda F(DEMO, 25) =4.54 , p<
.01, and no significant sex DEMO Sex X Distress
interaction. Table 1 presents the univariate
F ratios that contributed to the distress multi-
variate F ratio. Nondistressed spouses were
more DEMO to code their partners' behavior as
positive and super positive and DEMO likely to
code their partners' behavior as negative than
their distressed DEMO
Multivariate analysis of variance of spouses'
intent resulted in no significant distress, sex,
or sex X distress F ratios. There were no sig-
nificant differences in intention for either
husbands or wives on any DEMO For com-
parison with the impact data, Table 2 pre-
1 DEMO on couples were also done regardless of
their Marital Relationship Inventory score to study
the effect of the convergent operations procedure for
defining the DEMO groups of couples. The same pattern
of results emerge from these analyses; a similar pat-
tern of F ratios were significant but were not as
large. This suggests that multiple criteria improved
discriminability for classifying couples.
18
TABLE 1
UNIVARIATE F RATIOS AND MEAN S FOR RELATIVE
FREQUENCY DEMO SPOUSE'S CODING OF PARTNER'S
BEHAVIOR, STUDY 1
Nondis-
Distressed DEMO
Variable** average average
Super negative 2.06 .06 .01
Negative 10.66*:* .24 .11
Positive 7.47* .34 .50
Super positive 7.36* .02 .17
a Neutral DEMO not included in the analysis of multivariate F\
all five variables form a linearly dependent set, since they sum
to 1.0.
b degrees of freedom = 1, 28.
*p < .05.
**p < .01.
sents means and univariate F ratios for dis-
tressed and nondistressed couples.
These results DEMO consistent with the data
obtained by Birchler et al. (1975) for ob-
servers' coding of the couple's behavior. Birch-
ler et al. found that distressed couples were
more likely to emit negative and less DEMO to
emit positive codes than nondistressed couples.
Furthermore, the results support DEMO communi-
cation deficit model of marital distress. By
looking at Table 1 and Table 2 in combina-
tion, it can be seen that the distributions of
intent and impact are similar for nondis-
tressed couples. This DEMO not the case for dis-
tressed couples. Both groups of couples were
nearly identical in the way they intended their
behavior to be coded. DEMO, for dis-
tressed couples, their behavior was coded as
far less positive than was their intention.
Conflict effect. To check the low-high con-
DEMO manipulation, the videotapes of four
couples, two distressed and two nondistressed,
were randomly selected and coded for agree-
ment and disagreement. The DEMO 2 minutes of
each task were coded, with coders tallying
each DEMO of an agreement or disagree-
ment. There were four pairs of coders; each
pair coded only one couple. Coders were blind
to the task hypothesis and as to whether the
couple whose tape they were coding DEMO dis-
tressed or nondistressed. The total number of
agreements and disagreements were calculated
separately for each coder, summing over high-
and low-conflict tasks. Coders were first
trained using an interaction category system
developed in our laboratory (Gottman,
Notarius, & Markman, Note 1) and reached
GOTTMAN, DEMO, MARKMAN, BANK, YOPPI, AND RUBIN
criterion on an achievement test, which tested
their knowledge of agreement and disagree-
ment codes. One coder was designated the
coder and the other the reliability checker.
Correlations between DEMO and reliability
checker over the four couples were .93 for
agreement and .93 for disagreement. In the
low-conflict tasks, there were averages of 10.33
agreements and 6.92 disagreements; in the
high-conflict tasks, there were averages DEMO 5.38
agreements and 8.00 disagreements, x2(*) —
4.23, p < .05. In research on family interac-
tion, agreement and disagreement have DEMO
shown to be the best consistent discriminators
between distressed and nondistressed families
(Riskin & Faunce, 1972). Agreement-dis-
agreement ratios less than one DEMO character-
istic of distressed families, and ratios greater
than one are DEMO of nondistressed
families. For the low-conflict tasks, the agree-
ment-disagreement ratio DEMO 1.49, whereas for
the high-conflict tasks it was .67.
To assess DEMO effect of high- or low-conflict
tasks, the five received impact codes DEMO con-
sidered on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from
1 (super DEMO) to 5 (super positive). The
same Likert scale was constructed for the in-
tent codes. Scale scores were separately aver-
aged for DEMO three low-conflict tasks and the
two high-conflict tasks. An analysis of vari-
ance was performed on the impact data and
on the intent data, with two levels of distress
(distressed-nondistressed), two levels of sex
(DEMO), and two levels of conflict
(high-low). As expected, there was a signifi-
cant F ratio for the impact data on the
DEMO factor, F(l,56) = 15.37, p < .001.
Distressed DEMO averaged 3.04 and nondis-
tressed couples averaged 3.52 over all tasks.
TABLE 2
UNIVARIATE F RATIOS AND MEAN S FOR
FREQUENCY OF SPOUSES' INTENT,
STUDY 1
RELATIVE
Variable
Distressed
average
Nondis-
tressed
average
Super negative
DEMO
Positive
Super positive
.18
1.72
.53
.12
.00
.09
.49
.05
.00
.05
.55
.03
a Degrees of freedom = 1, 28. All Fs are nonsignificant. Neu-
tral is not included in the analysis of multivariate DEMO; all five
variables form a linearly dependent set, since they sum to 1.0.
BEHAVIOR EXCHANGE
There was not a significant conflict effect,
F(l , 56) = 3.86, p > .05, although the means
were DEMO the predicted direction (high-conflict
M = 3.17; low-conflict M - 3.39). There was
no significant sex main effect or any signifi-
cant DEMO On the intent variable, there
were no significant effects for any DEMO or for
the interactions.
It was thus possible to discriminate dis-
tressed from nondistressed husbands and wives
on how positively they coded their spouse'DEMO
behavior regardless of the level of conflict the
task induced. These results support the Jacob
and Davis (1973) findings and extend these
findings DEMO high-conflict tasks.
Reciprocity. Four analyses of covariance
were performed to compare p (W+/H+ )
with p (W+) , p (H+/W+ ) with p (H+) ,
p (W-/H- ) with DEMO (W-) , and p (H- /
W—) with p (H—) for distressed and nondis-
tressed couples. Probabilities were separately
computed for each couple. In each case the
unconditional probability was the covariate.
Because DEMO the relatively low frequencies of
the super-positive and super-negative codes,
these were combined with positive and nega-
tive codes, respectively, for the DEMO
analysis. The test of the reciprocity hypothe-
sis of distressed versus nondistressed marriage
is the significance of the group F ratio on that
portion DEMO the conditional probability that
cannot be predicted by the unconditional
probability. For example, the residual in re-
gressing p (W+/H+ ) on DEMO (W+ ) must be
greater in nondistressed couples than in dis-
DEMO couples. This means that knowing that
the husband has just coded the wife's behavior
as positive increases the prediction over the
base rate DEMO W + that the wife will subse-
quently code the husband's behavior as posi-
tive. The direction of the prediction is ob-
viously DEMO for negative reciprocity; that
is, there should be more negative reciprocity
in distressed than in nondistressed couples.
Table 3 presents the results of DEMO analyses
of covariance. There is some evidence that
there is more positive reciprocity in nondis-
tressed couples than in distressed couples.
Though the degree DEMO gain in prediction from
conditional to unconditional probabilities is
small for nondistressed couples, the analysis
of covariance controls for the possibility that
19
TABLE 3
RECIPROCITY ANALYSES, STUDY 1
Variable Distressed
Positive reciprocity
P (W+)DEMO
p (W+/H+)
p (H+/W+)
Negative reciprocity
p (W—)
p (W-/H-
p (H-)
p (H-/DEMO
)
)
a P (W + ) = the probability DEMO a positive wife code, p (W —)
= the probability of a negative wife code; p (H + ) = the DEMO
ability of a positive husband code, p (H —) = DEMO probability of
a negative husband code.
b Calculated by covariance analysis, DEMO unconditional base
rate as the covariate.
*p < .05.
when unconditioned base rates are initially
low, greater gain in prediction may be more
likely.
Method
Subjects and selection. An independent sample of
14 clinic and 16 DEMO couples was recruited for
participation in the research project. All clinic couples
were seeking therapeutic assistance for marital prob-
lems at either of two DEMO mental health
centers; nonclinic couples responded to a press re-
lease DEMO briefly described the project. Both clinic
and nonclinic couples were paid $10 for participation.
Precisely the same cutoff scores on the Locke-Wallace
MR I DEMO in Study 1 were used to select 12 distressed
and 8 nondistressed couples for analysis; all 30
couples completed the experimental procedures. Hus-
bands and wives in the two groups did not signifi-
cantly differ in DEMO, educational level, number of
years married, or salary. Couples in DEMO present study
were on the average 32.50 years old, had been DEMO
ried an average of 9.44 years, had completed an aver-
age DEMO 13.95 years of schooling, and earned an aver-
age salary of DEMO thousand dollars. Thus, the
couples in Study 2 had been married DEMO
6 years longer than the couples in Study 1 and had
approximately 2 years less of schooling. The major
difference between the samples in DEMO studies seems
to be the length of time the couples were married.
Procedure. Based upon the results of Study 1, the
procedure was modified as follows: First, two tasks
were selected: the Inventory of Marital Conflict
(IMC) as a high-conflict task and the food task as
DEMO low-conflict task. The IMC was selected because
it is a standardized task, it appeared to induce a
high degree of conflict in Study 1 in both groups
(nearly all couples fought considerably on this task),DEMO
and it could be expanded to include additional
vignettes to ensure a sufficient sample of interactions
.340
.430
.387
.350
.298
.450
.291
.398
DEMO 2
Nondis-
tressed
.541
.561
.635
.687
.161
.167
.063
.075
Reciprocity
X Groups Fh
4.68*
.192
.26
3.04
20
TABLE 4
UNIVARIATE F RATIOS AND MEANS FOR RELATIVE
FREQUENCY OF DEMO'S CODING OF PARTNER'S
BEHAVIOR, STUDY 2
Nondis-
Distressed tressed
DEMO average
Variablea p\>
Super negative 2.98 .05 .00
Negative 3.82 .18 .11
Positive 19.87* .30 .55
Super positive .21 .12 .15
a Neutral DEMO not included in the analysis of multivariate F;
all five variables form a linearly dependent set, since they sum
to 1.0.
b degrees of freedom = 1, 36.
*p < .001.
for stable estimates of conditional probabilities. The
food task was selected because it induced little con-
DEMO in either group in Study 1. The IMC was ex-
panded to include three additional vignettes.
All sessions were conducted at one of two DEMO
munity mental health centers nearest the couple's
residence. It may be the case that the lack of differ-
ences on intent variables in DEMO 1 may have re-
sulted from the couples not understanding that they
were to code how they intended their messages to be
taken by DEMO spouses. More explanation and a
specific example was provided for the intended
positivity codes of the talk table than had been
provided in Study DEMO
Results and Discussion
Multivariate analysis of variance of impact
data, with DEMO as a be-
tween-subjects factor and husband-wife as a
within-subjects factor resulted in a significant
effect for the distress factor, Wilks-Lambda
F(4, DEMO) = 7.01, p < .001, and no significant
sex or DEMO X Distress interaction. Table 4 pre-
sents the univariate F ratios that contributed
to the distress multivariate F ratio. Nondis-
tressed spouses were more DEMO to code their
partner's behavior as positive than their dis-
tressed counterparts. These results replicate
those of Study 1. A comparison of the DEMO
variate F ratios suggests that the results are
even stronger here. This may be a function of
the differences in the length of marriage DEMO the
two studies, since marital happiness is known
to decrease with DEMO of time married within
the age ranges of the current two studies
(Burgess et al., 1971).
Multivariate analysis of variance of spouses7
DEMO resulted in no significant distress, sex,
or Sex X Distress DEMO ratios. There were no
significant differences in intention for either
GOTTMAN, DEMO, MARKMAN, BANK, YOPPI, AND RUBIN
husbands or wives on any category. This pat-
tern of no differences is similar to that ob-
DEMO in Study 1. For comparison with Study
1, Table 5 presents DEMO means and univariate
F ratios for distressed and nondistressed
couples.
These results lend strong support to a com-
munication deficit explanation of marital dis-
DEMO: In the two studies, although distressed
and nondistressed couples do not significantly
differ in the way they intend their messages to
be received DEMO their spouses, they do signifi-
cantly differ in how the messages DEMO actually
received.
Conflict effect. Conflict effects were assessed
in the same manner as in Study 1. An analysis
of variance on the impact data DEMO no sig-
nificant main effect for conflict, 7^(1,72) =
2.29, p > .05, although, again, results were in
the DEMO direction (high-conflict M =
3.48, low-conflict M = 3.57). This result is
consistent with that of Study 1. As expected,
there DEMO a significant F ratio for the impact
data on the distress factor, F(l,72) = 14.57,
p < .001. Distressed couples DEMO 3.33,
and nondistressed couples averaged 3.72 over
all tasks.
There was a significant Distress X Conflict
interaction for the impact data, F(l,72) =
8.44, p < .01. It was easier to discriminate
DEMO from nondistressed couples on the
high-conflict task than on the low-conflict
task. Distressed couples averaged .70 lower
on impact scores than nondistressed couples
on DEMO high-conflict task; distressed couples
were .13 higher on impact scores than DEMO
tressed couples on the low-conflict task. There
were no significant main effects or interaction
effects on the intent variable.
TABLE 5
UNIVARIATE F RATIOS DEMO MEAN S FOR RELATIVE
FREQUENCY OF SPOUSES' INTENT, STUDY 2
Variable8
Fb
Nondis-
Distressed tressed
average average
Super negative
Negative
Positive
Super positive
DEMO
.80
5.43*
.23
.00
.04
.41
.14
.00
.02
.60
.10
a Neutral is not included in the analysis of multivariate F;
all DEMO variables form a linearly dependent set, since they sum
to 1.0.
DEMO Degrees of freedom = 1, 36.
*p < .05.
BEHAVIOR EXCHANGE
21
The presence of Group X Conflict interac-
tion effects DEMO the second study and their ab-
sence in the first study is interesting. It may
be that the food task is a different kind DEMO
task for the couples of Study 2, since the hus-
bands DEMO this study are working and hence
are less likely to have a role in food prepara-
tion than husbands in Study 1, who are more
likely to be in school and share in the house-
work. DEMO pilot study with both tasks, men-
tioned in the Procedure section DEMO Study 1,
found no significant sex differences in knowl-
edge on either of the food or NASA tasks;
however, a subsequent pilot study with college
students found significant sex differences in
self-ratings of confidence (on a 9-point scale)
in the solution for the NASA task, /(68) =
2.16, p < .04, with females less confident than
males. It may be that working husbands in
Study 2 have DEMO little confidence in their
knowledge of food as the female undergradu-
ates had of their knowledge of space. Both
groups of husbands may have DEMO more on
this task and consequently been perceived as
more positive by their wives. It may also be
the case that the length of DEMO factor
was related to the obtained interaction effects.
Perhaps couples who have been married longer
(Study 2) have learned to exchange more
positive DEMO in low-conflict situations
and to avoid situations of high conflict. This
is consistent with the clinical picture of the
"stable-unsatisfactory'7 marriage (Lederer &
Jackson, 1968) or the "united-front" couple
(Kramer, 1968), who can present a satisfac-
tory image of themselves to the public in so-
cial situations but are unable to hide behind
this image DEMO discussing real marital issues.
Overall, there seems to be evidence that DEMO
conflict level of the task influences how
spouses code each other's behavior. In the
first study it was equally easy to discriminate
distressed DEMO nondistressed couples whether
they were discussing an unresolved personal
issue or rank ordering a list of dog breeds.
In the second study couples could DEMO dis-
criminated only on the high-conflict tasks.
These results may account, DEMO part, for the
difficulty of obtaining consistent differences
across studies between DEMO and nondis-
tressed families (Jacob, 1975). It would be
wise to sample systematically from low- and
TABLE 6
RECIPROCITY ANALYSES, STUDY 2
Variable* Distressed
Nondis-
tressed
Reciprocity
X Groups
Fb
Positive reciprocity
p (W+)
p (W+/H+)
p (H+/W+)
Negative reciprocity
DEMO(W-)
p (W-/H- )
p (H-/W- )
.448
.536
.405
.512
.223
.354
.235
.331
.700
.787
.701
.756
DEMO
.195
.079
.121
2.22
.58
.61
.15
a P (W+ ) DEMO probability of a positive wife code, p (W —)
= probability of a negative wife code, p (H + ) = DEMO of
a positive husband code, p (H —) = probability DEMO a negative
husband code.
b Calculated by covariance analysis, with unconditional DEMO
rate as the covariate.
high-conflict tasks in future investigations of
couples and family interaction. The results of
the present investigation would suggest that
high-conflict DEMO are more reliable for dis-
crimination between distressed and nondis-
tressed couples.
Reciprocity. Table 6 presents the results of
the reciprocity analyses. Reciprocity variables
DEMO not discriminate between distressed and
nondistressed couples. In addition, the one
DEMO positive reciprocity effect of Study
1 was not replicated.
The results of these two studies must bring
into question the current marriage counseling
image DEMO positive reciprocity as characteristic
of nondistressed marriages and not character-
istic of distressed marriages. The high base
rate of behavior that is positively coded DEMO
observers or by spouses may seem to be
equivalent to reciprocity, DEMO it is not. The
data from the present investigation support
a "DEMO account" model of nondistressed mar-
riage rather than a reciprocity model. DEMO a
bank account model, a nondistressed marriage
differs from a distressed DEMO in that there
are more positive "deposits" than negative
"withdrawals." In a nondistressed marriage
the consequent positive impact codes are not
contingent DEMO the spouse's antecedent cod-
ing. Perhaps it is precisely this lack of re-
ciprocity in a context of high positive ex-
change that DEMO stable positive in-
teraction in nondistressed couples.
22
GOTTMAN, NOTARIUS, MARKMAN, BANK, YOPPI, AND RUBIN
The results of the present investigation have
demonstrated the usefulness of the talk table
DEMO a means for operationalizing behavior ex-
change theory. Results obtained are generally
consistent with more expensive coding studies.
Furthermore, the power of variables obtained
by the couple coding their own behavior to
discriminate between distressed and DEMO
tressed couples is somewhat greater than that
obtained by observer-coding studies. This re-
sult may have some theoretical import. Per-
haps the differences between DEMO and
spouse coding could account for some of
the unreliability inherent in present coding
systems. If one observer focuses on the
facial expressions of DEMO sender of a message,
a positive code could result from a read-
ing of intention; if the other coder focuses
on the message's impact on the receiver, a
negative code could result from a reading of
the impact of the message. It would be fruit-
ful DEMO control the cues that observers use and
to study those instances when observers and
spouses are discrepant. This would be one way
to study DEMO development of a private message
system in close relationships in which many
messages do not mean to the stranger what
they do to the DEMO for whom they were in-
tended. Work along these lines is in progress
in our laboratory.
One limitation of the present investigation
deserves mention. DEMO of the arrange-
ments with referring agencies and the nature
of the advertisement, both couples and in-
terviewers were aware of which couples were
seeking or starting marriage counseling. The
MRI scores were, however, not DEMO to
either the interviewers or the eouples. This
aspect of the design of the present investiga-
tion introduces an experimenter expectancy
criticism and the DEMO that couples may
be presenting themselves in order to be con-
sistent with their classification. Subsequent
investigations could improve on the current
procedures by DEMO for couples without
recruiting couples from therapeutic agencies.
Couples could be split on MRI scores, and the
interviewers could remain blind to a couple's
classification. Such a procedure, however, may
draw different samples of DEMO than the
present investigation, which used a conver-
gence of two DEMO of marital distress.
REFERENCE NOTE
1. Gottman, J., Notarius, C, & Markman, H. The
couples interaction scoring system (CISS). Un-
DEMO manuscript, 1976. (Available from John
Gottman, Department of Psychology, University
of Illinois, Children's Research Center, 51 E.
Gerty Drive, Champaign, Illinois 61820.)
REFERENCES
Alexander, J. F. Defensive and supportive communi-
DEMO in family systems. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 1973, 35, 613-617.
Azrin, N. H., Naster, B. J., & Jones, DEMO Reciprocity
counseling: A rapid learning-based procedure for
marital counseling. Behavior Research DEMO Therapy,
1973, 11, 365-382.
Birchler, G. R., Weiss, DEMO L., & Vincent, J. P. Multi-
method analysis of social reinforcement exchange
between maritally distressed and nondistressed
spouse and stranger dyads. Journal of DEMO
and Social Psychology, 1975, 31, 349-360.
Burgess, E. W., DEMO, J. J., & Thomas, M. M. The
family. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1971.
Gergen, K. The psychology of behavior exchange.
DEMO, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1969.
Haley, J. Research on family patterns: DEMO instru-
ment measurement. Family Process, 1964, 3, 41-65.
Haley, J. Speech sequences of normal and abnormal
families with two children present. Family DEMO,
1961,6, 81-97.
Hall, J. Decisions, decisions, decisions. Psychology
Today, November, 1971, 51-88.
Jacob, T. Family interaction in disturbed DEMO normal
families: A methodological and substantive review.
Psychological Bulletin, 1975, DEMO, 33-65.
Jacob, T., & Davis, J. Family interaction as a func-
tion of experimental task. Family Process, 1973, 12,
415-427.
DEMO, C. H. The theoretical position: diagnostic
and therapeutic implications. In Charles Kramer,
Bernard Liebowitz, Robert Phillips, Sylvia Schmidt,
& James DEMO (Eds.), Beginning phase of family
treatment. Chicago: Family Institute of Chicago,
1968.
Lederer, W. J., & Jackson, D. D. The mirages of
marriage. New York: Norton, 1968.
Locke, H. J. Prediction adjustment in marriage: A
comparison of a divorced and happily married
group. New York: Holt, 1961.
Navran, L. Communication and adjustment in mar-
riage. Family Process, 1967, 6, 173-180.
Olson, D. H., & Ryder, R. G. Inventory of marital
conflicts (IMC): An experimental DEMO pro-
cedure. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 1970,
32t DEMO
Patterson, G. R. A basis for identifying stimuli which
control behaviors DEMO natural settings. Child De-
velopment, 1974, 45, 900-911.
Rappaport, A. F., & Harrell, J. A behavioral-exchange
model for marital counseling. Family DEMO,
1972,2.7,203-212.
BEHAVIOR EXCHANGE
23
Raush, H. L., Barry, W. A., Hertel, R. K., & Swain,
M. A. Communication, conflict and marriage. DEMO
Francisco: Josey-Bass, 1974.
Riskin, J., & Faunce, E. E. DEMO evaluative review of
family interaction research. Family Process, 1972,
11, 365-455.
Speer, D. C. Marital dysfunctionality and two-person
non-zero-sum game behavior. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 1972, 21, 18-24.
Stuart, DEMO B. Operant interpersonal treatment for
marital discord. Journal of Consulting and Clini-
cal Psychology, 1969, 33, 675-682.
Terman, L. M., & Wallin, P. The validity of marriage
prediction and marital adjustment test. American
Sociological Review, 1949, 14, 497-504.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, DEMO H. The social psychology
of groups. New York: Wiley, 1959.
Weiss, R. L., Hops, H., & Patterson, G. R. A frame-
work for conceptualizing marital conflict: A tech-
nology for altering it, DEMO data for evaluating it.
In Leo A. Hamerlynck, Lee C. Handy, & Eric J.
Mash (Eds.), Behavior Change: The Fourth Banff
DEMO on Behavior Modification. Champaign,
111.: Research Press, 1973.
(Received DEMO 27, 1975){1g42fwefx}