JOHN M. GOTTMAN
University of Washington
CLIFFORD I. NOTARIUS
Washington, DC*
l
Decade Review: Observing Marital Interaction
This article reviews the advances made in the de-
cade of the 1990s in observing marital interac-
tion. Many DEMO advances in data collec-
tion, including synchronization of physiology,
behavior, and cognition, and advances in data
analysis such as sequential analysis, DEMO yielded
new understanding and advances in prediction of
marital outcomes. The advances have also includ-
ed the study of developmental processes, including
the transition to parenthood and the study of mid-
life and older marriages. Central DEMO have
been made in the study of affect and the study of
power and in their integration. This advance has
included the mathematical modeling DEMO interaction
using nonlinear difference equations and the de-
velopment of typologies. There has been an added
focus on health outcomes and the bidirectional ef-
DEMO of marriages on children. There has been an
expansion of the study of marital interaction to
common comorbid psychopathologies. Most im-
portant has been DEMO theorizing based on the
interaction of behavior, perception, and physiol-
ogy, as well as their predictive power.
Observational research plays a major role in re-
search on marriage, both for purposes of descrip-
tion and for building theories of the mechanisms
underlying central phenomena occurring within
Department DEMO Psychology, University of Washington, Se-
attle, WA 98115 (johng@u.washington.edu).
*5028 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, Suite 303, Washington, DC
20016
Key DEMO: comorbidities, interaction, marriage, obser-
vation, sequential analysis.
families. It DEMO the main roadway available for the
precise study of family process. It has always been
obvious to many scientists that observational re-
search can DEMO the study of marriages by add-
ing a depth and richness to other, less expensive
methods, such as surveys and questionnaires. In
the DEMO of the 1990s, however, it also has be-
come clear that observational methods can add
predictive power and theoretical clarity. These im-
portant DEMO stem, in part, from the
power of observational data to reveal a replicable
portrait of complex social interaction that lies be-
yond the DEMO awareness of even the most keen-
ly sensitive spouse or partner, DEMO thus lies beyond
assessment with self-report instruments.
Many of these advances also have been en-
abled by signiﬁcant technological breakthroughs
in observational research that DEMO in this past
decade. With the arrival of inexpensive computer-
assisted coding, live real-time observational cod-
ing, or the rapid coding of videotapes DEMO
nized to computer-readable video, time codes
became feasible. An observer can DEMO code com-
plex interaction between husbands and wives in
real time and later compute onsets, offsets, and
durations of speaker/listener events, compute in-
terobserver reliability, and also perform sequential
and time-series analyses that require knowledge of
exactly when the events occurred. The merging of
video and DEMO technology also has made it
possible to time-synchronize the real-time acqui-
sition of physiological and observational data
from an interacting couple, and the use of video
playback methods made it possible to time-syn-
chronize spouses’ perceptions DEMO cognitions of
Journal of Marriage and the Family 62 (November 2000): 927–947
927
928
the interaction. Thus, technology has made it pos-
sible to study, with time-synchronized data, the
dynamic interplay between behavior, cognition,
and physiology. Researchers discovered that the
isolated study of behavior, cognition, or DEMO
ogy without careful study of their interdependen-
cies would severely limit mapping ﬁndings onto
the real interactional world of the couples we were
studying. DEMO technical breakthroughs of the
1990’s have narrowed the gap between couples’
natural experience of their relationship and re-
searchers’ precise understanding of study partici-
DEMO
Advances in understanding marriage stem not
only from breakthroughs in technology, DEMO also
from innovations in the methodologies used to ex-
tract information from the ongoing ﬂow of inter-
action. Floyd (1989) reviewed research on DEMO
choice of coding units of different sizes and com-
plexities. More and more interest was paid to de-
veloping global coding systems to capture DEMO
ed interactional processes. Basco, Birchler, Kalal,
Talbott, and Slater (1991) developed and validated
a rapid rating scale called the Clinician Rating of
Adult Communication (CRAC). Be`langer, Sau-
borin, Laughrea, Dulude, and Wright (1993) com-
pared macroscopic global coding systems (Marital
Interaction Coding System-Global and the Global
Couple Interaction Coding System) and decided
that the convergence was moderate and that it was
premature to conclude that DEMO macroscopic
coding systems are interchangeable. Julien, Mark-
man, and Lindahl (DEMO) presented a new global
coding system and correlated it to the DEMO and
negative codes of a more microanalytic Couples
Interaction Scoring System (DEMO). Although neg-
ative codes between the two systems showed
some convergence, the positive codes did not.
Couples high in marital satisfaction reported high-
er mutuality, whereas couples lower in marital sat-
isfaction reported higher levels of destructive pro-
cess, coercion, and postconﬂict distress. Wampler
and Halverson (1990) developed a Q-sort obser-
vational measure of marital interaction, and DEMO
related it to their measures derived from the CISS
(Notarius, Markman, & Gottman, 1983).
A more powerful method of creating global
DEMO from more microanalytic categories
was a factor analysis reported by Heyman, DEMO,
Weiss, and Vivian (1995) using 995 couples’ vid-
eotaped DEMO interactions using the Marital In-
teraction Coding System (MICS). The DEMO
formed were hostility, constructive problem dis-
cussion, humor, and responsibility DEMO It is
Journal of Marriage and the Family
interesting that these super-categories are quite
different from earlier suggestions for a global
MICS system made DEMO Weiss and Tolman (1990).
An alternative approach to global coding DEMO the
work represented by the Gottman and Levenson
laboratories in which detailed microanalytic cod-
ing with multiple coding systems was undertaken
(e.g., Gottman, 1994). This included the coding of
facial expressions (the Emotion Facial Action
Coding System, Ekman & Friesen, 1978), MICS
coding, the development of a more rapid version
of the CISS (RCISS, Krokoff, Gottman, & Hass,
1989), and a Speciﬁc Affect Coding System
(Gottman, McCoy, Coan, & Collier, 1996) that
codes macrolevels DEMO emotional expression (e.g.,
anger, sadness, fear). This work DEMO led to reliable
microanalytic real-time observational coding of
marital interaction in both conﬂict and nonconﬂict
contexts. One advantage of coding speciﬁc affects
is greater DEMO in studying positive affect.
Gottman, Coan, Carrere, and Swanson (1998)
found that positive affect was the only predictor
of both stability DEMO happiness in a sample of
newlyweds. Finally, a more macro look DEMO
time at marital interaction was offered in a review
by Christensen & Pasch (1993). They broke down
marital conﬂict into seven stages, DEMO with
the precipitating event and evolving through the
ﬁght and then a return to normal.
The decade of the 1990s also saw the more
DEMO application of sequential analytic
methods for the quantitative study of patterns of
interaction between two people over time, the use
of time-series analyses, DEMO the mathematical
modeling of marital interaction. In two landmark
papers published in 1993, Grifﬁn (1993a, 1993b)
demonstrated an innovative approach for how
event history analysis could be applied to the
study of insider evaluations DEMO marital interaction.
The ﬁrst paper described the methodology, and
the second DEMO applied it in a study of marital
interaction. Couples had two conversations, one
about pleasant memories and one about a prob-
lem, and DEMO they engaged in a video recall of
affect procedure. The self-rating of affect during
the video recall were the data for the analyses.
The DEMO measure was time until there was
a transition out of negative affect. Grifﬁn reported
that, consistent with the Gottman and Levenson
(1986, 1988) hypothesis, wives maintained a neg-
ative affect state longer than husbands DEMO, partic-
ularly on the problem task.
Grifﬁn and Greene (1994) DEMO the results
of analyzing one case of orofacial bradykinesia
Marital Interaction
exacerbated during marital conﬂict. They used an
interrupted time-series analysis DEMO demonstrate
that an increase of the symptoms followed a series
of speciﬁc negative comments by the spouse in
the conversation. Gottman et al. (1998) applied
interrupted time-series analyses to their newlywed
heart rate data to assess the extent to which a
number of marital affective behaviors were either
DEMO or spouse-soothing; in a second step,
they then used these DEMO to predict marital out-
comes 6 years later. As predicted by Gottman and
Levenson (1988), only soothing of the male
spouse (primarily DEMO) predicted positive
marital outcomes.
We will focus the remainder of our DEMO on
what we see as the two primary advances made
in the study of marital interaction in the decade.
First, we will examine how researchers have taken
the fruits of cross-sectional, hypothesis-generating
descriptive research and tested models for pre-
dicting the longitudinal course of relationships
over time. These DEMO studies were a major
advance occurring in the decade, and their DEMO
demonstrate the maturation of the discipline. Sec-
ond, we examine the DEMO developments in
several core content areas: (a) the study of DEMO,
(b) the exploration of marital interaction as a
proximal determinant of individual well-being and
distress, and (b) the study of interrelationships
among interactional behavior, perception, and
physiology. We will end with a DEMO of
the decade of research and a discussion of future
research for the next decade.
THE STUDY OF COUPLES OVER TIME
Developmental Transitions
The DEMO life cycle has been used to describe
the natural history of couples over time. It is in-
tuitively appealing to suppose that the interaction-
DEMO patterns characterizing young couples versus
older couples, or young parents versus DEMO par-
ents, for example, are stamped with unique qual-
ities that determine if the couple is adaptively
passing through important and challenging family
DEMO transitions or not. Colloquially, couples
expect the marriage to be different DEMO the hon-
eymoon is over,’’ and empirically, we know that
DEMO on the average experience a signiﬁcant de-
cline in satisfaction after the birth of the ﬁrst child.
Divorce prediction. Basic descriptive research
during the DEMO paved the way in the 1990s for
929
interactional research that can track the longitu-
dinal course of marriages and can predict divorce.
For DEMO review of methodological issues, see Brad-
bury and Karney (1993). Gottman and Krokoff
(1989) reported that a different pattern of inter-
DEMO was related to concurrent marital satisfac-
tion than to the change in marital satisfaction over
time; for example, disagreement and anger were
related DEMO lower concurrent marital satisfaction,
but to improvement in marital satisfaction over
time. Buehlman, Gottman, and Katz (1992) re-
ported that, in a sample of families with pre-
school-aged children, their coding of an Oral His-
tory Interview was able to predict divorce or
stability over DEMO 3-year period with 94% accuracy
using a discriminant function analysis. The oral
history variables were also correlated in clear
ways with Time 1 marital DEMO in both prob-
lem solving and affect, the couple’s physiological
reactivity DEMO marital interaction, as well as
Time 1 and Time 2 marital DEMO Gottman
and Levenson (1992) reported the ﬁrst prospective
longitudinal study of divorce prediction that used
observational data. They found that a couple’s in-
DEMO and spouse’s physiological responses ob-
served at Time 1 were associated with a set of
variables forming a cascade toward divorce. Cou-
ples starting DEMO this cascade toward divorce at
Time 1 had interactions that were marked by more
negativity than positivity, and they rated their in-
teractions more negatively upon video recall.
Wives in these couples also had signiﬁcantly high-
DEMO heart rates and smaller ﬁnger pulse amplitudes
(which could be part DEMO a general alarm response
in which blood is drawn into the trunk from the
periphery). Subsequent work on the divorce pre-
diction question DEMO another sample of couples
(Gottman, 1993, 1994) identiﬁed the ratio of pos-
itivity to negativity during the conﬂict discussion,
and four DEMO negative interaction patterns
(criticism, defensiveness, contempt, and stone-
walling) DEMO highly predictive of divorce (see also
Gottman et al., 1998; DEMO, Wickrama, &
Conger, 1996).
Transition to marriage. Smith, DEMO, and
O’Leary (1990) studied premarital problem-solv-
ing discussions and predicted DEMO satisfaction
at 18 months and 30 months after marriage. The
negativity of the premarital interaction correlated
with concurrent marital unhappiness but was not
predictive DEMO postmarital satisfaction. Controlling
for premarital relationship satisfaction, affective
disengagement during a DEMO problem-solv-
930
ing discussion was negatively associated with
marital satisfaction at 18 months DEMO 30 months
after marriage. Cohan and Bradbury (1997) ex-
amined the longitudinal course of marital satisfac-
tion and depressive symptoms in newlywed mar-
DEMO over an 18-month period. Problem-solving
behavior mediated but did not moderate the rela-
tionship between life events and adjustment. In
particular, angry wives had better adjustment to
major and interpersonal events so that their de-
pressive DEMO were reduced and their marital
satisfaction increased.
Gottman et al. (1998) reported the results of a
multimethod longitudinal study predicting the
eventual 6-year DEMO happiness and stability
from newlywed interactions observed in the ﬁrst
months after the wedding. Seven types of process
models were explored: (a) anger as a dangerous
emotion, (b) active listening, (c) negative DEMO
reciprocity, (d) negative startup by the wife, (e)
DEMO, (f) positive affect models, and (g)
physiological soothing DEMO the male spouse. Sup-
port was not found for the models of anger as a
dangerous emotion, active listening, or negative
affect reciprocity DEMO kind, either low or high in-
tensity. Support was found for DEMO of the hus-
band’s rejecting his wife’s inﬂuence, negative star-
tup DEMO the wife, a lack of de-escalation of
low-intensity negative wife affect DEMO the husband,
or a lack of de-escalation of high-intensity hus-
band negative affect by the wife, and a lack of
physiological soothing of the male spouse, all pre-
dicting divorce. Support was also found for a con-
tingent positive affect model and for balance mod-
els (i.e., ratio models) of positive-to-negative
affect predicting satisfaction among stable cou-
ples.
DEMO to parenthood. In the past decade, four
landmark books were published DEMO summarized
key longitudinal research projects on the transition
to parenthood (Lewis, 1989; Michaels & Gold-
berg, 1988; Cowan & Cowan, 1992; Belsky &
Kelly, 1994). There have been approximately 15
longitudinal DEMO on the transition to parent-
hood; many of the others were DEMO prospective,
longitudinal studies. The longitudinal ﬁndings are
remarkably consistent. Most have concluded that
for the overwhelming majority of couples this
transition can be DEMO extremely stressful and
pleasurable. For approximately 40 to 70% of cou-
ples, there is a drop in marital quality. In general,
marital conﬂict increases by a factor of 9, people
are at risk for depression, there is a precipitous
Journal of Marriage and the Family
drop in marital quality within 1 year after the birth
of the ﬁrst child, people revert to stereotypic gen-
der roles, they are overwhelmed by the amount of
housework and child care there is to do, fathers
withdraw into work, and marital conversation and
sex decrease enormously. There is also an increase
in joy and pleasure with the baby. The longitu-
dinal DEMO have all discovered the strong link-
ages between the prebirth marital system (partic-
ularly highlighting the couple’s conﬂict resolution
skills, and a sense DEMO ‘‘we-ness’’), the parent-child
system, and the baby’s subsequent emotional/so-
DEMO and cognitive development. Belsky and Kel-
ly’s study is a rich source of information in un-
derstanding the transition. The Cowans’ study is
the DEMO controlled preventive marital intervention
study in the ﬁeld, and they demonstrated DEMO pow-
erful intervention effect (of 24 hours of group
supportive therapy DEMO pregnancy) in reducing
the drop in marital satisfaction, preventing di-
vorce, and improving parenting quality. By the
time the child reaches age 5, however, there were
no differences between the experimental and con-
trol DEMO; it is still a mystery as to what hap-
pened to DEMO relapse in the experimental group
between years 3½ and 5. Lewis’ (DEMO) landmark
work deﬁnes very speciﬁc prebirth marital ‘‘com-
petencies’’ that provide DEMO to child develop-
mental outcomes through parenting.
Couples at midlife and beyond. Overwhelmingly,
the existing observational research on marriage
has studied relatively young DEMO The data that
do exist on older marriages have been limited to
self-report data, derived primarily from question-
naires and interviews (Erikson, Erikson, & Kiv-
nick, 1989; Parron, 1982; Sinnett, Carter, & Mont-
gomery, 1972; Guilford & Bengtson, 1979) with
some exceptions (Illig, 1977; Zietlow and Sillars;
1988). In the 1990s, this state of affairs began to
be remedied. Using an observational system DEMO
coding emotional behavior, Carstensen, Gottman,
and Levenson (1995) studied the interactions of a
representative sample of couples in their 40s or
DEMO as they attempted to resolve marital conﬂicts.
With respect to negative emotions, the interactions
of older couples were clearly less emotional than
those of middle-aged couples. Older couples
showed less anger, disgust, belligerence, and
whining than did middle-aged couples. With re-
spect to the more positive emotions, however, the
evidence was mixed. Middle-aged couples ex-
pressed more interest and more humor, but older
couples expressed more affection. Importantly,
Marital Interaction
these ﬁndings of lesser negative emotion and
greater affection in DEMO couples when discussing
marital problems still held when the authors con-
trolled for differences in the severity of the prob-
lems being discussed. The DEMO of the couples
themselves were consistent with their behavioral
coding. When they showed spouses the videotapes
of their interactions and had them rate how DEMO
were feeling from moment to moment during the
interaction, older couples DEMO feeling more
emotionally positive than middle-aged couples
(Levenson, Carstensen, & DEMO, 1994).
THE CORE CONTENT AREAS
The Study of Power
It DEMO fortuitous that in 1993 the late Calfred Brod-
erick, originator of DEMO decade review paper series
in this journal, published an important book DEMO
Understanding Family Process. Broderick orga-
nized family process literature, which he DEMO
‘‘relational space,’’ into three major areas, the reg-
ulation of DEMO distance, the regulation of
transactions, and the regulation of ‘‘vertical
space,’’ by which he meant power. The idea of
‘‘regulation’’ implied a DEMO set point the-
ory. In a therapy context, these three areas DEMO
respectively discussed as positivity/caring, respon-
siveness, and status/inﬂuence (DEMO, Notarius,
Gonso, & Markman, 1976). We will brieﬂy DEMO
cuss these three areas. Historically, the regulation
of interpersonal distance was DEMO explored by ex-
amining the clarity of communication. Hypotheses
were advanced to explore the role of unclear com-
munication in dysfunctional families and family
DEMO More speciﬁc hypotheses were advanced
that unclear communication was responsible for
psychopathology (e.g., Bateson, Jackson, Haley,
& Weakland, 1956; Watzlawick, Beavin, & Jack-
son, 1967), and the cybernetic model or DEMO sys-
tems approach to family process was born. How-
ever, subsequent DEMO over three decades has
shown that the regulation of interpersonal distance
is all about affect, not about communication clar-
ity (e.g., Gottman, DEMO). The regulation of trans-
actions (e.g., signals of switches in speaking
turns) has been studied with strangers (e.g., Dun-
can & Fiske, 1977; Jaffe & Feldstein, 1970) and
has yet to DEMO applied to the study of marital in-
teraction.
The regulation of vertical space, that is, the
study of power has been much more DEMO It
was an area of important activity in the 1990s,
931
particularly as the study of physically abusive
marriages became a major focus DEMO research at-
tention. The empirical fabric of power always ap-
pears to disintegrate on closer examination. Brod-
erick (1993) wrote:
Literally hundreds DEMO studies have been done on
family power, who wields it and DEMO whose ex-
pense. The matter has turned out to be compli-
cated and elusive. As a result, the scholarly lit-
erature on power is voluminous, complex, and
often contradictory (see Szinovacz, 1987). The
DEMO majority of these studies are based on ques-
tionnaires that ask the respondent to report on
who wins the most contested decisions in his DEMO
her family. (p. 164)
Questionnaires ﬁlled out by independent ob-
DEMO do not correlate well, nor are different
measures well correlated (see Gray-Little &
Burks, 1983); nor have patterns of domination
proven DEMO over time (see Babcock, Waltz, Ja-
cobson, & Gottman 1993). An older paper by
Gray-Little (1982) is noteworthy because it DEMO
bined the observational assessment of talk time
during a 6-minute marital conﬂict discussion and
power during a marital game (the SIMFAM game,
Straus & Tallman, 1971). Results were complex
but included the result that balance in husband-
wife power was related to marital quality; how-
ever, self-report and observational measures did
not show a high level of agreement in classifying
couples. The issues of blending the study of affect
and DEMO are central to the integration of psy-
chological and sociological approaches to mar-
riage. As we will note, the issue of how to con-
ceptualize and study power may become clariﬁed
either through the use of DEMO precise observa-
tional measures or the use of more precise data
analytic techniques using data from two people
that unfolds over time.
Power studied DEMO more precise observations.An
example of this approach to clarifying power is a
recent study by Gray-Little, Baucom, and Hamby
(1996). They assessed power more precisely, us-
ing a coding of the couple’s inﬂuence patterns
during a discussion of the Inventory of Marital
Conﬂicts (Olson & Ryder, 1970). They found that
egalitarian couples had the highest Time 1 marital
satisfaction and fewer negative MICS behaviors
(Weiss, Hops, & Patterson, 1973); also, wife-dom-
inant couples improved the most in a DEMO
marital therapy study.
Power explored in the context of gender and re-
932
lational hierarchy. Feminist writers have pointed
to the central role that DEMO must play in under-
standing marriages. Quantitative observational re-
search has now begun to explore these ideas.
Women typically start most of the marital DEMO
discussions in laboratories that use observational
methods (Ball, Cowan, & DEMO, 1995; Oggins,
Veroff, & Leber, 1993). The degree of negative
affect and the amount of criticism with which a
conﬂict DEMO starts are also critical in deter-
mining its outcome. In one study, for example, the
way a marital conﬂict interaction began deter-
mined DEMO subsequent course 96% of the time
(Gottman, 1994; Gottman et DEMO, 1998, p. 7).
White (1989), in a sequential DEMO using the
Raush, Barry, Hertl, and Swain (1974) coding DEMO
tem, found evidence for the contention that men
display a more DEMO style in resolving marital
conﬂict, whereas women display a more afﬁliative
DEMO Ball et al. reported that couples perceived
the wife to be more important than the husband
in the mobilization phase of problem talk, which
involved raising the issues, planning on how to
solve them, being DEMO and taking control by si-
lence and nonresponse. Husbands and wives both
viewed this phase as the most stressful aspect of
marital problem solving. DEMO were perceived as
more inﬂuential in determining the content and
emotional depth of later phases of the discussion.
Women viewed their power in the DEMO phases as
illusory: ‘‘their behavior was shaped primarily by
the effort DEMO choose strategies that would avoid
upsetting their husbands. ’’ (Ball et DEMO, p. 303).
Coan, Gottman, Babcock, and Jacobson (1997)DEMO
used sequential analysis to investigate the propen-
sity of two types of physically violent men to re-
ject inﬂuence from their wives during a DEMO
conﬂict discussion. The sequence of escalation of
the negativity (from complaining DEMO hostility, for
example) was used to operationalize the sequence
of rejecting inﬂuence. As hypothesized, abusive
husbands whose heart rates decreased from base-
line to the marital conﬂict discussion (labeled as
Type I abusers in the study), rejected any inﬂu-
ence from their wives. These men were DEMO gen-
erally violent outside the marriage and were more
likely to have used a knife or gun to threaten their
wives than abusive husbands DEMO heart rates ac-
celerated from baseline to the conﬂict discussion
(label DEMO Type II abusers in the study). These anal-
yses were repeated for a representative sample of
nonviolent newlywed couples in the ﬁrst few
DEMO of marriage, and the escalation sequence
of men rejecting inﬂuence from DEMO wives pre-
Journal of Marriage and the Family
dicted subsequent divorce (DEMO et al., 1998).
The sequence of women rejecting inﬂuence from
DEMO husbands did not predict divorce. This study
was the ﬁrst time that negative affect reciprocity
was broken down into responding negatively in
kind (e.g., anger is met with anger) or escalation
(e.g., anger is DEMO with contempt). Negative rec-
iprocity in kind was characteristic of all mar-
riages; only the escalation sequence was charac-
teristic of marriages that were later to end in
divorce. These ﬁndings reconceptualize negative
affect reciprocity DEMO the rejection of inﬂuence.
Power studied with the mathematical modeling of
marital interaction. Power, according to Broderick
(1993), ‘‘may be most simply DEMO as the abil-
ity to win contested decisions’’ (p. 164). DEMO al-
ternative deﬁnition has emerged in the 1990s,
however, using DEMO modeling of marital
interaction. This alternative deﬁnition deﬁnes
power quantitatively as the ability of one partner’s
affect to inﬂuence the other’s affect. In this DEMO
eling (Cook et al., 1995; Gottman, Swanson, &
Murray, in press), two inﬂuence functions are
computed across the affective range of a conver-
sation, one for the husband’s inﬂuence on the
wife, and one for the wife’s inﬂuence on the hus-
band. This approach to modeling is based on writ-
ing down two interlocking nonlinear difference
DEMO for husband and wife, with inﬂuence
functions computed after controlling for DEMO
relation. The method has a venerable history in
the marital ﬁeld. Long ago, Anatol Rapoport
(1960, 1972) suggested that two linear differential
DEMO for husband and wife interaction could
describe a marital system as escalating out of con-
trol or being self-regulated. He never operation-
alized these DEMO or applied them to real data;
in addition, his equations DEMO linear, and
unfortunately, linear equations are usually unsta-
ble. Nonetheless, DEMO et al., applying the new
mathematics of nonlinear dynamic modeling (e.g.,
Murray, 1989), showed that depending on the
shape of the inﬂuence functions, couples can have
several stable steady states or ‘‘attractors,’’ that
are self-regulating, homeostatic set points for the
marital system. A homeostatic attractor is a point
in husband-wife phase space toward which the in-
DEMO is repeatedly drawn, and if the system is
perturbed, it will move back to the attractor. These
inﬂuence functions describe the impact of DEMO per-
son’s affect on the partner’s subsequent affect.
This determination is made across the range of
affects in the husband-wife dialogue. The inﬂu-
Marital Interaction
ence functions make the study of power more de-
tailed DEMO speciﬁc. Power may be speciﬁc to par-
ticular affects. Asymmetries in inﬂuence reﬂect a
power imbalance, and they reported that these
asymmetries were predictive of divorce.
Power and marital typologies. An important re-
search monograph was DEMO by Fitzpatrick
(1988) in which she presented the results of a se-
ries of studies that combined observational data
on marital interaction with DEMO data. She
presented a typology of marriage from her anal-
yses of ideology, communication, interdepend-
ence, and power dynamics in the marriage. Her
work was another example of the integration of
the study of power DEMO marital interaction. In a
monograph on what marital processes predict di-
vorce, Gottman (1994) also presented a marital
typology with three types, DEMO at interaction
and inﬂuence, and his types appear to be similar
DEMO those of Fitzpatrick. On a conﬂict task Gott-
man’s types were validating couples, who are high
on conﬂict but wait a while in the discussion and
ask questions before engaging in persuasion at-
tempts; volatile couples, who are high in conﬂict
and engage in persuasion attempts immediately;
and, Conﬂict Avoiding couples, who are low in
conﬂict and do DEMO engage in persuasion attempts
at all. All three types were equally likely to have
stable marriages, but Cook et al. (1995) discov-
ered that mismatches in inﬂuence functions be-
tween Gottman’s types predicted divorce. Noller
& Hiscock (1989) replicated most of Fitzpatrick’s
typology, except for a DEMO of effect of ideology
on traditionalism. Johnson, Huston, Gaines, &
Levinger (1992), however, developed a typology
(using diary data of work and leisure) and found
a very different typology with four major types:
symmetrical, parallel, differentiated companion-
ate, and role reversed. The question remains as to
what fundamental mismatches in typology are
dysfunctional.
Vanlear & Zietlow (1990) related Fitzpatrick’s
couple typology, marital satisfaction, and relation-
al control. ‘‘Relational control’’ attempts to cap-
ture the sequential communication of DEMO or
status between spouses (e.g., from assertion to
dominance, from DEMO deference to sub-
mission). Across couple types, marital satisfaction
was DEMO with interactions conﬁrming equal-
ity between partners (i.e., there was an absence of
putting self or partner up or down). More impor-
DEMO, the study revealed an interaction effect be-
tween couple type and DEMO control on mar-
933
ital satisfaction. This ﬁnding, along with those DEMO
Fitzpatrick and Gottman, further encourages re-
searchers to challenge a uniformity DEMO
holding that all distressed and nondistressed cou-
ples are alike in their reactions to speciﬁc inter-
actional behaviors.
Marital Interaction as Proximal Determinants of
DEMO and Individual Well-Being
Historically, an important revolution took place in
the DEMO of family processes when interactional
hypotheses were advanced to explain how speciﬁc
family interactions were related to and perhaps re-
sponsible for an individual DEMO member’s psy-
chopathology (e.g., Bateson, Jackson, Haley, &
Weakland, 1956; Watzlawick, Beavin, & Jackson,
1968). This marked DEMO beginning of a major con-
ceptual shift away from individual personality as
the primary determinant of personal well-being
and distress and toward social interaction DEMO sig-
niﬁcant others as among the most signiﬁcant de-
terminant of physical and psychological well-be-
ing. We will examine the evidence to emerge in
DEMO 1990s that represents the next evolution in this
30-year-old revolution.
Health and longevity. An outstanding review by
Burman and Margolin (1992) crystallized ongoing
DEMO that the psychosocial quality of marriages is
linked to mortality and morbidity. In searching for
a mechanism for these linkages, they decided that
the effect is indirect and nonspeciﬁc. Previous re-
search has identiﬁed strong links DEMO marital
quality and health (e.g., c.f., Burman & Margolin,
DEMO), and between being married and better
health and longevity (e.g., Berkman & Syme,
1979; Berkman & Breslow, 1983). Research DEMO
indicates that marital distress is associated with
suppressed immune function (e.g., Kiecolt-Glaser
et al., 1987; Kiecolt-Glaser, Malarky, Cacioppo,
& Glaser, 1994), cardiovascular arousal (e.g.,
Brown & Smith, 1992; Ewart, Burnett, & Taylor,
1983; Ewart, Taylor, Kraemer, & DEMO, 1991;
Gottman, 1994; Gottman & Levenson, 1992; Le-
DEMO & Gottman, 1983, 1985), and increases in
stress-related hormones such as catecholamines
and corticosteroids (e.g., Kiecolt-Glaser et
al.,1994). There DEMO extensive literature that indi-
cates, that for men, marriage offers health-buffer-
ing effects (e.g., Berkman & Syme; Berkman &
Breslow; Bernard, 1982; Burman & Margolin,
1992; Shumaker & Hill, 1991) and that women
are more likely to experience health-related prob-
934
lems if the marriage is distressed (Kiecolt-Glaser
et al.; Gaelick, Bodenhausen, & Wyer, 1985;
Ewart et al., 1991; Huston & Ashmore, 1986).
In the 1990s, researchers also broadened the
search for associations between marital interaction
and speciﬁc disorders. Many of these studies DEMO
somewhat weak in methodology but nevertheless
point the way toward the beneﬁts of more reﬁned
study.
Child outcomes. The decade of the 1990s has DEMO
rich in discovering linkages across interacting
subsystems within the family, and DEMO the child’s
peer relations as well. The mediating variable in
many of these investigations is the concept of
emotional regulation of arousal in children, vari-
ously deﬁned. Marital conﬂict, distress, and dis-
solution are linked DEMO problematic childhood out-
comes including depression, withdrawal, poor
social competence, DEMO health outcomes,
lower academic achievement, and conduct-related
incidents (Cowan & Cowan, 1987, 1992; Easter-
brooks, 1987; Emery & O’Leary, DEMO; Forehand,
Brody, Long, Slotkin & Fauber, 1986; Gottman &
Katz, 1989; Hetherington, Cox, & Cox, 1978;
Katz & Gottman, 1991; Peterson & Zill, 1986;
Porter & O’Leary, 1980; Rutter, 1971; Whitehead,
1979). For example, Cummings and colleagues
found that children exposed to angry interadult
conﬂict tend to DEMO negative behavior such as
physical aggression to cope (Cummings, Zahn-
Waxler, & Radke-Yarrow, 1984). El-Sheikh
(1994) found that preschool children DEMO highly
conﬂictual marriages displayed behavioral distress
and heart rate reactivity when shown tapes of an-
gry adult interactions. Brody, Arias, & Fincham
(1996) reported a link between conﬂict-promoting
marital attributions (e.g., seeing one’s partner as
selﬁsh) and ineffective parent-child communica-
tion and to the child’s attributions for negative pa-
rental behavior. Davies, Myers, and Cummings
(1996) DEMO videotaped segments of adults en-
gaged in brief verbal conﬂicts, with DEMO end-
ings to two groups of children, 7- to 9-year-olds
and DEMO to 15-year-olds. They reported that emo-
tionally harmonious endings were crucial in cre-
ating a sense of emotional security in both groups
of children, regardless of whether the adults’ con-
ﬂicts were about adult or child DEMO Explicit
verbal resolution was unnecessary. Across both
age groups, female children DEMO more fear
whereas male children offered more task-oriented
interventions. See also Davies and Cummings
Journal of Marriage and the Family
(1994) for an DEMO theory of emo-
tional regulation.
Margolin, Christensen, and John (1996), in a
sequential analysis, reported that distressed cou-
ples showed greater DEMO of tensions and
more spillover, particularly from marital to parent-
child DEMO Nonetheless, there may at times
be an inverse relationship between marital DEMO
and parent-child interaction. Mahoney, Boggio
and Jouriles (1996) found that DEMO were more
empathic toward their 4- to 10-year-old, clinic-
referred sons DEMO an episode of marital conﬂict.
Gottman, Katz, and Hooven (1996) reported
the results of a longitudinal study in which there
were clear DEMO between observed marital,
parent-child, and child-peer interaction when the
child DEMO 4 years old. Furthermore, these linkages
were mediated by the child’s DEMO to regulate
physiological arousal during parent-child interac-
tion. These linkages predicted a range of longi-
tudinal child outcomes, including child peer rela-
tions at age 8. The central concept of this research
was ‘‘meta-emotion,’’ which DEMO to the feelings
and cognitions that parents had about their own
and their children’s anger and sadness. Katz and
Gottman (1993) found that DEMO distinct and un-
correlated patterns of marital interaction were re-
lated to distinct child outcomes. A mutually hos-
tile pattern (which predicted marital dissolution)
correlated with child externalizing behavior,
whereas a husband angry and DEMO pattern
correlated with child internalizing disorders. Katz
and Gottman (1997) reported that variables that
index a ‘‘coaching’’ meta-emotion philosophy
buffer children from almost DEMO the deleterious
consequences associated with marital conﬂict and
dissolution. Coaching parents are aware of their
child’s emotion, they listen empathetically to the
child’s feelings, they help the child ﬁnd words to
express the emotion, and DEMO they explore and
implement strategies to deal with the emotion.
There was a physiological substrate to this buf-
fering effect. Katz and Gottman (1995) found that
a central child physiological dimension, called
‘‘vagal tone,’’ DEMO children from marital
conﬂict. Broadly, vagal tone is related to the DEMO
ity of the parasympathetic branch of the autonom-
ic nervous system to calm the child down. The
concept has become central theoretically for many
DEMO in organizing the bases for the infant’s
emotional and social development (DEMO, Fox,
1994; Garber & Dodge, 1991; Thompson, 1994)DEMO
For a review on the heritability of vagal tone and
other autonomic indices, see Healy (1992).
Marital Interaction
Rogers and Holmbeck (1997) reported that
more frequent and DEMO interparental aggression
was associated with greater adjustment problems
for children. They identiﬁed cognitive appraisal
strategies that were maladaptive for the children
and also noted DEMO peer social support could buff-
er the negative effects of marital conﬂict.
Once again, after a hiatus of many years, links
were again DEMO made in the 1990’s between the
marital relationship and child sibling relationships.
For example, among children aged approximately
4 to 9 years, Erel, Margolin, and John (1998) re-
ported linkages between the wives’ negative re-
ports of the marital relationship, the mother-child
relationship, and the DEMO siblings’ observed neg-
ative interaction. The younger siblings’ negative
interaction was linked with the mother-child and
the differential mother-child interaction (across
siblings). No such relationship was found for sib-
lings’ positive interactions.
Adolescent adjustment was DEMO studied in the
context of couples undergoing the transition to re-
marriage (Hetherington & Clingempeel, 1992).
There were three groups of families: stepfamilies
with a divorced custodial mother who was in the
ﬁrst months DEMO a remarriage, families with a di-
vorced custodial mother who had DEMO remarried,
and nondivorced families. Authoritative parenting
was associated with positive adjustment of chil-
dren in all family groups, but children in nondi-
vorced families were more competent and had
fewer behavior problems than children in DEMO
or remarried families. Nondivorced and remarried
couples looked similar on the observational mea-
sures. There was remarkable stability in marital
interaction over time; however, Deal, Hagan, and
Anderson (1992) noted that the new stepfather is
in a tenuous position in his new family, and ‘‘It
may thus be that the primary difference between
ﬁrst marriages and remarriages lies DEMO in the
quality of the marital relationship but in the rela-
tive importance of the marital relationship within
the whole family system’’ (p. 93).
Common comorbidities. Research in the past de-
cade ﬁrmly established that DEMO interaction is
also strongly associated with a broad range of out-
comes for family members. Although the direction
of cause and effect between marital DEMO
and spousal or child well-being is often unclear,
the strength and importance of these relations doc-
umented in the 1990s will surely be DEMO in
the next decade.
1. Depression. Schmaling, Whisman, Fruzzetti,
935
and Truax (1991) assessed the marital interaction
behaviors associated with wives’ DEMO They
found that active summarization by the wife was
associated with fewer depressive symptoms and
the absence of a diagnosis of major depression.
Johnson DEMO Jacob (1997) examined the marital
interactions of control couples and couples in
which either the wife or the husband was clini-
cally depressed. DEMO couples were more
negative than were nondepressed couples, and
couples with DEMO depressed wife were more negative
than were couples with a depressed husband.
McCabe and Gotlib (1993), in a study of de-
pressed and nondepressed couples, reported that
depressed wives became increasingly more nega-
tive in their verbal behavior over the course of the
interaction, and they perceived the interactions as
more hostile. After breaking the interaction into
thirds, they found that only depressed couples
were fairly immediately reactive to their spouse’s
DEMO in the interaction.
Biglan et al. (1985) discovered an interesting
set of interactions using sequential analysis, which
led to an exciting ﬂurry of theoretically based re-
search. They examined the potential ‘‘function’’
of depressed and DEMO behavior in depres-
sion, using sequential analyses. They compared
distressed and DEMO couples, both of
which included a depressed wife, with community
control subjects. The ﬁndings suggested that the
marital system might be covertly maintaining DEMO
pressive symptoms and thereby suggesting the di-
rection of the causal relationship between inter-
action and individual outcomes.
Biglan et al.’s study was criticized DEMO
they had difﬁculty obtaining nondepressed dis-
tressed couples. Schmaling and Jacobson (DEMO)
conducted the full design, crossing high or low
marital distress DEMO high or low depression. They
did not ﬁnd interactional patterns that were unique
to depression, but that these marital patterns were
due to marital distress rather than depression. Sim-
ilarly, Nelson and Beach (1990) found that the
suppression of aggressive behavior was an artifact
of the number DEMO months the couples had been
discordant. Interestingly, these means were long,DEMO
65.0 months for the nondepressed discordant and
94.5 months for the depressed discordant couples.
Greater suppression of aggressive behavior was
associated with shorter durations DEMO discord within
both groups of couples.
2. Violence. This decade saw a huge increase
in observational research applied to the study of
violent marriages. DEMO and Margolin (1993)
936
used sequential analysis to compare the reenact-
ments of physically aggressive, verbally aggres-
sive, withdrawing, and nondistressed low-conﬂict
couples. Physically aggressive couples DEMO char-
acterized by reciprocity of hostile affect and by
rigid, highly DEMO behavior patterns that
were stronger and longer lasting than those of oth-
er couples. Nondistressed couples also reciprocat-
ed hostility but were able to DEMO these negative
interaction cycles quickly. These sequential results
were also obtained by Cordova, Jacobson, Gott-
man, Rushe, and Cox (1993) for DEMO marital
conﬂicts in the laboratory rather than reenact-
ments of conﬂicts at home. These investigators
designed elaborate procedures to guarantee the
safety of the DEMO women following actual mar-
ital conﬂicts in the laboratory. The data suggest
that violent couples are missing an exit or with-
drawal ritual from DEMO reciprocated or escalat-
ing hostility.
Gottman, Jacobson, Rushe, and Shortt (1995)
reported a typology of batterers based on heart
rate reactivity. DEMO types of batterers were iden-
tiﬁed: Type 1 men, who lowered their heart rates
from baseline to a marital conﬂict interaction, and
Type 2 men, who raised it. Compared with Type
2 men, Type DEMO men were more violent outside the
marriage (to strangers, coworkers, DEMO, and
bosses), were higher on antisocial and sadistic ag-
gression DEMO scores, lower on dependency,
and were more verbally aggressive toward DEMO
wives during marital conﬂict; wives responded to
these men with anger, sadness, and defensiveness.
Type 1 men were more likely to threaten their
wives using a knife or gun, but both types had
inﬂicted as much actual physical damage (see Ja-
cobson & Gottman, 1998, for more detail). In a
subsequent paper on divorce prediction, Jacobson,
Gottman, Gortner, Berns, and Shortt (1997) re-
ported among their batterers there was a high di-
vorce/separation rate of 38% and DEMO husband
dominance and the wife’s reports of his emotional
abuse predicted the divorce. During the Time 1
marital interaction, more husband’s contempt, less
DEMO humor, less husband neutral affect, more
wife defensiveness, and less DEMO humor predicted
divorce. Physiological reactivity variables in both
husbands and wives at Time 1 also predicted di-
vorce.
As noted above, the research on violence in
marriages has focused attention on the power as-
pects of DEMO In an unpublished dissertation,
Rushe analyzed marital transactions in terms of
power and control strategies and concluded that
Journal of Marriage and the DEMO
the violent marriage is basically engaged in a
power struggle, which DEMO reminiscent of the anal-
yses carried out by Coan et al. (DEMO) on violent
men rejecting inﬂuence from women. This notion
of violence DEMO a form of power struggle is dis-
tinctly different from the emphasis on anger man-
agement for batterers in the therapy literature. The
power DEMO of violence suggests a system-
atic use of violence to intimidate and control the
abused wife, instead of periodic uncontrolled out-
bursts (see DEMO & Gottman, 1998). Babcock
et al. (1993) reported that DEMO couples were
more likely than nonviolent distressed and happily
married couples to engage in the husband de-
mand–wife withdraw pattern. Also, within the do-
mestically violent group, husbands who had less
power were more physically abusive toward their
wives. Power was measured by communication
skill using a structured DEMO about previous
arguments, and marital power outcomes was mea-
sured with DEMO Who Does What scale (Cowan,
Cowan, Coie, & Coie, 1978).
Positive affect and social support in violent
couples have been DEMO by Holtzworth-Munroe,
Stuart, Sandin, Smutzler, and McLaughlin (1997).
They found that compared with nonviolent men,
violent husbands in the DEMO social support
task (Bradbury & Pasch, 1994) offered less social
DEMO than nonviolent husbands. Instead, they
were more belligerent/domineering, more con-
temptuous/disgusted, showed more anger and ten-
sion, and were more DEMO by the wife’s problem.
3. Chronic Physical Pain. Romano et al.
(DEMO) developed a methodology for the behav-
ioral observations of chronic pain DEMO and
their spouses. Pain and control groups could be
discriminated with ratings of overt verbal and
nonverbal pain-related behaviors. Spouses of pain
patients showed DEMO solicitous behavior than
control spouses. Turk, Kerns, and Rosenberg
(1992), however, reviewed evidence that suggest-
ed the complexity of the problem: positive atten-
tion from spouses to displays of pain were asso-
ciated DEMO reports of more intense pain, higher
observed pain frequency, and greater disability;
but, negative spouse responding to pain was as-
sociated with increased affective distress.
4. Hostility and Type-A Personality. Harralson,
Suarez, and Lawler (1997) studied cardiovascular
reactivity in hostile men and women (using the
Cook-Medley Hostility scale, Cook & Medley,
1954) and the DEMO of anger. Medalie and
Goldbourt (1976) in a 5-year prospective study of
marital quality and health, found that a wife’s love
Marital Interaction
and support was associated with a reduced risk for
the DEMO of angina pectoris in husbands.
Sanders, Smith, and Alexander (1991) reported a
relationship between marital hostile/dominant be-
havior and Type A DEMO Type B personality pattern
in both husbands and wives. Brown and Smith
(1992) found a strong relationship between hos-
tility during marital interaction DEMO heart rate reac-
tivity.
5. Alcohol Abuse. Jacob and Krahn (1987)DEMO
used three analytic methods to cluster the marital
interactions of 96 couples (with the MICS) in
which the husband was either alcoholic, clinically
depressed, or a normal control. Cluster analysis
revealed that there were three salient dimensions
of the behaviors, negative evaluation, problem
solving, and positive evaluation. Jacob and Leon-
ard (1992) performed a highly detailed sequential
DEMO of these marital interactions. They found
that couples with a depressed husband were dif-
ferent from the normal controls and couples with
an alcoholic DEMO; couples with an alcoholic
husband and normal controls were characterized
by DEMO interaction patterns. Negative reciproc-
ity was lower among the couples with depressed
husbands, and husbands were less likely to follow
their wives’ problem solving with problem solv-
ing of their own.
6. Drug Abuse. Fals-Stewart and DEMO
(1998) used their macro-CRAC coding system to
study the marital conﬂict interactions of couples
with drug-abusing husbands and a well-selected
control group of DEMO abusing but dis-
tressed couples. They thus controlled for distress
and varied only the active ingredient of drug
abuse. No differences were found between DEMO
types on the self-report inventories, but the cou-
ples with the DEMO husband interact-
ed signiﬁcantly differently than the distressed
non–drug-abusing couples: they DEMO higher
abusiveness, lower problem-solving skills, and
more attribution of blame than the distressed non–
drug-abusing couples. In addition, they found that
the CRAC total score was negatively related to
the husband’s percentage of days abstinent DEMO
the year before entering substance abuse treat-
ment.
Interrelationships Among Interaction Behavior,
Cognition, and Physiology
The 1990s witnessed the blending of multiple
measurements with observational measures in one
investigation, which makes it possible to ask more
937
sophisticated questions at the interfaces of these
three domains. Notarius, Benson, Sloane, Vanzet-
ti, and Hornyak (1989) pioneered a methodology
for mapping the interface between perception and
behavior in their experimental investigation DEMO
Weiss’s (1980) concepts of positive or negative
sentiment override and Gottman, Notarius, Gonso,
and Markman’s (1976) concept of editing. The
DEMO of sentiment override implies a discrep-
ancy between a spouse’s subjective evaluation of
partner’s behavior and an outside observer’s eval-
uation of the same DEMO behavior. The valence
of any discrepancy between spouse and unbiased
observer in evaluating the partner’s behavior
would deﬁne positive or negative sentiment over-
ride. DEMO,’’ on the other hand, implies a pre-
cise sequence of DEMO in which a spouse re-
sponds positively (or even neutrally) immediately
after accurately perceiving his or her partner’s be-
havior to be negative (i.e., the perception matches
an unbiased observer’s assessment of the imme-
diate antecedent.) The important point is that these
salient interactional processes can only be studied
through an examination of the interface between
behavior and perception. DEMO log-linear
modeling to the observational and subjective data,
Notarius et al. (1989) found a surprising similarity
among nondistressed wives and distressed and
DEMO husbands. The perception of dis-
tressed wives was heavily under the inﬂuence of
negative sentiment override and these wives were
least likely to edit DEMO a negative reply to the their
husbands’ negative interactions. In contrast, DEMO
distressed wives and distressed and nondistressed
husbands were more likely to subjectively evalu-
ate their partner’s negative messages as neutral or
positive and even DEMO they made a negative
evaluation, and they were less likely to DEMO
negatively.
Bradbury and Fincham (1992) reported the re-
sults of two studies. In study 1 maladaptive attri-
butions were related to less effective DEMO
solving behaviors (coded globally with rating
scales), particularly for wives. DEMO study 2, a more
detailed coding system was used combined with
DEMO sequential analysis (Bakeman & Gottman,
1997; Bakeman & Quera, DEMO). In this study,
maladaptive attributions (controlling for marital
satisfaction) were related to the reciprocation of
negative partner behavior (hostility or rejection of
partner’s views). Attributions and behavior were
most strongly related for DEMO wives. Miller
and Bradbury (1995) found that maladaptive at-
tributions were related to hindering problem res-
938
olution on two tasks, a problem-solving and a so-
cial-support discussion. Attributions and behavior
were more strongly related for wives than hus-
bands DEMO for distressed than for nondistressed
spouses, again showing that cognitive factors
DEMO to impair interaction.
Vanzetti, Notarius, and NeeSmith (1992) stud-
ied speciﬁc and generalized expectancies that cou-
ples had for the outcomes of DEMO conﬂict in-
teractions. Distressed couples expected fewer
positive and more negative behaviors. Couples
high on relational efﬁcacy chose relationship-en-
hancing attributions more often that DEMO
couples. Halford and Sanders (1990) used a video
recall procedure to assess cognition of each part-
ner during both a problem discussion and DEMO re-
laxed discussion. Both domains discriminated dis-
tressed from nondistressed couples, DEMO negative
behavior in the interaction could be predicted bet-
ter by accounting for both past cognition and be-
havior than by relying on past DEMO alone.
Thomas, Fletcher, and Lange (1997), using a
thought DEMO video recall method pioneered by
Ickes (e.g., Ickes, Stinson, Bissonnette, & Garcia,
1990), in a study of empathic accuracy, DEMO cou-
ples review their own videotapes and describe
their own and their partner’s ‘‘on-line’’ thoughts
and feelings. Partners’ assumed similarity was re-
lated to DEMO satisfaction and the positivity of
the verbal interaction. Mendolia, Beach, and Tes-
ser (1996) found that the responsiveness to one’s
partner’s self-evaluations DEMO associated with fa-
vorable marital interaction during a conﬂict dis-
cussion, DEMO responsiveness to one’s own
self-evaluation was associated with unfavorable
marital interaction. These ﬁndings may suggest a
possible mechanism underlying defensiveness.
Fincham, Garnier, Gano-Phillips, and Osborne
(1995) developed a new methodology for studying
a couple’s DEMO expectations and the ‘‘ac-
cessibility’’ of marital satisfaction. To operation-
alize accessibility, they used two computer tasks
and measured response latencies to speciﬁc ques-
tions about the spouse or the marriage. Response
latencies moderated the relationship DEMO sat-
isfaction and expected partner behavior for hus-
bands.
Because there is considerable complexity in
studying each separate domain, it is not surprising
that work exploring the interrelations that exist be-
tween behavior and cognition is DEMO well ad-
vanced.
Journal of Marriage and the Family
Physiology and Interaction
The use of physiological measures in studies of
marital interaction has increased DEMO the decade.
Ewart, Taylor, Kraemer, and Agras (1991), in a
study of essential hypertension, investigated high
blood pressure and marital conﬂict. They reported
that ‘‘not being nasty matters more than being
nice.’’ This DEMO based on the ﬁnding that among
women, supportive or neutral messages DEMO un-
related to blood pressure, but hostile interaction
and marital dissatisfaction DEMO related. Among
men, blood pressure was related only to speech
rate. DEMO and Ruef (1992) reported a phys-
iological substrate for empathy. They asked sub-
jects to view a videotaped, 15-minute marital in-
teraction of a couple and to indicate how a
particular spouse reported feeling. When DEMO rat-
er’s physiological responses matched those of the
target spouse being observed, the rater was more
accurate predicting the targeted spouse’s feelings.
Gottman and Levenson (1992) combined phys-
iological assessment with observational coding of
interaction, speciﬁc affect, and the subjective
evaluation of affect. Using an index based on the
aggregate valence of all statements spoken during
a speaker turn, two groups of couples were
formed. The speaking turns of regulated couples
DEMO characterized by a positive slope (i.e., speak-
er turns were generally characterized by positive
affect) over the course of a conversation, whereas
DEMO speaking turns of nonregulated couples were
characterized by a negative slope (DEMO, speaker
turns were generally characterized by negative af-
fect) for one or both spouses. Wives in nonregu-
lated interactions showed higher levels of DEMO
than all other spouses; Gottman and Levenson
speculated that this heightened DEMO may play
in role in the poorer health of wives in distressed
marriages. Gottman et al. (1998), using interrupt-
ed time-series analysis, DEMO that only husbands’
physiological soothing (via self-soothing or
through wives’ humor) predicted marital stability
among newlyweds.
Smith and Brown (1991) related husbands’ DEMO
wives’ MMPI cynical hostility scale scores to two
marital interaction conditions, DEMO in which they
simply discussed a problem area, and one in
DEMO they received rewards for trying to per-
suade their wives in a win-lose contest. In hus-
bands their cynical hostility scores in the win-lose
DEMO was related to their own increased sys-
tolic blood pressure (SBP) and heart rate (HR)
reactivity. Husbands’ cynical hostility scores also
Marital Interaction
were related to increased systolic blood pressure
reactivity in their DEMO Wives’ cynical hostility
scores were unrelated to their own or to their hus-
bands’ physiological responses. Brown & Smith
(1992) reported that in DEMO win-lose condition,
husbands’ SBP increases were accompanied by
increases in anger and a hostile, coldly assertive
style. In wives, this same interactive DEMO oc-
curred, but it was not associated with their own
elevated DEMO
PROMISING TRENDS
Extension to Representative and International
Samples
There is a need to integrate sociological and psy-
chological methodologies in the future. Psycho-
logical DEMO have relied on samples of conve-
nience that have limited generalizability. A recent
exception is Escudero, Rogers, and Gutierrez
(1997), who, DEMO a detailed microanalytic investi-
gation also employing sequential analysis, studied
marital DEMO in Spain. They compared clinic
distressed couples with nonclinic nondistressed
couples. They used the Rogers relational coding
system (Rogers, 1972), which directly DEMO pow-
er transactions, and the CISS for coding affect.
They found DEMO clinic couples displayed more
domineering, more negative affect, and a stronger
association between one-up control and negative
affect than was the case for DEMO couples.
Krokoff, Gottman, and Roy (1988) conducted the
only random sample study of blue- and white-col-
lar marital interaction known to us. DEMO their
ﬁndings, there was more negative affect and neg-
ative affect DEMO for unhappy couples, re-
gardless of occupational status. Zamsky (1997)
compared the interactions of distressed and non-
distressed, White and African American couples.
Replicating interactional ﬁndings on more homo-
geneous groups, Zamsky found large differences
between distressed and nondistressed couples,
particular for the negative emotionally DEMO
ing behaviors. Surprisingly, communication dif-
ferences between couples were not attributable DEMO
factors of race, socioeconomic status, or any in-
teraction between these variables and marital sat-
isfaction.
Observational study of distressed and nondis-
tressed DEMO continued in the 1990s to be used
in international settings. In studies in Germany,
Kaiser, Hahlweg, Fehm-Wolfsdorf, and Groth
(1998) showed that a short-term psychoeducation-
939
al program increased the frequency of self-disclo-
DEMO, problem solving, acceptance, and nonverbal
positive behavior and decreased the DEMO of
criticism relative to a control group. Hahlweg,
Markman, Thurmaier, Engl, and Eckert (1998)
showed that many of the changes DEMO communica-
tion behaviors following the short-term interven-
tion were maintained through a 3-year follow-up.
Gender differences have frequently been observed
in studies with U.S. DEMO (see Baucom, Notar-
ius, Burnett, & Haefner, 1990), DEMO con-
cerning wives negativity, and similar differences
were observed in the DEMO samples. At the 3-
year follow-up, wives in the treatment and DEMO
groups were observed to display more nonverbal
negative behavior and more self-disclosure com-
pared with their husbands, and wives in the con-
trol group displayed more criticism than their hus-
bands.
In a study of distressed DEMO nondistressed
Dutch couples, Van Widenfelt (1995) conﬁrmed a
pattern of DEMO differences that have been
replicated in several studies carried out in the
United States. She used the Codebook for Marital
and Family Interaction (Notarius, Pellegrini, &
Martin, 1991) to deﬁne interactional behaviors
and found nondistressed couples to display sig-
niﬁcantly more statements to facilitate problem
solving, to emotionally validate partner, and to
self-disclose thoughts and feelings and distressed
couples to display signiﬁcantly more statements to
inhibit problem solving and to DEMO inval-
idate partner. Van Widenfelt also observed wives
in her Dutch sample to display signiﬁcantly more
statements that were emotionally invalidating of
their husbands (e.g., criticisms, guilt inductions,
character assassinations). Sequential analyses re-
DEMO the interaction of nondistressed couples to
be characterized by statements that facilitated
problem solving, followed by self-disclosure or
emotional validation. In contrast, the DEMO
of distressed couples was characterized by a high
frequency of emotional invalidation that was fol-
lowed by statements that either facilitated or in-
terfered DEMO problem solving, but without any
consequent emotional validation.
Observing in Naturalistic DEMO
Melby, Ge, Conger, and Warner (1995), in an el-
egant analysis, compared a marital discussion and
a problem-solving task and reported on the im-
portance of task in detecting positive marital in-
teraction. DEMO have been very few studies of
940
marital interaction outside laboratory settings, and
this is a direction that needs continuing explora-
tion. An exception is Vuchinich (1985), who stud-
ied naturally occurring dinner-time disputes. He
found that in 200 examples of DEMO, 67% ended
in standoffs in which no one yielded and the DEMO
was dropped. In 33% of the conﬂicts, the most
frequent reaction DEMO withdrawal, in which one
person refused to continue the discussion. The DEMO
action of submission, in which one person gave
in or compromised DEMO rare. Nonetheless, even if
not naturalistic, laboratory observation may have
validity, particularly if it can be shown to predict
important marital outcomes. Older evidence
shows that interaction in the lab underestimates
differences between distressed and DEMO
couples, compared with tape recordings made in
couples’ homes (Gottman, DEMO). More recently,
Hayden et al. (1998) related the mealtime inter-
actions of families to multiple levels of family as-
sessment; the measures were strongly related to
both mother and father involvement. The use DEMO a
marital interaction diary was pioneered in a study
by Halford, DEMO, Lowe, and Scheldt
(1992) in an attempt to discover the behavioral
ecology of stressful marital interaction. For ex-
ample, they found that most stressful interaction
occurred in the kitchen during the weekdays and
were DEMO with everyday life stresses; the
most stressful interactions resulted from one DEMO
ner leaving the scene.
Focus on Sequences or Patterns of Interaction
Either through using various tools of sequence
analysis, or through the direct observation of se-
quences, the observational study of marital inter-
action expanded to the analysis of patterned com-
munication. Probably the most important of these
DEMO was the investigation of the demand-with-
draw pattern. Most commonly, this DEMO observed as
wives demanding change (through emotional re-
quests, criticism, DEMO complaints) and husbands
withdrawing (through defensiveness and passive
inaction). Christensen and his students pioneered
the study of this sequence (Christensen & Heavey,
1990; Sagrestano, Christensen, & Heavey, 1998)
and showed DEMO this pattern was most likely when
discussing a wife issue and could be reversed for
a husband issue (Heavey, Layne, & Christensen,
1993). Given that a consistent ﬁnding is that wom-
en typically DEMO most of the issues in most mar-
riages, however, this ﬁnding may be of only the-
oretical interest. Heavey, Christensen, and
Journal DEMO Marriage and the Family
Malamuth (1995) demonstrated that the withdraw-
al by men and the female-demand/male-withdraw
pattern predicted decline in wives’ marital DEMO
faction 2.5 years later.
Demand-Withdraw Pattern and Power Revisited
The wife-demand/husband-withdraw pattern does
not imply that the wife is dominant in this inter-
DEMO pattern. The husband’s withdrawal could be
driving the wife’s demandingness, for DEMO In
an innovative analysis, Klinetob and Smith (1996)
continuously coded demand and withdraw behav-
iors for both husband and wife. Using bivariate
DEMO analysis and controlling for autocor-
relation, they assessed the direction of DEMO
between demand-withdraw behaviors (and be-
tween withdraw-demand) in both husbands and
wives. They found that in the wife-demand/hus-
band withdraw pattern, the overwhelming per-
centage of couples showed a bidirectional inﬂu-
ence pattern (especially when it was her issue),
with wife dominance as the next most frequent
pattern. For the husband-demand/wife-withdraw
pattern, once again a bidirectional inﬂuence pat-
tern was most common, with husband dominance
the next most frequent pattern (particularly when
it was his issue). This was an elegant approach to
the study of marital power.
The Importance of Positive DEMO
Part of the accomplishments in the study of mar-
ital interaction over the last 20 years can be traced
to the use of common DEMO and data an-
alytic strategies in independent laboratories
throughout the United States, in the Netherlands,
German, and Australia. One feature of the DEMO
paradigm was a focus on conﬂict discussions and
the negative behaviors that marked the interaction
of distressed couples in this context. As we enter
DEMO next decade, interactional researchers have be-
gun to look beyond conﬂict DEMO better understand
the contribution that intimacy and other affection-
al processes makes to relationship satisfaction and
stability.
The importance of looking at positive affective
DEMO is suggested by several studies of marital
interaction. Gottman et al. (DEMO) found that only
positive affect during conﬂict discussions in the
early DEMO of marriage predicted both later di-
vorce and the marital happiness of stable couples.
Pasch and Bradbury (1998) and Pasch, Bradbury,
and Davila (1997) studied social support in mar-
Marital Interaction
ital interaction using a task of only moderate con-
ﬂict DEMO which spouses discussed personal, non-
marital issues. Longitudinal data showed that
DEMO ‘‘support solicitation and provision behav-
iors’’ predicted marital outcomes 2 years later, in-
dependent of the negative behaviors exhibited
during marital conﬂict. Beach, DEMO, Blum, and
Roman (1993) reported that coworkers and mari-
tal quality played a signiﬁcant role in reducing
negative affective symptoms (depression and in-
terpersonal stress).
De Koning and Weiss (1997) studied the DEMO
of instrumental humor and found that it appears
to function differently during the problem-solving
conversations of younger couples married an av-
erage of 14 DEMO than during the conversations of
older couples married an average of 39 years.
Among younger couples, instrumental humor was
negatively associated with marital satisfaction, but
among older couples, instrumental humor was
strongly associated with marital DEMO The
authors speculated that humor many function as
an avoidance maneuver in the younger couples
and more genuinely represent positive affect in the
older DEMO Cordova (1998) is developing a
promising behavioral model of intimacy. Intimacy
is operationalized as a dyadic event sequence in
which one partner’s expresses DEMO personal vulner-
ability and the spouse responds in an accepting,
nonpunitive manner. Fruzzetti and Rubio-Kuhnert
(1998) found that intimacy, also assessed as a dis-
closure-validation sequence using Fruzzetti’s In-
timacy-Distance Process Model Coding System
(1995), was signiﬁcantly associated with relation-
ship satisfaction and individual well-being, both
cross-sectionally and longitudinally. Clearly the
ﬁeld is just beginning to explore DEMO interactional
basis of marital intimacy.
Immediate Interactional Outcomes
Haefner, Notarius, and Pellegrini (1991) focused
on immediate outcomes of a single problem-solv-
ing DEMO Satisfaction with an immediate-
ly preceding conversation was primarily deter-
mined by partners’ positive behaviors, especially
wives’ emotional validation and husbands’ prob-
lem-solving facilitation. Dimitri-Carlton (1997)
also examined proximal interactional determinants
of conversational outcomes: DEMO supported
versus feeling undermined by one’s partner. Inter-
estingly, a set DEMO mild negative behaviors was
found to be most predictive of feelings of support
and undermining.
941
Personality Revisited
Karney and Bradbury (1997), in a longitudinal
study, examined the relationship between neuro-
ticism, marital interaction, initial levels of marital
satisfaction and rates of change in marital satis-
DEMO They found that neuroticism was associ-
ated with initial levels of marital satisfaction but
not with rates of change in marital satisfaction.
On the DEMO hand, behavior during marital inter-
action (total positive minus negative codes using
the Sillars [1982] coding system) was associated
with rates of change in marital satisfaction, but
not with initial levels. Kobak and Hazan (DEMO),
using an attachment theory framework with Q-
sort methodology, reported that the accuracy of
spouse’s internal working models as relying on
one’s DEMO and the partner being psychologi-
cally available were related to observers’ positive
ratings of communication in problem-solving and
conﬁding tasks. Sayers and Baucom (1991) stud-
ied the relationship between femininity and mas-
culinity and marital interaction using the MICS.
Femininity was positively related to greater rates
of negative DEMO among both husbands and
wives. A sequential analysis supported the idea
that wives’ femininity was associated with greater
negative reciprocity of the wives. Men’s DEMO
ity was associated with husbands’ tendency to ter-
minate fewer negative sequences of behavior in
comparison with their wives. High masculinity of
the wives DEMO related to shorter sequences of neg-
ative behavior.
Stress Spillover Management
In 1987, Jacobson, Schmaling, and Holtzworth-
Munroe conducted a 2-year telephone follow-up
study of the couples from their marital therapy
study. They studied two DEMO of couples, those
who maintained change and those who relapsed.
The DEMO signiﬁcant difference between the two
groups was in the management of stress from non-
marital situations to the marital relationship. Cou-
ples who relapsed DEMO more spillover of stress into
the marriage than those who maintained change.
A Swiss psychologist, Bodenman (1997a) report-
ed that ‘‘dyadic coping’’ with stress predicted lon-
gitudinal outcomes (stability and happiness) in a
2-year DEMO of 70 Swiss couples. Bodenman has
developed an intervention program focusing of
dyadic coping with stress (Bodenman, 1997b).
This is an area DEMO needs a great deal of devel-
opment.
942
FINAL THOUGHTS
Behavioral observation of marital interaction con-
tributed signiﬁcantly to DEMO understanding of mar-
riage in the last decade. We would like readers to
carefully note that the construct of marital inter-
action might be DEMO using methodologies oth-
er than direct observation. For example, a spouse
DEMO be asked to report how often his or her
partner is critical. This question assesses a per-
sonal construction of the marital system; it does
not assess actual interaction. Given the cost of ob-
servational measures, it is all too tempting to
move back to less expensive methodologies. DEMO
can see the pull to develop inexpensive question-
naires to assess theoretical constructs that have
been derived from careful observational study and
validated by DEMO and longitudinal
study. We believe this would be a mistake. Al-
though it will be necessary to use self-report mea-
sures to tap phenomenological DEMO of im-
portance, we should not abandon the observational
methods that DEMO contributed to the decade’s ad-
vances in understanding relationships. We must
strive to develop reliable measures of phenome-
nological constructs and anchor these measures DEMO
the most reliable and valid data that we have
available on couples and families: the observation
of interaction. Observational measures will always
be most informative data source we will ever get
about process, which will be the richest source we
will ever have for describing and building theory.
DEMO
Babcock, J. C., Waltz, J., Jacobson, N. S., & Gottman,
J. M. (1993). Power and violence: The relation DEMO
tween communication patterns, power discrepancies,
and domestic violence. Journal of DEMO and
Clinical Psychology, 61, 40–50.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, DEMO M. (1997). Observing in-
teraction: An introduction to sequential analysis (2nd
ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bakeman, R., & Quera, V. (1995). Analyzing interac-
tion: Sequential analysis with DEMO and GSEQ. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Ball, F. L. J., Cowan, P., & Cowan, C. P. (1995). Who’s
got the power? Gender differences in partner’s per-
ception of inﬂuence during marital problem-solving
discussions. Family Process, 34, 303–321.
Basco, M. R., Birchler, G. R., Kalal, B., Talbott, R., &
Slater, M. A. (1991). The clinician rating of adult
communication (CRAC): DEMO clinician’s guide to the
assessment of interpersonal communication skill.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 47, 368–380.
Bateson, G., Jackson, D. D., Haley, J., & Weakland, J.
(1956). Toward a theory of schizophrenia. Behavioral
Science, 1, 251–264.
Baucom, D., Notarius, C., Burnett, C., & Haefner, P.
Journal of Marriage and the Family
(1990). Gender differences and sex-role identity in
marriage. In F. Fincham & DEMO Bradbury (Eds.), The
psychology of marriage: Basic issues and applica-
tions (pp. 150–171). New York: Guilford Press.
Beach, R. H., Martin, J. K., Blum, T. C., & Roman, P.
DEMO (1993). Effects of marital and co-worker relation-
ships on negative DEMO: Testing the central role of
marriage. The American Journal of Family DEMO,
21, 313–323.
Be`langer, C., Sauborin, S., Laughrea, K., Dulude, D., &
Wright, J. (1993). Macroscopic marital DEMO
coding systems: Are they interchangeable? Behavior
Research and Therapy, 8, 789–795.
Belsky, J., & Kelly, J. (1994). The transition DEMO parent-
hood. New York: Dell.
Berkman, L. F., & Breslow, L. (1983). Health and the
ways of living: The Alameda DEMO Study. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Berkman, L. F., & DEMO, S. L. (1979). Social networks,
host resistance, and DEMO: A nine-year follow-up
study of Alameda County residents. American Jour-
nal DEMO Epidemiology, 109, 186–204.
Bernard, J. (1982). The future of marriage. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Biglan, A., Hops, H., Sherman, L., Friedman, L. S., Ar-
thur, J., & Osteen, V. (1985). Problem solving inter-
actions of depressed women and their spouses. Be-
havior Therapy, 16, 431–451.
Bodenman, G. (1997a). The inﬂuence of stress and cop-
ing on close relationships: A two-year longitudinal
study. Swiss Journal of Psychology, 56, 156–164.
Bodenman, G. (1997b). Can divorce be prevented by
enhancing the coping DEMO of couples? Journal of
Divorce and Remarriage, 27, 177–194.
Bradbury, T. N., & Fincham, F. D. (1992). Attributions
and behavior in marital interaction. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 63, DEMO
Bradbury, T. N., & Karney, B. R. (1993). Longitudinal
study of marital interaction and dysfunction: Review
and analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 13, 15–27.
Bradbury, T. N., & Pasch, L. A. (DEMO). The Social Sup-
port Interaction Coding System (SSICS). Unpublished
DEMO manual, University of California, Los Ange-
les.
Broderick, C. B. (1993). Understanding family process:
Basics of family systems theory. Newbury DEMO, CA:
Sage.
Brody, G. H., Arias, I., & DEMO, F. D. (1996). Link-
ing marital and child attributions to family processes
and parent-child relationships. Journal of Family Psy-
chology, 10, DEMO
Brown, P. C., & Smith, T. W. (1992). Social inﬂuence,
marriage, and the heart: Cardiovascular consequences
of interpersonal control DEMO husbands and wives.
Health Psychology, 11, 88–96.
Buehlman, K. T., Gottman, J. M., & Katz, L. F. (1992).
How DEMO couple views their past predicts their future:
Predicting divorce from an Oral History Interview.
Journal of Family Psychology, 5, 295–318.
Burman, B., & Margolin, G. (1992). Analysis of the
association between marital relationships and health
problems: An interactional perspective. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 112, 39–63.
Burman, B., & Margolin, G. (1993). America’s angriest
DEMO videos: Behavioral contingencies observed in
Marital Interaction
home reenactments of marital conﬂict. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical DEMO, 61, 28–39.
Carstensen, L. L., Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W.
(1995). Emotional behavior in long-term marriage.
Psychology DEMO Aging, 10, 140–149.
Christensen, A., & Heavey, C. L. (1990). Gender and
social structure in the demand/withdraw pattern of
DEMO conﬂict. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59, 73–81.
Christensen, DEMO, & Pasch, L. (1993). The sequence of
marital conﬂict: An analysis of seven phases of mar-
ital conﬂict in distressed and DEMO couples.
Clinical Psychology Review, 13, 3–14.
Coan, J., Gottman, DEMO M., Babcock, J., & Jacobson, N.
S. (1997). DEMO and the male rejection of inﬂu-
ence from women. Aggressive Behavior, DEMO, 375–
388.
Cohan, C. L., & Bradbury, T. N. (DEMO). Negative life
events, marital interaction, and the longitudinal
course of newlywed marriages. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 73, 114–128.
DEMO, J., Tyson, R., White, J., Rushe, R., Gottman, J.,
& Murray, J. (1995). Mathematics of marital conﬂict:
Qualitative dynamic modeling of marital interaction.
Journal of Family Psychology, 9, 110–130.
Cook, W. W., & Medley, D. M. (1954). Proposed hos-
tility and Pharisaic-virtue scales for the MMPI. Jour-
nal of DEMO Psychology, 38, 414–418.
Cordova, J. (1998). A behavioral theory for the study of
intimacy: Intimate events, suppressive events and the
DEMO of intimate partnerships. Paper present-
ed at the meeting of the Association for the Advance-
ment of Behavior Therapy, Washington, DC.
Cordova, J. V., Jacobson, N. S., Gottman, J. M., Rushe,
R. and Cox, G. (1993). Negative reciprocity and com-
munication in DEMO with a violent husband. Jour-
nal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 559–564.
Cowan, C. P., & Cowan, P. (1992). When partners DEMO
come parents: The big life change for couples. New
York: Basic Books.
Cowan, C. P., Cowan, P. A., Coie, L., & Coie, J. D.
(1978). Becoming a family: The impact DEMO the ﬁrst
child’s birth on the couple’s relationship. In W. B.
Miller & L. F. Newman (Eds.), The ﬁrst child and
family formation. Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Popula-
tion Center.
Cowan, P. A., & Cowan, C. P. (1987, April). Couple’s
relationships, parenting styles and the child’s devel-
opment at three. Paper presented at the Society DEMO
Research in Child Development, Baltimore, MD.
Cummings, E. M., Zahn-Waxler, C., & Radke-Yarrow,
M. (1984). Developmental changes in children’s re-
actions to anger in the home. Journal of Child Psy-
chology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 25, 63–
74.
Davies, P. T., & Cummings, M. E. (1994). Marital con-
ﬂict and child DEMO: An emotional security hy-
pothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 387–411.
Davies, P. T., Myers, R. L., & Cummings, M. E. (1996).
Responses of children and adolescents to marital con-
ﬂict scenarios as DEMO function of the emotionality if con-
ﬂict endings. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 42, 1–21.
De Koning, E., & Weiss, R. L. (1997). DEMO funny thing
happened during my marriage. Paper presented at the
meeting of the Association for the Advancement of
Behavior Therapy, Miami, FL.
943
DEMO, J. E., Hagan, M. S., & Anderson, E. R. (1992).
The marital relationship in remarried families. In E.
M. Hetherington & W. G. Clingempeel (Eds.) Coping
with marital transitions: A family DEMO perspec-
tive. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development (DEMO No. 227, 57), 73–93. Chicago:
The University of Chicago DEMO
Dimitri-Carlton, S. (1997). Feelings of support and un-
dermining in couples’ problem-solving conversations.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Catholic Univer-
sity, Washington, DC.
Duncan, S. D., & Fiske, D. W. (1977). Face DEMO face
interaction: Research, methods, and theory. Hills-
dale, NJ: DEMO
Easterbrooks, M. A. (1987, April). Early family devel-
opment: Longitudinal impact of marital quality. Pa-
per presented at the Meeting for DEMO in Child
Development, Baltimore, MD.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, DEMO V. (1978). Facial action code
system. Palo Alto, CA: DEMO Psychologist
Press.
El-Sheikh, M. (1994). Children’s emotional and physi-
ological responses to interadult angry behavior: The
role of history of interparental hostility. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 22, 661–678.
Emery, R. E., & O’Leary, K. D. (1982). Children’s per-
ception of marital discord and behavior problems of
boys and girls. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychol-
DEMO, 10, 11–24.
Erel, O., Margolin, G., & John, DEMO S. (1998). Observed
sibling interaction: Links with the marital and
mother-child relationship. Developmental Psycholo-
gy, 34, 288–298.
Erikson, E. H., DEMO, J. M., & Kivnick, H. Q. (1989).
Vital involvement in old age. New York: Norton.
Escudero, V., Rogers, L., & Gutierrez, E. (1997). Pat-
terns of relational control and DEMO affect in
clinic and nonclinic samples. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 14, 5–29.
Ewart, C. K., Burnett, K. F., & DEMO, C. B. (1983).
Communication behaviors that affect blood pressure:
an A-B–A-B analysis of marital interaction. Behavior
Modiﬁcation, 7, 331–344.
Ewart, C. K., Taylor, C. B., Kraemer, H. C., & Agras,
S. W. (1991). High blood pressure and marital dis-
cord: Not being nasty matters more than being nice.
Health Psychology, 10, 155–163.
Fals-Stewart, W., & Birchler, G. R. (1998). Marital DEMO
teractions of drug-abusing patients and their partners:
Comparisons with distressed couples and relationship
to drug-using behavior. Psychology of Addictive Be-
haviors, 12, DEMO
Fincham, F. D., Garnier, P. C., Gano-Phillips, S., & Os-
borne, L. N. (1995). Preinteraction expectations, mar-
ital satisfaction, and accessibility: A new look at sen-
timent override. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 9, 3–
14.
Fitzpatrick, M. A. (1988). Between husbands and wives:
Communication in marriage. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Floyd, F. J. (1989). Segmenting interactions: Coding
units for assessing marital and family behaviors. Be-
havioral Assessment, 11, 13–29.
Forehand, R., Brody, G., Long, N., Slotkin, J., & Faub-
er, R. (1986). Divorce/divorce potential and interpar-
ental conﬂict: The relationship to early adolescent so-
944
cial and cognitive functioning. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 1, 389–397.
DEMO, N. A. (Ed.) (1994). The development of emotion
regulation: Biological and behavioral considerations.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child De-
velopment, 59 (2–3, Serial. 240). Chicago: The Uni-
DEMO of Chicago Press.
Fruzzetti, A. (1995). Intimacy-distance process model
coding system. Unpublished coding manual, Univer-
sity of Nevada, Reno.
Fruzzetti, A., & Rubio-Kuhnert, A. (1998). Observing
intimacy: Self-disclosure and validation DEMO
and its impact on relationship and individual well-
being. In J. V. Cordova (Chair), Conceptualizations
of intimacy: Theory and research. Symposium con-
DEMO at the meeting of the Association for the Ad-
vancement of Behavior Therapy, Washington, DC.
Gaelick, L., Bodenhausen, G. V., & DEMO, R. S. (1985).
Emotional communication in close relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49,
1246–1265.
Garber, J., & Dodge, K. A. (Eds.). (1991). The devel-
opment of emotion regulation and dysregulation.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gottman, J. M. (1979). Marital interaction: Empirical
investigations. New York: Academic Press.
Gottman, J. M. (1993). The roles of conﬂict engage-
ment, escalation DEMO avoidance in marital interaction:
A longitudinal view of ﬁve types of couples. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 6–15.
Gottman, J. M. (1994). What predicts divorce: The re-
lationship between marital DEMO and marital
outcomes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J. M., Coan, J., Carrere, S., & Swanson, C.
(1998). Predicting DEMO happiness and stability
from newlywed interactions. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 60, 5–22.
Gottman, J. M., Jacobson, N. S., Rushe, R. H., Shortt,
J. W. (1995). The relationship between DEMO rate
reactivity, emotionally aggressive behavior, and gen-
eral violence in batterers. Journal of Family Psy-
chology, 9, 227–248.
Gottman, J. M., & Katz, L. F. (1989). Effects of marital
discord on young children’s peer interaction and
health. Developmental Psychology, 25, 373–381.
Gottman, J. M., Katz, L. F., & Hooven, C. (1996). Pa-
rental meta-emotion philosophy and the emotional
life of families: Theoretical models and preliminary
data. Journal of Family Psychology, 10, 243–268.
Gottman, J. M., & Krokoff, L. J. (1989). Marital inter-
action and satisfaction: A longitudinal view. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 47–52.
Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1986). Assessing
DEMO role of emotion in marriage. Behavioral Assess-
ment, 8, 31–48.
Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1988). The social
DEMO of marriage. In P. Noller & M. A.
Fitzpatrick (Eds.), DEMO on marital interaction
(pp. 183–200). San Diego, CA: College DEMO Press.
Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital pro-
cesses predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, phys-
iology, and health. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63, 221–233.
Gottman, J. M., McCoy, K., Coan, J., & Collier, H.
(1996). The Speciﬁc Affect Coding System (SPAFF)
for observing emotional communication in marital
Journal of Marriage and the Family
and family interaction. In DEMO M. Gottman (Ed. ), What
predicts divorce? The Measures. Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Gottman, J. M., Notarius, C., Gonso, DEMO, & Markman,
H. (1976). A couples guide to communication. Cham-
paign, IL: Research Press.
Gottman, J. M., Swanson, C., & Murray, J. (in press).
The mathematics of marital conﬂict: Dynamic math-
ematical nonlinear modeling of newlywed marital in-
teraction. Journal of Family Psychology.
Gray-Little, B. (1982). Marital quality and power pro-
DEMO among Black couples. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 44, 633–646.
Gray-Little, B., Baucom, D. H., & Hamby, S. L. (DEMO).
Marital power, marital adjustment, and therapy out-
come. Journal of Family Psychology, 10, 292–303.
Gray-Little, B., & Burks, N. (DEMO). Power and satis-
faction in marriage: A review and critique. DEMO
logical Bulletin, 93, 513–538.
Grifﬁn, W. A. (1993a). Event history analysis of marital
and family interaction: A practical introduction. Jour-
nal of Family Psychology, 6, 211–229.
Grifﬁn, W. A. (1993b). DEMO from negative affect
during marital interaction: Husband and wife differ-
ences. DEMO of Family Psychology, 6, 230–244.
Grifﬁn, W. A., & Greene, S. M. (1994). Social inter-
action and symptom sequences: A case study of oro-
facial bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease during neg-
ative DEMO interaction. Psychiatry: Interpersonal
and Biological Processes, 57, 269–274.
Guilford, R., & Bengtson, V. (1979). Measuring marital
satisfaction in three generations: Positive and nega-
tive dimensions. Journal of Marriage and the Family,
39, 387–398
Haefner, P. T., Notarius, C. I., & Pellegrini, D. S. (1991).
Determinants of satisfaction with marital discussions:
DEMO exploration of husband-wife differences. Behav-
ioral Assessment, 13, 67–82.
Hahlweg, DEMO, Markman, H., Thurmaier, F., Engl, J., &
Eckert, V. (1998). Prevention of marital distress: Re-
sults of a German Prospective Longitudinal Study.
Journal of Family Psychology, 12, 543–556.
Halford, W. K., Gravestock, F. M., Lowe, R., & Scheldt,
S. (1992). Toward a behavioral ecology of stressful
marital interactions. Behavioral Assessment, 14, 199–
217.
Halford, W. K., & Sanders, M. R. (1990). The relation-
ship between cognition and behavior during marital
interaction. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 9, 489–510.
Harralson, T. L., Suarez, E. C., & Lawler, K. A. (1997).
Cardiovascular reactivity among hostile men and
women: The effects of sex and anger suppression.
Women’s Health, 3, 151–164.
Hayden, L. C., DEMO, M., Dickstein, S., Seifer, R.,
Sameroff, A., DEMO, Miller, I., Keitner, G., & Rasmussen,
S. (1998). Levels of family assessment I: Family,
marital, and parent-child DEMO Journal of Fam-
ily Psychology, 12, 7–22.
Healy, B. T. (1992). The heritability of autonomic ner-
vous system processes. In: Field, T. M., McCabe, P.
M., & Schneiderman, N. (Eds.), Stress and coping in
infancy and childhood (pp. 69–82). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Heavey, C. L., Christensen, A., & Malamuth, N. M.
(1995). The longitudinal impact of demand and with-
Marital Interaction
drawal during marital conﬂict. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 63, 797–801.
Heavey, C. L., Layne, C., & Christensen, DEMO (1993).
Gender and conﬂict structure in marital interaction:
A DEMO and extension. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 61, 16–27.
Hetherington, E. M., & Clingempeel, W. G. (1992).
Coping with DEMO transitions: A family systems
perspective. Monographs of the Society for Research
DEMO Child Development, 57 (Serial No. 227). Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Hetherington, E. M., Cox, M., & Cox, R. (1978). The
aftermath of divorce. In J. H. Stevens, DEMO, & M. Mat-
thews (Eds.), Mother-child, father-child relations.
Washington DEMO: National Association for the Edu-
cation of Young Children.
Heyman, R. E., Eddy, J. M., Weiss, R. L., & Vivian, DEMO
(1995). Factor analysis of the Marital Interaction
Coding System (MICS). Journal of Family Psychol-
ogy, 9, 209–215.
Holtzworth-Munroe, A., DEMO, G. L., Sandin, E., Smut-
zler, N, & McLaughlin, W. (1997). Comparing the
social support behaviors of violent and DEMO
husbands during discussions of wife personal prob-
lems. Personal Relationships, 4, 395–412.
Huston, T. L., & Ashmore, R. D. (1986). DEMO and
men in personal relationships. In R. D. Ashmore &
F. DEMO Boco (Eds.), The social psychology of female-
male relationships. (pp. 167–210). New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Ickes, W., Stinson, DEMO, Bissonnette, V., & Garcia, S.
(1990). Naturalistic social DEMO: Empathic ac-
curacy in mixed-sex dyads. Journal of Personality
and Social DEMO, 59, 730–742.
Illig, D. P. (1977). Distributional structure, DEMO
structure, multivariate information analysis, and
models of communicative patterns of elderly and
young married and friendship dyads in problem-solv-
ing situations. Unpublished doctoral DEMO,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park.
Jacob, T., & Krahn, G. (1987). The classiﬁcation of be-
havioral observation codes in studies of family inter-
action. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 49, DEMO
687.
Jacob, T., & Leonard, K. (1992). Sequential analysis of
marital interactions involving alcoholic, depressed,
and nondepressed men. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 101, 647–656.
Jacobson, N. S., & Gottman, J. M. (1998). When men
batter women. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Jacobson, N. S., Gottman, J. M., Gortner, E., Berns, S.,
& Shortt, J. W. (1997). The longitudinal course of
battering: When do couples split up? When does the
DEMO decrease? Violence and Victims, 11, 371–392.
Jacobson, N. S., DEMO, K., & Holtzworth-Munroe,
A. (1987). Component analysis of DEMO marital
therapy: 2-year follow-up and prediction of relapse.
Journal of Marital DEMO Family Therapy, 13, 187–195.
Jaffe, J., & Feldstein, S. (1970). Rhythms of dialogue.
New York: Academic Press.
Johnson, M. DEMO, Huston, T. L., Gaines, S. O., & Levinger,
DEMO (1992). Patterns of married life among young cou-
ples. Journal DEMO Social and Personal Relationships,
9, 343–364.
Johnson, S. L., & Jacob, T. (1997). Marital interactions
945
of depressed men and women. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 65, 15–23.
Julien, D., Markman, H. J., & Lindahl, K. M. (1989).
A comparison of a global and a macroanalytic coding
system: Implications for future trends in studying in-
teractions. Behavioral Assessment, 11, 81–100.
Kaiser, A., Hahlweg, K., Fehm-Wolfsdorf, G., Groth, T.
(1998). The efﬁcacy of a compact psychoeducational
group training program for married couples. Journal
DEMO Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 753–760.
Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (1997). Neuroticism,
marital interaction, and the trajectory of marital sat-
isfaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 72, 1075–1092.
Katz, L. F., & Gottman, J. M. (1991). Marital discord
and child outcomes: A social psychophysiological ap-
proach. In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The de-
velopment of emotion regulation and dysregulation.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, L. DEMO, & Gottman, J. M. (1993). Patterns of marital
conﬂict DEMO children’s internalizing and external-
izing behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 29, 940–
950.
Katz, L. F., & Gottman, J. M. (1995). Vagal DEMO pro-
tects children from marital conﬂict. Developmental
Psychopathology, 7, 83–92.
Katz, L. F., & Gottman, J. M. (1997). Buffering children
DEMO marital conﬂict and dissolution. Journal of Clin-
ical Child Psychology, 26, 157–171.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Fisher, L, Ogrocki, P., Stout, J. C.,
Speicher, C. E., & Glaser, R. (1987)DEMO ‘‘Marital quality,
marital disruption, and immune function.’’ Psycho-
somatic Medicine DEMO 13–34
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Malarkey, W. B., Cacioppo, J. DEMO,
Glaser, R. (1994). Stressful personal relationships:
Immune and endocrine function. In R. Glaser & J. K.
Kiecolt-Glaser (Eds.), Human stress and immunity
(pp. 321–339). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Klinetob, N. A., & Smith, D. A. (1996). Demand-with-
DEMO communication in marital interaction: Tests of
interpersonal contingency and gender role DEMO
ses. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 58, 945–
957.
Kobak, R. R., & Hazan, C. (1991). Attachment in mar-
DEMO: Effects of security and accuracy of working
models. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychol-
ogy, 60, 861–869.
Krokoff, L. J., Gottman, DEMO M., & Hass, S. D. (1989).
Validation of a DEMO rapid Couples Interaction Scor-
ing System. Behavioral Assessment, 11, 65–80.
Krokoff, L. J., Gottman, J. M., & Roy, A. K. (DEMO).
Blue-collar and white-collar marital interaction and
communication orientation. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 5, 201–221.
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., & Gottman, J. M.
(1994). Inﬂuence of age and gender on affect, phys-
iology, and their interrelations: A study of long-term
marriages. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 67, 56–68.
DEMO, R. W., & Gottman, J. M. (1983). Marital in-
teraction: Physiological linkage and affective ex-
change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 45, 587–597.
Levenson, R. W., & Gottman, J. M. (1985). Physiolog-
ical and affective predictors of change in relationship
946
satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 49, 85–94.
DEMO, R. W., & Ruef, A. M. (1992). Empathy: DEMO
physiological substrate. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 63, 234–246.
Lewis, J. (1989). The birth of the family: An empirical
inquiry. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Mahoney, A., Boggio, R. M., & Jouriles, E. N. (1996).
Effects of verbal marital conﬂict on DEMO
mother-son interactions in a child clinical sample.
Journal of Child Clinical Psychology, 25, 262–271.
Margolin, G., Christensen, A., & John, R. S. (1996).
The continuance of spillover of everyday tensions in
distressed and nondistressed families. Journal of
Family Psychology, 10, 304–321.
Matthews, L. S., Wickrama, K. A. S., & Conger, R. D.
(1996). Predicting marital instability from spouse and
observer reports of marital interaction. DEMO of
Marriage and the Family, 58, 641–655.
McCabe, S. B., & Gotlib, I. H. (1993). Interactions of
couples with and DEMO a depressed spouse: Self-
report and observations of problem-solving situa-
tions. DEMO of Personal and Social Relationships,
10, 589–599.
Medalie, J. H., & Goldbourt, V. (1976). Angina pectoris
among 10,000 men: II. Psychosocial and other risk
factors as evidenced by a multivariate analysis of a
ﬁve year incidence study. American Journal of Med-
icine, 60, 910–921.
Melby, J. N., Ge, X., Conger, R. D., & Warner, T. D.
(1995). The importance of task in DEMO positive
marital interactions. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 57, 981–994.
Mendolia, M., Beach, S. R. H., & Tesser, A. (DEMO).
The relationship between marital interaction behav-
iors and affective reactions to one’s own and one’s
spouse’s self-evaluation needs. Personal Relation-
ships, 3, DEMO
Michaels, G. Y., & Goldberg, W. A. (Eds.). (DEMO). The
transition to parenthood: Current theory and re-
search. New DEMO: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, G. E., & Bradbury, T. N. (1995). Reﬁning the
association between attributions and behavior in mar-
ital interaction. Journal of Family Psychology, 9,
196–208.
Murray, J. D. (1989). Mathematical biology. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Nelson, G. M., & Beach, S. R. H. (1990). Sequential
interaction in depression: Effects of depressive be-
havior on spousal aggression. Behavior Therapy, 21,
167–182.
Noller, P., & Hiscock, H. (1989). Fitzpatrick’s typology:DEMO
An Australian replication. Journal of Social and Per-
sonal Relationships, 6, 87–91.
Notarius, C. I., Benson, P. R., Sloane, D., DEMO, N.
A., & Hornyak, L. M. (1989). Exploring the interface
between perception and behavior: An analysis of
marital interaction in distressed and nondistressed
couples. Behavioral Assessment, 11, 39–64.
Notarius, C. I., DEMO, H. J., & Gottman, J. M.
(1983). Couples interaction scoring system: Clinical
implications. In E. E. Filsinger (Ed. ), Marriage and
family assessment (pp. 117–136). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
DEMO, C. I., Pellegrini, D., & Martin, L. (1991).
Codebook of Marital and Family Interaction (COM-
Journal of Marriage and the Family
FI). Unpublished manuscript, Catholic University of
America, Washington, DC.
Oggins, J., Veroff, J., & Leber, D. (1993). DEMO
of marital interactions among Black and White new-
lyweds. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 65, 494–511.
Olson, D. H., & DEMO, R. G. (1970). Inventory of mar-
ital conﬂicts (IMC): And experimental interaction
procedure. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 32,DEMO
443–448.
Parron, E. M. (1982). Golden wedding couples: Lessons
DEMO longevity. Generations, 7, 14–16.
Pasch, L. A., & Bradbury, DEMO N. (1998). Social support,
conﬂict, and the development of marital dysfunction.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66,
219–230.
Pasch, L. A., Bradbury, T. N., & Davila, J. (1997)DEMO Gen-
der, negative affectivity, and observed social support
in marital interaction. Personal Relationships, 4,
361–378.
Peterson, J. L., & Zill, DEMO (1986). Marital disruption,
parent-child relationships, and behavior problems in
children. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48,
295–307.
Porter, DEMO, & O’Leary, K. D. (1980). Marital discord
and childhood DEMO problems. Journal of Abnor-
mal Psychology, 8, 287–295.
Rapoport, A. (1960). Fights, games, and debates. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Rapoport, A. (1972). The uses of mathematical isomor-
phism DEMO general systems theory. In G. J. Klir (Ed.),
Trends in general systems theory (pp. 42–77). New
York: Wiley Interscience.
Raush, H. L., Barry, W. A., Hertl, R. K., & Swain, M.
A. (1974). Communication, conﬂict and marriage.
San Francisco: DEMO
Rogers, L. E. (1972). Relational communication control
coding manual Unpublished lab manual, Michigan
State University, East Lansing.
Rogers, M. J., & Holmbeck, G. N. (1997). Effects of
interparental aggression on children’s adjustment:
The moderating role of cognitive appraisal and cop-
ing. Journal DEMO Family Psychology, 11, 125–130.
Romano, J., Turner, J. A., Friedman, L. S., Bulcroft, R.
A., Jensen, M. P., & Hops, H. (1991). Observational
assessment of chronic pain patient-spouse behavioral
interactions. Behavior Therapy, 22, 549–567.
Rutter, M. (1971). Parent-child DEMO: Psychologi-
cal effects on the children. Journal of Child Psy-
chology DEMO Psychiatry, 12, 233–260.
Sagrestano, L. M., Christensen, A., & Heavey, C. L.
(1998). Social inﬂuence techniques during marital
conﬂict. DEMO Relationships, 5, 75–89.
Sanders, J. D., Smith, T. W., & Alexander, J. F. (1991).
Type A behavior and marital DEMO: Hostile-
Dominant responses during conﬂict. Journal of Be-
havioral Medicine, 14, 567–580.
Sayers, S. L., & Baucom, D. H. (1991). Role of femi-
ninity and masculinity in distressed couples’ com-
munication. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 61, 641–647.
Schmaling, K. B., Whisman, M. A., Fruzzetti, A. E., &
Truax, P. (1991). Identifying areas of marital conﬂict:
Interactional behaviors associated with DEMO
Journal of Family Psychology, 5, 145–157.
Schmaling, K. B., & Jacobson, N. S. (1990). Marital
Marital Interaction
interaction and depression. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 99, DEMO
Shumaker, S. A., & Hill, D. R. (1991). Gender differ-
ences in social support and physical health. Health
Psychology, 10, DEMO
Sillars, A. L. (1982). Verbal tactics coding scheme:
Coding manual. Unpublished manuscript, Ohio State
University, Columbus.
Smith, D. A., DEMO, D., & O’Leary, K. D. (1990).
Longitudinal prediction of marital discord from pre-
marital expressions of affect. Journal of Consulting
and DEMO Psychology, 58, 790–798.
Smith, T. W., & Brown, P. DEMO (1991). Cynical hostility,
attempts to exert social control and DEMO
reactivity in married couples. Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 14, 581–592.
Sinnet, N., Carter, L., & Montgomery, J. E. (1972). DEMO
er persons’ perceptions of their marriages. Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 32, 428–434.
Straus, M., & Tallman, I. (1971). DEMO: A technique
for observational measurement and experimental
study of families. In DEMO Aldous, T. Condon, R. Hill,
M. Straus, & I. DEMO (Eds.), Family problem solv-
ing (pp. 379–438). Himsdale, DEMO: Dryden.
Szinovacz, M. E. (1987). Family power. In M. DEMO Suss-
man & S. K. Steinmetz (Eds.), Handbook of marriage
DEMO the family (pp. 651–694). New York: Plenum
Press.
Thomas, DEMO, Fletcher, G. J. O., & Lange, C. (1997). DEMO
line empathic accuracy in marital interaction. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 839–850.
Thompson, R. A. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme
in search of deﬁnition. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The de-
velopment of emotion regulation: Biological and be-
havioral considerations. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 59 (2–3, Serial.
240). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Turk, D. C., Kerns, R. D., & Rosenberg, R. (1992).
Effects of marital DEMO on chronic pain and dis-
ability: Examining the down side of DEMO support.
Rehabilitation Psychology, 37, 259–273.
Van Widenfelt, B. M. (1995). The prediction and pre-
947
vention of relationship distress and divorce. DEMO
Hague, Netherlands: Cip-Gegevens Koninklijke.
Vanlear, C. A., & Zietlow, DEMO H. (1990). Toward a con-
tingency approach to marital interaction: An empiri-
cal integration of three approaches. Communication
Monographs, 57, 202–218.
DEMO, N. A., Notarius, C. I., & NeeSmith, D. (1992).
Speciﬁc and generalized expectancies in marital in-
teraction. Journal of Family DEMO, 6, 171–183.
Vuchinich, S. (1985). Arguments, family style. DEMO
chology Today, 19, 40–46.
Wampler, K. S., & Halverson, DEMO F., Jr. (1990). The
Georgia Marriage Q-Sort: An observational DEMO
of marital functioning. The American Journal of
Family Therapy, 18, 169–178.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J. H., & Jackson, D. D. (DEMO).
Pragmatics of human communication. New York:
Norton.
Weiss, R. DEMO (1980). Strategic behavioral marital thera-
py: Toward a model for assessment and intervention.
In J. P. Vincent (Ed.), Advances in family interven-
tion, assessment and theory (Vol. 1, pp. 229–271).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Weiss, R. L., Hops, H., & DEMO, G. R. (1973). A
framework for conceptualizing marital conﬂict. In L.
A. Hamerlynck, L. C. Handy, & E. J. Marsh (Eds.),
Behavior change: Methodology, concepts, and prac-
tice. (pp. 309–342). Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Weiss, R. L., & Tolman, A. O. (1990). The marital in-
teraction coding system—Global (MICS-G): A global
comparison to the MICS. Behavioral Assessment, 12,
271–294.
DEMO, B. B. (1989). Gender differences in marital com-
munication patterns. Family Process, 28, 89–106.
Whitehead, L. (1979). Sex differences DEMO children’s re-
sponses to family stress. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 20, 247–254.
Zamsky, E. (1997). Racial and socioeconomic status
DEMO in marital interaction. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, Catholic University of America,DEMO
Washington, DC.
Zietlow, P. H., & Sillars, A. L. (DEMO). Life-stage dif-
ferences in communication during marital conﬂicts.
Journal of Social & Personal Relationships, 5, 223–
245.{1g42fwefx}