Predicting Marital Happiness and Stability from Newlywed Interactions
Author(s): John DEMO Gottman, James Coan, Sybil Carrere, Catherine Swanson
Source: Journal of Marriage and the Family, Vol. 60, No. 1 (Feb., 1998), pp. 5-22
Published by: National Council on Family Relations
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/353438
Accessed: 26/06/2009 12:30
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms DEMO Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/DEMO/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. DEMO contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ncfr.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the DEMO copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted DEMO archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For DEMO information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
National Council on Family Relations DEMO collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Journal DEMO Marriage and the Family.
http://www.jstor.org
JOHN M. GOTTMAN, JAMES COAN, SYBIL CARRERE, AND
University of Washington
CATHERINE
SWANSON
Predicting
Marital Happiness and Stability
Newlywed Interactions
from
A study DEMO 130 newlywed couples was designed
to explore marital interaction processes that are
predictive of divorce or marital stability, processes
that further discriminate between happily and un-
happily married stable couples. We explore seven
types of process DEMO: (a) anger as a dangerous
emotion, (b) active listening, (c) negative affect
reciprocity, (d) negative start-up by the DEMO, (e)
de-escalation, (f) positive affect models, and (DEMO)
physiological soothing of the male. Support was
not found for the models of anger as a dangerous
emotion, active listening, or negative DEMO
reciprocity. Support was found for models of the
husband's rejecting his wife's influence, negative
start-up by the wife, a lack of DEMO of low
intensity negative wife affect by the husband, or a
DEMO of de-escalation of high intensity husband
negative affect by the wife, DEMO a lack ofphysiolog-
ical soothing of the male, all predicting divorce.
DEMO was found for a contingent positive affect
model and for balance models (i.e., ratio models)
of positive-to-negative affect predicting satisfac-
tion among DEMO couples. Divorce and stability
were predicted with 83% accuracy and satisfaction
with 80% accuracy.
Department of Psychology, Box 351525, University of
Washingon, Seattle, WA 98115 (johng@u.washington.edu).
Key Words: divorce, gender, interaction, DEMO, physiol-
ogy.
Journal
of Marriage
Recently some of our best scholars (e.g., Jacob-
son & Addis, 1993) have contended that marital
therapy has relapse rates so high that the entire
enterprise may be in DEMO state of crisis. Consistent
with these conclusions, the recent Consumer Re-
DEMO study of psychotherapy (Seligman, 1995)
also reported that marital therapy received the
lowest marks from psychotherapy consumers.
Marital therapy may be at DEMO impasse because it
is not based on a process model derived from
prospective longitudinal studies of what real cou-
ples do that predicts if DEMO marriages will wind
up happy and stable, unhappy and stable, or end
in divorce.
Differential longitudinal prediction of marital
satisfaction and stability may DEMO an essential step
that has been omitted in designing marital thera-
py. Building a process model of marriage using
this prediction approach could turn DEMO to be su-
perior to building an intervention by imagining
what target populations in trouble may need or by
imagining it according to some DEMO posi-
tion. What has happened in the field of marital
therapy is that a psychotherapy of marriage has
been constructed by extending methods of DEMO
chotherapy to the design of marital interventions,
instead of building a marital therapy from the way
people normally go about the process of DEMO
happily married. However, we should point out
that this is an DEMO This could be called
"the single theory assumption," which claims DEMO
the functioning, dysfunctioning, and repair of
marital relationships can be explained using one
and the Family 60 (February 1998): 5-22
5
6
theory. Alternatively, it might be the case that any
process, DEMO as active listening, might be a great
intervention, even if people don't naturally do it.
Thus, to use an analogy, it DEMO be the case that
more than one set of "orthopedic knowledge" is
necessary in marriage, one about the normally de-
veloping "bones" of marriage and another about
how to repair "broken bones" in DEMO We do
not think that this will be the case.
We attempt to build such a process model of
marriage. What processes ought to DEMO included
for investigation in building a process model? It
may be DEMO to simply describe what is
"dysfunctional" when a marriage is ailing. It may
be necessary to describe what is "functional"
when a marriage is working well. This may not be
redundant information.
"DYSFUNCTIONAL" DEMO OF
MARITAL PROCESSES
Two Models of Negative Affect: Anger
as a DEMO Emotion Versus
the "Four Horsemen"
The first set of processes DEMO what might be
called "the specificity of negativity hypothesis."
It DEMO the question of whether all negative
affects are equally corrosive in marriages. A per-
vasive model is that anger is destructive of mari-
tal DEMO For example, Hendrix (1988),
author of a bestselling book DEMO marriage, wrote in
a section titled "The Destructive Power of Anger":
Anger is destructive to a relationship, no matter
what its DEMO When anger is expressed, the per-
son on the receiving end DEMO the attack feels bru-
talized, whether or not there has been DEMO physi-
cal violence; the old brain does not distinguish
between choice DEMO weapons. Further, because of
the strange workings of the unconscious, the
person who unleashes the anger feels equally as-
saulted because on a DEMO level the old brain
perceives all action as inner-directed. (p. 147)DEMO
This view of anger also was expressed by Par-
rott and Parrott (1995), who have a chapter titled
"The Deadly Emotion of DEMO" They wrote:
It would be tough to find another emotion DEMO
has caused married couples more difficulty than
anger. Why do we get angry at the person we
love the most? Why do we allow ourselves to
get angry when we know in advance that we will
DEMO of Marriage and the Family
need to apologize? Why do we DEMO our voices
when it does no good? (p. 78)
In contrast, Winkler and Doherty (1983) re-
ported that, compared with DEMO couples in the
United States, Jewish Israeli couples did not asso-
DEMO the amount of anger expressed in their mari-
tal interaction with marital dissatisfaction.
Gottman and Krokoff (1989) reported that, al-
though anger was associated with lower concur-
rent marital satisfaction, it also was associated
with increases in marital satisfaction over time.
Gottman, Katz, and Hooven (1997) studied what
they called the "meta-emotion" philosophy of
parents-parents' emotional DEMO and
philosophies about anger and sadness. Parents'
meta-emotions about anger and sadness were re-
lated to the amount of coaching they did with
DEMO children, the way they taught their children a
new task, their child's regulatory physiology,
their child's ability to focus attention, and a vari-
ety of child developmental outcomes.
Furthermore, in two longitudinal studies,
Gottman (1994) reported that anger in marital in-
teraction DEMO not predict divorce, whereas four
processes that he called "The Four Horsemen of
the Apocalypse"-criticism, defensiveness, con-
tempt, and "stonewalling" (listener withdrawal)-
reliably did predict divorce. Subsequent research
added "belligerence," a behavior that is provoca-
tive and that challenges the spouse's power and
authority. (For example: "What can you do if I do
go drinking with Dave? What are you gonna do
about it?") The current study with newlywed cou-
ples contrasted these two models of marital dys-
function.
Affect, Power, and Gender
Here we also DEMO models that interface be-
tween affect and power. There are two models of
interest. The first we discuss as negative affect re-
ciprocity versus DEMO influence, and the sec-
ond we discuss as start-up-namely, who starts
the conflict discussion and how. We propose that
these processes are related DEMO that they suggest
the differential roles that husbands and wives play
in maintaining marital stability and happiness.
Negative reciprocity models and power. Using
observational DEMO of marital interaction, the most
reliable empirical discriminator between happy
and DEMO marriages across laboratories, within
the U.S. and cross-nationally (Germany, Holland,
Process Models of Marriage
and Spain) has been the negative affect reciproci-
ty model. (For a review, see Gottman, 1994.) If
one DEMO is negative (for example, angry), the
spouse is much more likely to be negative than he
or she usually would be. We DEMO distinguish
low-intensity negative affect reciprocity (sadness,
anger, whining, tension DEMO fear, domineering)
from high-intensity negative affect reciprocity
(contempt, defensiveness, or belligerence). This is
the first time this distinction has been DEMO, and
it is possible because of the design of the Specific
DEMO Coding System (Gottman, McCoy, &
Coan, 1996). This DEMO it possible to refine fur-
ther the negative affect reciprocity model by
breaking it into two types of hypotheses: negative
reciprocity in kind and escalating negativity. The
first sequence is a reciprocation in kind. Anger is
DEMO with anger, for example. This model suggests
that marriages deteriorate because DEMO cannot
"put the brakes on" or regulate the reciprocation
of negativity. These cycles of negativity charac-
terize ailing marriages; they do not characterize
marriages that are working well.
The second model is rapid escalation of DEMO
negativity in which any lower intensity negativity
like anger is met with an escalated negative affect
like belligerence, contempt, or defensiveness. We
recently DEMO discovered that in the study of vio-
lent marriages this latter pattern of the husband's
escalation of his wife's low-level negative affect
DEMO violent males' rejection of influence from
their wives (Coan, Gottman, Babcock, & Jacob-
son, in press). This interpretation of the DEMO
also was supported by a recent dissertation in our
laboratory by Rushe (1995). This form of the se-
quence of negative affect reciprocity operational-
izes the hypothesis into a specific gender pattern
that is primarily DEMO power, not affect. The hy-
pothesis is that marriages work to DEMO extent that
men accept influence from women. This pattern
of functional marriage is indexed by men who do
not escalate the low-intensity negative affect DEMO
women. Thus, it appears that issues of power
sharing are inherent DEMO part of the pattern of nega-
tive affect reciprocity. We believe that it is impor-
tant to distinguish these two models. One model
shows DEMO "affect dysregulation" in ailing mar-
riages (Hendrix, 1988; Markman, 1991). The
other suggests that dimensions of power need to
interface DEMO dimensions of affect to understand
how "dysfunctional" patterns work in ailing mar-
riages.
7
How conflict begins. This model, the negative
start-up model, is derived from of J. R. Patter-
son's writings about how coercive processes in
families start (e.g., Patterson, 1982). Start-up is
operationally defined as the escalation of conflict
from one partner's neutral DEMO to the other part-
ner's negative affect. We hypothesize a specific
gender pattern based on the female-
demand/male-withdraw pattern. (See Chris-
tensen & Heavey, 1990; Heavey, Christensen, &
Malamuth, 1995; Heavey, Christopher, & Chris-
tensen, 1993.) Women typically start most of DEMO
conflict discussions in laboratories that use obser-
vational methods (Ball, Cowan, & Cowan, 1995;
Oggins, Veroff, & Leber, 1993). A graph of mo-
ment-to-moment positive-minus-negative codes
using the Rapid Couples Interaction DEMO Sys-
tem found that the slope of these graphs was pre-
dictive a cascade toward divorce or marital stabil-
ity and happiness (Gottman & Levenson, 1992).
A quantitative analysis of the amount of negative
interaction minus the amount of positive interac-
tion during these conversations (Gottman, DEMO)
showed that for 96% of these interactions, if the
graphs DEMO in the first few minutes with a posi-
tive or a negative slope, they were not reversed.
In only 4% of the interactions was there a major
change in slope during the 15-minute interaction.
Hence, the way the interactions start may be criti-
cal in determining the couple'DEMO fate. The gen-
der-specific hypothesis here is that marriages
will work to the extent that women soften their
start-up by not escalating from neutral DEMO negative
affect.
The
Active Listening Model
PROCESSES
The most influential process theory of what is
functional in the context of the resolution of con-
DEMO in marriage may be called the active listening
model. This model also has been called a valida-
tion model (Gottman, Notarius, Gonso, & Mark-
man, 1978; Markman, Stanley, & Blumberg,
1994; DEMO & Markman, 1993) and a mirror-
ing model (Hendrix, 1988). It is the current way
of operationalizing empathy in marital interaction
DEMO a spectrum of perspectives, from the be-
havioral perspective (Jacobson & Margolin,
1979) to the psychoanalytic object-relations per-
spective (Siegel, 1992). This model forms the
basis of most complex multi-component marital
treatments (e.g., see Jacobson & Gurman, 1995).
"FUNCTIONAL"
MODELS
OF
MARITAL
8
In most marital therapies, the active listening
model is reflected in some form of what has come
to be known as the listener-speaker DEMO
(e.g., see Notarius & Markman, 1993). For exam-
ple, suppose the wife starts as the speaker, and the
husband is the listener. First, she is asked to state
her complaints directly to the husband. Suppose
she complains that she is hurt by the way he DEMO
lates to their youngest child. She hates the way he
ignores the boy and criticizes him. Then he is
asked to paraphrase, without defensiveness or
judgment, both the content and the feelings of his
wife's message and to check out his paraphrase.
Then he is asked to DEMO validate her
feelings. The hypothesis may be drawn that sta-
ble, DEMO marriages are characterized by such
exchanges during conflict resolution and that ail-
ing marriages are characterized by the absence of
these kind of exchanges. DEMO intellectual history
of this approach to marital therapy is from client-
centered therapy, adapted by Guerney for couples
(Guerey, 1982). However, DEMO is a conceptual
leap in Guerney's application of these ideas to the
marital arena. In client-centered therapy the client
is usually complaining about DEMO third person, and
the therapist is empathizing with the client against
DEMO third party. When the client complains about the
therapist, it is DEMO called "resistance." Yet in
the marital arena, the spouse, even though the tar-
get of these complaints, is expected to empathize
with her or his partner.
De-Escalation Models
The de-escalation model (Gottman, 1979) sug-
gests that what is important in functional relation-
ships is the DEMO of conflict, which in-
volves moving from one partner's negative DEMO
(either high or low intensity) to the other partner's
neutral affect. Gottman found that husbands in
happy marriages were the ones most DEMO to de-
escalate low-intensity negative affect, and
wives in happy marriages DEMO most likely to
de-escalate high-intensity negative affect.
Positive Affect Models
Another aspect of marital interaction that has re-
ceived scant attention are models of DEMO affect
(such as humor, affection, and interest) in predict-
ing the eventual fate of marriages. An exception
is Birchler, Weiss, and DEMO (1975), who used
a self-report diary measure of "pleases" DEMO "dis-
pleases," a precursor of the Spouse Observation
Journal of DEMO and the Family
Checklist, and a version of the Marital Interaction
DEMO System to code general conversation
when they supposedly were setting up the equip-
ment and the discussion of the Inventory of Mari-
tal Conflict (IMC; Olson & Ryder, 1970). In the
summary code of DEMO Marital Interaction Coding
System, the positive interactions were agreement,
approval, humor, assent, laugh, positive physical
contact, and smile. Distressed couples DEMO
an average of 1.49 positive interations per minute;
nondistressed couples produced an average of
1.93 positive interations per minute, a significant
difference. In the home environment, distressed
partners recorded significantly fewer pleasing
events and significantly greater displeasing events
than nondistressed partners did.
We are interested in two DEMO of the positive
affect model. One simply suggests that positive
affect will be randomly distributed throughout the
conflict, without any connection to other process-
es. This is a kind of noncontingent or good-will
positive affect model. DEMO second model of posi-
tive affect suggests that positive affect is used to
de-escalate marital conflict. It is in the service of
moving the DEMO affect from a negative to a less
negative (even a neutral DEMO) state. In this
contingent positive affect model, the underlying
or related purpose of the positive affect involves
de-escalation and possibly physiological soothing
of DEMO or partner (Gottman, 1990). This model
will be tested against the model of good-will pos-
itive affect, using structural equations modeling
in which the path coefficient between positive af-
fect and de-escalation will be DEMO across
newlyweds who eventually wound up in one of
three criterion groups: divorced, married but un-
happy, or married and happy.
Balance Models
One way of integrating negative and positive af-
fect models is to DEMO the importance of a bal-
ance of positive and negative affect. In these bal-
ance models, the couple maintains a set point of
the ratio of positivity to negativity that is func-
tional if it is DEMO or dysfunctional if it is low. The
balance models are not redundant because, for ex-
ample, if only a negativity model were validated,DEMO
it would suggest that a goal of marital therapy
ought to be declaring war on negative affect. Intu-
itively, such a conclusion seems absurd. A mar-
riage in which there is no negative affect and in
DEMO people were cheerful and positive all the
time would seem to be one version of Sartre's re-
Process Models of Marriage
lationship hell, one that is reminiscent of the film
The Stepford Wives in which suburban husbands
conspire to murder their DEMO and replace them
with cheerful robot copies. A balance model
would maintain that a marriage is like a stable,
predator-prey behavioral ecology, in which there
is a balance between the necessary predator of
negative affect DEMO the necessary prey of positive
affect. The ratio of pleases to displeases in Birch-
ler, Weiss, and Vincent's study (1975) also DEMO
criminated between the groups. (The ratio was
29.66 for nondistressed couples DEMO 4.30 for dis-
tressed couples.) We employed an observational
system that DEMO considerably more detail and
specificity than the Marital Interaction Coding
System of Birchler and colleagues obtained in the
realm of emotion, for both positive and negative
affect (Gottman, 1996). Hence, another form of
the positive affect model is the ratio model, which
suggests that what is important is the relative
amount of positive to negative affect. Gottman
(1994) reported that in three types of stable mar-
riages that he identified, the ratio of positive to
negative interaction during conflict resolution
was 5 to 1, whereas the ratio was .8 to 1 in unsta-
ble marriages.
The Potential Importance of Physiological
Soothing of the Male
Why might DEMO affect and de-escalation be
related to the relapse effect in marital therapy?
We propose that the link lies in the couple's abili-
DEMO to physiologically soothe self and partner. In
many marital therapies, partly DEMO the influ-
ence of Murray Bowen's work (for a review, see
Papero, 1995), the therapist soothes the couple so
that in the analysis of process they will rationally
examine their dysfunctional patterns of DEMO
tion. The hypothesis is that if the therapist plays
this role instead of the couple, relapse may be the
result. That is, we DEMO a good outcome for the
couple to the extent that they, DEMO, are
able to soothe self and partner.
There may be differences DEMO how important
this physiological soothing is according to gen-
der. Gottman and Levenson (1988) reviewed evi-
dence for the hypothesis that men and DEMO dif-
fer in their responses to negative affect in mar-
riage and in other close relationships. They
proposed that the research suggests that in DEMO cli-
mate of negative affect that pervades unhappy
marriages, men withdraw DEMO, and
women do not. Since their review appeared, there
9
has been considerable empirical support for this
contention, and it has been called the female-
demand/male-withdraw pattern by Christensen
and his associates (e.g., DEMO, 1987, 1988,
1990; see also Gottman, 1994, on DEMO criti-
cism and male stonewalling). There is also evi-
dence that babies do not socially reference their
unhappily married fathers but do continue DEMO so-
cially reference their unhappily married mothers
(Dickstein & Parke, 1988). The evidence for this
emotional withdrawal of the male in ailing DEMO
lies is so widely recognized that it has become the
subject of national conferences (e.g., the National
Conference on Men in Families in DEMO). Writers
have presumed that it is related to what has been
called "the absent father" and the widespread
abandonment of children by DEMO after divorce.
(See Griswold, 1993; Parke, 1996; Popenoe,
DEMO)
Gottman and Levenson (1988) hypothesized
that this gender difference is based, in part, on a
biological difference between the sexes. Their DEMO
pothesis was that men are in some ways more re-
active to stress than women, particularly in the
adrenergic parts of the cardiovascular system and
in the stress-related endocrine responses that ac-
company active coping, particularly the cate-
cholamines adrenaline and noradrenaline (Obrist,
1981). There is some evidence to suggest that this
difference is found physiologically (in the auto-
nomic nervous system and endocrine responses)
and in emotion-related behaviors. (For a review,
see Polefrone & Manuck, 1987.) Recent evidence
DEMO that this gender difference may be par-
ticularly pronounced in the vigilance-startle sys-
tem (McCarter & Levenson, 1996) and that there
is a greater male adrenergic-cardiovascular re-
sponse to acoustic startling in terms of the DEMO
tivity of the heart rate and vasoconstrictive re-
sponses.
Because of the aversive nature of diffuse auto-
nomic arousal, men may attempt to avoid nega-
tive affect in close relationships because it is
more physiologically punishing DEMO them than for
women. Gottman (1994) reported that, emotional-
ly, males are flooded by lower levels of negative
affect than females are. DEMO evaluate this hypothe-
sis, in the study presented here, variables related
to either partner's positive affect and to either
partner's de-escalation DEMO conflict were used as
events in interrupted time-series analyses of
heart-rate data collected synchronously with the
video time code. The extent to which the DEMO
of either spouse occurred then was assessed and
10
used as a predictor of marital outcome. The
Gottman-Levenson hypothesis would DEMO support-
ed only if the only predictors of marital outcomes
involved the physiological soothing of the male.
To summarize, we are asking questions about
what interactive processes are dysfunctional and
what are functional in the context DEMO a longitudi-
nal prediction study. We explore seven types of
models: (a) anger as the destructive emotion ver-
sus the Four Horsemen; (b) active listening; (c)
negative affect reciprocity: in kind (either low or
high intensity) and husband escalation (indexing
dimensions of DEMO and gender, specifically the
husband's refusal to accept influence); (d) nega-
tive start-up by the wife; (e) de-escalation: low in-
tensity by the husband or high intensity by the
wife; (DEMO) positive affect models: contingent, non-
contingent, and ratio; (g) physiological soothing
of the male. We will ask these questions in the
context of a representative sample of 130 newly-
weds from the Seattle DEMO We studied these 130
couples over a 6-year period in cohorts of approx-
imately 40 couples per cohort. Our follow-up pe-
riod has varied DEMO 3 to 6 years. There were 17
divorces in that time. We then took 20 compara-
ble couples with high marital satisfaction and 20
DEMO low marital satisfaction as comparison
groups.
METHOD
Participants
Between 1989 and 1992, we used a two-stage
sampling procedure to draw a sample of newly-
wed couples from the Puget Sound area in Wash-
ington. Couples initially DEMO recruited using
newspaper advertisements. To be eligible for the
study, the DEMO had to have married for the
first time within 6 months of participating in the
study, and they had to be childless. Couples were
contacted by phone and administered our tele-
phone version of the Marital DEMO Test
(MAT; Krokoff, 1987; Locke & Wallace, 1959)
DEMO surveyed to determine their eligibility on the
other criteria. The MAT measures marital satis-
faction. Higher scores represent higher marital
satisfaction. There were 179 DEMO couples
who met the research criteria and participated in
the initial survey phase of the study. In this phase,
husbands and wives separately DEMO mailed a set
of questionnaires to fill out that included mea-
sures of demographic characteristics and indices
about their marriage, well-being, and health.
DEMO of Marriage and the Family
In the second phase of the study, 130 newly-
wed couples who represented an even distribution
of marital satisfaction were invited to participate
in a marital interaction laboratory session and
complete DEMO questionnaires. These cou-
ples fit perfectly the demographic characteristics
of the major ethnic and racial groups in the
greater Seattle area, according to the Seattle City
Metropolitan Planning Commission Report. The
demographic characteristics for these newly DEMO
ried couples were: wife's age = 25.4 years (SD =
3.5); husband's age = 26.5 years (SD = 4.2);DEMO
wife's marital satisfaction = 120.4 (SD = 19.7);
husband's marital satisfaction = 115.9 (SD =
18.4).
Marital Status and Criterion Groups
Once each year, the marital status and satisfaction
of the 130 couples in the study were assessed. At
the end of the DEMO period (called Time 2 in this
article), there had been DEMO divorces-six in the
first cohort, six in the second, and five in the
third. The mean number of years married among
the divorced DEMO was 3 (SD = .79). The low-
est of each DEMO's Time-2 scores on the Locke-
Wallace marital satisfaction measure were used to
form two similarly sized criterion groups of stable
couples-the 20 most DEMO married and the 20
most unhappily married. The mean score of mari-
tal satisfaction at Time 2 of the stable, happily
married group was 128.30 (SD = 27.65), and the
mean score of marital satisfaction at Time 2 of
the stable and unhappily married group was 90.70
(SD = 16.08).
Procedures and Measures
Behavioral observation. Two remotely controlled
DEMO video cameras recorded both spouses during
the interaction sessions. The images from the two
cameras were combined in a split-screen image.
Microphones recorded the DEMO's audio interac-
tions. The computer synchronized physiological
data with video data by utilizing the elapse-time
codes imposed on the video recordings. The Spe-
DEMO Affect Coding System (SPAFF; Gottman,
McCoy, & Coan, 1996) was used to code the cou-
ples' conflict interactions. The system DEMO
specific affects expressed during the session of
problem resolution. SPAFF focuses solely on the
affects expressed. The system draws on facial ex-
pression (based on Ekman & Friesen's, 1978, sys-
tem of facial action DEMO), vocal tone, and
Process Models of Marriage
speech content to characterize the emotions dis-
played. DEMO categorized the affects displayed
using five positive codes (interest, validation, DEMO
fection, humor, joy), 10 negative codes (disgust,
contempt, belligerence, domineering, anger,
fear/tension, defensiveness, whining, sadness,
stonewalling), and a neutral affect code. Every
videotape was coded in DEMO entirety by two inde-
pendent observers using a computer-assisted cod-
ing system that automated the collection of timing
information. Each coder noted only the DEMO of
each code. A time-locked confusion matrix for
the entire videotape then was computed using a 1-
second window for determining agreement of
each DEMO in one observer's coding against all of
the other observers' DEMO (See Bakeman &
Gottman, 1986.) The diagonal versus the diago-
nal-plus-off-diagonal entries in these matrices
then were entered into a repeated measures DEMO
sis of variance using the method specified by
Wiggins (1977). DEMO computed the Cronbach al-
phas for each code as the ratio of the mean square
for observers minus the error mean square and the
DEMO square for observers plus the error mean
square. (See also Bakeman & Gottman, 1986.)
The Cronbach's alpha generalizability coeffi-
cients ranged DEMO .651 and .992 and aver-
aged .907 for the entire coding of all 130 video-
tapes.
Physiological measures. During the first year of
data DEMO, we measured physiological re-
sponses with polygraphs and a computer to DEMO
and store the physiological data. The electrocar-
diogram was collected, and DEMO intervals
were calculated as the time in milliseconds be-
tween consecutive R-waves. General somatic ac-
tivity was indexed by an electromechanical trans-
ducer under DEMO platform supporting each
spouse's chair.
Self-report of affect. After the marital interaction,
spouses viewed a videotape of it and were asked
to DEMO how they felt during the interaction.
They used a rating dial to provide a continuous
self-report measure of their emotional evaluation
of the marital DEMO
Questionnaires. We used the MAT (Locke-Wallace,
1959), as well DEMO our telephone version of the
MAT, which has strong psychometric properties
(Krokoff, 1987). The Couple's Problem Inventory
(CPI; Gottman, DEMO, & Notarius, 1977) was
filled out by the study participants DEMO prior to the
11
marital discussion of areas of disagreement dur-
ing the marital interaction phase of the study.
Couples used the inventory to DEMO the severity of
issues in their marriage. Items include areas of
standard marital problems such as in-laws, fi-
nances, and sex. Each item DEMO rated on a scale of
0-100. Higher scores signify that the problem is
considered more severe.
Laboratory Procedures
The marital interaction assessment consisted of DEMO
discussion by the husband and wife of a problem
that was a source of ongoing disagreement in
their marriage and two recall sessions in DEMO
the couples viewed their discussion of their mari-
tal disagreement. After the couple completed the
CPI, the experimenter reviewed with the couple
the issues they rated most problematic and helped
them to choose several to use DEMO the basis for the
discussion. After choosing the topics for the dis-
cussion, couples were asked to sit quietly and not
interact with each other during a 2-minute base-
line. The couples discussed their chosen topics DEMO
15 minutes and then viewed the video recording
of the interaction. In counterbalanced order, the
husband and wife first viewed and rated their own
affect during the discussion and then viewed and
rated their spouse's DEMO Both the husband and
wife used rating dials that provided continuous
self-report data. We collected continuous physio-
logical measures and video recordings during all
DEMO the interaction sessions, and data were aver-
aged over 1-second intervals.
DEMO way to operationalize the active listening
sequences would be to look for sequences in
which one partner expressed negative affect and
the other partner DEMO the negative affect. We
cast a wider net than this and examined all se-
quences in which one spouse first expressed low-
intensity or DEMO negative affect, and
this was then followed by either interest, affec-
tion, humor, or validation by the partner. Thus,
we searched DEMO sequences that might be even
partially reflective of active listening-for exam-
ple, a sequence in which one partner complains
and the other partner responds warmly, perhaps
not exactly with validation, but with a great deal
DEMO active interest, affection, or shared humor. By
low-intensity negative affect, DEMO mean the
SPAFF codes anger, sadness, whining, disgust,
tension DEMO fear, or stonewalling. The SPAFF
codes for high-intensity negative affect are DEMO
ligerence, contempt, or defensiveness. The higher-
12
intensity negative affect codes are more predic-
tive of divorce (Gottman, 1994). Negative affect
reciprocity models mean the reciprocation of neg-
ative affect in kind, either high intensity or low
intensity. The refusing-to-accept-influence mod-
els involved the escalation of the intensity of neg-
ative affect from DEMO partner's low-intensity neg-
ative affect to the other partner's high-intensity
negative affect. Negative start-up involved a se-
quence of one partner's DEMO affect to the
other's negative affect, either high or low DEMO
ty. De-escalation sequences involved the couple
moving from either low-intensity negative affect
to neutral affect or from high-intensity negative
affect to neutral affect. The DEMO affect models
involved either the amount of positive affect or
the ratio of positive affect to positive plus nega-
tive affect, all computed for one spouse.
To examine whether the positive affect events
or the de-escalation DEMO were related to
physiological soothing and whether, as predicted,
physiological DEMO involves primarily the
male, we used the heart rate data that DEMO time-
locked with the SPAFF codes. The analysis pro-
ceeded in two phases. First, we used interrupted
time-series analyses to assess whether or not a
particular positive affective event (interest, ex-
citement, affection, and DEMO by either spouse)
or a de-escalation event (by either spouse) result-
ed in a statistically significant reduction in
heart rate or a DEMO downturn in the
heart rate slope of either spouse. De-escalation
was defined as negative affect by one spouse, fol-
lowed immediately in the next second by neutral
affect from the partner. That neutral affect had to
DEMO for at least 5 seconds. The Crosbie computer
program was used for these time-locked interrupt-
ed time-series analyses (Crosbie, 1993). A con-
DEMO 5-second preevent interval and a constant 5-
second postevent interval was used for these anal-
yses. Next, we computed the number of
statistically significant soothing events, compared
with all such events in a couple's record. These
frequencies then were entered into a log-linear
analysis to predict which DEMO the three criterion
groups-divorced, stable and happy, or stable and
unhappy-a couple was in. These data can predict
marital outcomes in a number DEMO ways. Many
models are possible. However, the most interest-
ing model DEMO us involves hypotheses of the impor-
tance to marital outcomes of the physiological
soothing of the male because Gottman and Lev-
enson (1988) DEMO that it is the physio-
logical arousal of the male that is likely to be the
Journal of Marriage and the Family
most important DEMO of sequences of both
escalation of negative affect and emotional with-
drawal. This hypothesis suggests that marriages
will work to the extent that they DEMO for
soothing of the male. The soothing can imply
self-soothing, or DEMO can imply soothing of the male
by the female.
RESULTS
The analyses pursued two types of predictions: a
marital stability prediction in which we combined
the two stable groups (happy and unhappy) and
attempted to DEMO divorce or stability from their
Time-i marital interaction (taken in the DEMO 6
months of marriage), and a marital happiness pre-
diction, DEMO which, controlling for stability, the pre-
diction was to a couple's Time-2 marital happi-
ness or unhappiness (from their Time-i marital
interaction taken in the first 6 months of mar-
riage). For all DEMO, this procedure was fol-
lowed: A sequence first was examined that in-
dexed a particular process model. If the results
turned out to DEMO statistically significant, a covari-
ance analysis also was conducted, using the fre-
quency of the consequent code as the covariate.
This was a DEMO approach to the fundamental,
sequential connection question, "Was the conse-
quent more predictable from the antecedent than
its base rate of occurrence?" (Gottman & Roy,
1990). Without this test, it cannot be known if a
high joint frequency of occurrence was not due
DEMO to a high base rate of the consequent, or if
a DEMO joint frequency of occurrence is not due
simply to a low base rate of the consequent. How-
ever, not all laboratories agree that a covariance
analysis is the most meaningful way of analyzing
for sequential connection. DEMO example, the Ore-
gon Social Learning Center employs only sequen-
tial DEMO such as conditional probabilities be-
cause of the valid point that they are more clearly
interpretable. We present both analyses. Finally,
in our DEMO analysis we construct a path analytic
model that attempts to link several theoretical
process models to positive affect to determine if
the positive affect DEMO was contingent on or in-
dependent of other marital interaction processes.
This analysis attempted to fit the same model to
all three criterion groups DEMO then to compare the
same model across groups.
Table 1 is a summary of means of anger and of
high- and low-intensity negative affect DEMO the
SPAFF. Neither husband's nor wife's anger was
predictive of divorce, nor did it predictively dis-
Process Models of Marriage
TABLE 1. TEST OF THE MODEL OF ANGER DEMO
Variable
Husband anger
Wife anger
Husband low negativity
Wife low negativity
Husband high negativity
Wife high negativity
Note: Means
*p < .05. **
are
p < .01. ***p <
in seconds
Stable
17.88
23.30
54.45
72.20
70.68
60.58
.001.
Divorced
24.88
54.70
102.53
161.24
146.24
121.00
criminate between DEMO and unhappy stable
marriages. However, in the model based on the
DEMO Horsemen, both husband's and wife's high-
intensity negative affect, (the sum of belligerence,
defensiveness, and contempt) did predict divorce,
but did not predictively discriminate between
happy stable and unhappy stable DEMO The
wife's low-intensity negative affect-the sum of
whining, anger, sadness, domineering, disgust,
fear, and stonewalling-did predict divorce, but it
DEMO not predictively discriminate between happy
and unhappy stable marriages.
In the stability analyses, the active listening F
ratios for interest, affection, humor, DEMO valida-
tion following the expression of negative affect
by the partner were .06, .24, .12, and .00, respec-
tively, all nonsignificant. These sequences oc-
curred infrequently for all couples, totaling ap-
proximately 4 seconds out of 900. Using all four
variables in a discriminant function analysis, x2
(4) = 3.92, ns. In the satisfaction analyses, the DEMO
ratios were .77, .00, .02, and 3.92, respectively,
all nonsignificant. Using all four variables in a
discriminant function analysis, x2 (DEMO) = .32, ns.
These active listening exchanges hardly ever oc-
curred, and they were not predictive of differen-
tial marital outcomes.
Negative Reciprocity Models
Reciprocating negativity in kind: low-intensity
negative affect. Examining the reciprocation of
low-intensity negative affect, we found that the F
ratios for the stability analyses were 9.12, p =
.003, for the husband's reciprocation DEMO negativity
and 12.10, p = .001, for the wife's reciprocation
of negativity (both significant). The unstable cou-
ple engaged in these sequences an average of
10.65 and 11.59 seconds, whereas the stable cou-
ples engaged in these sequences an average of
4.09 and 3.95 seconds, respectively. We conduct-
ed a covariance analysis with the consequent as
the DEMO, and the F ratios became F(2,109) =
2.54, DEMO, for the husband's reciprocation of nega-
13
THE DESTRUCTIVE EMOTION DEMO MARRIAGES
F (1,55) Happy Unhappy F (1,38)
DEMO 17.30 18.45 .01
3.52 16.45 30.15 1.14
2.31 32.75 76.15 1.64
7.05** 45.70 98.70 .07
13.03*** 66.15 75.20 .22
6.76* 53.95 73.20 .93
tivity DEMO F(2,109) = 4.39, p = .038, for the DEMO's
reciprocation of negativity. Hence, in the first few
months of DEMO, wives in marriages that are
going to be unstable are more DEMO to reciprocate
low-intensity negative affect than wives in mar-
riages that are going to be stable. The respective
F ratios for the happiness analyses DEMO 5.81, p =
.0176, and 4.50, p = .0362. Conducting DEMO covari-
ance analysis with the consequent as the covari-
ate, however, we found that both F ratios became
nonsignificant, F(1,126) DEMO 3.85, p = .052, and
F(1,126) = 3.43, p = .066.
Reciprocating negativity in kind: high-intensity
negative affect. We examined the reciprocation of
high-intensity negative affect, and the F ratios for
the stability analyses were 8.03, p = .006, for the
husband's DEMO of high-intensity negativ-
ity and 4.88, p = .031, for the wife's reciprocation
of high-intensity negativity, both significant. The
unstable couples engaged in these sequences an
average of 22.65 and 16.06 seconds, whereas the
stable couples engaged in these sequences an av-
erage of 6.78 and DEMO seconds, for the husband's
and wife's reciprocation, respectively. Conduct-
ing a covariance analysis with the consequent as
the covariate, however, DEMO found that both F ra-
tios became nonsignificant, F(1,54) = 3.11, p =
.083, and F(1,54) = .45, ns. The respective F ra-
tios for the happiness analyses were .90, ns, and
1.64, ns, for the husband's and wife'DEMO reciproca-
tion, respectively. Hence, reciprocating high in-
tensity negativity in kind did not predict either
marital instability or unhappiness among the sta-
ble DEMO
In eight predictions, in the covariance analyses
only one and one DEMO anticipated-the wife's re-
ciprocation of low-intensity negative affect in
kind-was significant for the prediction of mari-
tal instability.
Refusing to accept influence: the escalation of neg-
ative affect models. For the stability analyses, the F
ratios were 17.40, p = .0001, for the husband reject-
14
ing influence from his wife, and 5.02, p = .029, for
the wife rejecting influence from her husband.
However, the covariance analyses yielded F(1,126)
= 10.53, p = .002, and DEMO(1,126) = .98, ns, respec-
tively. For the happiness DEMO, the F ratios
were .30, ns, and 1.18, ns, DEMO husbands and wives,
respectively. Hence, as expected, the evidence
shows that divorce was predicted only by the hus-
band's refusing to DEMO influence from his wife.
Negative Start-Up Model
The F ratios for stability were 6.83, p = .01, for
the husband's start-up and DEMO, p = .004, for the
wife's start-up. However, the DEMO analysis
revealed that F(1,126) = 1.03, ns, for DEMO husband's
start-up and F(1,126) = 10.81, p = .0001, for the
wife's start-up. Hence, as expected, there was evi-
dence only for the wife's start-up predicting di-
vorce. For DEMO happiness analyses, F ratios were
3.64, p = .059, and DEMO, ns, respectively. The co-
variance analyses for the marginally significant
effect revealed that F(1,109) = .08, ns, respectively.
De-Escalation Models
De-escalating low intensity negativity. The F ra-
tios for stability were 7.30, p = .009, for the hus-
band's de-escalation and 3.81, DEMO = .056, for the
wife's de-escalation. In the covariance analyses,DEMO
for the wife's de-escalation, F(1,126) = 1.35, DEMO,
but for the husband's de-escalation, F(1,126) =
6.47, p = .014. Hence, as expected, there was evi-
dence that the husband's de-escalation of low-
intensity negative affect predicts marital DEMO,
which is consistent with results reported by
Gottman (1979). DEMO the happiness analyses, the
F ratios were 2.69, ns, and DEMO, ns, respectively.
De-escalating high-intensity negative affect. The
second de-escalation sequence involved the cou-
ple moving from high-intensity negative affect to
neutral affect. The DEMO ratios for stability were 3.47,
p = .068, for the DEMO's de-escalation, and
2.53, ns, for the wife's de-escalation. DEMO F ratios
for the covariance analyses were 3.29, p = .072,DEMO
for the husband's de-escalation and 2.12, ns, for
the wife's de-escalation. The absence of a stability
effect for the wife's DEMO of high-
intensity negative affect is inconsistent with re-
sults reported by Gottman (1979). For the happi-
ness analyses, the F ratios DEMO .56, ns, and .07,
ns, respectively, and the discriminant function
was X2 (2) = .88, ns.
Journal of Marriage and the Family
Positive Affect Models
Next we examined positive affect. The amount DEMO
positive affect was significantly related to stabili-
ty, with F ratios DEMO, p = .008, for husband posi-
tive affect, and 7.64, p = .008, for wife positive
affect (stable husbands = 62.23 DEMO, unstable
husbands = 31.76 seconds; stable wives = 59.05
and unstable wives = 31.23 seconds), discrimi-
nant function x2 (2) = DEMO, p = .013. Positive af-
fect also was related to happiness, with F ratios
5.27, p = .027, for the husband's DEMO affect,
and 8.25, p = .007 for the wife's DEMO affect,
X2 (2) = 8.14,p = .017.
Positive-to-negative affect ratio model. We com-
puted the ratio of positive affect to the DEMO of
positive and negative affect for each wife and
husband. For the stability analyses, the F ratios
were 9.56, p = .003 for DEMO wife's ratio, and 9.96,
p = .003 for the DEMO's ratio, respectively, x2
(2) = 10.57, p = DEMO (M for stable husbands =
.42, unstable husbands = .16; DEMO for stable wives
= .38, unstable wives = .15.) For the happiness
analyses, the F ratios were 5.88, p = .020, and
1.61, ns, respectively, for husband and wife ra-
tios, with DEMO function %2 (2) = 5.36, p =
.069. (M for happy husbands = .49, unhappy hus-
bands = .36; M for DEMO wives = .48, unhappy
wives = .27.)
Contingent versus noncontingent DEMO affect
models. The analyses we conducted revealed that
positive affect was the only variable that predict-
ed marital stability and also was able to DEMO
nate between stable, happily married couples and
stable, unhappily married couples. To understand
the role of positive affect, we constructed a path
analytic model among the following variables:
positive affect, the sum of husband and wife bat-
'em-back sequences, the sum of husband and wife
DEMO sequences, and the sum of husband
and wife negative reciprocity sequences (combin-
ing reciprocity of low- and high-intensity nega-
tive affect).
The DEMO Figure 1 constructed, using the
Bentler computer program EQS (1989), was suc-
cessful in fitting the covariance matrices of all
three groups. DEMO the stable and happily married
group, X2 (1) = .35, p = .55, Bentler-Bonett
Normed Index (BBN) = .992, Comparative DEMO
Index (CFI) = 1.00; for the stable and unhappily
married DEMO, x2 (1) = .25, p = .62, BBN = DEMO,
CFI = 1.00, and for the divorced group, x2 (DEMO) =
Process Models of Marriage
FIGURE 1: COMPARISON OF PATH MODELS FOR THE STABLE AND HAPPILY MARRIED, THE
STABLE AND UNHAPPILY MARRIED, AND THE DEMO
STABLE,
HAPPY
STABLE,
UNHAPPY
DIVORCED
1. NEGATIVE
RECIPROCITY
.41 .41,32
15
16
FIGURE 2. PROBABILITY
SIGNIFICANTLY
THAT HUMOR BY WIFE
DECREASED HUSBAND'S DEMO RATE
.35-
.30-
.25-
^
,-
.
0c
.20-
.15-
.10-
DEMO
0
Happy
Unhappy
Divorced
.40, p = .53, BBN = .970, CFI = 1.00. We then
compared the models across all three groups. The
omnibus test showed that the path coefficients for
the three groups DEMO significantly different,
X2(11) = 22.87, p = .018. Testing specific path co-
efficients with cumulative multivariate statistics
showed that the paths DEMO variables 3 and 4
were significantly different across groups, as
were DEMO paths between 2 and 4 and between 2
and 3. (Model DEMO are available from
the author.) Only in the stable, happy group was
there a positive association between de-escalation
and positive affect (variables 3 and 4). In the
other two groups, the path coefficient was nega-
tive. The relationship between escalation (vari-
able 2, bat-'em-back) and positive affect (variable
4) was more negative in the stable, happy group
than in the stable, unhappy group and in the di-
vorced group. The relationship between escala-
tion (variable 2) and de-escalation (variable 3)
was stronger in the stable, happy group than in
the other two groups.
Strength of the Predictions
The same discriminant function DEMO, combin-
ing the models of start-up, high and low intensity
FIGURE 3. PROBABILITY
SIGNIFICANTLY
THAT DE-ESCALATION BY HUSBAND
DECREASED HUSBAND'S HEART RATE
DEMO
.30-
.........
.25-
............
.20- ........
15 .......1 ..
.10
.. .......
0
Happy
Unhappy
Divorced
Journal of Marriage and the Family
de-escalation, the Four Horsemen, and total posi-
tive affect, was employed in making DEMO
about both divorce and satisfaction. For the di-
vorce prediction, the DEMO correlation was
.69, with a correct stability-divorce prediction of
82.5%. For DEMO satisfaction prediction among the
stable couples, the canonical correlation was .60,DEMO
with a correct stability-divorce prediction of 80%.
The only one-tailed statistically significant
predictions of marital outcome involved the phys-
iological soothing of the male DEMO either the male
himself or by the female. The events that were in-
volved in this prediction were de-escalation by
the husband, G2 (DEMO) = 9.20, p < .01; humor by the
wife, G2 (2) = 3.80, p < .05; validation by the hus-
DEMO G2 (2) = 10.60, p < .01; affection by the hus-
band, G2 (2) = 8.10, p < .01. Figures DEMO summa-
rize these statistically significant predictions of
marital outcome obtained by the probabilities that
these positive events would result in significant
physiological soothing of DEMO male. Figure 2
shows that the probability that humor by the wife
significantly decreased the husband's heart rate
was significantly higher in couples DEMO eventual-
ly wound up stable and happy than in the other
two groups of couples. Figure 3 shows that the
probability that de-escalation by DEMO husband sig-
nificantly decreased his own heart rate was signif-
icantly higher in couples that eventually wound
up stable and happy than in the DEMO two groups
of couples. Figure 4 shows that the probability
that validation by the husband significantly de-
creased his heart rate was significantly higher DEMO
couples that eventually wound up stable and
happy than in the other two groups of couples.
Figure 5 shows that the probability that affection
DEMO the husband significantly decreased his heart
rate was significantly higher in couples who
eventually wound up stable and happy than in the
other two DEMO of couples.
The same discriminant function model was
employed in making predictions of both divorce
and satisfaction. For the divorce prediction, the
canonical correlation was .69, with a correct
stability-divorce prediction of 82.5%. For the
satisfaction prediction among the stable couples,
the canonical correlation was .60, with a correct
stability-divorce prediction of 80%.
DISCUSSION
Consistent with Gottman (1994), we found no ev-
idence in the study of newlyweds to support DEMO
model of anger as the destructive emotion in mar-
Process
Models
of
Marriage
FIGURE 4. PROBABILITY THAT VALIDATION BY HUSBAND
SIGNIFICANTLY
DEMO HUSBAND'S HEART RATE
.35
.30-.......................................................................
.25-...........
. 20--
-
.......
0
:
Happy
Unhappy
Divorced
riages.
the
and defensiveness
during
that
common
therapy,
marital
ential
We need to convey how shocked and surprised
we DEMO by these results for the active listening
model. We expected that the validation sequence
would predict positive outcomes in marriages.
We have recommended this DEMO
(Gottman, 1979; Gottman, 1994; Gottman, Notar-
ius, Gonso, & Markman, 1978). To deal with our
shock and surprise, DEMO conducted series of qual-
itative analyses on the data from this study and
from another longitudinal cohort we have been
following for 13 years. DEMO examined in detail
every videotape and transcript of every stable,
happy couple. It was not a big surprise to find that
couples were DEMO paraphrasing their spouses very
often. We also found that they were not summa-
rizing their partner's feelings (e.g., "Sounds like
this makes you pretty mad"), nor even summariz-
ing the content of their spouse's statements
("You'd like it if we saved more DEMO each
month"). Furthermore, they almost never validat-
ed their spouse's feelings (e.g., "I can understand
why this would make you upset"). Further exami-
nation of the validation code of the SPAFF re-
vealed that our observers were using our valida-
tion code exclusively DEMO what Duncan and Fiske
(1977) had called "listener backchannels." These
are the usual brief vocalizations, head nods, and
facial movements that DEMO to the speaker that
the listener is tracking.
Instead, in the DEMO analyses of process,
we found that there was a particular pattern of
Instead,
Gottman
conflict
the active
marital
we found
findings
were DEMO destructive
resolution.
listening
component
occurred
conflict
outcomes.
that
belligerence,
patterns
analyses
which
models
infrequently in the
and
of current
was not predictive
that
DEMO
contempt,
Our
model,
replicated
suggested
is the most
of marital
resolution
of differ-
of
17
models that predicted divorce. The pattern predic-
DEMO of divorce was negative start-up by the wife,
refusal of the husband to accept influence from
his wife, wife's reciprocation of low intensity
negativity in kind, and the absence of de-escalation
of low intensity negativity by the husband. The only
variable that predicted both marital stability DEMO
marital happiness among stable couples was the
amount of positive affect in the conflict. Through
path modeling, we found that only in couples who
eventually wound up stable and happy was this
positive affect contingent, acting in the service of
the de-escalation of negativity. Also, only in this
group, if couples refused to accept influence,
were they also likely to de-escalate. The relation-
ship between escalation (bat-'em-back) and posi-
DEMO affect was more negative in the stable and
happy group than in the stable and unhappy group
and in the divorced group. Furthermore, we found
support for the hypothesis that positive affect and
de-escalation are predictive DEMO positive outcomes
in the marriage to the extent that the positive affect
or de-escalation involved the physiological sooth-
ing of the male either by DEMO partner or himself.
We conclude that the marriages that wound up
happy and stable had a softened start-up by the
wife, that the husband accepted influence from
her, that he de-escalated low-intensity negative
affect, that DEMO was likely to use humor to effec-
tively soothe him, and DEMO he was likely to use
positive affect and de-escalation to effectively
soothe himself. The alternative to the active lis-
tening model suggested by these DEMO is a
model of gentleness, soothing, and de-escalation
of negativity (DEMO by one spouse is fol-
lowed by the partner's neutral affect). In contrast
to this gentle de-escalation and soothing, the ac-
tive listening model is a more confrontational
model in the sense that it DEMO people to be
able to be empathetic in the face of negative af-
fect directed at them by their spouses. Based on
FIGURE 5. DEMO THAT AFFECTION BY HUSBAND
SIGNIFICANTLY DECREASED HUSBAND'S HEART RATE
.40
.35 ......... ........................................................................
.30- ---Z - / /
o ''' ' A:'' ' -- - _ % -
Happy Divorced
a
18
our analyses, we are led to the hypothesis that the
active listening model may be expecting a form of
emotional gymnastics from people DEMO, at that
moment in that relationship, are somewhat emo-
tionally disabled by conflict. We found that even
couples in stable, happy marriages do not do this
active listening naturally. Active listening, al-
though it may make intuitive sense as a model of
empathy, may be misguided. After all, even in
client-centered, individual therapy, the client is
generally complaining about a third party, and the
therapist empathizes. In some senses, DEMO promi-
nent active listening model of marital therapy
may amount to a kind of celebration of conflict.
Hendrix (1988) has suggested that the DEMO lis-
tening model is the way to "understand one's
partner'DEMO inner world" (p. 118). The suggestion
often has been made in advice books that conflict
is, in fact, the road to DEMO in marriages. For
example, the subtitle of Wile's (1988) DEMO is
"How Conflict Can Improve Your Relationship."
Markman, Stanley, DEMO Blumberg (1994) suggest
that, because conflict is inevitable, managing con-
flict is an essential communication skill and that
the active listening model "may be very different
from the way you normally might do things, but
that's the point. Like any skill, these new sugges-
tions become easier with practice" (p. 9). Other
writers also have DEMO questions about how dif-
ficult active listening may be for couples in their
everyday lives in the midst of conflict (e.g., Wile,
DEMO; N. S. Jacobson, personal communication,
June 4, 1996).
DEMO generally negative results of our analyses
in the models of negative affect reciprocity in
kind show that negative affect reciprocity in kind
does not, in general, predict negative marital out-
comes. There was only evidence that in the first
few months of marriage the wife in a marriage
DEMO is going to be stable is more likely to recipro-
cate low-intensity negative affect than is the case
in a marriage that is going DEMO be unstable. This re-
sult was weak in terms of the size of the F ratio,
F(2,109) = 4.39, p DEMO .038. This means that, by
and large, it is characteristic of all marriages,
even happy, stable ones, for people to reciprocate
DEMO negativity, even high intensity negativity. In
happy and stable marriages husbands DEMO de-esca-
late low intensity negativity, but wives do not,
and DEMO one does so when the negativity escalates,
even in happy, DEMO marriages. This suggests
that, for the most part, there is not much of a
brake in most marriages once negativity begins. I-
statements DEMO have been characteristic of the
Journal of Marriage and the Family
therapeutic use of the active listening model. At
the outset of the complaint-validation DEMO,
clients are admonished to state their complaints in
terms of what they want, instead of the partner's
failing. Wile (1995) wrote:
It is impossible to make "I-statements" when
you are in DEMO "hating-my-partner, wanting-re-
venge, feeling-stung-and-needing-to-sting-back"
state of mind. At such DEMO moment you cannot re-
member what an "I-statement" and, frankly,DEMO
you do not care. (p. 2)
But this is precisely DEMO therapists have sug-
gested that making I-statements, being nondefen-
sive, being empathetic, and paraphrasing one's
partner are necessary. They are unnecessary when
things are going well.
The findings in these data suggest that nega-
DEMO affect reciprocity in kind, because it is so
characteristic of all DEMO, may be something
that therapists can afford to ignore. It is DEMO the
problem. The problem, our data suggest, is the es-
calation of negativity and only by the husband,
which we believe is DEMO index of the husband's re-
fusal to accept influence from his wife. We are
quite confident that this sequence indexes this
process. Our DEMO comes from a detailed
observational analysis of transactions of power
and influence in a recent dissertation on violent
couples in our laboratory by Regina DEMO (1995)
and a subsequent analysis of the same sequence in
DEMO same couples. We are, however, planning to
code this pattern of rejecting and accepting influ-
ence directly with a new observational coding
system, but the process will take several years to
complete.
If we assume DEMO this sequence is, in fact, an
index of the refusal of some husbands to share
power with their wives by rejecting the demands
DEMO makes, then the issue in therapy becomes not
one of getting DEMO couple to apply the brake in the
face of negative affect reciprocity, but in getting
husbands to share power with their wives. Usual-
ly the wife brings marital issues to the table for
discussion, and she usually brings a detailed anal-
ysis of the conditions in which this DEMO oc-
curs, its history, and suggestions for a solution.
Some men, those whose marriages wind up stable
and happy, accept influence from DEMO wives, and
some do not. Most sociological analyses of mar-
riage DEMO the loss of power that men have
experienced in the last 40 years with the loss of
the breadwinner role and with women's DEMO
gence in the workplace (e.g., Schwartz, 1994).
is,
Process Models of Marriage
Women not only work but tend to have DEMO as
meaningful to them as their husbands' careers, al-
beit they are earning a fraction of what men earn
for the same work. DEMO data suggest that only
newlywed men who accept influence from their
wives are winding up in happy and stable mar-
riages.
We conducted exploratory DEMO of the cor-
relates of the husband's rejection of influence
from the wife. These analyses capitalize on
chance, and we need to be cautious about accept-
ing these results. The preliminary results suggest
that the DEMO's rejection of influence from his
wife is unrelated to the husband's age, income,
occupation, or educational level. However, we
found that the husbands who are more likely to
reject influence from their DEMO are high on the
MMPI hostility subscale (which assesses suspi-
cious DEMO), are smokers, are more likely to
regularly use cocaine, were rated by observers as
dominating their wives in the discussion in our
DEMO history interview, make the major decisions
in the family, have suffered financial or emotional
hardships in the marriage, are physically shorter,
report being healthier, and are more physically
active in one-on-one competitive sports than men
who accept influence from their wives.
The data suggest that, though asymmetric,
gender roles during conflict resolution are a two-
way street. DEMO newlywed women who are able
to soften their start-up of conflict wind up in
happy and stable marriages. The view recom-
mends a model DEMO marital therapy based on gen-
tleness, on a softened start-up by DEMO wife, on the
male's acceptance of influence, of de-escalation
of low intensity negativity by the male, high ra-
tios of positivity to negativity, and the use of pos-
itive affect by both partners to de-escalate conflict
and to physiologically soothe the male. Perhaps
these approaches to DEMO represent a psycho-
logically less costly approach than approaches
currently taught to distressed couples, and per-
haps this less costly approach to conflict is less
likely to relapse after treatment.
We need to comment on the DEMO of physio-
logically soothing the male in marriages that turn
out to be stable and happy. Although there is evi-
dence for the Gottman-Levenson DEMO,
there is also evidence that distressed marriages
and high levels of marital conflict are chronically
and diffusely physiologically arousing for
women, as well as for men (Gottman, 1990;
Gottman & Levenson, 1992), that this arousal is
especially marked for women in battering mar-
19
DEMO (Jacobson, Gottman, Waltz, Rushe, & Bab-
cock, 1994), and that this arousal is predictive of
the illness of women (Gottman, 1994). For both
newlywed men and women, marital conflict also
DEMO associated with reduced serum prolactin and
higher levels of the stress-related hormones,
epinephrine, norepinephrine, ACTH, and growth
hormone, but not cortisol (Malarkey, Kiecolt-
Glaser, Pearl, & Glaser, 1994), and associated
DEMO the suppression of the immune system
(Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1993). Marital separation is
associated with even greater immuno-suppression
in women than in DEMO (Kiecolt-Glaser et al.,
1987, 1988). Also, Gottman (1994) reported that
a spouse's contempt was predictive of increased
infectious illness for women, but not for men. The
relationship between marital conflict and illness
for men, but not for women, was mediated
through loneliness. DEMO conflict, peripheral
autonomic physiology, cardiovascular reactivity,
the endocrine system, DEMO immune system, and ill-
ness all are associated in similar and DEMO
ways for men and women, and the final assess-
ment is DEMO yet in. It is likely that the biological,
stress-related response of men is more rapid and
recovery is slower than that of women, and that
this response is related to the greater emotional
withdrawal of DEMO than women in distressed fam-
ilies. Levenson, Carstensen, and Gottman (DEMO)
suggested that the general psychophysiological
finding of men's greater awareness of their car-
diovascular physiology may imply that men are
more likely DEMO women to look at their bodily
cues for signs of emotion, DEMO women are
more likely than men to look at the social envi-
ronment. Hence, men are more likely than women
to withdraw when aroused physiologically. How-
ever, it is likely that physiological soothing (by
self DEMO partner) of both spouses will turn out to
be an important DEMO of marital therapy.
Many prominent writers on marital therapy
have proposed ways of having the therapy do the
work of softening confrontation in marriages. DEMO
example, Hendrix (1988) has suggested that mari-
tal hostility is DEMO the result of "childhood
wounds," and he speaks of training DEMO to
"develop an X-ray vision" that allows them to see
the wounds behind the hostility. This approach is
likely to help soften the DEMO's response to hos-
tility when the therapist is present and can help
reframe a perceived attack as the result of an un-
resolved DEMO Hendrix even has suggested that
one task of marriage is to heal childhood wounds.
This view is consistent with object relations theo-
20
ry, which also sees marital hostility as primarily
the result of projective identification. Other mari-
tal therapies have provided similar mechanisms of
softening DEMO from within the thera-
py. Johnson and Greenberg's (1988) "DEMO
focused" therapy, which is based on attachment
theory, views marital DEMO as the result of an
"underlying" insecurity. The therapist helps the
couple reframe hostility in the context of what
they call the more "vulnerable" emotions. In this
way, anger and contempt are reframed as DEMO re-
sult of an emotion that is probably easier for the
partner to be empathetic to, namely the spouse's
fear. In an examination of who profits most from
this therapy, Johnson and Greenberg suggested
that it is couples who are able to soften their com-
plaints. In DEMO, the term "softening" for changing
the hardness of the confrontation DEMO be at-
tributed to them (p. 188). In a recent DEMO of a
new integrative therapy, Jacobson and Chris-
tensen (1996) DEMO an "acceptance" therapy
based on helping partners accept their spouses as
they are, instead of demanding change, although
they suggest that, paradoxically, acceptance is
also the basis for obtaining behavior change. The
therapy also includes a set of techniques for the
therapist to reduce direct confrontation DEMO refram-
ing the "harder" emotions (anger, hostility) as the
"softer" emotions (fear, sadness).
Thus, these therapies are, to some degree,
proposing mechanisms that appear to be aimed at
producing DEMO similar to what the newlyweds
in this study who wound up in stable, happy mar-
riages do. Some things may be hard to reprogram,
however. For example, it seems unlikely that cou-
ples will be able to follow an admonition to in-
crease the amount of positive DEMO in the service
of de-escalation. Interest, humor, and affection
need to occur naturally, particularly in the context
of conflict resolution. The admonition to be funny
or to enjoy a partner's attempts at humor are
DEMO self-destructive mechanisms.
Of course, we need to raise again the caveat
DEMO it is not logical that, to be effective, therapeu-
tic interventions for ailing marriages need to be
based on an empirical analysis of DEMO naturally
occurs in well-functioning marriages. There could
be two kinds of lawful relationships, one for mar-
riages that function well and another for mar-
riages that were ailing but then are repaired. We
do not think DEMO this will turn out to be the case.
In our view, DEMO is needed is an empirically
based theory of how positive processes are con-
nected in marriages that are functioning well-
Journal of Marriage and DEMO Family
how they are established and maintained. A po-
tentially profitable avenue of investigation would
involve asking what is the etiology of the dys-
DEMO patterns predictive of divorce in these
data, such as the wife'DEMO negative start-up and the
husband's refusing to accept influence. We ex-
pect that the answers to both questions are found
in patterns of DEMO engagement and respon-
siveness during everyday interaction. Negative
wife start-up may be an escalated complaint, and
it may be escalated because the lower intensity
complaint was previously ignored by her husband
in the nonconflict context. Hence, we predict that
engagement and responsiveness in neutral affec-
tive contexts and DEMO and responsiveness
to both positive and negative affect in nonconflict
contexts will predict both the wife's negative hard
start-up and the husband's DEMO to accept her
influence. To investigate this, we constructed an
apartment DEMO where couples lived for 24
hours (and were videotaped for 12 DEMO) and
were instructed to act as they normally would at
home. DEMO subsample of 50 newlywed couples from
this study went through this procedure. Currently,
we are coding the 600 hours of videotape from
this DEMO of the study to assess whether engage-
ment and responsiveness during interactions in
these nonconflict contexts are related to the pat-
terns of conflict DEMO that we now have
identified.
If we are right, then the DEMO are that
marital therapy needs to do two things. First, it
DEMO to abandon the active listening model in
favor of a model of increased softening and gen-
tleness in start-up, de-escalating, changing the
balance DEMO power in favor of the husband's in-
creased acceptance of influence from his wife,
and increasing physiological soothing (by self and
partner). Second, it also may need to find ways of
working with the couple's patterns of emotional
engagement and responsiveness in contexts other
DEMO conflict resolution, as well as changing the
way couples resolve disagreements, which ap-
pears to be the sole preoccupation of all extant
marital
DEMO
REFERENCES
Ball,
F. L. J.,
got the power?
ception
discussions.
Bakeman,
tion: An introduction
York:
Cowan,
Gender
of influence
Family
R., &
Cambridge
P., & Cowan,
differences
during
Process,
J. (1986).
to sequential analysis. New
University
C.
in partner's
marital
34, 303-321.
Observing
Press.
P. (1995).
per-
DEMO
interac-
Who's
Gottman,
Process Models of Marriage
Bentler, P. M. (1989). EQS: Structural equations pro-
gram manual. Los Angeles: BMDP Statistical Soft-
ware.
Birchler, DEMO R., Weiss, R. L., & Vincent, J. P. (1975)DEMO
Multimethod analysis of social reinforcement ex-
change between maritally distressed and nondis-
tressed spouse and stranger dyads. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 31, 349-360.
Christensen, A., & Heavey, C. L. (1990). Gender and
social structure in the demand/withdraw pattern of
marital conflict. DEMO of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59, 73-82.
Christensen, A. (1987). Detection of conflict patterns in
couples. In K. Hahlweg & M. DEMO Goldstein (Eds.), Un-
derstanding major mental disorder: The contribution
of family interaction research (pp. 250-265). New
York: Family Process Press.
DEMO, A. (1988). Dysfunctional interaction pat-
terns in couples. In P. Noller & M. A. Fitzpatrick
(Eds.), Perspectives on marital interaction (DEMO 31-
52). Avon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Christensen, A. (1990). Gender and social structure in
the demand/withdrawal pattern of marital DEMO
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
73-81.
Coan, J., Gottman, J., Babcock, J. & Jacobson, N. (in
press)DEMO Battering and the male rejection of influence
from women. Aggressive Behavior.
Crosbie, J. (1993). Interrupted time-series analysis with
brief single subject data. DEMO of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 61, 966-974.
Dickstein, S. & DEMO, R. D. (1988). Social referencing
in infancy: A glance DEMO fathers and marriage. Child
Development, 59, 506-511.
Duncan, S. D. DEMO, & Fiske, D. W. (1977). Face-to-face
interaction: Research methods and theory. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. (1978). The Facial Action
Coding System. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psycholo-
gists' Press.
Gottman, J. (1979). Marital interaction: Experimental
DEMO New York: Academic Press.
Gottman, J. (1990). How marriages DEMO In G. R.
Patterson (Ed.) New directions in family research:
Depression and aggression. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J. M. (1994)DEMO What predicts divorce? Hills-
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gottman, J. M. (1994). Why marriages succeed or fail.
New York: DEMO & Schuster.
Gottman, J. M. (Ed.) (1996). What predicts divorce?:
The measures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J. M., Katz, L. F., & Hooven, C. (1997).
Meta-emotion. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J. M., & Krokoff, L. J. (1989). The relation-
ship between marital interaction and marital satisfac-
tion: A longitudinal view. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 57, 47-52.
Gottman, J. M. & Levenson, R. W. (1988). The social
psychophysiology DEMO marriage. In P. Noller & M. A.
Fitzpatrick (Eds.), Perspectives DEMO marital interaction
(pp. 182-200). Philadelphia: Multilingual matters.
Gottman, J. DEMO & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital pro-
cesses predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, phys-
iology, and health. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63, 221-233.
21
Gottman, J. M., Markman, H., & Notarius, C. (1977).
The topography of marital conflict: DEMO sequential anal-
ysis of verbal and nonverbal behavior. Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 39, 461-477.
Gottman, J. M., McCoy, K. & Coan, J. (1996). The Spe-
cific Affect Coding System. In DEMO (Ed.), What
predicts divorce? The measures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Gottman, J. M., Notarius, C., Gonso, J., & DEMO, H.
(1978). A couple's guide to communication. Cham-
paign, IL: Research Press.
Gottman, J. M., & Roy, A. K. (1990). Sequential analy-
sis: A guide for behavioral researchers. New DEMO:
Cambridge University Press.
Giswold, R. L. (1993). Fatherhood in America. New
York: Basic Books.
Guerney, B. (1982). Relationship enhancement. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Heavey, C. L., Christensen, A., & Malamuth, N. M.
(1995). The longitudinal impact of demand and with-
DEMO during marital conflict. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 63, 797-801.
Heavey, C. L., Christopher, L., & Christensen, A.
(1993)DEMO Gender and conflict structure in marital inter-
action: A replication and DEMO Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 16-27.
Hendrix, DEMO (1988). Getting the love you want: A guide
for couples. New York: Henry Holt & Co.
Jacobson, N. S., & Addis, M. E. (1993). Research on
couples and couple therapy. What DEMO we know?
Where are we going? Journal of Consulting and DEMO
ical Psychology, 61, 85-93.
Jacobson, N. S., & Christensen, DEMO (1996). Integrative
couple therapy: Promoting acceptance and change.
New York: W.W. Norton.
Jacobson, N. S., Gottman, J. M., Waltz, DEMO, Rushe, R., &
Babcock, J. (1994). Affect, DEMO content, and psy-
chophysiology in the arguments of couples with a DEMO
olent husband. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psy-
chology. 62, 982-988.
DEMO, N. S., & Gurman, A. S. (1995). Clinical
handbook of couple therapy. New York: Guilford.
Jacobson, N. S., & Margolin, G. (1979). Marital
therapy. New York: Brunner-Mazel.
Johnson, S. DEMO, & Greenberg, L. S. (1988). Emotionally
focused therapy for DEMO New York: Guilford.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Malarkey, W. B., DEMO, M. A., &
Newton, T. (1993). Negative behavior DEMO marital
conflict is associated with immunological down-
regulation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 55, 395-409.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Fisher, B. S., Ogrocki, P., DEMO,
J. C., Speicher, C. E., & Glaser, R. (DEMO). Marital
quality, marital disruption, and immune function.
Psychosomatic Medicine, DEMO, 13-33.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Kennedy, S., Malkoff, S., DEMO,
L., Speicher, C. E., & Glaser, R. (1988)DEMO Marital dis-
cord and immunity in males. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 50, 213-229.
Krokoff, L. (1987). Anatomy of negative affect in
working-class marriages. DEMO Abstracts In-
ternational, 45,7A. (University Microfilms No. 84-22
109).
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., & Gottman, J. M.
(1994). Influence of age and gender on affect, physi-
ology, and their interrelations: A study of long-term
22
marriages. Journal of Personality & Social Psycholo-
gy, 67, 56-68.
DEMO, H. J., & Wallace, K. M. (1959). Short marital ad-
justment and prediction tests: Their reliability and va-
lidity. Marriage and Family Living, 21, 251-255.
Malarkey, W. B., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Pearl, D., &
Glaser, R. (1994). Hostile behavior DEMO marital
conflict alters pituitary and adrenal hormones. Psy-
chosomatic Medicine, 56, 41-51.
Markman, H. J. (1991). Constructive marital conflict is
NOT DEMO oxymoron. Behavioral Assessment, 13, 83-
96.
Markman, H., Stanley, DEMO, & Blumberg, S. L. (1994).
Fighting for your marriage. DEMO Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
McCarter, L. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1996, October).
Sex differences in physiological reactivity to the
acoustic DEMO Paper presented at the Society for
Psychophysiological Research, Vancouver, Canada.
Notarius, C., & Markman, H. (1993). We can work it
DEMO: Making sense of marital conflict. New York:
Putnam.
Obrist, P. (1981). Cardiovascular psychophysiology.
New York: Plenum.
Oggins, J., Veroff, J., & Leber, D. (1993). Perceptions
of marital interaction among Black and White newly-
weds. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
DEMO,494-511.
Olson, D. H., & Ryder, R. G. (1970). Inventory of Mari-
tal Conflicts (IMC): An experimental interaction pro-
cedure. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 32, 443-
448.
Papero, D. V. (1995). Bowen family systems and mar-
riage. In N. S. Jacobson & A. S. Gurman (Eds.), Clin-
ical handbook of couple therapy (pp. 11-30). New
York: Guilford.
Journal of Marriage and DEMO Family
Parke, R. D. (1996). Fatherhood. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Parrott, L., & Parrott, L. (1995). DEMO soul mates:
Cultivating spiritual intimacy in the early years of
marriage. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing
House.
Patterson, J. R. (1982)DEMO Coercive family process. Eu-
gene, OR: Castalia.
Polefrone, J. M., & Manuck, S. B. (1987). Gender dif-
ferences in cardiovascular DEMO neuroendocrine re-
sponse to stressors. In R. C. Barett, L. Biener, &
G. K. Baruch (Eds.), Gender and stress pp. 13-38.
DEMO York: The Free Press.
Popenoe, D. (1996). Life without DEMO New York:
Free Press.
Rushe, R. (1995). Tactics of power and influence in vio-
lent marriages. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University DEMO Washington, Seattle.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). The effectiveness DEMO psy-
chotherapy: The Consumer Reports study. American
Psychologist, 50, 965-974.
DEMO, J. (1992). Repairing intimacy: An object rela-
tions approach DEMO couples therapy. Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.
Schwartz, P. (1994)DEMO Peer marriage. New York: The
Free Press.
Wiggins, J. (1977)DEMO Personality and prediction. New
York: Addison-Wesley.
Wile, D. B. (1988)DEMO After the honeymoon: How conflict
can improve your relationship. New York: Wiley.
Wile, D. B. (1995). After the fight: A night in the life of
a couple. New York: Guilford.
Winkler, I., & Doherty, W. J. (1983). Communication
styles and marital satisfaction DEMO Israeli and American
couples. Family Process, 22, 229-237.
We've Expanded Our Product Line!
Historical
Communities
J.cq-oi-oJ:oo Jacqueline
Regardless
identification,
adaptive
DEMO 60 ill.
94V3 NCRMember
The Intentional Family:
World (B)
DEMO Dohey
Dr. Doherty offers proven str
amidst t.day's huriedandr
families drift toward a I
sat'egies beco.i
for
rituals. Ta
Fathr's'1
DEMO
(V)
Jones
of their divergent
American families
strategies
in their
DEMO Families
andJustice
in Dist-ressed
collective histories, and their Resources:
in DEMO conr
struggles
$39.95
How s
the d
Over
150 products-39
*
* Children,
* Divorce & Families * Family Life Education *
* DEMO,
*
& Families
to resist
NCFR
uProudly Announces
Its Latest Collection
of Family Resources.
i
NEW
items-arranged by topic:
Adolescents,
Aging,DEMO
Therapy
& Families * Policy
& Families
*
& Families * Diversity &
Grief, Death, & Loss * Health & Families *
& Families * Relationships,
Violence & Families * Work & Families ?
Families ?
Obtain
yourfree copy of our 39-page Catalog.
Special discount
prices
for NCFR members.
National
3989 Central
Minneapolis, MN 55421
Free: 888-781-9331 DEMO Phone:
NCFR FAX: 612-781-9348 * E-mail:
NCFR
Visit
Council
DEMO Family
Ave. NE, Suite 550
Relations
our Website
612-781-9331
at www.ncfr.com
DEMO
ncfr3989@ncfr.com
JMF298
raio
Marriage,{1g42fwefx}