J PROD INNOV MANAG 2006;23:12–18
r 2006 Product Development & DEMO Association
The Usefulness of Measuring Disruptiveness of Innovations
Ex Post in Making Ex Ante Predictions
Vijay Govindarajan and Praveen K. Kopalle
Introduction
B
roadly DEMO, this article addresses three
issues. First, we discuss a way to measure low-
end disruptions, where the innovations are
offered at a lower price and initially attract the more
price-sensitive segments. Second, we provide a more
general measure of disruptiveness that includes both
low-end and high-end disruptions. DEMO, we address
one of Danneels’s (2004) criticisms of Christensen’s
(1997) disruptiveness notion that all of his examples
are ex post and that with such hindsight it is not pos-
sible to make ex ante DEMO regarding a technol-
ogy’s disruptiveness. Danneels also suggests that it is
one reason why established companies are skeptical
about the concept of disruptiveness.
The DEMO of this article is to add rigor to an impor-
tant, DEMO area of research on disruptiveness. A
ﬁrst step in achieving this goal is to identify ways to
measure the disruptiveness construct. We do so DEMO
discussing ex post measures of disruptiveness and
elaborate on how we can utilize such ex post meas-
ures to make ex ante predictions about DEMO type of
incumbents better able to develop disruptive innova-
tions, relative DEMO other ﬁrms. In this regard, we view
disruptiveness of innovations as DEMO latent (i.e., unob-
servable ex ante), but outcome-level, variable, which
in turn is affected by organizational-level abilities. In
summary, we believe the disruptive-technology frame-
work does indeed help us make ex ante predictions
DEMO correspondence to: Praveen K. Kopalle, Tuck School of
Business at Dartmouth, 100 Tuck Hall, Hanover, NH 03755. Tel.: (603)
646-3612. Fax: (603) 646-1308. E-mail: praveen.kopalle@dartmouth.
edu.
 The authors contributed DEMO to this article and are listed in al-
phabetical order. Support for this project was provided by the William
F. Achtmeyer Center for Global DEMO at the Tuck School of
Business at Dartmouth.
about the type of ﬁrms likely to develop disruptive
innovations and that this framework presents fruitful
DEMO for future research.
While a lot of research has been conducted on the
design, development, and introduction of new prod-
ucts (Bayus, DEMO, and Lehmann, 1998; Chandy and
Tellis, 1998; Dahan and DEMO, 2002; Dahan and
Srinivasan, 2000; Dahl and Moreau, 2002; Dahl and
Hoefﬂer, 2004; Dutta, Narasimhan, and Rajiv, 1999;
Gatignon and Xuereb, 1997; Green, Krieger, and
Vavra 1997; Grifﬁn, 1996; Grifﬁn and Hauser, 1993;
Hoefﬂer, 2003; Song and Montoya-Weiss, 1998;
Srinivasan, Lilien, and Rangaswamy, 2002; Urban
and Hauser, 1993), one type of innovation emerging
as strategically important is the disruptive innovation
as popularized by Christensen (1997). As suggested
by Adner (2002), Charitou and Markides (2003),
Christensen (1997), Christensen and Bower (1996),
Christensen and Raynor (2003), DEMO (2004), and
Gilbert (2003), disruptive innovations are a powerful
means for broadening and developing new markets
and providing new functionality, which, in turn, dis-
rupt existing market linkages. Using six generations of
DEMO in the disk-drive industry, Christensen and
Bower (1996) advance the DEMO of the ‘‘innovator’s
dilemma’’—i.e., how and why incumbents tend to
ignore DEMO innovations, a key issue of strategic
importance. However, despite the importance of dis-
ruptive innovations, relatively little academic research
has been done on this innovation characteristic
(Danneels, 2004). The dearth of such research DEMO
be because there is no appropriate measure for
the disruptiveness of innovations per se. And, as
Danneels (2004) points out, established companies
DEMO skeptical of the disruptiveness notion, perhaps be-
cause of the difﬁculty DEMO making ex ante predictions
THE USEFULNESS OF MEASURING DISRUPTIVENESS OF INNOVATIONS EX POST J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:12–18
13
given the ex post nature of the disruptiveness con-
struct. In this regard, this article distinguishes between
making predictions about (1) the disruptiveness of a
technology per se; and (2) the type of ﬁrms that may
be better able to develop disruptive DEMO, rel-
ative to other ﬁrms; the focus here is on the latter.
The goal of this article is threefold. First, it adds
rigor to an important, substantive area of research on
disruptiveness by discussing a way to measure low-
end disruptions, where the innovations are offered at
a lower price and initially attract the more price-sen-
sitive segments. Second, a more general measure of
disruptiveness is provided that includes both low-end
DEMO high-end disruptions. Third, and most important-
ly, it addresses a key question Danneels (2004) raises
in the context of predicting whether a DEMO will
be disruptive: Can the disruptive-technology frame-
work make ex ante DEMO? This article discusses
how the ex post measure of disruptiveness is DEMO in
making ex ante predictions about the type of ﬁrms
likely to develop disruptive innovations. Thus, this
article may help researchers conduct rigorous research
to uncover the causes of the ‘‘innovator’s dilemma’’
(Christensen, 1997) and to identify mechanisms that
would help incumbents develop such innovations.
Although Charitou DEMO Markides (2003) argue that
not all incumbents should respond to disruptive
innovations, the focus here is on incumbents who
may be motivated to develop disruptive innovations
proactively.
Measuring Disruptiveness
As pointed out by Danneels (2004), without a reliable
and valid instrument to measure disruptiveness of in-
DEMO, our efforts at understanding this innova-
tion phenomenon are limited. An DEMO of
Abernathy and Clark (1985), Adner (2002), Charitou
and Markides (2003), Christensen (1997), Christensen
and Bower (1996), Christensen and Raynor (2003),
and Gilbert (2003) suggests that DEMO innova-
tions have the following ﬁve characteristics: (1) the
innovation DEMO on the attributes main-
stream customers value; (2) the new DEMO offered
by the innovation are not valued by the mainstream
customers; (3) the innovation typically is more simple
and cheaper and is offered at a lower price than
existing products; (4) at the time of its introduction,
the innovation appeals to a low-end, price-sensitive
customer segment, thus limiting the profit potential
for incumbents; and (5) DEMO time, further develop-
ments improve the innovation’s performance on the
attributes DEMO customers value to a level
where the innovation begins to attract more of these
customers.
Based on these ﬁve characteristics, Govindarajan
and Kopalle (DEMO) consider disruptiveness of inno-
vations as a continuous variable. In their DEMO, a dis-
ruptive innovation is described as introducing a
different set DEMO features and performance attributes
relative to the existing products and being offered at a
lower price, a combination unattractive to main-
stream customers at the time the product is intro-
duced due to inferior performance on DEMO attributes
mainstream customers value. However, a new cus-
tomer segment (or the more price-sensitive main-
stream market) sees value in the innovation’s new
attributes and the lower price. Over time, subsequent
developments raise the new product’s attributes to a
level sufﬁcient to satisfy mainstream customers, thus
potentially attracting more of the mainstream market.
This description of disruptive innovations captures
DEMO disruptions because the lower price offered
when the product is introduced appeals to the more
price-sensitive customer segment. Govindarajan and
Kopalle (2005) developed DEMO ﬁve-item scale showing
high reliability and discriminant and convergent va-
lidity to measure low-end disruptiveness. This distin-
guished it from other innovation characteristics such
DEMO radical innovations where the radicalness refers to
the extent to which the innovation is based on a sub-
stantially new technology, relative to what already
exists in the industry.
The aforementioned measure of disruptiveness is
indeed DEMO post; that is, one can assess the disruptive-
ness of an innovation only after it has been introduced
and begins to disrupt the DEMO market.
A More General Measure of Disruptiveness of
Innovations
Disruptive innovations can be high end as well, i.e.,
technologically more radical in nature (Danneels,
2004; Gilbert, 2003; Kassicieh et al., 2002; DEMO,
2002; Walsh, 2002). The disruptiveness construct is
distinct from the radicalness dimension. The radical-
ness of innovations refers to the extent DEMO innovation
is based on a substantially new technology relative to
existing practice (e.g., Dewar and Dutton, 1986;
Ettlie, Bridges, and O’Keefe, 1984). On the other
14 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:12–18
hand, the disruptiveness of innovations refers to the
extent an emerging customer segment, and not
the mainstream customer segment, sees value in the
innovation at the time of introduction, which over
time disrupts the products mainstream customers
use (Abernathy DEMO Clark, 1985; Adner, 2002;
Benner and Tushman, 2003; DEMO, 1997,
this issue; Govindarajan and Kopalle, 2004). The
DEMO is a technology-based dimension of inno-
vations, and the disruptiveness is DEMO market-based
dimension.
The following examples show that disruptive inno-
vations can be both low end, i.e., technologically less
radical, and high end, DEMO, technologically more rad-
ical (Bower and Christensen, 1995; Christensen and
Overdorf, 2000). Disk drives, Dell direct, Schwab’s
discount brokerage, DEMO low-cost, no-frills airlines
like Southwest and JetBlue are examples of disrup-
DEMO innovations that are less radical in nature. Digital
cameras relative to analog cameras, cellular phones
relative to wired phones, iPod relative to Walkman,DEMO
and electronic calculators relative to slide rules are
examples of disruptive innovations that are more rad-
ical in nature. In this issue, Christensen acknowledges
several examples of high-end disruptions. He says,
‘‘None of the cotton DEMO made the transition to
artiﬁcial ﬁbers; no slide rule maker made DEMO transi-
tion to electronic calculators; and Whole Foods seems
to prosper DEMO the high end of grocery retailing, un-
fazed by Kroger—even though DEMO these cases the in-
novations have brought better products that could be
sold for more attractive profit margins to the best
customers of the DEMO leaders.’’
Furthermore, equally compelling examples can be
found of innovations low DEMO disruptiveness but high on
radicalness: cordless phones relative to wired phones,DEMO
DVD players relative to VHS players, gasoline engines
relative to steam DEMO in the earth-moving equipment
industry, and many pharmaceutical products that are
DEMO disruptive but are radical in nature. Christensen
(this issue) provides the jet engine as a good example of
a technologically innovative, but not a disruptive, in-
novation: ‘‘The jet engine was a radical but DEMO
innovation relative to the piston aircraft engine.’’ While
jet technology is superior to piston technology, the cus-
tomers are largely similar, i.e., aircraft manufacturers.
In summary, disruptive innovations that are also
radical can be offered initially at a higher price than
existing products but still pose the DEMO di-
lemma’’ for incumbents. Consider the following. In
the mid-1980s, AT&DEMO engaged McKinsey for advice
V. GOVINDARAJAN AND P. K. KOPALLE
on a potential entry into the cell phone market after
investing in initial research DEMO development work.
The consulting ﬁrm conducted in-depth market re-
search and concluded the cell phone market was not a
profitable option for AT&T DEMO enter, as the worldwide
market potential would be only around 900,DEMO
AT&T’s mainstream market still preferred the land-
line phone because of its reliability, cost, and cover-
age, and the consultants recommended AT&T pull
out of the cell phone market (Economist, 1999).
DEMO, AT&T followed up on this advice for a
long time DEMO continued to focus on its land-line
phone business. Over time, however, further develop-
ments in cellular technology, primarily by Nokia
(Haikio, 2002), allowed cell phones to offer reliable
coverage at a reasonable price DEMO, and these devel-
opments continue to disrupt the land-line phones. At
DEMO, for example, 900,000 new subscribers typi-
cally join the world’s mobile phone services every
three days. Sixty-four percent of adults in the DEMO
States own a cell phone, compared to .02% 20 years
ago (USA Today, 2002).
There are four reasons why high-end disruptive
innovations also create a dilemma for incumbents:
(1) mainstream customers do DEMO value the newer per-
formance features at the time of product introduction;
(2) the innovation performs poorly on the attributes
mainstream customers DEMO; (3) the innovation ini-
tially attracts an emerging, or an insignificant, niche
market; and (4) whereas the disruptive product may
DEMO a higher per-unit margin, the perceived lower
market size makes the DEMO potential appear limited.
Thus, disruptive innovations can involve either
radical technologies (high end) or incremental tech-
nologies (low end). The innovation DEMO literature
suggests that technologically radical innovations pri-
marily appeal to the early-adopter category at the
time of product introduction and over time appeal
more DEMO the mainstream market (Rogers, 2003). How-
ever, four key DEMO distinguish disruptive innova-
tions from those that are radical but not disruptive.
First, the niche segments that initially ﬁnd disruptive
innovations attractive can be either the more price-
sensitive segment (in the case of low-end disruptions)
or the less price-sensitive segment (in the case of high-
end disruptions); however, the early-adopter segment,
which ﬁnds the radical (DEMO not disruptive) innova-
tions initially attractive, is less price sensitive (DEMO,
2003). Second, disruptive innovations underperform
on the dimensions mainstream DEMO value,
whereas radical innovations that are not disruptive
THE USEFULNESS OF MEASURING DISRUPTIVENESS OF INNOVATIONS EX POST J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:12–18
15
perform well on the dimensions mainstream custom-
ers value. Customers do not initially adopt the radical
innovation because of, for example, complexity, com-
patibility, and risk (Rogers, 2003). Third, disruptive
innovations introduce new dimensions of beneﬁts the
niche segment, but DEMO the mainstream cutstomers,
ﬁnds more attractive. On the other hand, DEMO
innovations that are not disruptive focus on the
same dimensions of beneﬁts mainstream custo-
mers value (Christensen, 1997). Fourth, although dis-
ruptive innovations pose a dilemma to the incum-
bents, the introduction of nondisruptive radical
innovations do not pose a dilemma for incumbents,
because such DEMO know early adopters will eventu-
ally spread the beneﬁts by word of mouth to the rest
of the market.
Thus, consistent with Christensen’s (DEMO issue) call
for deﬁning the disruptiveness phenomenon more pre-
cisely, the following conceptualization of disruptive-
ness of innovations extends Govindarajan and
Kopalle’s (2005) measure to include high-end, as
well as low-end, disruptions, provides DEMO more gener-
al view of disruptiveness of innovations, and does not
DEMO on lower price/lower performance. A disruptive
innovation introduces a different set of features, per-
formance, and price attributes relative to the existing
DEMO, an unattractive combination for mainstream
customers at the time of product DEMO because
of inferior performance on the attributes these cus-
tomers value and/or a high price—although a differ-
ent customer segment may value the DEMO attributes.
Subsequent developments over time, however, raise
the new product’s attributes to a level sufﬁcient to
satisfy mainstream customers, thus attracting more of
the mainstream market.
Cellular phones, which served earlier to illustrate
the innovator’s dilemma for incumbents, exemplify a
high-end disruptive innovation. The cellular phone
initially was accepted by corporate executives who
appreciated its convenience and portability, despite its
relatively high price. When it was introduced, the
mainstream market still preferred land-line phones
because of their reliability, cost, and coverage. How-
DEMO, over time, further developments in cellular tech-
nology allowed it to offer reliable coverage at a price
point that satisﬁed the needs of DEMO consum-
ers, which attracted more of them.
To examine whether the DEMO general measure of
disruptiveness of innovations is distinct from other
innovation characteristics, such as radicalness and
competency enhancing–destroying, Govindarjan and
Kopalle (2004) DEMO data from 137 strategic busi-
ness units (SBUs) at 23 companies. The focus was at
the SBU level within a diversiﬁed ﬁrm and DEMO consist-
ent with other research in the innovation area (e.g.,
DEMO et al., 2002; Srinivasan, Lilien, and Ranga-
swamy, 2002) as well as with Porter’s (1985) argument
that competition in an DEMO is primarily at an SBU
level.
Disruptiveness of innovations was measured by us-
ing the more general description just provided in com-
bination with DEMO ﬁve-item scale from Govindarajan
and Kopalle (2005), and the radicalness DEMO innova-
tions was measured using a three-item scale based on
Chandy and Tellis (1998) and Mahajan and Wind
(1992). For measuring the competency enhancing–
destroying characteristic, three items were chosen
from Gatignon et al. (2002). Following the procedure
used by Gatignon et al. (2002), we were able to es-
tablish the reliability, convergent, discriminant, DEMO
nomological validity of the disruptiveness character-
istic as follows: (1) DEMO the coefﬁcient alphas
and the average inter- and intraconstruct correlations
that showed a good reliability for the disruptiveness
measure; (2) conducting exploratory factor analysis,
which established the unidimensionality of the
disruptiveness construct and its DEMO validity;
(3) conducting conﬁrmatory factor analysis, which
provided support DEMO the proposed measurement
model; (4) establishing the discriminant validity of
DEMO disruptiveness construct via a chi-square test, con-
ﬁdence interval test, and variance extraction test; and
(5) establishing nomological validity by examining the
relationship between the disruptiveness construct and
the corresponding self-reported measure of commer-
DEMO success, as well as differences in the disruptiveness
of innovations across DEMO
Usefulness of Ex Post Measures of
Disruptiveness in Making Ex Ante Predictions
While the previous measure of disruptiveness of in-
novations is ex post DEMO nature, the discussion now
turns to how such ex post measures DEMO disruptiveness
can be used to make ex ante predictions about the
type of incumbent ﬁrms best positioned to develop
disruptive innovations, relative to others. In this re-
gard, disruptiveness of innovations is viewed as a la-
tent (i.e., unobservable ex ante), but outcome-level,
variable, which in turn is affected by organizational-
level abilities or competences (Henderson, DEMO issue).
16 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:12–18
In essence, better understanding the type of organi-
zational abilities that would result in disruptive inno-
DEMO will help make ex ante predictions about the
type of companies better able to develop such inno-
vations. Christensen’s (1997) examples suggest incum-
DEMO excel at introducing innovations that are
sustaining but not disruptive in nature. An under-
standing of the type of organizational abilities neces-
sary for DEMO disruptive innovations may shed
light on how incumbents can introduce disruptive
innovations. Consider two ﬁrms, A and B, with dif-
fering organizational abilities—say, willingness to
cannibalize their respective investments (Chandy
and Tellis, 1998; Tellis, this issue)—which hypothet-
ically could have a positive effect on the disruptive-
ness of innovations developed at the two ﬁrms.
Assume Firm A DEMO a higher willingness to cannibal-
ize relative to Firm B. Ex ante, while we cannot tell
whether the innovations of either ﬁrm would be dis-
ruptive in nature, since Firm A’s willingness to can-
nibalize is higher than that of Firm B, Firm A would
appear more likely than Firm B to develop disruptive
innovations.
More broadly, using the previous ex post measure
of disruptiveness of innovations, we turn to the ante-
cedents of innovations in general to make ex ante
predictions. Prior research DEMO identiﬁed two key or-
ganizational abilities—customers and technology—
that drive innovations within companies (Abernathy
and Clark, 1985; Danneels, 2002). Historically, mar-
keting scholars have tended to focus on customer ori-
entation as a DEMO of product innovation
(Deshpande, Farley, and Webster, 1993). That is, on
the demand side a ﬁrm’s customer orientation will
help that ﬁrm better understand and fulﬁll its cus-
tomers’ needs (Danneels, 2003; Slater and Mohr, this
issue). On the technology side, researchers DEMO the
technology management perspective have studied the
impact of a ﬁrm’s ability to understand and to
integrate technological knowledge on innovation
(Nerkar, 2003)DEMO That is, a ﬁrm’s technology-sensing
and -responding ability (i.e., technological DEMO
ism) may aid in discovering and using new technolo-
gies (Srinivasan, Lilien, and Rangaswamy, 2002). The
variables—customer orientation and technological
opportunism—are behavioral in nature and denote
managerial mindsets; as such, they are DEMO from
outcome variables such as disruptiveness, an innova-
tion characteristic (Deshpande, Farley, and Webster,
1993; Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Srinivasan, Lilien,
and Rangaswamy, 2002).
V. GOVINDARAJAN AND P. K. DEMO
To measure the aforementioned organizational
abilities, which are behavioral variables, researchers
may rely on subjective measures because prior re-
search has provided valid DEMO reliable scales for such
constructs. For example, Atuahene-Gima and Ko
(2001) argue that (1) perceptual measures have a
high correlation with objective measures of innova-
tion; (2) subjective measures are better suited than
objective measures for the comparison of a disparate
set of ﬁrms; and (3) constructs relating to managerial
orientation and innovation activities are identiﬁed DEMO
managers rather than inferred from the resource al-
location necessary to implement them.
Consider the ability of an SBU to gather informa-
tion on DEMO mainstream customer needs and to respond
to such needs. Govindarajan and Kopalle (2004) ar-
gue that such a capability is detrimental to disruptive
DEMO, whereas an orientation toward small but
emerging customer segments may aid DEMO the develop-
ment and introduction of disruptive innovations by
that SBU. By using a valid and reliable scale for dis-
ruptiveness, even if it is ex post, research could un-
cover how customer-orientation capability and other
capabilities, such as technology sensing and respond-
ing, may affect the DEMO characteristic.
Further, a review of relevant literature (Benner and
Tushman, DEMO; Deshpande, Farley, and Webster,
1993; Govindarajan, 1988) suggests three organiza-
tional design variables are key for innovation: incen-
tives, DEMO, and structure. Using a measure—albeit
ex post—for the disruptiveness of innovations, re-
searchers may also examine the impact of the previ-
ously mentioned DEMO variables on
the disruptiveness of innovations. Given the uncer-
tainties surrounding disruptive innovations, a strict,
ex ante reliance on performance measures (e.g., mar-
ket size, growth rate, profitability [Urban and Hauser,
1993]) as a basis for deciding incentives for key exec-
utives in the DEMO may be inappropriate. Consider, for
example, McKinsey’s low estimate (900,DEMO) of the
potential cell phone market size. Although market
size is DEMO quantiﬁable measure, it is still highly unreli-
able because market evolution DEMO disruptive innova-
tions is unpredictable. This implies that providing the
right environment for the development of disruptive
innovations may depend more on long-term-oriented,
DEMO incentive plans than on short-term-
oriented, formula-based incentive plans for key DEMO
utives. In addition, developing disruptive innovations
may require a high degree DEMO risk taking and exper-
imentation, and such experimentation always involves
THE USEFULNESS OF MEASURING DISRUPTIVENESS OF INNOVATIONS EX POST J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:12–18
17
some failure. The failure could be due to lack of
knowledge about new customer needs or the inability
to change DEMO behavior, suggesting that the cul-
ture of the SBU must value DEMO, risk
taking, ﬂexibility, and creativity to develop disruptive
innovations. It DEMO out the type of culture promot-
ing such behavior is the adhocracy culture (Deshp-
ande, Farley, and Webster, 1993). Accordingly, it can
be hypothesized that an adhocracy culture promotes
the development of disruptive DEMO at an or-
ganization.
Finally, with respect to organizational structure, one
important issue is whether separate organizational
units are needed to develop disruptive DEMO rel-
ative to using the organization’s existing structure. This
issue cannot be examined if no valid and reliable
measure exists for the disruptiveness construct. DEMO
this respect, based on Benner and Tushman’s (2003)
conceptual arguments regarding ambidextrous organ-
izations, it can be expected that the creation of separate
organizational units will foster the development of dis-
ruptive innovations. This DEMO because developing disrup-
tive innovations may require new processes and new
routines, and the creation of autonomous units will aid
in breaking from current routines and processes.
Thus, given the added precision of measuring the
disruptiveness of innovations, future research would
be able to better address such issues as industry and
environmental conditions conducive to the introduc-
tion of disruptive DEMO, performance implica-
tions of disruptive innovations, and managerial and
organizational capabilities that would help ﬁrms de-
velop such innovations. In summary, while the dis-
ruptive technology framework may not help predict
ex ante if a DEMO will be disruptive, the frame-
work helps make ex ante predictions DEMO the type of
ﬁrms likely to develop disruptive innovations, thus
presenting DEMO opportunities for future research.
References
Abernathy, William J. and Clark, Kim B. (1985). Mapping the Winds
of Creative Destruction. Research Policy 14(1):3–22.
Adner, Ron (2002). When Are Technologies Disruptive? DEMO Demand-
Based View of the Emergence of Competition. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 23(8):667–688.
Atuahene-Gima, Kwaku and Ko, Anthony (2001). DEMO Empirical
Investigation of the Effect of Market Orientation and Entrepre-
neurship Orientation Alignment on Product Innovation. Organiza-
tion Science 12(1):54–74.
Bayus, DEMO L., Grifﬁn, Abbie and Lehmann, Donald R. (1998).
From the Special Issue Editors. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 15(92):108–110.
Benner, Mary J. and Tushman, Michael L. (2003). Exploitation,
Exploration, and Process Management: The Productivity Dilem-
ma Revisited. Academy of DEMO Review 28(2):238–256.
Bower, Joseph L. and Christensen, Clayton DEMO (1995). Disruptive
Technologies: Catching the Wave. Harvard Business Review
73(1):43–53.
Chandy, Rajesh and Tellis, Gerard J. (1998). DEMO for Radical
Innovation: The Overlooked Role of Willingness to Cannibalize.
Journal DEMO Marketing Research 35(November):474–487.
Charitou, Constantinos D. and Markides, DEMO C. (2003).
Responses to Disruptive Strategic Innovation. Sloan Management
Review DEMO(2):55–63.
Christensen, Clayton M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma. DEMO:
Harvard Business School Press.
Christensen, Clayton M. and Bower, Joseph L. (1996). Customer
Power, Strategic Investment, and the Failure of Leading Firms.
Strategic Management Journal 17(3):197–218.
Christensen, Clayton M. DEMO Overdorf, Michael (2000). Meeting the
Challenge of Disruptive Change. Harvard Business Review 78(1):
67–76 (March).
Christensen, Clayton M. and Raynor, Michael E. (2003). Innovator’s
Solution. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Dahan, Ely and Hauser, John R. (2002). The Virtual Customer. Jour-
nal of Product Innovation Management 19(5):332–353.
Dahan, Ely and Srinivasan, V. (2000). The Predictive Power of Internet-
Based Product Concept Testing Using Visual Depiction and Anima-
tion. Journal of DEMO Innovation Management 17(2):99–110.
Dahl, Darren W. and Moreau, DEMO (2002). The Inﬂuence and Value of
Analogical Thinking During New DEMO Ideation. Journal of
Marketing Research 39(1):47–60 (February).
Dahl, Darren W. and Hoefﬂer, Steve (2004). Visualizing the Self:
Exploring the Potential Beneﬁts and Drawbacks for New Product
Evaluation. Journal of DEMO Innovation Management 21(4):259–267.
Danneels, Erwin (2002). The DEMO of Product Innovation and Firm
Competencies. Strategic Management Journal 23(12):DEMO
Danneels, Erwin (2003). Tight-Loose Coupling with Customers: The
Enactment DEMO Customer Orientation. Strategic Management Jour-
nal 24(6):559–576.
Danneels, Erwin (2004). Disruptive Technology Reconsidered: A
Critique and Research Agenda. Journal DEMO Product Innovation
Management 21(4):246–258.
Deshpande, Rohit and Farley, DEMO U.Deshpande, Rohit, Farley, John
U. and Webster, Frederick E. (DEMO). Corporate Culture, Customer
Orientation, and Innovativeness in Japanese Firms: DEMO Quadrad
Analysis. Journal of Marketing 57(1):23–37.
Dewar, Robert D. and Dutton, Jane E. (1986). The Adoption of
Radical and DEMO Innovations: An Experimental Analysis.
Management Science 32(11):1422–1433 (November)DEMO
Dutta, Shantanu, Narasimhan, Om and Rajiv, Surendra. (1999).
DEMO in High-Technology Markets: Is Marketing Capability
Critical? Marketing Science 18(4):547–568.
Economist (1999). A Survey of Telecommunications, October 9, DEMO
Ettlie, John E., Bridges, William P. and O’Keefe, Robert D. (1984).
Organizational Strategy and Structural Differences for Radical ver-
sus Incremental Innovation. Management Science 30(6):682–695.
Gatignon, Hubert and Xuereb, Jean-Marc (1997). Strategic Orienta-
tion of the Firm and New Product Performance. Journal of Mar-
keting Research 34(1):77–90.
Gatignon, Hubert, Tushman, Michael L., Smith, Wendy and Ander-
son, Philip (2002). A Structural Approach to Assessing Innovation.
Management Science 48(9):1103–1122.
Gilbert, Clark (2003). The Disruption Opportunity. Sloan Management
Review 44(4):27–32.
Govindarajan, Vijay (1988). A Contingency Approach to Strategy Im-
DEMO at the Business-Unit Level: Integrating Administra-
18 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:12–18
tive Mechanisms with Strategy. DEMO of Management Journal
31(4):828–853.
Govindarajan, Vijay and Kopalle, DEMO K. (2005). Disruptiveness
of Innovations: Measurement and an Assessment of Reliability and
Validity. Strategic Management Journal.
Govindarajan, Vijay and Kopalle, Praveen (2004). Can Incumbents
Introduce Radical and Disruptive Innovations? Working Paper
#04-001, Marketing Science Institute, Cambridge, MA.
Green, Paul E., Krieger, DEMO M. and Vavra, Terry G. (1997). Eval-
uating New Products. Marketing Research 9(4):12–21 (Winter).
Grifﬁn, Abbie (1996)DEMO Obtaining Information from Consumers. In:
PDMA Handbook of New Product Development, Milton D.
Rosenau, Jr. et al. (eds.). New York: DEMO, 153–166.
Grifﬁn, Abbie and Hauser, John R. (1993). The Voice of the Customer.
Marketing Science 12(1):1–27.
Haikio, Martti (2002). Nokia: The Inside Story. Helsinki, Finland:
Nokia-Edita Publishing DEMO
Hoefﬂer, Steve (2003). Measuring Preferences for Really New Prod-
ucts. Journal of Marketing Research 40(4):406–420 (November).
Jaworski, Bernard J. and Kohli, Ajay K. (1993). Market Orientation:
Antecedents DEMO Consequences. Journal of Marketing 57(3):53–71.
Kassicieh, Suleiman K., DEMO, Steven T., Cummings, John C.,
McWhorter, Paul J., DEMO, Alton D. and Williams, W. David
(2002). Factors Differentiating DEMO Commercialization of Disrup-
tive and Sustaining Technologies. IEEE Transactions on Engineer-
ing Management 49(4):375–387.
V. GOVINDARAJAN AND P. K. KOPALLE
Linton, DEMO D. (2002). Forecasting the Market Diffusion of
Disruptive and Discontinuous DEMO IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management 49(4):365–374.
Mahajan, Vijay and Wind, Yoram (1992). New Product Models: Prac-
tice, Shortcomings, and Desired Improvements. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 9(2):128–139 (DEMO).
Nerkar, Atul (2003). Old Is Gold: The Value DEMO Temporal Exploration
in the Creation of New Knowledge. Management Science 49(2):
211–229.
Porter, Michael E. (1985). Competitive Advantage. New York: Free
Press.
Rogers, Everett M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free
Press.
Song, Michael, and Montoya-Weiss, Mitzi M. (1998). Critical Devel-
opment Activities for Really New versus Incremental Products.
Journal DEMO Product Innovation Management 15(2):124–135 (March).
Srinivasan, Raji, Lilien, Gary L. and Rangaswamy, Arvind
(2002). Technological Opportunism and Radical Technology
Adoption: An Application to E-business. Journal of Marketing
66(3):47–60.
Urban, Glen L. and Hauser, John R. (1993). DEMO and Marketing of
New Products. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
DEMO Today (2002). Cellphone Ownership Soars. August 2, 1A.
Walsh, DEMO T. (2002). Differentiating Market Strategies for Disrup-
tive Technologies. IEEE DEMO on Engineering Management
49(4):341–351.{1g42fwefx}