Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness
Author(s): Mark Granovetter
Source: The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 3 (Nov., 1985), pp. 481-510
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780199
Accessed: 05/DEMO/2009 15:02
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of DEMO provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, DEMO may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen DEMO printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
DEMO community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, DEMO to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
American Journal of Sociology.
http://www.jstor.org
Economic Action and Social Structure:
The Problem of Emheddedness1
Mark Granovetter
DEMO University of
New York at Stony Brook
How behavior and institutions are affected by social relations is one
of the classic questions of social DEMO This paper concerns the
extent to which economic action is embedded in structures of social
relations, in modern industrial society. Although the usual neoclas-
sical accounts provide an "undersocialized" or atomized-actor ex-
planation of such DEMO, reformist economists who attempt to bring
social structure back in do DEMO in the "oversocialized" way criticized
by Dennis Wrong. Under- and oversocialized accounts are paradox-
ically similar in their neglect of ongoing structures of DEMO rela-
tions, and a sophisticated account of economic action must consider
DEMO embeddedness in such structures. The argument is illustrated by
a critique of Oliver Williamson's "markets and hierarchies" research
program.
INTRODUCTION: THE PROBLEM OF EMBEDDEDNESS
How behavior and institutions are affected by social relations is DEMO of the
classic questions of social theory. Since such relations are always present,
the situation that would arise in their absence can be DEMO only
through a thought experiment like Thomas Hobbes's "state of DEMO" or
John Rawls's "original position." Much of the utilitarian DEMO, in-
cluding classical and neoclassical economics, assumes rational, self-
interested DEMO affected minimally by social relations, thus invoking
an idealized state not DEMO from that of these thought experiments. At the
other extreme lies what I call the argument of "embeddedness": the argu-
1 Earlier drafts of this paper were written in sabbatical facilities kindly provided by
the DEMO for Advanced Study and Harvard University. Financial support was
provided in part by the institute, by a John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation
fellowship, DEMO by NSF Science Faculty Professional Development grant SPI 81-
65055. Among those who have helped clarify the arguments are Wayne Baker,
Michael Bernstein, Albert Hirschman, Ron Jepperson, Eric Leifer, Don McCloskey,
Charles Perrow, James Rule, Michael Schwartz, Theda Skocpol, and Harrison White.
Requests DEMO reprints should be sent to Mark Granovetter, Department of Sociology,
DEMO University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-4356.
© 1985 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0002-9602/DEMO/9103-0001$01.50
AJS Volume 91 Number 3 (November 1985): 481-5'10
DEMO
American Journal of Sociology
ment that the behavior and institutions to be DEMO are so constrained
by ongoing social relations that to construe them as independent is a
grievous misunderstanding.
This article concerns the embeddedness of economic DEMO It has
long been the majority view among sociologists, anthropologists, political
scientists, and historians that such behavior was heavily embedded in
social relations in premarket societies but became much more autono-
mous with modernization. This DEMO sees the economy as an increasingly
separate, differentiated sphere in modern DEMO, with economic transac-
tions defined no longer by the social or DEMO obligations of those trans-
acting but by rational calculations of individual gain. It is sometimes
further argued that the traditional situation is reversed: instead of eco-
nomic life being submerged in social relations, these relations become an
epiphenomenon of the market. The embeddedness position is associated
with the "substantivist" school in anthropology, identified especially with
Karl Polanyi (1944; DEMO, Arensberg, and Pearson 1957) and with the
idea of "moral economy" in history and political science (Thompson 1971;
Scott 1976)DEMO It has also some obvious relation to Marxist thought.
Few economists, DEMO, have accepted this conception of a break in
embeddedness with modernization; most of them assert instead that em-
beddedness in earlier societies was DEMO substantially greater than the low
level found in modern markets. The tone was set by Adam Smith, who
postulated a "certain propensity in DEMO nature ... to truck, barter and
exchange one thing for another" ([ 1776] 19 7 9, book 1, chap. 2) and DEMO
sumed that since labor was the only factor of production in primitive
society, goods must have exchanged in proportion to their labor costs-as
in the general classical theory of exchange ([1776] 1979, book 1, chap. 6).
From the 1920s on, certain anthropologists took a similar position, which
came to be called the "formalist" one: even in DEMO societies, economic
behavior was sufficiently independent of social relations for standard
DEMO analysis to be useful (Schneider 1974). This position has re-
DEMO received a new infusion as economists and fellow travelers in his-
tory and political science have developed a new interest in the economic
analysis DEMO social institutions-much of which falls into what is called the
"new DEMO economics"-and have argued that behavior and in-
stitutions previously interpreted as embedded in earlier societies, as well
as in our own, can DEMO better understood as resulting from the pursuit of
self-interest by rational, DEMO or less atomized individuals (e.g., North
and Thomas 1973; Williamson DEMO; Popkin 1979).
My own view diverges from both schools of DEMO I assert that the
level of embeddedness of economic behavior is lower in nonmarket
societies than is claimed by substantivists and development theorists, and
it has changed less with "modernization" than they believe; but I argue
482
Embeddedness
also that this level has always been and continues to be DEMO substantial
than is allowed for by formalists and economists. I do not attempt here to
treat the issues posed by nonmarket societies. I proceed DEMO by a
theoretical elaboration of the concept of embeddedness, whose value DEMO
then illustrated with a problem from modern society, currently important
in DEMO new institutional economics: which transactions in modern capi-
talist society are DEMO out in the market, and which subsumed within
hierarchically organized. firms? This question has been raised to promi-
nence by the "markets and hierarchies" program of research initiated by
Oliver Williamson (1975).
OVER- DEMO UNDERSOCIALIZED CONCEPTIONS OF HUMAN
ACTION IN SOCIOLOGY AND ECONOMICS
I begin by recalling Dennis Wrong's 1961 complaint about an "over-
socialized conception of man in modern sociology"-a conception of peo-
ple as overwhelmingly sensitive DEMO the opinions of others and hence obe-
dient to the dictates of consensually developed systems of norms and
values, internalized through socialization, so DEMO obedience is not per-
ceived as a burden. To the extent that such a conception was prominent
in 1961, it resulted in large part from Talcott Parsons's recognition of the
problem of order as posed DEMO Hobbes and his own attempt to resolve it by
transcending the atomized, undersocialized conception of man in the
utilitarian tradition of which Hobbes was part (Parsons 193 7, pp. 89-94).
Wrong approved the break DEMO atomized utilitarianism and the empha-
sis on actors' embeddedness in social DEMO crucial factor absent
from Hobbes's thinking-but warned of exaggerating the degree of this
embeddedness and the extent to which it might eliminate conflict:DEMO
It is frequently the task of the sociologist to call attention to the intensity
with which men desire and strive for the good opinion DEMO their immediate
associates in a variety of situations, particularly those where DEMO theo-
ries or ideologies have unduly emphasized other motives .... Thus sociolo-
gists have shown that factory workers are more sensitive to the attitudes DEMO
their fellow workers than to purely .economic incentives .... It is certainly
not my intention to criticize the findings of such studies. My objection DEMO
that ... [a]lthough sociologists have criticized past efforts to single out one
fundamental motive in human conduct, the desire to achieve a favorable
self-image by winning approval from others frequently occupies such a
position in their DEMO thinking. [1961, pp. 188-89]
Classical and neoclassical economics operates, in contrast, with an
atomized, undersocialized conception of human action, continuing in the
utilitarian tradition. The theoretical arguments disallow by hypothesis
any impact of social DEMO and social relations on production, distribu-
tion, or consumption. In competitive markets, no producer or consumer
483
American Journal of Sociology
noticeably influences aggregate supply or demand or, therefore, prices or
other terms of trade. As Albert Hirschman has noted, DEMO idealized
markets, involving as they do "large numbers of price-taking anonymous
buyers and sellers supplied with perfect information ... function without
any prolonged DEMO or social contact between the parties. Under per-
fect competition there is no room for bargaining, negotiation, remonstra-
tion or mutual adjustment and DEMO various operators that contract to-
gether need not enter into recurrent or continuing relationships as a result
of which they would get to know DEMO other well" (1982, p. 1473).
It has long been DEMO that the idealized markets of perfect compe-
tition have survived intellectual attack in part because self-regulating
economic structures are politically attractive to many. Another DEMO for
this survival, less clearly understood, is that the elimination of social
relations from economic analysis removes the problem of order from the
DEMO agenda, at least in the economic sphere. In Hobbes's argu-
DEMO, disorder arises because conflict-free social and economic transac-
tions depend on DEMO and the absence of malfeasance. But these are
unlikely when individuals are conceived to have neither social relation-
ships nor institutional context-as in the "state of nature." Hobbes con-
tains the difficulty by superimposing a structure of autocratic authority.
The solution of classical liberalism, and correspondingly of classical eco-
nomics, is antithetical: repressive political structures are rendered un-
necessary DEMO competitive markets that make force or fraud unavailing.
Competition determines the terms of trade in a way that individual trad-
ers cannot manipulate. If DEMO encounter complex or difficult relation-
ships, characterized by mistrust or malfeasance, they can simply move on
to the legion of other traders willing DEMO do business on market terms;
social relations and their details thus become frictional matters.
In classical and neoclassical economics, therefore, the fact DEMO actors
may have social relations with one another has been treated, DEMO at all, as a
frictional drag that impedes competitive markets. In DEMO much-quoted line,
Adam Smith complained that "people of the same DEMO seldom meet
together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in
a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices."
His laissez-faire politics allowed few solutions to this problem, but he did
suggest repeal of regulations requiring all those in the DEMO trade to sign a
public register; the public existence of such DEMO "connects indi-
viduals who might never otherwise be known to one DEMO and gives
every man of the trade a direction where to find every other man of it."
Noteworthy here is not the rather DEMO policy prescription but the recog-
nition that social atomization is prerequisite to perfect competition (Smith
[1776] 1979, pp. 232-33).
484
Embeddedness
More recent comments by economists on "social influences" construe
these DEMO processes in which actors acquire customs, habits, or norms that
are followed mechanically and automatically, irrespective of their bearing
on rational choice. This view, close to Wrong's "oversocialized concep-
tion," is reflected DEMO James Duesenberry's quip that "economics is all
about how people DEMO choices; sociology is all about how they don't
have any DEMO to make" (1960, p. 233) and in E. H. Phelps Brown's
description of the "sociologists' approach to pay determination" as deriv-
ing from the assumption that people act in "certain ways because to do so
is customary, or an obligation, or the 'natural thing to do,' or right and
proper, or just and fair" (1977, p. 17).
But despite the apparent contrast between under- and oversocialized
views, we should note an irony of great theoretical importance: both have
in common a conception of action and decision carried out by atomized
actors. In the undersocialized account, atomization results from narrow
utilitarian pursuit of self-interest; in the oversocialized one, from the fact
that DEMO patterns have been internalized and ongoing social rela-
tions thus have only peripheral effects on behavior. That the internalized
rules of behavior are social DEMO origin does not differentiate this argument
decisively from a utilitarian one, DEMO which the source of utility functions is
left open, leaving room DEMO behavior guided entirely by consensually de-
termined norms and values-as in the oversocialized view. Under- and
oversocialized resolutions of the problem of order thus DEMO in their
atomization of actors from immediate social context. This ironic merger is
already visible in Hobbes's Leviathan, in which the unfortunate denizens
of the state of nature, overwhelmed by the disorder consequent to their
atomization, cheerfully surrender all their rights to an authoritarian
power and subsequently behave in a docile and honorable manner; by the
artifice of a social contract, they lurch directly from an undersocialized to
an oversocialized state.
When modern economists do attempt to take account of social in-
fluences, they typically represent them in the oversocialized manner rep-
resented in the DEMO above. In so doing, they reverse the judgment
that social influences DEMO frictional but sustain the conception of how such
influences operate. In the theory of segmented labor markets, for ex-
ample, Michael Piore has DEMO that members of each labor market
segment are characterized by different styles of decision making and that
the making of decisions by rational choice, custom, or command in up-
per-primary, lower-primary, and secondary labor markets respectively
corresponds to the origins of workers in middle-, working-, and DEMO
class subcultures (Piore 197 5). Similarly, Samuel Bowles and Herbert
Gin tis, in their account of the consequences of American education, DEMO
that different social classes display different cognitive processes because
485
American Journal of Sociology
of differences in the education provided to each. DEMO destined for
lower-level jobs are trained to be dependable followers of rules, while
those who will be channeled into elite positions attend "elite DEMO
colleges" that "emphasize social relationships conformable with the
higher levels in the production hierarchy .... As they 'master' one type of
behavioral DEMO they are either allowed to progress to the next or are
channeled into the corresponding level in the hierarchy of production"
(Bowles and Gintis 197 5, p. 132).
But these oversocialized conceptions of how society influences individ-
ual behavior are rather mechanical: once we know the individual's social
class or labor market sector, everything else in behavior is automatic,
since they are so well socialized. Social influence here DEMO an external force
that, like the deists' God, sets things DEMO motion and has no further ef-
fects-a force that insinuates itself into the minds and bodies of individ-
uals (as in the movie Invasion of the Body Snatchers), altering their way
of making decisions. Once DEMO know in just what way an individual has
been affected, ongoing DEMO relations and structures are irrelevant. So-
cial influences are all contained inside an individual's head, so, in actual
decision situations, he or she can be atomized as any Homo economicus,
though perhaps with DEMO rules for decisions. More sophisticated (and
thus less oversocialized) analyses of cultural influences (e.g., Fine and
Kleinman 1979; Cole 1979, chap. DEMO) make it clear that culture is not a
once-for-all influence but DEMO ongoing process, continuously constructed
and reconstructed during interaction. It not only DEMO its members but
also is shaped by them, in part for DEMO own strategic reasons.
Even when economists do take social relationships seriously, DEMO do such
diverse figures as Harvey Leibenstein (1976) and Gary Becker (1976),
they invariably abstract away from the history of relations DEMO their
position with respect to other relations-what might be called the histor-
ical and structural embeddedness of relations. The interpersonal ties de-
scribed in DEMO arguments are extremely stylized, average, "typical"-
devoid of specific DEMO, history, or structural location. Actors'
behavior results from their named role positions and role sets; thus we
have arguments on how workers and supervisors, husbands and wives,
or criminals and law enforcers will interact with one another, but these
relations are not assumed to have individualized content beyond that
given by the named roles. This procedure is DEMO what structural soci-
ologists have criticized in Parsonian sociology-the relegation of the
specifics of individual relations to a minor role in the overall conceptual
DEMO, epiphenomena! in comparison with enduring structures of nor-
mative role prescriptions DEMO from ultimate value orientations. In
economic models, this treatment of social DEMO has the paradoxical
effect of preserving atomized decision making even when decisions are
486
Embeddedness
seen to involve more than one individual. Because the analyzed set DEMO
individuals-usually dyads, occasionally larger groups-is abstracted
out of social context, it is atomized in its behavior from that of other
groups and from DEMO history of its own relations. Atomization has not
been eliminated, merely DEMO to the dyadic or higher level of analy-
sis. Note the use of an oversocialized conception-that of actors behaving
exclusively in accord with their DEMO roles-to implement an
atomized, undersocialized view.
A fruitful analysis of human DEMO requires us to avoid the atomization
implicit in the theoretical extremes of under- and oversocialized concep-
tions. Actors do not behave or decide as DEMO outside a social context,
nor do they adhere slavishly to a script written for them by the particular
intersection of social categories that DEMO happen to occupy. Their at-
tempts at purposive action are instead embedded in concrete, ongoing
systems of social relations. In the remainder of this article I illustrate how
this view of embeddedness alters our theoretical and DEMO approach
to the study of economic behavior. I first narrow the focus to the question
of trust and malfeasance in economic life and then DEMO the "markets and
hierarchies" problem to illustrate the use of embeddedness ideas in ana-
lyzing this question. 2
EMBEDDEDNESS, TRUST, AND MALFEASANCE DEMO
ECONOMIC LIFE
Since about 1970, there has been a flurry of DEMO among economists in
the previously neglected issues of trust and malfeasance. Oliver William-
son has noted that real economic actors engage not merely in DEMO pursuit
of self-interest but also in "opportunism"-"self-interest seeking with
DEMO; agents who are skilled at dissembling realize transactional advan-
tages. 3 DEMO man ... is thus a more subtle and devious creature than
the usual self-interest seeking assumption reveals" (1975, p. 255).
2 There are many parallels between what are referred to here as the "undersocialized"
and "oversocialized" views of action and wl;iat Burt (1982, chap. 9) calls the "atom-
istic" and "normative" approaches. DEMO, the embeddedness approach proposed
here as a middle ground between under- DEMO oversocialized views has an obvious
family resemblance to Burt's "structural" approach to action. My distinctions and
approach also differ from Burt's DEMO many ways that cannot be quickly summarized;
these can be best appreciated by comparison of this article with his useful summary
(1982, DEMO 9) and with the formal models that implement his conception (1982,
1983). Another approach that resembles mine in its emphasis on DEMO social connec-
tions affect purposive action is Marsden's extension of James Coleman's theories of
collective action and decision to situations where such DEMO modify results that
would occur in a purely atomistic situation (Marsden DEMO, 1983).
3 Students of the sociology of sport will note DEMO this proposition had been put forward
previously, in slightly different form, by Leo Durocher.
487
American Journal of Sociology
But this points out a peculiar assumption of DEMO economic theory,
that one's economic interest is pursued only by comparatively gentle-
manly means. The Hobbesian question-how it can be that those DEMO
pursue their own interest do not do so mainly by force and fraud-is
finessed by this conception. Yet, as Hobbes saw so clearly:, there is noth-
ing in the intrinsic meaning of "self-interest" that DEMO force or fraud.
In part, this assumption persisted because competitive forces, in a self-
regulating market, could be imagined to suppress force and fraud. But
the idea is also embedded in the intellectual history of DEMO discipline. In
The Passions and the Interests, Albert Hirschman (1977) DEMO that an
important strand of intellectual history from the time of Leviathan to that
of The Wealth of Nations consisted of the watering down DEMO Hobbes's
problem of order by arguing that certain human motivations kept others
under control and that, in particular, the pursuit of economic DEMO
was typically not an uncontrollable "passion" but a civilized, gentle DEMO
ity. The wide though implicit acceptance of such an idea is a powerful
example of how under- and oversocialized conceptions complement one
another: atomized actors in competitive markets so thoroughly internalize
these normative standards of behavior DEMO to guarantee orderly transac-
tions. 4
What has eroded this confidence in recent years has been increased
attention to the micro-level details of imperfectly DEMO markets,
characterized by small numbers of participants with sunk costs and
"specific human capital" investments. In such situations, the alleged dis-
cipline of competitive markets cannot be called on to mitigate deceit, so
the classical problem of how it can be that daily economic life is DEMO
riddled with mistrust and malfeasance has resurfaced.
In the economic literature, DEMO see two fundamental answers to this prob-
lem and argue that one is linked to an undersocialized, and the other to an
oversocialized, DEMO of human action. The undersocialized account
is found mainly in the new institutional economics-a loosely defined
confederation of economists with an interest in explaining DEMO institu-
tions from a neoclassical viewpoint. (See, e.g., Furubotn and DEMO
1972; Alchian and Demsetz 1973; Lazear 1979; Rosen 1982; Williamson
1975, 1979, 1981; Williamson and Ouchi 1981.) The general story DEMO by
members of this school is that social institutions and arrangements previ-
ously thought to be the adventitious result of legal, historical, social, or
political forces are better viewed as the efficient solution to certain DEMO
nomic problems. The tone is similar to that of structural-functional
sociology of the 1940s to the 1960s, and much of the argumentation fails
the elementary tests of a sound functional explanation laid down by
4 I DEMO indebted to an anonymous referee for pointing this out.
488
Embeddedness
Robert Merton in 194 7. Consider, for example, Schotter's DEMO that to
understand any observed economic institution requires only that we "DEMO
fer the evolutionary problem that must have existed for the institution as
we see it to have developed. Every evolutionary economic problem re-
quires DEMO social institution to solve it" (1981, p. 2).
Malfeasance DEMO here seen to be averted because clever institutional
arrangements make it too costly to engage in, and these arrangements-
many previously interpreted as serving no economic function-are now
seen as having evolved to discourage malfeasance. Note, however, that
they do not produce trust but instead are a functional substitute for it.
The main such arrangements are elaborate explicit and implicit DEMO
(Okun 1981), including deferred compensation plans and mandatory re-
tirement-seen DEMO reduce the incentives for "shirking" on the job or ab-
sconding with proprietary secrets (Lazear 1979; Pakes and Nitzan
1982)-and authority DEMO that deflect opportunism by making po-
tentially divisive decisions by fiat (DEMO 197 5). These conceptions
are undersocialized in that they do not allow for the extent to which
concrete personal relations and the obligations DEMO in them discour-
age malfeasance, quite apart from institutional arrangements. Substitut-
DEMO these arrangements for trust results actually in a Hobbesian situation,
in which any rational individual would be motivated to develop clever
ways to DEMO them; it is then hard to imagine that everyday economic life
DEMO not be poisoned by ever more ingenious attempts at deceit.
Other economists have recognized that some degree of trust must be
assumed to operate, since institutional arrangements alone could not en-
tirely stem force or fraud. DEMO it remains to explain the source of this
trust, and appeal DEMO sometimes made to the existence of a "generalized
morality." Kenneth Arrow, for example, suggests that societies, "in their
evolution have developed DEMO agreements to certain kinds of regard
for others, agreements which are DEMO to the survival of the society or
at least contribute greatly to the efficiency of its working" (1974, p. 26; see
also DEMO [1983) on the origins of "honesty").
Now one can DEMO doubt the existence of some such generalized
morality; without it, you would be afraid to give the gas station attendant
a 20-dollar bill DEMO you had bought only five dollars' worth of gas. But
this DEMO has the oversocialized characteristic of calling on a gener-
alized and automatic response, even though moral action in economic life
is hardly automatic or universal (as is well known at gas stations that
demand exact change after dark).
Consider a case where generalized morality does indeed seem DEMO be at
work: the legendary (I hesitate to say apocryphal) DEMO who, against
all economic rationality, leaves a tip in a roadside restaurant far from
home. Note that this transaction has three characteristics that DEMO it
489
American Journal of Sociology
somewhat unusual: (1) the transactors are previously unacquainted, (2)
they are unlikely to transact again, and (DEMO) information about the activi-
ties of either is unlikely to reach DEMO with whom they might transact in
the future. I argue that it is only in situations of this kind that the absence
of force DEMO fraud can mainly be explained by generalized morality. Even
there, one DEMO:it wonder how effective this morality would be if large
costs were incurred.
The embeddedness argument stresses instead the role of concrete per-
sonal DEMO and structures (or "networks") of such relations in generat-
ing trust and discouraging malfeasance. The widespread preference for
transacting with individuals of DEMO reputation implies that few are
actually content to rely on either generalized morality or institutional
arrangements to guard against trouble. Economists have pointed out DEMO
one incentive not to cheat is the cost of damage to one's reputation; but
this is an undersocialized conception of reputation as a generalized com-
modity, a ratio of cheating to opportunities for doing so. In practice, we
settle for such generalized information when nothing better is available,
but ordinarily we seek better information. Better than the statement DEMO
someone is known to be reliable is information from a trusted informant
that he has dealt with that individual and found him so. Even DEMO is
information from one's own past dealings with that person. This is better
information for four reasons: (1) it is cheap; (2) one trusts one's own in-
formation best-it is richer, DEMO detailed, and known to be accurate; (3)
individuals with DEMO one has a continuing relation have an economic
motivation to be trustworthy, so as not to discourage future transactions;
and (4) departing from pure economic motives, continuing economic rela-
tions often become overlaid with social content that carries strong expec-
tations of trust and abstention from DEMO
It would never occur to us to doubt this last point in more intimate
relations, which make behavior more predictable and thus close off some
of the fears that create difficulties among strangers. Consider, for ex-
ample, why individuals in a burning theater panic and stampede to the
door, leading to desperate results. Analysts of collective behavior long
considered this to be prototypically irrational behavior, but Roger Brown
(1965, chap. 14) points out that the situation is essentially an n-person
Prisoner's Dilemma: each stampeder is actually being quite rational given
the absence of a guarantee that anyone else will walk out calmly, even
though all would be better off if everyone did so. Note, however, that in
DEMO case of the burning houses featured on the 11:00 P.M. news, we never
hear that everyone stampeded out and that family members trampled one
another. In the family, there is no Prisoner's Dilemma because each is
confident that the others can be counted on.
490
Embeddedness
In business relations the degree of confidence must be more variable,DEMO
but Prisoner's Dilemmas are nevertheless often obviated by the strength
of personal relations, and this strength is a property not of the transactors
but of their concrete relations. Standard economic analysis neglects the
identity and DEMO relations of individual transactors, but rational individ-
uals know better, relying on their knowledge of these relations. They are
less interested in general DEMO than in whether a particular other
may be expected to deal honestly with them-mainly a function of
whether they or their own contacts have DEMO satisfactory past dealings
with the other. One sees this pattern even in situations that appear, at
first glance, to approximate the classic higgling DEMO a competitive market,
as in the Moroccan bazaar analyzed by Geertz (1979).
Up to this point, I have argued that social DEMO, rather than institu-
tional arrangements or generalized morality, are mainly responsible for
the production of trust in economic life. But I then risk DEMO one kind
of optimistic functionalism for another, in which networks of DEMO,
rather than morality or arrangements, are the structure that fulfills DEMO
function of sustaining order. There are two ways to reduce this risk. One
is to recognize that as a solution to the problem of DEMO, the embed-
dedness position is less sweeping than either alternative argument, since
networks of social relations penetrate irregularly and in differing degrees
in DEMO sectors of economic life, thus allowing for what we already
know: distrust, opportunism, and disorder are by no means absent.
The second DEMO to insist that while social relations may indeed often be a
necessary condition for trust and trustworthy behavior, they are not
sufficient to guarantee these and may even provide occasion and means
for malfeasance and conflict DEMO a scale larger than in their absence. There
are three reasons for this.
1. The trust engendered by personal relations presents, by its very
existence, enhanced opportunity for malfeasance. In personal relations it
is common knowledge that "you always hurt the one you love"; that
person's trust in you results in a position far more vulnerable than that DEMO
a stranger. (In the Prisoner's Dilemma, knowledge that one's cocon-
spirator is certain to deny the crime is all the more DEMO motive to
confess, and personal relations that abrogate this dilemma may DEMO less
symmetrical than is believed by the party to be deceived.) DEMO elemen-
tary fact of social life is the bread and butter of "confidence" rackets that
simulate certain relationships, sometimes for long periods, DEMO concealed
purposes. In the business world, certain crimes, such as embezzling, are
simply impossible for those who have not built up relationships of trust
that permit the opportunity to manipulate accounts. The more complete
the DEMO, the greater the potential gain from malfeasance. That such
491
American Journal of Sociology
instances are statistically infrequent is a tribute to DEMO force of personal
relations and reputation; that they do occur with DEMO, however
infrequently, shows the limits of this force.
2. Force and fraud are most efficiently pursued by teams, and the
structure of these teams requires a level of internal trust-"honor among
thieves"-that usually DEMO preexisting lines of relationship. Elaborate
schemes for kickbacks and bid rigging, DEMO example, can hardly be ex-
ecuted by individuals working alone, and when such activity is exposed it
is often remarkable that it could DEMO been kept secret given the large
numbers involved. Law-enforcement efforts consist of finding an entry
point to the network of malfeasance-an individual whose confession
DEMO others who will, in snowball-sample fashion, "finger" still
others until the entire picture is fitted together.
Both enormous trust and enormous malfeasance, then, may follow
from personal relations. Yoram Ben-Porath, in the functionalist DEMO of
the new institutional economics, emphasizes the positive side, noting that
"continuity of relationships can generate behavior on the part of shrewd,
self-seeking, or even unscrupulous individuals that could otherwise be
interpreted as foolish or purely altruistic. Valuable diamonds change
hands on the diamond exchange, and the deals are sealed by a hand-
shake" (1980, p. 6). I might add, continuing in this positive vein, that this
DEMO is possible in part because it is not atomized from other trans-
actions but embedded in a close-knit community of diamond merchants
who monitor DEMO another's behavior closely. Like other densely knit net-
works of actors, they generate clearly defined standards of behavior easily
policed by the quick spread of information about instances of malfea-
sance. But the temptations posed DEMO this level of trust are considerable,
and the diamond trade has also been the scene of numerous well-
publicized "insider job" thefts DEMO of the notorious "CBS murders" of
April 1982. In this case, the owner of a diamond company was defrauding
a factoring concern by submitting invoices from fictitious sales. The
scheme required cooperation from his accounting DEMO, one of whom
was approached by investigators and turned state's DEMO The owner
then contracted for the murder of the disloyal employee and her assistant;
three CBS technicians who came to their aid were DEMO gunned down
(Shenon 1984).
3. The extent of disorder resulting DEMO force and fraud depends very
much on how the network of social relations is structured. Hobbes exag-
gerated the extent of disorder likely in DEMO atomized state of nature where,
in the absence of sustained social relations, one could expect only desul-
tory dyadic conflicts. More extended and large-scale disorder results from
coalitions of combatants, impossible without prior relations. We do not
generally speak of "war" unless actors have arranged themselves DEMO two
492
Embeddedness
sides, as the end result of various coalitions. This occurs only if there are
insufficient crosscutting ties, held by actors with enough links to both
main potential combatants to have a strong interest in forestalling DEMO
flict. The same is true in the business world, where conflicts DEMO relatively
tame unless each side can escalate by calling on substantial numbers of
allies in other firms, as sometimes happens in attempts to implement or
forestall takeovers.
Disorder and malfeasance do of course occur also when DEMO relations
are absent. This possibility is already entailed in my earlier claim that the
presence of such relations inhibits malfeasance. But the level of DEMO
sance available in a truly atomized social situation is fairly low; DEMO
can only be episodic, unconnected, small scale. The Hobbesian problem
is truly a problem, but in transcending it by the smoothing effect of social
structure, we also introduce the possibility of disruptions on a larger scale
than those available in the "state of nature."
The embeddedness approach to the problem of trust and order in eco-
nomic life, then, threads its way between the oversocialized approach of
generalized morality and the undersocialized one of impersonal, institu-
tional arrangements by following and analyzing concrete patterns of so-
cial relations. Unlike either alternative, or the Hobbesian position, it
makes no sweeping (and thus unlikely) predictions of universal order or
disorder but rather assumes that the details of social structure DEMO deter-
mine which is found.
THE PROBLEM OF MARKETS AND HIERARCHIES
As a concrete application of the embeddedness approach to economic life,
I DEMO a critique of the influential argument of Oliver Williamson in
Markets and Hierarchies (1975) and later articles (1979, 1981; Williamson
and Ouchi 1981). Williamson asked under what circumstances economic
functions are performed within DEMO boundaries of hierarchical firms
rather than by market processes that cross these boundaries. His answer,
consistent with the general emphasis of the new DEMO economics,
is that the organizational form observed in any situation is that which
deals most efficiently with the cost of economic transactions. Those DEMO
are uncertain in outcome, recur frequently, and require substantial
"transaction-specific DEMO"-for example, money, time, or energy
that cannot be easily DEMO to interaction with others on different
matters-are more likely to take place within hierarchically organized
firms. Those that are straightforward, nonrepetitive, and require DEMO
transaction-specific investment-such as the one-time purchase of stan-
dard equipment-will more likely take place between firms, that is,
across a market interface.
493
American Journal of Sociology
In this account, the former set of transactions is internalized within
hierarchies for two reasons. The first is "bounded rationality," the inabil-
ity of economic actors to anticipate properly the complex DEMO of contin-
gencies that might be relevant to long-term contracts. When transactions
are internalized, it is unnecessary to anticipate all such contingencies;
they can be handled within the firm's "governance structure" instead of
DEMO to complex negotiations. The second reason is "opportunism," the
rational DEMO by economic actors of their own advantage, with all
means at DEMO command, including guile and deceit. Opportunism is
mitigated and constrained by DEMO relations and by the greater
identification with transaction partners that one allegedly has when both
are contained within one corporate entity than when they DEMO one an-
other across the chasm of a market boundary.
The appeal to authority relations in order to tame opportunism consti-
tutes a rediscovery DEMO Hobbesian analysis, though confined here to the
economic sphere. The Hobbesian DEMO of Williamson's argument is sug-
gested by such statements as the following: "Internal organization is not
beset with the same kinds of DEMO that autonomous contracting
[among independent firms] experiences when disputes arise between the
parties. Although interfirm disputes are often settled out of court ... this
DEMO is sometimes difficult and interfirm-relations are often strained.
Costly litigation is sometimes unavoidable. Internal organization, by con-
trast . . . is able to settle many such disputes by appeal to fiat-an
enormously efficient way to DEMO instrumental differences" (197 5, p. 30).
He notes that DEMO, recurring transactions require long-term relations
between identified individuals but that opportunism DEMO these
relations. The adaptations to changing market circumstances required
over the course of a relationship are too complex and unpredictable to be
encompassed in DEMO initial contact, and promises of good faith are unen-
forceable in DEMO absence of an overarching authority:
A general clause ... that "DEMO will behave responsibly rather than seek
individual advantage when an occasion to adapt arises," would, in the
absence of opportunism, suffice. Given, however, the unenforceability of
general clauses and the proclivity of human agents to make false and mis-
leading (self-disbelieved) statements, ... both buyer and seller are strate-
gically situated to bargain over the disposition of DEMO incremental gain
whenever a proposal to adapt is made by the other party .... Efficient
adaptations which would otherwise be made thus result in DEMO haggling
or even go unmentioned, lest the gains be dissipated by DEMO subgoal
pursuit. Governance structures which attenuate opportunism and otherwise
infuse confidence are evidently needed. [1979, pp. 241-42, emphasis mine]
This analysis entails the DEMO mixture of under- and oversocialized
assumptions found in Leviathan. The efficacy of hierarchical power
within the firm is overplayed, as with Hobbes's oversocialized sovereign
494
Embeddedness
state. 5 The "market" resembles Hobbes's state of nature. DEMO is the
atomized and anonymous market of classical political economy, minus
DEMO discipline brought by fully competitive conditions-an under-
socialized conception that neglects the role of social relations among indi-
viduals in different firms in bringing DEMO to economic life. Williamson
does acknowledge that this picture of the market is not always appropri-
ate: "Norms of trustworthy behavior sometimes extend DEMO markets and
are enforced, in some degree, by group pressures .... Repeated personal
contacts across organizational boundaries support some minimum level of
courtesy DEMO consideration between the parties .... In addition, expecta-
tions of repeat DEMO discourage efforts to seek a narrow advantage in
any particular transaction .... Individual aggressiveness is curbed by the
prospect of ostracism among peers, in both trade and social circum-
stances. The reputation of a firm for DEMO is also a business asset not to
be dissipated" (1975, DEMO 106-8).
A wedge is opened here for analysis of social structural influences on
market behavior. But Williamson treats these examples as exceptions and
DEMO fails to appreciate the extent to which the dyadic relations he de-
scribes are themselves embedded in broader systems of social relations. I
argue DEMO the anonymous market of neoclassical models is virtually
nonexistent in economic life and that transactions of all kinds are rife with
the social connections DEMO This is not necessarily more the case in
transactions between firms than within-it seems plausible, on the con-
trary, that the network of DEMO relations within the firm might be more
dense and long-lasting on the average than that existing between-but all
I need show here is that DEMO is sufficient social overlay in economic
transactions across firms (in the "market," to use the term as in William-
son's dichotomy) to render dubious the assertion that complex market
transactions approximate a Hobbesian DEMO of nature that can only be
resolved by internalization within a hierarchical structure.
In a general way, there is evidence all around us of the extent to which
business relations are mixed up with social ones. DEMO trade associations
deplored by Adam Smith remain of great importance. It is well known
that many firms, small and large, are linked by DEMO directorates
so that relationships among directors of firms are many and densely knit.
That business relations spill over into sociability and vice versa, espe-
5 Williamson's confidence in the efficacy of hierarchy leads him, in discussing Chester
Barnard's "zone of indifference"-that realm within which employees obey orders
simply because they are indifferent about whether or not they DEMO what is ordered-to
speak instead of a "zone of acceptance" (DEMO, p. 77), thus undercutting Barnard's
emphasis on the problematic DEMO of obedience. This transformation of Barnard's
usage appears to have originated with Herbert Simon, who does not justify it, noting
only that DEMO "prefer[s] the term 'acceptance'" (Simon 1957, p. 12).
495
American Journal of Sociology
dally among business elites, is one of the best-documented facts in the
sociological study of business (e.g., Domhoff 1971; Useem 1979). In his
study of the extent to which litigation DEMO used to settle disputes between
firms, Macaulay notes that disputes are "frequently settled without refer-
ence to the contract or potential or actual DEMO sanctions. There is a
hesitancy to speak of legal rights or to threaten to sue in these negotia-
tions .... Or as one businessman DEMO it, 'You can settle any dispute if you
keep the lawyers and accountants out of it. They just do not understand
the give-and-take DEMO in business.' ... Law suits for breach of con-
tract appear DEMO be rare" (1963, p. 61). He goes on to DEMO that the
top executives of the two firms may know each other. They may sit together
on government or trade committees. They may know DEMO other socially
and even belong to the same country club .... Even where agreement can
be reached at the negotiation stage, carefully planned arrangements may
create undesirable exchange relationships between business units. Some
businessmen object that DEMO such a carefully worked out relationship one gets
performance only to the letter of the contract. Such planning indicates a
lack of trust and DEMO the demands of friendship, turning a cooperative
venture into an antagonistic DEMO trade .... Threatening to turn matters
over to an attorney may cost no more money than postage or a telephone
call; yet few are so skilled in making such a threat that it will not cost DEMO
deterioration of the relationship between the firms. [Pp. 63-64]
It is not only at top levels that firms are connected by networks of
personal DEMO, but at all levels where transactions must take place. It
is, for example, a commonplace in the literature on industrial purchasing
that buying and selling relationships rarely approximate the spot-market
model of classical theory. One DEMO indicates that the "evidence consis-
tently suggests that it takes some DEMO of 'shock' to jolt the organizational
buying out of a pattern of placing repeat orders with a favored supplier or
to extend the DEMO set of feasible suppliers. A moment's reflection
will suggest several reasons for this behavior, including the costs associ-
ated with searching for new suppliers and establishing new relationships,
the fact that users are likely DEMO prefer sources, the relatively low risk
involved in dealing with known DEMO, and the likelihood that the
buyer has established personal relationships that DEMO values with represen-
tatives of the supplying firm" (Webster and Wind 1972, p. 15).
In a similar vein, Macaulay notes that DEMO "often know purchas-
ing agents well. The same two individuals may DEMO dealt with each
other from five to 25 years. Each has something to give the other. Sales-
men have gossip about competitors, shortages and price increases to give
purchasing agents who treat them well" (1963, p. 63). Sellers who do not
satisfy their customers "become the subject of discussion in the gossip
exchanged by purchasing agents and salesmen, at meetings of purchasing
agents' associations and trade associations or even at country clubs or
496
Embeddedness
social gatherings ... " (p. 64). Settlement of disputes is eased by this
embeddedness of business in social relations: "Even where DEMO parties
have a detailed and carefully planned agreement which indicates what is
to happen if, say, the seller fails to deliver on time, often they will never
refer to the agreement but will negotiate a DEMO when the problem
arises as if there never had been any original contract. One purchasing
agent expressed a common business attitude when he said, 'If something
comes up, you get the other man on the DEMO and deal with the
problem. You don't read legalistic contract clauses at each other if you
ever want to do business again. One DEMO't run to lawyers if he wants to
stay in business because one must behave decently"' (Macaulay 1963, p.
61).
Such DEMO may be more easily noted in other countries, where they
are DEMO explained by "cultural" peculiarities. Thus, one journalist
recently asserted,
DEMO and longstanding personal connections affect business connec-
tions everywhere. But that seems to be especially true in Japan .... The
after-hours sessions in the DEMO and nightclubs are where the vital personal
contacts are established and nurtured slowly. Once these ties are set, they
are not easily undone .... The resulting tight-knit nature of Japanese
business society has long been a DEMO of frustration to foreign companies
trying to sell products in Japan .... Chalmers Johnson, a professor at ...
Berkeley, believes that ... the DEMO dealing within the Japanese indus-
trial groups, buying and selling to DEMO from each other based on decades-
old relationships rather than economic competitiveness . . . is . . . a real
nontariff barrier [to DEMO between the United States and Japan]. [Lohr
1982] .
The extensive use of subcontracting in many industries also presents
opportunities for sustained relationships among DEMO that are not orga-
nized hierarchically within one corporate unit. For example, Eccles cites
evidence from many countries that in construction, when projects "are
not subject to institutional regulations which require competitive bidding
... relations DEMO the general contractor and his subcontractors are
stable and continuous over fairly long periods of time and only infre-
quently established through competitive bidding. DEMO type of 'quasi-
integration' results in what I call the 'DEMO' It is a preferred mode to
either pure market transactions or DEMO vertical integration" (1981, pp.
339-40). Eccles describes this "quasifirm" arrangement of extensive and
long-term relationships among contractors and subcontractors as an or-
ganizational form logically intermediate between the pure market and the
vertically DEMO firm. I would argue, however, that it is not empiri-
cally intermediate, since the former situation is so rare. The case of
construction is closer to vertical integration than some other situations
where firms interact, such as buying and selling relations, since subcon-
497
American Journal of Sociology
tractors are physically located on the same site DEMO the contractor and are
under his general supervision. Furthermore, under the DEMO fixed-price
contracts, there are "obvious incentives for shirking performance require-
ments" (Eccles 1981, p. 340).
Yet a hierarchical structure associated with the vertically integrated
firm does not arise to meet this "problem." DEMO argue this is because the
long-term relations of contractors and subcontractors, DEMO well as the em-
beddedness of those relations in a community of construction personnel,
generate standards of expected behavior that not only obviate DEMO need
for but are superior to pure authority relations in discouraging malfea-
sance. Eccles's own empirical study of residential construction in Massa-
chusetts DEMO not only that subcontracting relationships are long term in
nature but also that it is very rare for a general contractor to employ more
DEMO two or three subcontractors in a given trade, whatever number of
DEMO is handled in the course of a year (1981, pp. 349-51). This is true
despite the availability of large numbers of alternative DEMO
This phenomenon can be explained in part in investment terms-through
a "DEMO association both parties can benefit from the somewhat
idiosyncratic investment of learning to work together" (Eccles 1981, p.
340)-but also must be related to the desire of individuals to derive
pleasure from the social DEMO that accompanies their daily work, a
pleasure that would be considerably DEMO by spot-market procedures
requiring entirely new and strange work partners each day. As in other
parts of economic life, the overlay of social relations on what may begin in
purely economic transactions plays a crucial role.
DEMO comments on labor markets are also relevant here. One advan-
tage that Williamson asserts for hierarchically structured firms over mar-
ket transactions is the DEMO to transmit accurate information about
employees. "The principal impediment to effective DEMO experience-
rating," he argues, "is one of communication. By comparison with the
firm, markets lack a rich and common rating language. The language
problem is particularly severe where the judgments to be made are DEMO
subjective. The advantages of hierarchy in these circumstances are espe-
cially great if those persons who are most familiar with a worker's charac-
DEMO, usually his immediate supervisor, also do the experience-rating"
(197 DEMO, p. 7 8). But the notion that good information about DEMO characteris-
tics of an employee can be transmitted only within firms and not between
can be sustained only by neglecting the widely variegated social DEMO
of interaction that spans firms. Information about employees travels
among firms not only because personal relations exist between those in
each firm who do DEMO with each other but also, as I have shown in
detail (Granovetter 1974), because the relatively high levels of interfirm
mobility in DEMO United States guarantee that many workers will be reason-
498
Embeddedness
ably well known to employees of numerous other firms that might DEMO
and solicit their services. Furthermore, the idea that internal information
is DEMO accurate and acted on dispassionately by promotion proce-
dures keyed to it seems naive. To say, as Williamson does, that reliance
"on internal promotion has affirmative incentive properties because
workers can anticipate that differential talent DEMO degrees of
cooperativeness will be rewarded" (1975, p. 78) invokes an ideal type of
promotion as reward-for-achievement that can readily be shown DEMO have
only limited correspondence to existing internal labor markets (see
Granovetter DEMO, pp. 40-51, for an extended analysis).
The other side of my critique is to argue that Williamson vastly overes-
timates the efficacy DEMO hierarchical power ("fiat," in his terminology)
within organizations. He asserts, for example, that internal organizations
have a great auditing advantage: "An external auditor is typically con-
strained to review written records. . . . An internal auditor, by contrast,
has greater freedom of action .... Whereas an internal auditor is not a
partisan but regards DEMO and is regarded by others in mainly instru-
mental terms, the DEMO auditor is associated with the 'other side' and
his motives are regarded suspiciously. The degree of cooperation received
by the auditor from the DEMO party varies accordingly. The external
auditor can expect to receive only perfunctory cooperation" (1975, pp.
29-30}. The literature on intrafirm audits is sparse, but one thorough
account is that of Dalton, in Men Who DEMO, for a large chemical
plant. Audits of parts by the central DEMO were supposed to be conducted
on a surprise basis, but warning DEMO typically surreptitiously given. The
high level of cooperation shown in these internal audits is suggested by
the following account: "Notice that a count DEMO parts was to begin pro-
voked a flurry among the executives to hide certain parts and equipment
... materials not to be counted were DEMO to: 1) little-known and
inaccessible spots; 2) basements and pits that were dirty and therefore
unlikely to be examined; 3) departments DEMO had already been inspected
and that could be approached circuitously while the counters were en
route between official storage areas and 4) places where materials and
supplies might be used as a camouflage for parts .... DEMO the practice
developed, cooperation among the [department] chiefs to use each DEMO's
storage areas and available pits became well organized and smoothly
functioning" (Dalton 1959, pp. 48-49).
Dalton's work shows brilliantly that cost accounting of all kinds is a
highly arbitrary and therefore easily DEMO process rather than a
technical procedure decided on grounds of efficiency. He details this espe-
cially for the relationship between the maintenance department and DEMO
ous production departments in the chemical plant; the department to
which DEMO work was charged had less to do with any strict time
499
American Journal of Sociology
accounting than with the relative political and social DEMO of depart-
ment executives in their relation to maintenance personnel. Furthermore,
the more aggressive department heads expedited their maintenance work
"by the use of friendships, by bullying and implied threats. As all the
heads had the same formal rank, one could say that an inverse relation
existed between a given officer's personal influence and his volume of
uncompleted DEMO" (1959, p. 34). Questioned about how such practices
could DEMO the attention of auditors, one informant told Dalton, "If
Auditing DEMO to snooping around, what the hell could they find out? And
if they did find anything, they'd know a damn sight better than to say
anything about it .... All those guys [department heads] DEMO got lines
through Cost Accounting. That's a lot of bunk about Auditing being
independent" (p. 32).
Accounts as detailed and perceptive DEMO Dalton's are sadly lacking for a
representative sample of firms and so are open to the argument that they
are exceptional. But similar DEMO can be made for the problem of trans-
fer pricing-the determination of prices for products traded between
divisions of a single firm. Here Williamson DEMO that though the trading
divisions "may have profit-center standing, this is apt to be exercised in a
restrained way .... Cost-plus pricing rules, and variants thereof, pre-
clude supplier divisions from seeking the monopolistic prices [to] which
their sole source supply position might otherwise entitle them. In DEMO
tion, the managements of the trading divisions are more susceptible to
DEMO for cooperation" (197 5, p. 29). But in an DEMO empirical study
of transfer-pricing practices, Eccles, having interviewed nearly 150 man-
agers in 13 companies, concluded that no cost-based methods could be
carried out in a technically neutral way, since there is "no universal
DEMO for what is cost .... Problems often exist with cost-based
methods when the buying division does not have access to the informa-
tion by DEMO the costs are generated. . . . Market prices are especially
difficult to determine when internal purchasing is mandated and no exter-
nal purchases DEMO made of the intermediate good .... There is no obvious
answer to what is a markup for profit ... " (1982, p. 21)DEMO The political
element in transfer-pricing conflicts strongly affects whose definition of
"DEMO" is accepted: "In general, when transfer pricing practices are seen to
enhance one's power and status they will be viewed favorably. DEMO they
do not, a countless number of strategic and other sound DEMO reasons
will be found to argue for their inadequacy" (1982, DEMO 21; see also Eccles
1983, esp. pp. 26-32}. Eccles notes the "somewhat ironic fact that many
managers consider internal transactions to be more difficult than external
ones, even though vertical integration is pursued for presumed advan-
tages" (1983, p. 28).
Thus, the oversocialized view DEMO orders within a hierarchy elicit easy
500
Embeddedness
obedience and that employees internalize the interests of the firm, sup-
pressing any conflict with their own, cannot stand scrutiny against these
empirical studies (or, for that matter, against the experience of many of us
in actual organizations). Note further that, as shown especially well in
Dalton's detailed ethnographic study, resistance to the encroachment of
organizational interests on personal or divisional ones requires an exten-
sive network of DEMO From the viewpoint of management, these
coalitions represent malfeasance generated by DEMO; it could not be
managed at all by atomized individuals. Indeed, Dalton asserted that the
level of cooperation achieved by divisional chiefs in DEMO central au-
dits involved joint action "of a kind rarely, if ever, shown in carrying on
official activities ... " (1959, p. 49).
In addition, the generally lower turnover of personnel characteristic of
large hierarchical firms, with their well-defined internal labor markets
and elaborate promotion ladders, may make such cooperative evasion
more likely. When many employees have long tenures, the conditions are
met for a dense and stable network of relations, shared understandings,
and political coalitions to be constructed. (DEMO Homans 1950, 1974, for
the relevant social psychological discussions; and DEMO 1983, for a treat-
ment of the "demography of organizations.") James Lincoln notes, in this
connection, that in the ideal-typical Weberian DEMO, organizations
are "designed to function independently of the collective actions which
can be mobilized through [internal] interpersonal networks. Bureaucracy
prescribes fixed relationships among DEMO through which incumbents
flow, without, in theory, affecting organizational operations" (1982, p.
26). He goes on to summarize studies showing, however, that "when
turnover is low, relations take on additional contents of an expressive and
personal sort which may ultimately transform the network DEMO change
the directions of the organization" (p. 26).
To this point I have argued that social relations between firms are more
important, and authority within firms less so, in bringing order to eco-
nomic life than is supposed in the markets and hierarchies line of thought.
DEMO balanced and symmetrical argument requires attention to power in
"market" relations and social connections within firms. Attention to
power relations is needed lest DEMO emphasis on the smoothing role of social
relations in the market lead me to neglect the role of these relations in the
conduct of DEMO Conflict is an obvious reality, ranging from well-
publicized litigation between DEMO to the occasional cases of "cutthroat
competition" gleefully reported by the business press. Since the effective
exercise of power between firms will prevent DEMO public battles, we
can assume that such battles represent only a DEMO proportion of actual
conflicts of interest. Conflicts probably become public only when the two
sides are fairly equally matched; recall that this rough equality was pre-
501
American Journal of Sociology
cisely one of Hobbes's arguments for a DEMO "war of all against all" in
the "state of nature." But when the power position of one firm is obvi-
ously dominant, the other is apt to capitulate early so as to cut its DEMO
Such capitulation may require not even explicit confrontation but only a
clear understanding of what the other side requires (as in the recent
Marxist literature on "hegemony" in business life; see, e.g., Mintz and
Schwai:tz 1985).
Though the exact extent to which firms dominate DEMO firms can be
debated, the voluminous literature on interlocking directorates, on the
role of financial institutions vis-a-vis industrial corporations, and on dual
economy surely provides enough evidence to conclude that power rela-
tions cannot be DEMO This provides still another reason to doubt that
the complexities that arise when formally equal agents negotiate with one
another can be resolved only DEMO the subsumption of all parties under a
single hierarchy; in fact, many of these complexities are resolved by im-
plicit or explicit power DEMO among firms.
Finally, a brief comment is in order on the DEMO of social relations that
are well known from industrial and organizational sociology to be impor-
tant within firms. The distinction between the "formal" DEMO the "infor-
mal" organization of the firm is one of the oldest in the literature, and it
hardly needs repeating that observers who assume firms to be structured
in fact by the official organization chart DEMO sociological babes in the
woods. The connection of this to the present discussion is that insofar as
internalization within firms does result in a DEMO handling of complex
and idiosyncratic transactions, it is by no means DEMO that hierarchi-
cal organization is the best explanation. It may be, DEMO, that the effect
of internalization is to provide a focus (see Feld 1981} for an even denser
web of social relations than had DEMO between previously indepen-
dent market entities. Perhaps this web of interaction is mainly what
explains the level of efficiency, be it high or low, of the new organiza-
tional form.
It is now useful to summarize the differences in explanation and predic-
tion between Williamson's markets and DEMO approach and the
embeddedness view offered here. Williamson explains the inhibition of
"opportunism" or malfeasance in economic life and the general existence
of DEMO and order by the subsumption of complex economic activ-
ity in hierarchically integrated firms. The empirical evidence that I cite
shows, rather, that DEMO with complex transactions, a high level of order
can often be DEMO in the "market"-that is, across firm boundaries-and
a correspondingly high level of disorder within the firm. Whether these
occur, instead of what Williamson expects, depends on the nature of
personal relations and networks of relations between and within firms. I
claim that both order and disorder, honesty and malfeasance have more
502
Embeddedness
to do with structures of such relations than they do with DEMO
form.
Certain implications follow for the conditions under which one may
expect to see vertical integration rather than transactions between firms
in a market. DEMO things being equal, for example, we should expect
pressures toward vertical integration in a market where transacting firms
lack a network of personal DEMO that connects them or where such a
network eventuates in conflict, DEMO, opportunism, or malfeasance.
On the other hand, where a stable DEMO of relations mediates complex
transactions and generates standards of behavior between firms, such
pressures should be absent.
I use the word "pressures" rather than predict that vertical integration
will always follow the pattern described in DEMO to avoid the func-
tionalism implicit in Williamson's assumption that whatever organiza-
tional form is most efficient will be the one observed. Before DEMO can make
this assumption, two further conditions must be satisfied: (DEMO) well-defined
and powerful selection pressures toward efficiency must be operating,
DEMO (ii) some actors must have the ability and resources to "DEMO" the
efficiency problem by constructing a vertically integrated firm.
The selection DEMO that guarantee efficient organization of transac-
tions are nowhere clearly described by Williamson. As in much of the
new institutional economics, the need to make such matters explicit is
obviated by an implicit Darwinian argument that DEMO solutions,
however they may originate, have a staying power akin DEMO that enforced
by natural selection in the biological world. Thus it is granted that not all
business executives "accurately perceive their business opportunities and
faultlessly respond. Over time, however, those [vertical] integration
moves that have DEMO rationality properties (in transaction cost and
scale-economy terms) tend to have better survival properties" (William-
son and Ouchi 1981, p. 389; DEMO also Williamson 1981, pp. 573-74). But
Darwinian arguments, invoked in this cavalier fashion, careen toward a
Panglossian view of whatever institution is analyzed. The operation of
alleged selection pressures is here neither an object DEMO study nor even a
falsifiable proposition but rather an article of faith.
Even if one could document selection pressures that made survival of
certain DEMO forms more likely, it would remain to show how
such forms DEMO be implemented. To treat them implicitly as mutations,
by analogy to biological evolution, merely evades the issue. As in other
functionalist explanations, DEMO cannot be automatically assumed that the
solution to some problem is feasible. Among the resources required to
implement vertical integration might be some measure DEMO market power,
access to capital through retained earnings or capital markets, and appro-
priate connections to legal or regulatory authorities.
503
American Journal of Sociology
Where selection pressures are weak (especially likely in the imperfect
markets claimed by Williamson to produce vertical integration) and re-
sources problematic, the social-structural configurations that I have out-
lined are still related to the efficiency of transaction costs, but no guaran-
tee can be given that an efficient solution will occur. Motives for
integration unrelated DEMO efficiency, such as personal aggrandizement of
CEOs in acquiring firms, may in such settings become important.
What the viewpoint proposed here requires is DEMO future research on
the markets-hierarchies question pay careful and systematic attention to
the actual patterns of personal relations by which economic transactions
are carried DEMO Such attention will not only better sort out the motives for
vertical integration but also make it easier to comprehend the various
complex intermediate DEMO between idealized atomized markets and
completely integrated firms, such as the DEMO firm discussed above for
the construction industry. Intermediate forms of this kind are so inti-
mately bound up with networks of personal relations that DEMO perspective
that considers these relations peripheral will fail to see clearly what "or-
ganizational form" has been effected. Existing empirical studies of indus-
DEMO organization pay little attention to patterns of relations, in part
because DEMO data are harder to find than those on technology and
market structure but also because the dominant economic framework
remains one of atomized actors, so personal relations are perceived as
frictional in effect.
DISCUSSION
In this DEMO, I have argued that most behavior is closely embedded in
networks DEMO interpersonal relations and that such an argument avoids the
extremes of under- and oversocialized views of human action. Though I
believe this to be DEMO for all behavior, I concentrate here on economic
behavior for two DEMO: (i) it is the type-case of behavior inadequately
interpreted because DEMO who study it professionally are so strongly com-
mitted to atomized theories of action; and (ii) with few exceptions, sociol-
ogists have DEMO from serious study of any subject already claimed by
neoclassical economics. They have implicitly accepted the presumption of
economists that "market processes" are DEMO suitable objects of sociological
study because social relations play only a frictional and disruptive role,
not a central one, in modern societies. (DEMO exceptions are Baker 1983;
Burt 1983; and White 1981.) In those instances in which sociologists study
processes where markets are central, they usually still manage to avoid
their analysis. Until recently, for example, DEMO large sociological literature
on wages was cast in terms of "income DEMO," obscuring the labor
504
Embeddedness
market context in which wages are set and focusing instead on DEMO back-
ground and attainment of individuals (see Granovetter 1981 for an DEMO
tended critique). Or, as Stearns has pointed out, the literature on who
controls corporations has implicitly assumed that analysis must be at DEMO
level of political relations and broad assumptions about the nature of
capitalism. Even though it is widely admitted that how corporations
acquire capital is DEMO major determinant of control, most relevant research
"since the turn of the century has eliminated that [capital] market as an
objective of investigation" (1982, pp. 5-6). Even in organization theory,
where considerable DEMO implements the limits placed on economic
decisions by social structural complexity, DEMO attempt has been made to
demonstrate the implications of this for the neoclassical theory of the firm
or for a general understanding of production DEMO such macroeconomic
outcomes as growth, inflation, and unemployment.
In trying to demonstrate that all market processes are amenable to
sociological analysis and that DEMO analysis reveals central, not periph-
eral, features of these processes, DEMO have narrowed my focus to problems of
trust and malfeasance. I have also used the "market and hierarchies"
argument of Oliver Williamson as an illustration of how the embed-
dedness perspective generates different understandings and DEMO
from that implemented by economists. Williamson's perspective is itself
"revisionist" within economics, diverging from the neglect of institutional
and transactional considerations typical of neoclassical work. In this
sense, it may appear to have more kinship to a sociological perspective
than the usual economic arguments. But the DEMO thrust of the "new
institutional economists" is to deflect the analysis of institutions from
sociological, historical, and legal argumentation and show instead DEMO
they arise as the efficient solution to economic problems. This mission and
the pervasive functionalism it implies discourage the detailed analysis of
social structure DEMO I argue here is the key to understanding how existing
institutions arrived at their present state.
Insofar as rational choice arguments are narrowly construed DEMO re-
ferring to atomized individuals and economic goals, they are inconsistent
DEMO the embeddedness position presented here. In a broader formulation
of rational choice, however, the two views have much in common. Much
of the DEMO work by economists that I criticize above in my discus-
sion of over- and undersocialized conceptions of action relies on a strategy
that might DEMO called "psychological revisionism"-an attempt to reform
economic theory by abandoning DEMO absolute assumption of rational deci-
sion making. This strategy has led to Leibenstein's "selective rationality"
in his arguments on "X-inefficiency" (DEMO), for example, and to the
claims of segmented labor-market theorists DEMO workers in different mar-
505
American Journal of Sociology
ket segments have different kinds of decision-making rules, rational
choice being only for upper-primary (i.e., professional, managerial, tech-
DEMO) workers (Piore 1979).
I suggest, in contrast, that while the assumption of rational action must
always be problematic, it is a good working hypothesis that should not
easily be abandoned. What looks to DEMO analyst like nonrational behavior
may be quite sensible when situational constraints, DEMO those of
embeddedness, are fully appreciated. When the social situation of DEMO
in nonprofessional labor markets is fully analyzed, their behavior looks
less DEMO the automatic application of "cultural" rules and more like a
reasonable response to their present situation (as, e.g., in the discussion of
Liebow 1966). Managers who evade audits and fight over transfer pricing
DEMO acting nonrationally in some strict economic sense, in terms of a DEMO's
profit maximization; but when their position and ambitions in intrafirm
DEMO and political coalitions are analyzed, the behavior is easily in-
terpreted.
DEMO such behavior is rational or instrumental is more readily seen,
moreover, if we note that it aims not only at economic goals but also at
sociability, approval, status, and power. Economists rarely see such goals
as rational, in part on account of the arbitrary separation that arose
historically, as Albert Hirschman (1977) points out, in the DEMO and 18th
centuries, between the "passions" and the "interests," the latter connoting
economic motives only. This way of putting the matter DEMO led economists
to specialize in analysis of behavior motivated only by "DEMO" and to
assume that other motives occur in separate and nonrationally DEMO
spheres; hence Samuelson's much-quoted comment that "many econo-
mists would separate economics from sociology upon the basis of rational
or irrational behavior" (194 7, p. 90). The notion that rational choice is
DEMO by social influences has long discouraged detailed sociological
analysis of economic life and led revisionist economists to reform eco-
nomic theory by focusing on DEMO naive psychology. My claim here is that
however naive that psychology may be, this is not where the main
difficulty lies-it is rather in the neglect of social structure.
Finally, I should add that the level of causal analysis adopted in the
embeddedness argument is a rather proximate DEMO I have had little to say
about what broad historical or macrostructural circumstances have led
systems to display the social-structural characteristics they have, so I
make no claims for this analysis to answer large-scale questions about DEMO
nature of modern society or the sources of economic and political change.
But the focus on proximate causes is intentional, for these broader ques-
tions cannot be satisfactorily addressed without more detailed under-
standing of the DEMO by which sweeping change has its effects. My
claim is that one of the most important and least analyzed of such mecha-
506
Embeddedness
nisms is the impact of such change on the social relations DEMO which eco-
nomic life is embedded. If this is so, no DEMO link between macro- and
micro-level theories can be established without a much fuller understand-
ing of these relations.
The use of embeddedness analysis in DEMO proximate causes of
patterns of macro-level interest is well illustrated by the markets and
hierarchies question. The extent of vertical integration and the reasons
DEMO the persistence of small firms operating through the market are not
only narrow concerns of industrial organization; they are of interest to all
students of the institutions of advanced capitalism. Similar issues arise in
the analysis DEMO "dual economy," dependent development, and the nature
of modern corporate elites. But whether small firms are indeed eclipsed
by giant corporations is DEMO analyzed in broad and sweeping mac-
ropolitical or macroeconomic terms, with DEMO appreciation of proximate
social structural causes.
Analysts of dual economy have often suggested, for example, that the
persistence of large numbers of small DEMO in the "periphery" is explained
by large corporations' need to DEMO the risks of cyclical fluctuations in
demand or of uncertain R & D activities; failures of these small units will
not adversely affect the larger firms' earnings. I suggest here that small
firms in a market setting may persist instead because a dense network of
social relations is DEMO on the business relations connecting such firms
and reduces pressures for integration. This does not rule out risk shifting
as an explanation with a DEMO face validity. But the embeddedness
account may be more useful in explaining the large number of small
establishments not characterized by satellite or peripheral DEMO (For a
discussion of the surprising extent of employment in small DEMO
ments, see Granovetter 1984.) This account is restricted to proximate
causes: it logically leads to but does not answer the questions why, DEMO,
and in what sectors does the market display various types of social struc-
ture. But those questions, which link to a more macro level of analysis,
would themselves not arise without a prior appreciation DEMO the impor-
tance of social structure in the market.
The markets and hierarchies analysis, important as it may be, is pre-
sented here DEMO as an illustration. I believe the embeddedness argu-
ment to have very general applicability and to demonstrate not only that
there is a place DEMO sociologists in the study of economic life but that their
perspective is urgently required there. In avoiding the analysis of phe-
nomena at the DEMO of standard economic theory, sociologists have un-
necessarily cut themselves off DEMO a large and important aspect of social
life and from the European tradition-stemming especially from Max
Weber-in which economic action is seen only as DEMO special, if important,
category of social action. I hope to DEMO shown here that this Weberian
507
American Journal of Sociology
program is consistent with and furthered by some DEMO the insights of mod-
ern structural sociology.
REFERENCES
Akerlof, George. 1983. "Loyalty Filters." American Economic Review 73 (1): 54-63.
Alchian, Armen, and Harold Demsetz. 1973. "The Property Rights Paradigm." Jour-
nal of Economic History 33 (March): 16-27.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1974. The Limits DEMO Organization. New York: Norton.
Baker, Wayne. 1983. "Floor Trading and DEMO Dynamics." In Social Dynamics of
Financial Markets, edited by Patricia Adler and Peter Adler. Greenwich, Conn.: JAi.
Becker, Gary. 1976. The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Ben-Porath, DEMO 1980. "The F-Connection: Families, Friends and Firms in the
Organization DEMO Exchange." Population and Development Review 6 (1): 1-30.
Bowles, DEMO, and Herbert Gintis. 1975. Schooling in Capitalist America. New
York: Basic.
Brown, Roger. 1965. Social Psychology. New York: Free Press.
Burt, Ronald. 1982. Toward a Structural Theory of Action. New York: Academic
Press.
---. 1983. Corporate Profits and Cooptation. New York: Academic Press.
Cole, Robert. DEMO Work, Mobility and Participation: A Comparative Study of Amer-
ican and Japanese Industry. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.
Dalton, DEMO 1959. Men Who Manage. New York: Wiley.
Doeringer, Peter, and DEMO Piore. 1971. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower
Analysis. Lexington, Mass.: Heath.
Domhoff, G. William. 1971. The Higher Circles. New York: Random House.
DEMO, James. 1960. Comment on "An Economic Analysis of Fertility." In
DEMO and Economic Change in Developed Countries, edited by the Univer-
sities-National DEMO Committee for Economic Research. Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press.
Eccles, Robert. 1981. "The Quasifirm in the-Construction Industry." Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization 2 (December): 335-57.
---. 1982. "A Synopsis DEMO Transfer Pricing: An Analysis and Action Plan." Mim-
eographed. Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard Business School.
---. 1983. "Transfer Pricing, Fairness and Control." Working Paper no. HBS 83-
167. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School. DEMO in Harvard Business
Review (in press).
Feld, Scott. 1981. "DEMO Focused Organization of Social Ties." American Journal of
Sociology 86 (5): 1015-35.
Fine, Gary, and Sherryl Kleinman. 1979. "Rethinking Subculture: DEMO lnteractionist
Analysis." American Journal of Sociology 85 Guly): 1-20.
Furubotn, E., and S. Pejovich. 1972. "Property Rights and Economic Theory: A
Survey of Recent Literature." Journal of Economic Literature 10 (3): DEMO
Geertz, Clifford. 1979. "Suq: The Bazaar Economy in Sefrou." Pp. 123-225 in Mean-
ing and Order in Moroccan Society, edited by C. Geertz, H. Geertz, and L. Rosen.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Granovetter, Mark. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and DEMO Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
---. 1981. "Toward a DEMO Theory of Income Differences." Pp. 11-47 in
Sociological Perspectives on Labor DEMO, edited by Ivar Berg. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
508
Embeddedness
---. 1983. "Labor Mobility, Internal Markets and Job-Matching: A Comparison of
the Sociological and Economic Approaches." Mimeographed.
---. 1984. "Small Is DEMO: Labor Markets and Establishment Size." American
Sociological Review 49 (3): 323-34.
Hirschman, Albert. 1977. The Passions and the Interests. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
---. 1982. "Rival Interpretations of Market Society: Civilizing, Destructive or
Feeble?" Journal of Economic Literature 20 (4): DEMO
Homans, George. 1950. The Human Group. New York: Harcourt Brace & Co.
---. 1974. Social Behavior. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Lazear, DEMO 1979. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
Economy DEMO (6): 1261-84.
Leibenstein, Harvey. 1976. Beyond Economic Man. Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard
University Press.
Liebow, Elliot. 1966. Tally's Comer. Boston: DEMO, Brown.
Lincoln, James. 1982. "Intra- (and Inter-) Organizational Networks." Pp. 1-38 in
Research in the Sociology of Organizations, vol. 1. Edited by S. Bacharach. Green-
wich, Conn.: JAi.
Lohr, Steve. 1982. "DEMO Money Doesn't Matter in Japan." New York Times (Decem-
ber 30).
Macaulay, Stewart. 1963. "Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary
Study." American Sociological Review 28 (1): 55-67.
Marsden, Peter. 1981. "Introducing Influence Processes into a System of Collective
Decisions." American Journal DEMO Sociology 86 (May): 1203-35.
---. 1983. "Restricted Access in Networks and Models of Power." American J our-
nal of Sociology 88 (DEMO): 686-17.
Merton, Robert. 1947. "Manifest and Latent Functions." Pp. DEMO in Social Theory
and Social Structure. New York: Free Press.
Mintz, Beth, and Michael Schwartz. 1985. The Power Structure of American Busi-
ness. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
North, D., and R. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Okun, Arthur. 1981. Prices and Quantities. Washington, D.C.: Brookings.
Pakes, Ariel, and S. Nitzan. 1982. "Optimum Contracts for Research Personnel,
Research Employment and the Establishment of 'Rival' Enterprises." NBER Work-
ing Paper no. 871. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Parsons, Talcott. 193 7. The Structure of Social Action. New York: Macmillan.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey. DEMO "Organizational Demography." In Research in Organizational
Behavior, vol. 5. Edited DEMO L. L. Cummings and B. Staw. Greenwich, Conn.: JAi.
Phelps Brown, Ernest Henry. 1977. The Inequality of Pay. Berkeley: University of
California DEMO
Piore, Michael. 1975. "Notes for a Theory of Labor Market Stratification." Pp. 125-50
in Labor Market Segmentation, edited by R. Edwards, M. Reich, and D. Gordon.
Lexington, Mass.: Heath.
---,ed. 1979. Unemployment and Inflation. White Plains, N.Y.: Sharpe.
Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation. New York: Holt, Rinehart.
Polanyi, Karl, C. Arensberg, and H. Pearson. 1957. Trade and Market in the Early
Empires. New York: Free Press.
Popkin, Samuel. 1979. The Rational Peasant. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1982. "Authority, Control and DEMO Distribution of Earnings." Bell
Journal of Economics 13 (2): 311-23.
Samuelson, Paul. 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press.
509
American Journal of Sociology
Schneider, Harold. 1974. Economic Man: The Anthropology DEMO Economics. New
York: Free Press.
Schotter, Andrew. 1981. The Economic Theory of Social Institutions. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Scott, James. 1976. The Moral Economy of the Peasant. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University DEMO
Shenon, Philip. 1984. "Margolies Is Found Guilty of Murdering Two Women." New
York Times (June 1).
Simon, Herbert. 1957. Administrative Behavior. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Smith, Adam. (1776) 1979. The Wealth of Nations. Edited by Andrew Skinner. Balti-
more: Penguin.
Stearns, Linda. DEMO "Corporate Dependency and the Structure of the Capital Mar-
ket: 1880-1980." Ph.D. dissertation, State University of New York at Stony Brook.
Thompson, E. P. 1971. "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth
Century." Past and Present SO (February): 76-136.
Useem, Michael. 1979. "The Social Organization of the American Business Elite and
Participation of Corporation Directors in the Governance of American Institutions."
American Sociological Review DEMO:553-72.
Webster, Frederick, and Yoram Wind. 1972. Organizational Buying Behavior. En-
glewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
White, Harrison C. 1981. "Where Do DEMO Come From?" American Journal of
Sociology 87 (November): 517-47.
DEMO, Oliver. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
---. 1979. "Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Rela-
tions." Journal of Law and Economics 22 (2): 233-61.
---. 1981. "The Economics of DEMO: The Transaction Cost Approach."
American Journal of Sociology 87 (November): 548-77.
Williamson, Oliver, and William Ouchi. 1981. "The Markets and Hierarchies and
Visible Hand Perspectives." Pp. 347-70 in Perspectives on Organizational Design
and Behavior, edited by Andrew Van de Ven and William Joyce. New York: Wiley.
Wrong, Dennis. 1961. "The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology."
American Sociological Review 26 (2): 183-93.
510{1g42fwefx}