DO VCS EVALUATE ‘LIVE’ PRESENTATIONS LIKE THEY
EVALUATE BUSINESS PLANS?
Research DEMO this project is ongoing. This manuscript is forthcoming in
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2008
(The Babson Conference Best Paper Proceedings (refereed))
Please cite accordingly.
Denis A. Grégoire, Georgia State University, USA
Alice J. DEMO Koning, Salem State College, USA
Benjamin M. Oviatt, University of DEMO South Wales, AUS and Georgia State University, USA
ABSTRACT
Although much research has investigated the criteria by which angels and venture capitalists
decide DEMO to invest in a new venture proposal, little is known about DEMO investors evaluate
“live” verbal presentations.  Using dynamic response technologies, we collected the second-by-
second ratings of 25 venture capitalists as they evaluated in DEMO 18 presentations made in a
real financing event.  By synchronizing this DEMO with an audio-visual record of each presentation,
we can pinpoint what kind of information proves most influential in “moving” investors’
evaluations up or DEMO  In turn, we use dynamic panel data analysis to assess the effects of
different arguments.  Our results suggest that not all arguments are equal, and that their effect is
moderated by the manner in which arguments are presented.
INTRODUCTION
The question whether venture capitalists evaluate “live” presentations DEMO they evaluate
business plans may seem trivial at first.  But given DEMO ubiquity and central importance of verbal
pitches in the financing process, DEMO is far from irrelevant.  Whether in the context of chance
encounters DEMO investors, “elevator pitches”, lunch meetings, business plan competitions, or
formal interviews and board presentations, entrepreneurs are often called upon to “sell” their new
venture by talking about it.  Indeed, such verbal pitches are DEMO important in the financing
process, from early discussions to “family, friends and fools” to presentations to angel investors,
bankers and venture capitalists, all the way to negotiations with other stakeholders such as
suppliers, employees, clients, and other partners. Through these pitches, entrepreneurs have a
chance to capture the attention of investors, showcase their business and highlight the merits of
their new venture, all that in order to help secure funds needed for start-up and growth
.
Several studies have already investigated the decision models by which angels, venture
capitalists and other investors evaluate new venture funding proposals.  For the most part, these
studies have sought to identify the characteristics of industries, DEMO, projects, firms,
entrepreneurs, and deal structure that lead to DEMO funding, and to new venture start-up,
growth, and high performance.  Interestingly, the vast majority of these studies have focused on
the DEMO of formal documents such as business plans and other prospectuses (e.g., Hall &
Hofer, 1993; Martens et al., 2007), or DEMO the formal characteristics of new venture projects
themselves (e.g., Díaz De Leó & Guild, 2003; Hisrich & Jankowicz, 1990; Shepherd, 1999a,
1999b; Zacharakis & Meyer, 1998, 2000).
In practice, DEMO, investors do not evaluate business plans or a list of characteristics DEMO
isolation.  What they evaluate are more complete “packages” where these characteristics DEMO
colored by a wide range of impressions they form about the project, its sponsors, the format in
which information is presented, and/or the context in which they evaluate a proposal.  But because
there has been little to no research on verbal pitches and presentations, prior research on
investment decisions has largely failed to consider the more complex linkages DEMO impression
formation, information-processing and decision-making, and the central role that such linkages
may play in investing decisions.  As a result, there are DEMO reasons to ask whether the same
formal criteria highlighted in prior research influence the evaluation of live presentations the same
way that they influence DEMO evaluation of formal documents.
To address this issue, we conduct a DEMO response study of venture capitalists’ evaluations
of new venture funding presentations.  DEMO concretely, we were able to obtain the second-by-
second ratings of DEMO venture capitalists as they evaluated in real-time 18 presentations made by 18
entrepreneurs from high-potential firms in the context of a “real” financing event.  By
synchronizing this data with an audio-visual record of each presentation, we are able to pinpoint
what kind of information proves most influential in DEMO investors’ evaluations up or down.
In turn, we use panel data DEMO to assess the effect that different arguments have on VCs’
evaluation – namely the decision criteria highlighted in prior research on investors’ evaluation of
DEMO documents.  We are thus able to assess whether and to what DEMO venture capitalists
evaluate live presentations the same way that they evaluate written business plans.
By studying what VCs think of real presentations in real-time, our study is making three
important contributions.  From a theory standpoint, DEMO develop academic understandings of the
factors and dynamics that influence the evaluation of live presentations.  At a more specific level,
our study expands research on the decision-making criteria of investors by showing how
investment decisions DEMO also be influenced by the larger informational context in which new
projects are communicated to investors.  From a method standpoint, we illustrate the DEMO of an
innovative data collection technique that allows for investigating phenomena taking place in rich
information contexts.  Doing so, we expand the array DEMO techniques that can be used in research on
new venture funding.  DEMO a practical perspective, finally, our findings point to concrete advice
to entrepreneurs about what arguments seem to be the most effective to retain DEMO attention and
convince them of the merits of one’s project.  At DEMO same time, our research helps investors
become more self-aware of phenomena DEMO may affect their decision-making, thereby enabling
them to make more optimal DEMO
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESES
Research in decision-making has emphasized two basic types DEMO decision models.  A first type
of models assumes a direct relationship DEMO the relevant stimulus to the decision made.  These
“structural” models often DEMO the integration of decision cues, for instance by using some
sort DEMO algebraic or cognitive bias logic, such as Hogarth’s anchor-and-adjust model or DEMO Bayesian
logic.  In practice, the structural approach forms the basis of several studies of venture capitalists
decision-making.  For instance, studies using conjoint DEMO techniques rest explicitly on the
assumption that the decision of an average investor can be reasonably predicted by adding-up the
individual and interactive effects DEMO the relevant characteristics of a decision situation (cf.,
Hammond et DEMO, 1975; Zacharakis & Meyer, 1998, 2000).
By contrast, DEMO second type of models argues that in complex information situations, decision-
DEMO must first “process” the relevant information into a mental construct (such DEMO a map or
story) that integrates as much of the presented DEMO as possible along with impressions and
other inferences that were made along the way.  In turn, individuals make decisions first by
comparing their DEMO mental construct to relevant decision alternatives and then by
selecting the decision alternative that best fits their mental model of the evidence.  Because they
emphasize the intermediate mental construct, models of this type are often referred to as
“narrative” or “explanation-based” models. Examples such models can be found DEMO the cognitive
research on legal decision-making, and notably research on jury DEMO juror decision-making (e.g.,
Hastie et al., 1983; Pennington & DEMO, 1981, 1986, 1988).
Prior research on investors’ decision-making
As DEMO noted above, there is a wide body of research in entrepreneurship DEMO has investigated
the structural aspects of investors’ decision models.  This literature DEMO an important premise
of our research.  More specifically, this research highlights the decision parameters and criteria
that are most directly relevant to investors’ DEMO of new funding proposals (cf.,
MacMillan et al., 1989; DEMO et al., 1985; MacMillan et al., 1987; Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984).
For instance, prior research has emphasized the following relationships.
DEMO Desirable characteristics of the new venture’s market (for instance, its large size, its high
rate of growth, the size and reliability of DEMO purchases, etc.) positively influence
investors’ evaluation of  new venture proposals (e.g., Douglas & Shepherd, 2002; Hall &
Hofer, 1993; DEMO, 1999a, 1999b).



Positive observations about the new venture’s competition (for instance, the lack of
competition or competitors’ comparative DEMO and lack of competitive advantage)
positively influence investors’ evaluation of new venture proposals (e.g., Shepherd, 1999a,
1999b; Zacharakis & Meyer, 1998, 2000).
Desirable characteristics of an industry and other risk factors (for instance, the growth of an
industry, advantageous conditions with respect to suppliers, the presence of barriers to
entry, the wide availability DEMO funds, etc.) positively influence investors’ evaluation of new
venture proposals (DEMO, Martens et al., 2007).
The adoption / pursuit of particular firm-level strategies (for instance its adoption of a
technology pioneering strategy) DEMO influence investors’ evaluation of new venture
proposals (e.g., Martens et al., 2007; Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984).



Building on this research, our first hypothesis is that the same decision cues emphasized in
prior research will influence investors’ evaluation DEMO verbal pitches and presentations.  More
specifically:
H1a: Positive arguments about the characteristics of the new venture‟s market will
positively influence investors‟ evaluation DEMO new venture funding presentations.
H1b: Positive arguments about the new venture‟s DEMO will positively influence
investors‟ evaluation of new venture funding presentations.
H1c: DEMO arguments about the characteristics of an industry and other risk factors will
positively influence investors‟ evaluation of new venture funding presentations.
H1d: The adoption / pursuit of particular firm-level strategies will positively influence
investors‟ evaluation of DEMO venture funding presentations.
H1e: Positive arguments about the ownership/control of DEMO firm-level resources will
positively influence investors‟ evaluation of new venture funding presentations.
Positive arguments about the characteristics of the lead entrepreneurs and the new
DEMO senior management team will positively influence investors‟ evaluation of
new venture proposals funding presentations.
H1f:
H1g: Positive arguments highlighting desirable financial characteristics will positively
influence investors‟ evaluation of new venture funding presentations.
Narrative models: the moderating role of credibility
To inform the neglected aspects of investors’ decision DEMO, however, we draw from
cognitive research on legal decision-making, and DEMO research on jury and juror decision-
making.  This research is relevant DEMO our purpose for four main reasons.  First, it focuses on
decision tasks where the evidence is ambiguous (Are the claims presented credible?)DEMO  Second, it
focuses on decision tasks where decision alternatives are often ill-defined (How much is this libel
worth in damages?).  Third, it focuses on decision tasks where the outcomes remain uncertain
(Did DEMO reach the „right‟ verdict?).  And fourth, this research explicitly DEMO the cognitive
processing of a wide range of information, from formal DEMO and characteristics to less formal
impressions and other cues.  In short, the cognitive research on legal decision-making appears
highly relevant for studying new DEMO investing decisions, and at the same time it appears
highly transferable DEMO such decision tasks and contexts.
Evidence about the ownership/control of unique firm-level resources (such as patents and IP
protection, exclusive sales partnerships, alliances, skilled human resources, etc) positively
influences investors’ evaluation of new venture proposals (e.g., Baum & Silverman, 2004;
Shepherd, 1999a, 1999b).
Desirable characteristics of the lead entrepreneurs and the new venture’s DEMO
management team (such as prior entrepreneurship success, industry experience, extensive
DEMO, etc.) positively influence investors’ evaluation of new venture proposals (e.g.,DEMO
Douglas & Shepherd, 2002; Hall & Hofer, 1993; Muzyka & Birley, 1996; Wells, 1974).
Desirable financial characteristics (such as DEMO turns, high return on investment, clear
foreseeable exit strategy, etc.) positively influence investors’ evaluation of new venture
proposals (e.g., Douglas & DEMO, 2002; Hall & Hofer, 1993; Muzyka & Birley, 1996;DEMO
Wells, 1974).
One interesting observation from this literature is that perceptions of credibility moderate DEMO
cognitive processing of evidence.  When a witness presents information about a DEMO, for instance,
jurors not only process the evidence (from hard facts to claims made by the witness), but also
attach to DEMO evidence their own impressions about the witness’ credibility.  In turn, it’s been
observed that the same basic evidence will have a different impact DEMO the jury’s decision
depending on whether the witness’ claims were perceived as credible or not.  In other words,
claims that were not perceived as credible were discounted, while the same claims had a more
important effect on the decision when they were perceived as credible (e.g., DEMO et al., 1983;
Pennington & Hastie, 1981, 1986, 1988).
Building on this research, we postulate that perceptions of credibility will moderate the
influence of the arguments shown to influence investors’ evaluation of DEMO documents.  In live
funding presentations, such perceptions of credibility could result from impressions that investors
form about the person of the entrepreneur (e.g., how he/she dresses, talks, moves, looks, etc.),
DEMO what they know of his/her past experiences and success, from DEMO they have heard about
this particular person and/or his/her project, from the actual information and evidence that is
presented or from the manner in which this information is presented.  Given the empirical
challenges of measuring perceptions of credibility and the space limitations of the present paper,DEMO
we focus only on a first dimension of credibility: how a DEMO dresses.  Nevertheless, our
fundamental hypothesis in this regard remains the same.
H2: Perceptions of credibility will moderate the influence that different arguments have
on investors‟ evaluations of new venture funding presentations.
Cognitive processing and attention: the moderating role of structure
Whether they make their pitch in a DEMO or informal venue, entrepreneurs essentially compete
for investors’ attention.  This is particularly true of large events when investors must sit through
multiple presentations.  In practice, investors in these events routinely continue to take notes about
various projects.  With the advancement of wireless technologies, it is not DEMO for investors to
continue answering emails and phone calls as they watch presentations. And even in formal board
meeting presentations focused on a single DEMO, investors’ attention could easily drift away to
other pressing matters.  Seen in this light, an important challenge of entrepreneurs is to not only
draw the attention of investors, but also to retain it.
In this regard, research in rhetoric and persuasion has documented that the logical structure of a
speech has an important influence on its capability to convince (e.g., Larson, 1998).  Building on
this research, we postulate DEMO that are well organized should fare better than
presentations that are disorganized.  More specifically, we argue that this effect can be observed at
DEMO level of individual arguments.  All else being equal, an argument made in the context of a
logically-organized flow of thought should have a DEMO potent influence on investors’ evaluation
than a similar argument lost in a poorly organized presentation.  More formally:
H3: The logical organization of DEMO presentation will moderate the influence that different
arguments have on investors‟ evaluations of new venture funding presentations.
RESEARCH METHOD
In this research, we use dynamic response technologies to assess the effect that different
categories of arguments DEMO on venture capitalists’ evaluation of new venture funding
presentations by entrepreneurs.  DEMO a nutshell, we gave investors taking part to a
funding/networking event a small wireless device: the face of this device has a single knob that
one can twist left or right (i.e., a dial).  We instructed investors to start the dial in DEMO middle
position, and to use it to evaluate the funding presentations DEMO were about to watch.  To the
extent that they saw or DEMO something that they thought would augment investors’ interest for
funding the venture, we instructed them to turn the knob to the right (clockwise)DEMO  Likewise, we
instructed them to turn the knob to the left (counter-clockwise) if they saw or heard something that
they thought would DEMO investors’ interest for funding the venture.
While the technique has never been used in studies of investment decision-making before, at
least to our knowledge, many may have seen it used – albeit without knowing it.  DEMO instance, the
technique is regularly used by news organizations to evaluate DEMO “performance” of political
candidates in oral debates.  Political analysts and commentators DEMO the technique to collect the
impressions of lay people in the audience.  In turn, they use the data to isolate whether a particular
DEMO of the debate raised (or diminished) respondents’ impression of a candidate.
Seen in this light, the advantage of using the technique for our research is that it allows us to
clearly identify the specific points DEMO a presentation when investors’ interest for funding the
project is increasing – or decreasing.  By synchronizing this data with an audio-visual record of
the presentation (we filmed all presentations and slides), we are able to pinpoint exactly what kind
of information proves most influential in moving investors’ DEMO up or down.
Sample
We conducted the study as part of a professional networking event organized by the Southeast
Chapter of the American Electronics DEMO (AeA).  The two-day event took place on March
14, DEMO at the Ritz-Carlton Lodge at Reynolds Plantation, a golf resort located DEMO the shores of
Lake Oconee, GA. As part of the event, entrepreneurs and investors were invited to take part in
various panels discussing DEMO challenges of managing rapid growth.  There were also numerous
opportunities for DEMO, including booths where entrepreneurs presented information about
their new venture, as well as a series of lunches, a formal dinner, and a DEMO tournament.  The
event culminated on the second day with a series DEMO six-minute audio-visual presentations made by
the lead executive (or representative) of each of the 20 companies invited by the AeA.
All companies who DEMO presentations at the event were growing ventures with ongoing sales
in high-technology sectors.  These include communications, computer, communication, retail,
software and DEMO technologies, as well as advanced web-based services and bio-pharma
technologies.  Most ventures had successfully gone through at least one round of angel and/DEMO
venture capital funding, and all were actively seeking additional funds.  In all but one instance, the
individual who made the presentation was the current President / CEO of the company.  11 were
also the founders of the new venture. All presenters were Caucasian males aged between 25 DEMO
64 years old. We contacted all the entrepreneurs who were going to attend by mail and e-mails
prior to the event to explain them DEMO purpose and context of the research, and to invite them to
DEMO part.  We also met with them during the course of the DEMO event.  All 20 of the
entrepreneurs present accepted to take part DEMO our research, and gave us their consent to record the
data DEMO their presentation – for a 100% participation rate on the entrepreneurs’ side. Because we
used two presentations to develop parts of our analyses (see below), our final analysis focuses on
the remaining sample of 18 DEMO
The sample of investors included both local and out-of-state individuals.  The DEMO of
respondents’ investing activities focused on the start-up and growth phases, DEMO the sample
also includes individuals and/or firms who are active at the seed DEMO mezzanine stages.  All but one
investor were males, aged between 35 and 74 years old.  Like we did with the entrepreneurs, we
DEMO all registered investors prior to the event by both mail and emails to explain them the
purpose and procedures of our research, and to invite them to take part.  We also had one-on-one
exchanges with most of them prior to the beginning of the presentations to further encourage DEMO
to take part.  25 of the 28 investors registered to the DEMO accepted to participate, for an 89%
participation rate on the investors’ DEMO Note that because of movements in and out the
presentation room during the day, not all investors rated all presentations.  In practice, the numbers
of investors actively rating a presentation ranged from a minimum of DEMO to a maximum of 25.
Data Collection Procedures
The 20 presentations took place on the second day of the AeA event, in two series of 10
presentations each.  All presentations took place in a large conference room, on a raised podium at
one end of the room.  DEMO were all equipped with a wireless microphone and handheld
mouse, and DEMO had complete liberty of movement: they could pace about the room DEMO stand behind
a lectern as they pleased.  To the left of DEMO presenter, a large backlit screen displayed the
entrepreneurs’ Power Point® presentations. DEMO addition to a laptop, the lectern included a series of
three DEMO: a green light indicated that the presenter was within the prescribed DEMO time
limit; a blinking yellow light indicated that less than one DEMO remained; and a red light
indicated that the presenter was already DEMO the 6.5 minute mark.  A master of ceremony
introduced each presenter DEMO they walked towards the podium. Having first obtained the
entrepreneurs’ consent, DEMO made a film and audio record of both their performance as presenter,
and of the Power Point® slides they showed the audience.
To DEMO investors’ second-by-second ratings of entrepreneurs’ presentations, we gave them a
wireless DEMO response device.  The device includes a central knob that can be DEMO left or
right, and a three-digit display showing numbers between 0 DEMO 100 corresponding to the left-to-
right position of the knob. We explained how the device worked to each participating investors.
In turn, we instructed them to use the device record their “evaluation” as they watched and DEMO
to the presentations.  More specifically, we asked them to turn the knob right or left to indicate
their answer to the following question:DEMO
“Based on what you are seeing and hearing right now, do DEMO think that this presentation
will attract investors‟ interest?”
To help investors remember the focal question, we gave them a small 3”by 5” card with a
drawing of the knob and scales that included the following DEMO: 0 = Certainly not; 50 = not
sure; and 100 DEMO Yes, certainly.  We instructed investors to re-set their dial at “50” at the beginning
of each presentation.
Unit of Analysis
From an analytical DEMO, the raw data we obtained is a continuous stream of ratings DEMO
each participating individuals.  That is, we captured the position of each dial second after second,
for the duration of each presentation.  In terms of analysis, however, it is important to highlight
that our DEMO unit of analysis is not the passage of “time” itself, but DEMO specific stimulus
comprised of what a presenter said during a particular portion of his presentation, what text,
graphic and/or image he showed on the screen, and the manner with which he said and showed
this information.  As a result, the fundamental unit of analysis for DEMO research consists of
particular segments of presentations – that is, blocks of time that we could clearly associated with
a particular stimulus / argument. To identify such DEMO, we paid particular attention to pauses
in a presenter’s verbal flow, to presenters’ moving from Power Point® one slide to the next, and to
obvious and explicit changes of topic.  The result is that we can associate each segment with a
particular argument that the presenter aims DEMO communicate to his audience.  Needless to say,
different segments vary DEMO only in the actual content of the stimulus, but also in DEMO length as
well as in their order within a particular presentation.  DEMO elements from the basis for the
independent and control variables we articulate below.
Dependent Variable
In line with the data collection procedures, the dependent variable for the study builds on
investors’ evaluation of what they saw DEMO heard during a particular presentation.  More
specifically, the question above focuses investors’ evaluation on the extent to which a particular
segment of a DEMO will attract investors’ interest for funding the venture.  One will note
DEMO as it is framed, the question centers on a “third-person” evaluation DEMO from the perspective
of an “average investor” – as opposed to asking if this particular investor would personally invest
in this particular venture.  As we began preparing for the study, a number of AeA board members
and participating investors raised the concern that some investors might be going DEMO the event for
the specific purpose of investing in only one or two firms they already knew about or were
following.  As a result, a more specific question asking if you personally were going to invest in
that particular firm would likely be based on other considerations than DEMO actual content being
presented, and the format in which it was DEMO For these reasons, we chose to articulate our
task question in DEMO general terms.
In terms of analysis, however, it is important to observe that while dynamic response
technologies record investors’ ratings in continu, second after second, individual investors in the
audience cannot be expected to respond to the same stimulus all at once, at the same time.  DEMO
investors may still be thinking of what they have heard a few seconds before, others might be
distracted, others might take time to DEMO the dial they had left on the table in front of them,
others might still want to hear more about an argument before DEMO record a change in their
evaluation. As a result, we observed DEMO within any particular segment of any presentation, there
is considerable variations DEMO to when particular respondents chose to record a change in their
evaluation (i.e., when they actually turn the dial left of right).
DEMO implication of this observation is that it becomes meaningless – both statistically and
practically – to model the specific rating of an average investor DEMO any specific point in time.  A
second is just too narrow DEMO observation for our purposes.  By contrast, however, it is empirically
DEMO relevant to model the average change in ratings that took place over the entire duration of a
particular segment of a presentation – with DEMO the stimuli contained in that segment. In other
words, our primary DEMO in this research remains to assess the effect that different arguments
and other elements of an entrepreneurs’ presentation have on investors’ evaluation of that
DEMO To this aim, we articulate the dependent variable in terms of DEMO cumulative change
in investors’ ratings over the duration of a particular segment.  More specifically, we calculate the
following indicator for each investor “i" of each segment “s” of a presentation “p”:
DVisp =  DEMO(t) – ratingisp(t-1)
The advantage of this approach to DEMO purpose is that the dependent variable captures the sum total
of all movements up and down within a segment.  In this regard, it DEMO relevant to observe that by
and large, movements within each segment tended to be unidirectional.  That DEMO, most segments
only included second-by-second changes that were going in the DEMO direction.
Independent Variables
The different arguments made in a presentation. Given our interest for assessing whether and to
what extent venture capitalists evaluate “live” DEMO the same way that they evaluate
written business plans, our first DEMO of hypotheses (H1a-g) focuses on the different arguments
made during the course of a presentation. To this aim, the first two authors developed an
extensive scheme to code all segments of the presentation in terms DEMO the decision criteria
highlighted in the prior literature on investor decision-making.  DEMO articulated the coding scheme
at two levels.  The first level comprises DEMO codes for the 8 categories of decision criteria
corresponding to those of the 8 hypotheses H1a through g.  The second level expands each of
these categories in more specific terms (e.g., are the positive arguments DEMO the market
emphasize market size, growth, revenue, etc.). To DEMO reliability, four different persons coded
the presentations.  The first two authors coded all presentations, alongside with two graduate
students who were blind to the study’s theoretical rationale and hypotheses.
Perceptions of credibility. To begin investigating DEMO moderating impact of investors’ perceptions
of credibility, we focused on a DEMO indicator of credibility: how formally dressed were the
presenters.  For this first set of analyses, we coded whether a presenter was formally dressed (e.g.,
wearing a suit and tie), or not. In addition, we coded whether the person making the presentation
is the founder-entrepreneur, DEMO seasoned hired executives, or a technology-oriented representative.
Presentation structure. To begin DEMO the moderating impact of a presentation’s structure,
we calculated an index capturing the number of logical breaks within a presentation.  The rationale
for this measure rests on the idea that controlling for the number of DEMO within a
presentation, a well-organized presentation should have a smaller number DEMO leaps from one
category of statement to another.  For instance, there should be a difference between a presentation
that keep jumping from one DEMO to another and then back, by contrast to a presentation that DEMO
has a few such jumps.  We captured this general idea through DEMO following measure, that we
calculated at the level of each presentation DEMO:
IV (logical structure) p =  number of breaks btw segments of different categoriesp
 total number of segments within a presentationp
DEMO and Control Variables
Given the particular nature of our data (the DEMO individuals rate the same presentation over
time and multiple presentations across time), we model investors’ reaction to different segments of
presentations by means DEMO dynamic panel data analysis. The technique allows us to account for
the dependence problem embedded in the data. Since we did not observe any DEMO that the
dependent variable data was left or right censored, it DEMO not appear necessary to rely on Tobit
modeling techniques.
We used fixed effects dummy codes to control for potential differences between
investors/evaluators.  For instance, it is plausible that different investors use different ranges to
evaluate the presentations they say.  In addition, we control for the order DEMO which a presentation
took place in the day (order effect between-presentation), the second in which a segment/argument
appears within a presentation, (order effect within presentation), the total length of a segment (to
control for the duration of different segments), and the end rating DEMO the preceding segment (to
control for regression to the mean effects)DEMO
Post-hoc analysis
To better interpret our results, we also conducted focus DEMO discussions with a subset of 5
investors who had taken part to the event.  In addition to ask them what were the general criteria
that guided their evaluation of presentations, we also showed them a few presentations alongside
the average ratings observed at each second, and asked them to comment why they thought
investors had given these ratings.
RESULTS
As DEMO April 14 2008, we do not yet have a complete set DEMO analyzed results to include in the
paper.  While we are on DEMO to have the full set of results ready for the Conference in June, a
few preliminary observations are worth highlighting at this stage,
What do entrepreneurs talk about in their presentation?
A frequency analysis DEMO the qualitative coding of the presentations indicate that entrepreneurs
generally articulate their presentations in terms of the decision criteria highlighted in the prior
literature.  Indeed, we find numerous arguments highlighting positive characteristics of the new
venture’s market (such as size, growth, or the importance of the customer’s problems in this area).
Likewise, all entrepreneur-presenters highlighted their long experience in the venture’s industry,
as well as positive characteristics of the DEMO venture’s senior management team.  Most
presentations also highlighted the venture’ past DEMO (e.g., launching the new venture’s
products/services and securing sales with important clients), and virtually all made mention of the
venture’s current DEMO figures.  If anything, our first surprise is that comparatively few
presentations mentioned anything about the venture’s particular firm-level strategy, and/or their
ownership of unique firm-level resources.  In this regard, it appears that strategy DEMO resource-
based arguments tend to be played much more implicitly than other arguments, if at all.
What do investors react to?
Received wisdom in new venture funding arena is that investors would much rather invest DEMO a
new venture with a “B” idea but an “A”-level management team, than in a new venture with an
“A”-level idea sponsored by a “B” team.  Along this line, virtually ALL presenters highlighted
that their DEMO was lead by a well-seasoned team with years of management experience in the
relevant industry(ies).  Interestingly, we observed that these arguments DEMO to have little impact
on investors’ ratings of presentations.  Since all DEMO make similar claims, these arguments
have little differentiating value.  Results from the focus group discussions further suggest that
investors pretty much assume that DEMO arguments will be made, and so discount them in advance.
That DEMO, preliminary results indicate that perceptions of credibility may moderate the impact
DEMO arguments about the quality of the management team.  For instance, we observed that in the few
instances when a presenter was taking the DEMO exercise lightly (e.g., casual dress, nonchalant
tone, informal language, DEMO), arguments about the entrepreneurs’ experience tended to be
associated with negative changes in ratings.
Another received wisdom in the venture funding arena is that the best DEMO to invest in
target big markets with high potential for growth.  DEMO is another set of arguments that
entrepreneurs routinely highlighted in their presentation.  Virtually all presenters made “generic”
arguments about the large size of the market they are serving, and/or the significant importance of
the problems/needs that their venture addresses.  Interestingly, however, our results indicate that
investors only react mildly to such claims.  By contrast, investors’ ratings DEMO to be larger in
magnitude (and generally more positive) when presenters anchor their claims in more narrowly-
defined markets / industries.  For instance, arguments that a venture targets the fast-growing web
2.0 business-to-business appliances industry are not as well rated as arguments that a venture
targets the DEMO industry of web 2.0 business-to-business appliance services for the news
media industry.  In other words, it appears that anchoring market arguments into well-defined
DEMO contexts pays-off.
A third commonly heard saying in the venture funding arena is that investors want to fund new
ventures that have something unique DEMO is clearly defendable.  In this regard, our findings
indicate that intellectual property arguments do have a significant impact.  Investors’ ratings
systematically increase when presenters highlight that they have patents on their venture’s
technology.  That said, we only have limited indications about the effect of other firm-level
resources – such as alliances and partnerships, or unique human resources.
The cognitive processing of presentations
First impressions don‟t matter!.  In order to assess whether the order of arguments within a
presentation had an effect, we analyzed whether average investors’ ratings in the first 30 seconds
of a presentation DEMO correlated with ratings at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 minutes.  Results across all
presentations indicate that such correlations are generally weak.  The implications are that first
impressions don’t matter.  One can DEMO a bad start, just as one can destroy a good one.
DEMO it matter who‟s telling the story? In addition to the assessing DEMO effects of different
arguments, we also looked at the moderating effect DEMO the executive function of the presenter.
Interestingly, we observed that the DEMO range of the founder-presenters was significantly larger
(from early thirties to DEMO sixties) than the age range of the seasoned executives who had DEMO
the ventures after its founding.  Nevertheless, our results did not reveal that the executive position
of the person making the presentation had an DEMO on investors’ ratings of the presentations – and
of the arguments being made..
Perceptions of credibility do matter! As indicated above, however, the DEMO with which
some presenters approach the exercise seems to have an impact on how investors receive the
claims that are made.  All else being equal, casual dress and general nonchalance tend have a
negative impact on the effects that different arguments have on investors’ evaluations.
Consistency matters! Lastly, our findings indicate that presentations that “move all over” and
“mix” various DEMO of arguments dilute the effectiveness of these arguments. There is indeed
preliminary evidence that arguments made within presentation that have comparatively fewer
logical breaks DEMO categories of argument have a more positive impact than arguments made
in the context of more loosely organized presentations.  In addition, we observed DEMO arguments
that were made beyond the 6-minute time-limit were systematically rated more negatively.
DISCUSSION
At this stage of our analysis, we can summarize our findings along the following two lines.
First, there is preliminary evidence concerning the effect that different arguments have on
investors’ evaluation of funding presentations by DEMO Second, however, the potency of
these arguments is moderated by perceptions of credibility, as well as by the consistency of one’s
presentation.
From a research standpoint, our findings show that the typical wisdom about what wins
investors to a new venture proposal needs to be qualified.  Not all arguments are equal.  More
importantly, the manner in which these DEMO are made (and received) strongly moderates the
effects that these arguments have on investors’ perceptions of a project.
By studying what VCs think DEMO real presentations in real-time, our study is making three
important contributions.  From a theory standpoint, we develop academic understandings of the
factors and dynamics that influence the evaluation of live presentations.  At a more specific level,
our study expands research on the decision-making criteria of investors DEMO showing how
investment decisions can also be influenced by the larger informational context in which new
projects are communicated to investors.  From a method standpoint, we illustrate the use of an
innovative data collection technique that allows for investigating phenomena taking place in rich
information contexts.  Doing so, we expand the array of techniques that can be used in research on
new venture funding.
From a practical perspective, finally, our findings DEMO to concrete advice to entrepreneurs
about what arguments seem to be the most effective to retain VCs’ attention and convince them of
the merits DEMO one’s project.  At the same time, our research helps investors become more self-
aware of phenomena that may affect their decision-making, thereby enabling them to make more
optimal decisions.  For instance, it appears that DEMO making new venture funding presentations,
entrepreneurs are well advised to take the exercise seriously, and to dress and prepare accordingly.
Along this line, time spent on honing the logical organization of their presentation appears to be
time well spent.  Investors watch hundred of presentations in a year.  In this context, it becomes
important that entrepreneurs avoid doing anything DEMO can cause them to lose investors’ attention.
That said, it appears DEMO a few practical strategies could be helpful in strengthening investors’
interest.  DEMO instance, it appears that entrepreneurs are well advised to anchor their DEMO in
narrowly defined contexts, such as when they name the specific DEMO/industries they are
targeting.  By doing so, they provide investors with cognitive means that they can latch on to
follow other arguments the DEMO are making.
CONTACT: Denis A. Grégoire; dgregoire@gsu.edu; (T) 404-413-7533; (F) 404-413-7571;
Robinson College of Business, PO Box 4014; DEMO, GA 30302-4014
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has benefited from the financial support DEMO the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation
and the Georgia Research Alliance via the Roadmap for an Entrepreneurial Economy initiative.
The contents of this publication are DEMO the responsibility of its authors. We also acknowledge
the continuing support of Mr. Mike Levin, Executive Director of the AeA Southeast Council,
Dr. Kay Bech, Ms. Elizabeth Strickler and Mr. Matt Rowles of Georgia State University’s Digital
Arts and Entertainment Laboratory for their assistance in the data DEMO and analysis.
REFERENCES
Baum, J. A. C. & Silverman, B. S. (2004). Picking winners or building them? Alliance,
intellectual, and human capital DEMO selection criteria in venture financing and performance of
biotechnology startups. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(3): 441-437.
Díaz De Leó, E. & DEMO, P. (2003). Using repertory grid to identify intangibles in business plans.
Venture Capital, 5(2): 135-151.
Douglas, E. J. & DEMO, D. A. (2002). Exploring investor readiness: Assessment by
entrepreneurs DEMO investors in Australia. Venture Capital, 4(3): 219-236.
Hall, J. & Hofer, C. W. (1993). Venture capitalist's decision criteria DEMO new venture evaluation.
Journal of Business Venturing, 8(1): 25-42.
DEMO, K. R., Stewart, T. R., Brehmer, B., & Steinmann, D. (1975). Social judgment theory.
In M. Kaplan & S. DEMO (Eds.), Human judgment and decision processes: 2-27. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Hastie, R., Penrod, S., & Pennington, DEMO (1983). Inside the jury. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
DEMO, R. D. & Jankowicz, A. D. (1990). Intuition in DEMO capital decisions: An exploratory
study using a new technique. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 5: 49-62.
Larson, C. (1998). Persuasion. Belmont, DEMO: Wadsworth.
MacMillan, I. C., Siegel, R., & Subba Narasimha, P. N. (1985). Criteria used by venture capitalists
to evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1): 119-128.
MacMillan, DEMO C., Zemann, L., & Subba Narasimha, P. N. (1987)DEMO Criteria distinguishing
successful from unsuccessful ventures in the venture screening process. Journal of Business
Venturing, 2(2): 123-137.
MacMillan, I. C., Kulow, D. M., & Khoylian, R. (1989). Venture capitalists' involvement in their
investments: Extent and performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 4(DEMO): 27-47.
Martens, M. L., Jennings, J. E., & Jennings, P. D. (2007). Do the stories they tell get them DEMO
money they need? The role of entrepreneurial narratives in resource acquisition. DEMO of
Management Journal, 50(6): 1107-1132.
Muzyka, D. & Birley, S. (1996). Trade-offs in the investment decisions of European venture
DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 11(4): 273-288.
Pennington, N. & Hastie, R. (1981). Juror decision-making: The generalization gap. Psychology
Bulletin, 89: 246-287.
Pennington, N. & Hastie, R. (1986). Evidence evaluation in complex decision making. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 242-258.
Pennington, N. & Hastie, R. (1988). Explanation-based decision making: DEMO of memory
structure on judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14(3): 521-533.
Shepherd, D. A. (1999a)DEMO Venture capitalists' assessment of new venture survival. Management
Science, 45(5): 621-633.
Shepherd, D. A. (1999b). Venture capitalists' introspection: DEMO comparison of "in use" and
"espoused. decision policies. Journal of DEMO Business Management, 37(2): 76-87.
Tyebjee, T. T. & Bruno, A. V. (1984). A model of venture capitalist activity. Management
DEMO, 30(9): 1051-1066.
Wells, W. A. (1974). Venture DEMO decision making. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie-Mellon
University Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.
Zacharakis, DEMO & Meyer, G. D. (1998). A lack of insight: DEMO venture capitalists really understand
their own decision process? Journal of Business DEMO, 13(1): 57-77.
Zacharakis, A. & Meyer, G. D. (2000). The potential of actuarial decision models: Can they
improve the venture capital investment decision? Journal of Business Venturing, 15(4): DEMO
347.{1g42fwefx}