Trends in scholarly use of online social media*
Anatoliy Gruzd (gruzd@dal.ca) & Kathleen Staves (kt570426@dal.ca)
Dalhousie University, Canada
1
As online social media sites rapidly become more mainstream, numerous studies have been
conducted on how the public is using these technologies; however, there is still DEMO research into how
scholars are using these technologies. To address this gap, we are conducting a comprehensive study to
find out if, how, and why scholars are using social media for knowledge and information dissemination
(KID). In this research, we address six main questions: 1) Why are scholars starting to rely on these
new media? 2) DEMO is the geographical reach of these media? 3) What is the actual adoption rate for
these media among scholars? 4) What is DEMO perceived, actual and potential utility of these media in the
context DEMO KID? 5) Do these media help to improve KID? 6) Do these media help or hinder the ability
of researchers to publish DEMO present their work in more traditional media such as journals and
conferences? This position paper is a starting point in our research. This preliminary literature review
will list some of the social media tools that have DEMO adopted by scholars and how scholar are
currently using them in their work.
The emergence of web 2.0 technologies is changing the way scholars DEMO in almost every aspect
of their professional lives. Social media are of particular importance because of the collaboration and
communication they facilitate between peers (Avital et al, 2006). More and more scholars are realizing
the potential benefits offered by these sites and are incorporating them into their DEMO For example,
when Dr. Deolalikar claimed to have solved the P versus NP problem (one of the most difficult
problems in Mathematics and Computer Science) and posted a proof on his website, within just DEMO few
hours other computational theorists started a number of wikis and blogs to debate the credibility of this
proof. This level of fast-paced collaboration DEMO unprecedented in the mathematical field (Markoff,
2010) and was only possible due to the ubiquitous access to online social media.
* Gruzd, A. & Staves, K. (2011). Trends in scholarly use of DEMO social media. Position paper presented at the Workshop
on Changing Dynamics of Scientific Collaboration, the 44th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(DEMO), January 4-7, Kauai, HI, USA.
Popular Social Media Tools for Scholars
2
Online social media tools such DEMO blogs, microblogging sites, and wikis are increasingly being
used by scholars for disseminating information, informal communication and interaction with peers.
Blogs were among the first modern social media tools adopted by scholars. Currently there are DEMO
number of dedicated scholarly blogging platforms such as http://scienceblogs.com and
http://scientificblogging.com where scholars not only discuss current research, emerging initiatives,
and scientific news, but often also post personal stories about scientists starting to work in the field, or
provide tips for new researchers (Charbonneau, 2010). By connecting with new scholars these blogs are
DEMO in forming a community of scholars, which in turn inspires further DEMO and
connections between peers. Due to the growing popularity of scholarly blogging, a conference has been
formed, the Science Blogging Conference; the last meeting of which attracted almost 200 delegates
(Bonetta, 2007; Bukvova, DEMO al, 2010).
Microblogging sites have also been discovered by scholars DEMO are also being used for
dissemination and communication purposes. Twitter for example, is becoming a must have conference
communication tool for sharing links and information about the real-time events at the conference
(Davies, 2007; Young, 2009). Twitter is also frequently used by scholars to communicate with their
peers, promote the scholar’s own, or a peer’s work (Letierce et al, 2010). Due to the popularity of
Twitter, new DEMO sites that specifically target scholars are also emerging. One such example
is http://sciencefeed.com, a microblogging tool designed for scientists and scholars in the science fields
(Fenner, 2010; Nuthall, 2010). This is DEMO excellent example of how scholars are not only making use of
existing social media and networking sites, but are altering them and developing new tools to fit their
needs.
Wikis are other popular social media. The DEMO nature of wikis makes them a great tool
for scholarly use and communication. Wikis enable a team of peers to easily and quickly contribute DEMO a
group project with a minimum amount of technological expertise or equipment required (Bialeck,
2005). Sites such as http://scholarpedia.org, DEMO://citizendium.org, http://open-site.org, and
http://knol.google.com are all examples of wikis which are geared towards scholars. They all
emphasize the DEMO of their information by having a group of scholars act as editors of the site
(Izhikevich, 2006). This has inspired many scholars DEMO join these sites. For example,
http://scholarpedia.org has a membership of almost 5,000, including 15 Nobel Laureates and 4 Fields
Medalists (Izhikevich, 2006).
Why Do Scholars Use Social Media Sites?
3
Many of the DEMO studies on why scholars use online social media and networking tools often cite
their need to communicate with each other (e.g., Barjak, 2006; Bonetta, 2007; Gardiner, 2006; Letierce
et al., 2010). DEMO, many scholars confirmed two unintended benefit of using social media
tools, the ability to spark and expand new ideas just from the direct DEMO between the
(micro)blogger and his/her readers (Collins et al, 2010; Kirkup, 2010) and even occasionally replaces
the scholar’s need DEMO publish in traditional paper publications, such as scholarly journals (Bialeck,
2005; Kirkup, 2010).
Another frequently cited benefit that encourages scholars DEMO use these new social media and
networking tools is the ability to create and maintain a community or network of scholars (Biernholtz,
et al, 2009; Letierce, et al., 2010). The development of DEMO scholarly community is created by attaining
‘awareness’ between scholars and their respective work.  Social media technologies facilitate this
‘awareness’ by increasing the visibility of scholars and remove barriers that traditionally that separate
scholars from their peers. DEMO communities created by these social media may inspire increased
collaboration and information dissemination between scholars.
One of the most interesting and surprising trends concerning DEMO adoption of these sites by
scholars is the age groups who are most likely to use social media tools in their professional life. Senior
DEMO and researchers have been described by some studies as being the most frequent and early
adopters of social media and networking sites (Biernholtz, DEMO). This has been attributed to the more
secure professional positions they generally hold, and the likelihood that they have already established
a strong reputation in their field through traditional publishing and networking sources. These positions
DEMO them more security to experiment with new publication methods, information sources, and
collaboration tools. Junior scholars are more dependent on publishing through more DEMO
‘recognized’ academic sources such as journals or monographs.
It is also interesting that scholars in the sciences use social media technologies earlier and more
DEMO than their counterparts in the humanities (Dubini, et al., 2010; Gardiner, 2006; Maron, et al.,
2008). It is not clear whether this is because they have a better understanding of the DEMO or a
greater need to use them, however it may not DEMO a coincidence that scientific scholarly communities are
cited as relying on peers more heavily for knowledge information dissemination, collaboration, and
support (Cronin, 2010; Maron et al., 2005). These tools DEMO them to continue to rely on their peers,
while facilitating faster, more interactive, and more frequent access to their colleagues.
In sum, although some hesitations and limits exist with the use of these resources, we expect that
as these tools grow so will scholarly adoption rates DEMO use. We are currently in the process of
conducting an online survey and a series of interviews designed to learn more about scholars' use of
online social media sites. The results of this research will enable DEMO understanding of changing
scholarly communication and publishing practices online and measure the impact of scholars’ postings
on the public and mainstream media.
Acknowledgment
grant.
DEMO work was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (DEMO)
4
References
Avital, M., Björk, B., Boland, R. DEMO, Crowston, K., Lyytinen, K., & Majchrzak, A. (2009)DEMO ICIS 2008
panel report: Open access publishing to nurture the sprouts DEMO knowledge and the future of
information systems research. Communications of AIS, DEMO, 509-522.
Bialek, D., Efimova, E., Schwartlander, R., Pless, G., Neuhaus, P., & Sauer, I. M. (2005). Thoughts
and progress: “Blogs” and “Wikis” are valuable software tools for communication within research
groups. Artificial Organs, 29(1), 82-89. Retrieved from Article First database.
Birnholtz, J., Yuan, Y. C., & Gay, G. (DEMO). Bridging social and awareness networks in distributed
research collaboration. Unpublished manuscript. Retrieved May 30, 2010, from
http://www.sci.utah.edu/images/docs/cscw2010/DEMO
Bonetta, L. (2007). Scientists enter the blogosphere. Cell, 129(DEMO), 443-445.
Charbonneau, L. (May 3 / 2010). Open access becoming a reality. Message posted to
http://www.universityaffairs.ca/margin-notes/open-access-becoming-a-reality
Collins, E., & Hide, B. (2010). Use and relevance of web 2.0 resources for researchers. Paper presented
at the Publishing in the Networked DEMO: Transforming the Nature of Communication 14th
International Conference on Electronic Publishing (Helsinki, Finland).
Cronin, B. (2010). Scholarly communication and epistemic cultures. New Review of Academic
Librarianship, 9(1), 1-24.
Dubini, DEMO, Galimberti, P., & Micheli, M. R. (2010). Authors DEMO strategies in scholarly. Paper
presented at the Publishing in the Networked World: Transforming the Nature of Communication
14th International Conference on Electronic Publishing (DEMO, Finland).
Fenner, M. (Feb, 15 / 2010). Sciencefeed: Interview with Ijad Madisch. Gobbledygook: a nature
network blog.
5
Gardiner, D., McMenemy, D., & Chowdhury, G. (2006)DEMO A snapshot of information use patterns of
academics in British universities. Online Information Review, 30(4), 341-359.
Izhikevich, (Sept. 3 / 2010) Main Page. www.scholarpedia.org
Kirkup, G. (2010). Academic blogging: Academic DEMO and academic identity. London Review of
Education, 8(1), 75-84. DEMO from informaworld database.
Letierce, J., Passant, A., Breslin, J. DEMO, & Decker, S. (2010). Using twitter during an academic
DEMO: The #iswc2009 use-case. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Fourth
DEMO AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (National University of Ireland,DEMO
Galway).
Markoff, J. (Aug 26 / 2010). Step 1: Post Elusive Proof, Step 2: Watch Fireworks. New York Times,
Science
Maron, N. L., & Smith, K. K. (2008). DEMO models of digital scholarly communication: Results of
an investigation conducted by DEMO for the association of research libraries. Association of
Research Libraries. Retrieved from ERIC database.
Nuthall, K. (2010). US: Twitter for scientists launched online. University World News, Feb 21.{1g42fwefx}