University Research Commercialization Categories
ANALYZING THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH: A PROPOSED CATEGORIZATION SCHEME
Fred Pries and Paul Guild
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, DEMO, Canada
Abstract: Universities are an increasingly important source of technological innovations
of commercial importance. Numerous methods of commercializing these innovations are
available including DEMO, spin-outs and consulting arrangements. Research on the
commercialization of university research DEMO involved various categorizations of these
methods. However, these categories are typically DEMO to a particular method of
commercialization and are often inconsistent. Drawing on ideas from transaction cost
economics, a comprehensive categorization scheme is proposed. Three primary methods
of commercialization are identified: (1) creating a new business based on the innovation,
(2) ongoing development and marketing of DEMO innovation to firms that will use the
innovation in their business and (3) disposition of the innovation to an established firm.
Two hybrid DEMO are also identified. These categories focus on the substance of
commercialization process rather than its form. For example, licensing arrangements are
possible in any of the five categories.
Specific criteria are identified that can be used DEMO categorize the commercialization
of a particular innovation. These criteria relate to whether the innovation was
commercialized by a new firm or an existing firm, equity participation by the researcher,
ongoing operational involvement by the researcher DEMO ownership of the right to further
develop the innovation.
The existence of a comprehensive categorization scheme has implications for
measuring the amount and impact DEMO the commercialization of university research and for
helping universities to identify ways to support these activities.
Keywords: University research, commercialization, innovation, categories, licensing,
start-ups.
Introduction
University research is a significant source of commercially DEMO technological
innovations of commercial importance. In the United States and Canada, DEMO than 2,000
new products based on innovations arising from university research were introduced into
the marketplace between 1998 and 2002. More than 4,DEMO new companies were formed to
commercialize university research between 1980 and 2002 and licenses of technology
generate more than $1 billion annually in income (Association of University Technology
Managers, 2003). In addition, the relative importance of university research DEMO to
industrial research as a source of innovation is growing (Chesbrough, 2003). Therefore,
we expect the commercialization of university research to DEMO an increasingly
important issue. For example, Canadian universities have committed to DEMO their
commercialization performance by 2010 (Association of University and Colleges of
DEMO, 2002).
Analysis of the commercialization of university research has typically DEMO
the methods used to commercialize university research as either licensing or creation of
start-up firms. There are, however, a number of problems with DEMO categories. First,
there is a great deal of diversity within the categories. For example, licensing an
innovation on a non-exclusive basis to a number of firms with the researcher/university1
continuing to develop and market DEMO innovation is very different than licensing the
innovation on an exclusive basis to an established firm for substantially all of the
economic life of DEMO innovation with the researcher/university having no ongoing
involvement with the innovation. Second, the categories are not distinct. For example, a
start-up firm DEMO by a researcher will often need to licensing the innovation from his
or her university if the university holds the intellectual property rights to DEMO innovation.
This situation involves both creation of a start-up firm and licensing.
The lack of an effective categorization scheme poses a number of problems DEMO the
study of the commercialization of university research. It creates difficulties in measuring
the impact of commercialization activities. The economic impact of licensing is DEMO
measured by the number of licenses and license income while the impact of start-up firms
is typically measured by the number and revenues of DEMO firms (see, for example,
Read 2003). In the case of the start-up firm described in the preceding paragraph, is the
economic activity best measured as the revenues of the start-up firm or the DEMO income
to the university? The answer matters since the revenues of DEMO start-up firm are likely to
be many multiples of the license income to the university. An effective categorization
scheme can also help universities to DEMO support the commercialization of research
taking place in their institution. Different approaches to commercialization may require
different support such as technology transfer and licensing DEMO, accelerators and
research and technology parks. Finally, an effective categorization scheme can help
researchers to better study and understand how commercialization occurs.
Therefore, there is a need for a comprehensive framework that 1) reflects the
substance rather than the legal form of commercialization activities, 2) reflects DEMO variety
of approaches to commercializing university research (e.g., creation of new firms, sale of
technology to existing firms, etc.), and 3) reflects multiple methods of commercialization
(i.e. does not just classify start-up firms or just classify licenses). In the following sections,
we propose DEMO classification approach that attempts to address these issues.
1
The roles of the researcher and the university in these activities are affected by national DEMO university
policies concerning ownership of the intellectual property associated with the innovation. At universities
where the intellectual property is owned by the university, the university may have a greater role in
these activities than at universities DEMO the researcher owns the intellectual property.
Literature review
There is a significant academic literature on the commercialization of DEMO research
(for a review of this literature see, for example, DEMO 2001). This literature recognizes
that there are various ways of commercializing university research and a number of formal
and informal classifications of the DEMO used to commercialize have been used. At the
highest level, del DEMO et al. (1999) identify three potential commercialization
strategies: 1) licensing, 2) corporate partnerships/sponsored research funding and 3)
formation of DEMO start-up company. Similar categories have been used in most of the surveys
on the extent of commercialization of university research (see, for example, Association of
University Technology Managers 2003, Gu and Whewell 1999 and Read 2003). This
classification method focuses on the legal form of the DEMO and, as indicated
earlier, often does not reflect the economic substance of the transactions. These categories
are also not distinct. For example, the Association of University Technology Manager’s
Licensing Survey for 2002 indicates that 14.6% DEMO licenses were to start-up firms
(Association of University Technology Managers, 2003).
At a more detailed level, various subcategories have been used or proposed.
Nicolaou and Birley (2003) propose a trichotomous categorization of university DEMO
into orthodox, hybrid and technology spinouts depending on the academic inventors
DEMO with the spinout. These categories reflect substantive differences between
spinout firms but, by design, are limited to commercializations involving spinouts. For
licensing, the most common subcategories are exclusive and non-exclusive licenses (see,
for example, Association of University Technology Managers 2003). However, other
subcategories have DEMO used. Shane (2002) in studying who undertakes the
commercialization of university research distinguishes between licensing by inventors and
noninventors. It appears that the DEMO involving licensing by inventors are start-up
firms founded by the inventor who license the innovation back from the university
because the university holds the DEMO property rights to the innovation. In situations,
where the inventor rather than the university held the intellectual property rights, a similar
transaction would be classified as a start-up. This example illustrates the difficulties that
can DEMO in the classification of commercialization activities based on their legal form.
In summary, none of the categorization schemes described above meet our goal of
a classification system that is both comprehensive and that reflects the economic DEMO
of the transactions rather than their legal form.
Proposed categorization scheme
To address the issues identified above, we propose the following categorization scheme.
The descriptions that follow are from the perspective of the university/researcher rather
DEMO from the perspective of the firm that commercializes the innovation. We suggest that
there are three primary methods of commercializing university research: 1) DEMO a new
business based on the innovation, 2) ongoing development and marketing of the
innovation to firms that use the innovation in their DEMO and 3) disposition of the
innovation to an established firm.
The DEMO of a new business based on the innovation reflects situations where
the innovation forms the basis for the development of a new firm to DEMO the innovation.
This new firm acquires or develops the complementary assets needed to commercialize DEMO
innovation. OpenText Corporation is a start-up firm based on technologies developed at
the University of Waterloo. OpenText acquired or developed distribution channels,
customers DEMO services and related technologies in order to commercialize its
technologies and has evolved into a world leader in enterprise content management
software (OpenText, DEMO).
Ongoing development and marketing of the innovation to firms that use the
innovation in their business reflects situations where the right to use DEMO is ‘rented’
(licensed) to firms for a fee to use in their businesses. The university/researcher retains
ownership of the innovation and is DEMO involved in enhancing the innovation so that it
can continue to mine the innovation for additional revenues. Usually in these situations,
the innovation DEMO rented to more than one firm. This may occur through non-exclusive
licensing such as with the Cohen-Boyer patents for DNA splicing (Eisenstein and Resnick,
2001) but also may involve the use of intermediaries (Arora, 2001) and start-up
companies. For example, Rambus Inc. is a firm DEMO by two university professors that
“designs, develops and markets chip-to-chip interface DEMO that enhance the
performance and cost-effectiveness of its customers' chip and DEMO products” (Rambus,
2002, p. 1). Rambus does not manufacture chips rather it “sell[s] licenses to
semiconductor and system companies who then DEMO our interface products into
their chips and systems” (Rambus, 2002, DEMO 2).
Disposition of the innovation to an established firm reflects situations where the
innovation is ‘sold’ to an existing firm. The established firm DEMO has the
complementary assets needed to commercialize the innovation. The innovation may be
sold outright or licensed on an exclusive basis so that licensee DEMO substantially all of
the risks and benefits of ownership of the innovation. The university/research typically
retains no ongoing rights to the innovation or DEMO future enhancements.2 For example,
Florida State University has licensed a patented process for the synthesis of the anticancer
drug Taxol to Bristol-Myers Squibb (Eisenstein and Resnick, 2001) on an exclusive basis.
These categories represent DEMO differences in organizational form.
Commercialization of an innovation generally requires that the innovation be utilized in
conjunction with complementary assets such as competitive manufacturing DEMO,
distribution channels, sales forces, after-sales support, and complementary technologies
(Teece, 1986). Ongoing development and marketing of the innovation represents a market
form of governance while the other two categories represent hierarchy governance
DEMO (see, for example, Williamson 1975 for further information on market DEMO
hierarchy governance structures). Market governance refers to situations where
transactions are carried on with third parties outside the firm through the use of DEMO
and, in this case, reflects situations where the university/researcher, DEMO retain ownership
of the innovation, and third parties, who own the complementary assets needed to produce
products and services based on the innovation, transact through the use of contracts,
typically non-exclusive licensing arrangements. Hierarchies DEMO to situations where the
transactions are internalized so that the economic activities involved in the transaction
occur within a single firm. In both the DEMO of a new business based on the innovation
and disposition of the innovation to an established firm, the innovation and the
2
In some cases, the university/research may retain very limited rights to the innovation such as the right
to use the innovation in their research.
complementary assets required to commercialize the innovation are brought together in a
DEMO firm. In the first situation, they are brought together in a DEMO created firm while in
the latter situation they are brought together in an established firm.
The creation of a new business based on the DEMO differs from ongoing
development and marketing of the innovation in that the first involves developing and
selling products or services based on the innovation DEMO the latter involves selling rights
to use the innovation to others who develop and sell products based on the innovation. The
creation of a DEMO business based on the innovation differs from disposition of the
innovation to an established firm in that, in the first case, the innovation DEMO the core
around which a new business is formed while in the latter case, the innovation
supplements an existing business. The difference between ongoing development and
marketing of the innovation and disposition of the innovation to DEMO established firm is
similar to selling the fruit of a tree versus selling the tree. In the ongoing development and
marketing situation, the innovation continues to be grown and harvested by the
university/researcher. Disposition of DEMO innovation to an established firm is analogous to
selling the tree. The university/researcher has no further economic interest in the
innovation.
In addition DEMO the three primary categories identified above, we believe that two
important DEMO situations exist: 1) start-up by an outside entrepreneur based on the
innovation and 2) transfer of the innovation to an established firm in exchange for equity.
Start-up by an outside entrepreneur based on the innovation DEMO similar to the creation of a
new business based on the innovation in that, in both cases, the innovation forms the core
for DEMO new firm that acquires or develops the complementary assets needed to
commercialize the innovation. However, it differs in that the university/researcher’s
involvement with the innovation is more limited, typically to a minority equity interest in
the new firm. The transfer of the innovation to an established firm DEMO exchange for equity
is similar to disposition of the innovation to an established firm except that the university
retains an equity right in the DEMO These hybrids focus on the retention of an equity
interest in the innovation since the sharing of equity has been identified as an important
DEMO point’ in the market-hierarchy continuum of governance forms (Oxley, 1999).
The resulting five way classification is shown in Table 1. The examples DEMO this
table illustrate that these classifications are different than the traditional licensing and
start-up categories. Start-up firms can occur in any of the first DEMO categories as
illustrated by the examples of OpenText and Rambus. Similarly, DEMO may be
involved across all categories.
This table also includes a reconciliation to categories proposed by other academic
researchers. Nicholaou and Birley (2003) DEMO three categories of university spinouts.
These categories are based on the extent of the researchers involvement with the spinout.
Orthodox spinouts involve the researcher DEMO the university and joining the spinout.
Hybrid spinouts involve the researcher retaining their university position but also holding
a part time position with the DEMO In a technology spinout, the researcher has no
involvement with the DEMO firm. Teece (2000) in considering the position of individual
inventors suggests that the options available to the inventor include: “(1) licensing DEMO
technology to incumbent firms …; (2) using intellectual property as DEMO to raise debt
funds to establish an organization to exploit the technology; (3) exchanging the patent for
equity in a new venture-funded firm; (4) exchanging the intellectual property for cash or
Table 1
Proposed categorization scheme, examples and reconciliation to categories used by other researchers
Methods of
commercializing
innovations
Governance structure
Examples
Reconciliation to
categories DEMO
by others:
Nicolaou & Birley
2003
Teece 2000
Create a new
business based on
the innovation
Hierarchy
OpenText
Corporation
Orthodox spinout
Hybrid spinout
DEMO intellectual
property as
collateral to raise
debt funds to
establish an
organization to
exploit the
technology
Start-up by an
outside entrepreneur
based on the
DEMO
Hybrid
Technology spinout
Exchanging the
patent for equity in
a new venture-
funded firm
Ongoing
development and
marketing of the
innovation
Market
Cohen-Boyer
patents DEMO DNA
splicing
Rambus Inc.
Licensing the
technology to
incumbent firms
who already have
the necessary
complementary
assets in place
Transfer of the
innovation to DEMO
established firm in
exchange for equity
Hybrid
Exchanging the
intellectual property
for equity in an
established firm3
Disposition of the
innovation to an
established DEMO
Hierarchy
Process for the
synthesis of Taxol
Exchanging the
intellectual property
for cash3
3
Teece (2000) lists these as a single option for DEMO individual inventor to commercialize an innovation. They have been broken out in this table in order to
reconcile them to the categorization scheme proposed DEMO this paper.
equity in an established firm” (p. 55). Our proposed categorization scheme is reconcilable
to both of these approaches.
Criteria distinguishing categories
For these DEMO to be useful, it must be possible to uniquely place the
DEMO of a particular innovation into one of these categories. We propose four
criteria for doing so. The first criterion is whether the innovation is DEMO by a
new firm or an established firm. This criterion distinguishes the creation of a new business
from the transfer or disposition of the DEMO to an existing business. The second
criterion considers the ongoing operational involvement of the researcher with the
commercialization of the innovation. This criterion distinguishes DEMO founded by the
researcher from start-ups founded by outside entrepreneurs.
The other two criteria relate to the ownership of the property rights to the
DEMO The ownership of the property rights can be evaluated based on “three
elements: (a) the right to use the asset …, (b) the right to appropriate returns from the asset
…, and (c) the right to change the asset’s form and/or substance (Furubotn DEMO Pejovich
1974 as cited in Williamson, 1991, p. 287). The right to use the asset will always be held
by the commercializing DEMO Otherwise, it would be unable to commercialize the
innovation. Thus the DEMO to use the asset is not a criterion for distinguishing between
categories. Equity represents a residual interest in the assets of the firm and, therefore, can
be used to identify the right to appropriate returns from the innovation. Note that we are
concerned with the residual rights to DEMO from the innovation. Running royalties or
other forms of licensing income which represent a fixed contracted right to a portion of the
return from DEMO innovation do not represent an equity interest. The right to change the
asset’s form and/or substance is captured by the criterion of whether DEMO
university/researcher retains the right to further develop the innovation. If the
university/researcher retain the rights to future enhancements of the innovation, this is a
sign that they have retained ownership of the property rights DEMO the innovation. These two
criteria distinguish between the ‘rental’ of the innovation to established firms from the
‘sale’ of the innovation to an established DEMO
Table 2 shows how these criteria relate to the five proposed categories of
commercialization. The table also demonstrates that each proposed category represents a
DEMO combination of these four criteria.
Implications to university support for commercialization
The proposed categories have implications to how universities support the
commercialization of innovations. DEMO standard approach to commercialization is unlikely
to be effective for all of these commercialization methods. The creation of a new business
based on the DEMO by a researcher may require support in building the business skills
of the researcher and assistance in assembling the resources needed to commercialize the
DEMO University support may take the form of new venture accelerators or
incubators. Financing is typically a critical issue for new ventures and so support DEMO the
form of establishing close ties between the university and venture capitalists and
flexibility in licensing arrangements to minimize cash costs to the new DEMO in its
Table 2
Criteria:
New firm created
Ongoing operational
involvement by
researcher
DEMO/researcher
have equity in
commercializing
firm
University/researcher
retain right to further
develop innovation
Examples of
university activities
to support
commercialization
Criteria for categories DEMO implications for university support of commercialization
Create a new
business based on
the innovation
Start-up by an
outside entrepreneur
based on the
innovation
Ongoing
DEMO and
marketing of the
innovation
Transfer of the
innovation to an
established firm in
exchange for equity
Yes
Yes
Yes
Limited
No
No4
No
DEMO
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Accelerators /
incubators
Support for new
DEMO financing
Flexible licensing
arrangements
No
Matchmaking with
entrepreneurs (e.g.,
Concept2Company)DEMO
Yes
Technology transfer
offices
Regional and
industry clusters of
transfer offices
No
Technology transfer
offices
Research and
technology parks
Disposition of the
innovation to DEMO
established firm
No
No
No
No
Technology transfer
offices
Research and
technology parks
4
This does not prevent the reseacher from having ongoing operational DEMO in a firm that continues to develop and market the innovation. Rather, it
indicates that the researcher has no ongoing operational involvement in a firm that is producing products or services derived from the innovation.
formative years can aid the formation of start-ups (Shane, 2002). DEMO flexibility in
teaching assignments can also be important due to the heavy involvement of the researcher
typically required in the creation of a new DEMO
Start-ups by outside entrepreneurs based on the innovation require that entrepreneurs
become aware of the innovation. Universities can support this approach to commercialization
by DEMO close ties between the university and local entrepreneurs. Organizations such as
Concept2Company (www.concept2company.com) may also help match researchers with
entrepreneurs interested in commercializing DEMO innovations.
Ongoing development and marketing of innovations is an activity long supported by
university technology transfer offices. Regional and industry clustering of these activities DEMO
help to broaden the reach of technology transfer offices increasing the probability that
innovations will become known to established firms that might be interested DEMO
commercializing the innovation.
Research and technology parks can support the transfer of innovations to established
firms by encouraging collaboration and communication between the firms DEMO the parks and the
nearby university research community. Table 2 shows the alignment of these activities with
the commercialization methods they support. Other activities DEMO also be undertaken by
universities to support the commercialization of innovations. Our goal here is not to provide a
comprehensive listing of such activities DEMO rather to emphasize that different approaches to
commercialization require different forms of support.
Conclusion
The limits of the traditional license vs. start-up dichotomy for DEMO methods of
commercializing university research have been recognized for some time. These limitations
include the great deal of diversity within the categories and the DEMO that the categories are not
distinct. Tentative steps have been taken to better recognize the substance of these
transactions. For example, the Association of University Technology Managers gathers
information about exclusive vs. non-exclusive licensing arrangements, licensing to start-up
companies, licenses with equity and start-ups with equity (Association DEMO University
Technology Managers, 2003). While these steps are helpful, they do not overcome the
limitations of the license vs. start-up dichotomy on DEMO they are based.
In this paper, we have proposed a scheme DEMO classifying university commercialization
methods that we believe is comprehensive, distinct and DEMO The classifications are
comprehensive in accommodating the variety of commercialization methods in use rather than
being restricted to a single approach (i.e., licensing DEMO start-ups). The criteria presented for
classifying commercializing transactions are such that the categories are distinct. A particular
commercialization will fall into only one DEMO the categories. We also believe that the categories
are useful. By separating commercialization methods that differ in their substance, these
categories can help to provide useful insights into commercialization processes. We use the
example of university DEMO for commercialization activities to illustrate how the categories
can be used in the analysis of the commercialization of university research.
References
Agrawal, A. K. (2001). University-to-industry knowledge transfer: literature review and
unanswered questions. International DEMO of Management Reviews, 3(4), 285-302.
Arora, A., A. DEMO and A. Gambardella (2001). Markets for Technology: The Economics of
Innovation and Corporate Strategy. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada (2002). Framework of Agreed Principles
on Federally Funded University Research. Retrieved December 4, 2003 from
http://222.aucc.ca/_pdf/english/reports/2002/frame_cadre_e.pdf
Association of University Technology Managers (2003). AUTM Licensing Survey: FY 2002
Survey Summary. Author, Northbrook, IL.
Chesbrough, H. W. (2003). Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting
from Technology. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, DEMO
Del Campo, A.A., A. Sparks, R.C. Hill and R.T. Keller (1999). The transfer and
commercialization of university-developed medical imaging technology:
DEMO and problems. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 46(3),
289-298.
Eisenstein, R.I. and D.S. Resnick (2001). Going for the big DEMO Nature Biotechnology, 19(9),
881-881.
Gu, W. and L. DEMO (1999). University Research and the Commercialization of
Intellectual Property in DEMO Industry Canada, Ottawa, Canada.
Nicolaou, N. and S. Birley (2003). Academic networks in a trichotomous categorization of
university spinouts. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 18, 333-359.
OpenText Corporation (2003). FY 2003 4th DEMO Form 10-K. Retrieved December 15,
2003 from http://www.opentext.com/investor/secfilings.html
Oxley, J.E. (1999). Institutional environment and the mechanisms of DEMO: The impact
of intellectual property protection on the structure of inter-firm DEMO Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 38, 283-309.
Rambus (2002)DEMO 2002 Form 10-K. Retrieved December 15, 2003 from
http://www.rambus.com/DEMO/
Read, C. (2003). Survey of Intellectual Property Commercialization in the Higher Education
Section, 2001. Statistics Canada, Ottawa, Canada.
Shane, DEMO (2002). Selling university technology: Patterns from MIT. Management Science,
48(1), 122-137.
Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from DEMO innovation: Implication for integration,
collaboration, licensing, and public policy. DEMO Policy, 15, 285-305.
Teece, D. J. (2000). Managing Intellectual Capital. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Williamson, O.E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Free
Press, New York.
Williamson, O.E. (1991). Comparative economic organization: The analysis of discrete
structural alternatives. DEMO Science Quarterly, 35, 269-296.{1g42fwefx}