Does Familiarity Breed Trust? The Implications of Repeated Ties for Contractual Choice in
Alliances
Author(s): Ranjay Gulati
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Feb., 1995), pp. 85-112
DEMO by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256729
Accessed: 01/11/2010 10:32
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms DEMO Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be DEMO at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears DEMO the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and DEMO upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
DEMO scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of DEMO is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to DEMO Academy
of Management Journal.
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management Journal
1995, Vol. 38, No. 1, 85-112.
DOES FAMILIARITY BREED TRUST? THE
IMPLICATIONS OF REPEATED TIES FOR
CONTRACTUAL CHOICE IN ALLIANCES
RANJAY GULATI
Northwestern University
Exploring the factors that explain the DEMO of governance structures in
interfirm alliances, this study challenges the use DEMO a singular emphasis
on transaction costs. Such an approach erroneously treats each trans-
action as independent and ignores the role of interfirm trust that
DEMO from repeated alliances between the same partners. Compre-
hensive multiindustry data on alliances made between 1970 and 1989
support the importance of such trust. DEMO support emerged for the
transaction cost claim that alliances that encompass shared research
and development are likely to be equity based, there is also strong ev-
idence that repeated alliances between two partners are less likely DEMO
other alliances to be organized using equity.
In the last two decades, a number of environmental shifts have led to
new opportunities for interfirm cooperation-the globalization of markets,
the convergence of and rapid shifts in DEMO, the rise of Japan and
Europe as technologically advanced economies, and regulatory changes
within the United States. Perhaps the most significant manifestation of DEMO
rise in interorganizational cooperation has been the dramatic increase in
interfirm strategic alliances. Such alliances encompass a variety of agree-
ments whereby two or DEMO firms agree to pool their resources to pursue
specific market opportunities. These agreements include joint ventures,
joint R&D agreements, technology exchange, DEMO investment, licensing,
and a host of other arrangements. Many empirical DEMO have documented
the dramatic growth of such alliances in numerous industrial sectors, the
multitude of reasons why firms have entered into such partnerships, DEMO the
wide variety of contractual arrangements firms use to formalize their alli-
ances (Contractor & Lorange, 1988; Harrigan, 1986, 1989; Hergert & Morris,
1988; Hladik, 1985).
Economists and management theorists have become concerned in recent
years with the contractual, or governance, structures DEMO in alliances and
most have adopted a theoretical stance informed by transaction cost eco-
I would like to thank Robert Burgelman, Gerald Davis, DEMO Gomes-Casseres, Mark
Granovetter, Sachin Gupta, Paul Hirsch, Paul Lawrence, DEMO Mizruchi, Nitin Nohria, Peter
Ring, Aage Sorensen, Brian Uzzi, DEMO Edward Zajac for helpful comments on various drafts of
this article. Thanks also to the two anonymous reviewers for detailed suggestions on revision.
85
86
Academy of Management
Journal
February
nomics (cf. Hennart, 1988; Pisano, 1989; Pisano, Russo, & Teece, 1988).
Transaction cost theorists argue that anticipated transaction costs determine
the type of contract used in DEMO alliance. Transaction costs, which typically
arise out of concerns about opportunistic DEMO on the part of one or more
of a set of partners, include the costs of negotiating and writing contingent
contracts, monitoring contractual DEMO, enforcing contractual prom-
ises, and addressing breaches of contractual promises (DEMO, 1985: 36).
Much of the prior empirical research on transaction cost economics has
examined the choice companies make between vertical integration and
DEMO's-length market transactions, also called the make-or-buy decision (Bal-
akrishnan & Wernerfelt, 1986; Masten, 1984; Monteverde & Teece, 1982;
Walker & Weber, 1984). In these instances, treating each transaction as DEMO
crete is justifiable since the repeated making of ties between the same two
partners is rare. However, two firms may enter multiple strategic alliances
with each other over several years. Empirical studies on the governance of
DEMO have unfortunately continued in the transaction cost economics
tradition, treating each DEMO as independent and considering the activi-
ties it includes as singularly reflecting the transaction costs associated with
it. The approach taken is thus static; it ignores the possibility of repeated
alliances and the emergent processes resulting DEMO prior interactions be-
tween partners that may alter their calculus when they are choosing con-
tracts in alliances (Ring & Van de Ven, DEMO; Zajac & Olsen, 1993).
By ignoring the fact that firms may enter multiple alliances with each
other over time, empirical work informed by transaction cost economics
precludes the possibility that an important economic and DEMO context may
alter the formal structure of those alliances and the transaction costs asso-
ciated with them. This omission is significant because experience can DEMO
gender trust among partners, and trust can limit the transaction costs DEMO
ciated with their future alliances (Granovetter, 1985, 1992; Marsden, DEMO).
Early theorizing within transaction cost economics highlighted such facets
(Commons, 1970; Williamson, 1975), but subsequent researchers in this
stream have DEMO systematically examined them.
This article draws on both transaction cost economics and sociological
theory to examine the factors that explain the choice of governance DEMO
in individual alliances. The social context of alliances, viewed here as
DEMO over time, can only be observed by examining firms' relationships
over time. Thus, I tested predictions with comprehensive data on alliances
formed between 1970 and 1989 in the biopharmaceutical, new materials,
and automotive economic sectors by American, European, and Japanese
firms. I defined an alliance DEMO any independently initiated interfirm link that
involves exchange, sharing, or co-development. This definition, which ex-
cludes one-time marketing promotions, transient distribution agreements,DEMO
technology purchase agreements, and state-supported R&D programs such as
SEMATECH, a semiconductor industry consortium, the Microelectronics
Computer Corporation, and ESPIRIT, a European Community-supported
1995
Gulati
87
subsidy program, is consistent with many prior empirical approaches to the
study of alliances (Harrigan, 1986; Hergert & Morris, DEMO; Hladik, 1985;
Parkhe, 1993).
TRANSACTION COSTS AND THE DEMO OF ALLIANCES
According to transaction cost economics, in a world without DEMO
costs all activities would be carried out as exchanges between units, DEMO it
is due to the failure of markets, or arenas of DEMO, to allow for many
exchanges without prohibitively high governance costs that DEMO
come to exist (Williamson, 1985, 1991). In other words, hierarchical organ-
ization is considered a response to market failure. Transaction cost DEMO
ics is not only concerned with the emergence of organizations per se to
manage transaction costs, but also with how the choice of organizational
form may vary according to the specific types of exchange activities encom-
DEMO Thus, a second-order question examined is, how can existing ex-
change relations be structured to economize on transaction costs? In this
context, DEMO application of transaction cost economics to the formation of
alliances is most apparent. Since alliances blend elements of the two ex-
tremes of market DEMO hierarchy, it follows that firms would enter such ar-
rangements when DEMO transaction costs associated with an exchange are in-
termediate and not high enough to justify vertical integration (Bradach &
Eccles, 1989; Eccles, 1981; Williamson, 1985).
A similar logic can be applied to DEMO even finer distinctions about the
type of contract used in those intermediate instances in which transaction
cost considerations mandate alliances. The contract used for DEMO alliance will
be closer to either the market or the hierarchy extreme, depending on the
magnitude of the transaction costs: the greater the DEMO costs, the more
hierarchical the contract (Pisano, 1989; Pisano et al., 1988). The possibility
of opportunistic behavior by a partner generates the most salient transaction
costs in the alliance context. Additional costs result DEMO making alliance-
specific investments and from any uncertainty associated with the partner-
ship itself.
The specific governance structure of alliances is important for a DEMO
of reasons. First, a contract is an important mechanism by which DEMO
protect themselves from a partner's opportunism. Evidence suggests that
firms entering alliances are potentially vulnerable to the opportunistic be-
havior of their partners (Business Week, 1986; Doz, Hamel, & Prahalad, 1989;
Kogut, 1988, 1989; Reich & Mankin, 1986). In the face DEMO the hazards asso-
ciated with alliances, the contracts used reflect the DEMO the partners see
(Ring & Van de Ven, 1992).
Second, a contractual agreement serves as a framework within which
cooperation between partners proceeds. Although alliance partners may not
follow their initial contract to the DEMO, it provides a set of normative guide-
lines: "The major DEMO of a legal contract is to provide a framework
88
Academy of Management Journal
February
... a framework highly adjustable, a framework which almost never accu-
rately indicates real working relations, but which affords a rough indication
around which such relations vary, an occasional guide in case of doubt, and
a norm of ultimate appeal when the relations cease in fact to work"
(Llewellyn, 1931: 736-737).
Third, the recent availability of an array of innovative contractual ar-
rangements opens up the possibility of new interfirm cooperative agree-
ments. The dramatic DEMO in the use of arm's-length contracts, which
don't involve DEMO ownership, is particularly noteworthy in this respect.
Equity and Nonequity Alliances
DEMO cost economists have classified the governance structures
of alliances in terms of their use of equity ownership (Pisano, 1989; Pisano
et al., DEMO). Equity alliances, as defined by transaction cost economists, take
one of two forms (Pisano, 1989). They can either be organized DEMO an equity
joint venture, which involves the creation of a new DEMO independent jointly
owned entity, or they can come about when one DEMO the partners takes a
minority equity position in the other partner or partners. Transaction cost
economists justify treating equity joint ventures and minority equity DEMO
ments as a single category on the grounds that "a direct DEMO investment by
one firm into another essentially creates an equity joint venture between one
firm's existing shareholders and the new corporate investor" (DEMO, 1989:
111). In both types, the effective shared equity stakes of the firms vary case
by case. The important point is DEMO beyond a certain threshold, the shared
ownership structure effectively deters opportunistic DEMO
Equity-based ventures are considered hierarchical to the extent that they
more closely replicate some of the features associated with organizational
hierarchies than do other DEMO An example of an equity joint venture is
CFM International (CFMI), whose partners are the French jet engine manu-
facturer Societe Nationale d'l:tude et de Constuction de Moteurs d'Aviation
(SNECMA) and DEMO Electric. This 50-50 venture, formed in 1971 to
produce jet engines DEMO small commercial aircraft, has been eminently suc-
cessful. According to the DEMO agreement, the partners were to share both
ownership and work equally. DEMO is typical of equity joint ventures, CFMI is
an entity with DEMO own headquarters, chief executive officer (CEO), board of
directors, DEMO staff, members of which come from both companies (Enright,
1992).
Nonequity arrangements in contrast, don't involve the sharing or ex-
change of equity, nor do they usually entail the creation of a new organiza-
tional entity. In the absence of any shared ownership structure, nonequity
alliances are more akin to arm's-length market exchanges on the DEMO
of market to hierarchy. Organization members of the partner firms work
together directly from their own organizational confines. Nonequity alli-
ances include unidirectional agreements, such as licensing, second-
1995
Gulati
89
sourcing, and distribution agreements, and bidirectional agreements such DEMO
joint contracts and technology exchange agreements. Examples of such alli-
ances are some of the partnerships Cadence Technologies, a leader in elec-
tronic design automation, has entered over the years with their leading cus-
tomers, DEMO as Harris, Toshiba, National Semiconductor, Ericksson, Intel,
Phillips, DEMO, Mitsubishi, Kawasaki Steel, and SGS-Thompson. Within such
partnerships, the customers share Cadence's development costs for new
products that are especially useful DEMO the former's own purposes. They
provide Cadence with financial resources and may maintain engineering
staff at Cadence to assist in the ongoing development DEMO Equity is ex-
changed, and no new organizational entities are created DEMO oversee the part-
nerships.
From a transaction cost economics standpoint, quasi-market DEMO like
nonequity alliances are the default mode for organizing alliances, and DEMO
use of equity must be explained. The explanation offered is that firms use
equity alliances when the transaction costs associated with an exchange are
DEMO high to justify a quasi-market, nonequity alliance. Researchers have iden-
tified DEMO sets of governance properties through which equity alliances ef-
fectively alleviate transaction costs (Pisano et al., 1988). The first are the
properties DEMO a "mutual hostage" situation in which shared equity helps
align the interests of all the partners. Not only are the partners required to
DEMO ex ante commitments to an equity alliance, but also, their concern for
their investment reduces the possibility of their behaving opportunistically
over the DEMO of the alliance (Williamson, 1975). In the case of alliances
that involve sharing or developing new technologies over which property
rights are DEMO to enforce, equity ownership also provides an effective
means for allocating DEMO resources. For instance, at CFMI, both partners
benefit from the increasing value of their equity in the venture. Issues of the
ownership of DEMO property developed in the venture are side-
stepped as the property belongs to the venture itself.
The second set of properties are those of DEMO administrative hierarchy
that not only oversees the day-to-day functioning of an alliance, but also
addresses contingencies as they arise. In equity joint ventures, DEMO hierarchy of
managers serves this function; in the case of direct DEMO investments, hi-
erarchical supervision is created when the investing partners participate DEMO
the board of directors of the partner that received the investment. For in-
stance, the top management team of the joint venture CFMI includes a CEO,
a chief financial officer (CFO), and two vice presidents. Traditionally, the
CEO and one vice president have come from SNECMA and the CFO and the
other vice president from General Electric. The DEMO of directors, which
includes top managers from both partners, ratifies important decisions. This
participation is the mechanism by which partners exercise their residual
DEMO of control (Grossman & Hart, 1986).
The benefits of equity alliances must be weighed against their disad-
vantages. Equity alliances can not DEMO take a long time to negotiate and
organize, but can also DEMO very high exit costs. Furthermore, significant
90 Academy of Management Journal February
administrative costs can be associated with DEMO hierarchical supervision they
encompass.
The same pros and cons must be assessed for nonequity alliances. They
can be negotiated rapidly and require only limited DEMO from each
partner. For instance, the partners at Cadence Technologies can DEMO
their investments at short notice if necessary, and Cadence can put DEMO
such alliances with other partners relatively quickly. But partners are vul-
nerable to each other's opportunistic behavior, and one may find it difficult
to persuade the other to make significant alliance-specific investments
(Joskow, 1985)DEMO A further difficulty may arise in alliances formed to share or
develop new technologies; here, significant disagreements on the allocation
of property rights DEMO arise. Even when there is agreement, it may be diffi-
cult DEMO transfer tacit knowledge across loosely connected firms (Badaracco,
1990; Hennart, 1988).1 Furthermore, such agreements entail a fair amount of
management DEMO, albeit of a different nature than that required in equity
alliances.
DEMO prior research on the governance of alliances, I chose to focus
DEMO the dichotomy between equity and nonequity alliances. My central con-
cern was to examine the factors that explain the use of equity in alliances. DEMO
looked at equity for numerous reasons. First, its use is a DEMO feature
that offers a means to distinguish most alliances. Most other classifications
are not based on such a readily measured feature, so alliances cannot easily
be placed on their proposed scales. Second, the use of equity is an important
measure by which partners, especially first-time ones, address DEMO con-
cerns about malfeasance in alliances. My previous fieldwork at firms enter-
ing alliances corroborates this practice (Gulati, 1993). Third, prior research
by transaction cost economists on these issues has focused on the use DEMO
equity, so looking at the dichotomy between equity and nonequity alliances
DEMO the present findings to be compared to those of prior research.
R&D alliances. Firms enter alliances for a wide variety of reasons.2 A
DEMO basis from which transaction cost economics has examined the
costs associated with alliances has been the activities encompassed by the
agreement, for instance, DEMO presence of R&D. Prior research suggests that
transactions involving the sharing, exchange, or co-development of knowl-
edge can be somewhat problematic because DEMO the peculiar character of
knowledge as a commodity (Arrow, 1974). Many of these problems result
from parties' inability to accurately assess the value of the commodity being
1 Tacit knowledge here refers to knowledge DEMO cannot be made fully explicit and typically
resides in patterns of relationships, norms, information flows, ways of making decisions, and
other organizational DEMO
2 Systematic empirical studies have examined some of the economic and technological
factors underlying the formation of alliances (Mariti & Smiley, 1983). DEMO of the typical
motivations examined include sharing uncertainty, sharing costs, access to complementary
technologies, learning new tacit technologies, reducing innovation period, monitoring environ-
mental changes, entering foreign markets, and expanding product range (Hagedoorn & Schak-
enraad, 1990).
1995
Gulati
91
exchanged as well as from concerns about opportunism resulting DEMO poor
monitoring possibilities in such exchanges (Balakrishnan & Koza, 1993). The
difficulty of transferring R&D know-how across organizations compounds
these problems (Badaracco, 1990; Hennart, 1988). In sum, alliances with an
DEMO&D component are likely to have higher transaction costs than those that
don't involve joint R&D.
Transaction cost theorists claim that alliances DEMO R&D will
most likely be organized as equity-based partnerships because of the signif-
icant transaction cost burden. Shared equity can align the interests DEMO part-
ners and limit opportunistic behavior by focusing attention on their equity
stake in the alliance. Furthermore, such alliances are usually accompanied
by an independent administrative structure, which fosters information flow
and provides for ongoing coordination.
In a study of the telecommunications industry, Pisano, Russo, and Teece
(1988) explicitly tested the impact of transaction costs on the nature DEMO
alliances. They predicted that the greater the hazards associated with an
alliance, the more likely it will be equity based, and their findings DEMO
these predictions. Pisano (1989) observed similar results in the biotechnol-
ogy sector. In both cases, high transaction costs were measured as the pres-
ence of an R&D component in the alliance. In a study DEMO U.S.-Japanese
alliances, Osborn and Baughn (1990) followed a similar reasoning DEMO also
showed that alliances encompassing joint R&D were more likely to be equity
based. Thus,
Hypothesis 1: Alliances are more likely to be equity based
if they have a shared R&D component.
Unlike DEMO costs analyses, the current work treated this hypoth-
esis as a DEMO point rather than an end point.
THE ROLE OF INTERFIRM TRUST IN ALLIANCES
In recent years, numerous researchers have been critical of transaction
cost economics' treatment of each transaction between companies as an
independent event (DEMO & Prahalad, 1991; Ring & Van de Ven, 1992). DEMO
assumption is particularly inappropriate where firms repeatedly enter trans-
actions with each other. Why and how are repeat alliances likely to differ
from one-time DEMO in governance structure? An important cause and
consequence of such repeat DEMO among firms is the emergence of in-
terfirm trust, which obliges DEMO to behave loyally and can play an im-
portant role in their choice of governance structure for future alliances with
each other. The term DEMO has widely varying connotations (for excellent
reviews on the topic, see Barber [1983], Gambetta [1988], and Luhmann
[1979]). In this context, I conceived of trust as "a type of expectation that
alleviates the fear that one's exchange partner will act opportunistically"
(Bradach & Eccles, 1989: 104). This definition is akin to Simmel's DEMO of
mutual "faithfulness" in social relationships (Simmel, 1978: 379)DEMO Gambetta
gave this cogent definition of such forms of trust:
92
Academy of Management Journal
February
Trust ... is a particular level DEMO the subjective probability with
which an agent assesses that another agent or group of agents
will perform a particular action both before he can DEMO such
action . . . and in a context in which it affects his own action.
When we say we trust someone or that DEMO is trustworthy,
we implicitly mean that the probability that he will perform an
action that it beneficial or at least not detrimental to DEMO is high
enough for us to consider engaging in some form of cooperation
with him (1988: 217).
Can there be trust between DEMO organizations that are simply agglomer-
ations of individuals. Intuitively, trust is DEMO interpersonal phenomenon.
Some sociologists have argued that although expectations of trust do ulti-
mately reside within individuals, it is possible to think of interfirm trust in
economic transactions (Zucker, 1986). At the organizational level, observers
point to numerous examples of "preferential, stable, obligated, bilateral DEMO
ing relationships" to illustrate that firms develop close bonds with other
DEMO through recurrent interactions (Sabel, 1991). Recent historical ac-
counts of industrial districts such as the modern woolens center at Prato,
Italy, the injection molding center in Oyannax, France, the cutlery industry
in DEMO, England, and the nineteenth-century Swiss watch-making re-
gion (Piore & DEMO, 1984; Sabel, 1991; Sabel & Zeitlin, 1985; Weiss, DEMO,
1988) support this argument. Similar accounts have been made of DEMO
tracting relations in the Japanese textile industry (Dore, 1983), the French
engineering industry (Lorenz, 1988), the American construction industry
(Eccles, 1981), and the Italian textile industry (Johnston & Lawrence, 1988).
A variety of terms have been used to describe this phenomenon: Williamson
(1985) described it as both "relational contracting" and "obligational con-
tracting"; Eccles (1981) as "quasi-firm arrangements"; Johnston and
Lawrence (1988) as "value-added partnerships"; Dore (1983) as "DEMO
relational contracting"; and Zucker (1986) as "process-based trust." Under-
lying all these accounts is a single notion: interfirm trust is incrementally
built as firms repeatedly interact (Good, 1988).
The idea of DEMO emerging from prior contact is based on the premise
that through ongoing interaction, firms learn about each other and develop
trust around norms of equity, or "knowledge-based trust" (Shapiro, Shepp-
ard, & Cheraskin, 1992). There are strong cognitive and emotional bases for
such trust, which are perhaps most visible among individual organization
members (Lewis & Weigert, 1985). Macaulay, in a seminal essay, observed
how close personal ties emerged between individuals in organizations that
contracted with each other; these personal relationships in turn "exert pres-
sures for conformity to expectations" (Macaulay, 1963: 63). Palay (1985)
similarly found that the relationships between rail-freight carriers and auto
shippers were overlaid with close personal DEMO among members of
those organizations. He described how these overlapping relationships were
an important factor in their use of informal contracts in a situation DEMO would
otherwise have demanded a detailed, formal contract because of high DEMO
1995
Gulati
93
action costs. Kanter and Myers (1989) pointed out DEMO interpersonal ties
across organizations with alliances increase over time. Similarly, Ring DEMO
Van de Ven (1989) pointed to the important role of informal, personal con-
nections across organizations in determining the governance structures used
to organize their transactions.
How is trust between firms likely to alter their DEMO of contracts in
subsequent alliances? Perhaps the biggest concern of firms DEMO alliances
is the predictability of their partners' behavior. A detailed contract DEMO one
mechanism for making behavior predictable, and another is trust. Where
DEMO is trust, people may not choose to rely upon detailed contracts DEMO
ensure predictability. Indeed, as Macaulay observed: "Detailed negotiated
contracts can DEMO in the way of creating good exchange relationships between
business units" (1963: 64).
Entertaining the possibility of trust between alliance partners emerging
from prior ties clearly alters assessments of the transaction costs associated
with DEMO alliances. Trust counteracts fear of opportunistic behavior and
as a result, DEMO likely to limit the transaction costs associated with an ex-
change. This process in turn should affect the governance structure of the
alliance. In DEMO words, trust can substitute for hierarchical contracts in
many exchanges and DEMO as an alternative control mechanism (Bradach &
Eccles, 1989).
DEMO is important to distinguish knowledge-based trust just discussed from
deterrence-based trust, DEMO also plays a role in repeat alliances (Ring &
Van de Ven, 1989; Shapiro et al., 1992). The latter emphasizes utilitarian
considerations that may also lead to believing that a partner will behave DEMO
a trustworthy manner. Specifically, trust can arise when untrustworthy be-
havior DEMO a partner can lead to costly sanctions that exceed any potential
benefits that opportunistic behavior may provide. Some potential sanctions
are loss of repeat DEMO with the same partner, loss of other points of
interaction between DEMO two firms, and loss of reputation (Granovetter, 1985;
Macaulay, 1963; Maitland, Bryson, & Van de Ven, 1985: 63). Thus, on strictly
utilitarian grounds it is to the firm's benefit to behave in a trustworthy
manner.3
How significant might the role of DEMO deterrent sanctions be in the case
of interfirm alliances? Recent research DEMO alliances suggests that most firms
are embedded in a social network of prior alliances through which they are
connected with one another either directly DEMO indirectly (Kogut, Shan, &
Walker, 1993; Powell & Brantley, 1993). Within such a dense social network,
reputational considerations should play an important role in each firm's
potential for future alliances. DEMO, as this article shows, many firms
3 In recent years there has been some debate on whether behavior with utilitarian motiva-
tions can DEMO be described as trust (Uzzi, 1993; Williamson, 1993). For my purposes, interfirm
trust encompasses such utilitarian behavior, and I choose DEMO to engage in this debate.
94 Academy of Management Journal February
do engage in repeat alliances with DEMO other, suggesting that there are al-
ways prospects for future partnerships DEMO presently allied firms.
Trust itself can be difficult to observe and measure. It has a taken-for-
granted character since it is so closely linked DEMO fundamental social norms
and customs. Following prior research, I chose to DEMO a factor that likely
produces trust as its proxy (Zucker, 1986)-prior alliances between firms.
This substitution is based on the intuition that DEMO firms with prior alliances
are likely to trust each other more than other firms with whom they have had
no alliances (Ring & Van de Ven, 1989).4 Other theorists have made similar
claims about the role of repeat alliances. In a survey-based empirical study,
Parkhe (1993) observed that the presence of a prior history of cooperation
between two firms limited their perception of expected opportunistic be-
havior in new alliances DEMO as a result lowered the level of contractual
safeguards employed in those alliances. Drawing on an inductive field study
at seven pairs of firms DEMO alliances, Larson (1992) observed that firms not
only rely extensively DEMO mechanisms of social control, as opposed to
formal contracts, in the formation and maintenance of alliances, but that
such relational factors become increasingly important as the relationships
between firms develop over time.
The operational proposition DEMO here is that firms are less likely
to use equity in repeated alliances than in a first-time alliance since interfirm
trust based on prior DEMO reduces the imperative to use equity. Actors are
thus willing to take what Williamson (1993) calls "calculative risks" because
of their confident DEMO that their counterparts will act responsibly.
Thus:
Hypothesis 2: The DEMO the number of previous alli-
ances between the partners in an alliance, the less likely
the alliance is to be equity based.
A further question remains as to whether the character of the previous
alliances affects DEMO type of new alliance used. It could be that two firms will
prefer a nonequity alliance only when they already have an equity alliance
DEMO place. According to such a logic, an equity alliance creates a DEMO
situation by requiring ex ante commitments by the partners and engendering
partners' concern for the value of their investments. Once two firms share
one hostage it obviates the need for additional hostages. This is similar to
DEMO Williamson (1983) described as "credible commitments." A singular
focus on this hostage-taking character is, however, overly narrow. As high-
4 Firms DEMO be connected with other firms through a wide array of social and economic
relationships. These include supplier relationships, trade association memberships, interlock-
ing DEMO, relationships amongst individual employees, and alliances. All these can be
important sources of information that leads to trust. Indeed, prior research has shown that a
variety of interorganizational contacts serve as conduits for both technological DEMO social in-
formation about organizational activities (Baker, 1990; Davis, 1991). Because of limitations in
the scope of this study, I focused on a single source of social connections among firms, prior
alliances.
1995
Gulati
95
lighted earlier, prior equity alliances are more than simple hostages. They
entail close interactions between the partners over prolonged periods of
DEMO, all of which can enhance trust through mutual awareness. As a DEMO
manager whom I interviewed at a computer software firm said,
Our technology partnerships are organized as detailed equity-
based contracts.... These in turn DEMO led to numerous re-
peated alliances with the same set of firms.... In our subse-
quent alliances we don't bother to write detailed DEMO That
would not only be tedious but also an insult to our relationship.
Sometimes we give our lawyers only a few days to write DEMO the
contract, and that too after the project may already have DEMO
Such behavior could be a result of having a hostage in the form of an equity
alliance already in place. However, informants also reported that the logic
behind their use of loose contracts was not so DEMO the existing equity
alliance, but their familiarity with their partners and DEMO that they
were trustworthy (Gulati, 1993).
An alternative to the above scenario is that two firms will prefer a
nonequity alliance even DEMO they only have a prior nonequity tie that may
be easy to dissolve but also enhances mutual awareness.5 This effect is likely
to be DEMO significant than that arising from the presence of prior equity
alliances, DEMO not only create shared hostages but may lead to closer
interaction among partners. Thus,
Hypothesis 3a: The greater the number of previous equity
alliances between the partners in an alliance, the less
likely an alliance is to be equity based.
Hypothesis 3b: The greater the number of previous non-
equity alliances between the partners in an alliance, the
less likely the alliance is to be equity based.
Looking beyond the history DEMO alliances between given firms, I also
expected firms to trust domestic DEMO more than international partners,
not only because more and better information is available about domestic
firms, but also because the reputational consequences of opportunistic be-
havior are greater in a domestic context (Gerlach, 1990)DEMO "Character-based
trust," whereby firms trust others that are socially similar DEMO themselves, may
also be an issue (Zucker, 1986). Given DEMO trust, I expected firms to be more
willing to engage in DEMO, quasi-market alliances with domestic partners
than with international partners.
Hypothesis 4: Alliances are more likely to be equity based
if they are among DEMO of different nations.
5 Of course, nonequity alliances, even if they can be easily dissolved, can be very important
strategically and thus can still serve as important hostages.
96
Academy of Management Journal
February
Alliances can be between two or DEMO partners. Research on group
behavior suggests that beyond a certain threshold, DEMO increase in the number
of participants in any group can lead to dysfunctional behavior within the
group and to a decline in its ability DEMO perform assigned tasks (Hackman,
1987; Steiner, 1972). Within DEMO, the presence of more than two part-
ners heightens the possibility DEMO stalemates and conflicts. Inasmuch as mul-
tilateral alliances pose larger organizational problems than bilateral alli-
ances, I expected them to more likely be equity based.
Hypothesis 5: Alliances are more likely to be equity based
if they are among more than two firms.
METHODS
Sample
The unit of DEMO here was the transaction. My data set included
information on all publicly announced alliances in the period 1970-89 in
the biopharmaceuticals, new materials, DEMO automotive economic sectors.
The biopharmaceutical sector includes applications in therapeutics, vac-
DEMO, and diagnostics. The new materials sector includes metals, ceramics,
polymers, and composites. The automotive sector includes both manufac-
turers of finished automobiles and their suppliers.
More than half the data came from the Cooperative DEMO and
Technology Indicators (CATI) database, collected by researchers at the DEMO
tricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology (MERIT)
at DEMO University of Limburg. Unlike data on alliances drawn solely from
announcements in popular business periodicals like the Wall Street Journal,
the CATI data DEMO collected by examining technical journals, books, and
business periodicals for various sectors. I collected the remainder of the
alliance data used here from DEMO sources, including industry reports,
industry-specific articles reporting alliances, and materials from industry
consultants. For the automotive industry, the sources I consulted included
Automotive News, Ward's Automotive Reports, U.S. Auto Industry Report,
DEMO Industry of Japan, and the Japanese Auto Manufacturers Forum; for
the biopharmaceutical sector, Bioscan, Ernst & Young Reports, and the Bio-
technology Directory; for the new materials sector, Office of Technology
Assessment reports DEMO Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment reports; and for all DEMO, Predicast's F & S Index of Corporate
Change.
The goal DEMO the data collection was to comprehensively cover all alli-
ances formed within the selected industries. I placed no restrictions on the
sizes of the DEMO in the alliances, including both large and small firms.
Only alliances DEMO had actually been formed were recorded. The complete
data set includes information on over 2,400 alliances formed by American,
European, and Japanese firms. To my knowledge, it is the most comprehen-
1995
Gulati
97
sive data set on alliances within each of the DEMO sectors, both in terms of the
length of time included and DEMO depth of coverage.6
The data segment acquired from MERIT coded information on the form
of an alliance (equity based or not) and the DEMO it encompassed. This
was based upon precise criteria used to draw assessments from the public
announcement of the alliance. In coding the remainder of DEMO data that I
collected, I was consistent with the coding scheme DEMO by MERIT.
Furthermore, I assessed the reliability of the coding criteria DEMO asking two
academic experts on strategic alliances to code a random sample of 25 alli-
ances using the information I had collected. There was DEMO coinci-
dence in their coding and my own.
An alliance was labeled as including R&D only if a public announce-
ment clearly stated DEMO the agreement encompassed joint product develop-
ment or basic R&D. Similarly, an alliance was coded as equity based when a
public announcement said that an equity joint venture had been created or
that a firm DEMO taken a substantive minority position in another with the
intent of pursuing joint projects.
Fortunately, most public announcements of alliances report detailed
information on their governance structures, activities, and goals. When ac-
tivities or governance DEMO were ambiguous, I tried to identify addi-
tional public records that DEMO clearly stated the goals of a partnership. For
over 30 percent of the alliance records that I collected, I consulted multiple
sources.
The period of this study, 1970-89, was a potential source of bias, but
there were strong reasons for choosing it. First, the growth of alliances in
these years was unprecedentedly high (Anderson, 1990; Hagedoorn & Schak-
enraad, 1990), but little previous research on alliances has encompassed
longitudinal data covering such an extensive time period. Inasmuch as the
growth of DEMO in this period represents current trends in alliances, the
present findings DEMO continue to be relevant to the contemporary forma-
tion of alliances.
A second possible limitation of the sampling design was that the data
encompass DEMO three industries. I exercised caution in interpreting results
obtained with the pooled sample of data from all three industries, including
dummy variables for each sector. Furthermore, I reestimated the models for
each sector separately to ensure that the postulated effects held within each
industry. Although these industries represent DEMO broad spectrum in terms of
stage of maturity, a legitimate remaining DEMO is that the findings re-
ported here may be idiosyncratic to the industries included.
6 The number of alliances examined here far exceeds the DEMO examined in previous
studies: Nohria and Garcia-Pont (1991) reported 96 DEMO sector alliances for the period
1980-89 versus the 493 reported here; DEMO Pisano (1989) reported 195 biopharmaceuticals
alliances, versus the 781 reported DEMO
98
Academy of Management Journal
February
Dependent
Variable
The dependent variable, mode of alliance, was coded "1" if an alliance
involved the use of equity and "0" if it did not. The fundamental character-
DEMO that distinguishes equity alliances from nonequity alliances is that eq-
uity sharing creates shared ownership and is, beyond a minimum threshold,
effective in reducing exposure to opportunistic behavior.
Independent
Variables
Table 1 describes
the variables DEMO
arguments
Definitions
TABLE 1
and Predicted Signs of Variables
Variable
Mode
R&D
component
Repeated ties
International alliance
Multilateral alliance
Repeated equity ties
Repeated DEMO ties
New materials sector
Automotive sector
Year
Percentage of equity
alliances
Definition
Dummy variable indicating if alliance was
equity based
Dummy variable indicating presence DEMO an
R&D component in the alliance
Number of prior alliances between the firms
Set to one if the firms are of differing
nationalities (default domestic)
Set to one if the alliance has more than DEMO
partners (default bilateral)
Number of prior equity alliances between
the DEMO (in the presence or absence of
any nonequity alliances)
Number DEMO prior nonequity alliances
between the firms (in the absence of any
DEMO alliances)
Set to one if firms are in the new materials
sector (default biopharmaceutical)
Set to one if firms are in the automotive
sector (default biopharmaceutical)
A year value for each record ranging from 1
to 19
Percentage of equity alliances announced in
the industry DEMO the prior year
in the analysis
made in this article in the predicted
For consistency with
tion costs as the presence
present, 0 = no R&D). R&D alliances
R&D, product development, DEMO elements
cally were those that involved
Hypothesis 2 concerns
signs.
prior empirical
of an R&D component
included
of both. Non-R&D
research,
DEMO production
the relationship
and summarizes
I defined high transac-
in an alliance (1 = R&D
those that encompassed
or marketing.
alliances
typi-
between
the type of alliance
Prediction
Dependent
variable
+
+
?
No prediction
No prediction
No prediction
+
basic
1995
Gulati
99
between given partners and the history of alliances between DEMO The vari-
able repeated ties recorded the number of prior alliances two firms had had
since 1970 (0 = first-time alliance). I also calculated the variables repeated
equity ties and repeated nonequity ties, respectively indicating the number
of prior equity and nonequity alliances between two parties. These DEMO
also took a zero value for a first-time alliance of the given type.
An important clarification is necessary at this point. Three alternative
scenarios DEMO possible in the history of alliances between two firms. The two
could have entered (1) only nonequity alliances in the past, or (DEMO) only equity
alliances, or (3) both equity and nonequity alliances. To which category
should the third scenario be assigned? Since Hypothesis 3a predicts the role
of prior equity ties, in the presence or absence of other nonequity ties, re-
peated equity includes both the situation in which there are only prior
equity alliances and that in which there DEMO been mixed alliances. Hypoth-
eses 3b, on the other hand, focuses on the effect of prior nonequity alliances
in the absence of any DEMO ties. Hence, repeated nonequity ties does not
include situations with mixed DEMO
I included a dummy variable indicating whether an alliance was do-
mestic or international (1 = partners of differing nationalities, 0 = partners
DEMO the same nationality).
To capture any effects that arose from the number of partners in an
alliance, I computed that number. Since the alliances in the sample were
either bilateral or trilateral, this variable was recoded as a dummy variable
with a value of "1" if DEMO alliance was multilateral and a value of "0" if an
alliance was bilateral.
Statistical Model
A "logit" model was used to assess DEMO effects of the independent vari-
ables on the likelihood of an alliance being equity based (Aldrich & Nelson,
1984). The general specification of the model used was as follows: log[P(Mi
= 1)/(1 - P(Mi = 1)] = Ao + B1(Xi), where P(Mi = 1) is the probability that
alliance i DEMO equity based and Xi is the vector of independent variables. A
variable's positive coefficient indicates its propensity to promote equity al-
liances.
Controls
DEMO included two control variables to represent the three sectors studied.
One dummy variable was coded "1" if an alliance was in the new DEMO
sector, "0" otherwise, and the second was coded "1" if the alliance was in
the automotive sector and "0" otherwise. DEMO default sector was biophar-
maceuticals.
A control variable assessing the relationship of equity alliance forma-
tion to the percentage of equity alliances announced in DEMO industry was also
included. I counted the number of alliances announced in an industry in the
year prior and computed the percentage of those DEMO were equity based. In
a limited way, this variable tested the DEMO claim that firms mimic
TABLE 2
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
Variables
Mode
R&D
component
Repeated DEMO
International
alliance
Multilateral
alliance
Repeated
equity ties
Repeated
nonequity
ties
New
materials
sector
Automotive
sector
10. Year
11. Percentage of
equity
alliances
1.
2.
DEMO
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Frequencya
0 1
840 1,577
1,015
1,402
1,322
1,095
1,756
661
1,DEMO
1,143
1,924
493
0.65
0.58
1.40
0.45
0.27
1.18
0.01
0.47
0.20
14.50
0.35
0.47
0.49
0.98
0.49
0.45
0.85
0.11
0.49
DEMO
3.62
0.15
a Where no figure is given, value is a DEMO
Means
s.d.
Minimum
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Maximum
1
1
9
1
1
9
2
1
2
3
4
5
.17
DEMO
.02
.05
-.15
.01
.04
-.19
.07
.02
.02
.01
.06
.75
.12
-.22
-.01
.02
.05
.00
0
1
.05
.06
-.08
-.04
DEMO
.00
-.13
.09
.08
-.09
.06
.02
.28
.01
.06
0
1
1
19
0.13
1.00
.10
-.06
-.02
.00
.03
Totals = 2,DEMO except for the percentage of equity alliances,
6
7
8
-.05
-.13
-.04
.07
.05
.00
.03
.48
.07
-.01
-.01
.14
for DEMO it is 2,395.
9
-.16
.15
10
-.35
0
0
CD
D
Ql o
"r
CD
Fs
P;
1995
Gulati
101
the contracts other firms in their industry use. This DEMO can also be
interpreted as capturing the net effect of the various macroeconomic factors
within an industry that may influence the formation of equity DEMO
(Amburgey & Miner, 1992).
Finally, I included a dummy DEMO for each year to capture temporal
effects and also control for any temporal autocorrelation.
RESULTS
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics and correlations for all DEMO
The data presented in this table point to the diversity of alliances included
in the pooled sample, in which over 500 of the approximately 2,400 alliances
were repeat links between firms.
The correlations show a DEMO problems of multicollinearity. Notably,
repeated equity ties is highly correlated with repeated ties (r > .70); the high
correlation is no surprise since repeated equity ties is a nested subset of
repeated ties. Because DEMO the collinearity, I introduced these variables sep-
arately in the logit DEMO
Table 3 presents the logistic regression estimates. The first column re-
ports the base model including all the control variables. The coefficients for
the DEMO variables were significant (p < .01) in all cases. Although this
finding suggests intrinsic industry differences in the likelihood that equity-
based alliances DEMO be used (the constant terms for each of the industries
differ), it does not reveal whether or not the main effects hypothesized differ
across the three industries. More specifically, the positive signs indicate that
both the automotive and new materials sectors were more likely to have
equity-based DEMO than the biopharmaceutical sector, once independent
variables included in each model DEMO controlled. I later estimated unre-
stricted models for each of the industries (these results are not presented
here). The signs of the coefficients indicated that the postulated directions of
the main effects were indeed observed DEMO each sector.
My original estimations included a dummy variable for each year. For
simplicity of presentation, I reestimated the models using a single variable,
year, which ranges in value from 1 to 19, indicating DEMO year. No differences
in results for the other independent variables were observed in these two sets
of estimates, and the results are mixed for year, which is significant in some
models and not in others.
The positive and significant coefficient (p < .01) for the percentage of
DEMO alliances announced in an industry in a given year suggests
that this variable positively affects the use of equity alliances by firms in the
DEMO in the subsequent year. This finding holds true in the remaining
models as well and suggests that the form of contracts used in alliances DEMO
be linked to an industry's propensity to use equity alliances.
The second column in Table 3 shows results with the measure of trans-
DEMO costs introduced into the model. The results are consistent with Hy-
pothesis 1: alliances involving R&D are more likely to be equity based than
are non-R&D alliances, a relationship indicated by the positive coefficients
102
Academy of Management Journal
Variables
Constant
R&D component
Repeated ties
DEMO alliance
Multilateral alliance
Repeated equity ties
Repeated nonequity ties
New materials sector
Automotive sector
Year
Percentage of equity
alliances
N
- 2 log likelihood
DEMO
df
a Standard errors are
* p < .05
** p < .01
TABLE 3
Results of Logistic Regression Analysisa
Model 1 Model 2 DEMO 3 Model 4
-0.83** -1.55** -1.53** -1.66**
(0.26) (0.27) (DEMO) (0.28)
0.90** 0.99** 0.99**
(0.09) (0.09) (0.09)DEMO
0.36**
(0.10)
0.42**
(0.13)
-0.03*
(0.01)
0.90**
(0.30)
2,395
3,041.74
45.37**
4
-0.23**
(0.05)
0.33**
(0.09)
0.12
(0.11)
-
0.32**
(0.09)
0.15
(DEMO)
97
(0.13)
in parentheses.
0.50**
(0.11)
0.67**
(DEMO)
-0.03*
(0.01)
0.99**
(0.31)
2,395
2,946.79
140.31**
5
0.47**
(0.12)
0.69**
(0.14)
-0.02
(0.01)
1.03**
(0.31)
2,395
2,915.02
172.09* *
8
0.41**
(DEMO)
0.68**
(0.14)
-0.02
(0.01)
1.08**
(0.32)
DEMO,395
2,875.03
212.08**
8
February
Model 5
-1.66**
(0.28)
DEMO
(0.09)
0.32**
(0.09)
0.15
(0.11)
0.97*
(0.13)
0.11
(0.37)
0.41**
(0.12)
0.68**
(0.14)
-0.02
(0.01)
1.08**
(0.32)
2,395
2,874.93
212.18**
9
DEMO
of the variable R&D component (p < .01). This DEMO remains true in later
models as well.
The third column shows results with the three measures of trust: the
number of prior alliances by the same pair of firms, whether they were
domestic or international, DEMO the number of partners involved. Results
suggest that the repetition of ties is a significant determinant of mode of
alliance (p < .01). Specifically, the negative coefficient of the dummy vari-
able repeated ties supports Hypothesis 2 and indicates that the larger the
number of prior alliances DEMO partners, the less likely their current
alliance is to be equity DEMO, even when the presence of an R&D component
is controlled DEMO The positive and significant coefficient for international
alliance supports Hypothesis 4, DEMO predicts that such alliances are more
1995
Gulati
103
likely to be equity based than domestic alliances. No DEMO is found for
Hypothesis 5, however, which predicts that the use of equity is more likely
in multilateral than in bilateral alliances. These DEMO remain true in sub-
sequent models.
Models 4 and 5 were estimated using the measures of prior equity and
nonequity alliances. The variable for DEMO alliances was omitted because
of multicollinearity concerns. In both models, results DEMO that the num-
ber of prior equity-based ties between two firms reduces the likelihood that
a current alliance between them will be equity based, thus supporting Hy-
pothesis 3a.
Results do not support Hypothesis 3b, which postulates that even in the
absence of prior equity ties, the larger the number of nonequity alliances
between two firms, the less likely their future alliance is to be equity based.
However, the number of alliances that actually fit this pattern was extremely
small (N = 23). Thus, the insignificant finding may be the result of my
having too few observations.
Looking at the overall fit of each of the models DEMO by their - 2 log
likelihoods and associated chi-squares, I observed DEMO the introduction of
R&D in model 2 significantly improved the fit of the base model. Another
significant improvement occurred in models 3 and DEMO, with the introduction
of the variables for repeated, international, and DEMO alliances and
that for repeated equity ties.
Table 4 presents the classification tables corresponding to each of the
models in Table 3. These tables DEMO highlight the association between
the predicted and observed responses for each model. All five models per-
form better than a random proportional chance model, which would have a
"hit rate" of p2 + (1 - p)2, where p is the probability of an event's having
occurred (Bayus & Gupta, 1992). On the basis of the DEMO proportion of
events, I estimated p to be .65 (1,568/2,395). Thus, the classification accuracy
for a random model is 54.25 percent. The percentage of correctly classified
cases in the five models DEMO ranges from 65.7 to 67.7 percent, a rate
clearly superior to DEMO random model. The models also perform better than
a simple model with only the intercept (which would predict all nonevents),
albeit not DEMO a large percentage difference. Although this pattern suggests a
significant improvement over a random proportional chance model, it also
indicates that I may have overlooked additional relevant variables.
The relative magnitudes of raw logit coefficients are DEMO directly inter-
pretable since they refer to the increase in logarithmic odds resulting from a
unit increase in a variable. In Table 5 I DEMO elasticities for the key vari-
ables entered in two models shown in Table 3 (Ben-Akiva & Lerman, 1985;
Fernandez & McAdam, 1988; Peterson, 1985).7 Elasticities indicate the per-
7 I computed these DEMO scores by looking across all individual records as opposed to
simply setting mean values for each independent variable and then looking at percentage shifts.
104
Observed
Model 1
No event
Event
Total
Model 2
No event
DEMO
Total
Model 3
No event
Event
Total
Model 4
No event
Event
Total
Model 5
No event
Event
Total
Academy of Management Journal
TABLE DEMO
Estimates of Fit of Logistic Regression Models
Predicted ~P ~redicted ~Percentage
No Event
20
15
35
125
91
216
173
119
292
199
177
DEMO
199
178
377
Event
807
1,553
2,360
702
1,477
2,179
654
1,449
2,103
628
1,391
2,019
DEMO
1,390
2,018
Total
827
1,568
2,395
827
1,568
2,395
827
1,568
2,395
827
1,568
2,DEMO
827
1,568
2,395
February
Correct
65.7
66.9
67.7
66.4
66.3
centage change in the probability of a hypothesized event for a one-unit
DEMO in an explanatory variable.
The results in Table 5 must be interpreted with caution since each
variable has a different underlying measurement scale. In DEMO, for
R&D, a unit change indicates that non-R&D alliances possibly had an R&D
component. For repeated alliances, a unit change indicates the existence of
one more prior alliance. Thus, Table 5 shows that if two firms had entered
an R&D alliance instead of DEMO non-R&D alliance, their likelihood of forming
an equity joint venture DEMO have increased by about 38 percent. If two
TABLE 5
Elasticitiesa for Logistic Regression Analysis Results
Variables
Model 3
Model 5
R&D
Repeated DEMO
International alliance
Multilateral alliance
Repeated equity ties
Repeated nonequity ties
37.73
-14.13
12.47
5.74
38.36
12.10
7.46
-13.70
7.51
a Elasticity is the change DEMO probability resulting from a unit change in an independent
variable.
1995
Gulati
105
firms entering an alliance had one more prior alliance DEMO any kind, model 3
suggests that their likelihood of forming an DEMO joint venture would have
declined by 14.13 percent. Model 5 suggests that one more prior equity
alliance reduced the likelihood of forming an equity DEMO by 13.70 per-
cent. Similarly, the marginal effects of international and DEMO alli-
ances are also reported.
DISCUSSION
The results of models 1 through 5 (Table 3) provide strong evidence for
most of the present DEMO They show (1) that R&D-based alliances are
more likely to be equity based than non-R&D alliances, (2) that the larger the
number of prior alliances between two firms, the less likely are their subse-
quent alliances to be equity based, (3) that the larger the number of prior
equity alliances across two firms, the less likely their subsequent alliances
are to be equity based, and (4) that international alliances are more likely to
be equity based than domestic DEMO No support, however, emerged for
the claim that prior nonequity alliances alone reduce use of equity in new
alliances. Also, the number of partners in an alliance does not seem to affect
the form of DEMO used.
Taken together, the results suggest that firms select contractual forms DEMO
their alliances on the basis of not only the activities they include (R&D), but
also the existence and frequency of prior ties with a partner. What emerges
from this account is an image of DEMO formation in which cautious con-
tracting gives way to looser practices as partner firms build confidence in
each other. In other words, familiarity between organizations through prior
alliances does indeed breed trust.
In an important review DEMO the transaction cost economics literature,
Bradach and Eccles (1989) argued that three primary control mechanisms
govern economic transactions between firms: price, DEMO, and trust.
They observed that, in equity alliances, firms rely DEMO a mix of price and
authority-price because of concern for the value of their equity, and au-
thority because of the hierarchy created. Such an approach, however, looks
at alliances in a static context, treating each transaction as independent,
without taking into account how the relationships DEMO evolve over time.
Observing interfirm alliances over time suggests that repeated ties between
firms engender trust that is manifested in the form of the DEMO used to
organize subsequent alliances. Firms appear to some degree to substitute
trust for contractual safeguards in their repeated alliances. Thus, trust is also
an important component of the control mechanisms used within alliances.
The creation DEMO trust is most visible between partners that already have
an equity alliance in place. My earlier discussion of some of the processes
underlying interorganizational DEMO suggests that prior equity ties are
not simply mutual hostages that enhance each firm's ability to penalize
partners that behave opportunistically, but also conduits for the exchange of
information between partners that allow them to DEMO knowledge-based
106 Academy of Management Journal February
trust in each other. The finding DEMO that only having prior equity alliances
led to looser contracts could very well indicate that equity alliances foster
closer interaction between partners than do DEMO alliances.
The results reported here do not show that prior nonequity alliances
alter the choice of subsequent contracts. Such alliances may represent purely
knowledge-based DEMO but, as pointed out earlier, this argument is somewhat
tenuous. It is difficult to draw any significant conclusions from this finding
because of DEMO extremely small number of observations of such cases.8
Although the findings reported here enhance understanding of gover-
nance structure in alliances, they have broad implications for transaction
cost economics as well. Building on the original insights DEMO Coase (1937), this
theory has reified the transaction as the DEMO of analysis, treating each trans-
action as an independent event. It DEMO ignored the work of Commons (1970),
Coase's contemporary, DEMO also placed importance on transactions as the
appropriate unit of analysis but offered a more process-oriented and tempo-
rally informed view of transactions (cf. Van de Ven, 1993). Other researchers
have offered similar exhortations (DEMO Zajac & Olsen, 1993), but organization-
al researchers have yet DEMO take them up. The current work, a step in this
direction, suggests that transaction cost economics must explicitly incorpo-
rate the role of DEMO ties in its analytical framework. In particular, if the
theory's DEMO on the transaction as the appropriate unit of analysis is to
remain viable, the interdependencies that result from prior transactions
should be included.
Within the broad market-versus-hierarchy argument, my focus has been
on those cases in which firms have decided to form an alliance and face the
issue DEMO the type of governance to be used. Within this narrow domain, DEMO
only the complexity of activities within the alliance moderates firm behav-
ior-the social context resulting from past alliances also affects the contrac-
tual form DEMO alliance takes. Similarly, transaction costs as traditionally de-
fined are unlikely DEMO singularly determine decisions about the use of mar-
kets, alliances, or hierarchical integration, and social context should play an
important role (Granovetter, 1985).
The findings of this study have several practical consequences for DEMO
terfirm alliance activity and, more broadly, for interfirm cooperation. The
study highlights a number of efficiency benefits that follow from creating
trust in DEMO relationships. First, drafting detailed contracts can be
costly and time consuming. DEMO Week (1986) reported that executives
can spend as much as 23 percent of their time developing alliance plans and
19 percent of their DEMO drafting legal documents. Trust between partners
8 In a competing perspective regarding prior nonequity alliances, commitment between
organizations would be viewed as incrementally escalating. In this view, firms may first "test
the water" with each other through loosely organized small-scale projects and subsequently
expand the scopes of DEMO partnerships by entering equity alliances with each other. In this
case, DEMO existence of a prior nonequity alliance would make it more likely that a subsequent
alliance would be equity based.
1995
Gulati
107
can reduce such costs. As Arrow (1974) claimed, trust is perhaps the most
efficient mechanism for governing economic transactions. Trust DEMO also
expand the realm of feasible alliances and allow firms to enter partnerships
that may otherwise have been deemed impossible, even with detailed equity
contracts. Furthermore, detailed contracts can stifle a partnership's adapt-
ability to shifting environments.
Another efficiency-related benefit for firms in trusting relationships is
reduced DEMO costs. An important concern for firms seeking new alliances
is the availability of trustworthy partners, and considerable effort can be
devoted to identifying them (Nohria, 1993). Firms placed in a social network
of trusting DEMO can significantly reduce their search for new part-
ners when they decide to ally with an entity they already trust (Gulati, 1993).
DEMO and Future Research
An important dimension omitted in this discussion is how organiza-
tional factors guide contractual choices. Each partners' size, technological
sophistication, resource constraints, and prior experience with alliances can
play a role, DEMO can a host of other factors. Osborn and Baughn (1990) pointed
to the size of partners as an important determinant of the governance DEMO
ture of alliances.
Another possible line of inquiry would be a finer-grained analysis of
contractual forms of alliances. For equity alliances, this analysis could entail
examining what explains the distribution of ownership, or more broadly, DEMO
distinctions between asymmetrically and symmetrically owned partner-
ships. For nonequity alliances, DEMO could look in more detail at the
various forms included within this category, arrayed on a scale running from
informal to formal, and DEMO of the factors that explain the specific form
used.
Following prior empirical research by transaction cost theorists, I used
the presence of R&D in an alliance as a proxy for transaction costs. There is
considerable DEMO for improvement in measuring these costs. Such im-
provement would not only allow a more accurate assessment of the multi-
faceted role of transaction DEMO in alliances, but would also test how appro-
priate R&D DEMO been as a measure of transaction costs.
Yet another arena for future research could be examining the social
context in which alliances take place DEMO more depth. My focus has been on
direct ties between firms established through prior alliances. It would be
interesting to assess the role of DEMO broader social context, encompassing other
forms of interfirm connections besides alliances, defined by both direct and
indirect ties.
Finally, an important area for future research would be to identify, mea-
sure, and empirically assess DEMO role of trust in the formation, governance,
and ultimate success DEMO interfirm alliances. I relied on the history of prior ties
as the factor most likely to produce trust, but a vast gap in understanding the
many dimensions of trust and their operation within alliances remains.
The DEMO analyses offer exciting research opportunities, but require
108 Academy of Management Journal February
the collection of data beyond those DEMO for this research. Examining
organizational factors guiding contractual choices would require detailed
data on the firms participating in the alliances studied. Similarly, a richer
analysis of the contractual forms themselves would entail collecting detailed
data on DEMO contracts used and, in the case of equity alliances, the distribu-
tion of equity shares. Disentangling transaction costs in alliances and assess-
ing DEMO various components would require detailed information on the
transactions themselves and the specific circumstances of each of the part-
ners. An examination of the DEMO of the overall social structure would
entail collecting information on various additional ties among organizations.
Assessing interfirm trust and its various dimensions would most DEMO en-
tail a detailed survey administered to managers in firms participating in
alliances. Given the comprehensiveness with which this study covered al-
liance announcements DEMO the resultant large number of alliances included
(2,417), detailed DEMO collection on firms and contracts was not possible.
These further issues are, however, important, and they present some of the
most exciting opportunities for future research on interfirm cooperation.
CONCLUSION
The most basic conclusion that DEMO from this study is that contracts
chosen in alliances do not depend wholly upon the activities included
within the partnership and their associated transaction DEMO Rather, such
choices also depend on the trust that emerges between DEMO over
time through repeated ties. My findings suggest that neither transaction costs
nor social factors should dominate discussion of alliances and that in the
DEMO analysis, any explanation should encompass both.
REFERENCES
Aldrich, J. H., & Nelson, F. D. 1984. Linear probability, logit, and probit models. DEMO
Hills, CA: Sage.
Amburgey, T. L., & Miner, A. DEMO 1992. Strategic momentum: The effects of repetitive, positional,
and contextual momentum on merger activity. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 335-
348.
Anderson, E. 1990. Two firms, one frontier: On assessing joint venture performance. DEMO
Management Review, 31(2): 19-30.
Arrow, K. 1974. The limits of organization (1st ed.). New York: Norton.
Badaracco, J. L. 1990. The knowledge link. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Baker, W. DEMO 1990. Market networks and corporate behavior. American Journal of Sociology,
96: 589-625.
Balakrishnan, S., & Koza, M. P. 1993. Information asymmetry, adverse selection and joint ven-
tures: Theory and evidence. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 20: 99-117.
Balakrishnan, S., & Wernerfelt, B. 1986. Technical change, competition and vertical integration.
Strategic Management Journal, 7: 347-355.
Barber, B. 1983. The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
1995 Gulati 109
Bayus, B. L., & Gupta, S. 1992. An empirical analysis of consumer durable replacement inten-
tions. International Journal of Research DEMO Marketing, 9: 257-267.
Ben-Akiva, M., & Lerman, S. R. DEMO Discrete choice analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bradach, J. L., & Eccles, R. G. 1989. Markets versus hierarchies: From ideal types DEMO plural forms.
In W. R. Scott (Ed.), Annual review of DEMO, 15: 97-118. Palo Alto, CA: Annual
Reviews Inc.
Business Week. 1986. Corporate odd couples: Joint ventures are the rage, but the DEMO often
don't work out. July 21: 100-105.
Coase, R. 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica, 4: 386-405.
Commons, J. R. 1970. The economics of collective action. Madison, WI: University of Wiscon-
DEMO Press.
Contractor, F., & Lorange, P. 1988. Cooperative strategies in DEMO business. Lexing-
ton, MA: Lexington Books.
Davis, G. F. 1991. DEMO without principles? The spread of the poison pill through the inter-
DEMO network. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36: 583-613.
Dore, R. 1983. Goodwill DEMO the spirit of market capitalism. British Journal of Sociology, 34:
DEMO
Doz, Y., Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. 1989. DEMO with your competitors and win. Harvard
Business Review, 67(1): DEMO
Doz, Y., & Prahalad, C. K. 1991. Managing DMNCs: A search for a new paradigm. Strategic
Management Journal, 12: 145-164.
Eccles, R. G. 1981. The quasifirm in the construction industry. Journal of Economic DEMO
and Organizations, 2: 335-357.
Enright, M. J. 1992. CFM International, Inc. Harvard Business School Case no. 9-792-097,
Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fernandez, R. M., & McAdam, D. 1988. Social DEMO and social movements: Multiorganiza-
tional fields and recruitment to Mississippi Freedom DEMO Sociological Forum, 3(3):
357-382.
Gambetta, D. 1988. Can DEMO trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and DEMO
cooperative relations: 213-237. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Gerlach, M. 1990. Socially bounded rationality: A case study in the limits to international
business alliances. Working paper, Walter A. Haas School of Business, University of DEMO
ifornia, Berkeley.
Good, D. 1988. Individuals, interpersonal relations, and trust. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust:
Making and breaking cooperative relations: 31-48. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action DEMO social structure: A theory of embeddedness. Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology, 91: 481-510.
Granovetter, M. 1992. Problems of explanation in economic sociology. DEMO N. Nohria & R. Eccles
(Eds.), Networks and organizations: Structure, form and action: 25-56. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press.
Grossman, DEMO, & Hart, 0. 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: DEMO theory of vertical and
lateral integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94: 691-719.
Gulati, R. 1993. The dynamics of alliance formation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Har-
vard University, Cambridge, MA.
Hackman, R. H. 1987. The DEMO of work teams. In J. L. Lorsch (Ed.), Handbook of DEMO
tional behavior: 315-342. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
110 Academy of Management Journal February
Hagedoorn, J., & Schakenraad, J. 1990. Technology cooperation, strategic alliances and their
motives: Brother can you DEMO a dime, or do you have a light. Working paper, Maastricht
Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology, University of Limburg, Neth-
DEMO
Harrigan, K. R. 1986. Managing for joint ventures success. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Harrigan, K. R. 1989. Strategic alliances: Form, autonomy DEMO performance. Working paper,
Columbia University, New York.
Hergert, M., & Morris, D. 1988. Trends in international collaborative agreements. In F. K. DEMO
tractor & P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative strategies in international business: 99-110.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Hennart, J-F. 1988. A transaction costs theory of equity joint ventures. Strategic Management
Journal, 9: 361-374.
Hladik, K. J. 1985. International joint ventures: An economic analysis of U.S.-foreign busi-
ness partnerships. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Johnston, R., & Lawrence, P. R. 1988. Value added partnerships. Harvard Business Review,
66(4): 94-101.
Joskow, P. 1985. Contract duration and relationship-specific investments: Empirical evidence
from coal markets. American Economic Review, 77: 168-185.
Kanter, R. M., & Myers, P. 1989. Inter-organizational bonds and intra-organizational behav-
ior: How alliances and partnerships change the organizations forming them. Paper
presented at the DEMO Annual Meeting of the Society for the Advancement of Socio-
Economics, DEMO, MA.
Kogut, B. 1988. A study of the life cycle of joint ventures. In F. K. Contractor & P. Lorange (Eds.),
DEMO strategies in international business: 169-186. Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
Kogut, B. 1989. The stability of joint ventures: Reciprocity and competitive rivalry. Journal of
Industrial Economics, 38: 183-198.
Kogut, B., Shan, W., & Walker, G. 1993. Competitive cooperation in biotechnology: Learning
through networks? DEMO N. Nohria & R. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and organizations: Structure,
form and action: 348-365. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Larson, A. 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study of the governance of
exchange relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37: 76-104.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. 1985. Trust as a social reality. Social Forces, 63: 967-985.
Llewellyn, K. N. 1931. What price contract? An essay in perspective. Yale Law Journal, 40:
704-751.
Lorenz, E. H. DEMO Neither friends nor strangers: Informal networks of subcontracting in French
industry. DEMO D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations: DEMO
210. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and DEMO New York: Wiley.
Macauley, S. 1963. Non-contractual relations in business: DEMO preliminary study. American So-
ciological Review, 28: 55-67.
Maitland, I., Bryson, J., & Van de Ven, A. 1985. Sociologists, economists, and opportunism.
Academy of Management Review, 10: 59-85.
Mariti, P., & Smiley, R. H. 1983. Cooperative agreements and the organization of industry.
DEMO of Industrial Economics, 31: 437-451.
Marsden, P. V. 1981. Introducing DEMO processes into a system of collective decisions.
American Journal of Sociology, DEMO: 1203-1235.
1995
Gulati
111
Masten, S. 1984. The organization of production: Evidence DEMO the aerospace industry. Journal
of Law and Economics, 27: 403-417.
Monteverde, K., & Teece, D. 1982. Appropriable rents and quasi-vertical integration. Journal of
Law and Economics, 25: 321-328.
Nohria, N. 1993. Information and search in the creation of new business ventures: The case of
the 128 venture group. In N. Nohria & R. G. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and organizations:
Structure, form and action: 240-261. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Nohria, N., & Garcia-Pont, C. 1991. Global strategic linkages and industry structure. Strategic
Management Journal, 12: 105-124.
Osborn, R. N., & Baughn, C. C. 1990. Forms of interorganizational governance for DEMO
alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 33: 503-519.
Palay, T. 1985. DEMO regulatory constraints: Contracting safeguards and the role of informal
agreements. Journal DEMO Law, Economics, and Organization, 1: 155-175.
Parkhe, A. 1993. DEMO alliance structuring: A game theoretic and transaction cost examina-
tion of DEMO cooperation. Academy of Management Journal, 36: 794-829.
Peterson, T. 1985. DEMO comment on presenting results from logit and probit models. American
Sociological Review, 50: 130-131.
Piore, M., & Sabel, C. 1984. The second industrial divide. New York: Basic Books.
Pisano, G. P. 1989. Using DEMO participation to support exchange: Evidence from the biotech-
nology industry. Journal DEMO Law, Economics, and Organization, 5(1): 109-126.
Pisano, G. P., Russo, M. V., & Teece, D. 1988. Joint ventures DEMO collaborative agreements in the
telecommunications equipment industry. In D. Mowery (Ed.), International collaborative
ventures in U.S. manufacturing: 23-70. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
DEMO, W. W., & Brantley, P. 1993. Competitive cooperation in biotechnology: Learning
through networks. In N. Nohria & R. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and organizations: Structure,
form and action: 366-394. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Reich, R. B., & Mankin, E. D. 1986. Joint ventures with Japan give our future away. Harvard
Business Review, 64(2): 78-86.
Ring, P. M., & Van de Ven, A. 1989. Formal and informal dimensions of transactions. In A. Van
de Ven, H. Angle, & M. S. Poole (Eds.), Research on the management DEMO innovation: The
Minnesota Studies: 171-192. New York: Ballinger/Harper-Row.
Ring, P. M., & Van de Ven, A. 1992. Structuring cooperative relationships DEMO organiza-
tions. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 483-498.
Sabel, C. 1991. DEMO trust: Building new forms of cooperation in a volatile economy.
Working DEMO, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
Sabel, C., & Zeitlin, DEMO 1985. Historical alternatives to mass production: Politics, markets and
technology in nineteenth century industrialization. Past and Present, 108: 133-176.
Shapiro, D. L., Sheppard, B. H., & Cheraskin, L. 1992. In theory: Business on a handshake.
Negotiation Journal, 8: 365-377.
Simmel, G. 1978. The philosophy of money. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Steiner, I. D. DEMO Group process and productivity. New York: Academic Press.
Uzzi, B. 1993. The other side of the economic looking glass: Bringing embeddedness back in.
Working paper, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University, Evan-
ston, IL.
Van de Ven, A. H. 1993. The institutional theory of DEMO R. Commons: A review and commen-
tary. Academy of Management Review, 18: 139-152.
112 Academy of Management Journal February
Walker, G., & Weber, D. 1984. A transaction cost approach to make-or-buy decisions. Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 29: 373-379.
Weiss, L. 1984. The Italian state and small business. DEMO Journal of Sociology, 25(2):
214-241.
Weiss, L. 1988. DEMO and geopolitics. In L. Weiss (Ed.), Creating capitalism: The state and
small business since 1945: 161-195. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Williamson, O. E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, DEMO E. 1983. Credible commitments: Using hostages to support exchange. American
Economic DEMO, 73: 519-540.
Williamson, O. E. 1985. The economic institutions of DEMO New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. 1991. Comparative economic organization: The analysis of discrete structural
alternatives. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36: 269-296.
Williamson, O. E. 1993. Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of Law and
Economics, 36: 453-486.
Zajac, E. J., & Olsen, C. P. 1993. From transaction cost to transactional value analysis: Implica-
tions for the study of interorganizational strategies. Journal of Management Studies, 30:
131-145.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional sources of DEMO structure 1840-1920.
In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 8:
53-111. Greenwich, CT: DEMO Press.
Ranjay Gulati is an assistant professor of organization behavior at the J. L. Kellogg
Graduate School of Management at Northwestern University. He received DEMO Ph.D.
degree from Harvard University. His current research is in the areas of strategic alli-
ances, social networks, and supplier relationships.{1g42fwefx}