THE JOURNAL OF FINANCE • VOL. LX, NO. 1 • FEBRUARY 2005
Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss
Aversion? An Experimental Analysis
MICHAEL S. HAIGH and JOHN A. LIST∗
ABSTRACT
Two behavioral concepts, loss aversion and mental accounting, have been combined to
provide a theoretical explanation of the equity premium puzzle. Recent experimental
evidence supports the theory, as students’ behavior has been found to be consistent
with myopic loss aversion (MLA). Yet, much like certain anomalies in the realm of
riskless decision-making, DEMO behavioral tendencies may be attenuated among pro-
fessionals. Using traders recruited from the CBOT, we do indeed find behavioral dif-
ferences between professionals and students, but rather than discovering that the
anomaly is muted, we DEMO that traders exhibit behavior consistent with MLA to a
greater extent than students.
ONE MAINSTAY AMONG ECONOMISTS IS their fascination with anomalies and unsolved
DEMO Arguably one of the most provocative enigmas in recent years is the eq-
uity premium puzzle: Given the return of stocks and bonds over the last century,
an unreasonably high level of risk aversion would DEMO necessary to explain why
investors are willing to hold bonds at all (Mehra and Prescott (1985)). Recently,
Benartzi and Thaler (DEMO) combined two behavioral concepts—loss aversion
(Kahneman and Tversky (1979)) DEMO mental accounting (Thaler (1985))—to
provide a theoretical foundation for DEMO observed equity premium puzzle. While
only a few experimental studies have tested Benartzi and Thaler’s myopic
loss aversion (MLA) theory, the results thus far have been quite promising,
as Thaler et al. (1997), Gneezy and Potters (1997), and Gneezy, Kapteyn, and
Potters (DEMO) have all observed individual behavior consistent with the MLA
conjecture.
∗Haigh DEMO from the Office of the Chief Economist at the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading
Commission and AREC, University of Maryland. List is from AREC and the Department of
Economics, University of Maryland, and the NBER. Please DEMO correspondence to List at
JList@arec.umd.edu. We wish to thank the journal editor, Richard Green, for his patience, perse-
verance, and comments on DEMO versions of the manuscript. An anonymous reviewer and Daniel
Millimet provided very helpful comments. Liesl Koch helped prepare the manuscript and Jonathan
Alevy provided DEMO research assistance. Thanks also to John Di Clemente, former Managing
Director DEMO Research at the Chicago Board of Trade for authorizing the study. CBOT officials
Dorothy Ackerman Anderson, Keith Schap, and Frederick Sturm also provided DEMO support
on site. Thanks to the University of Maryland for funding this research. The authors are grateful
to Jana Hranaiova, seminar participants at the Washington Area Finance Association, and the
Eastern Finance Association for their helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors DEMO do not, in any way, reflect the views or opinions of the U.S. Commodity
Futures Trading Commission.
523
524
The Journal of Finance
Yet, in light of some recent studies (e.g., List (2002, 2003, 2004)) that re-
port market anomalies in the realm of riskless decision-making are attenuated
among real economic DEMO who have intense market experience, the current
lot of experimental studies DEMO their support of MLA may be viewed with cau-
tion.1 This point is strengthened given that there are numerous reasons to sus-
pect that DEMO professionals’ behavior may differ from nonprofessional be-
havior due to training, DEMO, etc. (Burns (1985), Holt and Villamil (1986)).
DEMO and Mann (2000) take the argument a step further by suggesting that
any research that ignores the use of professional traders is likely DEMO be received
passively because “ordinary” individuals are unlikely to have any substantial
impact on market price since they are too far removed from the DEMO discovery
process.2
As a whole, these arguments suggest that behavior may DEMO significantly
when real market players are put to the task. To explore this issue within
the realm of MLA, we make use of undergraduate students as our experimen-
tal control group, and recruit 54 professional futures and options pit traders
from the Chicago Board of Trade to examine DEMO behavioral discrepancies exist
across subject pools. Using an experimental protocol that is consistent with
the extant literature, we find that professionals do indeed behave differently
from undergraduate students. Yet, instead of displaying behavior inconsistent
with the MLA conjecture, as we had expected, the professional traders exhib-
ited DEMO consistent with MLA to a greater extent than undergraduate
students.
These findings, which support evidence from laboratory experiments using
student subjects, may have DEMO asset pricing and modeling implications.
As the literature notes, the presence DEMO MLA suggests that market prices of
risky assets might be significantly higher if feedback frequency and decision
flexibility are reduced. In this sense, institutions may have the ability to influ-
ence asset prices through changes in DEMO information provisioning policies. As
outlined in Gneezy et al. (2003, p. 821), this behavioral phenomenon appears
to be what compelled Israel’s largest DEMO fund manager, Bank Hapoalim,
to change its information release about DEMO performance from every month to
every 3 months, noting that “investors DEMO not be scared by the occasional
drop in prices.”
The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. In the next section, we provide
a brief background of MLA and describe our experimental design. In Section II
DEMO report our results. Section III summarizes and concludes the paper.
1 Indeed, Christensen-Szalanski and Beach (1984) make an even stronger argument noting that
the experimental literature using students is biased (see also Bonner and Pennington (1991)).
Their main contention is that experimental findings of major DEMO have largely used student
subjects, whereas those few studies that have DEMO professionals have usually reported perfor-
mance more in line with mainstream theory. This line of argument is also an assumption implicit
in other experimental DEMO (e.g., Frederick and Libby (1986)).
2 If one is interested in market behavior, it is important to recognize that it is behavior at the
margin, not at the mean, that drives market DEMO (Becker (1962)).
Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss Aversion?
525
I. Background and DEMO Design
Before becoming immersed in the experimental design, it is important
DEMO highlight what MLA is and why it is important to understand. As
aforementioned, MLA is a behavioral theory that combines loss aversion and
mental accounting. An agent is said to be loss averse if he is DEMO acutely aware
of losses than gains of equal size. More formally, DEMO aversion is the result of
individuals having a “value function” defined with respect to the status quo.
This value function is positive and concave DEMO gains and is negative, convex,
and more steeply sloped over DEMO (Kahneman and Tversky (1979)). Mental
accounting refers to how DEMO aggregate choices (explicitly or implicitly).
In particular it refers to DEMO transactions are evaluated over time (how often
portfolios are evaluated) and cross-sectionally (whether they are evaluated as
portfolios or individually). Mental accounting determines both the outcomes of
decisions as well as the framing of DEMO decisions. An agent who frames his
decisions narrowly will tend to make shorter-term choices and an agent who
frames outcomes narrowly will evaluate her DEMO and gains more frequently
(Thaler et al. (1997)).
If DEMO evaluate their investments at high frequencies, there may be peri-
ods DEMO time where the return on a risky asset (i.e., stocks) DEMO lower than those
on a safe asset (i.e., bonds), whereas less frequent evaluation might suggest the
opposite. Since losses are weighed more DEMO than gains, the high-frequency
evaluation will lead to greater dissatisfaction. If DEMO agent considers perfor-
mance over longer time periods, the riskier asset DEMO likely to outperform the
safer asset, and hence agents will place DEMO higher value on stocks relative to
bonds. An individual is, therefore, myopically loss averse if he evaluates gains
and losses separately as soon DEMO the information is consumed, rather than pool-
ing the returns into DEMO lifetime portfolio.
As an example of how MLA influences individual decision-making, DEMO
that an agent is loss averse and weighs losses relative to gains at a rate of
δ> 1. Suppose also that the agent has a two-thirds probability of losing $1 and
a one-third probability of winning DEMO The expected utility of the gamble is
thus 1/3(2.5) DEMO δ2/3(−1), which takes on a positive value if δ< 1.25. If, on the
other hand, the loss-averse agent evaluates three lotteries in combination, we
may view her expected utility per decision task as follows: 1/27(7.5) + 6/27(4) +
the individual lottery sequence more attractive to a loss-averse individual than12/27(0.5) + δ8/27(−3), δ2/3(−1), which is positive DEMO δ< 1.56, effectively making
the aggregate lottery sequence.3
3 To fully appreciate the effect of MLA on risk preferences, we consider an agent who must choose
between a stock with an expected return (and standard deviation) of 7% (20%) per year and a less
volatile stock with a guaranteed 1% annual return. Using the assumptions above, we find that the
appeal of the risky asset will be a function of DEMO time horizon of the investor: An agent willing to
wait longer DEMO evaluating the outcome of the asset will find the stock more attractive than an
equally loss-averse agent who evaluates sooner. Moreover, agents who differ in the frequency with
which they evaluate outcomes will not derive the DEMO utility from owning the stocks. To illustrate,
consider the simple example in Thaler et al. (1997): Assume that the loss-averse utility takes the
526
Table I
Experimental Design
Subject Type Treatment F Treatment I
Students DEMO 32
Traders 27 27
Note: Numbers represent sample sizes. Treatment F DEMO subjects placing bets in nine rounds; after
each round, the subject was informed of the outcome. Treatment I was identical except subjects
placed DEMO for three rounds at a time rather than for each round. Thus, subjects in Treatment F
received frequent feedback, whereas subjects in Treatment DEMO received infrequent feedback.
A. Experimental Design
To study whether traders exhibit behavior consistent with the MLA conjec-
ture, we used a straightforward 2 × 2 experimental design (see Table I). Be-
cause one important goal of our research was to explore whether agents who are
professional traders DEMO behavior in line with MLA, we used undergrad-
uate students as DEMO experimental control group. Using a between-person ex-
perimental design, we included DEMO undergraduate students and professional
traders in two distinct treatments: Treatment F (denoting frequent feedback)
and Treatment I (denoting infrequent feedback). And to ensure comparability
with the extant literature, we followed Gneezy and Potters (1997) when crafting
our experimental protocol and parameters.4 In this spirit, our experimental de-
sign should be considered an “artefactual field experiment” (see Harrison and
List (2004)).
In Treatment F, subjects were confronted with a sequence of nine rounds
in which they were endowed with DEMO units per round (see below for exchange
rate details). In DEMO of the nine rounds, the subject decided what portion of this
DEMO (0, 100) she desired to bet in a lottery that DEMO two-and-a-half
times the bet with one-third probability and nothing with two-thirds probabil-
ity. As illustrated in the experimental instructions contained in Appendix A,
DEMO were made aware of the probabilities, payoffs, and the fact that the
lottery would be played directly after all subjects had made their DEMO for
that round. Thus, subjects played rounds one by one. Subjects DEMO therefore
aware of the fact that they could earn anywhere between 0 and 350 units in each
round. Finally, subjects were informed that monies earned were to be summed
and paid in private at the end DEMO the experiment.
Contrasting with this “frequent feedback” environment is Treatment I, DEMO
is identical to Treatment F, except that in Treatment I agents DEMO their
form U(w) = w for w ≥ 0and U(DEMO) = 2.5w for w < 0 (where w denotes the change in wealth and
2.5 is the value of the agent’s loss aversion DEMO). Under this scenario, the utility of investing
in the stock DEMO be
to the utility of 1 for the bond. After two periods, however, the utility from owning the stock is
1
−2.75: ( 2 (27) +
4.25: ( 1 1 (27 − 13) +
from the bond of 2.4 2(27) + 2
4 Appendix A contains our experimental instructions for student Treatment F, which closely
follow Gneezy and Potters (1997). Instructions for Treatment I are similar to Treatment F, with
the necessary adjustments.
The Journal of Finance
1
2 2.5(−13)) if evaluated myopically (one period) compared
1
4 DEMO(−13)), compared to the cumulative (noncompounded) return
Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss Aversion?
527
bets in blocks DEMO three. Rather than placing their round bet and realizing the
round outcome before proceeding to the next round, in Treatment I agents
decided in round t how much of their 100-unit endowment they wished to bet
DEMO the lotteries for each of three rounds, t, t + 1, and t + 2. Following Gneezy
and Potters (1997), we DEMO the bets to be homogeneous across the three
rounds. Most importantly, DEMO subjects placed their bets, they were informed
about the combined realization DEMO the three rounds. This contrasts with our
assignment of gains and losses after each round in Treatment F, and provides
heterogeneity in the evaluation period.
Previous efforts have shown that this simple framing change can have DEMO
markable effects on betting behavior. To cite just one example, using DEMO
undergraduate students, Gneezy and Potters (1997) found that the average
DEMO of endowment bet is significantly greater in the low feedback treat-
ment compared to the high feedback treatment: 67.4% versus 50.5%.
As summarized in Table I, we recruited 64 subjects for our student treat-
ments from the undergraduate student body at the University of Maryland.
Each treatment was DEMO in a large classroom on the College Park campus of
the University of Maryland. To ensure that decisions remained anonymous, the
subjects were seated far apart from each other. The trader subject pool included
54 professional DEMO from the CBOT.5 Each of the trader treatments was run
in a large room on-site at the CBOT. As in the case of the DEMO, communi-
cation between the subjects was prohibited and the traders were DEMO such
that no subject could observe another individual’s decision (and payoffs)DEMO
Before moving to a discussion of the experimental results, we should DEMO
tion a few noteworthy aspects of our experimental design. First, all DEMO
were run using pencil and paper. After subjects made their decisions and the
lottery results were realized, experimenters circulated to ensure that individual
payoffs were calculated correctly. Then, the agents made their decision for the
next decision period. Second, whether a participant won or lost in any given
round of the lottery depended on their personal win color. Participants won
DEMO their win color matched the round color that was drawn by the assistant,
and lost if their win color did not match the DEMO color. The outcome of the
random events (the round color drawn) was announced publicly, and subjects
were only aware of their own bets and whether they won or lost (i.e., they
were not made DEMO of others’ round colors or bets). Third, in the student
DEMO, the exchange rate was 1:1 (1 cent for each unit), and in the trader
treatments, the exchange rate was 4:1 (4 cents for each unit). Our decision to
quadruple the stakes for traders was based on a detailed discussion with CBOT
5 We DEMO to all subjects recruited from the CBOT as traders. However the 54 traders recruited
consisted of locals, brokers, clerks and exchange employees (e.g., floor managers or market re-
porters) who worked in the open DEMO environment. We found no statistical difference between
floor participant types, hence DEMO pool participants and collectively call them “traders.” This find-
ing is intuitive since the average nonlocal/broker had accumulated approximately 9 year of floor
DEMO and many reported to have had several years of experience as either a local or bro-
ker. Finally, the average trader (including nonlocals/DEMO) was involved with about 537 traded
contracts daily.
528
The Journal of Finance
Figure 1. Comparing betting patterns.
officials about DEMO earnings.6 Fourth, data for the student (trader) treat-
ments were DEMO in four (four) distinct sessions and no subject participated
in more than one treatment.
II. Results
Our key comparative static result is an DEMO of behavioral differences
across frequent and infrequent treatments between subject types. To maintain
consistency with the previous literature, we begin the empirical analysis by
discussing findings from nonparametric statistical tests. We then extend these
results by DEMO empirical estimates from a panel data regression model.
Since MLA predicts that the average bet in Treatment F should be less than
the average DEMO in Treatment I, we directly compare betting levels in Figure 1,DEMO
which places our data alongside the data reported in Gneezy and Potters (1997).
Betting behavior summarized in Figure 1 is consistent with MLA. For in-
stance, while traders bet on average nearly 75 units in Treatment I, they bet
only 45 units in Treatment F. Our student data, which are consonant with the
6 Our student exchange rate is very similar to Gneezy and Potters (1997) after adjusting for
exchange DEMO differences between the guilder and the U.S. dollar. CBOT officials suggested that
designing a 30-minute game with an expected average payout of approximately $30.00 DEMO more
than a reasonable approximation to an average trader’s earnings for an equivalent amount of
time on the floor (in our experiment, the DEMO trader’s earnings for 25 minutes was about
$40.00). Indeed, postexperimental DEMO with the traders indicated that these stakes were
salient.
Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss Aversion? 529
empirical findings presented in Gneezy and Potters (1997) and Thaler et al.
(1997), exhibit a similar pattern: In Treatment I, students bet on average 62.50
DEMO versus 50.89 units in Treatment F. Yet, the data indicate a DEMO pat-
tern. While the University of Maryland undergraduate students exhibit behav-
ior that is consistent with MLA, the effect is much less pronounced than the
treatment effect observed among traders.
To assess these differences statistically and DEMO a sense of the temporal
nature of the betting patterns, we DEMO the amount bet at the individual
level in rounds 1–3, 4–6, and 7–9 for Treatment F (to avoid data-dependency
issues) and compare DEMO data to observations in Treatment I. We present a
summary of the raw data and statistical tests in the upper and lower panels
of DEMO B. The upper panel of Appendix B can be read as follows: Row 1,
column 1, at the intersection of “Rounds 1–3” DEMO “Trader Treatment F,” denotes
that the average trader in Treatment F bet 48.85 (with a standard deviation
of 30.88) units in rounds DEMO As a comparison, column 2 in this same row
indicates that DEMO in those same rounds bet 66.22 in Treatment I. Using
a nonparametric Mann–Whitney statistical test, we find that these bets are
significantly different at the p < 0.05 level. This result is contained in the
lower DEMO of Appendix B at the intersection of “Rounds 1–3” and “Trader
Treatment F versus Treatment I” (z =−2.19; p = 0.029).
Perusing DEMO summary of empirical results in the lower panel of Appendix
B reveals the strength of the treatment effect among dealers: In every block
of three rounds, traders in Treatment I bet greater amounts than traders in
Treatment F. Alternatively, we only find sporadic statistical significance among
students.7 This pattern of results also holds if we consider the average bet across
DEMO rounds (Rounds 1–9): Traders bet 74.29 units in Treatment I DEMO 45.59 in
Treatment F (a difference of 28.7) whereas students bet 62.50 in Treatment
I and 50.89 in Treatment F (a difference of 11.61). Our raw data, therefore,
provide a surprising insight: DEMO traders exhibit behavior consistent
with MLA to a greater extent than undergraduate students.
Although analysis of the raw data provides evidence to support this DEMO
pected finding, there has been little attempt to control for the DEMO nature
of our data. To provide a robustness test, we estimate DEMO panel data regression
model in which we regressed the individual bet on a dummy variable for subject
pool, a dummy variable for treatment, DEMO interaction, and unobservable sub-
ject and time effects. Because the subject DEMO and treatment dummy variables
are static, we report panel data estimates DEMO a random effects regression
model (the rank condition would be violated DEMO we estimated a fixed effects
model).
Empirical results from two specifications are contained in Table II.8 Specifi-
cation (1) is a simple DEMO regression model, while specification (2) augments
this baseline model by DEMO subject and period random effects. Regardless
7 Given the fact that subjects are confronted with an upper (100) and lower (0) bound, the
distribution must be non-normal. Moreover, results from the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test confirm
the non-normality of the data.
8 Note from χ 2 tests presented DEMO Table II that both of our models are significant at the p < 0.01
level.
530 The Journal of Finance
Table II
Regression Results
Specification
Variable (1) (2)
Constant 85.2∗ 81.9∗
(3.0) (3.2)
Student −16.9∗ −10.3∗
(3.9) (3.8)
Treatment F −36.7∗ −38.5∗
(4.1) (DEMO)
Student ∗ Treatment F 22.7∗ 13.4∗
(5.5) (6.3)
DEMO 0.11 0.11
χ 2(3 d.f.) 42.1∗ 200.6∗
Subject Random Effects DEMO Yes
Time Effects No Yes
N 1,062 1,062
Notes: DEMO variable is the individual bet. “Trader” is the omitted subject category and
therefore represents the baseline group. Student (Treatment F) is the student (treatment)
indicator variable that equals 1 if the subject was a DEMO (in Treatment F), 0 otherwise.
Student ∗ Treatment F is DEMO student indicator variable interacted with the frequent feedback
treatment variable. Specification (DEMO) is a Tobit model. Specification (2) is a random effects DEMO
model. The χ 2 values provide evidence of the models’ explanatory power. In both cases our model is
significant at the p < 0.01 DEMO Standard errors are in parentheses beneath coefficient estimates.
∗ Denotes significance at the p < 0.05 level.
of which empirical assumptions one subscribes to, our estimation results sup-
port the conclusions from the raw data. For DEMO, in specification (2) we find
that traders in Treatment F DEMO approximately 38.5 fewer units than traders in
Treatment I, and this DEMO is significant at the p < 0.01 level. The evidence
is slightly weaker for students, where Treatment F subjects bet approximately
25 (13.4–38.5) fewer units than students in Treatment I, a noteworthy differ-
ence, DEMO one that is significantly less than the 38.5 unit difference observed
between traders. This finding can be gleaned from the coefficient estimate of
the DEMO ∗ Treatment F interaction term in Table II, which is significant DEMO
the p < 0.05 level.9
III. Concluding Remarks
Two behavioral concepts, DEMO aversion and mental accounting, have recently
been combined to provide a DEMO explanation of the equity premium
puzzle (Benartzi and Thaler (1995))DEMO Although only a few empirical tests have
been carried out to explore the predictive power of the theory (e.g., Thaler et al.
(1997), Gneezy and Potters (1997), Gneezy et al. (2003)), the experimental tests
9 We also included a second part of the DEMO whereby subjects bet using their own funds
earned from part 1. We exclude summary statistics of these data to conserve space, but note that
the pattern of results for personal funds is consistent with the betting DEMO observed above.
See Appendix A for part 2 instructions.
Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss Aversion? 531
to date have provided results consistent with the theory. Yet, inference from
these experiments is open to criticism because it is based on observing the be-
havior of DEMO students. This can be problematic because observed
treatment effects among students may not be representative of behavior in
naturally occurring environments, where selection effects may have created
distinct populations of economic decision-makers. Combining this insight with
DEMO fact that some recent field studies (e.g., List (2002, 2003, 2004) indicate that
market experience attenuates certain market anomalies in riskless DEMO, we
suspect that the current evidence supporting MLA may be viewed DEMO caution.
To provide initial insight into the robustness of the extant literature, we re-
cruited futures and options traders to participate in an experiment. Making use
of undergraduate students as our control group, we find an unexpected result:
While the data suggest that both traders and students DEMO investment be-
havior in line with MLA, traders exhibit this behavior DEMO a greater extent than
students. At a fundamental level, this result DEMO important, since our traders,
who are vital components of the DEMO discovery process, exhibit more evidence
of this type of behavior than DEMO other subject pool that has been evaluated to
date.
A few normative and positive implications naturally follow. First, our findings
suggest that expected utility theory may not model professional traders’ behav-
ior well, and this finding lends credence to behavioral economics and finance
models, which are beginning to relax inherent assumptions used in standard
financial economics. In a positive sense, these findings have direct implications
on the communication strategies for fund managers, whereby revealing infor-
mation on a less frequent basis means that the DEMO of incurring a loss
is reduced. Moreover, providing less freedom to DEMO (i.e., inducing agents to
think in a more aggregated way) DEMO reduce the likelihood that a sell-off en-
sues after a minor setback. This intuition follows Gneezy et al. (2003), who note
that if market information becomes more readily available at a lower cost one
might DEMO it to be used more often—hence affecting behavior over riskier
assets and therefore relative prices.
Appendix A: Experimental Instructions for Student Treatment F
A.1. Instructions for Part 1
Part 1 of the experiment consists of nine DEMO rounds. In each round
you will start with an amount of 100 units (1 unit = 1 cent). You must decide
which part of this amount (between 0 units and 100 units) you wish DEMO bet in
the following lottery:
You have a two-thirds chance (DEMO) to lose the amount you bet and a
one-third chance (33%) to win two-and-a-half times the amount you bet.
You are requested to record your choice on your registration form. Suppose you
decide to bet DEMO amount of X units (100 ≥ X ≥ 0) in the lottery. Then, you must
fill in the amount X in the column headed Amount in lottery, in the row with
the number of the present round.
532
The Journal of Finance
Whether you win or lose in the DEMO depends on your personal win color.
This color is indicated on top of your individual sheet. Your win color can be
red, blue, DEMO white, and is the same for all nine rounds. In any DEMO, you win
in the lottery if your win color matches the DEMO color that will be drawn by
the assistant, and you lose DEMO your win color does not match the round color.
The round color is determined as follows. After you have recorded your bet
in the DEMO for the round, the assistant will, in a random manner, DEMO one
color from a cup containing three colors: red, blue, DEMO white. The color drawn
is the round color for that round. If the round color matches your win color you
win in the lottery; otherwise you lose. Since there are three colors, one of which
matches your win color, the chance of winning in the lottery is one-third (33%)
and the chance of losing is two-thirds (67%).
DEMO, your earnings in the lottery are determined as follows. If you DEMO
decided to put an amount of X units in the lottery, DEMO your earnings in the
lottery for the round are equal to −X if the round color does not match your win
your win color (you win two-and-a-half times the amount bet).color (you lose the amount bet) and equal to +2.5X if the round color matches
The round color will be shown to you by the assistant. You are requested
DEMO record this color in the column Round colors, under win or DEMO, depending
on whether the round color does or does not match DEMO win color. Also you
are requested to record your earnings in the lottery in the column Earnings in
lottery. Your total earnings for the DEMO are equal to 100 units (your starting
amount) plus your earnings in the lottery. These earnings are recorded in the
column Total earnings, in the row of the corresponding round. Each time we
will come DEMO to check your registration form for errors in calculation.
After that, DEMO are requested to record your choice for the next round. Again
you start with an amount of 100 units, a part of which you can bet in the
lottery. The same procedure as described above determines DEMO earnings for
this round. It is noted that your private win color remains the same, but that for
each round, a new round DEMO is drawn by the assistant. All subsequent rounds
will also proceed in the same manner. After the last round has been completed,
your DEMO in all rounds will be summed. This amount determines your total
earnings for part 1 of the experiment. Then, the instructions for part 2 of the
experiment will be announced.
A.2. Instructions for Part 2
Part DEMO of the experiment is almost identical to part 1, but differs DEMO two
respects. First, part 2 consists of three rounds (instead of nine rounds). Second,
in part 2 you do not get DEMO additional starting amount from us. You play with
the money that you have earned in part 1. To that purpose, we first divide your
earnings in part 1 by three. The resulting amount is your starting DEMO S
for each of the three rounds. Again you are asked which part of this amount
(between 0 and S) you wish to DEMO in the lottery.
You have a two-thirds chance (67%) of losing the amount you bet and a
one-third chance (33%) of winning DEMO times the amount you
bet.
Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss Aversion?
533
You are asked DEMO record your choice on the registration form. If you decide to
bet an amount of X units (S ≥ X ≥ 0), then you must fill in the amount X under
Amount in lottery.
Your DEMO win color is the same as in part 1 and can be found on top of your
registration form. After you have recorded your DEMO for the present round, the
assistant will again, in a random manner, pick one color from a cup containing
three colors: red, blue, and white. The color drawn is the round color. If this
round color matches your win color, you win in the lottery, DEMO you lose.
If you have decided to bet an amount X in the lottery, then your earnings in
the lottery are equal to −X if the round color does not match your win color
does match DEMO win color (you win two-and-a-half times the amount bet for(you DEMO the amount bet for the round) and equal to +2.5X if DEMO round color
the round).
You are again requested to record the round color and your earnings in the
lottery on the registration form. DEMO total earnings for the round are equal
to your starting amount S plus your earnings in the lottery. You are asked to
record these DEMO your registration form. We will come by to check your form for
errors.
After that you are requested to make your choice for the DEMO round. Again
you can choose to bet part of your starting amount in the lottery. The same
procedure as described above determines your earnings. DEMO 3 will proceed
in the same manner. After that, your earnings DEMO the three rounds will be
added. This amount determines your total earnings in parts 1 and 2 of the
experiment.
Appendix B
Raw Data DEMO
Average Bet (SD)
Trader Trader Student Student
Treatment F Treatment DEMO Treatment F Treatment I
Rounds 1–3 48.85 (30.88) 66.22 (27.50) 42.77 (31.16) 56.50 (25.75)
Rounds 4–6 39.10 (33.11) 75.56 (24.58) 51.77 (30.64) 62.72 (26.69)
Rounds 7–9 48.83 (DEMO) 81.41 (22.74) 58.13 (28.52) 68.28 (26.88)
Rounds 1–9 45.59 (32.69) 74.29 (25.49) 50.89 (30.48) 62.50 (26.56)
Mann–Whitney z-Statistics (p-Values)
Trader Student
Treatment F Versus Treatment I Treatment F Versus Treatment I
Nonparametric Statistical Test Results
Rounds 1–3 −2.19 (0.029) −2.35 (0.019)
Rounds 4–6 −3.90 (0.000) −1.48 (0.138)
Rounds 7–9 −3.55 (0.000) −1.45 (0.146)
Rounds 1–9 −3.48 (DEMO) −1.82 (0.069)
Notes: Columns 1–4 in the upper panel DEMO trader and student betting behavior over
rounds. Columns 1–4 in the lower panel summarize Mann–Whitney tests of the differences in
behavior across treatment type.
534
The Journal of Finance
REFERENCES
Becker, Gary S., 1962, Irrational behavior and economic theory, Journal of Political Economy 70,
1–13.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the DEMO premium puzzle,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73–92.
Bonner, Sarah, and Nancy Pennington, 1991, Cognitive processes and knowledge as determinants
of auditor experience, Journal of Accounting Literature 10, 1–50.
Burns, Penny, DEMO, Experience in decision making: A comparison of students and businessmen in
a simulated progressive auction, in V. L. Smith, ed. Research in DEMO Economics (JAI
Press, Greenwich).
Christensen-Szalanski, Jay J., and Lee Roy Beach, 1984, The citation bias: Fad and fashion in the
judgment and decision literature, American Psychologist 39, 75–78.
Frederick, David, DEMO Robert Libby, 1986, Expertise and auditor’s judgments of conjunctive events,
Journal of Accounting Research 24, 270–290.
Gneezy, Uri, Arie Kapteyn, DEMO Jan Potters, 2003, Evaluation periods and asset prices in a market
experiment, Journal of Finance 58, 821–838.
Gneezy, Uri, and Jan DEMO, 1997, An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods, Quarterly
DEMO of Economics 112, 631–645.
Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. DEMO, 2004, Field Experiments 42, 1013–1059.
Holt, Charles A., and DEMO Villamil, 1986, The use of laboratory experiments in economics: An
DEMO survey, in S. Moriarity, ed. Laboratory Market Research (University of DEMO
Press, Norman, OK).
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, DEMO, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,
Econometrica 47, 263–91.
List, John A., 2002, Preference reversals of a different DEMO: The more is less phenomenon, American
Economic Review 92, 1636–1643.
DEMO, John A., 2003, Does market experience eliminate market anomalies? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118, 41–71.
List, John A., 2004, Neoclassical DEMO versus prospect theory: Evidence from the marketplace,
Econometrica 72, 615–625.
Locke, Peter R., and Steven Mann, 2004, Professional trader discipline DEMO trade disposition. Jour-
nal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle, Journal of Monetary
Economics 15, 145–161.
Thaler, Richard H., 1985, Mental DEMO and consumer choice, Marketing Science 4, 199–214.
Thaler, Richard H., Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, and Alan Schwartz, 1997, The effect DEMO
myopia and loss aversion on risk taking: An experimental test, Quarterly Journal of Economics
112, 647–661.{1g42fwefx}