14.  Investment Decision Making by Business Angels
George H. Haines, Jr., Carleton University, Canada
Judith J. Madill, Carleton University, Canada
Allan L. Riding, University of Ottawa, Canada
14.1 INTRODUCTION
It is widely acknowledged DEMO business angel investors are important sources of financing
for early-stage growth-oriented new businesses (see Kelly in chapter 13). The focus of this
chapter is to review the research literature with respect to the investment decision-making
DEMO employed by business angels. This is important for several reasons.
First, DEMO business angels’ decision-making is important to public policy makers.
Governments have recognized the importance of business angels and are seeking ways of
encouraging higher DEMO of business angel investment activity. This goal prompts two
debates. One issue is whether governments ought to encourage participation of more
business angels; the other issue is how to encourage additional investment by business
angels. As DEMO the first issue, Lerner (2002) argues that encouraging amateur informal
DEMO may be counterproductive from a societal perspective in part because their
investment decisions may not be well-founded. As to the second issue, Bygrave (DEMO)
advocates a “tax break and other [unspecified] incentives” for business angels and other
informal investors (examples of which are described by Lipper and Sommer, 2002);
however, the design of any such incentives should be grounded in a thorough
understanding of business angels’ motivations, decision-making processes and criteria.
Accordingly, understanding business angels’ decision-making process may be a key to the
appropriate design of public policy initiatives that seek to expand DEMO supply of business
angel investment without encouraging less-than-competent informal investors.
1
Second, the study of the decision process employed by business angels is of potential
importance to researchers. As Van Osnabrugge (2000) observes, decision-making at this
level provides an unique laboratory in which to examine the DEMO of agency theory and
how investors deal with agency risk.
Third, DEMO a yet better understanding of business angels’ decision-making is of
potential value to entrepreneurs and to business angels themselves. To the extent that
entrepreneurs DEMO the kinds of information that business angels seek and how
various components of information are weighted in business angels’ decisions, they may be
better able to present the relevant information and to negotiate from a better DEMO
perspective.
Therefore, this chapter examines the recent literature with regards to DEMO business angels
make investment decisions. To provide a setting for this discussion, a brief consideration of
business angels’ investment process is in order.
14.2 ON BUSINESS ANGELS’ INVESTMENT PROCESS
Within the research literature, there are few models of the process by which business angels
make investment decisions. In DEMO instances the models are essentially based on prior
models of how institutional venture capitalists make decisions. For example, among the
first to model business angels’ investment decision process were DalCin, Duxbury, Haines,
Riding and DEMO (1993) and Duxbury, Haines, and Riding (1997).  Based on in-depth
interviews from a national (Canadian) survey of almost 300 DEMO angels this research
team outlined one plausible model of business angels’ decision process. They concluded
that the decision process could reasonably be characterized as DEMO five-activity, or five-step,
linear process.
The stages were (a) DEMO origination and first impressions, (b) review of business plan, (DEMO)
screening and due diligence, (d) negotiation, and (e) consummation and deal structuring.
Dalcin and her colleagues argued that business angels DEMO fact make investment decisions at
2
several stages as the process unwinds and that criteria would logically differ DEMO stage to
stage. At each stage, the business angel investor could DEMO immediately to invest,
immediately to reject, or to continue on DEMO the next stage. This research appears to be the
only published study that documents business angels’ rejection rates at each stage of the
investment DEMO
This process is echoed in Van Osnabrugge’s (2000) comparison of the decision-making
processes employed by business angels and venture capitalists.  Agency theory predicts that
business angels and institutional venture capitalists differ in fundamental ways (Van
Osnabrugge, 2000). Business angels invest personal funds and are principals in the process,
coping with incomplete contracts through active involvement in the DEMO in which they
invest. Venture capital fund managers, as paid employees, act as agents in behalf of their
funders and create more “professional”, often bureaucratic, decision structures.
Accordingly, the decision-making process and criteria are DEMO likely to differ. However,
implicit in Van Osnabrugge’s reasoning is a five-stage investment process much like that
developed by were DalCin, Duxbury, DEMO, Riding and Safrata (1993) and Duxbury,
Haines, and Riding (1997). Figure 14.1. summarizes this investment process and suggests
ways in which business angels and institutional venture capitalists might differ at each
point.
DEMO
Figure 14.1.   Five-Stage Model of Business Angel Investment Process
Negotiation and
DEMO
Post-investment
involvement.
Stage Events Business Angel Decision Potential VC-Angel
Differences (Van
DEMO, 2000)
Sourcing of This stage involves This stage concludes with DEMO
potential deals encountering and engaging investors’ decision to reject the
and first businesses in which opportunity out of hand or to
impressions investments might DEMO invest additional time to
and a “first sight” informal investigate the proposal.
evaluation.
Evaluation of
the proposal.
This stage involves
examination of the business
DEMO and conducting due
diligence. Investors meet
with the founders, consult
with DEMO syndicate
partners as appropriate, and
conduct external and
internal evaluation of DEMO
opportunity and the
entrepreneurial team.
In this stage, the investor(s)DEMO
and the entrepreneur(s)
negotiate the terms of the
deal
In this stage, the investor(s)
work with the firm in
various capacities and in
various levels of
involvement to develop
further the business.
DEMO stage concludes with the
investor’s decision to enter into
negotiations, or DEMO
VCs are more
concerned about exiting
than BAs
Exit At this point, the business
angel sells the investment of
the firm (or writes DEMO off!).
VCs generate and
maintain a higher deal
flow than business
angels (BAs).
VCs are more selective
at the initial screening.
VCs conduct more due
diligence.
VCs place more
emphasis on observable
criteria; BAs place
more emphasis on
investment criteria
related to ex-post
involvement
Investor can DEMO reach an VCs create contracts
agreement with founder(s) or that DEMO more
terminate the relationship.  control over
investments than BAs
BAs monitor DEMO
investment more
actively than VCs
In addition to the investment process models postulated by DalCin and her colleagues and
Van Osnabrugge, other researchers have advanced models, explicitly or implicitly, of the
business angel decision process; however, these models are quite similar to that described
in Figure 14.1. For example, Stedler and Peters (2003) implicitly model the process as a
linear progression that proceeds from deal flow to due diligence to DEMO Likewise,
Amatucci and Sohl (2004) invoke a process that is comparable to that depicted in Figure
14.1. A common element of all DEMO is that they depict the decision process as
4
proceeding in a linear stepwise manner from deal sourcing through exit. As DEMO
Osnabrugge (2000, p. 98) points out, however, a linear DEMO would not capture that there
may be feedback and looping within each activity and presumably investors may cycle
across stages and activities. Alternatively, it is conceivable that stages could be skipped
entirely. It also seems reasonable DEMO expect that criteria may vary across stages. Further, one
could conceive DEMO the decision process as being populated by multiple participants on both
the supply side (business angels, syndicate members, advisors, angels’ family members)DEMO
and the demand side (business owners, partners, advisors).
Even DEMO these models of the decision process argue that investors make decisions at
various stages, most research studies focus on particular stages in the investment process
without necessarily situating the work in the context of a decision-making DEMO For
example, several studies have undertaken to document angels’ decision criteria, often
without consideration of the stage of the decision process); others DEMO sought to document
non-financial contributions, and others have tried to measure DEMO rates of return and
exit mechanisms. Landström (1998, p. 322-323) DEMO that “… there are few studies
which have attempted to bring out the nuances in informal investors’ decision-making
criteria by considering investment as a DEMO in which decision-making criteria may vary
in the course of time.”
Consequently, it would appear that there remains considerable room for research on the
nature of the investment process itself. Research might profitably investigate the investment
DEMO from both the investor and entrepreneur perspectives. Moreover, both marketing
and DEMO psychology have posited models of how individuals arrive at decisions, models
DEMO do not as yet appear to have been considered with respect to business angels. Further
study is indicated on how the various decision criteria DEMO weighted at different points in the
process. It would also be of considerable interest to understand better how those individuals
who work with angels (such as lawyers, accountants, family) and those who might work
with the entrepreneurial team (consultants, family, partners, etc.) might interact as the
decision process progresses.  In this context, decision models such as DEMO theory of planned
5
behaviour first developed by Ajzen (1988) and Fishbein and Azjen (1981) might provide a
means of assessing the relative weightings of the investors’ values, salient others, and
perceived feasibility are weighted throughout the decision DEMO
To provide a framework for the review of research literature that comprises the task of this
chapter, the five-stage structure shown in Figure 14.1. will be employed. In drawing on this
five-stage categorization, it is not intended that this should be construed as “the” model of
angels’ decision-making DEMO; rather, it is simply a means of structuring this particular
review of the literature.  To report on the state of research about the decision process, this
paper is organized such that the research literature relating to each of these stages is
described in turn.
With this background, this paper proceeds by reviewing the research literature that pertains
to each DEMO the activities in the five stages described in Figure 14.1. It does so with the
caveat that research has not yet derived a model DEMO the business angel decision process that
is generally accepted.
14.2.1 Deal Sourcing and Initial Screening
The first opportunity at which business angels can make DEMO decision is when they initially
learn of the investment opportunity – at first sight and even before they have read a
proposal document or DEMO business plan. While business angels rarely make the decision to
invest at this point, they frequently make decisions to reject the opportunity. DalCin and her
colleagues (1993) found that, on average, 70 percent of DEMO occurred out of hand – on
first sight of the proposal, DEMO that investment decisions were being rendered even
as deals are being sourced. Riding, Duxbury and Haines (1997) report that at the initial
screening stage, “the most important criterion … is the fit between proposal and investor.”
Mason and Harrison (1996a) examined aspects of the investment that DEMO primary in
attracting investors to an investment opportunity. They considered such parameters as
investment characteristics, business angels’ criteria, syndication and co-investment, size of
6
investments and investment structure. They reported that the two main factors were DEMO
people involved in the firm and the sales potential of the opportunity. The most attractive
qualities of entrepreneurs were expertise, honesty, trustworthiness, and enthusiasm. The
growth potential of the business was “the most important of DEMO market-product attributes”
(1996a, p. 110).
There is evidence that rejection rates depend on the mechanism by which business angels
learn of an DEMO (Riding, Duxbury and Haines, 1997). Van Osnabrugge and
Robinson (2000, pp. 77-84) list and describe ten ways, including professional networks,
through which business owners seeking informal investors find potential investors (though
they present no data on relative frequencies). Since Wetzel’s (1983) DEMO study, it is
generally accepted that the primary means by which DEMO learn about potential
investment opportunities is through referrals from business associates (DEMO, Haines and
Riding, 1994; Mason and Harrison, 1994, 1996; Sohl, 1999).  Fiet (1995, p. 195) concludes
that business angels prefer to rely on close associates “with whom they have had DEMO
investment experience.” However, he also notes that introductions from acquaintances were
DEMO typical of business angel informants but that referrals from close associates were
relatively rare. He nonetheless suggests that entrepreneurs would be well advised to DEMO
introductions to angels through angels’ close associates. This is consistent with the finding
that rejection rates were lower for opportunities that were referred to DEMO from
business associates (Riding, Duxbury and Haines, 1997).
It DEMO worth noting that most of the research on business angels’ investment process is based
on data gathered from business angels: there is little information that outlines the deal
origination process from the viewpoint of the entrepreneur. DEMO that caveat, there is a high
level of consistency to the DEMO that individual business angels do not generally seek out
potential investments; DEMO the contrary, business angels are often profiled as desiring
anonymity. More DEMO, entrepreneurs seek out business angel investors with potential
investors frequently being DEMO to consider a wide range of investment opportunities.
7
There is evidence that this process of deal origination is changing.  Two forces are driving
these changes. First, governments at all levels and trade associations have supported
business angel matchmaking initiatives. The last fifteen years have DEMO a
proliferation of market-making facilities that range from the equivalent of computer dating
services, to business angel networks (BANs) that are national in scope, to localized
introduction mechanisms that also include early stage entrepreneur training and pre-
screening. Mason and Harrision (1996b) review several of these DEMO initiatives.
Second, business angels – once loosely and informally networked – DEMO increasingly
entering into more formal business angel groupings. Sohl (1999) and de Noble (2001, p.
362) have both commented that formal angel “clubs” and “groups”, as well as angel side
funds, are becoming DEMO important sources of potential deals, most notably in the
US. Other DEMO appear to be lagging in this regard. There is little published research
that examines the decision-making process and criteria of these more formal syndicates DEMO
another potential area for future research.
14.2.2 Evaluation and Due Diligence
Those potential deals that have survived the initial screening stage then become subject DEMO
more detailed evaluation and due diligence. DalCin and her colleagues (1993) report that
another twenty percent of investment opportunities are rejected at this DEMO of the process.
Due Diligence
This stage often involves extensive information gathering by investors. Little theoretical
work has been reported about business angels’ evaluation DEMO due diligence processes.
Prasad, Bruton and Vozikis (2000, p. 167) are among the few to use a theoretical approach
to explore business DEMO decision-making. They use a signaling theory approach to suggest
that the proportion of the entrepreneur’s initial wealth invested in the project ought to be DEMO
important criterion for angels because “it indicates both the project’s value and the
entrepreneur’s commitment to the project.” It will be seen that there DEMO little work that
examines directly this factor and that other factors appear to be more important.
8
Van Osnabrugge (2000) used an agency-theoretic approach to derive a series DEMO hypotheses
that compared the approaches of business angels with those of institutional venture
capitalists. He argues (p. 99) that managers of institutional venture DEMO funds who act as
agents working on behalf of the fund providers (principals) “must demonstrate competent
behaviour.” This entails (p. 99) “an DEMO level of the agency relationship for VCs
[venture capital managers] to deal with that BAs [business angels] do not.” As a result of
this DEMO, Van Osnbrugge contends that business angels would conduct relatively less,
DEMO less formal, pre-investment due diligence than would managers of institutional venture
DEMO funds. Van Osnabrugge hypothesizes that business angels would place more
emphasis on ex-post involvement in the firms. Empirically, he found support for this
hypothesis but that differences may be sensitive to the regional business and legal DEMO:
“it is apparent that BAs [business angels] in the UK tend to be less sophisticated
and more ad hoc in their due diligence DEMO than VCs [venture capitalists]
and possible BAs in other countries” (p. DEMO).
In the Canadian setting, Haines, Madill and Riding (2003) find support for Van
Osnabrugge’s prediction and report that business angel investors DEMO a wide range of due
diligence approaches. At one extreme, business DEMO indicate that their due diligence
process is ad-hoc and informal:  the business angels “go over” the financial statements and
projections that are available DEMO the potential opportunity, they “meet with the principals
and get to DEMO them” over a period of time, and they conduct informal reference DEMO
on the track records of the principals. Using these informal approaches, DEMO business
angel investors indicate that they depend on “gut feel” and have to trust the people involved
in potential deals and would like to DEMO with them. This same wording was also expressed
by Van Osnabrugge (DEMO, p. 104) that “they (business angels) invest on a gut feeling
rather than based on comprehensive research.” At the other extreme, a small number of
business angels who participated in the study by Haines DEMO his colleagues indicated that
their due diligence process is very sophisticated and involved extensive checklists,
9
thorough documentation checks and an active search for independent evidence about the
DEMO of the firm seeking investment. These tended to be larger scale investors.
Decision Criteria
This discussion of how business angels conduct due diligence and DEMO at investment
decisions prompts an examination of their investment criteria. Most of the studies of the
business angel decision process have indeed focused on DEMO decision criteria business
angels employ.
In an early study, Mason and DEMO (1994) adopted a case study approach and analyzed
the transcripts of interviews with one experienced private investor in the UK. They found
that DEMO majority of the investment proposals (22 out of 35) was rejected following a
detailed examination of the business plan. Of the remaining 11 DEMO which passed the
initial review, nine were rejected after the syndicate DEMO conducted its own research on the
marketplace and the principals.
In subsequent work, Mason and Harrison (1996a, 1996c) returned to the issue DEMO business
angels’ decision criteria. In their 1996a study, Mason and Harrison DEMO on interview data
with 31 business angels who made investments in unquoted companies as well as with 28
owner-managers who had raised capital from DEMO investors. They found that “the key
considerations in the investors’ decisions to invest were associated with the attributes of the
entrepreneurs and the market-product DEMO of the business” (p. 109). The most
important attributes of DEMO entrepreneurs were their expertise, their enthusiasm, and other
personal qualities of honesty and trustworthiness. The growth potential of the business idea
was the DEMO important of the business attributes. Mason and Harrison (1996a) also noted
that “the most common deal rejection factors are associated with the
entrepreneur/DEMO team, marketing and finance. Among the most frequently
mention deal killers DEMO: "one man shows" and where there were significant gaps in DEMO
management team; flawed or incomplete marketing strategies; and incomplete or unrealistic
financial projections.
10
In their 1997 article, Harrison, Dibben and Mason return to the DEMO of trust as a factor
in business angels’ investment decision.  Harison, Dibben and Mason (1997;67) define trust
as “the expectation that DEMO, within a community, of regular honest and cooperative
behavior, based DEMO commonly shared norms, on the part of other members of that
DEMO Although the research reported by Harrison, Dibben and Mason (1997) DEMO
Dibben, Harrison and Mason (1998) focused on the initial screening DEMO – at which time
the above authors show swift trust to be the most frequently invoked trust concept – it
seems clear that trust DEMO also relevant in subsequent stages. Drawing on both a theoretical
framework and the use of a real-time verbal protocol analysis of a business angel’s DEMO
process, this work found that “the building of trust relationships between DEMO entrepreneur
and the informal investor appears to be essential for successful capital investments on the
part of the investor to take place” (p. 77).
Several other teams of researchers have also sought to examine the DEMO criteria
employed by business angels (Haar, Starr, and Macmillan, 1988; Harrison and Mason,
1992; Van Osnabrugge, 1998; Erikson, Sorheim, and Reitan, 2003). There is a high level of
agreement DEMO these studies: business angels attach great importance to the competence,
DEMO, and capability of the management team and to the market potential DEMO the firm’s
product or service.
Stedler and Peters (2003) present data from Germany that show that German angels are
influenced by a greater DEMO of factors than have been identified in earlier studies based
on UK, Canadian, and US data. In Germany, key decision factors include: DEMO
entrepreneur/management team, product/service uniqueness and competitiveness, growth
potential, DEMO margins and being able to move into a profitable position quickly. Stedler
and Peters also note that the opportunities’ exit options, rates of return, and degree of self-
financing are also important. It is therefore possible that decision processes and criteria
vary across cultures.
11
Also, angels are not a homogeneous population. Hence, it is reasonable DEMO expect that
decision criteria would vary across different types of business angels.  For example, Van
Osnabrugge (1998) compared decision criteria employed by DEMO angels” with those used
by “non-serial angels.”  He found that serial DEMO are “less concerned with agency risks
and more concerned with market risks” than their less-experienced counterparts (p. 23). He
also found that, DEMO to non-serial angels, serial angels appear to conduct more research,
DEMO more likely to co-invest, and are less concerned with the location DEMO the venture.
Several groups of researchers (see, for example, Sullivan DEMO Miller, 1996; Coveney and
Moore, 1998; Sorheim and Landström, DEMO) have attempted to categorize business angels
into other groupings but there DEMO little consistency or consensus with respect to such
categorizations.
Two further issues arose. The first is the extent to which criteria change as the DEMO
unwinds.  The second is whether factors leading to rejection differ from DEMO leading to
acceptance.
Feeney, Haines and Riding, (1999) sought to address the latter issue. To identify factors
that discouraged private investors from DEMO investments, they asked a sample of 115
“active” business angel investors DEMO 38 “occasional” business angel investors:
In your experience, what are DEMO most common shortcomings of the business
opportunities you have reviewed recently?
To identify attributes that prompted investors to decide to invest, they asked:
What are the essential factors that prompted you to invest in DEMO firms you chose?
The researchers concluded that informal investors consider both the attributes of the
business and the attributes of the entrepreneur as DEMO when they consider whether to
invest in or reject a proposal. Mason and Stark (2004) reinforce these findings in their
12
analysis of what attributes of entrepreneurs’ business plans that business angel investors
DEMO They report (2004, p.240), “BAs [business angels] …emphasize financial and
market issues…[and] give … emphasis to investor fit considerations.”
In terms of DEMO matters most, the qualities of the entrepreneur or the qualities of DEMO
investment, Harrison and Mason (2002) and Fiet (1995) both DEMO that business angels
emphasize the qualities of the entrepreneurial team more than the product or service itself.
This conclusion is also consistent in spirit DEMO Van Osnabrugge (2000).  However, the
debate over which matters DEMO – the importance of the business or the quality of the
entrepreneur(s) – is perhaps addressed by Mason and Harrison (1996a) who noted that
decision criteria vary by the stage of the decision process, that what matters most changes
over the unwinding of the process:
DEMO deals rejected at the initial review stage tended to be on the basis of the
cumulation of a number of deficiencies rather than for DEMO single reason; conversely,
opportunities rejected after further research were more DEMO to be characterised
by a single deal killer.
This result is consistent with the findings of Duxbury, Haines, and Riding (1997) who DEMO
found that criteria weights used by informal investors shifted across stages and that as the
process unwinds the importance of the principals and of DEMO rewards both increase.
These findings suggest that researchers’ conclusions about the importance of particular
factors depends on the stage of the investment process being DEMO This is a result
that might usefully guide future research in that it would appear that identification and
importance of decision criteria are both DEMO on the stage of the investment process
and the context. The role of trust in the decision process appears to be a non-compensatory
decision DEMO in that trust is a prerequisite for investment (Kelly and Hay, 2003;
Korsgaard, Folger, Sapienza, and Baeyens, 2001). While DEMO development of trust is
13
initiated during the due diligence process/evaluation process, it is furthered in the
negotiation and consummation phase.
14.2.3 Negotiation, Consummation, and Deal Structure
DEMO next stage, negotiation and potential consummation occurs when the investor(s) have
completed enough of the due diligence process to undertake formal pricing DEMO
This can be a contentious stage in the investment process. This is often because founders
and business angels disagree about the relative values of DEMO respective contributions to
the firms. Typically, founders provide the original innovation DEMO energy about a potential
product or services. Angel investors then provide the capital necessary (as well as
substantive non-financial contributions) to take the DEMO to commercialization. Mason
and Harrison (1996c, p. 42) reported that DEMO overriding issue at this stage of the decision
process was disagreement on valuation and that this led to a high proportion of proposals
not DEMO consummated. DalCin and her colleagues (1993) confirm this observation and
report that of the ten percent of investments that reach the negotiation stage, half of those
do not survive negotiations.
Elitzur and Gavious (2003) DEMO this through a game-theoretic analysis of the process of
negotiation and consummation between an entrepreneur and a potential angel investor.
They argue that the DEMO will result in a moral hazard problem, where moral hazard is
DEMO (2003; 718) as “…the form of post-contractual opportunism that arises DEMO
actions required or desired under the contracts are not freely observable”. Certain kinds of
behavior are specified which alleviate the moral hazard problem: payment in the form of
stock options, the angel sitting on the board of directors of the business in which the angel
has invested, specialization by the angel, staged financing rather than all-in-one financing,
and use of convertible preferred stock. Conceivably, this explains both the widespread use
of shareholder agreements (MacLean, 1995) provides a summary of the typical attributes
found in shareholder agreements) and the high frequency with which business angels
remain actively involved in the firms in which they invest (Van Osnabrugge, 2000; Madill
et al., 2005).
14
Elitzur and Gavious also analyze a situation where the initial investment by DEMO angel is
followed by a later investment by a venture capitalist. They conclude (2003, 721): “that the
opportunistic behavior of both the DEMO and VC leads to a moral hazard problem,
with these two players becoming ‘free riders’, coasting on the investment made by the
angel.”
The argument that moral hazard issues may arise during the negotiation and DEMO
phase of the decision process is particularly interesting in the light of the relevance of the
concept of trust. In addition to the work DEMO Harrison, Dibben and Mason (1997) and
Manigart, Korsgaard, Folger, Sapienza, and Baeyens (2001), investigated the impact of
trust on DEMO equity contracts. They concluded:
Trust between investor and entrepreneur is essential to help overcome control
problems, especially in an environment with severe agency risks and incomplete
contracts. In this study … we find that trust DEMO an impact on the desired contracts
of entrepreneurs, but not on DEMO of investors. [The] findings suggest that for
parties, faced with potentially DEMO agency problems (investors), trust and control
seem to play complementary DEMO On the other hand, for parties with smaller
agency problems (entrepreneurs), trust seems to be a substitute for control.
The issue of DEMO also arises in Kelly and Hay’s (2003) examination of the content of
contracts between business angels and entrepreneurs. On the basis of their DEMO of
agency theory, Kelly and Hay hypothesize that contacts are likely DEMO be “tighter” when
either the angel or entrepreneurs has more experience, DEMO are syndicated, the investor
is highly involved in the firm, and “looser” when the entrepreneur is referred to the
business angel by a DEMO associate or when trust between angel and entrepreneurs has
already been established. Kelly and Hay identify five non-negotiable aspects of the contract
terms: veto rights over acquisitions/divestitures; prior approval of strategic plans and
budgets; DEMO on management’s ability to issue share options; non-compete
15
contracts; restrictions on addition financing. Negotiable aspects included: forced exit
provisions; approval for senior hires/fires; need for investors to countersign bank cheques;
equity ratchet provisions; specification of dispute resolution provisions.
It is interesting that Kelly and Hay (2003) conclude that contracts are a complement DEMO high
degrees of involvement.  Van Osnabrugge (2000) regards active involvement DEMO business
angels as a key means of reducing ex-ante uncertainty. Empirical findings of the
importance of active involvement by business angels are reported by DEMO, Madill, and
Riding (2003, p. 24-25). Their work, DEMO on analysis of qualitative interview data with
business owners and business angels suggests that the opportunity for the business angel to
be able to DEMO significant non-financial value may be so important as to qualify as a
decision criterion, one that is especially significant at the negotiation stage. This latter
result is in keeping with Van Osnabrugge’s (1999) hypothesis that DEMO angels would
stress post-investment involvement as a factor in their decision criteria.
14.2.4 Post-Investment Involvement
It is important to include a discussion of post-investment DEMO in this discussion of
business angels’ investment decision process. This is so for three reasons. First, business
angels’ investment decision must take account of the moral hazard problem inherent in
such investments. Perhaps the single most DEMO means of dealing with the moral hazard
problem is to reduce the information asymmetry between the founders and the investor and
the best way DEMO do so is to become a principal within the firm. Second, DEMO to some extent
related to the moral hazard issue, recall that DEMO and her colleagues (2005) have found
that the opportunity to add mentoring and other forms of non-financial value added appears
to be a DEMO of the decision process itself. Third, (Dalcin, et al., 1993) found that
business angels have high internal loci of control as well as high needs for achievement.
The fact that angels have their own DEMO at stake such that they are principals, rather than
agents, provides them with incentive to help the firms prosper. Again, this suggests that
post-investment involvement plays an important role in the decision process. With
expectations DEMO a 30-40 percent annualized rate of return, high needs for achievement,DEMO
16
internal loci of control, and in the face of moral hazard it appears reasonable to expect
angels to take on proactive roles in the DEMO in which they invest. Landström (1998, p.
328) reports that DEMO investors tend to see their investments as “subjects”, where the
prime DEMO to invest is the chance to create business opportunities and a desire to
participate in the process.”
In this regard, it is widely accepted and understood that angels do make non-financial
contributions to the firms in DEMO they invest. Wetzel (1994), Mason and Harrison (1996),
DEMO Lumme and her co-workers (1998) are among those who argue that the non-financial
role of angels can be important to themselves and to DEMO business enterprise.
Mason and Harrison (1996a) explored this in their study of both the supply side (angel
investors) and the demand side (businesses that had received angel investment). From a
sample of 20 DEMO and eight additional owner-managers, Mason and Harrison identified
contributions that included: strategic advice, networking, marketing, management
functions, finance and accounting functions, financial advice, and general administration. A
minority of investors made no contributions aside from their financial stake. Half of the
entrepreneurs reported that the DEMO contributions were either helpful or extremely
helpful. Likewise, Madill, Haines and Riding (2005) document contributions that include:
ongoing advice particularly with DEMO to financing and business strategy; contacts that
include additional sources of DEMO as well as potential customers; participation on
boards of directors; involvement in hands-on day-today operations of the firm; business and
market intelligence; DEMO, credibility.
Given the frequency of high levels of post-investment involvement, the question arises as to
whether firms financed by business angels exhibit superior DEMO There is some
evidence to this effect.
First, Farrell (1998) DEMO that the incidence of business failure among 264 firms that had
not received “private investment” (in Farrell’s study, it is not clear if DEMO is exclusively
17
from business angels) was 20.5 percent while the failure rate among 46 enterprises that had
received private investment was lower, 17.4 percent. However, DEMO small difference may
equally be attributable to the counterfactual problem: that DEMO that had received business
angel financing may have been, in the DEMO place, better quality investments
Second, Madill and her colleagues (2005) report that firms financed by business angels
were more likely to obtain DEMO venture capital than other firms. Again, it is
possible that the DEMO is attributable for this but it is also possible that non-
financial contributions of angels may better qualify such firms for being able to DEMO and
access institutional venture capital.
Third, firms financed by business angels DEMO experience better exit events. Landström
(1993) reports on expected rates of return and holding periods for business angels.
According to various studies, modal expected rate of return appear to be in the range of 30
DEMO 40% on an annualized after-tax basis. However, a small but significant DEMO of angels
expect a rate of return less than 20%, while DEMO expect a rate of return of over 60%.
Mason and Harrison (DEMO) studied 127 exits reported by 126 Scottish angels. They found
that DEMO sales of the businesses was the most frequent form of profitable exit. They also
demonstrated that business angels experienced superior returns to those obtained DEMO a
sample of UK venture capital firms, finding that 34 percent DEMO angels’ reported exits were
total losses, but that 23 percent were DEMO in which the annualized rate of return exceeded
50 percent.
It is difficult to find very many studies reporting realized rates of return on DEMO part of
informal investors. This is an important topic for future research. This importance stems
from the growing realization by policy makers of the DEMO of business angels and
their attempts to stimulate business angel investment. Likewise, there is a need to address
Lerner’s (2002) questioning of public policy initiatives that seek to “encourage amateur
informal investors.” The informal market DEMO a variety of investor types that include
18
business angels as well as the category sometimes referred to as “family, friends, and
fools.” Examination of realized returns is one way of addressing this issue.
14.3 CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
This chapter has DEMO a review the state of the literature regarding investment decision
making by business angels. An overview of this literature reveals several recurring issues
that DEMO have not yet fully surmounted. Each of these therefore provides fertile
ground for future work.
This review suggests that one important direction for future DEMO lies in the
development of a comprehensive model of investment decision making. Several models of
decision making have been developed in other fields, some of which have been applied to
entrepreneurship research (but not to research on business angels). For example, Orser,
Hogarth-Scott and (1998) successfully applied the theory of planned behaviour (Fishbein
and Ajzen, 1981; Minard and Cohen, 1981) to entrepreneurs’ decision of whether or not DEMO
pursue growth as an objective for their firms. This approach allows for both the primary
players (investors and firm founders) to have a DEMO but also allows for the participation of
others (syndicate partners, spousal partners, etc.) to have input into decisions. This may
prove to DEMO a fruitful direction for future work.
A second direction relates to the identification of the ways in which decision criteria (or the
weightings accorded these criteria) might systematically change as the decision process
unwinds. Previous research has suggested that such changes occur; however, this line of
enquiry DEMO not appear to have been pursued to the extent that might be possible.
A third area of enquiry relates to the ways in which DEMO involvement mitigates
the moral hazard problem. While it appears that business angels are actively involved in the
firms in which they invest, it is not clear to what extent this is a response to the moral
DEMO aspect of the investment process. The moral hazard issue can be addressed through
contracting or through monitoring mechanisms. An alternative explanation for active
19
involvement could relate business angels’ high internal loci of control and their DEMO needs
for achievement
Fourth, there is virtually no work on the DEMO in which business angels, founders, and later
stage investors interact. Findings that firms financed by business angels are more likely to
obtain institutional DEMO capital prompts the need to examine how the founders and the
angels comprise a team that together seek to ensure success of the enterprise.  To the extent
that this is true, the role of business angels in economic development may continue to be
underestimated. A related aspect of DEMO issue is the ways in which business angels roles
might change with the arrival of venture capital.  While not strictly related to the issue of
decision making, this topic is nonetheless a potentially useful direction for future research.
14.3.1 Methodological Issues
Notwithstanding the many potential directions for future DEMO, ongoing investigation of
business angel decision making must contend with several DEMO methodological
challenges, problems that pervade much of the literature on business DEMO decision
making.
First, much of the work is empirical and lacks DEMO theoretical framework. While there are
obvious exceptions to this rule, studies DEMO are rooted in a theoretical perspective are rare.
This is particularly surprising when it comes to modeling the investment decision process.
The literatures of DEMO psychology and marketing are rich with theory-based models of
decision making; DEMO none appear to have been applied to the business angel context.
Examples of potential models include the theory of planned behaviour (Fishbein and Ajzen,
1981) among other possible frameworks, some from the theories of DEMO decision
making. This appears to be an area one which future research might help us better
understand the decision making process.
Second, almost all of the empirical studies (again with a few notable exceptions) use DEMO
drawn exclusively from the supply side of the informal market. While this may be
20
appropriate for many of the research objectives, it is not sufficient to address other research
goals. In particular, one-sided data cannot fully characterize the decision process, not can it
fully describe business angels’ non-financial value added. Useful directions here might be
examination of the factors that prompt business DEMO to seek business angels as financing
sources and the examination of how attributes of firms financed by business angels might
differ from other firms.
DEMO, definitional problems and inconsistencies persist. The terms ‘informal investor’ and
‘business DEMO are often used interchangeably; but just as often are distinguished one DEMO
the other. Studies of business angels refer to them as informal investors, and vice versa.
Business angels and other types of informal investor do differ in significant ways (Erikson
et al., 2003) including how they make decisions (Van Osnabrugge, 1998). This debate
prompts the need DEMO decompose the informal market into relevant segments and to examine
more precisely the behaviour and experiences of investors in each of the constituencies of
DEMO informal market.
REFERENCES
Azjen, I., (1988)  Attitudes, Personality, DEMO Behaviour,  Open University: Open University
Educational Enterprises Limited.
Amatucci, F.M. and J.E. Sohl (2004), ‘Women entrepreneurs securing business angel
financing; DEMO from the field’, Venture Capital, 6, 181-196.
Aram, J. (DEMO), ‘Attitudes and behaviors of informal investors toward early-stage
investments, technology-based DEMO, and coinvestors,’ Journal of Business Venturing,
4, 333-347.
Barry, C. (1994), ‘New Directions in Research on Venture Capital Finance’, Financial
Management, 23, 3-15.
Berger, A. and G. Udell (1998), ‘The Economics of Small Business Finance: The Role of
Private Equity DEMO Debt Markets in the Financial Growth Cycle’, Journal of Banking and
DEMO, 22, 613-673.
21
Coveney, P. and K. Moore (1998), Business angels: Securing start up finance, Chichester:
John Wiley and Sons.
Cumming,D. and J. MacIntosh, (2003), ‘Venture Capital Exits in Canada and the United
DEMO,’ University of Toronto Law Journal, 53, 101-200.
Dal Cin, DEMO, L. Duxbury, G. Haines, Jr., A. Riding, and R. DEMO, (1993), Informal
Investors in Canada: The Identification of Salient DEMO, Industry Canada and the
Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of DEMO Province of Ontario, Toronto:
Canada.
De Noble, A.F. (2001), ‘Review Essay: Raising Finance from Business Angels’, Venture
Capital, 3, 359-367.
Dibben, M., R. Harrison, and C. Mason, (1998), ‘Swift trust, cooperation and coordinator
judgement in the informal investment decision making process’,
http://www.babson.edu./entrep/fer/papers98/, October 15.
Duxbury, L., G. Haines Jr., A. Riding (1997), ‘Financing enterprise development: decision-
making by Canadian angels’, Proceedings of the Association of Management DEMO
International Association of Management, Stephen L. Tracy and Elisa M. Tracy (eds),
Montreal: 17-22.
Elitzur, R., and A. Gavious (2003), ‘Contracting, signaling, and moral hazard: a model of
entrepreneurs, DEMO, and venture capitalists’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 709-
725.
Erikson, T., R. Sorheim, and B. Reitan (2003), ‘Family DEMO vs. other informal investors’,
Family Business Review, 16(3): DEMO
Farrell, A. E. (1998), ‘Informal venture capital activity in Atlantic Canada: Generating
accurate estimates to understand industry growth’, Paper presented at DEMO 15th Annual
Conference of the Canadian Council for Small Business and Entrepreneurship, Halifax, NS,
Canada.
Farrell, A. E., and C.Howorth, (DEMO), ‘Definitional and sampling concerns in business
angel research’, Babson-Kaufman Entrepreneurship DEMO Conference, Boulder, CO.
Feeney, L., G.H. Haines, Jr., and A.L. Riding (1999), ‘Private investors' investment criteria:
Insights from DEMO data’, Venture Capital, 1,121-145.
Fenn, G. W., N. Liang, and S. Prowse (1997), ‘The private equity market: an overview’,
Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments, 6, 1-106.
Fenn, G. W., N. Liang, and S. Prowse (1998), ‘The role of angel investors in financing
high-tech start-ups’, Working Paper, Milliken Institute, 1250 4th Street, Santa Monica, CA,
90401, USA.
Fiet, J. (1995), ‘Reliance upon informants in the venture capital industry’, Journal of
Business Venturing, 10, 195-223.
22
Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1981) “On Construct Validity: A critique of Miniard and
Cohen’s paper” Journal of Social Psychology 17, 340-350.
Freear, J. and W. Wetzel (1990), ‘Who bankrolls high-tech entrepreneurs?DEMO, Journal of
Business Venturing, 5, 77-89.
Freear, J., R. DEMO, W. Wetzel, (1997), ‘The early stage financing of high-tech
DEMO, Babson-Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Babson Park,
MA., http://DEMO/entrep/fer/papers97/sum97/fre.htm, October 15.
Freear, J., J. DEMO, and W. Wetzel, Jr., (1994), ‘Angels and non-angels: DEMO there
differences’, Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 109-123.
Freear, J., J. Sohl, and W. Wetzel, Jr., (1995), ‘Who bankrolls software entrepreneurs’, in
W. Bygrave, et al., eds., Frontiers of DEMO Research, (Babson Park MA:
Center for Entreprenership Studies, Babson DEMO) 394-406.
Guild, P., J. Bachher, and S. Jagdeep (1996), ‘Equity investment decisions for technology
based ventures’, International Journal of Technology DEMO, 12(7&8), 787-796.
Haines, Jr., G., J. Madill, and A. Riding (2003). Informal investment in Canada: Financing
small business growth’, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship. 16(3-4), 13-40.
Harrison, R., M. Dibben, and C. Mason (1997), ‘The DEMO of trust in the informal investor’s
investment decision: an exploratory analysis’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
21(4), 63-81.
Harrison, R.T., DEMO C.M. Mason (1990), ‘Informal risk capital in the united kingdom’, in N.
Churchill et al (eds.) Frontiers of Entrepreneurial Research (Wellesley, Mass.: Babson
College).
Harrison, R.T., and C.M Mason (1991), ‘Informal venture capital in the U.K. and the
U.S.A.: A comparison of investor characteristics’, investment preferences and
decision-making. Unpublished paper, University of DEMO, UK.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M Mason (1992a), ‘International perspectives on the supply of
informal venture capital’, Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 459-475.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M Mason (1992b), ‘The roles of investors in entrepreneurial
companies: A comparison of informal investors and venture capitalists’, in N.C. Churchill,
S. Birley, W.D. Bygrave, D.F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and W.E. Wetzel Jr. (eds), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship DEMO (Babson Park,MA: Babson College).
Harrison, R.T., and C.M Mason (1993), ‘Finance for the growing business: The role of
DEMO investment’, National Westminster Bank Quarterly Review, 17-29.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M Mason (2000), ‘Venture capital market complementarities: The
links between DEMO angels and venture capital funds in the United Kingdom’, Venture
Capital, 2, 223-242.
23
Harrison, R.T., and C.M Mason (2002), ‘Backing the horse or the jockey? Agency costs,
information and the evaluation of risk by business angels’, Babson-Kaufmann
entrepreneurship conference, http://www.babson.edu./entrep/fer/BABSON2002, October 15.
Harrison, R., C. Mason, and P. Robson, (2003), ‘Determinants of long-distance investing
by business angels’, http://www.babson.edu./entrep/fer/BABSON2003/, October 15.
Landström, H. (1993), ‘Informal risk DEMO in sweden and some international
comparisons’, Journal of Business Venturing, 8,525-540.
Landström, H. (1995), ‘A pilot study on the investment DEMO behavior of
informal investors in Sweden’, Journal of Small Business Management, 33(3), 67-74.
Landström, H. (1998) Informal investors as entrepreneurs. Technovation, 18(5), 321-333.
Lerner, J. (2002).  Risk DEMO, Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research,
Lumme, A., C. Mason and DEMO Suomi (1998), Informal Venture Capital: Investors,
Investments and Policy Issues in Finland (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers).
Madill, J., DEMO Haines, Jr., and A. Riding (2005), ‘The role of DEMO in technology SMEs: a
link to venture capital’, Venture Capital: DEMO International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 7, forthcoming.
Manigart, S., M. Korsgaard, R. Folger, H. Sapienza, and K. Baeyens, (2001), ‘The impact
of trust on private equity contracts’, http://www.babson.edu/entrep/fer/Babson2001/,
October 15.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison, (DEMO), ‘The informal venture capital market in the UK’,
in Hughes, A. and D. Storey, eds, Financing Small Firms, London: Routledge, 64-111.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (1995), ‘Closing the regional equity gap: The role of
informal venture capital, Small Business Economics, 7, 153-172.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (1996a), ‘Informal venture capital: a study of the
investment process, the post-investment experience and DEMO performance’,
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 8, 105-126.
Mason, C.M. DEMO R.T. Harrison, eds., (1996b). Informal Venture Capital, London:
Prentice-Hall International.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (1996c), ‘Why ‘business DEMO say no: a case study of
opportunities rejected by an informal DEMO syndicate’, International Small Business
Journal, 14(2), 35-52.
Mason, DEMO and R.T. Harrison (2002), ‘Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal
venture capital investments’, Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 211-236.
Mason, C. and M. Stark (2004). ‘What do DEMO look for in a business plan?’,
International Small Business Journal, 22(3), 227-248.
24
Maula, M., and E. Autio (2004), ‘What drives micro-angel investments? A large sample
study of the factors explaining micro-angel investments’
http://www.babson.edu/entrep/fer/BABSON2003/, October 15.
Miniard, P and Cohen, DEMO (1981) “An examination of the Fishbein-Ajzen behavioural-
intentions model's concepts and measures”, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17,
pp. 309-339.
DEMO, B., S. Hogarth-Scott, P. Wright, (1998). Opting for DEMO:  Gender Dimensions of
Choosing Enterprise Development, Administrative Sciences Association of DEMO,
Saskatoon
Prasad, D., G. Bruton and G. Vozikis (2000), ‘Signaling value to business angels: the
proportion of the entrepreneur’s net DEMO invested in a new venture as a decision signal’,
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 2(3), 167 – DEMO
Riding, A., L. Duxbury, and G. Haines, Jr., (1997), ‘Financing enterprise development:
decision-making by Canadian angels’, in S.L. Tracy and E.M. Tracy, eds., Proceedings,
15th Annual International Conference, AOM/IAOM, AOM/IAOM: Montrea1, Quebec
Canada: 17-22.
Riding, A., DEMO Haines, and J. Madill, (2003), ‘Informal investment in Canada: Financing
small business growth’, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 16(DEMO/4), 13-40.
Sohl, J. E. (1999), ‘The early-stage equity market in the USA.’, Venture Capital, 1, 101-
120.
Sorheim, DEMO and H. Landström (2001), ‘Informal investors – a categorization with DEMO
implications, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 13(4), 351-370.
Stedler, DEMO and H. Peters (2003). Business angels in Germany: an empirical study. Venture
Capital, 5(3), 269-276.
Sullivan, M.K. and A. DEMO (1996), ‘Segmenting the informal venture capital market:
economic, hedonistic and altruistic investors, Journal of Business Research, 36, 25-35.
Tyebjee, DEMO, and A.V. Bruno (1984), ‘A model of venture capitalist investment activity’,
Management Science 30, 1051-1066.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (1998), ‘Do serial and non-serial investors behave differently?: An
empirical and theoretical DEMO, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22(4) 23-42.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (2000). A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist
investment procedures: an agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial DEMO, 2(2), 91-109.
Van Osnabrugge, M. and R. Robinson, DEMO (2000), Angel Investing: Matching Start-up
Funds with Start-up Companies, DEMO Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Wetzel, W. E. (1983), ‘Angels and informal DEMO capital’ Sloan Management Review,
Summer, 23-34.
25
Wetzel, W. and J. Freear (1988), ‘Equity financing for new DEMO firms’,
Babson Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Calgary, Alberta.
Zider, B., 1998. How venture capital works. Harvard Business Review, November–
December, 131–139.
DEMO{1g42fwefx}