1042-2587
© 2007 by
Baylor University
ET
&
Does Gender Matter?
P Women Business Angels
and the Supply of
Entrepreneurial Finance
Richard T. DEMO
Colin M. Mason
There is a substantial literature on the relationship between gender and access to ﬁnance.
However, most studies have been concerned with access to debt ﬁnance. More recently, the
focus of this research has broadened to examine women and venture capital. This article
extends the focus DEMO by examining the role of women in the business angel market,
which is more important than the formal venture capital market in terms DEMO both the number
of ventures supported and total capital ﬂows. Based on a detailed analysis of business
angels in the U.K., the study concludes that women investors who are active in the market
differ from their DEMO counterparts in only limited respects. Future research into women
business angels, DEMO the possible existence of gender differences, needs to be based on
DEMO fully elaborated standpoint epistemologies that focus on the experience of the woman
angel investor per se, and center on the examination of the role of homophily, social capital,
networking, and competition in investment behavior.
DEMO
The role of gender in access to business ﬁnance has been the subject of extensive
research, debate, and policy concern in recent years DEMO part of a wider interest in issues of
women’s entrepreneurship and business ownership (Ahl, 2004; Carter, Anderson, &
Shaw, 2003; DEMO, 1997; Gatewood, Carter, Brush, Greene, & Hart, 2003; Leitch &
Hill, 2006). Reﬂecting the nature of the funding DEMO and the characteristics of the
ventures established by women entrepreneurs, much DEMO the debate on gender and ﬁnance
has been concerned with access to loan ﬁnance and with the role of the banks in creating
or DEMO gender-based differences in access to ﬁnance (Buttner & Rosen, 1988,
1989; Carter & Rosa, 1998; Coleman, 2000; Fay & Williams, 1993; McKechnie, Ennew,
& Read, 1998; Read, 1998; Riding & Swift, 1990; Verhuel & Thurik, 2001). Despite the
volume of research, there is no unequivocal support for the idea that there are gender-
based differences in access to ﬁnance: While several studies “report discrimination...it
seems to be related to structural factors rather than gender DEMO se” (Ahl, 2004, p. 99). From
a policy perspective, two fundamental questions remain unanswered in unequivocal terms:
Is there a DEMO shortage of capital for women entrepreneurs (the funding gap), and DEMO what
Please send correspondence to: Richard T. Harrison at r.harrison@qub.ac.uk.
May, 2007
445
extent are the constraints faced by women entrepreneurs due to the “general DEMO
environment, a lack of information, ﬁrm characteristics, gender-based discrimination or
DEMO factors?” (Koreen, 2000, p. 4).
More recently, attention has shifted to the examination of a number of gender-related
features of DEMO venture capital market (Carter, Brush, Greene, Gatewood, & Hart, 2003;
Greene, Brush, Hart, & Saparito, 1999). Based DEMO an assessment of the empirical evi-
dence, on the demand-side, only a very small proportion of women-owned businesses
raise venture capital. On the DEMO, there very few women involved in making
investments, either as venture capital fund managers or as business angels, leading to
suggestions that gender homophily1 (the existence of sex-segregated social networks:
Aldrich, 1989; Moore & Buttner, 1997; Ruef et al., 2003) will constrain the DEMO
entrepreneurs’ search for, and access to, capital. These features may be related: The
limited participation of women as investors may go a considerable way toward explaining
the limited use of venture capital as a ﬁnancing DEMO by women entrepreneurs. However,
as the DIANA project notes, “missing DEMO research is an understanding about the
interaction between the demand- and the supply-side for equity capital” (Brush, Carter,
Gatewood, Greene, & DEMO, 2004). Furthermore, as access to funding by new and early
stage ventures frequently follows a “pipeline” model where the entrepreneurs’ own
resources DEMO capital from family and friends provide the initial funding, followed by
DEMO investment and then institutional venture capital (Harrison & Mason, 2000), gender-
based differences in access to venture capital may reﬂect differential access DEMO investment
at an earlier stage in the funding pipeline. Accordingly, this DEMO provides a ﬁrst attempt
to answer, in the business angel context, three key questions posed by the DIANA project
on women in venture DEMO First, are women business angels different from their male
counterparts in DEMO of their backgrounds and demographic features? Second, do male
and female business angels have the same approach to investment? Third, are women
DEMO angels more likely to invest in women-led ventures? Answers to these DEMO
will be valuable both in guiding intervention to support women entrepreneurs and in
supporting women entrepreneurs in their search for ﬁnance.
To date, there has been very little consideration of women’s access to angel ﬁnancing
(Amatucci & Sohl, 2004; Becker-Blease & Sohl, 2005) despite this being DEMO
more important as a source of venture capital (Mason & Harrison, 2000a; Sohl, 1999,
2003) and as a stepping stone to build businesses to the point where they become attractive
to venture capital DEMO (Freear & Wetzel, 1990; Harrison & Mason, 2000). For
example, there is only very limited reference in the DIANA project (DEMO et al., 2004;
Greene et al., 2003) to angels, and recent policy papers on women entrepreneurs’ access
to ﬁnance have made DEMO reference to angel ﬁnance (e.g., Canada, 2003). Nevertheless,
DEMO have been claims (frequently unsupported by direct evidence) that there are gender-
based issues in access to business angel capital. For example, “although ﬁnding and
engaging angel investors is a challenge for anyone, women entrepreneurs have experi-
enced particular difﬁculty” (Brush et al., 2004, p. 56). This is attributed to two reasons in
particular. First, women are less likely to have had prior entrepreneurial experience or a
high level DEMO managerial experience in a corporate setting and are hence less likely to
participate in networks with high net worth individuals (what Verheul & Thurik [2001]
refer to as the indirect effects underlying gender-based differential access to DEMO). It is
1. “Homophily refers to the selection of other team members on the basis of similarascriptive characteristics,
such as gender, ethnicity, nationality, appearance, and the like” (Ruef, Aldrich, & Carter, 2003, p. 196; see also
McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook, 2001).
446
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
these factors, rather than gender per se, which underlies the observed DEMO in the
propensity of men and women to become active angel investors. Second, if women do
establish such contacts, they need to build DEMO strong case for their capabilities and com-
mitment, often without the DEMO of an established relationship or trust engendered by
long-standing relationships. Accordingly, DEMO is an argument that an increase in the
number and visibility of women business angels, including the development of women-
only business angel networks (BANs) (Abramson, 2001; Hill, Nealis, & Sohl, 2004;DEMO
Shaw, 2001), would enhance the supply of ﬁnance to women DEMO and redress, at
least in part, the lower involvement of women in the asset and wealth creation process,
which is reﬂected in DEMO lower involvement of women in the angel investment market
(Hudson, Kenefake, & Grinstead, 20062).
Against this background, the contributions of the preliminary analyses reported in this
article are fourfold: First, we develop DEMO framework for investigating the relationship (if
any) between gender and business angel investing; second, we identify and analyze
examples of women business DEMO activity; third, we provide the ﬁrst ever proﬁle of the
characteristics, motivation, and investment criteria of women business angels using data
from DEMO sample of investors in the U.K.; and fourth, we explore the extent to which women
business angels are more likely to invest in DEMO entrepreneurs. The research is explora-
tory, given the paucity of prior DEMO on the supply of capital from women business
angels: If the DEMO angel market in general is “virtually invisible and often misunder-
stood” (DEMO, 1987, p. 299), this applies with an even greater emphasis for that part of
the market accounted for by women investors. Given DEMO importance of angel investment
in the entrepreneurial business development process, however, a deeper understanding of
this segment of the market can contribute to DEMO understanding of the dynamics of the
relationship between gender and access to venture capital, and its implications for venture
growth and development, at DEMO stages.
Context
The existence of gender differences in a wide range of entrepreneurial contexts
(including business ownership, growth and performance, access to ﬁnance, networking) is
widely accepted, although individual studies vary in the extent of the differences identiﬁed
(Ahl, 2004; Bruni, Gheraradi, & Poggio, 2005; Koreen, 2000). Less well understood are
the possible explanations for the gender-based differences observed, and any investigation
into the supply of investment capital from women business angels must be set in the
context DEMO the wider debate over the nature of women’s entrepreneurship. Here, there DEMO a
lack of cumulative knowledge, adequate conceptualisation, and theory building (DEMO,
Anderson et al., 2003, p. 72), and “women’s entrepreneurship has mostly been studied
from the very limited perspective of the differences DEMO men and women” (Ahl, 2004,
p. 34). She goes on to argue that entrepreneurship is itself a male-gendered concept that
requires DEMO particular gendered division of labor (Ahl, 2004, p. 61).
DEMO Ahl (2006) has more recently pointed out, the terms sex DEMO gender (originally
introduced to distinguish between socially constructed sex [sex-related differences, or the
factors that vary with sex; McHugh, Koeske, & Frieze, 1986; Unger, 1979] and biological
sex) have been widely conﬂated DEMO the entrepreneurship literature. One consequence is to
2. This Kauffman Foundation report is based on the reporting of a roundtable discussion with 12 women
DEMO angel investors in the United States and provides anecdotal information on this marketplace.
May, 2007
447
attribute problems (such as lower business growth performance or more problematic
access to ﬁnance) to women instead of to social orders and to emphasize the individual
over the structural and situational. For Ahl (2004, pp. DEMO; 2006), the current
discourse on women’s entrepreneurship sustains a social DEMO that beneﬁts men as a
group compared to women as a group3 and, in emphasizing the individualist perspective,
diverts attention from structural and institutional arrangements. Her response is to advo-
cate research that, by comparison with current research in the ﬁeld, expands the research
object and shifts the epistemological position. In terms of the research object, most current
research has adopted an individualist focus, approaching this with an objectivist episte-
mology based on the position that “judgements about [a topic] are objectively true DEMO false,
meaning that they are true or false independently of us, or of our perspectives, or
opinions” (Blackburn, 1995, p. 368; see also Brown, 1987; Putnam, 1981; Rorty, 1979).
DEMO this epistemological perspective, it is possible to consider a change in DEMO nature of
the research object by, for example, shifting the focus from the individualistic perspective
(the entrepreneur, the investor) to include factors “outside” the individual entrepreneur/
business. This shift in research object places DEMO attention on the relationships between
entrepreneurs/businesses and on wider contextual factors (for example, legislation, social
norms, labor market structures, economic policies, ﬁnancial market structures), and
encourages a greater emphasis on longitudinal and comparative studies where situational
contexts may vary while acknowledging that such research DEMO subject to many difﬁculties
in practice.
More radical is the shift in epistemological position advocated by Ahl (2006). This
draws on Berger and Luckmann’s (1967) discussion of the social construction of reality
and on DEMO (1979/1991) development of the idea of local, time-, and space-bound
determinisms of social reality replacing the idea of grand narratives. However, it is more
speciﬁcally grounded in Haraway’s (1991) feminist argument for DEMO knowledge,
which recognizes that science is socially constructed and operates through argument and
persuasion and that all knowledge is embodied in a position DEMO time and space rather than
standing outside this (as objectivism would DEMO) (see also Code, 1991; Letherby,
2003; McCarl Nielsen, 1990). For Ahl (2006), the shift to a constructivist epistemology
will require a reexamination of the separation of the categories of “men” DEMO “women,”
not least on the basis that “the reviewed research about women entrepreneurs showed very
few differences between men and women anyway, so even if maintaining an essentialist
position, there is not really a reason to study sex differences per se. It seems like a dead
end DEMO research” (Ahl, 2004, p. 187). More generally, this is supported by other recent
calls for a greater recognition of the social DEMO of entrepreneurship, which “arises
from universal processes of social construction—the narrative DEMO means by which
actors coordinate actions and identities. Entrepreneurship, like the DEMO of social life, is a
collaborative social achievement. The interactions of DEMO and their stakeholders
sustain and transform the nature of entrepreneurship” (Downing, 2005, p. 196).
Quite what this epistemological shift will look like in terms of the focus of, and
methodology for, research is DEMO For advocates of the development of a feminist-
standpoint epistemology, “experience DEMO be the starting point for any knowledge
3. This is seen in: (1) the proclamation of women entrepreneurs as unusual, which sustains DEMO idea of the
“masculine entrepreneur” and of entrepreneurship as a male-gendered construct; (2) the idea of women’s
entrepreneurship as a lifestyle choice, DEMO preserves man’s primary right to a career; and (3) the DEMO
of women’s entrepreneurship as a solution to the glass ceiling problem, DEMO “reinforces a social order where
men support men in a homo-social pattern and acknowledges the discrimination of women in the corporate
ladders” (Ahl, DEMO, p. 177).
448
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
production” (Letherby, 2003, p. 45). This would begin with but not end with women’s
experiences (McCarl Nielsen, 1990) and would proceed without universalizing a particu-
lar experience to create an overall perspective or DEMO (Smith, 1988). In the argu-
ment that follows, we DEMO partially to this call by examining sui generis the
characteristics and behavior of women business angels and the implications of these for
the ﬁnancing DEMO women-led businesses in particular. In this, we set the research in DEMO
context of the debate over feminist research methodologies generally (Letherby, 2003;
Mirchandani, 1999; Riger, 1992; Stanley & Wise, 1993) DEMO in entrepreneurship speciﬁ-
cally (Ahl, 2004; Marlow & Patton, 2005). In so doing, we follow an emerging trend in
research into gender and entrepreneurial ﬁnance: Rather than comparing the experiences
of men and women, a number of recent studies have focused speciﬁcally on those of
women (Hill, Leitch, & Harrison, 2006). This is important DEMO at least two reasons:
“[F]irst, it overcomes the prevailing dichotomous DEMO that concentrates on differ-
ences rather than similarities; and second it DEMO access to women’s realities regarding
the raising of ﬁnance” (Leitch & DEMO, 2006, pp. 9–10). As such, it moves beyond the
DEMO “difference” model of scientiﬁc research,4 including much gender research
(Riger, 1992), to recognize that it is necessary to give voice to DEMO experience and to
view society from women’s perspective (Belenky, Clinchy, DEMO, & Tarule, 1986;
Gilligan, 1982; Smith, 1988).
DEMO, while our primary focus is on the “real world” of the DEMO business angel,
because the present study is the ﬁrst formal detailed study of women business angel
investors, we also include a comparison with male business angel investors drawn from
the same sample frame.5 This allows DEMO to contribute to the wider debate over the nature
and status of women’s entrepreneurship. If there are observable gender-differentiated
differences in characteristics and behavior, this will provide a stimulus to further research
on the extent to DEMO there is both a difference in the “real world” of the woman business
angel and a social order within which these relationships exist and DEMO developed. If,
however, there are few or no observable differences DEMO men and women business
angel investors, we may conclude, with Ahl (2004) and others, that “gender” is itself a
problematic construct and one that is not helpful in framing useful and interesting research
questions. DEMO this case, we will raise questions about the most appropriate research DEMO
and methodologies for further research in entrepreneurial ﬁnance and about the orienta-
tion and focus of the “gender” theme in entrepreneurship research.
Gender and DEMO to Capital
A consistent ﬁnding in previous studies of business angels is that there are very few
women investors identiﬁed (Becker-Blease & Sohl, DEMO; Center for Venture Research,
2004; Mason & Harrison, 1994)DEMO fewer than 5% of the total (Table 1).6
4. The DEMO model is built into the methods of science because experiments are formally designed to
test and reject the null hypothesis that there is no DEMO between the experimental group and the control
group (Riger, 1992, DEMO 731; Unger, 1979).
5. It should be noted that this is not a matched pairs methodology in the strictest sense. This methodology DEMO
been used quite widely in studies of the ﬁnancing of women entrepreneurs and involves matching samples of
male and female businesses on a range DEMO attributes in order to eliminate the inﬂuence of structural factors in
order to reveal the effect of gender (e.g., Read, 1998; Riding & Swift, 1990). In the absence of any prior
information on DEMO characteristics, we had no criteria on which to effect a meaningful DEMO
6. In the Becker-Blease and Sohl (2005) analysis of angel portals in the United States, the proportion of
women angels per portal (DEMO women-only angel networks) varies from 3.3% to 7.1% (median), from
6.2% to 21.4% (mean), over the period 2000–2005.
May, 2007 DEMO
Table 1
Proportion of Women Business Angels: International Comparisons
% of women business
angels in sample Country Source
0 Australia Hindle and Wenban (1999)
0 Japan Tashiro (1999)
0–1 Denmark Vækstfonden (2002); DEMO, Nielsen, and Kjeldsen (2006)
1 U.K. Mason and Harrison (1994)
2 Canada Riding, Dal Cin, Duxbury, Haines, and DEMO (1993)
2 United States—East Coast Haar, Starr, and MacMillan (1988)
3 Norway Reitan and Sørheim (2000)
4 United States Gaston (1989)
5 Finland Lumme et al. (1998)
5 DEMO Stedler and Peters (2003)
5 U.K. InvestorPulse (2003)
5 New Zealand Infometrics Ltd (2004)
6–10 United States Becker-Blease and Sohl (2005)
8 Scotland Paul, Whittam, and Johnston (2003)
DEMO Singapore Hindle and Lee (2002)
Furthermore, there are suggestions that women are signiﬁcantly less likely than men to
become active investors, although this is more a reﬂection of their accumulated human
capital characteristics and DEMO involvement in the wealth accumulation process than any
apparent innate gender-related difference (Cowling, Harding, & Murray, 2003). Given that
the majority DEMO angel investors have entrepreneurial backgrounds and are often serial
entrepreneurs, this, in turn, may reﬂect wider issues of gender differences in business
start-up and ownership, business growth (and the related capital accumulation realized at
DEMO), and exit.7
While there have been very few efforts to explain the underrepresentation of women
in the business angel population, there is a wider literature on the underrepresentation of
women in a wide range of DEMO and social contexts that provides a basis for
developing an understanding of this issue. These studies have relied upon a wide range of
factors DEMO explanations, but three groups in particular can be identiﬁed: (1) discrimina-
tion; (2) abilities and preferences; and (3) competition.
DEMO
The ﬁrst group of explanations relate to discrimination—in the case of the access to
ﬁnance debate, in the ﬁnancial markets, and by ﬁnancial DEMO leads to the
differential treatment of women and men with otherwise equal abilities and preferences.
This is consistent with liberal feminist theory, which suggests that women are disadvan-
taged with respect to men due to either DEMO discrimination or to systematic factors that
preclude their access to key resources (Fischer, Reuber, & Dyke, 1993; Greer & Greene,
7. Although business start-up and ownership have been the focus of much of DEMO women’s entrepreneurship
literature, there have been no studies of gender issues DEMO the exit process and the only studies of exits included
in Gatewood et al. (2003) do not take a gender perspective.
450
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
2003). However, the observation of difference is not in and of itself sufﬁcient to support
the diagnosis of discrimination, not least because of methodological deﬁciencies in the
research on the ﬁnancing of women-led businesses (Leitch, Hill, & Harrison, 2006). First,
there is a general absence of studies that have fully taken into account or controlled for DEMO
full range of factors that may inﬂuence a venture’s success in raising ﬁnance (Read, 1998).
Second, much of this research, as DEMO previously, is predicated on the notion of
“difference” and assumes that DEMO entrepreneurship is the benchmark against which to
judge women’s entrepreneurship (Carter & Brush, 2004, p. 13). Third, most previous
studies of DEMO ﬁnancing of women-led ventures have focused on the supply of ﬁnance, DEMO
relatively few have examined either the gendered supply of ﬁnance (Read, 1998) or the
demand-side of transactions from a female perspective (Amatucci & Sohl, 2004). Fourth,
a high proportion of the research DEMO has been conducted has been based on North
American experience, which DEMO not readily transfer to other contexts (Ahl, 2004). What
does emerge from this research is the suggestion that structural issues such as DEMO size, age,
and type of business (Coleman, 2000; Fabowale, Orser, & Riding, 1995; Read, 1998) are
relatively more DEMO than gender issues, and gender differences are ﬁne nuances
rather than DEMO differences. Women may, for example, make fewer applications for
loans (DEMO & Connell, 2005), have broadly similar success rates as men DEMO gaining offers
of ﬁnance, but this may be on less favorable DEMO (Coleman, 2000; McKechnie et al.,
1998; Riding & Swift, 1990).
Abilities and Preferences
The second class of explanations rests on gender differences in abilities and prefer-
ences. This perspective is consistent with DEMO feminist theory, which attributes inherent
differences between men and women to DEMO in early and ongoing socialisation
(Fischer et al., 1993) and DEMO that women are not inferior to men but have developed
different but equally effective traits that may not be readily captured by analytical cat-
DEMO appropriate for men (Acker, 1978; Smith, 1988). This argument has been
advanced more generally as an explanation for occupational self-selection (Polachek,
1981), which gives rise to the glass ceiling effect and DEMO a number of studies in
entrepreneurship. These suggest that levels of entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy are higher
in males than females (Kourilsky & Walstad, 1998; Matthews & Moser, 1995, 1996),
although some commentators do suggest that this reﬂects the fact that men are socialized
into entrepreneurship to DEMO higher degree than women are (Scherer, Brodzinsky, & Wiebe,
DEMO). However, there is little to suggest that there are systematic DEMO differ-
ences in start-up motivations and intentions (Ahl, 2004). Until further well-grounded
research is available, apparent men–women differences may play a role in accounting for
these (Carter & Brush, 2004). These men–women DEMO may be reﬂected, for
example, in women’s lower stock of resources (both human and ﬁnancial capital, as a
result of occupational segregation DEMO the labor market), women’s lower levels of mean-
ingful business experience, family background and social roles (with women socialized
into the caring/DEMO role), and women’s different intentions in establishing a business
(in DEMO to labor market or domestic subordination, for work–family balance or as DEMO
feminist move—Goffee & Scase, 1983).
Competition
A third set of DEMO attributes these differences to the fact that women may be
less effective than men in competitive environments, even if they are able to perform
similarly in noncompetitive environments: “[T]his fact will reduce the chances of success
May, 2007
451
for women when they compete for new jobs, promotions, etc.” (Gneezy, Niederle, &
Rustichini, 2003, p. 1049). In a series of controlled experiments, Gneezy et al. concluded
that in incentive systems that reward only the winner, there is a signiﬁcant relative increase
in male performance, but not in female performance. However, this male/female perfor-
DEMO difference is only observed in mixed-gender groups. Speciﬁcally, it is not DEMO
utable to the uncertainty of the payment, through gender differences in DEMO aversion. Nor
is it due to an absence of competitiveness in the women participants: In single-sex
competitions, women participants improve their performance relative DEMO both the bench-
mark level and to that recorded in mixed-gender situations, with the result that the
performance gap between men and women is signiﬁcantly reduced.
This resonates with Fels’s (2004a, 2004b) recent argument that women may lack
ambition (a striving for mastery in a ﬁeld), in that ambitions held in youth are suppressed
and attenuated by adulthood, and experience a lack of recognition (a wish to be appreci-
ated for that mastery), which reinforces the absence of ambition. The problem, as Fels sees
it, is that over time, recognition dries up, and the pervasive climate of nonrecognition leads
women to “seek sanctuary on DEMO higher ground of internal satisfaction: [T]hey look for
rewards in the DEMO itself, not in fame, honor, or money” (Stansell, 2004)DEMO In other words,
“the daily texture of women’s lives from childhood on is inﬁltrated with microencounters
in which quiet withdrawal and the ceding DEMO available attention to others is expected—
particularly in the presence of men” (Fels, 2004a). As a result, there is at work a systemic
process of role socialization and acculturation, which is reﬂected in the positions women
occupy and the roles they play. More generally, this argument that there are gender
differences in reaction to competition can be related DEMO a longer tradition of feminist
writing: the relational perspective of Miller (1987, 1991), which sees an inner sense of
connection to others as a central organizing feature of women’s development; Chodor-
ow’s (1978) discussion of gender identiﬁcation and the development of a sense of self; and
Gilligan’s (1982) theory of women’s moral development where women stress DEMO in
the face of moral dilemmas in contrast to the emphasis of men on justice. The identiﬁ-
cation of these as contributions to a DEMO theory of women’s experiences (Jordan,
1993; Miller, 1993) provides a model of human growth and development “that is an
alternative to DEMO masculine bias in mainstream theories of development” (Buttner, 2001,
p. 256).
These sociological and psychological arguments reinforce the conclusions of Gneezy
DEMO al. (2003) and suggest that in a competitive environment, women DEMO perform differ-
ently, and less well, in mixed-sex groups and contexts. This carries across into entrepre-
neurship contexts and suggests that where gender-based DEMO are observed, it may
not be because of differences in abilities DEMO preferences or because of discrimination in
the absence of such differences, DEMO because of differences in the effectiveness of women
in competitive, particularly DEMO, environments.
Implications
This has implications for the development of social capital DEMO the basis for engaging
in entrepreneurial activity. For some, what Fels (2004a) sees as a problem—the lack of
ambition and the “gender recognition differential”—is the basis for an alternative
approach based on the development of DEMO more cooperative way of working and sharing
recognition through an emphasis on women’s relationality and connectedness (Gilligan,
1982). There is evidence to suggest that gender and network roles are related in the
development of DEMO capital: Networks with a high percentage of women members are
more DEMO to provide support to other members. As Wellman and Frank (2001, p. 252)
452
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
express it, “it appears that a high percentage of women in a network potentiates the entire
network to be more supportive. Or, perhaps egos at the center of such networks have
consciously organized their networks to DEMO more support.” Furthermore, there is
evidence to support an empirical generalization DEMO “women express, men repress”: In
other words, women interact in DEMO face to face by exchanging emotional support,
while men interact side by side by exchanging goods and services (Moore, 1990; Perlman
& Fehr, 1987).
Taking these observations on competition, ambition, and network roles and behaviors
together provides a framework for exploring some of Ahl’s (2004, 2006) suggestions for
the repositioning of gendered entrepreneurship research, which goes beyond simply using
gender as another factor or variable to be DEMO in a research design.
Methodology
The difﬁculties in identifying and obtaining information from business angels are well
documented (e.g., Mason & Harrison, 1994, pp. 71–76). Business angels are an invisible
population. They are not listed in any directories, and the market as a whole “operates in
almost total obscurity” (Prowse, 1998, p. 785). As a consequence, researchers are often
forced to use samples of convenience, which may DEMO biased toward certain types of
investor. As the debate between Stevenson and Coveney (1996) and Mason and Harrison
(1997) clearly demonstrated, differences in the characteristics of the convenience samples
used can lead to a DEMO variation in the proﬁles of angels drawn up and the
conclusions drawn, a variation that is attributable to the nature of the underlying data
sources and to the limitations on the sampling procedures that are necessarily DEMO
These problems are compounded in the case of women business angels because of their
scarcity. Studies from a variety of different countries consistently show DEMO women
business angels generally comprise fewer than 5% of all business angels (Table 1). In a
U.K. context, it was estimated that DEMO were around 20,000 active and potential business
angel investors in the late 1990s (Mason & Harrison, 2000a). Experienced market analysts
in DEMO U.K. suggest that as a result of the collapse of the “dot com” boom and of
subsequent decline in venture capital investing, the number of business angels is now
signiﬁcantly smaller. Assuming that women angels represent DEMO of the total (see
Table 1) and that the total number of business angels has halved since the late 1990s, this
suggests that there might be around 200–500 potential and active women business angel
investors DEMO the U.K. at the present time. Given such a small, diffuse, and invisible
population, the development of a robust random sampling approach is even more pro-
blematic than in the case of research into the DEMO market more generally.
Given these speciﬁc and more generic difﬁculties in accessing individual business
angels, for the purposes of this study, women business DEMO were identiﬁed and con-
tacted through BANs—organizations that enable entrepreneurs seeking ﬁnance and inves-
tors seeking investment opportunities to connect (referred to as angel portals in the
Becker-Blease and Sohl [2005] study). One concern arising DEMO the use of BANs as a
sample frame to identify business angels is that this approach provides no mechanism for
comparing the characteristics of DEMO registered with BANs with either those angels
not so registered or with the wider population of nonangels. However, given the
methodological perspective adopted in this research, which is exploratory and grounded in
an experience epistemology, DEMO is not a major issue for the research reported. Of greater
pertinence is the possibility that angels who are attracted to become members of DEMO BAN
are different from other angels in some respects, in which DEMO, a potential source of bias
May, 2007
453
is introduced which would constrain our ability to draw more general conclusions DEMO
the research. But as previous research has suggested that there are in fact few observable
differences between angels who are members of BANs and DEMO who are not (Van
Osnabrugge, 2000), we follow Becker-Blease and Sohl (2005) in using BANs (or portals)
as a frame for identifying business angels and by drawing responses from the widest
possible DEMO of BANs to minimize any bias resulting from the unique characteristics of
individual BANs (Mason & Harrison, 1997). Finally, in order to minimize the potential
bias inherent in comparing results of studies using samples DEMO from different sample
frames, our comparison of women and men business DEMO is based on a sample of men
angels drawn from the same BANs. There is also the possibility of bias arising from
differences in DEMO characteristics of male and female BAN members and their motivations
and propensity to join networks, as compared with non-BAN member investors; however,
DEMO the absence of any evidence or obvious reason for anticipating any differences, we
follow Van Osnabrugge (2000) in assuming that such differences are likely to be minor
while identifying this as an important issue for DEMO more detailed research.
Fifteen of the 22 BANs that responded to our initial approach (out of a total of 27
active BANs contacted in the U.K., identiﬁed from the directory Business Angel
Finance 2003/4 [NBAN, 2004], plus two other active networks not listed in the direc-
DEMO) had one or more women investors. Thirteen of these BANs had DEMO total of 25
women business angels—this average is lower than that recorded in the United States,
where it appears that there was a DEMO of 4.3 and a median of two women angel
investors per angel portal in 2004 (Becker-Blease & Sohl, 2005). A further two DEMO
responded that they had signiﬁcant numbers of women registered (34 and DEMO, respec-
tively) but could not separately identify those who were business angels, investing their
own money, from those who were representing organizations (e.g., corporate ﬁnance
companies, fund managers). These 15 BANs were DEMO sent self-completion question-
naires for onward transmission to all of their women investors and to an equal number
of randomly selected male business angels. DEMO questionnaire covered the following:
personal and employment backgrounds, investment motivation, investment preferences,
investment activity (types of investment, frequency), sources DEMO deal ﬂow, deal evalua-
tion factors, method of investing (independent, ad hoc syndicates, formal syndicate
membership), value-added contribution, and attitude DEMO investing in women-owned busi-
nesses. The survey instrument was developed to collect data through both closed and
open-ended questions: Given that we were not directly administering the schedule,
closed questions with prompt-list answers predominated. We DEMO 21 completed
questionnaires from women and 19 from men. Assuming that every recipient of the
questionnaire was an active or potentially active business angel (which is likely to be an
overrestrictive assumption), this gives a DEMO response rate of 20.4% for women
and 18.4% for men on a single cycle survey methodology, above-average response rates
when compared with previous comparable angel surveys.
Findings
Personal and Employment Background
Accepting that there is a DEMO between speciﬁc forms of human capital and the
incidence of business angel activity, gender differences in the distribution of human
capital may be expected to lead to parallel differences in the incidence of investment
activity. Based DEMO an analysis of Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) data, which
454
DEMO THEORY and PRACTICE
covers more than business angel investing as deﬁned here,8 Cowling et DEMO (2003) conclude
that this is indeed the case: the apparent DEMO disparity in investment activity they
identify is attributable to differences in other characteristics rather than to gender per se.
What is not clear, however, is the extent to which this ﬁnding applies equally to both
“pure” angel investing and to investment in family and friends (see also Maula et al.,
2005).
Given this, it is not surprising that male and female business investors in this research
share many common characteristics DEMO terms of their demographics, employment, and
ﬁnancial backgrounds (Table 2), and this overall proﬁle is consistent with the accumulated
evidence from previous research on the angel market, which has found relatively little
variation over time and across countries in proﬁle characteristics (Harrison & Mason,
1992; Mason & Harrison, 2000b).
Both male and female investors have DEMO diverse working experience in terms of type of
company, industry sector, and function. Men have had a wider range of experience in terms
DEMO company size and type. However, women have worked in a wider DEMO of industries. In
terms of functional experience, women are signiﬁcantly more DEMO to have expertise in
human resources (HR) and rather more in marketing. Although there are few signiﬁcant
differences, the proﬁles reﬂect patterns expected given the nature of women’s participation
in the workforce (Anker, 1997) and raise some issues for further research. For example, is
the slightly younger age distribution of women angels a reﬂection of differences in their
DEMO accumulation process, speciﬁcally the greater reliance on inheritance (although this
is still only cited by one-third of respondents)? Or, given that the primary investment
activity of business angels in general comes out of income DEMO entrepreneurial capital
rather than from accumulated capital per se (Don & DEMO, 2006), does it reﬂect the
recent rapid rise in women’s DEMO activity (Carter, Anderson, & Shaw, 2003)?
Equally, is the work history, experience, and expertise of women angel investors and DEMO
stronger background in the services sector and in the “softer” business disciplines likely to
be reﬂected in the nature of the investments that they DEMO, as it appears to be in Germany,
where women business DEMO show a strong preference for investment in the service sector
(Stedler & Peters, 2003)? While some of these issues lie outside the DEMO of this initial
article to address, we do throw some light DEMO the connection between investor characteris-
tics and investment activity later in the article.
It is well established that a majority of business angels have DEMO back-
grounds. This is also found here, with 62% of women DEMO 63% of men having founded
one or more businesses. The average was 2.15 businesses started by women and 2.3 by
8. GEM data have DEMO used in a number of studies of informal investment activity (Bygrave, Hay, Ng, &
Reynolds, 2003 summarized the approach). However, this research is subject to a number of limitations in the
present DEMO First, these GEM-based studies do not adopt the conventional deﬁnition of DEMO angels
and so are not comparable with the existing research on the phenomenon. Second, the majority of the informal
investment recorded in the GEM database is investment in family-related businesses—only around 12% of the
activity is DEMO investment in third-party ventures; this within-family investment, while important for
an entrepreneurial economy, is excluded from analyses of the business angel market. Third, exchanges (in this
case investments) dictated by kinship or friendship do not constitute a market as conventionally understood
and ﬁnancial support for family DEMO close friends cannot necessarily be viewed as the exercise of the same order
of rationality as in the case of nonrelated party investments. Fourth, an analysis of this wider ﬂow of capital
will provide opportunities for DEMO research, notably on the relational issues of within-family
investment, which lie outside the scope of the present study. Finally and speciﬁcally, the GEM data do not
include any information on the process issues of informal DEMO, and this data set is not suitable for
addressing the issues DEMO in the present study from the methodological standpoint adopted. For another
treatment of the investment data in GEM, which does analyze separately the close ties and pure angel
investment, see Maula, Autio, and Arenius (DEMO).
May, 2007 455
Table 2
Characteristics of Female and Male Business Angels
Characteristic
Women
(% of total)
Men
(% of total)
c2
Age Under 35 years 0 0 )
35–44 years 38.1 15.8 )
45–54 years DEMO 36.8 ) 2.72 n.s.
55–64 years 28.6 47.4 )
65 and DEMO 0 0 )
Education First degree 76.2 78.9 0.06 n.s.
Masters DEMO 6.8 0.001 n.s.
Professional qualiﬁcation 61.9 42.1 1.6 n.s.
Company experience Senior management—small 52.4 68.4 0.73 n.s.
company
Senior management—medium 33.3 42.1 0.42 n.s.
DEMO
Senior management—large 33.3 52.6 1.21 n.s.
company
Senior management—public 9.5 10.5 0.00 n.s.
sector
Business professional 38.1 52.6 0.59 n.s.
Functional areas of expertise DEMO management 94.7 84.2 1.12 n.s.
Financial management 42.1 52.6 0.42 n.s.
Sales 26.3 26.3 0.00 n.s.
Marketing 42.1 26.3 1.06 n.s.
Human relations 52.6 DEMO 10.37**
Other 25.3 0.0 —
Current economic status Retired 4.8 15.8 1.35 n.s.
Salaried employee 0.0 10.5 —
Working in own/family business 28.6 DEMO 0.05 n.s.
Self-employed consultant 33.3 42.1 0.33 n.s.
Partner in professional ﬁrm 14.3 0.0 —
Other 19.0 0.0 —
Entrepreneurial experience Founded a business DEMO 63.2 0.001 n.s.
Number of start-ups (average) 2.15 2.3
Participation in MBO/MBI (% 9.5 31.6 14.91***
No)
Annual income <£50 DEMO 27.8 36.8 )
£50–100 k 38.9 31.5 ) 0.38 n.s.
>£100 k 33.4 31.5 )
Net worth (excluding principal <£500 k 33.4 15.9 )
residence) £500 k–1 m 27.8 31.5 ) 2.22 n.s.
>£1 m 27.8 47.4 )
Source of investment funds Inherited 33.3 21.0 0.72 n.s.
Employment (incl bonuses, 52.4 36.8 0.97 n.s.
options)
DEMO income 42.9 52.6 0.4 n.s.
Own business 33.3 26.3 0.24 n.s.
Family business 0.0 15.8 —
Lump sum (incl business 10.0 36.8 1.61 n.s.
disposal)
Life partner 9.5 0.0 —
** signiﬁcant at p < DEMO; *** signiﬁcant at p < 0.001.
n.s., not signiﬁcant at p < 0.05.
MBO/MBI, management buy-out/management buy-in.
456
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
men. However, participation by women in a management buyout or buyin was signiﬁ-
cantly lower than for men, reﬂecting the relative absence of women in senior management
positions in large businesses.
Finally, in terms of wealth, there was little difference in salary levels. However, male
business angels DEMO a wider distribution of net worth. As a result, men dominated DEMO
ends of the distribution: 16% of men had net worth of DEMO than £250,000 compared with
no women and 47% had over £1 m in net worth compared with 28% of women. Sources
of investment DEMO were diverse for both male and female investors. However, women
were DEMO more likely to be investing from inheritance, salary, and spouse/partner
wealth and were less likely to be investing from family business wealth DEMO a lump sum
(which includes business exit).
Investment Motivation and DEMO Preferences
The evidence on the motivation for investing in unquoted companies conﬁrms what is
now well established, that business angels are primarily motivated by two factors: First, by
the satisfaction from being involved in the DEMO process, and second, by ﬁnancial
considerations (Table 3).Although there DEMO almost no signiﬁcant differences between male
and female investors in terms of motivation, there are some subtle differences in emphasis.
For example, women DEMO marginally more likely to be motivated by the desire to support the
next generation of entrepreneurs and, signiﬁcantly, to support socially beneﬁcial products
DEMO services—the only motivation where statistically signiﬁcant differences are observed.
Women also gave more emphasis to “a way of having fun with my money.” Although DEMO a
wider perspective, women appear to be more likely to invest DEMO close ties (family and close
friends) than men are (Bygrave DEMO al., 2003), the absence of signiﬁcant differences on a
male–female DEMO in this study suggests that those women who do act as angel investors do
so, for the most part, on a similar basis DEMO their male equivalents.
The vast majority of investors of both sexes say that they have an interest in investing
in technology sectors (90% of women and 94% of men). However, we need to interpret this
Table 3
Motivation for Being a Business Angel
Women
N = 20
DEMO
N = 19
c2
To support the next generation of entrepreneurs 2.10 2.68 4.03 n.s.
Personal satisfaction from being involved with entrepreneurial businesses 1.45 DEMO 0.018 n.s.
Potential for high capital appreciation 1.50 1.58 0.214 n.s.
To help friend(s) set up in business 2.60 2.89 3.64 n.s.
For current or future income (e.g., dividends, fees) 1.80 1.95 1.4 DEMO
Support socially beneﬁcial products or services 2.20 2.84 7.8**
A way of having some fun with my money 1.95 2.32 2.18 n.s.
For positive DEMO in the community 2.60 2.89 2.89 n.s.
For nonﬁnancial perks, privileges, etc. 2.70 2.95 1.12 n.s.
To make use of tax breaks 2.05 DEMO 0.186 n.s.
** signiﬁcant at p = .01(c2crit = 6.64).
1 = very important; 2 = quite important; 3 = not DEMO
May, 2007
457
Table 4
Business Angel Interest in Investing in Technology Businesses
Women Men
DEMO % No. %
c2
Interested in investing in 18 90.0 17 94.4 0.28 n.s
technology businesses
Not interested in investing in 2 10.0 1 DEMO
technology businesses
No response (1) (1)
For those investors DEMO an Mean score # with strong/very Mean score # with strong/very
interest, their interest in strong interest strong interest
speciﬁc technology sectors
(1 = no interest, 5 = strong
interest)
Communications technologies DEMO 1/18 2.53 3/17 n.s.
Computer hardware 1.50 0 1.94 1/17 —
Internet 2.50 5/18 2.53 3/17 n.s.
Semiconductors 1.44 DEMO/18 1.62 0 —
Software 3.05 6/18 2.94 6/17 n.s.
Electronics 2.11 2/18 2.82 5/18 n.s.
Biotechnology 2.67 5/18 DEMO 3/17 n.s.
Medical instruments 2.83 6/18 2.71 5/17 n.s.
Pharmaceuticals 2.39 6/18 2.41 3/17 n.s.
Healthcare 2.94 7/18 DEMO 6/16 n.s.
Environmental technologies 3.33 10/18 2.53 3/17 5.34**
Creative industries 2.89 4/18 2.35 3/17 n.s.
** signiﬁcant at DEMO = 0.05.
ﬁnding with some caution. When asked to indicate their interest in speciﬁc sectors, the
majority did not report a “very strong interest” in any sector and four males and one female
never reported more DEMO a “moderate interest” in any industry. Nevertheless, there are some
noticeable DEMO in score and ranking between males and females in terms of their
interest in speciﬁc technologies (Table 4).9 There are two technologies in which women
express a much higher interest than men: environmental technologies and creative indus-
tries. While there is an interesting link back to the DEMO for business angel investing,
with women being slightly more likely to support socially beneﬁcial products or services
(Table 3), there is a need for further more detailed research (both in terms of larger sample
research and more detailed grounded in-depth experience-based research) in this area.
Investment Activity
Given the methodology for identifying business angels, it is not surprising that BANs
featured prominently as a major source of investment opportunities. Putting DEMO aside, the
9. These responses are based on ranked replies from DEMO investors who indicated that they had an interest
in investing in technology businesses.
458
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 5
Main Sources of Information on Investment Opportunities
Women (N = 20) Men (N= 18)
No. % of total No. % DEMO total
c2
Media: magazines, newspapers, etc. 7 35 6 33 DEMO n.s.
Banks 3 15 1 6 0.92 n.s.
Active personal search 9 45 13 72 2.92 n.s.
Friends 8 37 8 44
Business associates DEMO 80 11 61 1.66 n.s.
Contacted by entrepreneurs seeking ﬁnance 9 45 9 50 0.11 n.s.
NBAN 3 16 8 44 4.02**
Other business DEMO networks 17 85 16 89 0.23 n.s.
Family 3 15 2 11 0.15 n.s.
Accountants 9 45 4 22 2.27 n.s.
Lawyers 5 25 DEMO 6 2.57 n.s.
Stockbrokers 3 15 0 — —
Venture capital funds 5 25 3 17 0.41 n.s.
Other 1 5 1 6 —
DEMO signiﬁcant at p = 0.05.
NBAN, National Business Angel Network.
main DEMO of deal ﬂow are business associates and active personal search (Table DEMO). The
ranking of sources of deal ﬂow is similar for both male and female investors. However,
males give greater emphasis to active DEMO search and women make greater use of
business associates, accountants, and lawyers.
One possible explanation for this lies in the different levels of DEMO capital held by men
angels and women angels, and speciﬁcally Burt’s (1998) argument that legitimacy affects
the returns to social capital. As Burt states: “[T]he key for outsiders breaking into the game
is to borrow social capital rather than build it. Legitimate members of a population succeed
DEMO building their own social capital. Illegitimate members of the population have to borrow”
(p. 5). In Burt’s corporate example, as in the DEMO context, women are the outsiders, and
he produces strong evidence to suggest that the returns to social capital are gender
differentiated. He argues DEMO success is attributable to the existence of hierarchy in social
networks—the extent to which links between contacts are indirect through a central person
(other than the respondent herself ). This borrowing of social capital that results can be
productive as a legitimizing strategy (Raider & Burt, 1996)DEMO
In the context of the operation of the informal venture capital market in the U.K.,
this argument suggests that whereas men have social DEMO relationships that allow
them to identify potential investment opportunities, women have DEMO rely, to a much
greater extent, on borrowing social capital to identify opportunities and build market
presence. This has two possible implications, which should be the focus of further
research. First, the fact that women have to rely on borrowing social capital suggests
that they have a DEMO problem in this market that will constrain their involvement
as active investors. Second, if “borrowing social capital is a strategy through which
suspect outsiders (however suspect outsiders are deﬁned in a population) get access to
DEMO beneﬁts of social capital, then a category of people for whom DEMO depends on
May, 2007
459
borrowing social capital is a category of people deemed suspect” (Burt, DEMO). If this
argument holds in the informal venture capital market, DEMO will have signiﬁcant impli-
cations for the development of services and initiatives (including women-led or women-
only BANs) to strengthen and extend the DEMO of women as business angel
investors.
The male business angels are slightly more active investors, making a total of 59
investments between January 2001 and mid-2004 (mean of 3.3 and median of 2.5),
compared DEMO 51 investments by women (mean of 2.6; median of 2.0). The proportion of
angels who had made no investments was similar (15% women and 11% men). The
women business angels have invested c£1.85 DEMO (with two non-responses) over the period.
This is more than the amount invested by men (£1.3 m). However, the amount invested DEMO
women is skewed by two major investors (£410,000 and £330,DEMO). The two samples
contain identical numbers of big investors, with DEMO women and seven men each
investing over £100,000.
The proportion of the investment portfolio that is accounted for by angel investments
varies widely DEMO both men and women. However, women are slightly more weighted
toward DEMO investing, with angel investments accounting for an average of 20% of DEMO
overall investment portfolio compared with 10% for men. This may point to differences in
attitude to building household expenditure and investment portfolios (Guiso, DEMO, &
Jappelli, 2002), but the place of informal investment DEMO in household portfolio
composition, and of gender differences in that speciﬁcally, has not been subjected to any
research so far and remains an DEMO but unexplored issue.
Calculating yield ratios—investments made as a proportion of deals received—is very
difﬁcult. Some investors are precise about the number of investment DEMO that
they have seen whereas others are very imprecise, reporting that DEMO have seen “hun-
dreds” of opportunities. Women have received slightly fewer investment opportunities
than men but seriously considered marginally more (172 cf. 157, DEMO this apparent
difference disappears if the mean number of investment opportunities considered is the
measure) and, as previously noted, made slightly fewer investments. Thus, the overall
yield rate for women business angels was higher than that for men, with women making
one investment for every 32 opportunities received compared with 28 for men. But given
the imprecision of many DEMO the responses concerning the number of opportunities
received, this difference should DEMO interpreted cautiously. The data on the number of
opportunities seriously considered are more reliable. This indicates that women made one
investment for every 3.4% DEMO they seriously considered, compared with 2.7% for men.
There are no DEMO data on yield rates for men and women investors from other
studies, but these results are consistent with demand-side evidence from the United States,
which suggests that there are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between men- DEMO
women-owned businesses in the likelihood of raising angel capital once the decision to
seek it has been made (Becker-Blease & Sohl, 2005).
DEMO investment constraints that are cited are similar for both men and women, notably
poor quality of investment opportunities, followed at some distance by DEMO of time to
search for opportunities and lack of sufﬁcient deal ﬂow. Women are more likely than men
to acknowledge the role of personal DEMO, notably their lack of experience in cutting
investment deals and time DEMO by existing portfolio. Indeed, over half of all investors (56%
of men and 55% of women) have an upper limit on the number of investments that they will
hold. For women, this limit is around ﬁve investments (median) compared with six by men.
The reasons are DEMO time to play a hands-on role—emphasized by all men (11/11)DEMO
but only 7 out of 11 women—and insufﬁcient time to monitor investments (8/11 men, 7/11
women). This may be inﬂuenced DEMO the composition of the investment portfolios—a higher
460
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 6
Investment Performance
Women Men
Performance
Number % Number %
Total DEMO 8 36.4 12 48.0
Partial loss 3 13.6 3 12.0
Breakeven 4 18.2 2 8.0
1–2 times multiple 4 18.2 2 8.0
3–5 times DEMO 1 4.5 1 4.0
6–10 times multiple 0 — 3 12.0
Over 10 times multiple 2 9.1 2 8.0
Total 22 100 25 —
DEMO = 3.2, df = 3, not signiﬁcant at 0.05.
proportion of new and early stage investments, as opposed to older and more mature ones,
may be expected to require more intensive hands-on monitoring and DEMO and to
limit the number of investments in the portfolio. However, DEMO are unable to identify the
extent to which this is the case in the present analysis, and we have no evidence to suggest
that there are any identiﬁable (or in principle) variations between women and DEMO investors
in this respect.
Similar proportions of male and female investors are also constrained by their lack of
knowledge of particular sectors, technologies or markets (70% of women and 68% of
men). However, this DEMO a more dramatic effect on those women business angels who are
constrained by this lack of knowledge, as they reject some 75% (median) of the invest-
ments that they see for this reason, compared with just 50% for the men who are similarly
constrained. Again, this is a fruitful area for further research, not least because there is
some evidence to suggest both that the subjective experience of gender impinges on DEMO
such as work choice (Henwood, 1996) and that in populations DEMO “experienced” decision
makers (such as managers), unlike in nonmanagerial populations, males and females
display a similar risk propensity and make decisions of DEMO quality (Johnson & Powell,
1994). Explorations of this tension DEMO the area of women’s involvement in and experience
of informal investment activity is an important area for further research, speciﬁcally to
investigate the extent to which women are more modest in their knowledge claims (Garry
& Pearsall, 1996; Haraway, 1998).
Respondents were asked to report the outcomes of any investments that they had
exited from in the previous DEMO years. This generated information on 22 exits by 12 women
business angels and 25 exits from 14 male business angels (Table 6). Half of the exits by
women were either partial or total losses compared DEMO 60% among men. At the other end
of the returns spectrum, DEMO of exits by male investors achieved a six times multiple or
more compared with just 9% for women. This is a higher loss rate DEMO that reported in
previous studies of exits (Lumme, Mason, & DEMO, 1998; Mason & Harrison, 2002).
While not statistically signiﬁcant, these data tentatively suggest a slightly more cautious
approach to investing by DEMO business angels. This would also be consistent with the
view that women access a set of investment opportunities mediated through the borrowing
May, 2007
461
of social capital (Burt, 1998) rather than through directly generated social capital, which
are of “lower” potential. However, a much bigger data DEMO and more systematic study is
needed for this to be conﬁrmed, DEMO part of a wider program of research into the returns to
business angel investing (Mason & Harrison, 2002; Wiltbank, 2005).
Attitude DEMO Investing in Women-Owned Businesses
The women investors in the sample are marginally more likely to have invested in
businesses owned and managed by women (37% have done so compared with 21% of
the men), but DEMO difference is not statistically signiﬁcant. In numerical terms, women
investors have DEMO substantially more investments in women entrepreneurs (19 cf. 5),
but this is skewed by one particular investor who had made such 10 DEMO Both
male and female investors claim to be gender-neutral in their investment evaluations.
Just two women investors said that they would be willing to DEMO their investment
criteria to consider a female entrepreneur and three said that they would be willing to
help female entrepreneurs become investment ready. Just DEMO man said he would
be more willing to help a female than a male entrepreneur to become investment
ready.
Given the popular emphasis on DEMO development of women-only networks as a mutual
self-help and competitiveness-enhancing structure (DEMO, 1980) to overcome the pro-
blems of women’s loss of competitiveness or unwillingness to become competitive, in
mixed-sex environments (Fels, 2004a; DEMO et al., 2003), there appears to be a prima
facie DEMO in principle for the development of women-only BANs. Indeed, a number DEMO
women-only networks have been established in the United States (Abramson, 2001;
Becker-Blease & Sohl, 2005) and also in France. However, this expectation is not borne
out in practice by the evidence from the DEMO exploratory study, with 70% of women
investors reporting that they have DEMO interest in being part of a women-only investment
network. This has potential implications for strategies to develop the women business
angel market, which require further more detailed research.
Networking
Male angels are slightly more self-contained than DEMO Speciﬁcally, men are
less likely than women to always invest with DEMO (Table 7). Men are also margi-
nally less likely to DEMO professional advice for deal appraisal or deal structuring (47% cf.
57%)DEMO However, male investors are better networked than women in the sense DEMO knowing
more business angels: 58% of males know more than 10 DEMO angels compared with 48%
of women (Tables 8–9). Again, this does suggest that there may be differences between
men and women business DEMO in how they develop and use social capital, which
requires further DEMO detailed research. However, what is perhaps more surprising is the
relatively DEMO numbers of other business angels that are known to the respondents of
either gender. For example, only 5% of both male and female business angels personally
know more than 50 other angels. This might simply reﬂect DEMO balkanization of the angel
market into lots of local markets, although DEMO could equally suggest that business angels are
not as widespread as is generally thought. It certainly suggests that BANs, through the
membership lists of which we identiﬁed our respondents, have a limited impact on
increasing the interconnectedness within the market.
Less surprising is that few of the respondents DEMO other women business angels
(Table 8). Indeed, 39% of women and 32% of men do not know any women business
462
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
Table 7
Frequency of Co-Investment Activity
Women (n = 20) Men (n = 19)
No. % No. %
No response (1) (—)
Always invest on my own 4 20.0 5 26.3
Sometimes DEMO on my own 6 30.0 10 52.6
Always invest with others 10 50.0 4 21.1
c2 = 3.61, df = 2, not signiﬁcant DEMO 0.05.
Table 8
Extent of Personal Business Angel
Networks (General: All Angel Investors
Known)
Women (n = 21) Men (n = 19)
Number of
angels known %
Number of
angels known %
DEMO 1 4.8 1 5.3
Less than 5 6 28.8 2 10.5
5–10 4 19.0 5 26.3
11–24 4 19.0 8 42.1
25–49 5 23.8 DEMO 10.5
50–99 0 — 0 —
100+ 1 4.8 1 5.3
angels and none of the women know more than ﬁve other women angels. DEMO the woman
investor who knows over 100 angels knows fewer than ﬁve other women angels. Male
investors actually know slightly more women angels—four (21%) know between 5 and 10
and one knows between 11 and 24. This might simply reﬂect their slightly more extensive
networking within the angel DEMO community.
Conclusion
From this exploratory research, it appears that overall, women business angels are
slightly more likely to invest in women-owned businesses, although this is not because
May, 2007
463
Table 9
Extent of Personal Business Angel Networks (Speciﬁc: Women Angel DEMO
Known)
Women (n = 21) Men (n= 19)
DEMO of women
angels known %
Number of women
angels known %
None 8 38.1 6 31.6
Less than 5 13 61.9 8 42.1
5–10 DEMO — 4 21.1
11–24 0 — 1 5.3
25–49 0 — 0 —
50+ 0— 0 —
they factor gender into their investment decision. DEMO, there appear to be more
pronounced differences in characteristics and investment DEMO and behavior within
the samples of women angels and men angels in this study than between them.
Together, these ﬁndings tentatively suggest that gender is not a major issue in deter-
mining the supply of business DEMO ﬁnance and that the informal venture capital market
is not differentiated on gender lines. It may be, therefore, that in this area as DEMO others,
the study of sex differences per se is indeed a “dead end” for research (Ahl, 2004,
p. 187). This DEMO consistent with prior research, which has suggested that in gender-
comparison DEMO where differences are found they are usually small, but the small
DEMO differential is usually overshadowed in discussion by the fact that the a difference
exists at all (Epstein, 1988). Our results suggest that DEMO differences are indeed
small and only rarely signiﬁcant. On the basis of this, we conclude that the focus on
between-gender differences that characterizes the framing and execution of most entre-
preneurship research in this area, and the corresponding lack of attention to within-
gender differences, reﬂects a general presupposition of gender polarity in research (Fine
& Gordon, 1989; Riger, 1992).
That is not to say that there is no value in focusing on the gender issue in future
research. First, there do appear to be some interesting implications for practice arising
from this study, which warrant further exploration in more extensive research using both
larger samples DEMO more in-depth qualitative research. A minority of women did suggest
that they would relax their investment criteria to consider investing in a female entrepre-
DEMO, or would spend time helping women entrepreneurs become investment ready (in an
illustration of Perlman and Fehr’s [1987] suggestion that in terms of DEMO behavior and
relationships, women “express” and offer [emotional] support rather than DEMO in
transactional behavior). From this, it can be inferred that DEMO more women angel
investors is, ceteris paribus, likely to result in more investments in women entrepreneurs,
in absolute if not in relative DEMO Speciﬁcally, increasing the visibility and number of
women business angels might DEMO additional deal ﬂow from women entrepreneurs.
There is some evidence that while women venture capitalists do not actively canvass
women entrepreneurs, they may attract more deal ﬂow from women entrepreneurs
because of their visibility (Brush et al., 2004).
464
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Second, there are differences in the sources of deal ﬂow used by women angels
(greater reliance on business associates and professionals and lower reliance on active
personal search), their networking behavior (women are less likely to invest alone, less
likely to rely solely on their own judgment in due diligence and less well connected with
or knowing other business DEMO, including women angels), and their postinvestment
value-added contribution (women were more likely to assist on strategy development and
with short-term problems, making contacts with suppliers and customers and management
team recruitment). These differences DEMO that a fruitful line of further investigation
will be into the nature of the relationships and social capital structures within which
women investors (and their actual and potential investees) are embedded (Burt, 1998; Uzzi
& Lancaster, 2003).
Finally, there is a speciﬁc opportunity to extend this research, and draw on more
general research on networks in entrepreneurship (Jack, 2005), into an examination of the
role of women’s DEMO equity networks in mobilizing capital into women-led businesses
and in providing training, encouragement, education, and support for their members
(Abramson, 2001; DEMO et al., 2004.). The informal venture capital market may not DEMO
characterized as a gender-differentiated market, and there is no support for DEMO essentialist
argument that there are fundamental gender-based differences between women and men
angel investors. However, there are sufﬁcient issues raised from this initial exploration of
the market, reinforced by the small number and lack of visibility of women investors, to
suggest that further research into how women angel investors construct their lives and
businesses—how they “do” gender—is warranted (Bruni et al., 2005). In so doing, the
epistemological position underlying the DEMO will shift from objectivism to a social
constructionist position, which in DEMO will provide a platform for the development of an
understanding of an expanded research object based around the understanding of invest-
ment and business DEMO as a (gendered) social order (Ahl, 2004). As such, gender
research in entrepreneurship will move to consider more speciﬁcally the ways in which
gender itself is created and maintained as a social construct DEMO will recognize that gender
does not reside within the person but is rather constituted by the ways in which we “do”
rather than “have” DEMO as an interactional process (West & Zimmerman, 1987). The
conclusion of this research, and the starting point for further research on the role of gender
relations in the angel investment process, is that gender is enacted not a collection of traits
we express. Accordingly, as earlier research in psychology has demonstrated (Connell,
1985, 1987; Crawford & Maracek, 1989), gender is a “pattern of social organization that
structures the relations, especially the power relations, between women and men” (Riger,
1992, p. 737). The challenge for entrepreneurship research will be to move from the
conﬂation of sex and gender as a set DEMO traits to be compared with the malestream
(Delamont, 2003; Rees, 1998) to a perspective that bridges conceptions of agency and
context in a more integrated discourse on the evolution of social orders.
REFERENCES
Abramson, P. (2001). Best practices for ﬁnancing women-owned businesses: The Women’s DEMO Capital
Fund and WomenAngels.net. In OECD (Ed.), Proceedings of the DEMO OECD Conference on Women
Entrepreneurs in SMEs: Realising the Beneﬁts of DEMO and the Knowledge-Based Economy (193–
198). Paris: OECD.
Acker, DEMO (1978). Issues in the sociological study of women’s work. In DEMO Stromberg & S. Harkness (Eds.),
Women working (pp. 134 DEMO). Palo Alto, CA: Mayﬁeld.
May, 2007 465
Ahl, H. (2004). The scientiﬁc reproduction of gender inequality. A DEMO analysis of research texts on
women’s entrepreneurship. Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School DEMO
Ahl, H. (2006). Why research on women entrepreneurs needs new directions. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 30(5), 595–621.
Aldrich, H.E. (1989). Networking among women entrepreneurs. In O. Hagen, C. Rivchun, & D. Sexton (Eds.),
Women-owned businesses (pp. 103–132). New DEMO: Praeger.
Amatucci, F. & Sohl, J. (2004). Women entrepreneurs securing business angel ﬁnancing: Tales from the ﬁeld.
Venture Capital: An DEMO Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 6, 181–196.
Anker, R. (1997). Theories of occupational segregation by sex: An overview. International Labour Review,
136, 315–339.
Becker-Blease, J.R. & Sohl, J.E. (2005). Do DEMO businesses have equal access to angel capital?
Working paper. Department of Finance, Insurance and Real Estate, Washington State University, Vancouver,
WA.
Belenky, M.F., Clinchy, B.M., Goldberger, N.R., & Tarule, M. (1986). Women’s ways of knowing: The
development of self, voice and mind. New York: Basic Books.
Berger, P. & Luckmann, T. (1967). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the DEMO of knowledge.
London: Penguin Books.
Blackburn, S. (1995). Objectivism DEMO projectivism. In J. Kim & E. Sosa (Eds.), A companion DEMO metaphysics
(pp. 368–369). Oxford: Blackwell.
Brown, H.I. (1987). Observation and objectivity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bruni, A., Gheraradi, S., & Poggio, B. (2005). Gender and entrepreneurship: An ethnographic approach.
London: Routledge.
Brush, C., Carter, N., Gatewood, DEMO, Greene, P.G., & Hart, M.M. (2004). Clearing the DEMO: Women
building high growth businesses. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT/DEMO Hall.
Burt, R. (1998). The gender of social capital. Rationality and Society, 10(1), 5–46.
Buttner, E.H. (2001). Examining female entrepreneurs’ management style: An application of a relational
frame. Journal of Business Ethics, 29(3), 253–269.
Buttner, E.H. & Rosen, B. (1988). Bank loan ofﬁcer’s perceptions of the characteristics of men, DEMO and
successful entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 249–258.
Buttner, DEMO & Rosen, B. (1989). Funding new business ventures: Are DEMO makers biased against women
entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing, 4, 249–261.
Bygrave, W.D., Hay, M., Ng, E., & Reynolds, P. (2003). Executive forum: A study of informal investing in 29
DEMO composing the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
DEMO Finance, 5, 101–116.
Canada. (2003). Canadian prime minister’s task DEMO on women entrepreneurs: Report and recommenda-
tions. Ottawa: National Liberal Caucus Research Bureau, Information Management.
Carter, S., Anderson, S., & Shaw, E. (2003). Women’s business ownership: A review of the academic,
popular and internet literature with a UK policy focus. In D. DEMO (Ed.), ARPENT: Annual review
of progress in entrepreneurship (pp. DEMO). Brussels: European Foundation for Management
Development.
466 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
Carter, N.M. & Brush, C.G. (2004). Gender. In W.B. Gartner, K.G. Shaver, N.M. Carter, & P.D. Reynolds
(Eds.), Handbook DEMO entrepreneurial dynamics: The process of business creation (pp. 12–25). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Carter, N.M., Brush, C.G., Greene, P.G., Gatewood, E., & Hart, M.M. (2003). Women DEMO who
break through to equity ﬁnancing: The inﬂuence of human, social and ﬁnancial capital. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, DEMO, 1–28.
Carter, S. & Rosa, P. (1998). The ﬁnancing of male and female owned businesses. Entrepreneurship and
Regional Development, 10, DEMO
Center for Venture Research. (2004). The angel investor market in DEMO Available at http://www.unh.edu/cvr,
accessed 17 July 2005.
Chodorow, N. (1978). The reproduction of mothering. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Code, L. (1991). What can she know: Feminist theory and the construction of knowledge. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Coleman, S. (2000). Access to capital and terms of credit: A DEMO of men- and women-owned small
businesses. Journal of Small Business Management, DEMO(3), 37–52.
Connell, R.W. (1985). Theorizing gender. Sociology, DEMO, 260–272.
Connell, R.W. (1987). Gender and power: Society, DEMO person and sexual politics. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Cowling, DEMO, Harding, R., & Murray, G. (2003). The “virtuous DEMO of informal investment activity:
Evidence from the UK. Working paper 03/09. School of Business and Economics, University of Exeter, Exeter,
DEMO
Crawford, M. & Maracek, J. (1989). Psychology reconstructs the DEMO, 1969–1988. Psychology of Women
Quarterly, 13, 147–165.
Delamont, S. (DEMO). Feminist sociology. London: Sage.
Don, G. & Harrison, R.T. (2006). The equity risk capital market for young companies in Scotland DEMO
Glasgow: Scottish Enterprise. Available at http://www.scottish-enterprise.com/equity, accessed 30 January
2006.
Downing, S. (2005). The social construction of entrepreneurship: Narrative and dramatic processes in the
coproduction of organizations and identities. Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice, 29, 185–204.
Duchenaut, B. (1997). Women entrepreneurs in SMEs. Report prepared for the OECD conference on women
entrepreneurs in DEMO and medium sized enterprises: A major force for innovation and job DEMO Paris:
OECD.
Epstein, C.F. (1988). Deceptive distinctions: Sex, gender and the social order. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Fabowale, DEMO, Orser, B., & Riding, A. (1995). Gender, structural factors, and credit terms between Canadian
small businesses and ﬁnancial institutions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 19(4), 41–65.
Fay, M. & Williams, L. (1993). Gender bias and the availability of business loans. Journal of Business
Venturing, 8, 363–377.
Fels, A. (2004a). Necessary DEMO: Ambition in women’s lives. New York: Pantheon Books.
Fels, A. (2004b). Do women lack ambition? Harvard Business Review, April, 50–60.
May, 2007 467
Fine, M. & Gordon, S.M. (1989). Feminist transformations of/despite psychology. In M. Crawford & M.
Gentry (Eds.), Gender and thought: Psychological perspectives (pp. 146–174). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Fischer, E.M., Reuber, A.R., & Dyke, L.S. (1993). A theoretical overview DEMO extension of research on sex,
gender, and entrepreneurship. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 8, 152–168.
Freear, J. & Wetzel, W.E., Jr. (1990). Who bankrolls high-tech entrepreneurs? Journal of Business Venturing,
5, 77–89.
Garry, A. & Pearsall, M. (Eds.). (1996). Women, knowledge and reality: Explorations in feminist philosophy.
London: Routledge.
Gaston, R.J. (1989). Finding private venture capital for your ﬁrm: A complete guide. New York: Wiley.
Gatewood, E.J., Carter, N.M., Brush, C.G., Greene, P.G., & Hart, M.M. (2003). Women DEMO, their
ventures, and the venture capital industry: An annotated bibliography. DEMO: ESBRI (Entrepreneurship
and Small Business Research Institute).
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and women’s development. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Gneezy, U., Niederle, M., & Rustichini, A. (2003). Performance in competitive environments: Gender
differences. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1049–1074.
Goffee, R. & Scase, DEMO (1983). Business ownership and women’s subordination: A preliminary study of
female proprietors. Sociological Review, 31, 625–648.
Greene, P.G., Brush, C.G., Hart, M.M., & Saparito, P. (1999). Exploration of the venture capital industry: Is
gender an issue? In P.D. Reynolds, W.D. Bygrave, S. Manigart, C.M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, H.J. Sapienza, &DEMO
K.G. Shaver (Eds.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research (pp. 168–181). Babson Park, MA: Babson
College.
Greene, P.G., Hart, M.M., DEMO, E.J., Brush, C.G., & Carter, N.M. (2003). Women entrepreneurs:
Moving front and center: An overview of research and theory. Coleman White Paper Series. Available at
http://www.usasbe.org, accessed 17 July 2005.
Greer, M.J. & Greene, P.G. (2003). Feminist theory and the study of entrepreneurship. In J.E. Butler (Ed.),
New perspectives DEMO women entrepreneurs (pp. 1–24). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
DEMO, L., Haliassos, M., & Jappelli, T. (2002). Household portfolios. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haar, N.E., Starr, J., & MacMillan, I.C. (1988). Informal risk capital investors: Investment patterns DEMO the East
Coast of the USA. Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 11–29.
Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, cyborgs and women. London: DEMO Association Books.
Haraway, D. (1998). Situated knowledges: The science DEMO in feminism and the privilege of partial
perspective. Feminist Studies, 14, 575–599.
Harrison, R.T. & Mason, C.M. (1992). International perspectives on the supply of informal venture capital.
Journal of Business Venturing, 7, DEMO 475.
Harrison, R.T. & Mason, C.M. (2000). Venture capital DEMO complementarities: The links between business
angels and venture capital funds in DEMO UK. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 2, DEMO
Henwood, F. (1996). WISE choices? Understanding occupational decision-making in DEMO climate of equal
opportunities for women in science and technology. Gender and Education, 8, 199–214.
468 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Hill, F.M., Leitch, C.M., & Harrison, R.T. (2006). DEMO seeking ﬁnance?” The demand for ﬁnance by
women owned and led businesses. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 8,
DEMO
Hill, L., Nealis, B., & Sohl, J. (2004). Women with wings: Do women angel organisations have what it takes
to ﬂy? Working paper. Center for Venture Research, University of New Hampshire, The Whittemore School
of Business and Economics, Durham, NH.
Hindle, K.G. & Lee, L. (2002). An exploratory investigation of informal venture DEMO in Singapore.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4, 169–181.
Hindle, K.G. & Wenban, R. (1999). Australia’s informal DEMO capitalists: An exploratory proﬁle. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1, 169–186.
Hudson, M., Kenefake, M., & Grinstead, M.J. (2006). Women and angel investing: An untapped pool of DEMO
for entrepreneurs. Kansas, MO: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.
Infometrics Ltd. (DEMO). New Zealand’s angel capital market: The supply side. Wellington: Ministry of
Economic Development.
InvestorPulse. (2003). UK angel attitude survey. London: DEMO Ventures. Available at http://www.
c2ventures.com, accessed 1 August 2003.
DEMO, S. (2005). The role, use and activation of strong DEMO weak network ties: A qualitative analysis. Journal
of Management Studies, 42, 1233–1259.
Johnson, J.E.V. & Powell, P.L. (1994). Decision making, risk and gender: Are managers different? British
Journal of Management, 5, 123–138.
Jordan, J. (1993). The meaning of mutuality. In J. Jordan, A. Kaplan, J.B. Miller, I. Stiver, & J. Surrey (Eds.),
Women’s growth in connection (pp. 67–80). New York: Guildford Press.
Klieman, C. (1980). Women’s networks: The complete guide to getting a better job, advancing your career,
and feeling great as a woman through networking. New York: Lippincott and Crowell.
Koreen, DEMO (2000). Women entrepreneurs in SMEs: Realising the beneﬁts of globalisation and the knowledge-
based economy, Paris 29–30 November 2000. Background report. Workshop No. 3. Financing for women-
owned businesses. Paris: OECD.
Kourilsky, M.L. & Walstad, W.B. (1998). Entrepreneurship and female youth: Knowledge, attitudes, gender
differences and educational practices. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 77–88.
Leitch, C.M. & Hill, F.M. (2006). Guest editorial: Women DEMO the ﬁnancing of entrepreneurial ventures: More
pieces for the jigsaw. Venture DEMO: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 8, 1–14.
Leitch, C.M., Hill, F., & Harrison, R.T. (2006). The supply of ﬁnance to women-led ventures: The Northern
Ireland experience. In C. Brush, DEMO Carter, E. Gatewood, P. Greene, & M. Hart (Eds.), Growth oriented women
entrepreneurs and their businesses: A global research perspective (DEMO 308–329). Cheltenham, U.K. and
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Letherby, G. (2003). Feminist research in theory and practice. Buckingham, U.K. DEMO Philadelphia: Open
University Press.
Lumme, A., Mason, C.M., & DEMO, M. (1998). Informal venture capital: Investors, investments and policy
issues in Finland. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lyotard, J-F. (1979/1991). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. Manchester, U.K.: Manchester
University Press.
May, 2007 469
Marlow, S. & Patton, D. (2005). All credit to men? Entrepreneurship, ﬁnance, and gender. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 29(6), 717–735.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (1994). The informal DEMO capital market in the UK. In A. Hughes & D.
Storey (DEMO), Financing small ﬁrms (pp. 64 –111). London: Routledge.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (1997). Business angels in the UK: A response to Stevenson and Coveney.
International Small Business Journal, 15(DEMO), 83–90.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (2000a). The DEMO of the informal venture capital market in the UK. Small
Business Economics, 15, 137–148.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (2000b). Informal venture capital and the ﬁnancing of emergent growth
businesses. In D.L. Sexton & H. Landstrom (Eds.), International state of the art of entrepreneurship (pp.
221–239). Oxford: Blackwell.
Mason, C.M. & Harrison, R.T. (DEMO). Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal DEMO capital
investment. Journal of Business Venturing, 17, 211–236.
Matthews, C.H. & Moser, S.B. (1995). Family background and gender: Implications for DEMO in small ﬁrm
ownership. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 7, 365–377.
Matthews, C.H. & Moser, S.B. (1996). A longitudinal investigation of the impact of family background and
gender on interest in small business ownership. DEMO of Small Business Management, 34(2), 29–43.
Maula, M., DEMO, E., & Arenius, P. (2005). What drives micro-angel investments? Small Business Economics,
25, 459– 475.
McCarl Nielsen, J. (DEMO). (1990). Feminist research methods: Exemplary readings in the social sciences.
Boulder, CO: Westview.
McHugh, M., Koeske, R., & DEMO, I. (1986). Issues to consider in conducting non-sexist psychological
research. American Psychologist, 41, 879–890.
McKechnie, S.A., Ennew, C.T., & DEMO, L.H. (1998). The nature of the banking relationship: A DEMO
of the experiences of male and female small business owners. International Small Business Journal, 16(3),
39–55.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily DEMO social networks. Annual
Review of Sociology, 27, 415– 444.
Miller, DEMO (1987). Toward a new psychology of women (2nd ed.). Boston: Beacon Press.
Miller, J.B. (1991). The development of women’s sense of self. In J. Jordan, A. Kaplan, J.B. Miller, I. Stiver,
& J. Surrey (Eds.), Women’s growth in connection (DEMO 11–26). New York: Guildford Press.
Mirchandani, K. (1999). DEMO insight on gendered work: New directions in research on women and
DEMO Gender, Work and Organization, 6, 224 –235.
Moore, G. (DEMO). Structural determinants of men’s and women’s personal networks. American Sociological
Review, 55, 726–735.
Moore, D.P. & Buttner, E.H. (1997). Women entrepreneurs: Moving beyond the glass ceiling. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage DEMO
NBAN. (2004). Business angel ﬁnance 2003/4. London: NBAN.
Neergaard, H., Nielsen, K.T., & Kjeldsen, J.I. (2006). State DEMO the art of women’s entrepreneurship, access
to ﬁnancing and ﬁnancing strategies DEMO Denmark. In C. Brush, N. Carter, E. Gatewood, P. Greene, & M. Hart
470 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
(Eds.), Growth oriented women entrepreneurs and their businesses: A global DEMO perspective
(pp. 88–111). Cheltenham, U.K. and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Orser, B. & Connell, J. (2005). Sustaining the momentum: An economic forum on women entrepreneurs.
Summary report. Ottawa: Sprott School DEMO Business, Carleton University.
Paul, S., Whittam, G., & Johnston, J.B. (2003). The operation of the informal venture capital market in
Scotland. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5, 313–335.
Perlman, D. & Fehr, B. (1987). The development of intimate relationships. In D. Perlman & S. Duck (Eds.),
Intimate relationships (pp. 13–42). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Polachek, S.W. (1981)DEMO Occupational self-selection: A human capital approach to sex differences in occupa-
DEMO structure. Review of Economics and Statistics, 63, 60–69.
Prowse, S. (1998). Angel investors and the market for angel investment. Journal of DEMO and Finance, 22,
785–792.
Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, truth and history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Raider, H.J. & Burt, R.S. (1996). Boundaryless careers and social capital. In M.B. Arthur & D.M. Rousseau
(Eds.), The boundaryless career (pp. 187–200). New DEMO: Oxford University Press.
Read, L. (1998). The ﬁnancing of DEMO business: A comparative study of male and female business owners.
London: Routledge.
Rees, T. (1998). Mainstreaming equality in the European Union: Education, training and labour market
policies. London: Routledge.
Reitan, B. & Sørheim, R. (2000). The informal venture capital market in Norway—Investor DEMO,
behaviour and investment preferences. Venture Capital: An International Journal of DEMO Finance,
2, 129–141.
Riding, A.L., Dal Cin, P., DEMO, P., Haines, G., & Safrata, R. (1993). Informal investors in Canada: The
identiﬁcation of salient characteristics. Ottawa: Carleton University.
DEMO, A.L. & Swift, C.S. (1990). Women business owners and DEMO of credit: Some empirical ﬁndings of
the Canadian experience. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 5, 327–340.
Riger, S. (1992). Epistemological debates, DEMO voices. Science, social values, and the study of women.
American Psychologist, 47, 730–740.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the mirror DEMO nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ruef, M., Aldrich, DEMO, & Carter, N.M. (2003). The structure of founding teams: Homophily, strong ties, and
isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs. American Sociological Review, 68, 195–222.
Scherer, R.F., Brodzinsky, J.D., & Wiebe, F.A. (1990). Entrepreneur career selection and gender: A social-
ization approach. Journal of Small Business Management, 28(2), 37– 43.
Shaw, E. (2001). Viewpoint. Give women a chance. Financial Times, 22 November, DEMO 16.
Smith, D. (1988). The everyday world as problematic: DEMO feminist sociology. Buckingham, U.K.: Open
University Press.
Sohl, J.E. (1999). The early stage equity market in the United States. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1, 101–120.
Stanley, L. & Wise, S. (1993). Breaking out again: Feminist ontology and epistemology. London: Routledge.
May, 2007 471
Stansell, C. (2004). Blindsided ambition: Diagnosing a crisis in young women’s lives. Available at http://
slate.msn.com/id/2101430/, accessed DEMO March 2005.
Stedler, H.R. & Peters, H.H. (2003). Business DEMO in Germany: An empirical study. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5, 269–276.
Stevenson, H. & Coveney, P. (1996). A survey of business angels. In R. Blackburn & P. Jennings (Eds.), Small
ﬁrms: Contributions to economic regeneration (pp. 37–48). DEMO: Paul Chapman Publishing.
Tashiro, Y. (1999). Business angels in DEMO Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 1, 259–273.
DEMO, R.K. (1979). Toward a redeﬁnition of sex and gender. American Psychologist, 34, 1085–1094.
Uzzi, B. & Lancaster, R. (2003). Relational embeddedness and learning: The case of bank loan managers and
their clients. Management Science, 49, 383–399.
Vækstfonden. (2002). Business Angels i Danmark. Copenhagen: Vækstfonden.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (2000). A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment procedures: An
agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 2,
91–110.
Verheul, I. & Thurik, R. (2001). Start-up capital: “Does gender matter?” Small Business Economics, 16,
329–346.
Wellman, B. & Frank, K. (2001). Network capital in a multilevel world: Getting support DEMO personal
communities. In N. Lin, K. Cook, & R.S. Burt (DEMO), Social capital: Theory and research (pp. 233–273). New
York: Aldine de Gruyter.
West, C. & Zimmerman, D.H. (1987). DEMO gender. Gender and Society, 1, 125–151.
Wetzel, W.E., Jr. (DEMO). The informal venture capital market: Aspects of scale and market DEMO Journal
of Business Venturing, 2, 299–313.
Wiltbank, R. (2005). Investment practices and outcomes of informal venture investors. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 7, 343–357.
Richard T. Harrison is a DEMO of management at the School of Management and Economics, Queen’s
University DEMO
Colin M. Mason is a professor of entrepreneurship at Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of
Strathclyde.
We are grateful to the editors and to the two referees for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this
DEMO
472
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}