V E NT UR E
C A P IT AL,
1999,DEMO
V OL .
1,
NO .
2,
95
100
Editorial
An overview of informal
venture capital research
Introduction
Informal venture capital-equity investments DEMO non-collateral forms of
lending made by private individuals (termed business angels) using their
own money, directly in unquoted companies in which they have no
family connection, plays a key role in the financing of emergent
businesses. First, it occupies a critical position in the growth firm
financing spectrum, filling the gap between founders, family and friends
and institutional DEMO capital funds
transactions costs, normally do not make
the informal venture DEMO market is
institutional venture capital market, in
invested in businesses at DEMO start-up
number of such deals made. Third,
investors, contributing their DEMO, expertise, knowledge
a variety of informal and formal roles
because of their entrepreneurial background,
contribute more to a business
Research into informal DEMO
years, from ‘first generation’ (or
‘second generation’ (more analytical
range DEMO issues which will form
research in the field have been
press).
which,
small
substantially
terms
and
business
in their
business
just
has
DEMO,
policy
of
(Mason
than
capital
market
and
the basis
identified
DEMO
of
of
early
angels
and
investee
angels
money
expanded
largely
oriented)
a
both
growth
third
and
their
investments.
larger
the
stage
are
contacts
DEMO:
therefore
(Sohl,
rapidly
descriptive)
studies,
generation
Harrison
DEMO
Second,
than the
amounts
and
‘hands
this
in
issue).
recent
to
a
of
in
and
the
on’
in
First
generation
studies
Research DEMO the informal venture capital market was pioneered by
William E. Wetzel Jr in the early 1980s in the USA (Wetzel 1981). The
context for this study was the widely held perception that technology-
based ventures DEMO a ‘finance gap’ when seeking to raise small
amounts of early stage risk capital, although this ran counter to anecdotal
evidence that business angels played a key role in filling this gap.
However, little was known about their characteristics, the amount of
capital available, what they look DEMO in an investment proposal and how
entrepreneurs could find them. Wetzel’s motivation was therefore to ‘put
some boundaries on our ignorance’. Emerging directly out DEMO this study
was a public policy proposal to mobilise ‘angel money’ by establishing
regional referral networks to enable investors to examine a broader range
DEMO e
Capital
ISSN
1369-1066 p rint/IS SN 1464-5343 online 1999
http: //www.tandf.co.uk /JNLS/vec.htm
http: //www.taylorandfrancis.com /JNLS/vec.htm
Taylor
&
F rancis
Ltd
96
Ed ito ria l
of investment opportunities. This provided a means DEMO overcoming the
absence of efficient channels of communication between entrepreneurs
and investors which were impeding the efficient functioning of the
market.
Subsequent studies of DEMO venture capital in other parts of the
USA in the 1980s replicated and refined Wetzel’s pioneering study and
continued the focus on describing the DEMO, behaviour and character-
istics of angels. The late 1980s and early DEMO saw the international
diffusion of research on informal venture capital. Detailed studies of the
informal venture capital market have now been undertaken in Canada, the
United Kingdom, Sweden, The Netherlands and Finland. More recently,
DEMO have also been undertaken in Australia (Hindle and Wenban, this
issue) and Japan (Tashiro in press) and research is in progress in a number
of other countries, including Denmark, Norway, Germany, Singapore DEMO
Saudi Arabia. The main focus of these studies is comparative, replicating
DEMO US and UK studies, with a similar emphasis on market and DEMO
characteristics. In short, the objective in these studies has continued to DEMO
to ‘put boundaries on our ignorance’ but in new geographical contexts.
What emerges from these studies is a high degree of similarity in the DEMO
characteristics of business angels and their investment activity across
countries: business DEMO in different countries have many more common
features than differences, with DEMO Japanese business angels deviating
significantly.
Second
generation
studies
‘Second generation’ studies of the informal venture capital market can be
grouped into three categories: studies which have addressed a range of new
topics; studies which have focused on policy issues; and studies which have
introduced a theoretical perspective. These studies reflect a growing
sophistication in the analysis of the informal venture DEMO market and
draw their inspiration more specifically from research in entrepreneurship
and institutional venture capital.
Research
on
new
topics
The 1990s has seen research DEMO a growing range of new topics, with
research on the institutional DEMO capital industry often providing the
inspiration. Three themes in particular have emerged. First, the investment
decision-making process has been analysed in terms of a stage model of the
informal venture capital investment decision–making process which is
DEMO, although not identical, to that of institutional venture capital
(Feeney DEMO al. this issue). Second, a number of studies have investigated DEMO
post-investment relationship, that is, the nature, extent and impact of DEMO
contribution made by informal venture capital investors in their investee
business. Third, there have been attempts to analyse angels’ returns
achieved, the time DEMO exit and the method of exit.
Ed ito ria l
97
Applied
studies
Wetzel’s pioneering research in the DEMO 1980s made the original case for
policy intervention in the informal venture capital market to address
market inefficiency issues, and much of the subsequent research in this area
has focussed on the development of business angel DEMO, or business
introduction services, as a means of promoting informal venture capital
activity (Aernoudt, this issue). Most assessments of the effectiveness DEMO
business angel networks are favourable, although there is increasing
concern amongst DEMO angels about the poor quality of investment
opportunities that they see.
Theoretical
approaches
Theoretical approaches to the analysis of the informal venture capital
market DEMO the most recent and least extensive strand of research in the
field. Indeed, research on informal venture capital has not been
characterised to date by a high level of theoretical sophistication. However,
for both the DEMO venture capital market and the private equity market
more generally substantial progress in the application and development of
finance theory to the informal venture DEMO market is hindered by the
virtual absence of large-scale data sets. This special issue includes two
papers which seek to extend the conceptual basis DEMO research in the field:
Feeney et al. apply elements of decision theory to the informal investor’s
decision-making processes, and Steier and Greenwood adopt a social
network model of organisation formation to analyse the evolution of
DEMO investor-firm relationships.
Informal
venture
capital
research:
prospects
Informal venture capital research remains a relatively small and immature
field of academic enquiry. Although the DEMO studies were undertaken in the
early 1980s, it is only during DEMO 1990s that researchers outside North
America have begun to focus on this topic. The research agenda for a ‘third
generation’ of research studies encompasses DEMO, analytical,
theoretical and policy issues (Mason and Harrison in press).
Methodological
issues
The single most important methodological problem in undertaking research
DEMO the informal venture capital market arises from great difficulty in finding
business angels, who are both unwilling to identify themselves (as a result
DEMO are no directories of business angels) and may be unwilling to DEMO
to research surveys. This has two consequences for researchers. First, the
DEMO and characteristics of the population of business angels is unknown, and
DEMO Second, research on the informal venture capital market has,
98
Ed ito ria l
of necessity, been based on ‘samples of convenience’ whose representative-
ness can never be verified. Business angel research has DEMO to be heavily
reliant on large scale postal questionnaire surveys. While this methodolo-
gical approach was appropriate when the emphasis was on descriptive
research, it is less suited to answering questions about how the market
actually DEMO Thus, further studies of the informal venture capital
market need to DEMO alternative research designs, such as focusing on
particular types of business DEMO, using case studies to explore particular
aspects of the informal venture DEMO market (as in Steier and Greenwood’s
paper, this issue), establishing longitudinal tracking of panels of investors to
incorporate the time dimension, adopting critical incident analysis to resolve
the present impasse in studies which seek DEMO assess the value-added impact
of hands on investors, the use of DEMO protocol analysis to explore the way
in which business angels undertake their initial screening of investment
opportunities, and applications of conjoint analysis and qualitative
approaches such as focus groups to add new perspectives to our under-
DEMO of how the informal venture capital market operates.
Analytical
issues
There are many issues where Wetzel’s call for research which can ‘put
boundaries on DEMO ignorance’ remains valid. Seven issues in particular are
priorities for researchers to address. First, more sophisticated estimates of
the size of the informal venture capital market are required. Existing
estimates–based on extrapolation of fragmentary data–are extremely DEMO
and make no allowance for business angels’ investment allocation decisions
among assest classes, nor do they identify either trends in informal
investment activity over time, whether cyclical or secular, or the macro-
economic influences on DEMO supply of informal venture capital. Second,
although the business angel population is heterogeneous, only a handful of
studies have actually developed angel typologies or studied particular sub-
sets of business angels. However, the classifications are eclectic, and the
methodologies used are unsophisticated. Third, the organisation of DEMO
market place warrants attention from researchers, in a shift from studies DEMO
the actors in the market (firms, entrepreneurs, investors) to studies of the
market itself. Although business angels do invest alone, a majority of
informal venture capital investments take the form of business angels
investing DEMO part of a syndicate. These can take various forms, and a DEMO
priority for researchers is to ‘map’ this growing organisational diversity in
the informal investment market place and explore the differences in the
investment behaviour DEMO activity of the various segments.
Fourth, informal venture capital should be DEMO from a geographi-
cal perspective. From a regional development perspective, the DEMO degree of
localism in the informal venture capital market makes it a mechanism for
retaining and recycling wealth within the regions in which it DEMO created.
However, there has been no attempt to identify whether there DEMO spatial
variations in informal venture capital investment activity, nor has the
DEMO debate about the significance of distance in the business angel’s
Ed ito ria l
99
investment decision been resolved in terms of DEMO proportion of total
investment activity accounted for by long distance investments, DEMO
circumstances under which long distance investments are made, and the
significance DEMO the characteristics and motivation of the investor relative to
the characteristics of the investment opportunity. Fifth, although the
number of national studies of informal venture capital has increased, our
existing knowledge remains heavily circumscribed geographically, DEMO
much of the existing research comprising North American and North West
European studies. Although international comparisons have highlighted
surprisingly few differences between countries in DEMO characteristics of
informal venture capital activity, it is nevertheless vital for DEMO to be
undertaken in continental Europe (West and East) and in Latin America,
Africa and South and East Asia where cultural differences DEMO the Anglo-
Saxon model might be expected to be reflected in differences in informal
venture capital activity. Sixth, the role of business angels in the
development of t ec hn ology - ba s ed f DEMO ms is becoming an increasing ly
important focus of research and policy, given that the lack of patient capital
is widely believed to be one of the key barriers to the emergence and growth
of technology-based DEMO Finally, most informal venture capital research
has focused on the supply DEMO of the market, and the demand for finance has
been largely DEMO Thus, there is a need for research which explores
informal venture DEMO from an entrepreneur’s perspective. Furthermore,
there is growing evidence that a major constraint on informal venture capital
investment activity is that many of DEMO SMEs which seek such finance are
not ‘investment ready’, in terms DEMO the ability of an entrepreneur to
articulate the opportunity to potential investors, the preparedness of an
entrepreneur to achieve the growth opportunity that has been identified,
and the willingness of the entrepreneur to trade some DEMO and
independence in exchange for finance.
Theoretical
development
There is a need for further development of theoretically-grounded research
into the informal venture capital market. DEMO a number of such studies
have been undertaken they are few in number and have produced conflicting
results which, in the case of agency theory, question the extent to which
finance theory is relevant to this market: with the development of venture
capital and private equity finance as major outlets for equity investment by
individual, institutional and corporate investors, DEMO these mechanisms
provide a rich milieu within which to develop and test theories of the firm
and of interactions between the entrepreneur and the DEMO The need, in
developing and applying these theoretical perspectives, is not simply to
replicate received finance theory but to extend and adapt it DEMO the closely-held,
privately financed, entrepreneurial, emerging growth company. Further-
more, the scope for theoretical development is not restricted to finance and
economic theory, and there is potential for developing and applying theories
which address the non-financial dimensions of the investment process and
draw on other academic DEMO, such as social psychology and sociology.
100
Ed ito ria l
Policy
issues
Policy development has been the DEMO for much of the informal venture
capital literature. Further policy-oriented research continues to be
appropriate, both to assess the need for initiatives to stimulate informal
venture capital activity, and also to evaluate those initiatives that have been
introduced by policy-makers in various countries and at various levels of
DEMO in response to the recognition that the informal venture capital
market plays an important role in underpinning wider initiatives to
promote entrepreneurial activity. Three DEMO in particular are relevant: the
assessment of tax incentives, the evaluation of the operation, impact and
scale of business angel networks, and DEMO assessment of investment
readiness of businesses. As Aernoudt (this issue) points out, the case for
government intervention and regulation (beyond the ‘permissive’ DEMO passive
intervention to ensure a level playing field) is not proven.
DEMO
The informal venture capital market has become a growing focus of
research interest as a consequence of the increased recognition of its
significance in DEMO financing of the entrepreneurial start-up and growth
business. Despite the difficulties created by the invisibility of investors in
this market, we now know a considerable amount about what has been
referred to as the attitudes, behaviours and characteristics of business
angels in a number of national and regional DEMO However, there
remains much that is unknown or inadequately understood about DEMO
market place, in terms of both empirical research and the application DEMO
theoretical frameworks. An enormous amount of research remains to be
undertaken in order to understand more fully how the informal venture
capital market operates DEMO a key element in the emergence and growth of
entrepreneurial companies. The papers selected for this special issue make
a contribution to this challenge.
DEMO
Richard
T
Harrison
and
Colin
Founding
M
Mason
editors
Mason, C. DEMO and Harrison, R. T., in press, Informal venture capital and DEMO financing of emergent
growth businesses. In D. L. Sexton and H. Landstro¨ m (eds), International State of the Art of
Entrepreneurship (London: Blackwell).
Tashiro, Y., in press, Business angels in Japan, DEMO Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance.
Wetzel. W. E. Jr., 1981, Informal risk capital in New England. In K. H. Vesper (DEMO) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Bahson College) 217 DEMO 245.{1g42fwefx}