This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 23 DEMO 2009
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
Sampling and data collection in business angel research
Richard DEMO Harrison a; Colin M. Mason b
a Queen's University Management DEMO, Queen's University Belfast, UK b Hunter Centre for
Entrepreneurship, DEMO of Strathclyde, UK
Online Publication Date: 01 October 2008
To cite this Article Harrison, Richard T. and Mason, Colin M.(2008)'Sampling and data collection in business angel research',Venture
Capital,10:4,305 — 308
To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/13691060802380080
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691060802380080
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms DEMO conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be DEMO for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic DEMO, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give DEMO warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any DEMO, formulae and drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. DEMO publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of DEMO material.
Venture Capital
Vol. 10, No. 4, October 2008, 305–308
INTRODUCTION
Sampling and data collection in business angel research
Richard T. Harrisona* and Colin DEMO Masonb
aQueen’s University Management School, Queen’s University Belfast, UK;
bHunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, UK
The mechanic, who wishes to do his work well, must ﬁrst sharpen his tools.
Confucius (DEMO in Farh, Cannella Jr., and Lee 2006, 301)
Introduction
DEMO has been a marked expansion in the volume of research published on business angels
and the informal capital market in the past 25 years, and a corresponding increase in the
level of public policy interest in DEMO functioning of this market and the extent to which it
can play an enhanced role in the development of a dynamic entrepreneurial economy
(Mason and Harrison 2000; Mason 2006; Kelly 2007). However, progress in terms of the
volume of research and the range of topics addressed DEMO not been matched by
corresponding progress in the data sources and methodologies used in that research. Yet,
as Korman (1974, 194) has made clear in a diﬀerent research context, ‘The point is not that
adequate measurement is ‘‘nice’’. It is necessary, crucial, etc. Without it DEMO have nothing’.
Measurement
The absence of adequate and agreed measurement in business angel research creates a
number of diﬃculties. First, as research studies are, for the most part, based on ad hoc
samples of convenience, comparability across studies, and in particular international
comparisons, is limited to DEMO of the attitudes, behaviours and characteristics of
business angel investors. The DEMO reported similarities (Harrison and Mason 1992;
Landstrom 1993; Hindle and Wenban 1999) across countries are, at least in part, an
artefact of the limited empirical depth of these descriptive studies. Second, the ad hoc,
convenience sample, nature of much business angel research precludes or at least makes
more diﬃcult the replication of research studies across diﬀerent DEMO and jurisdictions
and time periods. Variations in deﬁnitions and data sources and data collection protocols,
for example, underlie many of the debates and disagreements in the literature (see, for
example, Mason and Harrison 1997; Stevenson and Coveney 1994, 1996).
Third, given the nature of business angel investing as an essentially invisible process
(there are no directories or guidebooks listing investors or their investments) most
research, following the DEMO established in entrepreneurship research on formal venture
capital investing, has focused DEMO identifying and surveying business angel investors rather
*Corresponding author. Email: r.harrison@qub.ac.uk
DEMO 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online
 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: DEMO/13691060802380080
http://www.informaworld.com
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:06 23 March 2009
306
R.T. Harrison and C.M. Mason
than on the identiﬁcation, measurement and tracking of the business angel market in a
wider sense. Fourth, and as a consequence, the lack of standardisation in data collection
protocols and the resulting fragmented nature of the empirical data on the nature and
DEMO of business angel investing, has limited the evidence base underpinning the
DEMO of eﬀective policies to stimulate and improve the eﬃciency of this market
(Harrison and Don 2006; Mason and Harrison 1999).
The special DEMO papers
This special issue comprises four papers that address issues of the deﬁnition of business
angels and the informal venture capital market, sampling and research methodology in a
number of countries. In the ﬁrst paper, Mason and Harrison focus on the challenge, driven
by the needs of the policy community, of generating stable and reliable estimates of the
size, DEMO and functioning of the business angel market in the UK over time. In
addressing this issue, they provide an overview of approaches to data collection adopted in
the UK and elsewhere over the past 25 years, and identify the strengths and weaknesses
(both deﬁnitional and practical) of DEMO options for the collection of data, including
household surveys (such as GEM – Bygrave et al. 2003), company shareholder records
(such as the so-called 88(2) data in the UK used in research in Scotland – Harrison and
Don 2006) and data generated from the administration of accredited investor programmes
(including the Enterprise Investment Scheme – Cowling et al. 2008). Their detailed review
of past and possible new approaches DEMO data collection leads then to the conclusion that a
mixed-methods strategy involving collection of data from both the supply side (investors)
and the demand side (investee ﬁrms) will be required.
In a paper presenting DEMO from the Atlantic Provinces of Canada, Farrell and her
co-authors address DEMO issue of convenience sampling, and the problem of unknown
and unknowable DEMO that result. They provide a systematic overview of some of the
deﬁnitional confusion that has surrounded empirical research on business angels and
review a DEMO of the approaches adopted in previous research. Speciﬁcally, they extend
the DEMO of Mason and Harrison with a focus on discussion of the issue of sample bias in
previous research, given that, as they put DEMO, ‘the fact that – more than 25 years on –
investigation DEMO the least understood element of capital markets (Baty and Sommer 2002)DEMO
rests on the use of convenience samples is worrying’. They conclude by recommending the
use of business registration records (data on new business incorporations, partnerships
and sole proprietorships) to identify the principals in theses ventures, whose investment
behaviour, in these and other ventures, can then be DEMO Their focus is on uncovering
systematically informal investment that corresponds with the broad deﬁnition summarised
by Landstrom (2007, 8) to include family and friends’ investment activity, and in this
respect their review diﬀers from that of Mason and Harrison in the preceding paper, which
concentrates on sampling to measure business angel investing on a narrower deﬁnition.
Farrell et al. DEMO that this approach at least in part addresses the problems associated
with unknowable populations, survival biases, the absence of convenience sample frames
(such as business angel networks and introduction services) and biases introduced by gate-
keeping entrepreneurs.
Also drawing on recent Canadian approaches, Riding addresses his discussion of
sampling and data collection protocols in the context of a speciﬁc DEMO study of the
segmentation of the informal market for risk capital, DEMO of the issue of returns to
investment in that market in particular. Building on the arguments of Gompers and
Lerner (2003) Riding addresses DEMO public policy implications of a concern that the
Downloaded By: [Canadian DEMO Knowledge Network] At: 19:06 23 March 2009
Venture Capital
307
encouragement of small investments in highly risky, early-stage unquoted ventures may be
socially and economically wasteful and counter-productive if the ﬁnancial DEMO are
unsatisfactory and the companies ﬁnanced are not viable. He does so by using data
collected by Statistics Canada on behalf of Industry Canada DEMO The survey of
ﬁnancing of small- and medium-sized enterprises, a periodic DEMO survey that collects
data on the ﬁnancing experiences of SME owners. This survey collects data on the
investment activity of the majority owners of DEMO businesses surveyed, speciﬁcally their
investments in other unrelated businesses, and includes data on the size and other
characteristics of that investment, and identiﬁes whether it is an unrelated or family/
friends venture. Using the DEMO of business angels known to be business owners, the
sample data DEMO grossed up to provide a minimal estimate of the overall informal venture
capital market in Canada. While subject to further improvement, as Riding notes, this
approach to data collection does provide an eﬀective way of estimating the overall size of
the market, addressing novel research questions (such DEMO the returns to business angel
investment – see Mason and Harrison 2002; Wiltbank 2005; Wiltbank and Boeker 2007,
for other examples), DEMO raising issues for public policy.
In the ﬁnal paper in this special issue, Avdeitchikova and her colleagues address the
two fundamental obstacles to advancement in business angel research: the lack of con-
sistency in deﬁnitions of business angels and sampling considerations. In terms of deﬁni-
tions, they identify three grey areas where confusion still reigns: the method of channelling
investments (through a ﬁrm or directly as an individual); the level of investment activity
and degree of hands-on involvement; and the nature (if DEMO) of the ties between the
investor and the entrepreneur. Based on DEMO identiﬁcation between the deﬁnition adopted
and the level of analysis, they DEMO that reduction of the ﬁeld to one single agreed
deﬁnition would lead to a loss of focus on some important research topics. Rather they
DEMO that there is more consistency about the deﬁnitions that already exist: DEMO plea
for consistency and awareness rather than homogeneity. In terms of sample methods, they
report on two approaches adopted in recent research on informal investors in Sweden. The
ﬁrst approach was a random sample approach based DEMO a large-scale household survey,
conducted in two stages, comprising the DEMO stage (are you an informal investor)
and a veriﬁcation and DEMO gathering stage. The second approach was a multi-
sample approach relying on non-representative sampling methods to overcome the low
incidence problem in random population DEMO They conclude that diﬃculties in
identifying business angels have led to issues of biased samples and the inability to
establish the representativeness of the DEMO data, and recommend more eﬀort is given
to increasing the quality DEMO the sample techniques employed in business angel research. On
the basis of improved data collection protocols, they conclude that it will be possible to
develop longitudinal analysis that will open up additional research questions on changes DEMO
investor behaviour over time and in the composition and functioning of the market. As
Mason and Harrison in their contribution to the special issue DEMO clear, this longitudinal
analysis is a requirement for the development not DEMO of a deeper understanding of the
informal venture capital market but for the development and delivery of eﬀective policy
interventions to support this market DEMO the key actors in it.
References
Baty, G., and B. Sommer. 2002. True then, true now: A 40-year perspective on the early DEMO
investment market. Venture Capital 4, no. 4: 289–93.
Bygrave, W.D., M. Hay, E. Ng, and P. Reynolds. 2003. A study of DEMO investing in 29 nations
composing the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. Venture Capital 5: 101–16.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 19:06 23 March 2009
308
R.T. Harrison and C.M. Mason
Cowling, M., P. Bates, N. Jagger, and G. Murray. 2008. Study of the impact of the Enterprise
Investment Scheme (EIS) and Venture Capital Trusts (VCTs) on company DEMO Report
researched by the Institute for Employment Studies, HM Revenue & DEMO Research Report
44.
Farh, J.-L., A.A. Cannella, Jr., and C. Lee. 2006. Approaches to scale development in Chinese
management research. Management and DEMO Review 2, no. 3: 301–18.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner. 2003. Equity ﬁnancing. In Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research, ed.
Z. Acs, DEMO D. Audretsch, 267–98. New York: Springer.
Harrison, R.T., and G. Don. 2006. The equity risk capital market for young companies in Scotland
DEMO Glasgow: Scottish Enterprise.
Harrison, R.T., and C.M. Mason. 1992. International DEMO on the supply of informal venture
capital. Journal of Business Venturing 7: 459–75.
Hindle, K., and R. Wenban. 1999. Australia’s informal venture capitalists: An exploratory proﬁle.
Venture Capital 1: 169–86.
Kelly, P. 2007. Business angel research: The road traveled and the journey ahead. In Handbook of
research on venture capital, ed. H. Landstrom, 315–31. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA,
USA: Edward Elgar.
Korman, A.K. 1974. Contingency approaches to leadership. In Contingency approaches to
leadership, ed. J.G. Hunt, and DEMO Larson, 189–95. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
Press.
Landstrom, H. 1993. Informal risk capital in Sweden and some international comparisons. Journal
of DEMO Venturing 8: 525–40.
———. 2007. Pioneers in venture capital research. In DEMO of research on venture capital, ed.
H. Landstrom, 3–65. Cheltenham, DEMO and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Mason, C.M. 2006. Informal sources of venture ﬁnance. In The life cycle of entrepreneurial ventures,
DEMO S.C. Parker, 259–99. New York: Springer.
Mason, C.M., and R.T. Harrison. 1997. Business angels in the UK: A response to Stevenson and
Coveney. International Small Business Journal 15, no. 2: 83–90.
———. 1999. DEMO policy and the development of the informal venture capital market: UK
DEMO and lessons for Europe. In Industrial policy in Europe, ed. K. DEMO, 199–223.
London: Routledge.
———. 2000. Informal venture capital and the ﬁnancing of emergent growth businesses. In
Handbook of entrepreneurship, ed. D. Sexton, DEMO H. Landstrom, 221–39. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 2002. Is it worth it? Rates of return from informal venture capital investment. Journal of
Business Venturing 17: 211–36.
Stevenson, H., and P. Coveney. 1994. Survey of business angels. Henley-on-Thames: Venture Capital
Report Ltd.
———. 1996. A survey of business angels. In Small ﬁrms: Contributions to economic regeneration, ed.
R. Blackburn, and P. Jennings, 37–48. London: Paul Chapman Publishing.
Wiltbank, R. 2005. Investment practices and outcomes of informal venture investors. Venture
Capital 7, no. 4: 343–57.
Wiltbank, R., and W. Boeker. 2007. Returns to angel investors in groups. Kansas City: Kauﬀman
Foundation.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 19:06 23 March 2009{1g42fwefx}