Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
Vol. 27, Nos.9–10, 527–554,
, 2015
DEMO://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08985626.2015.1066875
Heuristics, learning and the business angel investment
DEMO process
a
b
c
Richard T. Harrison *, Colin Mason
and DEMO Smith
a
b
University of Edinburgh Business School, Edinburgh, EH8 9JS, UK;
Adam Smith Business School,
c
University of Glasgow, DEMO G12 8QQ, UK;
Discovery Investment Fund, Dundee, UK
(Received 17 May 2012; accepted 24 June 2015)
This paper extends the literature on the investment decision-making of business
angels. Using insights from the DEMO body of research on entrepreneurial
learning processes, particularly the use of DEMO and the nature of learning
from meagre experience, we explore whether DEMO learn from experience, how
they learn and what they learn. These DEMO are addressed using verbal protocol
analysis, a methodology for examining decision-making DEMO real time, with three
groups of business angels with differing levels DEMO investment experience, and
with follow-up debrieﬁng interviews with these angels. This DEMO some
differences in the speed of decision-making and the emphasis given to various
investment criteria. There is some evidence for the use of heuristics DEMO the
decision-making process, and for the critical role played by vicarious DEMO
from the experience of others. Learning in the individual angel decision-making
process is a social as well as an individual phenomenon.
Keywords: business angels; investment decisions; experiential learning;
vicarious learning; heuristics; verbal protocol DEMO
1. Introduction
Business angels – high net worth individuals who invest their own money, along with their
time and expertise, directly in unquoted DEMO in which they have no family
connection, in the hope of DEMO gain (Mason 2006, 261) – play a signiﬁcant role in DEMO
ﬁnancing of entrepreneurial businesses (Harrison et al. 2010). Understanding how DEMO
make their investment decisions is therefore not only an important research question but
also has practical signiﬁcance for both entrepreneurs and their advisers by DEMO
investment readiness (Mason and Kwok 2010) and business angel training (DEMO Jose´,
Roure, and Aernoudt, 2005). In this paper we have three objectives. First, we address the
following questions. Do angel investors learn from the experience of investing? If so, how
do they DEMO, and how does this learning inﬂuence their approach to investing? Second,
we discuss the extent to which angels, whether experienced or novice, use heuristics, that
is, the decision rules used to reduce complex judgemental tasks to relatively simple
cognitive operations (Holcomb et al. 2009), as the basis for both experiential learning and
vicarious learning from observing DEMO modelling the experience of others (Bandura 1962,
1986; Manz and Sims 1981). Third, we ask how investors without prior investment
experience learn. Many angels make only a small number of investments (Mason and
Harrison 1996, 2002; Harrison and Mason 1992) and this may not be sufﬁcient to derive
*Corresponding author. Email: r.harrison@ed.ac.uk
q
2015 Taylor & Francis
5282
R.T. Harrison et al.
the necessary experience to improve their investment DEMO Reﬂecting on March et al.’s
(1991/1996) analysis of learning from samples of less than one we explore how
inexperienced angels learn from DEMO and convert infrequent events into
interpretations that form the basis of interpreting subsequent knowledge-shaping
experiences. Given that there is some evidence that heuristically based DEMO
by experts is ‘better’ than that by novices (Farsi et al. DEMO), evidence on these issues has
the potential to make a valuable contribution to angel education.
The prior literature on how business angels make DEMO investment decisions comprises
two types of study (Mason 2006; Riding et al. 2007). Process studies identify a number of
discrete stages in DEMO investment decision-making process (Fried and Hisrich 1994; Riding
et al. 1993; Haines et al. 2003). Criteria studies examine the factors angels use to evaluate
investment opportunities, either as a generalized retrospective view of angels’ investment
criteria from survey data (Mason and Harrison 2002; Feeney et DEMO 1999; Mittness et al.
2012a, 2012b), or through case studies of how individual investors or speciﬁc angel groups
make their investment decisions (Mason and Harrison 1996; Roach 2010; Gregson, Mann,
and Harrison 2013).
A major gap in this literature on angel investing and DEMO is evidence on
learning from experience, although there is some evidence DEMO this for entrepreneurs
(Parker 2006; Cassar and Craig 2009; Fern, Cardinal, and O’Neill 2012) and venture
capital investors (De Clercq and Sapienza 2005). Less experienced venture capital
investors do learn from interaction DEMO their portfolio companies (Spender and Grant
1996; Yli-Renko et al. 2001). Indeed, VCs both learn from past investments (prior
experience), DEMO exploitative behaviour by changing their investments in
response to the outcomes of past investments, and anticipate learning from future ones,
exhibiting explorative behaviour by directing investment towards new investment
opportunities (Sorensen 2007, 39; Bergemann and Hege 1998, 2005; Goldfarb et al. 2007).
This research DEMO that there are several dimensions of experience that may have
an impact on angels’ investment decision-making process, including entrepreneurial
experience, industry speciﬁc experience DEMO broader management experience (Van
Osnabrugge 1998; Sørheim and Landstro¨m 2001, DEMO et al. 2008). While
learning can take place from all types of experience, and prior research has demonstrated
that entrepreneurial experience in particular is associated with participation in angel
investing (Harrison and Mason 1992; DEMO et al. 1999; Politis and Landstro¨m 2002;
Politis 2005), DEMO is not associated with more effective (in outcome terms) decision-
making as investors, nor is this or prior industry experience more generally a good
predictor of the sectoral pattern of subsequent investment activity (Mason and Harrison
2002). Further, entrepreneurial experience itself is static and while it may predispose
investors, and shape their initial approach, to angel investing, it does not contribute to the
dynamics of the learning process.
In DEMO paper therefore we build on the prior research on learning in venture capital
investing and concentrate on the hitherto neglected study of the extent DEMO which business
angels learn speciﬁcally from the experience of making investments itself. Although there
has been some general recognition that angels’ investment behaviour may DEMO as
they make more investments (Freear et al. 1994; Van Osnabrugge 1998;So¨ rheim and
Landstro¨m 2001; Paul et al. 2003), most previous studies, by neglecting speciﬁc
consideration of the issue, implicitly assume DEMO investors know what they are doing and
that their approach to investing does not change with investment experience (Mason and
Harrison 2002; Mason DEMO). As such, our focus is not on the role and DEMO of learning
from prior experience (entrepreneurial, industrial, managerial) but speciﬁcally on the
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
5293
nature of learning from the investment process DEMO as an interaction between the angel
investor and the entrepreneur and with other angel investors (Maxwell and Levesque 2014;
Maxwell et al. 2011). In this we follow the focus of Aldrich and Yang (2014, 59) who
argue, in the entrepreneur/new venture context, that
DEMO viable and proﬁtable ventures depends not only on the habits, heuristics, and routines
that nascent entrepreneurs have acquired from family, schools, and DEMO careers prior to the
startup stage, but also on what they DEMO learn by doing, borrowing, and experimenting during
the startup process.
Accordingly, the contribution of our research is to position angel investment decision-
making research in the tradition of experiential learning research that views experience as
DEMO foundation of and stimulus of learning, sees learners as actively constructing DEMO own
experience, and views learning as a holistic process which is DEMO and culturally
constituted, inﬂuenced by the socioemotional context within which it DEMO (Boud, Cohen,
and Walker 2000, 8 – 16). DEMO, given that angel investing is characterized as a
decision-making situation of DEMO and time limitation, we expect to see investors
make use of DEMO – subjective and informal rule of thumb or intuitive guidelines that
yield quick and usually acceptable solutions to problems (Busenitz and Barney 1997)–in
their decision-making. Research on heuristics and entrepreneurial decision-making has
been relatively sparse (Shepherd, Williams, and Patzelt 2015, 30), with a small number of
exceptions of studies on heuristics and new opportunity recognition, entrepreneurial
learning and innovation (Alvarez and Busenitz 2001; Holcomb et al. 2009; Manimala 1992;
Shepherd, Haynie, and McMullen 2012). As a ﬁrst DEMO to addressing the lack of
research on the relationship between investment experience and subsequent investment
decision-making we therefore apply insights from the entrepreneurial learning DEMO
heuristics literatures to explore the process of learning in angel investing.
Methodologically, this focus on heuristics and learning from experience poses a
challenge. Both process and criteria studies of angel investment decision-making have
adopted a wide DEMO of research designs and methods. Of most relevance to the research
reported here are real time studies, which have emerged in response to the weaknesses in
the generalized retrospective approach. For example, Mason and Rogers (DEMO) and
Harrison et al. (1997) have used verbal protocol analysis DEMO ask respondents to ‘think out
loud’ as they perform a task, DEMO this case undertaking the initial screening of an investment
opportunity. Mason and Stark (2004) have used verbal protocol analysis (VPA) to
compare DEMO investment decision-making processes and investment criteria of business
angels with those of bankers and venture capital fund managers. A variant on these verbal
protocol DEMO are studies which have examined the real time reactions of investors to
oral presentations by entrepreneurs (Mason and Harrison 2003; Clark 2008). DEMO have
used conjoint analysis to study factors that inﬂuence investment decisions, DEMO
respondents to make a series of trade-offs (e.g. Muzyka et al. DEMO; Landstro¨m 1998;
Ludvigsen 2009). More recently, Maxwell and Levesque (2014) have used observational
interaction methods to record, code and analyse behaviours during actual business angel –
entrepreneur interactions (Maxwell, Jeffrey, and Levesque 2011). What all of these real-
time methods offer is DEMO counter to prior studies that rely on investor recollections of the
decision process, a process they may not be aware of (Zacharakis and DEMO 1998) and are
subject to the constraints of collecting retrospective data DEMO the decision process is
complete rather than while it is in progress (Wiltbank et al. 2009). We contribute to this
literature by demonstrating the applicability of VPA to the analysis of decision-making in
entrepreneurial contexts.
5304
R.T. Harrison et al.
The structure of the paper is as DEMO In Section 2, we summarize the literature on
how angels evaluate DEMO opportunities. This is followed by a discussion of the
potential role of decision-making heuristics and learning from experience in this process.
In Section 4, we describe the verbal protocol analysis research design and describe the
research DEMO and data collection and analysis protocols. Section 5 summarizes our
ﬁndings and Section 6 discusses the implications of these for the further study of DEMO
angel decision-making. This paper concludes with a discussion of the implications of this
study for business angel decision-making research and for research into other DEMO of
entrepreneurial decision-making research.
2. How business angels evaluate investment opportunities
Business angel investing is a multistage decision-making process of interaction between
investors and DEMO under conditions of risk (Maxwell et al. 2011). For Fiet (1995)
investment risk has two identiﬁable components: market risk, extended DEMO a wider
construct of performance risk by Das and Teng (1998); and agency risk, recast as
relationship risk by Maxwell and Levesque (2014). Performance risk relates to the
possibility that external or operational DEMO (for example, market changes, competitor
behaviour, implementation failures, technology DEMO) may compromise achievement of
a venture’s declared objectives. Agency or relationship DEMO reﬂects the possibility that the
entrepreneur may not achieve the same outcomes when spending the investor’s money
(through poorer decision-making) than would the DEMO, reﬂecting both moral hazard
(a divergence of interests between the two parties) and adverse selection (suboptimal
decision-making based on information asymmetries) (DEMO and Levesque 2014).
The assessment of risk and the wider decision-making processes of business angels
differ from those of institutional venture capitalists (Fiet 1995; Harrison and Mason 2002).
When business angels initially become aware of an investment opportunity their ﬁrst
question is to consider how well DEMO ‘ﬁts’ with their own personal investment criteria, an
anchoring decision (Tversky and Kahneman 1973, 1974). This may include location,
amount sought, knowledge of and interest in the sector and ability to add value. Angels
then undertake a quick review of those opportunities which fall within DEMO personal
investment criteria. Their aim at this point in the decision-making process is simply to
assess whether the proposal has sufﬁcient merit to justify DEMO investment of time to
undertake a detailed assessment, based on the DEMO of a representativeness heuristic
(Tversky and Kahneman 1974). Angels approach DEMO stage with a negative mindset,
expecting that the opportunity will be poor (because of the opportunities that they have
previously seen) and DEMO for reasons to reject it. The rejection of opportunities is
generally based on several factors rather than a single deal killer (Mason and Harrison
1996), although there is recent research evidence to suggest that investors DEMO identify a
‘fatal ﬂaw’ that precludes further consideration of an opportunity (DEMO et al. 2011).
The market (route to market, market potential, customer engagement) and the entrepreneur
(relevant experience) are the key DEMO at this stage, along with product/service
(product status, protectability) and ﬁnancial factors. However, while concerned with the
fundamental ﬁnancial model, DEMO exhibit considerable scepticism about the value of
much of the detailed ﬁnancial information in the business plan of start-ups. Nevertheless,
investors want to DEMO that there is the potential for signiﬁcant ﬁnancial return, that the
DEMO are ﬁnancially committed and what the money that is invested will be used for.
Some angels will be ﬂexible, willing to treat these criteria as compensatory (e.g. a strong
management team would compensate for a distant location), whereas others will regard
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
5315
them as non-compensatory (Feeney et al. 1999). What is not clear from this previous
research is the extent DEMO which all potential investors share this view: in the absence of DEMO
investment experience it may be that inexperienced business angels may place more
attention on tangible assessment criteria such as ﬁnancial considerations.
The purpose of DEMO initial screen is to ﬁlter out ‘no hopers’ in order to focus their time
on those opportunities that appear to have potential. These are DEMO to more detailed
appraisal. The investor will read the business plan in detail, go over the ﬁnancial
information, visit the premises, do some personal research to gather additional information
on market potential, competition and so on, and, critically, meet the principals. Indeed,
getting to know the principals personally (by a series of formal and informal meetings) DEMO
the most vital part of the process (May and Simmons 2001)DEMO This stage has received little
attention from researchers. However, it would DEMO that most angels emphasize their
intuition and gut feeling rather than performing formal analysis (Haines et al. 2003).
At this detailed evaluation stage the importance of people factors becomes critical (Riding
et al. 1995), with investors emphasising management abilities, an understanding of what is
required to be successful, a strong work ethic, integrity, honesty, openness and DEMO
chemistry (Haines et al. 2003). Indeed, angels give greater emphasis to these issues at
the initial screening stage than venture capital fund DEMO (Mason and Stark 2004).
This emphasis on the people reﬂects DEMO long and personal nature of the angel –
entrepreneur relationship. Rewards, DEMO of the projections and potential also assume
greater importance while ‘investor ﬁt’ becomes less of a consideration later in the
investment process (Riding et al. 1995).
Angels typically reject most of the opportunities that they DEMO In their Canadian study,
for example, Riding et al. (1993) found that 72.6% of opportunities were rejected at the
initial impressions stage, a further 15.9% were rejected following more detailed
evaluation, and as DEMO stage proceeds another 6.3% were eliminated, a cumulative
rejection rate of DEMO Thus, business angels proceeded to the negotiation stage with only
5% DEMO the investment opportunities that they receive, and conﬁrms that angel investors DEMO
in a position of having to learn more from the process of not investing than from
investment per se. However, the literature on angel decision-making is still largely
predicated on the assumption that entrepreneurial experience is DEMO surrogate for investment
experience and capability. Speciﬁcally, there is no discussion DEMO this literature of the
nature and extent of learning from experience (DEMO as entrepreneur or investor),
notwithstanding growing interest in entrepreneurship more DEMO in experiential
learning. This draws variously on Piaget’s (1970) genetic epistemology view that
knowledge depends on experience and Dewey’s (1938) pragmatism and DEMO emphasis on
learning as embedded in social practice (McHenry 2008), DEMO on Kolb’s (1984)
experiential learning theory with its emphasis on DEMO dual dialectics of action/reﬂection
and experience/reﬂection (Gemmell and Kolb DEMO; Corbett 2005; Politis 2005). In the
remainder of this paper we develop a more nuanced account of the process of learning
from DEMO investment process itself through the application of decision-making heuristics,
and in so doing contribute to the entrepreneurial ﬁnance literature.
3. Heuristics and entrepreneurial DEMO
All learning is learning from experience (Dewey 1938; Chickering 1977; DEMO 2004),
taking place in the ‘lifeworld of everyday contexts’ (Usher and Soloman 1999, 161; Brah
and Hoy 1989). Entrepreneurial action DEMO predicated on learning (Harrison and Leitch
2005, 2008; Wang and DEMO 2014), through the accumulation, assimilation and use of
5326
R.T. Harrison et al.
experiential entrepreneurial knowledge (Politis 2005; Cope DEMO; Wang 2008; Levesque
et al. 2009), in which learning asymmetries offer opportunity exploitation advantages
(Corbett 2005; Rae and Carswell 2001), DEMO of this research is based, directly or
indirectly, on adaptations of Kolb’s (1984) experiential learning theory, a cyclical process
of learning from experience through reﬂection and conceptualisation to action and on to
further experience (Kayes 2002; Moon 2004, 104 – 130). It has been DEMO that there is a
need for greater research into the process dynamics of learning in entrepreneurial contexts,
recognising that such learning is experiential (itself a process based on reﬂection – Boyd
and Fales 1983; Boud, Keogh, and Walker 1985; Mezirow 1990), that learning is a process
that alters permanently the character of behaviour, that learning is an individual process
(even if it occurs in a social or organisational context – Dutta and Crossan 2005), and that
learning is organized by DEMO routines, rules and practices (Harrison and Leitch 2005,
364). Furthermore, ‘there is a distinction between the knowledge stock of an
entrepreneurial venture (or entrepreneur) and the process through which that knowledge
has DEMO created. Further research is needed on this important relationship’ (Harrison and
DEMO 2005, 364).
In this paper we respond to this challenge DEMO examining the extent to which learning is
experiential, embedded in heuristics DEMO a residual outcome of learning and linked to
potential changes in behaviour. Much of the previous research has presumed that decision-
making is based DEMO the identiﬁcation, weighting and scoring of attributes or on reaction to
DEMO and experiences in a comprehensive process model of learning. However, in
DEMO, learning does not always follow completely such processes, and decision makers
rely instead on shortcut decision-making heuristics to deal with conditions of Knightian
DEMO and ambiguity (Busenitz and Barney 1997; Schade and Koellinger 2007).
Investment decision-making can be seen as a case example of a process DEMO making informed
choices based on an analysis of the demands of the environment and the costs and beneﬁts
associated with different choices and behaviours (Li et al. 2009), and there is growing
evidence on the DEMO use of heuristics to simplify the decision-making process
(Busenitz 1999) given information overload on the investors (Zacharakis and Meyer 2000;
Zacharakis and Shepherd 2001), even if the results are not systematic, are occasionally
inconsistent and rarely subject to in-depth discussion (Cueto and Zhang 2013).
The choice of the best option or action (in this case investment) involves dealing with
information that is inherently uncertain, and is so DEMO all stages of the decision process, from
robustly assessing the current DEMO of affairs given noisy sensory signals (Li et al. 2009,
DEMO) to determining the risks and rewards associated with a particular decision (Platt and
Heutel 2008; Rushworth and Behrens 2008; Schultz et al. DEMO; Yu and Dayan 2005).
There is now signiﬁcant evidence from DEMO that the brain meets this challenge
by taking into account and learning from knowledge derived from prior experience (Daw
and Doya 2006; Sutton DEMO Barto 1998; Juliusson et al. 2005). We build on this DEMO in
an exploratory study of the investment decision-making process of a sample of business
angel investors with different levels of investment experience. In so DEMO, we add to the
literature by examining speciﬁcally the case of DEMO from experience when there is no
(or little) relevant or appropriate experience to learn from, which is the position of an angel
investor undertaking their ﬁrst investment. As there are still no comprehensive theoretical
frameworks DEMO explain how entrepreneurial actors learn (Cope 2003, 2005), we ground our
analysis in two sets of insights: the role of heuristics in learning (Holcomb et al. 2009) and
the process of learning from DEMO when there is little experience to learn from
(March, Sproull, DEMO Tamuz 1991). As entrepreneurial learning, in the novice angel
investing DEMO as in that of nascent entrepreneurship, begins with a blank slate DEMO the
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
5337
absence of routines, the dynamic of entrepreneurial learning can be seen as the emergence
of routines (Aldrich and Yang 2014; Rerup and Feldman 2011; Becker and Lazaric 2009).
Developing DEMO, whether understood as mental shortcuts in the face of uncertainty
(Busenitz and Barney 1997) or an adaptive decision process (Todd, Gigerenzer, DEMO Group
2012; Gigerenzer and Selten 2001), is part of the DEMO learning process: heuristics
‘affect when and how entrepreneurs [and investors] learn DEMO apply routines throughout
their life course’ (Aldrich and Yang 2014, 63).
This connection between learning and heuristics distinguishes between experiential
learning from DEMO and the accumulation and storing of that learning as knowledge,
on the one hand, and vicarious learning by observing others’ behaviours and its
consequences and the assimilation of this information and using it as the DEMO for action
(Holcomb et al. 2009). Building on this distinction, Holcomb et al. (2009) identify three
heuristics that inﬂuence learning (Tversky and Kahneman 1973, 1974), given that both
experiential and vicarious learning are associated with the acquisition of incomplete or
ambiguous information. The distinctions DEMO these three classes of heuristic are well-
established both in the theoretical literature on the representation of judgements and the
processes by which they DEMO and in the empirical testing of these frameworks (Kahneman
et al. DEMO; Gilovich et al. 2002). They provide a parsimonious account of DEMO the
processes through which people make important and difﬁcult real world judgements (the
‘positive’ agenda) and the conditions under which everyday judgements are DEMO to be
biased (the ‘negative’ agenda). Furthermore, these heuristics represent the basis for rapid,
automatic assessments in both everyday decision situations DEMO those requiring a high
level of domain speciﬁc expertise, such as DEMO angel investment decision process, that may
or may not be overridden DEMO deliberate judgements (Gilovich et al. 2002, 4 – 5; Dawes
DEMO al. 2002; De Bondt and Thaler 2002; Fischhoff 2002; Henrion DEMO Fischhoff 2002;
Koehler et al. 2002; Tetlock 2002).
First, the availability heuristic refers to the extent to which there are traces DEMO event
instances (e.g. new venture creation or angel investing) in memory and the ease with
which certain associations come to mind. The extent DEMO which memory contains traces
of events is relevant here: the more DEMO these are, the more likely enactment of
similar behaviour will be. DEMO the case of angel investing, we would expect that the greater
DEMO experience of investing (and therefore the greater availability of event instances
DEMO memory) the more conﬁdent angel investors will be in appraising investment
DEMO Second, the representativeness heuristic refers to the tendency to identify
the DEMO or most signiﬁcant feature of a category of events and apply it to all examples of
that category, such as the set of factors associated with success in venture capital investing,
hence improving decision-making effectiveness (Zacharakis and Shepherd 2001). The
greater the experience of the angel DEMO, therefore, in our context, the greater their
ability to make DEMO screening judgements. As Cueto and Zhang (2013) demonstrate,
venture capital investors place high importance on both an availability heuristic (the
availability of past information to shape decisions on resources and investments) and a
representativeness heuristic (by comparison of a decision situation with previous ventures
looked at or invested in). Third, the anchoring and adjustment heuristic suggests that in
making a decision, individuals settle on an anchor value, based DEMO prior experience, partial
analysis or by intuitive judgement, and progressively adjust this in the light of experience.
While largely outside the scope of DEMO present paper (as this heuristic is most likely to
apply in DEMO about, for example, the valuation of a prospective investment and the
proportion of equity to be taken, rather than at the initial screening stage) this heuristic
suggests that in making such decisions the investor’s anchor values will have an important
5348
R.T. Harrison et al.
bearing on the outcome. As Gilovich and DEMO (2002, 3) point out, each heuristic is
associated with a distinct basic computation the mind has to make in forming judgements:
DEMO availability heuristic piggybacks on memory retrieval processes, the representative-
ness heuristic DEMO on automatic pattern-matching processes, and the anchoring and
adjustment heuristic relies DEMO the establishment of a salient value to work from (Chapman
and DEMO 2002; Epley and Gilovich 2002). Indeed, they point out that in judgement
situations where the availability and representativeness heuristics may be applicable DEMO is
often possible for decision makers to alternatively use the anchoring and adjustment
heuristic. While we focus on availability and representativeness in the analysis DEMO
follows, we do so on the basis that these reﬂect the DEMO situation we study and not
because they are in any way ‘privileged’ over anchoring and adjustment.
If we accept the neuroeconomics emphasis on the DEMO of learning as routinized
knowledge derived from prior experience (Daw and DEMO 2006; Sutton and Barto 1998;
Juliusson et al. 2005), DEMO represent a residual outcome of learning, the hard-wiring
of experiential learning DEMO more effective decision-making than offered by consciously
engaged in reﬂection and decision-making in each encountered decision situation (Pinker
1994; Nicholson 1998). In DEMO analysis that follows, therefore, we will refer to the
distinction between experiential and vicarious learning and the role of the availability and
representativeness DEMO in inﬂuencing the observed learning processes of a sample of
business angel investors of different degrees of experience. In particular, given that
heuristics represent the outcome of prior (experiential) learning we will also point to DEMO
importance of vicarious learning as a learning process, recognising that recent DEMO in
cognitive science suggests that not all learning is hard-wired (Sparks DEMO) and that there
is therefore still scope to examine the extent DEMO which learning is an on-going social
process. As such, vicarious learning DEMO the present context can be seen as the underpinning
for the operation of heuristics in the learning process. March et al. (1991) have DEMO
two mechanisms by which meagre experiences (or none at all) can be converted into
interpretations of history, or perhaps better, histories (i.e. learning). First, history can be
experienced more richly: rather than DEMO a historical event (in our context, an
investment or an investment presentation or pitch) that history can be experienced in
multiple aspects, DEMO focusing on critical events and by experiencing more interpretations
of that event (emphasising the social as well as individual aspect of the learning process).
Second, individuals and organisations can simulate history, either by conceptualising
DEMO (what might have happened if circumstances were a little different) or by
developing hypothetical histories (heuristics and simulations) that may have interpretative
DEMO greater than the history actually experienced.
In the remainder of this paper we extend the literature on investment decision-making
by business angels by incorporating DEMO heuristics and learning perspective to explore in an
investigative/descriptive manner whether business angels learn from experience, their use
of heuristics in the decision-making process, how they learn and how this learning is
reﬂected in their approach to investing. We do so, ﬁrst, by comparing how three DEMO of
investors with differing levels of investment experience approach the initial appraisal of
investment opportunities, and second, by asking investors to reﬂect on DEMO learning.
4. Methodology
4.1
Verbal protocol analysis
We use VPA, a DEMO which involves respondents ‘thinking out loud’ as they perform
a particular task. The reliance on verbal data to develop insights about thinking
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
5359
and learning is based on the rich DEMO from respondents’ spoken thoughts, collected
concurrently rather than retrospectively, associated with completion of a task. This
verbalisation of thoughts requires that individuals must DEMO aware of those thoughts and that
they must be amenable to language. In other words, VPA can throw light on thinking and
learning processes that are consciously available, activated in short-term memory and that
can be encoded verbally (Long and Bourg 1996). A major advantage of verbal protocol
data is that they provide the richest information on the contents DEMO working memory during
task completion (Crutcher 1994; Payne 1994; Wilson DEMO). Indeed, verbal protocol
reports do appear to have a number DEMO additional advantages (Afﬂerbach and Johnston
1984). First, their validity relies on a different set of assumptions from those of most other
methods DEMO investigating cognitive processes, which gives them a valuable role in the
DEMO of converging data complementary to those used in other studies. Second, DEMO
under certain circumstances, they provide direct veridical descriptions of cognitive
processes DEMO otherwise could only be investigated indirectly. Third, they provide
access to DEMO reasoning processes underlying higher level cognitive and decision-making
activity. Finally, they DEMO an analysis of the affective components of decision processes.
Given this, DEMO protocols have been used extensively in the study of expert versus
novice task performance across a number of domains: this research has demonstrated that
experts have both more knowledge and more organized knowledge structures within their
DEMO domains than do novices, and that experts are more likely to DEMO, anticipate,
plan ahead and reason accordingly in the face of DEMO ever-changing circumstances
associated with many problems (Bourg 2002). A further DEMO of VPA is that it
provides sequential observations over time, revealing DEMO in working memory over
the process of task completion, of particular DEMO in the study of problem solving for
multiple-step problems (as in DEMO investment decision-making process), the analysis
(as here) of novice versus expert task performance and in studies of conceptual change.
There are some DEMO of verbal protocol data, notwithstanding early contentions
that thinking aloud does DEMO affect normal cognitive processing (Ericsson and Simon
1993). In particular, the verbal protocol procedure may lead to overestimates and/or
underestimates of DEMO knowledge and processes used, and may encourage respondents to
use strategically DEMO they do not usually employ. Equally, the requirements of the
protocol DEMO interfere with respondents’ ability and willingness to use knowledge and
processes they would normally use, might raise self-presentation issues (embarrassment,
introversion/extroversion) and issues arising from the social roles associated with
communicating with the DEMO (Bourg 2002). These limitations can be minimized by
collecting verbal DEMO data while subjects are performing the task of interest:
concurrent (DEMO) protocols have been shown to outperform retrospective (after task
completion) DEMO, especially in providing more insight into the decision-making steps
involved (Kuusela and Paul 2000; McGuinness and Ross 2003).
However, the diversity DEMO applications of the approach has highlighted some
methodological confusion (Ericsson and DEMO 1993, 3):
If the purpose in obtaining verbal reports is mainly to generate hypotheses and ideas,
investigators need not concern themselves (and generally have not concerned themselves)
with methodological questions about how DEMO data are to be collected. As a result, there is
little DEMO literature on such methodological issues; the data-gathering and data-analysis
methods actually DEMO vary tremendously, and the details of these methods are sketchily
reported DEMO research publications that make use of such data.
There are two issues here. First, in cognition/information processing research, the
dominant tradition in DEMO, the focus is on explaining how and why people think in DEMO
53610
R.T. Harrison et al.
task situations, developing and testing ‘detailed information processing models of
cognition, models that can often be formalized in computer programming languages
and analyzed by computer simulation’ (Ericsson and Simon 1993, DEMO). Our approach,
however, has more in common with the DEMO approach to VPA which foregrounds
the analysis of the process(es) DEMO formed rather than the outputs of those process as data
for predictive modeling (Swain 2006). Second, there is little consistency in data DEMO
and analysis methods, and limited transparency in the reporting of these, an issue we
address below.
In summary, VPA is a ﬂexible methodology that is particularly appropriate for
‘research in any research endeavour for which DEMO goals are to understand the processes
that underlie performance’ (Trickett and DEMO 2008, 335). More speciﬁcally, with
respect to the focus of this research, the analysis of verbal data is of direct relevance,
embedded as it is in research that tries to understand cognition and DEMO particular the kind of
knowledge one gains from learning: ‘the research DEMO the verbal analysis method
focuses on learning.
... [I]ts goal ... is to capture the representation of knowledge that a learner has and how DEMO
representation changes with acquisition. Secondary questions might include contrasting the
knowledge of an expert or more advanced learner with that of a novice. (Chi 1997, 272 – 273)
In this paper we follow this focus on learning and on the expert/novice distinction.
VPA has been used DEMO to examine the decision-making process of both
venture capitalists and business angels (Hall and Hofer 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer 1995;
Mason and DEMO 1997; Mason and Stark 2004), on the basis that it DEMO a more
reliable and much richer understanding of the decision-making process of investors and the
criteria used to evaluate investment opportunities than is possible DEMO approaches that use
questionnaires, surveys and interviews (Shepherd and Zacharakis 1999; Zacharakis and
Meyer 1998). However, in these applications it has DEMO limitations. First, a frequency
count of ‘thought units’ is an imperfect DEMO of the importance of a factor in the ﬁnal
decision (Zacharakis DEMO Meyer 1995). No weightings are placed on the responses to
measure emphasis and the topics mentioned most frequently may not necessarily be those
DEMO ultimately inﬂuence the decision. Nor does it allow for different convincer patterns.
In other words, people may repeat something several times it they are unsure but say it only
once if they are absolutely sure. Second, subjectivity is involved in coding, analysing and
interpreting the transcripts (Riquelme DEMO Rickards 1992). Third, some respondents may be
uncomfortable or self-conscious DEMO thinking and speaking out loud which may distort
their thinking (e.g. DEMO in excessive repetition of what they are reading). Fourth, it DEMO
impossible to entirely remove the effect of the artiﬁciality of the situation. Fifth, from a
practical point of view it ignores the role of the source of funding opportunity which is an
important initial inﬂuence on DEMO investor’s attitude to the opportunity (Hall and Hofer
1993). However, Ericsson and Simon (1980, 1993) argue that VPA is a valuable method of
analysing decision-making as long as the following criteria are met: the information
reported must be the focus of attention; the task is not highly routinized by habit; there must
be only a short time between performance and verbalisation (concurrent rather than
retrospective protocols); subjects are asked to verbalize all thoughts and neither self-edit
nor follow researcher instructions DEMO provide speciﬁc types of information; verbalisation
does not require excessive encoding; reports are oral; subjects are free from distraction
(including the researcher DEMO out of the subject’s eye-line to minimize the
conversational aspect of the think aloud task); instructions are clear; and completeness in
reporting is encouraged. These conditions are all met in this study.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
53711
4.2
Application
To provide methodological transparency, the approach to VPA adopted in this study is
summarized in Table 1. DEMO is an exploratory small-scale study and the applicability of
our analysis and conclusions is, therefore, limited to the initial investment appraisal stage
and DEMO the individual investor decision-making process. It cannot therefore be generalized
to other investors or investment contexts, such as syndicates (Mason 2006; Sohl 2007) and
gatekeepers (Paul and Whittam 2010), and to later stages DEMO the investment decision-
making process (Maxwell and Levesque 2014; Maxwell et al. 2011), without further
research. However, this is a purposive sample which, in terms of both overall sample size
and composition, is DEMO with guidelines for effective VPA, notably those studies
exploring the novice/DEMO distinction, and recognizes the challenges of identifying and
recruiting angels to DEMO in research studies (Harrison and Mason 2008).
Speciﬁcally, although previous VPA studies in other ﬁelds have used single-subject case
studies (generally to generate hypotheses for testing in larger studies), it is accepted that
DEMO more expert the participants the less variance there is in relative aspects of performance
(requiring fewer participants); accordingly, studies using novices (describing the
equivalent of our nascent and novice categories) are recommended to use between 5
and 10 participants (Trickett and Trafton 2008, 335).
DEMO 2 summarizes the core demographics of our sample. This proﬁle is consistent
with previous studies of business angels in the UK, and in Scotland in particular (Harrison
and Mason 1992; Paul et al. 2003). DEMO the angel market in Scotland is more highly
developed and visible in an institutional sense than in the rest of the UK (Harrison et al.
2010; Gregson et al. 2013), there is nothing to suggest that there are any systematic
differences in the decision-making processes of angel DEMO in Scotland and elsewhere.
In terms of career, which might be DEMO to have a bearing on how participants make
decisions in terms of prior knowledge they have stored, there is no evidence to suggest that
angels in the three categories have systematically different proﬁles. Speciﬁcally, the super
angel category is not dominated by participants with more extensive entrepreneurial
experience.
DEMO coding of the VPA transcripts was based on the classiﬁcation of thought units
related to investment criteria used by Zacharakis and Meyer (1995) DEMO extended by Mason
and Rogers (1997) on the basis of the evidence from prior studies of business angel
decision-making (Table 3). The classiﬁcation of statement type used by Zacharakis and
Meyer (1995) was DEMO unchanged (Table 4). Given that the coding scheme has been
DEMO used in previous UK-based studies of business angel investment decision-
making it meets the requirements of being reliable (sufﬁciently precisely delineated that
different coders will agree on the coding of particular utterances) and useful (at DEMO right
level of granularity to answer the question of interest) (Trickett and Trafton 2008, 342).
Using a coding scheme which is already well established is also consistent with
recommendations that studies with relatively larger DEMO of participants (as here)
generally involve less exploratory research (Trickett and Trafton 2008).
In terms of implementation, researcher bias can occur where the researcher both
develops and applies the coding scheme. Ideally, the researcher develops the coding
scheme and then uses independent coders who are DEMO with regards to the theoretical
constructs under examination. It was not possible to use independent coders in this study.
However, the lead coder had not been involved in the development of the coding scheme,
and DEMO that extent constituted a naı¨ve coder with reference to the underlying constructs.
We developed a set of written instructions describing each of the codes (summarized in
53812
R.T. Harrison et al.
Table 1. Application of verbal protocol analysis.
DEMO Procedures before recording verbal protocols
Selecting decision the focus is on the initial screening stage – the stage when an investor has
context/task DEMO aware of an investment opportunity and considers it with a view to
obtaining sufﬁcient initial impressions to decide whether it is worthy of
detailed DEMO or should be rejected out of hand. This stage is done
fairly quickly, typically in less than 10 minutes (Hall and Hofer 1993;DEMO
Mason and Rogers 1997), with angels rejecting most of the opportunities
that they review (Haines at al. 2003).
Selecting research text A current real investment opportunity was sourced from a business angel
(deﬁne the task) network. This was a start-up health care/medical devices company seeking
£500,000 ($750,000) in a seed ﬁnance round. It was DEMO a ﬁctitious name
to protect its anonymity and a local address in view of the importance that
the majority of angels give to investing DEMO local businesses.
Selecting subjects All the angels in this study were conducting the screening for the purposes
of direct personal investment and on their DEMO behalf only. The sample
comprises three categories of business angels with contrasting investment
experience. Each category2 comprised four angels, all based in Scotland,
who were all identiﬁed with the help of LINC Scotland, the national
association for business angels:
(a) experienced (or super) business DEMO who each had made ﬁve or more
investments3
(b) novice angels who had each made just one investment
(c) nascent angels who DEMO seriously engaged in looking to make their ﬁrst
investment.
2. Procedures during verbal protocol recording
Informal talk with subjects Each session began with a DEMO of the purpose of the research,
emphasizing the underlying objective and utility of the results. Subjects
were assured of anonymity is soliciting their DEMO consent to
participate. Subjects performed the task individually. The locations were
either the angel’s home ofﬁce, work ofﬁce or a hotel.
Becoming familiar with The researcher read aloud to each subject detailed instructions on the
thinking DEMO thinking aloud procedure to familiarize them with the technique.
Thinking aloud during The angels were asked to read the opportunity in the same way DEMO they
reading would normally read an investment proposal but verbalize their thoughts as
they did so. The instruction that they were given was to DEMO out loud the
thoughts that came into their mind. Respondents were not required to
provide any explanations or verbal descriptions (Ericsson and Simon 1993).
One of the authors was present as each respondent performed this DEMO and
reminded respondents to think out loud if they lapsed into silence for more
than 15 s.
3. Procedures following verbal protocol recording
Retrospective DEMO A short de-brieﬁng session and semi-structured interview was then carried
recording out with each investor after they had completed the evaluation which asked
them DEMO reﬂect on the ‘what’ and ‘how’ of their own learning as investors
Literal transcription Participants’ thoughts were recorded and subsequently a complete transcript
of DEMO was made for each respondent’s consideration of each investment
opportunity to make visible subjects’ comprehension, doubts, mistakes,
term identiﬁcation and selection.
Coding DEMO transcripts The segmentation of verbal utterances requires identiﬁcation of the relevant
unit of analysis, or granularity of the segments, with respect to the DEMO
questions of interest. This deﬁning cut can occur at a number of scales, or
grain sizes (Chi 1997). We follow Trickett and DEMO (2008, 338) in
segmenting according to a complete thought, understood as a clause
(a subject and a verb), consistent with the earlier approach of Mason and
Rogers (1997). These thought units were then coded ﬁrst into one of nine
categories relating to different types DEMO investment criteria and secondly into
seven categories of cognitive process (e.g. DEMO, inference, question).
The coding scheme was based on Zacharakis and Meyer (1995) as modiﬁed
by Mason and Rogers (1997).
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
53913
Table 2. Angels experience and qualiﬁcations.
Age DEMO Career Education
Super Angel 1 72 M Owner – Engineering Support No degree
Company to oil and gas
Super Angel 2 58 M Various DEMO management Law and Accounting
positions degrees
Super Angel 3 57 M Various FD and NXD posts MBA
Super Angel 4 60 M Various FD DEMO MBA
Novice Angel 1 50 M MD to large company MBA
Novice Angel 2 45 M MD to various small enterprises MBA
Novice Angel DEMO 67 M MD BA
Novice Angel 4 56 M Finance Consultant to business BA in Finance
Nascent Angel 1 58 M Owner of Marketing DEMO Firm BA Business Studies
Nascent Angel 2 52 M Banker No Degree
Nascent Angel 3 57 M CFO to various Firms and has CA
DEMO out a couple of acquisitions,
also KPMG Business Consultant
Nascent Angel 4 43 M Various MD positions BA Business Studies
Tables 3 and DEMO) and identiﬁed recursively throughout the analysis stage of the research
those DEMO that fell outside the deﬁnition of the code, and deﬁned the DEMO of
what was and was not an example. The coding procedure was based on the analysis of
anonymized transcripts, so that at the point of coding the coder did not know which
Table 3. Classiﬁcation of DEMO segments in the protocols – Investment Criteria.
Investment Criteria Description
1 Entrepreneur/ The background, experience and track record of the entrepreneurs, their
management team personal qualities (for example, their commitment, enthusiasm), and the
range of skills/functions of the management team
2 Strategy The overall DEMO and strategy of the business
3 Operations How the business is organized to produce and deliver the product (that is
(practicalities of the DEMO associated with the production process)
business functioning)
4 Product/Service The nature of the product/service, in terms of its concept, DEMO,
distinctiveness, and innovativeness. It also includes the quality,
standards DEMO performance, appearance, styling and aesthetic appeal, and
ergonomics, function and ﬂexibility of the product/service
5 Market The potential and growth of DEMO market, demonstrated market need,
level/nature of competition and barriers DEMO entry
6 Financial This includes three aspects: (1) the ﬁnancial DEMO of the business
considerations (for example, costs and pricing, revenue DEMO ﬁnancial projections),
(2) the value of the equity/worth DEMO business, and (3) the likely rate of
return and exit DEMO possibilities
7 Investor ﬁt This includes two elements: (1) the DEMO between the investors
background, skills and knowledge of the industry, market, technology, et
cetera, and the investment opportunity, and (2) DEMO investors preferences
(that is, is this an industry, market, et cetera, that the investor wants
to be in?)
8 Business DEMO The whole package/plan
9 Other Comments on any aspect of the business which cannot be coded in any
other category
Source: Mason and Rogers (1997).
54014
R.T. Harrison et al.
Table 4. Classiﬁcation of thought segments in DEMO protocols – statement type.
Description Non-evaluative statement consisting of verbatim or paraphrased quotation
of information presented in plan
Recall Non-evaluative information obtained from past DEMO
Preconception Judgemental statement based on previous experience/ background knowledge
Inference Statement DEMO involves a judgement on some part of the plan
Question Statement which seeks further information
Action Statement of intention or action to be performed (for example, to search
for a source of information)
Comment Uncodable or irrelevant statement
Source: Mason and Rogers (1997).
participants were DEMO as super angels, novice angels, and nascent angels. This was to
avoid a situation where if the researchers who were involved in the DEMO knew which
participants were from each category it is possible that a participant’s category could
inﬂuence a coder’s application of the codes. For similar DEMO, coders undertook their
coding independently so that their efforts were not DEMO by others, only coming
together to compare coding results at the DEMO of the process.
Inter-rater reliability is a major issue in data coding. First, the categories need to be
deﬁned carefully before each rater codes the data, an issue we addressed by using an
established coding scheme. Second, there has to be agreement on how discrepancies are
handled. Two of the authors were involved in coding, with coder 2 undertaking partial
coding, as is normal (Chi 1997). Our analysis is therefore DEMO on the coding primarily of
the lead coder, working with a DEMO developed by the other authors based on priori
experience of similar research, ﬁnalized in discussion with the other authors. While this
does not fully deal with possible researcher bias, it is the most appropriate response to the
particularities of business angel research within the context of contemporary
understandings DEMO the importance of data quality, reliability and trust in qualitative
entrepreneurship DEMO (Leitch et al. 2010).
5. Heuristics and investment decision-making
There DEMO no difference between the investor groups in terms of the investment decision.
Three of the four angels in each category rejected the opportunity outright, with only one
in each group sufﬁciently interested to want more information DEMO meet the entrepreneur
(Table 5). Reﬂecting their greater experience-based knowledge DEMO knowledge-
structuring processes, super angels as expected made the quickest decision DEMO exhibited
the least variability, suggesting evidence of experiential learning and faster DEMO
processes (Baron and Ensley 2006). In particular, their decision processes show strong
evidence for the role of a representativeness heuristic in decision-making. DEMO decisions of
these investors are based on a focus on a limited number of factors which their prior
experience has shown to be associated DEMO a prospectively successful investment. This
allows them to more quickly assess the likelihood that this proposition will generate
sufﬁcient returns to make it attractive DEMO them (Juliusson et al. 2005).
This is demonstrated in Table DEMO: although there is broad agreement amongst the
different types of business DEMO in the relative importance of the investment criteria,
there is a bigger difference between super angels and the other two categories. This
provides DEMO initial evidence that there is some learning from experience. Finance, in
DEMO of the ﬁnancial structure of and projections for the venture, is DEMO most important
criterion for both nascent and novice angels but ranks only fourth for experienced
Table 5. Decision and length of time to make decision.
Super Angels DEMO Angels Nascent Angels
Decision x x x
Time taken 11 min 5 min 6 min
50 s 30 s 25 s
Average time 7 DEMO 34 s
(Median 6 min 28 s)
12 3 4 DEMO 3412 3 4
p p XX
14 min 9 min 3m
25 s 40 s 55 s
8 min 44 s
(Median 8 min 18 s)
6 min
30 s
xx x
20 min 5 DEMO 6 min
53 s 20 s 30 s
10 min 59 s
(Median 8 m 53 s)
p
11 min
15 s
x
6 min
55 s
Key: x ¼ reject: p¼ consider in DEMO detail.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
54115
54216
R.T. Harrison et al.
Table 6. Verbal protocol frequency counts by DEMO criterion.
% of thought units by type – averaged by type of business angel (ﬁgure in
brackets is ranking)
Investment criterion Super business angel Novice business angel Nascent business angel
Investor Fit 20.1 (1) DEMO (2) 8.8 (4)
Product 19.5 (2) 18 (3) 21.4 (2)
Business Plan 17.2 (3) 14.9 (4) DEMO (6)
Finance 14 (4) 22.3 (1) 32.3 (1)
Market 12.7 (5) 7.2 (6) 15.3 (3)
Strategy 2.6 (6) 5.3 (7) 6.5 (5)
Entrepreneur 11 (DEMO) 8.7 (5) 4.4 (7)
Other 1.9 (8) 2.9 (8) 4.4 (7)
Operations 1 (9) 0 (9) 0.3 (9)
Total 100 100 100
Notes: Percentages do not DEMO up to 100 because of rounding.
Spearman’s Rho rank order correlation: DEMO – Novice; r¼ 0.85; Novice – Nascent r¼ 0.74;
Super – Nascent r¼ 0.71.
investors. For nascent and novice angels this priority DEMO to ﬁnance in the decision
process is consistent with an availability heuristic based on their assimilation (in this
case through vicarious learning from the representations of the experience of others
rather from their own direct experience) of prior event histories into memory on which
they base their predictions DEMO likely success factors and critical decision inﬂuencers
(Holcomb et al. 2009)DEMO As such, this is consistent with a process of learning from DEMO
samples of experience through experiencing multiple interpretations of those events
(March DEMO al. 1991).
Investor ﬁt (the compatibility of the characteristics of DEMO investment opportunity –
sector, stage, funding required – with the preferences and current investment portfolio of
the investor) is the most important criterion amongst experienced angels, who clearly
recognize the value of maintaining clear and consistent investment criteria, not deviating
from them and investing in markets and sectors that they know and understand. There is
evidence here of both DEMO heuristic and of an anchoring heuristic in which
their prior decision set puts constraints on the nature of the opportunities they consider
attractive. Nascent DEMO place more emphasis on marketing than either novices or
experienced angels, DEMO angels emphasize the business plan more than either
novices or nascent angels. Again this demonstrates the operation of a representativeness
heuristic. Although not major, novice angels appear more likely to base at least their initial
decisions DEMO the qualities (trustworthiness, likeability, experience, perceived competence)
of the entrepreneur than will more experienced investors who can draw on more robust
DEMO and representativeness heuristics to aid their decision-making.
One of the most pronounced ﬁndings from this investigative research is that there are
contrasts in the DEMO in which the different investor types allocate their time (Table 7)DEMO
Experienced angels do not become obsessed with just one or two investment factors. This
is an important conclusion for it suggests, in contrast to the interpretation of the factors
identiﬁed as important in the decision process, that in this respect they are not employing a
representativeness heuristic, which would be reﬂected in their allocation of more time
to fewer factors DEMO an overall quicker process. For these investors, the operation of
an DEMO heuristic and of an anchoring and adjustment heuristic, together with the
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
54317
Table 7. Verbal protocol frequency counts: importance of top two criteria.
Super business
angel
Novice business
angel
Nascent business
DEMO
% of thought units
First ranked investment criterion 20.1 33.0 22.2
Top two ranked investment criteria 39.6 53.7 42.4
accumulation of more direct experience DEMO which to draw (which underpins the
availability heuristic), appears to DEMO the signiﬁcance of the representativeness
heuristic in their decision processes. Table 7 also indicates that novice angels commit most
time to their top two DEMO, reinforcing their reliance on a representativeness heuristic.
In other words, in terms of total time spent on assessment and the concentration on fewer
DEMO it is novice investors who stand out. The shift in the relative importance of these
heuristics in the learning process with experience is not DEMO, and understanding
how and why this is remains an important topic DEMO further research.
There are few differences in the cognitive processes used by business angels to analyse
the investment proposal, either in terms of the rank order of statement types or the absolute
frequencies with which they DEMO evidenced (Table 8). Inferences, questions and
descriptions are the top three statement types for all three groups of angels. In terms of
DEMO allocation of time nascent angels spend most time asking questions and least time on
description. In all cases recall statements are rare, suggesting that at the initial screening
stage at least, there is little evidence of an anchoring and adjustment heuristic at work.
6. Reﬂections on heuristics and DEMO
These contrasts in the verbal frequency counts amongst the three groups of angels are not
as great as might be expected, with the differences limited to the time to make the decision
and the emphasis given DEMO certain investment criteria. This suggests consistency in the
underling decision processes, DEMO although the differences are ﬁnely tuned, there is some
evidence of DEMO in the nature of the learning process: seven themes can be DEMO
from the VPA and a thematic analysis (Guest et al. 2012; King 2004; Braun and Clarke
Table 8. Verbal protocol frequency counts by statement type.
% of thought units by type – averaged by type DEMO Business Angel
(ﬁgure in brackets is ranking)
Statement type Super DEMO Angel Novice Business Angel Nascent Business Angel
Inference 37.7 (1) 38.1 (1) 38.1 (1)
Description 22.7 (2) 19.9 (2) 16.7 (3)
Question 20.1 (3) 15.1 (3) 26.2 (DEMO)
Comment 7.5 (4) 10.3 (4) 7.5 (4)
DEMO 5.2 (5) 6.3 (6) 4.8 (5)
Recall 3.6 (6) 1.8 (7) 4.8 (5)
Action 3.2 (7) DEMO (5) 2 (7)
Total 100 100 100
Notes: Percentages do not add up to 100 because of rounding.
Spearman’s Rho rank DEMO correlation: Super – Novice r¼ 0.89; Novice – Nascent r¼ 0.80;
Super – Nascent r¼ 0.89.
54418
R.T. Harrison et al.
2006) of the follow-up interview transcripts. While indicative not deﬁnitive, some
differences among the three categories of angel investors emerge and offer directions for
further research.
First, learning, particularly for DEMO investors, is a continuous process and
begins with the very ﬁrst DEMO However, the impact of much of the learning appears
to be DEMO in the next stage of the investment process, where angels undertake DEMO
detailed investigation of those investment proposals that pass their initial screen, DEMO
than at the initial screening stage itself. Novice investors, therefore, report less learning
because they have less experience to reply on. This is DEMO important area for further
research into the role of heuristics in the process of angel learning from experience.
Second, there is some evidence from both super angels and novice angels that their
decision processes are anchored DEMO fundamentals. Accordingly, the nature and extent of
their learning appears to DEMO restricted, with the majority noting that the underlying
fundamentals (i.e. the key investment criteria) and their investment processes have
remained the same. As one commented, it is not so much learning that is happening than
reinforcement: in other words, learning is superﬁcial, conﬁned to the process itself, which
may become more reﬁned or selective. Heuristics, and through DEMO the incorporation of
experience into decision rules and criteria, rather than DEMO accumulation of experience
itself therefore appear to play a signiﬁcant role, DEMO learning occurs through the processes
that shape and develop the heuristics underpinning decision-making.
Third, where learning from experience does play a role is in the reprioritisation of
decision criteria. In a clear signal of the importance DEMO learning from experience, super
angels in particular highlight their evolving attitude DEMO the importance of the ‘people
factor’ in investment decision-making. Given that references to the entrepreneur were only
ranked seventh (out of nine) by DEMO investors, this implies that the nature of the learning
process shows DEMO in an enhanced application of a representativeness heuristic.
Fourth, this points DEMO the possible role of associative learning (Mitchell, De Houwer,
and Lovibond 2009) in the investment process, as investors build up through DEMO an
association between certain characteristics (in this case, entrepreneur-related) and
DEMO outcomes. This represents a fruitful avenue for further research. Fifth, a DEMO
of investors highlighted the importance of speed, and the related signiﬁcance DEMO instinct
and gut feeling, in their decision-making. Speciﬁcally, several angels identiﬁed the need to
focus and discriminate and thereby make quicker decisions as DEMO key area of learning as
their conﬁdence grew, suggesting that anchoring DEMO adjustment heuristics may become
more important as experience grows.
Sixth, there DEMO evidence that vicarious and social learning (Burgoyne 1995) plays an
important role in the learning process for these investors. Several of the angels DEMO
other investors as a key source of their learning, both through DEMO membership and
informally by using other investors as sounding boards. This view is consistent with the
reliance on experiencing history, including failure as a ‘learning event’ (Cope 2003), more
richly through exposure to multiple aspects and multiple interpretations of it as a social as
well as individual DEMO Finally, in the case of nascent angels, some demonstrated clear
evidence of the role of cognitive biases in attenuating the learning process (Corbett, Neck,
and DeTienne 2007), arguing with conﬁdence – arguably over-conﬁdence – that the
knowledge that they had derived from their professional career DEMO that there was little
if anything that they needed to learn. Others, however, recognized their need to learn, and
indicated that they were looking to learn from existing investors, reemphasising both the
importance of vicarious learning in situations where one’s own experience is meagre or
absent and DEMO need to unlearn some prior experience before starting to learn to become an
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
54519
investor. In other words, there is recognition among some at least of these investors that
they do need to DEMO and explicitly address the anchoring heuristics that have
used and develop adjustment heuristics based on more than incremental change in the
anchor points.
7. DEMO
This paper has sought to extend the literature on how business angels make their
investment decision by exploring the effect that experience has on DEMO approach. Given
the weaknesses of retrospective analyses of decision-making our approach was based on a
real time methodology, VPA, which involved asking three DEMO of angels, differentiated
by their investment experience, to review an investment opportunity. The three groups
were compared in terms of speed of decision, investment criteria and cognitive processes.
Super angels – the most experienced – DEMO quickest to make their decision and their
review gave greater emphasis to ‘investor ﬁt’ than either the novice or the nascent angels.
These angels, in contrast, gave more emphasis than super angels to ﬁnancial issues. The
only difference of note in the cognitive processes was that nascent angels DEMO more time
than either novice or super angels in asking (rhetorical) questions as they read the
proposal.
Both the super and novice angels DEMO that they have learnt continuously from
their investment experience. There is evidence of both experiential learning (individual)
and of vicarious learning from the experience of others. There is also some evidence of the
importance of DEMO in both the decision-making process and in respect of the nature
of the learning process itself. Investors in our sample do show a reliance DEMO memories of
past events (an availability heuristic) in making decisions, DEMO show a tendency to identify
the most signiﬁcant feature of a category of events (a representativeness heuristic) and
apply it rather than an DEMO set of features. However, somewhat counter-intuitively,
this was less pronounced DEMO the more experienced angels in our sample, and this remains
an DEMO are for further research. Although our focus on the initial screening stage
precluded extensive discussion of anchoring and adjustment heuristics, there was some
evidence to suggest that novice angels in particular anchored their judgements more
frequently DEMO their prior experience. For them, this reinforces a weak availability heuristic
DEMO may be associated with poorer quality investment decisions. Again, this represents DEMO
important area for further research.
However, it is also clear from DEMO analysis that the learning has been in terms of their
approach to investing rather than their fundamental investment philosophy. Moreover, this
learning has had more effect on how they conduct their due diligence on opportunities that
DEMO their initial screening rather than on the initial screening stage itself, DEMO the key
learning based around the way in which they assess the people involved in the business.
Some have also learnt how to discriminate DEMO effectively and hence make quicker
decisions. Investing with other, more experienced, angels has been a signiﬁcant source of
learning for the majority of DEMO and nascent angels. Failed investments have also been a
signiﬁcant source of learning. The attitudes of some of the nascent entrepreneurs, on the
other hand, seemed complacent, believing that they could rely on knowledge that DEMO had
accumulated in their professional career, pointing to both the existence DEMO substantive
cognitive biases and to the potentially negative impact on learning of inappropriate
anchoring heuristics accompanied by a bias-limited adjustment heuristic.
Finally, the paper conﬁrms the importance of the social dimension of learning for
several of DEMO business angels. These angels note that learning from other, more experienced
54620
R.T. Harrison et al.
angels, both members of the same investment syndicate and investment partners, have been
a signiﬁcant source of learning. Much of the entrepreneurial learning literature is based on a
view of learning DEMO an individual process of learning from experience. However, the
evidence from DEMO exploratory research into learning in the angel investment decision-
making process points to the importance of vicarious learning from the experience of others,
DEMO compensate for the difﬁculties of learning from experience when there has been no
experience to learn from, and to the role of heuristics as a means of processing and reducing
that experience into a more limited DEMO of decision criteria.
Three implications follow from this analysis. First, there DEMO a need for further more
detailed exploration of the issues raised in this paper, and in particular of the role of
heuristics in angel decision-making, and notably how the level of experience (among
business angels) can be expected to inﬂuence their use of heuristics (availability,
representativeness, anchoring and adjustment) across a wider sample of investors in a
DEMO range of stages in the decision process and in a more diverse set of investment
settings (including group and syndicate investment situations). Given that there is relatively
little evidence of learning at all, in terms of behaviour, this study does not support the view
that ‘experts’ have both more knowledge and more organized knowledge structures than do
novices, and that experts are more likely to evaluate, anticipate, plan ahead and DEMO
accordingly.1 Second, there is a speciﬁc need to explore more extensively DEMO nature of the
entrepreneurial leaning process in a social as well as individual context, recognising that the
generation of knowledge, including tacit and DEMO as well as cognitive knowledge, is a
social process (Burgoyne 1995). Third, based on this new understanding of the angel
learning process, and in view of the importance attached to simulating experiences through
the generation of hypothetical histories (March et al. 1991), approaches to angel education
(e.g. through angel academies – San Jose´ et al. 2005) DEMO usefully be recast to emphasize
the reliability of learning through the construction and sharing of belief (the development of
appropriate heuristics) and the DEMO of learning through the construction of causal belief
(the association of DEMO factors and outcomes, the what happened, why it happened and
how we should learn from it questions). In so doing, it will be possible to accelerate the
speed with which individual angels, of some experience or none, can ‘extract meaning from
sample sizes of one or fewer’ (March et al. 1991, 15).
Finally, in this paper we have argued ﬁrst, that entrepreneurial experience, identiﬁed in
the literature DEMO a key characteristic of angel investors, is a rather different type DEMO experience
than investor experience, not least because it is essentially static, something angels bring to
the investment situation, and second, that we DEMO simply read off experience from the
former to the latter but have to grasp the nuances of how investor experience itself is shaped
and DEMO In focusing on the process by which this experience is honed through the use
of heuristics, this paper demonstrates how, in this case, learning is achieved and applied and
points to how the process of DEMO learning might be improved.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes
1. It is, of course, possible DEMO our more experienced investors (super angels) are not sufﬁciently
experienced to warrant the title of ‘expert’ in the sense used in verbal protocol DEMO in other
domains, calling into question the extent to which the DEMO market in Scotland, although
extensive, is knowledgeable (Gregson et al. DEMO).
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
54721
2. The terminologies were taken from an DEMO analysis of the character of the Scottish business
angel market (Paul DEMO al. 2003).
3. This deﬁnition of super angels is with respect to the stage of development of the business angel
market in Scotland, which in common with the rest of the UK, is characterized by a large number
of relatively infrequent investors, many of them recent entrants into the market, and a few
signiﬁcantly more active investors, some DEMO whom will have many more investments than this
minimum threshold. This contrasts with, for example, the more mature angel market in the US,DEMO
where super angels can be deﬁned as those making 50 or more investments (Sudek, May, and
Wiltbank 2011).
References
Afﬂerbach, P., and P. Johnston. 1984. “On the Use of Verbal Reports in Reading DEMO Journal
of Reading Behavior 16: 307 – 322.
Aldrich, H., DEMO T. Yang. 2014. “How Do Entrepreneurs Know What to Do? Learning DEMO Organizing
in New Ventures.” Journal of Evolutionary Economics 24 (1): DEMO – 82. doi:10.1007/s00191-
013-0320-x.
Alvarez, S. A., and L. W. Busenitz. 2001. “The Entrepreneurship of Resource-Based Theory.”
Journal of Management 27 (6): 755 – 775. doi:10.1177/014920630102700609.
Avdeitchikova, S., H. DEMO m, and N. Ma˚ nsson. 2008. “What Do We Mean When DEMO Talk
About Business Angels? Some Reﬂections on Deﬁnitions and Sampling.” Venture DEMO:
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 10 (4): 371 DEMO 394. doi:10.1080/
13691060802351214.
Bandura, A. 1962. “Social Learning Through DEMO In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
edited by M. R. Jones. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bandura, A. 1986. Social Foundations of Thought DEMO Action: A Social Cognitive Theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Baron, R. A., and N. D. Ensley. 2006. “Opportunity Recognition as the Detection of Meaningful
Patterns: Evidence from Comparisons of Novice and Experienced Entrepreneurs.”
Management Science 52 (9): 1331 – 1344. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1060.0538.
Becker, DEMO, and N Lazaric, eds. 2009. Organizational Routines: Advancing Empirical Research.
DEMO: Edward Elgar.
Bergemann, D., and U. Hege. 1998. “Venture Capital DEMO, Moral Hazard, and Learning.”
Journal of Banking and Finance 22 (DEMO – 8): 703 – 735. doi:10.1016/S0378-4266(98)00017-X.
Bergemann, D., and U Hege. 2005. “The Financing of Innovation: Learning and Stopping.” RAND
Journal of Economics 36: 719 – 752.
Boud, R. DEMO, and D Walker. 2000. Using Experience for Learning. Milton Keynes: SRHE/Open
University Press.
Boud, D., R. Keogh, and D. Walker. 1985. Reﬂection: Turning Experience into Learning. London:
Kogan Page Ltd.
Bourg, DEMO 2002. “Research Methods: Verbal Protocols.” In The Encyclopedia of Education, edited by
J. W. Guthrie. 2nd ed. New York: Macmillan.
Boyd, E. DEMO, and A. W. Fales. 1983. “Reﬂective Learning: Key to Learning from Experience.”
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 23 (2): 99 – 117. doi:10.1177/0022167883232011.
Brah, A., and J. Hoy. 1989. “Experiential Learning: A New Orthodoxy?” In Making Sense of
Experiential Learning, edited by S. Warne Weil and I. McGill. Milton Keynes: SRHE/Open
University Press.
Braun, V., and V. Clarke. 2006. “Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology.” Qualitative DEMO in
Psychology 3 (2): 77 – 101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
DEMO, J. G. 1995. “Learning from Experience: From Individual Discovery to Meta-Dialogue Via
the Evolution of Transitional Myths.” Personnel Review 24 (6): 61 – 72. doi:10.1108/
00483489510097967.
54822
R.T. Harrison et al.
Busenitz, L. W. 1999. “Entrepreneurial Risk and Strategic Decision Making: It’s a Matter of
Perspective.” The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 35 (3): 325 – 340. doi:10.1177/
0021886399353005.
Busenitz, L. W., and J. B. Barney. 1997. “Differences Between Entrepreneurs DEMO Managers in
Large Organizations: Biases and Heuristics in Strategic Decision-Making.” Journal DEMO
Business Venturing 12 (1): 9 – 30. doi:10.1016/S0883-9026(DEMO)00003-1.
Cassar, G., and J. Craig. 2009. “An Investigation of Hindsight Bias in Nascent Venture Activity.”
Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2): 149 – 164. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.02.003.
Chapman, G. B., and E. DEMO Johnson. 2002. “Incorporating the Irrelevant: Anchors in Judgements of
Belief and DEMO In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited by
T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman, 120 – 138. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Chi, M. T. H. 1997. “Quantifying Qualitative Analyses of Verbal Data: A Practical Guide.” The
Journal of the Learning Sciences 6 (3): 271 – 315. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0603_1.
Chickering, DEMO 1977. Experience and Learning. New York: Change Magazine Press.
Clark, C. 2008. “The Impact of Entrepreneurs’ Oral ‘Pitch’ Presentation Skills on Business Angels’
DEMO Screening Investment Decisions.” Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance DEMO (3): 257 – 279. doi:10.1080/13691060802151945.
Cope, J. 2003. “Entrepreneurial Learning and Critical Reﬂection: Discontinuous Events as Triggers
for Higher-Level Learning.” Management Learning 34 (4): 429 – 450. doi:10.1177/
1350507603039067.
Cope, J. 2005. “Toward a Dynamic Learning Perspective of Entrepreneurship.” Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 29 (4): 373 – 397. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2005.00090.x.
Corbett, A. C. 2005. “Experiential Learning Within the Process of Opportunity Identiﬁcation and
Exploitation.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29 (4): 473 – 491. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
6520.2005.00094.x.
Corbett, A. C., H. Neck, and D. DeTienne. 2007. “How Corporate Entrepreneurs Learn from
Fledgling Innovation Initiatives: Cognition and the Development of a Termination Script.”
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31 (6): 829 – 852. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2007.
00208.x.
Crutcher, R J. 1994. “Telling What We Know: The Use of Verbal Report Methodologies in
Psychological Research.” Psychological Science 5 (5): 241 – 243. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.
1994.tb00619.x.
Cueto, J. I., and S. H. Zhang. 2013. “New Venture Decisions DEMO A Literature Review of the
Entrepreneurial Heuristics and Biases.” Accessed 24 July 2014. iceb.nccu.edu.tw/
proceedings/APDSI/2013/proc/P130122002.pdf
Das, T. K., DEMO B. Teng. 1998. “Between Rust and Control: Developing Conﬁdence in Partner
DEMO in Alliances.” Academy of Management Review 23: 491 – 512.
Daw, N. D., and K. Doya. 2006. “The Computational Neurobiology of Learning and Reward.”
Current Opinions in Neurobiology 16 (2): 199 – 204. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2006.03.006.
Dawes, R. M., D. Faust, and P. E. Meehl. 2002. “Clinical Versus Actuarial Judgement.” In Heuristics
and Biasaes: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited by T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and
D. Kahneman, 716 – 729. Cambridge University Press.
De Bondt, W. F. M., and R. H. Thaler. 2002. “Do Analysts Overreact?” In Heuristics and DEMO:
The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited by T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman,
678 – 715. Cambridge University Press.
De Clercq, D., and H. Sapienza. 2005. “When Do Venture Capital Firms DEMO from Their Portfolio
Companies?” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29 (4): 517 – 535. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
6520.2005.00096.x.
Dewey, J. 1938. Experience DEMO Education. New York: Collier.
Dutta, D. K., and M. M. DEMO 2005. “The Nature of Entrepreneurial Opportunities:
Understanding the Process Using the 4I Organizational Learning Framework.” Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and Practice 29 (4): 425 – 449. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2005.00092.x.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
54923
Epley, N., and T. Gilovich. 2002. DEMO Adjustment Back in the Anchoring and Adjustment
Heuristic.” In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited by
T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman, 139 – 149. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
DEMO
Ericsson, K. A., and H. A. Simon. 1980. “Verbal Reports as Data.” Psychological Review 87 (3):
215 – 251. doi:10.1037/DEMO
Ericsson, K. A., and H. A. Simon. 1993. Protocol Analysis. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Farsi, J. Y, N. Imanipour, and S. Mahlouji. 2012. “Effects of Experience on Applying
Entrepreneurial Decision Heuristics.” DEMO Journal of Human Social Sciences 12: 1 – 9.
Feeney, L., G. H. Haines, and A. L. Riding. 1999. “Private Investors’ Investment DEMO: Insights
from Qualitative Data.” Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance 1 (2): 121 – 145. doi:10.1080/136910699295938.
Fern, DEMO J., L. B. Cardinal, and H. M. O’Neill. 2012. “The Genesis of Strategy in New Ventures:
Escaping the Constraints of Founder and DEMO Knowledge.” Strategic Management Journal
33 (4): 427 – 447. doi:DEMO/smj.1944.
Fiet, J. O. 1995. “Risk Avoidance Strategies in Venture Capital DEMO Journal of Management
Studies 32 (4): 551 – 574. doi:DEMO/j.1467-6486.1995.tb00788.x.
Fischhoff, B. 2002. “Heuristics and Biases in Application.” In Heuristics DEMO Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited by T. Gilovich, DEMO Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman,
730 – 748. Cambridge, UK: DEMO University Press.
Freear, J, J. Sohl, and W Wetzel. 1994. DEMO and Non-Angels: Are There Differences?” Journal
of Business Venturing 9 (2): 109 – 123. doi:10.1016/0883-9026(94)90004-3.
Fried, V. H., and R. D. Hisrich. 1994. “Toward a Model of Venture Capital Investment Decision
Making.” Financial Management 23 (3): 28 – 37. doi:10.2307/3665619.
Gemmell, R. M., and D. A. Kolb. 2013. “Experiential DEMO and Creativity in Entrepreneurship.”
In Encyclopaedia of Creativity, Invention, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, edited by I. E.
G. Carayannis, 702 – 710. Springer.
DEMO, G, and R Selten, eds. 2001. Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Gilovich, T., and D. Grifﬁn. 2002. DEMO – Heuristics and Biases: Then and Now.”
In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited by T. Gilovich,
D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman, 1 – 17. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University DEMO
Gilovich, T., D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman, eds. 2002. Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of
Intuitive Judgement. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Goldfarb, B., D. Kirsch, and D. Miller. 2007. “Was There Too Little Entry During the Dot Com
Era?” Journal of Financial DEMO 86 (1): 100 – 144. doi:10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2006.03.009.
Gregson, G, S Mann, and R Harrison. 2013. “Business Angel Syndicsation and the DEMO of Risk
Capitsal in a Small Market Economy: Evidence from Scotland.” DEMO and Decision
Economics 34 (2): 95 – 107. doi:10.1002/DEMO
Guest, G., K. M. MacQueen, and E. E. Namey. 2012. DEMO Thematic Analysis. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Haines, G. H. Jr., J. J. Madill, and A. L. Riding. 2003. “Informal Investment in DEMO: Financing
Small Business Growth.” Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 16 (3-4): 13 – 40.
doi:10.1080/08276331.2003.10593306.
Hall, J, and DEMO W Hofer. 1993. “Venture Capitalists’ Decision Criteria in New Venture Evaluation.”
Journal of Business Venturing 8 (1): 25 – 42. doi:10.1016/0883-9026(93)90009-T.
Harrison, R. T., M. Dibben, and C. M. Mason. 1997. “The Role of Trust in the Business Angel’s
Investment Decision: An Exploratory Analysis.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
21 (4): 63 – 81.
Harrison, R. T., G. Don, and K. Glancey Johnston. 2010. “The Early Stage Risk Capital Market in
Scotland Since 2000: Estimates of Scale.” Characteristics and Market Efﬁciency, Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial DEMO 12 (3): 211 – 239. doi:10.1080/
13691066.2010.486149.
55024 R.T. Harrison et al.
Harrison, R. T., and C. M. DEMO 2005. “Entrepreneurial Learning: Researching the Interface
Between Learning and the Entrepreneurial DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
29 (4): 351 – 371. doi:DEMO/j.1540-6520.2005.00089.x.
Harrison, R. T., and C. M. Leitch, eds. 2008. DEMO Learning: Conceptual Frameworks
and Applications. London: Routledge.
Harrison, R. T., and C. M. Mason. 1992. “International Perspectives on the Supply of Informal
DEMO Capital.” Journal of Business Venturing 7 (6): 459 – 475. DEMO:10.1016/0883-9026(92)
90020-R.
Harrison, R. T., and C. M. Mason. 2002. “Backing the Horse or the Jockey? Agency Costs,
Information and the Evaluation of Risk by Business Angels.” In Frontiers of Entrepreneur-
DEMO Research 2002, edited by WD Bygrave, CG Brush, P Davidsson, J Fiet, PG Greene,
RT Harrison, M Lerner, GD Meyer, J Sohl, and A Zacharakis, 393 – 403. Babson College,
MA: Babson Park.
Harrison, R. T., and C. M. Mason. 2008. “Sampling and Data Collection in Business Angel
Research.” Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 10 (4):
305 – 308. doi:DEMO/13691060802380080.
Henrion, M., and B. Fischhoff. 2002. “Assessing Uncertainty in Physical Constants.” In Heuristics
and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, edited DEMO T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and
D. Kahneman, 666 – 677. DEMO, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Holcomb, T R, R. D. Ireland, R. M. Holmes Jr., and M. A. Hitt. 2009. “Architecture of
DEMO Learning: Exploring the Link Among Heuristics, Knowledge, and Action.”
Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice 33 (1): 167 – 192. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2008.
DEMO, E. A., N. Karlsson, and T. Ga¨ rling. 2005. “Weighing DEMO Past and the Future in Decision
Making.” European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 17 (4): 561 – 575. doi:10.1080/
09541440440000159.
Kahneman, DEMO, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds. 1983. Judgement under uncertainty: heuristics and
biases. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kayes, D. A. 2002. “Experiential Learning and Its Critics: Preserving the Role of Experiential
Learning in Management Learning and Education.” Academy of Management Learning and
Education 1 (2): 137 – 149. doi:10.5465/AMLE.2002.8509336.
King, N. 2004. “Using Templates in the Thematic Analysis of Text.” In Essential Guide to
Qualitative DEMO in Organizational Research, edited by C. Cassell and G. Symon,
DEMO – 270. London: Sage.
Koehler, D., L. Brenner, and D. Grifﬁn. 2002. “The Calibration of Expert Judgement: Heuristics and
Biases Beyond the Laboratory.” In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgement, edited DEMO T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman, 686 – 715. DEMO, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Kolb, D. 1984. Experiential Learning: DEMO as the Source of Learning and Development.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kuusela, H., and P. Paul. 2000. “A Comparison of Concurrent and DEMO Verbal Protocol
Analysis.” American Journal of Psychology 113 (3): 387 DEMO 404. doi:10.2307/1423365.
Landstro¨ m, H. 1998. “Informal Investors as DEMO Technovation 18: 321 – 333.
Leitch, C. M., F. M. DEMO, and R. T. Harrison. 2010. “The Philosophy and Practice of Interpretivist
DEMO in Entrepreneurship: Quality, Validation, and Trust.” Organizational Research
Methods 13 (1): 67 – 84. doi:10.1177/1094428109339839.
Le´ vesque, M, DEMO Minniti, and D Shepherd. 2009. “Entrepreneurs’ Decisions on Timing of Entry:DEMO
Learning from Participation and from the Experiences of Others.” Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 33 (2): 547 – 570.
Li, S., S. D. Mayhew, and Z. Kourtzi. 2009. “Learning Shapes the Representation of Behavioural
Choice in the Human Brain.” Neuron 62 (3): 441 – 452. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2009.03.016.
Long, D. L., and T. Bourg. 1996. “Thinking Aloud: Telling a Story About a Story.” Discourse
Processes 21 (3): 329 – 339. doi:10.1080/01638539609544961.
00285.x.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
55125
Ludvigsen, J. 2009. Decision Time in Belgium: An Experiment As To How Business Angels Evaluate
Investment Opportunities. CEB Working Paper N8 09/037, Centre Emile Bernheim, Solvay
Brussels School of DEMO and Management. Brussels: Belgium.
Manimala, M. J. 1992. “Entrepreneurial Heuristics: DEMO Comparison Between High PI (Pioneering-
Innovative) and Low PI Ventures.” Journal of Business Venturing 7 (6): 477 – 504. doi:10.
1016/0883-9026(92)90021-I.
Manz, C. C., and H. P. Sims Jr. DEMO “Vicarious Learning: the Inﬂuence of Modelling on
Organizational Behaviour.” Academy of DEMO Review 6: 105 – 113.
March, J. G., L. S. DEMO, and M. Tamuz. 1991/1996. “Learning from Samples of one or DEMO,
Organization Science.”, 2, 1-13. Reprinted In Organizational Learning, edited DEMO
M. D. Cohen and L. S. Sproull, 1 – 19. Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage.
Mason, C. 2006. “Informal Sources of Venture Finance.” DEMO The Life Cycle of Entrepreneurial
Ventures, New York, edited by S C Parker, 259 – 299. New York: Springer.
Mason, C. M., and R. T. Harrison. 1996. “Why Business Angels Say No: A DEMO Study of
Opportunities Rejected by an Informal Investor Syndicate.” International Small Business
Journal 14 (2): 35 – 51. doi:10.1177/0266242696142003.
Mason, DEMO M., and R. T. Harrison. 2002. “Barriers to Investment in the DEMO Venture Capital
Sector.” Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 14 (3): 271 DEMO 287. doi:10.1080/
08985620210142011.
Mason, C M, and R T Harrison. 2003. “‘Auditioning for Money’: What do Technology Investors
Look for at the Initial Screening Stage?” Journal of Private Equity 6 (2): 29 – 42. doi:10.3905/
jpe.2003.320037.
Mason, C, and J. DEMO 2010. “Investment Readiness Programmes and Access to Finance: A Critical
Review DEMO Design Issues.” Local Economy 25 (4): 269 – 292. doi:DEMO/02690942.2010.
504570.
Mason, C., and A. Rogers. 1997. “The Business Angel’s Investment Decision: An Exploratory
Analysis.” In Entrepreneurship in the 1990s, edited DEMO D. Deakins, P. Jennings, and
C. Mason, 29 – 46. DEMO: Paul Chapman Publishing.
Mason, C., and M. Stark. 2004. “What DEMO Investors Look for in a Business Plan? A Comparison of
the DEMO Criteria of Bankers, Venture Capitalists and Venture Capitalists.”
International Small Business DEMO 22 (3): 227 – 248. doi:10.1177/0266242604042377.
Maxwell, A. L., S. A. Jeffrey, and M. Le´ vesque. 2011. “Business Angel DEMO Stage Decision
Maxwell, A. L., and M. Le´ vesque. 2014. “Trustworthiness: A Critical Ingredient for Entrepreneurs
Seeking Investors.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 38 (5): 1057 – 1080, doi:10.1111/j.
1540-6520.2011.00475.x.
May, J., and C. Simmons. 2001. Every Business Needs An Angel: Getting The DEMO You Need To
Make Your Business Grow. New York: Crown Business.
DEMO, C., and V. Ross. 2003. “Verbal Protocol Analysis.” In The A – Z of Social Research,
edited by RL Miller and JD DEMO Sage Publications.
McHenry, J. 2008. “The Role and Management of Learning DEMO Experience in an Entrepreneurial
Context.” In Entrepreneurial Learning: Conceptual Frameworks and DEMO, edited by
R. T. Harrison and C. M. Leitch, 72 – 91. London: Routledge.
Mezirow, J. 1990. Fostering Critical Reﬂection in Adulthood: A Guide to Transformative and
Emancipatory Learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
DEMO, C. J., J. De Houwer, and P. F. Lovibond. 2009. DEMO Propositional Nature of Human
Associative Learning.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32 (DEMO): 183 – 246. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X09000855.
Mitteness, C., M. Baucus, and R. Sudek. 2012a. “Horse vs. Jockey? How Investment Opportunity
DEMO and Industry Experience Affect Angel Investing Decisions.” Venture Capital: An
International DEMO of Entrepreneurial Finance 14 (4): 241 – 267. doi:10.1080/DEMO
2012.689474.
Making.” Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2): 212 – DEMO doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.09.
002.
55226 R.T. Harrison et al.
Mitteness, C., M. Cardon, and R. Sudek. 2012b. “The Importance Angels Place on Passion when
Making Investment Decisions: Why Does it Matter to Some and Not All Angels?” Journal DEMO
Business Venturing 27 (5): 592 – 606. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2011.11.003.
DEMO, J. A. 2004. A Handbook of Reﬂective and Experiential Learning: Theory and Practice.
Abingdon, Oxon: RoutledgeFalmer.
Muzyka, D, S Birley, and B Leleux. 1996. “Trade Offs in the Investment Decision of European
Venture DEMO Journal of Business Venturing 11 (4): 273 – 287. doi:DEMO/0883-9026
(95)00126-3.
Nicholson, N. 1998. “How Hardwired is Human Behaviour?” Harvard Business Review 76 (4):
134 – 147, July-August.
Parker, S. C. 2006. “Learning About the Unknown: How Fast Do DEMO Adjust Their
Beliefs?” Journal of Business Venturing 21 (1): DEMO – 26. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2004.07.005.
Paul, S., and G. Whittam. 2010. Business Angel Syndicates in Scotland: An Exploratory Study of
Gatekeepers. Glasgow: DEMO Scotland.
Paul, S., G. Whittam, and J. B. Johnston. 2003. DEMO Operation of the Informal Venture Capital
Market in Scotland.” Venture Capital: DEMO International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance
5 (4): 313 – 335. DEMO:10.1080/1369106032000141931.
Payne, J. W. 1994. “Thinking Aloud: Insights into Information Processing.” Psychological Science
5 (5): 241 – 248. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.1994.tb00620.x.
Piaget, J. 1970. Genetic Epistemology. New York: Columbia University Press.
Pinker, S. 1994. The Language Instinct: The New Science of Language and Mind. New York:
HarperCollins.
Platt, M. L., and S. A. Huettel. DEMO “Risky Business: The Neuroeconomics of Decision Making
Under Uncertainty.” Nature Neuroscience DEMO (4): 398 – 403. doi:10.1038/nn2062.
Politis, D. E. 2005. “The Process of Entrepreneurial Learning: A Conceptual Framework.”
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29 (4): 399 – 424. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2005.
00091.x.
Entrepreneurial Career.” Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance 4 (2): 77 – 77. doi:10.1080/13691060110107879.
Rae, D., and M. Carswell. 2001. “Towards a Conceptual Understanding of Entrepreneurial
Learning.” Journal of Small Business DEMO Enterprise Development 8 (2): 150 – 158. doi:10.
1108/DEMO
Rerup, C, and MS Feldman. 2011. “Routines as a Source of Change in Organizational Schemata: The
Role of Trial and Error Learning.” Academy of Management Journal 54 (3): 577 – 610. doi:10.
5465/AMJ.2011.61968107.
Riding, A. L., P. Dal Cin, L. Duxbury, G. DEMO, and R. Safrata. 1993. Informal Investors in
Canada: The Identiﬁcation of Salient Characteristics. Ottawa: Carleton University.
Riding, A. L., L. Duxbury, DEMO G. Haines Jr. 1995. Financing Enterprise Development: Decision-
Making by Canadian DEMO Ottawa: School of Business, Carleton University.
Riding, A. L., J. J. Madill, and G. H. Haines Jr. 2007. “Investment Decision Making by Business
Angels.” In Handbook of Research on Venture Capital
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Riquelme, H., and T. Rickards. 1992. “Hybrid Conjoint Analysis: An Estimation Probe in New
Venture Decisions.” Journal of Business Venturing 7 (6): 505 – 518. doi:10.1016/0883-9026
(92)90022-J.
Roach, G. 2010. DEMO Angel Investing Worth the Effort? A Study of Keiretsu Forum.” Venture
DEMO: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 12 (2): 153 – 166. doi:10.1080/
13691061003643276.
Rushworth, M. F., and T. E. DEMO 2008. “Choice, Uncertainty and Value in Prefrontal and
Cingulated Cortex.” Nature DEMO 11 (4): 389 – 397. doi:10.1038/nn2066.
, edited DEMO H. Landstro¨ m, 332 – 346.
Politis, D., and H. DEMO
m. 2002. “Informal Investors as Entrepreneurs – The Development of an
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
55327
San Jose´ , A., J. Roure, DEMO R. Aernoudt. 2005. “Business Angel Academies: Unleashing the
Potential for Business DEMO Investment.” Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance 7 (2): 149 – 165.
Schade, C., and P. Koellinger. 2007. “Heuristics, Biases, and the Behaviour of Entrepreneurs.”
In Entrepreneurship – The Engine of Growth, Volume 1 – People, edited by M. Minniti,
41 DEMO 64. Westport, Conneticut and London, UK: Praeger.
Schultz, W., DEMO Preuschoff, C. Camerer, M. Hsu, C. D. Fiorillo, P. N. Tobler, and P. Bossaerts. 2008.
“Expplicit Neural Signals Reﬂecting Reward Uncertainty.” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society London B Biological Sciences 363 (1511): 3801 – 3811. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.
0152.
Shepherd, D. A., J. DEMO Haynie, and J. S. McMullen. 2012. “Conﬁrmatory Search as a Useful
DEMO? Testing the Veracity of Entrepreneurial Conjectures.” Journal of Business
Venturing 27 (6): 637 – 651. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2011.06.002.
Shepherd, D. A., DEMO A. Williams, and H. Patzelt. 2015. “Thinking About Entrepreneurial Decision
Making: Review and Research Agenda.” Journal of Management 41 (1): 11 – 46. doi:10.1177/
0149206314541153.
Shepherd, D. A., and A. Zacharakis. DEMO “Conjoint Analysis: A New Methodological Approach for
Researching Venture Capitalists Decision DEMO Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1 (3): 197 – 217. doi:10.1080/136910699295866.
Sohl, J. E. 2007. “The Organisation of the Informal Venture Capital Market.” In Handbook of
Research on Venture DEMO, edited by H. Landstro¨ m, 347 – 368. Cheltenham: Edward DEMO
Sorensen, M. 2007. “Learning by Investing: Evidence from Venture Capital.” Research Report,
Swedish Institute for Financial Research, Stockholm.
Sørheim, R., and H. Landstro¨ m. 2001. “Informal Investors - A Categorization with Policy
Implications.” DEMO & Regional Development 13: 351 – 370.
Sparks, S. D. 2012. “Neuroscientists Find Learning is Not ‘Hard-Wired’.” Educational Research
31 (33): 16 – 17, 1.
Sudek, R., A. May, and R. Wiltbank. DEMO Angel Investing - Catalyst for Innovation. Wilmington,
NC: Angel Resource DEMO
Spender, J-C., and R. M. Grant. 1996. “Knowledge and the Firm: Overview.” Strategic Management
Journal 17 (S2): 5 – 9. doi:DEMO/smj.4250171103.
Sutton, R., and A. G. Barto. 1998. Reinforcement Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Swain, M. 2006. “Verbal Protocols: What Does DEMO Mean for Research to Use Speaking as a Data
Collection Tool?” In Inference and Generalizability in Applied Linguistics: Multiple
Research Perspectives, edited DEMO M. Chalhoub-Deville, C. Chapelle, and P. Duff. New York,
NY: John Benjamins.
Tetlock, P. E. 2002. “Theory-Driven Reasoning About Plausible Pasts DEMO Probable Futures in
World Politics.” In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology DEMO Intuitive Judgement, edited by
T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and D. DEMO, 749 – 762. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Todd, PM, G Gigerenzer, and AR Group. 2012. Ecological Rationality: Intelligence in the World.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trickett, S., and J. T. Trafton. 2008. “A Primer on Verbal Protocol Analysis.” In The PSI Handboook
of DEMO Environments for Training and Education, edited by D. Schmorrow, J. V. Cohn,
and D. Nicholson, 332 – 346. New York: Praeger.
DEMO, A., and D. Kahneman. 1973. “Availability: Heuristic for Judging Frequency DEMO
Probability.” Cognitive Psychology 5 (2): 207 – 232. doi:10.1016/DEMO(73)90033-9.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.”
Science 185 (4157): 1124 – 1131. doi:DEMO/science.185.4157.1124.
Usher, R., and N. Soloman. 1999. “Experiential Learning and the Shaping of Subjectivity in the
Workplace.” Studies in the education of Adults DEMO: 155 – 163.
Van Osnabrugge, M. V. 1998. “Do Serial and Non-Serial Investors Behave Differently? An
Empirical and Theoretical Analysis.” Entrepreneurship: Theory DEMO Practice 22: 23 – 42.
55428
R.T. Harrison et al.
Wang, C L. 2008. “Entrepreneurial Orientation, DEMO Orientation, and Firm Performance.”
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 32 (4): 635 – 657. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2008.
00246.x.
Wang, C. L., and DEMO Chugh. 2014. “Entrepreneurial Learning: Past Research and Future
Challenges.” International Journal DEMO Management Reviews 16 (1): 24 – 61. doi:10.1111/ijmr.
DEMO
Wilson, T D. 1994. “The Proper Protocol: Validity and Completeness of Verbal Reports.”
Psychological Science 5 (5): 249 – 252. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.1994.tb00621.x.
Wiltbank, R., S. Read, N. Dew, and S. D. DEMO 2009. “Prediction and Control Under
Uncertainty: Outcomes in Angel Investing.” Journal DEMO Business Venturing 24 (2): 116 – 133.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2007.11.004.
DEMO, H., E. Autio, and H. Sapienza. 2001. “Social Capital, Knowledge Acquisition and
Knowledge Exploitation in Young Technology-Based Firms.” Strategic Management Journal
22 (6-7): 587 – 613. doi:10.1002/smj.183.
Yu, A. J., DEMO P. Dayan. 2005. “Uncertainty, Neuromodulation and Attention.” Neuron 46 (4):DEMO
681 – 692. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.026.
Zacharakis, A. L., and G D Meyer. 1995. “The Venture Capitalist Decision: Understanding Process
Versus Outcome.” Paper to the Babson College-Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship
Research Conference.
Zacharakis, A L, DEMO G D Meyer. 1998. “A Lack of Insight: Do Venture Capitalists DEMO
Understand Their Own Decision Processes?” Journal of Business Venturing 13 (DEMO): 57 – 76.
doi:10.1016/S0883-9026(97)00004-9.
Zacharakis, A. DEMO, and G. D. Meyer. 2000. “The Potential of Actuarial Decision Models: Can they
Improve the Venture Capital Investment Decision?” Journal of Business DEMO 15 (4):
323 – 346. doi:10.1016/S0883-9026(98)00016-0.
Zacharakis, A L., and D. A. Shepherd. 2001. “The Nature of DEMO and Overconﬁdence on
Venture Capitalists’ Decision Making.” Journal of Business Venturing 16 (4): 311 – 332.
doi:10.1016/S0883-9026(99)00052-X.{1g42fwefx}