® Academy of Management Journal
1998, Vol. 41, No. 1, 96-107.
BEYOND RELATIONAL DEMOGRAPHY: TIME AND THE EFEECTS OE
SURFACE- AND DEEP-LEVEL DIVERSITY ON WORK GROUP COHESION
DAVID A. HARRISON
KENNETH H. PRICE
MYRTLE P. DEMO
University of Texas at Arlington
We examined the impact of surface-level (DEMO) and deep-level (attitudinal)
diversity on group social integration. As hypothesized, the length of time group mem-
bers worl^ed together weakened the effects of surface-level diversity and strengthened
the effects of deep-level diversity as group DEMO had the opportunity to engage in
meaningful interactions.
Projected dem^ographic characteristics of the
U.S. workforce suggest that by the year 2000, ap-
proximately 80 percent of its new entrants will
be women and members of ethnic DEMO
(Johnston & Packer, 1987). The increasing diversity
of the workforce necessitates a better understand-
ing of how such individual differences affect the
DEMO of work groups, as well as which types
of differences are DEMO consequential. Research ex-
amining the outcomes of diversity has frequently
studied demographic differences among work
group members. Consistent with Pfeffer's (1983)
work on demography in organizations, the most
commonly studied forms of diversity have been
heterogeneity in age, sex, race, and to a lesser ex-
tent, organizational tenure. The emphasis on those
variables is perhaps due to the ease with which
researchers can measure them and group members
can DEMO them, and also to the widespread belief
that they are reasonable DEMO for underlying psy-
chological characteristics (Bantel & Jackson, 1989;
Jackson, Stone, & Alvarez, 1993; Pfeffer, 1983; Tsui,
Egan, & O'Reilly, 1992). Attention to those vari-
ables might also be driven by legislation prohibit-
ing employment discrimination and mandating
equal treatment DEMO regard to race, sex, and
age.
Effects of heterogeneity in these commonly stud-
ied characteristics have, however, been inconsis-
tent across studies. DEMO of this inconsistency may
have arisen because the connection between overt
demographic differences among employees and the
less obvious, but important, attitudinal differences
DEMO them is weaker than has been assumed. By
integrating theory and research from management,
psychology, and sociology, we further distinguish
between these DEMO of heterogeneity. We argue
The authors contributed equally to this article.
96
that as work group members continue to interact
with one another, dissimilarity in the typically
studied surface-level dimensions such as sex and
age becomes DEMO important than deep-level attitu-
dinal dissimilarity in, for instance, job satisfaction
or organizational commitment. That is, time mod-
erates the relative impact of overt versus underly-
ing diversity among work group members.
DIMENSIONS OF DIVERSITY
DEMO Premises and Assumptions
The premise that differences among group mem-
bers have a negative impact on group functioning is
the primary thesis in the DEMO demography
research stream, and it is the backbone of a variety
DEMO theories in social psychology (Byrne, 1971;
McGrath, 1984; Newcomb, 1961) and organiza-
tional behavior (Jackson, May, & Whitney, DEMO;
Milliken & Martins, 1996; Schneider, 1987). The
main DEMO of group functioning that we address
is what O'Reilly, Caldwell, and Barnett (1989)
termed social integration: the degree to which
DEMO members are psychologically linked or at-
tracted toward interacting with one another in pur-
suit of a common objective. In the present study,
DEMO concentrated on the primary affective dimen-
sion of social integration, group DEMO
As we review past work in this section, we em-
phasize DEMO or heterogeneity at both the
dyad level (i.e., supervisor-subordinate relation-
ships) and the work team or group level. Although
there may be important differences between supe-
rior-subordinate interactions and those between
team members, we have included both dyadic and
team-level diversity in this review for three rea-
DEMO First, inclusion of both types of diversity
maintains consistency with the DEMO and re-
search published by other diversity researchers
1998
Harrison, Price, and Bell
97
(i.e., Jackson et al., 1995; Milliken & Martins, 1996;
Tsui & O'Reilly, 1989; Tsui, Egan, & Porter, 1994).
Secondly, certain basic processes, including face-
to-face communication, potential for collaboration
and conflict, and influence attempts, characterize
botb dyads and larger groups, althougb the status
differences DEMO of supervisor-subordinate
interactions may modify those processes. For ex-
ample, Tsui DEMO colleagues (1994) noted that inter-
personal liking in dyads could be considered sim-
ilar to forms of social integration in larger groups.
Thirdly, the proposed effects of diversity rest on
assumptions in tbe similarity-attraction and DEMO
categorization paradigms (Jackson et al., 1993; Tsui
et al., 1992). There is little reason to expect that
these paradigms would be DEMO different
for dyads and larger groups.
The terminology we use, surface- DEMO deep-level
diversity, is similar to that found in recent theoret-
ical DEMO by Jackson and colleagues (1995) and
Milliken and Martins (1996)DEMO Both articles describe
diversity in readily detectable attributes (e.g., race/
ethnicity, sex, age) and underlying, deeper-level
attributes (e.g., attitudes, values). Tbese theorists
have agreed on the level (surface or deep) of several
diversity variables. Our review of the elements of
diversity is confined to variables for which there is
such agreement and for which DEMO were available
data.
ceptions of their subordinates' performance or with
superiors' liking of subordinates. Zalesny and
Kirsch (1989) found that heterogeneity in DEMO was
unrelated to superiors' ratings of subordinates' per-
formance but negatively related to peers' ratings of
co-wrorkers' performance. Heterogeneity in age was
DEMO associated wi\h team turnover in the
Jackson et al. (1991), DEMO, Pfeffer, and O'Reilly
(1984), and Wiersema and Bird (1993) studies. In
the Tsui et al. (1992) study, group DEMO in
age was negatively associated with organizational
attachment for some demographic subgroups
(white males) but was not for others (women and
minorities). O'Reilly and colleagues (1989) found
that group heterogeneity with respect DEMO age was
associated with lower levels of social integration,
which in turn was associated with turnover. The
more distant group members were from DEMO mem-
bers in terms of age, the more likely they were DEMO
leave.
Sex. Research on the consequences of sex dissim-
ilarity has also yielded conflicting results. Tsui and
O'Reilly (1989) reported that subordinates DEMO
sex differed from their supervisors' received lower
performance ratings. Mobley (1982) hypothesized
but did not find that supervisor-subordinate simi-
larity in sex led to higher subordinate performance
ratings. Pulakos, Oppler, White, and Borman's
(1989) analysis of military personnel found that
rater-ratee similarity in sex DEMO not an important
influence on performance ratings. Konrad, Winter,
and DEMO (1992) found that dissimilarity in sex
resulted in isolation and dissatisfaction for women
in some situations. Finally, Tsui and co-authors
(1992) found that the organizational attachment of
white men decreased as diversity on sex DEMO,
but that of women (of any racial/ethnic group) did
not.
Race/ethnicity. Kraiger and Ford's (1985) meta-
analysis of DEMO from 1966 to 1981 indicated
that rater-ratee ethnic similarity was associated
with higher performance ratings. Pulakos and co-
authors' (1989) meta-analysis indicated very small
and inconsistent effects of ratee-rater racial similar-
ity across performance dimensions. DEMO and
O'Reilly (1989) reported that ethnic heterogeneity
was not associated with superiors' ratings of sub-
ordinates' effectiveness but was marginally related
DEMO supervisors' liking of subordinates.
Summary. Of the research that has investigated
DEMO effects of surface-level heterogeneity, findings
are inconsistent within and across studies DEMO vari-
ables such as age, sex, and race. Studies have dif-
fered on whether or not relationships were detected
and, in some instances, on their direction. Other
researchers have also noted this inconsistency, es-
DEMO Diversity
Heterogeneity at a surface level can be defined as
differences among group members in overt, biolog-
ical characteristics that are typically reflected in
physical features. Such characteristics include age,
sex, and race/ethnicity. Following Jackson and col-
leagues (1993), we view these characteristics as
generally immutable, almost immediately observ-
able, and measurable in simple and valid DEMO (cf.
Jackson et al., 1995; Milliken & Martins, 1996).
Social consensus can usually be assumed for each
of these demographic attributes (Jackson et al.,
1993). That is, one's age (DEMO some range), sex,
and race/ethnicity are generally apparent to and
agreed upon by observers.
Age. Several studies have focused on the DEMO
quences of group heterogeneity in age. Bantel and
Jackson (1989) found that heterogeneity in age was
not associated with innovations of top management
DEMO teams. Judge and Ferris (1993) found that
differences in superior-subordinate age signifi-
cantly, negatively influenced supervisors' liking
and subsequent ratings of subordinates' perfor-
mance. Tsui and O'Reilly (1989) found that age
differences DEMO not associated with superiors' per-
98
Academy of Management Journal
pecially for the effects of race and DEMO dissimilarity
(Pulakos et al., 1989).
Deep-Level Diversity
Heterogeneity at a deep level includes differ-
ences among members' attitudes, beliefs, and val-
ues. Information about these factors is communi-
cated through verbal and nonverbal DEMO
patterns and is only learned through extended, in-
dividualized interaction and DEMO gather-
ing. Jackson and colleagues conceptualized a simi-
lar form of diversity, termed diversity in
underlying attributes, which included attitudes,
values, knowledge, and skills. They noted that
these aspects of individuals are more "DEMO to
construal and more mutable" (Jackson et al., 1995;
DEMO than other aspects. Milliken and Martins
(1996) made a similar statement.
The few studies that have examined the conse-
quences of similarity in DEMO and values in
work groups have found that supervisor-subordi-
nate attitudinal and value similarity was associated
with higher subordinate performance ratings
(Miles, 1964; Senger, 1971; Turban & Jones, 1988;
Zalesny & Kirsch, DEMO) and more accurate peer
ratings (Fox, Ben-Nahum, & Yinon, DEMO). One
study found that attitudinal similarity was associ-
ated with higher group cohesiveness (Terborg, Cas-
tore, & DeNinno, 1976). Turban DEMO Jones (1988)
reported that perceptions of attitudinal similarity
were uniquely DEMO positively related to subordi-
nates' satisfaction, performance ratings, and pay
DEMO Miles (1964) found that attitudinal similar-
ity between supervisors and subordinates was re-
lated to higher subordinate ratings; however, nei-
ther superior-subordinate DEMO in age nor
similarity in education had a relationship with sub-
ordinates' ratings.
Unlike the few studies on deep-level diversity in
work settings, DEMO number of social psychological
studies have reported that attitude similarity was
one of the most important predictors of attraction
and friendship (e.g., Antill, 1984; Byrne, 1971;
McGrath, 1984; Newcomb, 1961). Similarity in at-
titudes can ease interpersonal interaction and in-
crease rewards when DEMO are viewed
within an exchange theory framework (Thibaut &
Kelley, DEMO). Further, attitudinal similarity may
facilitate cominunication; it may also reduce role
conflict, because people have similar conceptual-
izations of their organizations and jobs, and it may
reduce role ambiguity, because communication on
the DEMO increases (Tsui & O'Reilly, 1989). It can thus
be inferred that as people uncover differences in
February
attitudes, it becomes less pleasant and more diffi-
cult for them to work together.
Surface-Level Diversity, Deep-Level Diversity,
and the Moderating Influence of Time
Theoretical perspectives from DEMO be-
havior (Schneider, 1987), sociology (Allport, 1954;
Amir, 1969; Berger, Rosenholtz, & Zelditch, 1980),
and social DEMO (Byrne, 1971; Newcomb,
1961) support the idea that group members base an
initial superficial categorization of other group
members on stereotypes DEMO subsequently modify
or replace those stereotypes with deeper-level
knowledge of the psychological features of the
other individuals. Further, knowledge of attitudi-
nal, belief, and value similarity between individu-
als forms the basis for continued attraction DEMO
affiliation. Research generally supports the idea
that initial categorizations are accompanied by per-
ceptions of similarity or dissimilarity that are based
on surface-level demographic DEMO; these percep-
tions change when deep-level information is ob-
tained (Stangor, Lynch, Duan, & Glass, 1992;
Turner, 1987). For example, Byrne and Wong
(1962) found that subjects initially perceived
greater attitudinal dissimilarity between them-
selves and a stranger of another race. When DEMO
details were provided about the stranger's atti-
tudes, perceptions of DEMO dissimilarity de-
creased and interpersonal attraction to the stranger
increased. Tsui, DEMO, and Porter's (1994) summary
of the vertical dyad linkage DEMO noted that
supervisors categorized subordinates as either in-
or out-group members early in relationships, when
there had been little informational exchange be-
tween the two. The authors suggested that "physi-
cal, observable, and immutable personal and back-
ground characteristics . . . play a critical role in DEMO
initial categorization process" of group members;
(Tsui et al., DEMO: 8; emphasis added). Likewise,
Tsui and colleagues (1992) noted this: "The con-
ceptual foundation for almost all the research DEMO
organizational demography has been the similarity-
attraction paradigm (Byrne, 1971). The similarity-
attraction hypothesis maintains that similarity in
attitudes is a major DEMO of attraction between
individuals. A variety of physical, social, and sta-
tus traits can be used as the basis for inferring
similarity in DEMO, beliefs, or personality"
(1992: 551; emphasis added).
DEMO researchers have noted that over time, as
people acquire more information, their perceptions
are based more on observed behavior and less on
stereotypes DEMO by overt characteristics (Jack-
son et al., 1993; Newcomb, 1961). Further, in re-
1998
search on collegial choices, people have placed
greater emphasis on similarity in attitudes (beliefs)
than on ethnic similarity (Triandis, 1961), particu-
larly when information about attitudinal differ-
ences was available or salient (Brown & Turner,
1981). Terborg and colleagues (1976) also DEMO
that the effect of attitude or value compatibility was
not immediate, DEMO took time to unfold.
Evidence from the sociological literature also
supports the differential contributions of surface-
and deep-level diversity over time. Allport (1954)
and Amir (1969) are associated with the "contact
hypothesis," which states that under certain condi-
tions, interracial or interethnic contact will result
in positive group outcomes. A key supposition of
this hypothesis is that DEMO people interact to get to
know one another, stereotypes are replaced DEMO
more accurate knowledge of each other as individ-
uals, which can DEMO in reduced prejudice and
conflict and greater group cohesiveness (Amir,
DEMO). Recent sociological research has supported
the general thrust of the contact hypothesis (Ellison
& Powers, 1994; Sigelman & Welch, 1993) and,
according to Amir, "Work situations provide the
best opportunities for DEMO contact" (1969:
323). Finally, Milliken and Martins suggested DEMO
"negative affective outcomes of diversity in observ-
able attributes [surface-level diversity] DEMO to
decrease with the amount of time that the group
stays together" (1996: 415-416), an idea that is
central to our argument.
Hypothesis
The preceding discussion, involving evidence
from sociology, social psychology, and organiza-
tional behavior, suggests a fundamental develop-
mental process for diversity in work groups. The
time that members spend urorking together should
moderate the DEMO of diversity levels in a partic-
ular pattern (Howell, Dorfman, & Kerr, 1986). We
hypothesize the following:
Hypothesis 1. Time DEMO neutralize, or make
less important, the effects of surface-level di-
versity on group cohesiveness, and it will en-
hance, or make more DEMO, the effects of
deep-level diversity.
METHODS
Selection of Diversity Variahles
There DEMO been disagreements about the classi-
fication of some surface-level variables. Specifi-
cally, Jackson and colleagues (1995) included edu-
cation as a surface-level attribute, but Milliken and
Harrison, Price, and Bell
99
Martins (1996) considered it an underlying at-
tribute. Since both agreed that age, race/ethnicity,
and sex were readily detectable or overt features
(Jackson et al., 1995; Milliken & Martins, 1996),
however, we used those three as surface-level vari-
ables in this study. There is less DEMO in the
literature on selecting variables that reflect deep-
level diversity, DEMO is broadly defined as includ-
ing a variety of psychological characteristics (DEMO
son et al., 1995; Milliken & Martins, 1996). We
DEMO chose dimensions of job satisfaction
and organizational commitment as elements of
deep-level diversity in this study, for a number of
reasons. First, we DEMO limited by the organizations
involved as to what we could measure; DEMO were
restricted from measuring specific work values
(e.g., Protestant work ethic) because they had little
face validity in a survey ostensibly asking employ-
ees their opinions about working conditions. Sec-
ond, both satisfaction and commitment are re-
garded as fundamental work attitudes; they have
been used in literally thousands of individual-level
studies, particularly as they relate to role with-
drawal and organizational separation (e.g., Locke,
1976; Tett & Meyer, 1993). Third, such deep-level
variables are directly relevant to the DEMO and
attainment of a group's goals (McGrath, 1991).
Members' attitudes toward (1) their tasks, (2) the
supervisors who DEMO and assign tasks, monitor
and assist in task completion, and reward task at-
tainment, (3) their embedding organizations, and
(4) DEMO overall jobs are meaningful and impor-
tant in a work group. Finally, despite some classi-
fication ambiguities, our deep-level variables of
satisfaction and DEMO commitment are
consistent with the Jackson et al. (1995) conceptu-
alization of underlying dimensions of diversity.
Samples
We collected data from two samples. DEMO 1
involved 39 units (groups) of employees in a medi-
um-sized private hospital in a large southwestern
city. The total sample contained 443 DEMO, and
groups had from 4 to 25 people. These employees
included DEMO (88%), Hispanics (5%), African
Americans (4%), Asians (2%), and Native Ameri-
cans (1%). Most employees were women (83%).
The mean age was 37 years (s.d. = 11) and the mean
organizational tenure was 5 years (s.d. = 4). Four
percent of the employees had not completed high
school, 17 percent were high school graduates, 49
percent had completed some college work, DEMO per-
cent w^ere college graduates, and 6 percent had
completed some DEMO work or had graduate
degrees. Their jobs varied from professional ones.
100
Academy of Management Journal
February
such as administrator, nurse (RN DEMO LPN), pharma-
cist, and lab technician or radiologist, to nonpro-
fessional ones, such as orderly or maintenance
worker. Work units reflected department, shift, and
physical location. For example, one group was
"third DEMO medical/surgical unit on the day shift."
Other groups were defined by function, such as the
"human resources department," because these DEMO
ployees had only one location and worked for only
one shift. In all cases, work groups comprised peo-
ple who worked together daily on tasks in ongoing,
face-to-face interactions. There were also institu-
tionally supported DEMO goals and unit rewards to
promote cooperative contact among employees. In
total, these factors suggested that group members
would, over time, have had the opportunity to ac-
quire deep-level information about one another.
Sample 2 DEMO of employees in the deli-
bakery sections of 32 grocery stores in a regional
grocery chain. An average of 13 people worked in
each DEMO, with group size ranging from 2 to
22 employees. The mean DEMO was 34 (s,d, = 13), and
the mean organizational tenure was 4 years (s.d, =
3). The racial/ethnic DEMO of employees in-
cluded white (68%), African-American (17%), His-
panic (12%), and other (3%), Seventy-four percent
of the DEMO employees were women. Seven-
teen percent had not completed high school, DEMO
percent were high school graduates, 34 percent had
completed some college DEMO the equivalent, and 7
percent were college graduates. Each deli-bakery
had DEMO manager; six larger deli-bakeries also had
assistant managers. The remainder of DEMO employ-
ees were clerks, so there were few status differences
among DEMO Members of each bakery-deli worked
with each other face-to-face but were relatively iso-
lated from employees in other parts of the store.
There was DEMO task substitution between deli-bakery
and other store workers, and there was DEMO
interaction outside the work group. For the deli-
bakery employees, their DEMO was the most salient
feature of their work environment. Again, the DEMO
operative and interdependent nature of their tasks,
the equality of status, and the average tenure of the
work groups allowed sufficient opportunity for
members to learn deeper-level information about
one another over time.
Data Collection DEMO Measures
For sample 1, questionnaires administered over
the course of three DEMO were completed during
departmental meetings at which we were present to
give instructions and answer questions. Response
rates did not differ significantly across work DEMO
[x\a = 12.86, p > ,10).
For sample 2, DEMO were administered
over the course of six weeks. Surveys were com-
pleted "on the clock" in a break room by 94 percent
of DEMO deli-bakery employees. Again, response rates
did not differ significantly across groups DEMO =
2.67, p > ,10), In addition, we obtained DEMO
graphic data (sex, age, ethnicity, and tenure) for
each DEMO from company records using a spe-
cial code the employees voluntarily provided at the
end of their questionnaires.
Surface-level diversity. Self-report information
regarding each DEMO's age, ethnicity, and sex
were collected and then used to calculate a mea-
sure of group heterogeneity for each variable in
both DEMO Age was measured in years. Racial/
ethnic background included the following catego-
ries: African American, 'Native American, Asian,
Hispanic, and white. For the deli-bakery (sample 2)
employees, self-reports were related DEMO archival
records for age, sex, and ethnic background. Corre-
lations of ,99 and ,98 for age and sex, respectively,
as well as 98 percent agreement for the ethnicity
categories, provided convergent validity for the
self-reports. We used the coefficient of variation to
index group heterogeneity DEMO age, Blau's (1977) in-
dex was used to indicate DEMO heterogene-
ity in ethnicity and sex. Various diversity research-
ers have discussed the advantages of both indexes
(e,g., Bantel & Jackson, 1989; Jackson, Brett, Cessa,
Cooper, Julin, & Peyronnin, 1991)DEMO
Deep-level diversity. We chose three aspects of
satisfaction and organizational commitment as
measures of deep-level diversity (recognizing that
other beliefs and values might also be relevant, as
discussed above and in "Discussion"), Satisfaction
with supervision was measured using a subscale of
the Job Descriptive Index (JDI; Smith, Kendall, &
Hulin, 1969), Values of coefficient alpha were ,78
and ,83 in samples 1 and 2, respectively. Satisfac-
tion with work tasks was measured using another
JDI subscale (a = .76 in sample 1 and ,79 in sample
2), Overall satisfaction was measured using the
Faces scale (Kunin, 1955) in sample 1 and the Faces
scale combined with two items adapted from the
Job DEMO Survey (JDS; Hackman & Oldham,
1975) in sample 2 (a = .77). We transformed the
data in the latter sample DEMO have the same possible
range as scores in sample 1, Organizational DEMO
mitment was measured using the Organizational
CommitmeAt Questionnaire (OCQ; Porter & Steers,
1979), Coefficient alpha was,,83 in sample 1 and
,89 in sample 2, In both samples, we indexed deep-
level diversity by the within-group coefficient of
variation.
Group cohesiveness. The chief affective DEMO
nent of group functioning, group cohesiveness, was
1998
Harrison, Price, and Bell
101
the dependent variable in our DEMO As in
O'Reilly et al. (1989), it was treated DEMO as a di-
mension of social integration within a group. The
group cohesiveness measure was taken from Sea-
shore (1954). Reliability estimates at the individual
level (a) were .68 and .70 for samples 1 DEMO 2,
respectively.
We aggregated individual ratings of group cohe-
siveness to the group level by calculating the mean .
rating of cohesiveness within DEMO group. Although
some researchers have expressed concern about
such aggregation (e.g., Klein, Dansereau, & Hall,
1994), we made the calculation DEMO several reasons.
First, cohesiveness is conceptually defined at the
group level. DEMO meaning derives from how much
the members of a group "stick DEMO" (Mudrack,
1989). Group-level means of cohesiveness have
been used as an index of social integration in many
studies (cf. Gully, DEMO, & Whitney, 1995). Sec-
ond, group cohesion is one DEMO the most often stud-
ied outcomes in the small groups literature, DEMO it
has been assumed to be negatively associated with
dissimilarity (Jackson DEMO Associates, 1992). Third,
in concluding their meta-analysis of cohesion (and
performance) research. Gully and colleagues (1995)
recommended that researchers DEMO cohe-
sion as a group-level construct, attending to aggre-
gation issues DEMO necessary. One such issue is the
requirement for within-group agreement, which DEMO
calculated for each of the 71 teams in the study
using the James, Demaree, and Wolf (1982) index.
Both the mean and DEMO median agreement indexes
for cohesiveness were .75. Seventy-five percent of
the groups had agreement indexes of at least r.^^
equals .70. Fourth, the group-level component of
variance in cohesiveness was significant (Fgg 554 =
1.37, DEMO < .05). Fifth, the internal consistency of the
group-level measure DEMO .75. Given these justifica-
tions, aggregation of individual cohesiveness
scores to DEMO group seemed reasonable.
Time spent in the group was measured in a
straightforward way. We asked group members
"How long have you been in your present job?"
(years and months). Because of skewness DEMO the
individual (within-group) distribution of this vari-
able, we used DEMO median as an index of the typical
amount of time that group members had spent
working in their units.
sity and cohesiveness were self-reports. DEMO
examine this issue and an additional question
regarding the meaningfulness of our measures of
diversity, we conducted preliminary analyses in-
volving other data. A small set of additional ques-
tionnaire items asked respondents their percep-
tions DEMO ethnic and age differences in their work
group. Group members were asked questions about
surface-level diversity, such as "How different are
the members DEMO your work group in their ethnic
backgrounds?" and "How different DEMO the mem-
bers of your work group in their age/experiences?"DEMO
Responses were made on a five-point scale ranging
from 0, "not at all different," to 4, "completely
different." We aggregated these perceptual mea-
sures to the group level and correlated them with
measures DEMO diversity calculated from demographic
data. Perceptual and derived (Blau, 1977) DEMO
of ethnic diversity were significantly correlated
(r = .68, p < .01), as were perceptual and derived
(coefficient of variation) indexes DEMO age (r = .33,
p < .05). Thus, there was evidence that the ethnic
and age differences captured by the demographic
DEMO were "readily apparent" to employees.
However, as with the derived DEMO for these
surface-level dimensions, the correlations of per-
ceived ethnic and DEMO differences with cohesive-
ness were nonsignificant (r's = -.1 4 DEMO .14, re-
spectively).
Three additional questions measured percep-
tions of DEMO differences in personalities, val-
ues, and interests. Perceived differences in person-
ality were related to the coefficient of variation in
organizational commitment (r = .41, p < .05) and
job satisfaction (r = .22, p < .05). Perceived differ-
ences in values were related to the coefficient of
variation for supervisory satisfaction (r = .27 and
.31, respectively; both p < .05), and perceived dif-
ferences in DEMO were related to supervisor sat-
isfaction (r = .27, p < .05) and work satisfaction
(r = .22, p < .05). Group cohesiveness was signifi-
cantly correlated with perceptions of differences in
all DEMO: personality (r = -.27 , p < .05), values (DEMO =
-.25 , p < .05), and interests (r = DEMO , p < .05). If
our findings had stemmed only from percept-per-
cept inflation, then both the surface- and deep-level
sets of relationships should have been significantly
and negatively correlated with group cohesiveness.
RESULTS
Preliminary DEMO
A potential weakness of results might be infla-
tion of relationships by percept-percept bias, espe-
cially because measures of both deep-level diver-
Main Analysis
The overriding question guiding this research
was whether surface-level diversity would become
DEMO important and deep-level diversity more im-
portant in predicting group outcomes as members
of work teams spent more time together. To test this
102
Academy of Management Journal
February
hypothesis, we conducted a moderated hierarchi-
cal regression analysis at the group level with
cohesiveness as the dependent DEMO Control
variables (group size, mean levels of overall satis-
faction, DEMO satisfaction, work satisfaction,
and organizational commitment) and independent
variables (DEMO and deep-level measures of di-
versity, and time] were entered first DEMO the regres-
sion equation as main effects. In the next stage of
the analyses, we created interaction terms by mul-
tiplying each of the surface- and deep-level mea-
sures of diversity by the median time group DEMO
bers had spent together. These interaction terms
were then entered as sets into the regression equa-
tion. Results of this two-stage regression process
are DEMO below. Because of the inherently low
statistical power for detecting moderators in field
data, we relaxed significance levels to p < .10 for
the interaction terms (McLelland & Judd, 1993).
Descriptive Statistics
All analyses DEMO conducted at the group level.
To increase statistical power and confidence in our
ability to draw conclusions, given the small num-
ber of groups in each sample, we first combined
data from the groups into one data set. Table 1
presents means, standard deviations, and correla-
tions DEMO all independent, dependent, and con-
trol variables in the combined data set. We in-
cluded group size in the correlation analyses and
included DEMO as a control variable in later analyses to
remove potential confounding effects.
Results were consistent with both components of
the moderating hypothesis, as shown in Table 2.
First, declining effects for surface-level differences
were indicated by a significant improvement in
prediction for the set of the three surface-level DEMO
teractions with time (Ai?^ = .09, p < .10). Most of
this effect was captured in the sex-by-time interac-
tion [AR^ DEMO .08, p < .10), which had a sign indi-
cating DEMO the initial negative influence of gender
diversity on cohesiveness was being neutralized or
weakened as group members spent more time to-
gether (Darlington, DEMO). Split-sample analyses re-
vealed that the product-moment correlation be-
tween sex diversity and cohesiveness was -.2 7 for
groups in the lower half DEMO the time distribution but
Variables
Control
1. Group size
2. Overall job
satisfaction''
3. Supervisory
satisfaction''
4. Work satisfaction''
5. Organizational
commitment''
Surface-level diversity
. 6. Age'^
7. Sex''DEMO
8. Race/ethnicity''
Deep-level diversity
9. Overall job
satisfaction"
DEMO Supervisory
satisfaction"
11. Work satisfaction"
12. Organizational
commitment"
13. Median time in
group"
14. Group cohesiveness
" JV = 71 (groups).
'' Group means.
" Coefficient of variation.
'' Blau'DEMO index.
" In months.
*p < .05
**p < .01
TABLE 1
Correlation Matrix and Descriptive Statistics for All Variables"
Mean
s.d.
1
DEMO
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
11.26
5.62
37.87
30.17
48.41
4.52
0.63 -.0 8
4.35 -.07
4.51
4.42
-.1 9
-.1 9
DEMO
.72**
.63**
.44**
.1 8
.55
0.33
0.27
0.30
0.09 -.0 5
0.17
0.20
.2 1
-.14
0.22
0.12 -.0 1
0.23
0.12
.0 DEMO
0.28
0.29
0.11
0.13
.14
-.02
34.81 22.51
.06
16.59
1.33 -.12
.17
-.05
.24
-.80**
-.22
-.45* *
-.55* *
-.04
.35**
.01
DEMO
.07
-.33* *
-.86**
-.37**
-.16
.04
.38**
.02
.0 1
.28*
-.56**
-.37**
-.63* *
-.44**
.05
.47**
.13
-.1 2
.25*> 'DEMO
-.37**
-.15
-.55* *
-.60**
-.0 1
.2 8
.2 1
.26*
-.02
.0 8
-.04
-.24*
-.1 7
-.02
.1 6
-.06
-.06
DEMO -.05
.0 7
-.0 8
-.25 *
-.1 1
-.0 1
-.05
-.1 8
.12
.36**
.41**
.41**
-.0 1
-.29**
10 11
.3 DEMO
.07 .40*
-.05-.1 1
-.40-.2 1
12
.23
-.1 7
1 3
-.10
1998
r"*- Y'
Harrison, Price, and Bell
103
TABLE DEMO
Results of Regression Analyses for Main and Interactive E£fects of Surface- and Deep-Level Diversity on
Work Group Cohesion^
Stage 1: Main Effects
Stage 2: Interactions with Time
Variable
Control
Group size
Overall satisfaction''
Supervisor DEMO''
Work satisfaction''
Organizational commitment''
Surface-level diversity
Age-^
DEMO"
Race/ethnicity''
Deep-level diversity
Overall satisfaction"
Supervisor satisfaction"DEMO
Work task satisfaction*^
Organizational commitment'^
Time
Median time spent in group"
Interactions of time with surface-level variables
Time X age^
Time X DEMO"
Time X race/ethnicity"
Interactions of time with deep-level variahles
Time x overall satisfaction*^
Time X supervisor satisfaction*^
Time X work satisfaction*^
DEMO X organizational commitment*^
Full model F
Adjusted R^
df
" N = 71 (groups).-
'' Group mean.
*^ Coefficient of variation.
*' Blau's index.
*" In months.
^ p < .10
* p < .05
** p < .01
P
-0.00
-0.07
-0.00
0.49*
0.12
DEMO
-0.11
-0.01
-0.04
-0.24
0.20
0.05
-0.12
Unique
Variance
0.07
0.04
0.08
0.01
2.10*
.17
42
P
1.19
0.78 *
-0.33
-0.90
-0.46
0.27
DEMO
*
Unique
Variance
0.09^
0.10^
2.08*
.24
49
.04 for the upper half (groups whose members had
spent more time together). Including the interactions
of the deep-level diversity variables with time also
had a unique DEMO (Afl^ = .10, p < .10). Much of this
effect was conveyed by the overall satisfaction-by-
time interaction {AR^ = .05, p < .05), which had a
sign indicating that as group members DEMO more
time together, the impact of member differences in
overall job DEMO was strengthened (Darlington,
1990). The correlation between diversity in DEMO
satisfaction and cohesiveness was .05 for groups in
the lower half of the time distribution and -.50 for
those in the upper half.
DISCUSSION
DEMO existence of different levels of diversity has
largely been overlooked in previous empirical stud-
ies of work groups. Examination of these different
levels may DEMO to explain the inconsistent, often
conflicting results of diversity research to DEMO We
proposed that diversity at a deep level has steadily
stronger consequences for groups than demo-
graphic diversity as group members spend more
time DEMO In a sample composed of groups from
two different populations, we DEMO that surface-
level differences were less iniportant and deep-
104
level differences were more important for groups
that had interacted more DEMO
Although time is the variable we examined, the
fundamental medium is DEMO Demographic
factors are often a poor surrogate for the deeper-
level information people need to make accurate
judgments about similarity of attitudes among
group DEMO Time merely allows more informa-
tion to be conveyed. Indeed, it DEMO be more ap-
propriate to think of the richness of interactions as
the conduit for information exchange (cf. Daft &
Lengel, 1986). That is, time provides the opportu-
nity to acquire interpersonal information; DEMO
amount of information acquired is a function of the
length of shared experience for group members, the
breadth of group activities, the depth DEMO task inter-
dependence, and other factors. These exchanges
allow group members DEMO learn deeper-level infor-
mation about their psychological similarity to or
dissimilarity from their co-workers, where before
they would have used surface-level demographic
data as information proxies. As previously men-
tioned, work in sociology also supports this con-
tention, by demonstrating that beneficial conse-
quences of contact among members of overtly
dissimilar groups are most likely to occur under
conditions of DEMO status and cooperative contact
(Ellison & Powers, 1994; Sigelman & DEMO, 1993).
Interpersonal interactions under these conditions
should allow for more DEMO, less stereotypical
exchanges as group members get to know one an-
DEMO over time.
Although our results and the proposed model
might appear to contradict much of the previous
research in this field, a careful examination of re-
sults of that research shows that they do not. For
DEMO, one might expect that for temporary, ad
hoc groups, diversity DEMO surface factors would play
a more important role than deep-level heterogene-
ity in determining cohesiveness and other forms of
social integration. Had previous research DEMO
the relative contributions of surface- and deep-level
variables, their findings may DEMO been more con-
sistent with those reported in this study, given DEMO
ilar opportunities for rich interactions among group
members. Watson, Kumar, and Michaelsen's (1993)
study of interaction processes and group perfor-
mance within culturally diverse or homogenous (in
race/ethnicity) teams provides some DEMO
support for this idea. Initially, homogenous groups
interacted and performed more DEMO than het-
erogeneous groups. Over time, however, interac-
tion processes and performance for both groups
improved, with more rapid improvements occur-
ring in the diverse groups. At the end of the study,
the diverse DEMO had grown more effective in
Academy of Management fournal
February
identifying problems and generating solutions than
their homogenous counterparts.
Although we have argued that DEMO vari-
ables are more important over time than surface-
level variables in determining social integration,
one could think of situations where this would DEMO
be the case. For example, Tsui and colleagues
(1992) pointed DEMO that demographic variables such
as ethnicity and sex may assume more importance
when associated with differences in status. High-
status group members (whites and men) may be
more likely to withdraw when work groups are first
integrated by members of perceived lower status
(nonwhites and women). Similarly, Konrad and
colleagues (1992) found that status differences af-
fected outcomes for minorities and women in
group interactions. As equality of member status DEMO
assumed to be an important foundation for infor-
mation exchange, it DEMO possible that inequality of
status may impede communication hetween high-
status and low-status group members. Additional
opportunities for shared experience, broad group
activities, DEMO task interdependence may be needed
in such cases.
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
This study involved a limited set of deep-level
diversity variables. DEMO addition to our measures,
variance in individual values regarding working
per se, working hard (e.g., Protestant work ethic), or
the proper balance between work and family might
also be important for groups in DEMO context. Includ-
ing such variables would strengthen future studies,
especially those of extremely potent work teams
(such as small, family-owned businesses).
DEMO of the problems inherent in the selection of
which deep-level differences to study is that there
are literally dozens of conceivably important work-
related DEMO (e.g., Meglino, Ravlin, & Adkins,
1989), cultural values (e.g., Triandis, 1989), termi-
nal values (e.g., Rokeach, DEMO), and work-related
attitudes to pick from. The relevance of each one
likely differs across situations, which is a major
theme in the budding literature on selection for
person-organization fit (e.g., Adkins, Russell, &
Werbel, 1994; Barrett, 1995; Vancouver & Schmitt,
1991). DEMO than the heterogeneity in job atti-
tudes studied in the present research, level of
agreement about, say, the proper role of the federal
government might be a strong element of deep-level
diversity for a chapter DEMO local campus Democrats.
Differences in attitudes toward enforcing the exist-
ing covenants and restrictions on property might be
critical to the harmony of a DEMO home-
owners' association. In a jazz band or marketing
1998
Harrison, Price, and Bell
105
team, consensus on the value of creative freedom
might be paramount. In a day care center, the crit-
ical values to share might deal with nurturance and
patience. In DEMO sports team, agreement about the
importance of goal directedness, dedication, DEMO
achievement might be an overriding concern. In a
university department, agreement DEMO the rela-
tive values of teaching and research might be most
significant. The crucial point is that the relevant
deep-level variables in any situation DEMO those that
bear directly on the fundamental purposes of the
group. An important theoretical and research ques-
tion, then, is which attitudinal differences DEMO most
significant for which types of groups?
Another limitation was our use of a cross-sec-
tional design. Ideally, any study of the relative in-
fluence of diversity variables on group functioning
would follow both the DEMO and independent
variables over the history of the group. Present
theories give little guidance on the proper span of
time to employ, but recent organizational behavior
and social psychological research shows that a fine-
grained record DEMO membership changes, interper-
sonal interactions, and performance over time
can yield entirely new insights about work groups
(Gersick, 1989; McGrath, Arrow, Gruenfeld,
Hollingshead, & O'Connor, 1993).
Common method variance DEMO also a potential
limitation on this type of research. It is important
to note that percept-percept inflation is a linear
confound, showing up as an additive bias in a
correlation or regression analysis (Podsakoff &
DEMO, 1986). That is, it can create spurious main
effects. However, our hypothesis predicts and the
data reveal important moderating effects. All of
these help to strengthen the argument that the
relations uncovered were a DEMO of the con-
structs being studied, rather than a methodolog-
ical DEMO
Finally, some other operational features would
strengthen future studies. A broader DEMO larger
sampling of work groups (with the caveats given
above) would strengthen statistical power. And,
although we "triangulated" surface- and deep-level
DEMO to some extent, it would have been
helpful to have had DEMO measures of social inte-
gration. Such measures might be taken from super-
visory reports on the interpersonal harmony of
work groups, from company archives, or from other
records of membership changes. Consideration of
other group-level dependent variables, such as
communication processes (Gersick, 1989) and per-
formance DEMO (Pelled, 1996), would make
useful extensions to this model.
Conclusion
Given the composition of the workforce today
and its projected future composition, understand-
ing and predicting employee reactions to all levels
of diversity is DEMO Most organizational research
on these reactions has been gloomy, suggesting that
DEMO diversity diminishes work group co-
hesion and organizational attachment and height-
ens risks of employee withdrawal and turnover.
Practitioners also see heterogeneity as having DEMO
ative outcomes (cf. Campion, Medsker, & Higgs,
1993). DEMO view of their positive findings, Watson,
Kumar, and Michaelsen (DEMO: 599) suggested the
"dark cloud" of negative outcomes from increasing
cultural diversity might have a "silver lining." We
agree and suggest DEMO research results indicating
many negative effects of surface-level diversity may
have also contained deeper-level similarities. Ex-
plicit recognition of these similarities may have
resulted DEMO different conclusions. Our findings are
significant because they focus on the issue of which
levels of differences are the most important in on-
going DEMO We also hope that our findings are
more optimistic than those of previous work be-
cause they focus on differences that are subject to
DEMO, rather than those that are immutable.
REFERENCES
Adkins, C. L., DEMO, C. J., & Werbel, J. D. 1994. Judgments of fit
DEMO the selection process: The role of work value congruence.
Personnel Psychology, 47: 605-623.
Allport, G. W. 1954. The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Amir, Y. 1969. Contact hypothesis in ethnic relations. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 11: 319-342.
Antill, J. K. 1984. Sex role complementarity versus similarity in
married couples. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 23: 13-37.
Bantel, K. A., & Jackson, S. E. 1989. DEMO management and
innovations in banking: Does the composition of the top
DEMO make a difference? Strategic Management Journal,
10: 107-124.
Barrett, DEMO S. 1995. Employee selection vifith the performance
priority survey. Personnel Psychology, DEMO: 653-662.
Berger, J., Rosenholtz, S. J., & Zelditch, M. 1980. Status organiz-
ing processes. In A. Inkeles, N. J. Smelser, & K. H. Turner
(Eds.), Annual review of sociology, vol. 6: 479-508. Palo
Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Blau, P. 1977. Inequality DEMO heterogeneity. New York: Free
Press.
Brown, R. J., & Turner, J. C. 1981. Interpersonal and intergroup
behavior. In J. C. Turner & DEMO Giles (Eds.), Intergroup be-
havior: 33-65. Chicago: University of DEMO Press.
Bjnrne, D. 1971. The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic
Press.
106
Academy of Management Joumal
February
Byrne, D., & Wong, T. 1962. Racial prejudice, interpersonal
attraction, and assumed dissimilarity of attitudes. Journal
DEMO Abnormal and Sacial Psychology, 65: 246-253.
Campion, M. A., Medsker, G. J., & Higgs, A. C. 1993. Relations
between work group characteristics and effectiveness: Im-
plications for designing effective work groups. Personnel
Psychology, 46: 823-850. '
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. DEMO 1986. Organizational information
requirements, media richness and structural design. Afan-
agement DEMO, 32: 554-571.
Darlington, R. 1990. Regression and linear madels. New DEMO:
McGraw-Hill.
Ellison, C. C , & Powers, D. A. 1994. The contact hypothesis and
racial attitudes among Black Americans. Social Science
Quarterly, 75: 385-400.
Fox. S., Ben-Nahum, Z., & Yinon, Y. 1989. Perceived similarity
and accuracy of peer ratings. Journal af Applied Psychol-
ogy, 74: 781-786.
Gersick, C. J. G. 1989. Marking time: Predictable transitions in
work groups. Academy af Management Journal, 32: 274 -
309.
DEMO, S. M., Devine, D. J., & Whitney, D. J. DEMO A meta-
analysis of cohesion and performance: Effects of level of
DEMO and task interdependence. Small Graup Be-
search, 26: 497-520.
Hackman, DEMO R., & Oldham, G. R. 1975. Development of the Job
Diagnostic Survey. Jaumal af Applied Psychalagy, 60:
159-170.
Howell, J. P., Dorfman, P. W., & Kerr, S. 1986. Moderator vari-
ables in leadership research. Academy af Management
Beview, 11: 88-102.
Jackson, S. E., & Associates (Eds.). 1992. Diversity in the work-
place: Human resaurce initiatives. New York: Gullford
Press.
Jackson, S. E., Brett, DEMO F., Sessa, V. I., Gooper, D. M., Julin, J. A.,
& Peyronnin, K. 1991. Some differences make a difference:
Interpersonal dissimilarity and group heterogeneity as cor-
relates of recruitment, promotion, DEMO turnover. Joumal af
Applied Psychology, 76: 675-689.
Jackson, S. E., May, K. E., & Whitney, K. 1995. Understanding
the dynamics of diversity in decision-making teams. In R. A.
Guzzo & E. Salas (Eds.), Team decision-making effective-
ness in organizations: 204-261. San Francisco: Jossey-
DEMO
Jackson, S. E., Stone, V. K., & Alvarez, E. DEMO 1993. Socialization
amidst diversity: Impact of demographics on work team
oldtimers DEMO newcomers. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw
(Eds.), DEMO in organizatianal hehaviar, vol. 15: 45 -
109. Greenwich, GT: JAI Press.
James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. 1982. Estimating within-
group interrater reliability with and without response bias.
DEMO af Applied Psychology, 69: 85-98.
Johnston, W. B., & Packer, A. H. 1987. Workforce 2000: Work
and warkers for the 21st DEMO: Indianapolis: Hudson
Institute.
Judge, T. A., & Ferris, G. DEMO 1993. Social context of performance
evaluation decisions. Academy af Management Jaumal,
36: 80-105.
Klein, K. J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, DEMO J. 1994. Levels issues in
theory development, data collection, and analysis. Acad-
emy of Management Beview, 19: 195-229.
Konrad, A. M., DEMO, S., & Gutek, B. A. 1992. Diversity in work
group DEMO composition: Implications for majority and mi-
nority members. In P. Tolbert & S. B. Bacharach (Eds.),
Besearch in the sacialagy of organizatians, vol. 10: 115-
140. Greenwich, GT: JAI Press.
Kraiger, K., & Ford, J. K. 1985. A meta-analysis of ratee race
effects DEMO performance ratings. Journal af Applied Psychol-
ogy, 70: 56-65.
Kunin, DEMO 1955. The construction of a new type of attitude
measure. Personnel Psychology, 8: 65-78.
Locke, E. A. 1976. The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In
M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial organization
psychology: 1297-1350. New York: Wiley.
McClelland, G. H., & Judd, C. M. 1993. Statistical difficulties of
detecting interactions and moderator effects. Psychological
DEMO, 114: 376-390.
McGrath, J. E. .1984. Groups: Interactian and process. Engle-
wood Gliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
McGrath, J. E. 1991. Time, DEMO, and performance (TIP): A
theory of groups. Small Group Besearch, 22: 147-174.
McGrath, J. E., Arrow, H., Gruenfeld, D. H., Hollingshead, A. B.,
& O'Gonnor, K. M. 1993. Groups, tasks, and technology: The
effects of experience and change. Small Group Besearch,
24: 406-420.
Meglino, B. M., Ravlin, E. DEMO, & Adkins, G. L. 1989. A work
values approach to corporate culture: A field test of the •
value congruence process and its relationship to individual
outcomes. Jaumal of Applied Psychology, 74: 424-432.
Miles, R. E. 1964. Attitudes toward management theory as a
factor in managers' relationships with their superiors.
Academy af Management, 7: 303-313.
Milliken, F. J., & Martins, L. L. 1996. Searching for common
threads: Understanding the multiple effects of diversity in
organizational groups. Academy af Management Beview,DEMO
21: 402-433.
Mobley, W. H. 1982. Supervisor and employee race and sex
effects on performance appraisals: A field study of adverse
impact and generalizability. Academy of Management
Journal, 25: 598-606.
Mudrack, P. E. 1989. Group cohesiveness: A legacy of confu-
sion? Small Group Behaviar, 20: 37-49.
Newcomb, T. M. 1961. The acquaintance process. New York:
DEMO, Rinehart & Winston.
O'Reilly, G. A., Ill, Galdwell, DEMO F., & Barnett, W. P. 1989.
Work group demography, social DEMO, and turnover.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 34: 21-37.
Pelled, L. H. 1996. Demographic diversity, conflict, and work
group outcomes: An intervening process theory. Organiza-
tian Science, 7: 615-631.
Pfeffer, J. 1983. Organizational demography. In L. L. Gummings
& B. M. Staw (Eds.), Besearch in organizational behaviar,
vol. 5: 299-357. Greenwich, GT: JAI Press.
Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. 1986. Self-reports in organiza-
tion research: Problems and prospects. Jaumal af Manage-
ment, 12: 531-544.
Porter, L. W., & Steers, R. M. 1979. Organizational, work, and
1998
Harrison, Price, and Bell
personal factors in employee turnover and DEMO
Psychological Bulletin. 64: 23-51.
Pulakos, E. D., Oppler, S. H., White, L. A., & Borman, W. C. 1989.
Examination of DEMO and sex effects on performance ratings.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 74: 770-780.
Rokeach, M. 1973. The nature of human values. New York:
Free Press.
Schneider, B. 1987. The people make the place. Personnel Psy-
chology, 40: 437-453.
Seashore, S. 1954. Group cohesiveness in the industrial work
group. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research.
Sengor, J. 1971. Managers' perceptions of subordinates' compe-
tence. Academy of Management Journal, 14: 415-423.
Sigelman, L., & Welch, S. 1993. The contact DEMO revis-
ited: Interracial contact and positive racial attitudes. Social
Forces, 71: 781-795.
Smith, P., Kendall, L., & Hulin, C. 1969. DEMO measurement
of satisfaction in work and retirement. Chicago: Rand
McNally.
Stangor, C, Lynch, L., Duan, C, & Glass. B. 1992. Categorization
of individuals on the basis of multiple social features. Jour-
nal of DEMO and Social Psychology. 62: 207-218.
Terborg, ]. R., Castore, C, & DeNinno, J. A. 1976. A longitudinal
field investigation of the DEMO of group composition on
group performance and cohesion. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology. 34: 782-790.
Tett, R. P., & Meyer, J. DEMO 1993. Job satisfaction, organizational
commitment, turnover intention, and turnover: Path analy-
ses based on meta-analytic findings. Personnel Psychology.
46: 259-293.
Thibaut, DEMO W., & Kelley, H. H. 1959. The social psychology of
groups. New York: Wiley.
Triandis, H. C. 1961. A note on Rokeach'DEMO theory of prejudice.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 16: 81-98.
Triandis, H. C. 1989. The self and social behavior in differing
cultural contexts. Psychological Review, 96: 506-520.
Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & Porter, L. W. 1994. Performance
implications of relational demography DEMO vertical dyads.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of
Management, Dallas.
Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O'Reilly, C. A., III. 1992. Being
107
different: Relational demography and organizational attach-
ment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37: 549-579.
Tsui, A. S., & O'Reilly, C. A., III. 1989. Beyond simple demo-
graphic effects: The importance of relational demography in
superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of Management
Journal, 32: 402-423.
Turban, D. B., & Jones, A. P. 1988. Supervisor-subordinate sim-
ilarity: Types, effects, and mechanisms. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 73: 228-234.
Turner, J. C. 1987. Rediscovering the social group: A self-
categorization theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Vancouver, J. B., & Schmitt, N. W. 1991. An exploratory exam-
ination of person-organization fit: Organizational goal con-
gruence. Personnel Psychology. 44: 333-352.
Wagner, W. G., Pfeffer, J., & O'Reilly, C. A., III. 1984. Organiza-
DEMO demography and turnover in top-management
groups. Administrative Science Quarterly. 29: 74-92.
DEMO, W., Kumar, K., & Michaelsen, L. K. 1993. Cultural
DEMO's impact on interaction process and performance:
Comparing homogeneous and diverse task groups. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 36: 590-602.
Wiersema, M. F., & Bird, A. 1993. Organizational demography in
Japanese firms: Group heterogeneity, individual dissimilar-
ity, and top management team turnover. Academy of DEMO
agement Journal, 36: 996-1025.
Zalesny, M. D., & Kirsch, DEMO P. 1989. The effect of similarity on
performance ratings and interrater agreement. Human Re-
lations. 42: 81-96.
David A. Harrison earned his Ph.D. from the University of
Illinois and is currently an associate professor o.f management DEMO
the University of Texas at Arlington. His current research deals
with work role adjustment and withdrawal, temporal issues in
organizations, and measurement.
Kenneth DEMO Price is an associate professor of management at
the University of Texas at Arlington. He received his Ph.D. from
Michigan State University. His current DEMO interests are in
the areas of group dynamics and procedural justice.
Myrtle P. Bell received her Ph.D. from the University of Texas
at Arlington, where she is an assistant professor of management.
Her current research interests DEMO workforce diversity and
its consequences and meaning for organization members.
{1g42fwefx}