This article was downloaded by: [155.247.166.234] On: 25 May 2015, At: 05:04
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Management Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
Mathew L. A. Hayward, Dean A. Shepherd, DEMO Griffin,
To cite this article:
Mathew L. A. Hayward, DEMO A. Shepherd, Dale Griffin,  (2006) A Hubris Theory of DEMO Management Science
52(2):160-172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1050.0483
Full DEMO and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article DEMO be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For DEMO information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the DEMO accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, DEMO, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or DEMO
Copyright © 2006, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on DEMO pages
INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For DEMO information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 52, No. 2, February 2006, pp. 160–172
issn 0025-1909 eissn 1526-5501 06 5202 0160
informs®
doi 10.1287/mnsc.1050.0483
©2006INFORMS
A DEMO Theory of Entrepreneurship
Mathew L. A. Hayward
Leeds School of Business, DEMO of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0419,
mathew.hayward@colorado.edu
Dean A. Shepherd
Kelley School of Business, Indiana University, 1309 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, Indiana 47405,
dean.shepherd@colorado.edu
Dale Grifﬁn
Sauder School of Business, DEMO of British Columbia, 2053 Main Mall,
Vancouver, British Columbia, DEMO V6T 1Z2, dale.grifﬁn@sauder.ubc.ca
his paper develops a hubris theory of entrepreneurship DEMO explain why so many new ventures are created
T in the shadow of high venture failure rates: More conﬁdent actors are moved to start ventures, and then
act on such conﬁdence when deciding how to allocate resources in their ventures. Building on theory and
evidence from the behavioral DEMO literature, we describe how founders’ socially constructed conﬁ-
dence affects the DEMO in which they interpret information about their prior and current ventures. We then
link founders’ propensity to be overconﬁdent to their decisions to allocate, use, and attain resources. In our
model, founders with greater socially DEMO conﬁdence tend to deprive their ventures of resources and
resourcefulness and, DEMO, increase the likelihood that their ventures will fail.
Key words : DEMO; hubris; entrepreneurship; resources
History : Accepted by Scott Shane, guest editor; received March 31, 2004. This paper was with the authors
DEMO months for 3 revisions.
2
Introduction
“Looking back on it, my DEMO was often terri-
bly wrong,” said one entrepreneur who had burned
throughmorethan$20milliontryingtolaunchaWeb-
basedbusiness.“Unfortunately,Iwasneverindoubt.”
(Kramer 2003, p. 63)
A good theory DEMO entrepreneurship should explain
the supply of ventures, which depends on the DEMO
mation of new ventures and the exit, including fail-
ure,ofexistingones.Itispuzzlingandintriguingthat
DEMO many ventures start in the presence of the alarm-
ingly high rates of venture failure (e.g., 574,300 ﬁrms
were started, or made their ﬁrst sale, in the United
States in 2000; see Shook DEMO al. 2003).1 Data from the
U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Information Tracking
Seriesshowsthatoftheventuresstartedbetween1989
and 1992, 34% did not survive the ﬁrst two years,
50% did not survive four years, and 60% did not
survive six years (Headd 2003; see also Phillips and
Kirchhoff1989forsimilarresults).Thesedataarecon-
sistent with DEMO data from the U.S. Census of
1 Venture failure arises when a venture becomes insolvent and is
unable to attract new debt or equity DEMO, and, consequently,
cannot continue to operate under its current ownership and man-
agement (Shepherd 2003).
160
Manufacturers that up to 62% and 80% of all new
chemistryindustryplantsexitedwithin5and10years
ofstarting,respectively,withmostexitsbeingfailures
(Dunne et al. 1989).
Whyandwhendofoundersformtheseventuresin
the presence of such failure rates?2 A hubris DEMO
of entrepreneurship models how more overconﬁdent
actors are more likely to initiate and incorporate ven-
tures and how their ventures are also more likely DEMO
fail. Greater overconﬁdence provides founders with
the bravado to undertake and persist with more chal-
lenging tasks and the conviction that they will have
DEMO necessary resources for their ventures to succeed
(Cialdini 1998). The DEMO of ventures present in an
economy, therefore, depends on the supply of over-
conﬁdent actors who are willing to start ventures.
2 Weemphasizethatnotallfoundersareoverconﬁdentand,DEMO
they were, their overconﬁdence could beneﬁt themselves and their
ventures (Taylor and Brown 1988). In keeping with our research
question,though,weseektolinkfounderoverconﬁdencewithven-
DEMO starts and failures; and so, we focus on the “dark side” of
overconﬁdence, which is also called hubris. Although others schol-
arshavefocusedonthis“darkside”andrecognizedthatfounders’
attributes can also be a source of their demise (Kets de Vries 1985,
Miller 1990), in this paper we focus exclusively on overconﬁdence,DEMO
its role in the founding process, and how founder overconﬁdence
limits DEMO abilities to recover from founding disadvantages.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, DEMO rights reserved.
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
DEMO founders are overconﬁdent, they overesti-
mate the likelihood that their ventures DEMO succeed
and that they can ensure such success (Kahneman
and Tversky DEMO refer to this as “optimistic over-
conﬁdence”). In particular, we DEMO overconﬁdence
as arising when founders overestimate the personal
wealth that they will generate from their ventures.
For further precision, we examine the overconﬁ-
dence that arises for founders who attain the ﬁrst
signiﬁcant round of external DEMO or equity ﬁnanc-
ing for their ventures (e.g., Tyebjee and Bruno
1984). The fate of these resources then becomes sub-
ject to DEMO judgment. Our explanation focuses
on socially-constructed conﬁdence, founders’ beliefs
about the DEMO of the project that rests on their
interpretation of their experiences, DEMO, and project
qualities. In general, a social-constructivist perspec-
tive implies that such perceptions often do not reﬂect
the underlying project, skills, and DEMO deter-
minants that drive failure.3
Before developing such a theory, we DEMO explana-
tions for the puzzle that motivates this paper: Why
do DEMO start ventures when the objective like-
lihood of success is so very low? Put another way,
how do founders interpret the high base rates of ven-
ture failure? Answers to these questions motivate us
to develop theory that pertains to our research ques-
tions:Howdoesactoroverconﬁdenceexplainventure
formation?Howdoesfounderoverconﬁdenceexplain
DEMO failure?
Venture Formation in the Light of the
Base Rates of Venture Failure
It is conceivable that founders and other investors
lack information DEMO the hazards of starting new
ventures. Lacking a central and authoritative source
of these data, and knowledge about the contingen-
cies in which they apply, prospective founders may
ﬁnd that these different data are abstract, DEMO
ing, or unhelpful. Alternatively, founders may be
simply unaware of these data or their implications,
say, because they are not brought to their attention
or they lack the skills to make sense of them. DEMO
searched unsuccessfully for systematic evidence that
might inform this explanation of venture formation
3 Given that overconﬁdence is highly typical of the founders who
DEMO describe, we believe that it is still appropriate to use the DEMO
“overconﬁdent founders,” even though there may be exceptions
(Cooper et DEMO 1988). Overconﬁdence is typically deﬁned at an
aggregate level, such DEMO positive outcomes occur less often than
expected. This aggregate comparison may be a set of judges, each
of whom makes one prediction, allowing DEMO to determine if the
set of judges is overconﬁdent, or, to deﬁne overconﬁdence at an
individual level, each judge may make a set of predictions, and
overconﬁdence is computed by comparing the expected level of
success with the obtained level.
161
in the presence of high venture DEMO rates. Another
explanationisthatfoundersmaybeawareofthehaz-
ards of starting ventures, but are indifferent to DEMO
failure because they do not bear its costs (Tversky
andKahneman1986).Atleastthreefactorscastdoubt
DEMO the robustness of this form of explanation.
First, founders invest in DEMO either because they
wish to share in the ﬁnancial gains or because other
investors require that founders have incentive for
the venture to succeed (Shane and Venkataraman
2000). Second, venture failure has the potential to
undermine founders’ emotional, ﬁnancial, and social
resources (Podolny 2001, Shepherd DEMO). Speciﬁcally,
venture failure can stigmatize founders, which at
minimum DEMO increase founders’ cost of capital on
subsequent ventures. Third, to varying DEMO ven-
ture capitalists and other investors actively monitor
founders’ attempts to use ventures for their personal
use (Cable and Shane 1997).
Founders also have idiosyncratic and personal rea-
sons for starting ventures, including helping family
members and gaining greater autonomy over their
work. Common to each of DEMO motives, however, is
that the nonﬁnancial beneﬁts of ventures to founders
are contingent on venture survival: Even if founders
accept lower ﬁnancial returns, they still require that
their ventures will survive long enough for the non-
ﬁnancial beneﬁts to overcome losses from failure.
Actorshavelessscopetoviewfoundingasafunway
to participate in DEMO high stakes lottery to the extent
thatgainstaketimetomaterializeandfailingimposes
personal costs on founders.
The complementary explanation that we offer is
that founders are aware that most DEMO fail, but
believe that they can beat the odds of failure. DEMO
focus here is on relatively informed or experienced
founders who are aware of these base rates of fail-
ure because the process by which DEMO arises for
informed founders may differ from that by which
it arises for uninformed or naïve founders who are
unaware of base failure rates; this latter process is
beyond our present scope. Furthermore, we suspect
that the effects of hubris will be stronger among less-
informed founders because DEMO are less familiar and
equipped to deal with the elementary risk factors
that cause venture failure. Moreover, this explana-
tion and choice of founders is consistent with evi-
dence that overconﬁdence pervades decisions that
have low DEMO rates of success; founders are overcon-
ﬁdent relative to other overconﬁdent DEMO and man-
agers; and that founders act on such overconﬁdence
once DEMO ventures form (Busenitz and Barney 1997,
Camerer and Lovallo 1999)DEMO Following this reason-
ing, we deﬁne venture overconﬁdence as the extent
DEMO which founders, when founding their ventures,
overestimate the wealth that DEMO will generate from
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
162
their ventures. In turn, such overconﬁdence is closely
linked to founders’ subjective interpretation of infor-
mation concerning their ability to ensure such sur-
DEMO To elaborate this explanation, we now turn to
the bases of DEMO as found in evidence on
behavioral decisions and founders.
The Bases of Founder Overconﬁdence
Our hubris account of overconﬁdence incorporates
three separate and potentially DEMO psycho-
logical processes: (1) overconﬁdence in knowledge,
(2) DEMO in prediction, and (3) overcon-
ﬁdence in personal abilities. The DEMO of judg-
mentstudiesexamineoverconﬁdencein metacognition,
thatis,howaccuratelypeopleassesstheirownknowl-
edge. As a general rule, people are more certain than
they should be that they know the correct answers to
questionsofgeography,demography,orotheraspects
of general knowledge. Overconﬁdence is particularly
DEMO when tasks are difﬁcult and/or when judg-
mentsaremadewithhighconﬁdence,conditionsthat
characterize those which founders face (Lichtenstein
et al. 1982, Schraw and Roedel 1994)DEMO
Similarpatternsofoverconﬁdencearefoundinpre-
dictions about future outcomes. Predictions are most
likely to be overconﬁdent when the target outcome
is rare, when the evidence available is only weakly
diagnostic, and/or when predictions are made with
highconﬁdence(Lichtensteinetal.1982,Valloneetal.
1990). While this evidence from students’ daily lives
is found in DEMO setting that is markedly different from
those facing founders, there are DEMO: Ventures
routinely fail, initial plans for a venture provide a
weak guide to its future performance, and founders
are generally highly conﬁdent.
In laboratory studies, overconﬁdence increases on
tasks with higher base rates of failure, even when
actors are informed of the actual base rates (Dunning
DEMO al. 1990). In a review of expert predictions, Koehler
et DEMO (2002) found a similar story even with on-the-
jobjudgmentsoflawyers,physicians,andeconomists.
They concluded that overconﬁdence—in knowledge
or in prediction—is likely to be found DEMO the
evidence appears strong, but is in fact weakly predic-
tive, due to a noisy environment or a low outcome
base rate. In DEMO, then, these forms of overcon-
ﬁdence are generally situationally driven, DEMO that
overconﬁdence will tend to be strongest in the uncer-
tain environments that founders tend to operate in.
4 Thisresearchhasbeenbasedonoverconﬁdenceinabsoluteperfor-
mance (e.g., whether DEMO venture will survive). Moore and Cain
(2004) found that individuals were more overconﬁdent in entering
“simple” industries than more difﬁcult ones when DEMO focus was
relativeperformance(e.g.,whetherone’sventurewillbean“above
average” performer).
Focused Issue: A DEMO Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
However,thereisstillthepotentialthatsomeindivid-
uals may DEMO more prone to selectively perceiving and
interpreting ambiguous evidence as strong evidence,
such as visionary founders. This type of individual
differenceunderlyingoverconﬁdenceisunlikelytobe
detected by DEMO studies of general knowledge
questions or bets about the future.
In many ways, founders are selected by the mar-
ket for their level of self-conﬁdence and persistence.
They are also selected for their ability to make DEMO
entsenseoutofuncertainandcontradictoryevidence.
Finally, by deﬁnition, entrepreneurial founders oper-
ate in settings where information and evidence is
highlyuncertain,feedbackisscarce,andpositiveout-
comes are rare. Together, these make up a power-
ful recipe for the type of overconﬁdence that DEMO link
to hubris. Note, however, that our hubris account
of overconﬁdence departs from standard economic
accounts (e.g., Bernardo and Welch 2001) in that it
treatsoverconﬁdenceasneither instrumental (i.e.,asif
it exists because it has evolutionary beneﬁts to actors,
ventures, or society) nor fundamental (i.e., DEMO if it were
a primitive aspect of judgment that does not need
explanation). Instead, in our account overconﬁdence
is jointly determined by characteristics of the envi-
ronment and the individual’s interpretation of the
environment. For DEMO, when environments are
markedbyhighbaseratesofsuccessandhighlydiag-
nostic and unambiguous evidence, judges are typi-
cally underconﬁdent in their predictions (Lichtenstein
et al. 1982, Koehler et DEMO 2002). We now more fully
elaborate direct evidence of founder overconﬁdence
and its origins.
Direct empirical support exists for the idea that
each DEMO the three types of overconﬁdence that under-
pin our account of hubris operate amongst founders.
Withregardtooverconﬁdenceinknowledge,Busenitz
and Barney (1997) compared 124 founders DEMO
95midlevelmanagersandshowedthatfounderswere
signiﬁcantly more overconﬁdent than managers in
their judgment about matters like death rates from
variousdiseasesandaccidents.Withregardtopredic-
tive overconﬁdence, Cooper et al. (1988) found that
81% of the 2,994 founders in their sample rated the
DEMO that their ventures would succeed at over
70%; and, incredibly, DEMO one third of founders in
this sample believed that such likelihood was fully
100%.5 The same study revealed unrealistic optimism
in the founders sampled: an average 81% probability
of success for their own business dwarfed the DEMO
probability of success they saw for businesses like
theirs (a realistic DEMO is somewhere in the range
of30%–70%;seeCooperetal.1988).Notethatamong
5 Founders who believe that their ventures will succeed are pre-
sumably even more likely to DEMO that they will not fail.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all DEMO reserved.
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
DEMO ventures, many will fail to generate the
wealththatfounders’expect,suchthatourmethodol-
ogy presents DEMO strong test of the relationship between
founders’ overconﬁdence and the failure of their ven-
tures. Note how this comparative optimism on the
part of DEMO founders sampled helps to argue against
the possibility that founders are simply ignorant of
the low base rates of success.
These ﬁndings reﬂect more DEMO actors’
propensity to overweight the utility of their private
information relative to the value of public infor-
mation (Bernardo and Welch 2001). That propensity
also causes actors to ignore or under-estimate the
impact of the (1) failure rate of competitors who have
sought similar opportunities in the past, (2) strength
of competitors for focal opportunities, and (3) base
failure rate among all founders (Bar-Hillel 1983,
Kahneman and DEMO 1993). Because more over-
conﬁdent founders believe that their private infor-
mation and skills can overcome the base rates of
failing at uncertain DEMO, founders also tend to enter
more exploratory ventures, such as those that involve
riskier product development and carry a higher risk
of failure (Bernardo and Welch 2001).
Overconﬁdence thus surfaces in founder decisions
about DEMO opportunities to pursue, as well as the
risks that founders will DEMO in mobilizing ini-
tial resource endowments. In businesses with greater
variance in uncontrollable outcomes, as with many
new ventures, actors might be expected DEMO more
carefully manage if not control risk. A hubris the-
ory of venture failure points to a different result:
More overconﬁdent founders seek DEMO and under-
estimate risks (Gervais and Odean 2001). That is,DEMO
suchfoundersdownplayoutcomerisk,includingthat
which is fuelled by competitors, or believe that they
DEMO overcome it, thus underestimating the resource
endowments that their environments require (Shane
and Stuart 2002).
Prospectivefoundersmayalsobepronetooveresti-
mating the performance beneﬁts that they DEMO derive
from their present resources because they neglect
their relevant referent group. Relative to competitors,
more overconﬁdent founders may overestimate cus-
tomers’ understanding DEMO and appreciation of their
products and services, and underestimate customers’
switching DEMO (Camerer and Lovallo 1999). Further,
if more overconﬁdent founders DEMO new infor-
mationthatdisconﬁrmstheirexpectationsabouttheir
resources and capabilities, they may exaggerate the
extenttowhichtheirresourcescanconfercompetitive
DEMO,say,may
overestimate their ability to secure and defend intel-
lectual property rights or underestimate the ability of
competitors to do the same (Erickson and Jacobson
1992, Mansﬁeld 1986). More pertinent here is that
163
overconﬁdent founders may exaggerate the utility of
their unique personality and leadership DEMO, rela-
tive to competing founders. Founders then are prone
to overconﬁdence DEMO respect to the risks inherent
in the opportunities that they identify and the ini-
tial resource endowments that they think will sufﬁce
to pursue DEMO opportunities. Together, these factors
illustrate the manner in which founders overestimate
DEMO
the time from idea to venture formation.
But,thisstillleavesunaddressedtheissueofwhich
actors are more overconﬁdent and so more likely to
form ventures. A starting point is DEMO one’s genes,
upbringing, and personality might predict one’s level
of DEMO, but these hypotheses are difﬁcult to
test, and in fact have received little empirical sup-
port (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, Gigerenzer 2002)DEMO
Another perspective that we addressed earlier is that,
subject to actors’ preferences and information, it is
rational for them to found ventures.
The complementary perspective that we develop
is that certain actors who are interested DEMO starting
ventures are stronger candidates to be overconﬁdent
about venture prospects and so are moved to become
founders.Recallthatarobustﬁndingincognitivepsy-
chologyisthathighconﬁdenceispositivelycorrelated
with greater overconﬁdence. The key DEMO that
follows is: What drives conﬁdence if not actual per-
formance?DEMO
that high conﬁdence (and hence high overconﬁdence)
isdrivenbyactors’interpretationorconstrualoftheir
experiences, including the cues that they take from
others about such experiences (Kruger and Dunning
1999,GrifﬁnandRoss1991),andislargelyunaffected
by the experiences of others (Ball et DEMO 1991) or the
features of the situation (Moore and Kim 2003), even
when consideration of others’ experiences and situa-
tional features could DEMO improve decision accuracy.
Basedonthisevidence,wenowrelateoverconﬁdence
to founders’ focal venture tasks and own experience
at founding. Our conceptual approach is that over-
conﬁdencearisesthroughtwobroadmechanismsthat
relatetotheseconditions.First,actorsmaynotchange
DEMO conﬁdence in their judgment towards a prospec-
tive task, but may DEMO less skilled on that task rela-
tive to prior tasks. Second, DEMO can become more
conﬁdent without any gains in their underlying skills
or judgment. In contrast, declines in overconﬁdence
occur when actors maintain their conﬁdence in judg-
ment and become more skilled, say, through greater
experience, as we now elaborate.
The following social-constructivist perspective on
founder overconﬁdence analyzes DEMO founders
becomemoreoverconﬁdentbyinterpretingtheirfocal
6 The authors thank Max Bazerman for his insights on this section.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
164
ventures, their prior ventures, and by taking cues
from salient DEMO
In this vein, ﬁndings from laboratory studies sug-
gest that actors’ DEMO relates to the com-
plexity of tasks that they are judging (DEMO, Vallone
et al. 1990). In particular, this literature shows that
moderately to extremely difﬁcult tasks can directly
increase actor overconﬁdence, whether or not actors
are experienced at those tasks (Lichtenstein and
Fischoff 1977). Thus, we now examine the direct
affects of venture task conditions on actors’ overcon-
ﬁdence in venture formation.
Overconﬁdence from Venture Task Conditions
Whereas DEMO assessments of their judgment
become more accurate on simple and repetitive tasks,
they become more overconﬁdent when they tackle
more complex tasks with DEMO greater degree of outcome
uncertainty (Lichtenstein and Fischoff 1977). Follow-
DEMO,wewouldexpectthatfounderover-
conﬁdence will increase as their ventures involve
more complex and dynamic tasks.
Complexity refers to “the number of relevant fac-
tors available for DEMO, how relevant the fac-
tors are, and the number of judgments that must
be made” (Wood 1986, p. 375). As actors DEMO
more complex tasks, they insufﬁciently allow for the
inherent uncertainty of DEMO outcomes, especially
when they lack guidance as to what the situation
DEMO (Vallone et al. 1990). Founders can face
greater complexity about DEMO needs of targeted cus-
tomers; whether their venture can meet those DEMO,
under what terms, and so forth (Sapienza and Gupta
1994); whether their products and services are sufﬁ-
ciently high quality to DEMO market acceptance, and
so on (Meyer and Utterback 1995). To illustrate, on
the one hand, founders may start a gas station DEMO
a well-known location where product and customer
requirements are relatively clear and cash ﬂows can
be predicted with some accuracy. On the other hand,DEMO
founders may form ventures that are predicated on
esoteric technology where cash ﬂows are contingent
on the interplay of unfolding technical and market
uncertaintiesandsofacechallenginginformationpro-
DEMO requirements (Anderson and Tushman 2001,
DessandBeard1984).Wewouldexpectthatfounders,
like other DEMO, will tend to underestimate the dif-
ﬁculty of solving more complex DEMO and so
become more overconﬁdent in their ability to solve
them.
Another dimension that characterizes founders’
tasks is the extent to which the nature DEMO required
tasks changes or is dynamic (Bluedorn 1993, Dess
and Beard 1984). For example, some industries have
high environmental complexity, whereby DEMO
consider a large number of relevant factors in mak-
ing judgments (DEMO and Beard 1984; Wood 1986,
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
p. 375). Others are more dynamic, such that the
task environment is difﬁcult to identify and change
is unpredictable (Bluedorn 1993), as is common as
with nascent markets (Santos and Eisenhardt 2005).
Faced with greater task dynamism, more DEMO
dent founders risk overcommitting venture resources
to key success factors only to ﬁnd that these change
or otherwise fail to materialize, thereby jeopardiz-
ing the venture’s ﬁt with its environment and, in
turn,performance(Ghemawat1991).Inthisdynamic,
serial founders tend to extrapolate conﬁdence in their
founding abilities to DEMO ventures even as the
utility of such abilities diminishes.
Focusing on the dimensions of complexity and
dynamism provides the basis for a 2 × DEMO typology of
task requirements where the level of overconﬁdence
varies across types. We expect that founder overcon-
ﬁdence will positively relate to the interaction DEMO the
complexity and dynamism of task requirements such
that (1) founders are most overconﬁdent with high
levels of dynamism and complexity, (2) founders are
moderately overconﬁdent as they tackle complex but
not dynamic tasks DEMO dynamic but not complex tasks,
and (3) founders are least overconﬁdent when their
tasks are neither complex nor dynamic. The relation-
ships DEMO the dimensions of the above industry
typology and overconﬁdence are captured in the fol-
lowing propositions (see Dess and Beard 1984 and
SutcliffeandHuber1998foroperationalizationsofthe
dimensions).
Proposition 1. The greater the environmental com-
plexity that is inherent DEMO the focal venture opportunity,
the greater the founder overconﬁdence.
Proposition 2. The greater the environmental
dynamism that is inherent in the focal venture DEMO,
the greater the founder overconﬁdence.
As actors undertake new tasks that stretch into
the future, they do so at a higher level of abstrac-
tion (Lieberman and Trope 1998) and so risk losing
touch DEMO the challenges of meeting key contin-
gencies, such as understanding customer DEMO and
completion times. Founders sometimes respond to
the uncertainties of complex ventures by imagining
rich projections of critical venture contingencies and
outcomes, as articulated in business plans. Business
plans can provide helpful guidelines that discipline
founders’ DEMO (Delmar and Shane 2003). Equally,
however, richer business plans show more elabo-
rate scenario and contingency planning, which ren-
der actors more conﬁdent about their ability to meet
milestones and deadlines without producing DEMO
gies that help them to actually complete a critical
task on time (Buehler et al. 1994, 1997). Founders
may perceive that business DEMO will help to ensure
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights DEMO
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
DEMO
pleted on time, even if they have seen many similar
projectsrunlate(DEMO,p.366).Thus,we
have:
Proposition 3. Greater business planning by founders
on a focal venture strengthens the positive relationship
between (1) the DEMO complexity inherent in the
focal venture opportunity and founder overconﬁdence, and
(2) the environmental dynamism inherent in the focal
venture opportunity and founder overconﬁdence.
Overconﬁdence from Experience at
Venture Founding
In general, greater experience at performing a task
leads actors to become more conﬁdent about their
judgment DEMO such a task (Pincus 1991). When the
task is well DEMO, repetitive, and can elicit constant
feedback, such judgment also tends DEMO become more
accurate, ex post (Wright 2001). As actors gain expe-
rience and feedback from focal tasks, their accuracy
in judgment increases on those tasks at a faster rate
than their conﬁdence, such that their overconﬁdence
diminishes (Keren 1987). This suggests that serial
founders may be less overconﬁdent than novices,
even if serial founders are also DEMO conﬁdent about
theirventures’prospects.Greaterexperienceincreases
founders’ opportunities and motivation to gather
information about the base rates of venture fail-
ure (particularly those with ventures that experience
intense rivalry), where and how to gather resources,
and so DEMO Founding ventures allows founders to
developrichernetworksthatenablethemtoraisecap-
ital, ﬁnd staff, develop customer and supplier rela-
tionships,andsoforth(HellmanandPuri2002,Shane
and Cable 2002). Thus, they become more aware of
the risks of pursuing entrepreneurial opportunities,
DEMO when their ventures were less successful
than expected. In contrast, novice DEMO may be
less aware of the base rates of venture failure, DEMO
less sensitive to the personal costs of such failure
(Bar-Hillel 1983)DEMO
Some recent evidence indirectly corroborates the
propositionthatserialfoundersarelessoverconﬁdent
than novices: In a DEMO of 149 early stage high-
tech ventures, Hsu (2004) found DEMO greater found-
ing experience increases the likelihood that founders
will seek and acquire more venture capital funding
earlier, and that such funding increases the likeli-
hood that their ventures will survive. If more expe-
rienced founders DEMO more mindful of the risks of
venturefailureandhavegreaterskillatacquiringcrit-
ical resources that stave off venture failure, they will
be less overconﬁdent with respect to the prospects of
their ventures relative to novices.
By the same token, the positive relationship
betweenexperienceandsuccessbecomesconfounded
165
as founders undertake ventures that differ from their
prior DEMO Using a sample of founders who grad-
uated from Stanford’s MBA program, Lazear (2004)
provides details on a set of actors who DEMO gener-
alist skills and so initiate ventures with quite distinct
technical and market requirements from prior ones.
Different market segments have different task envi-
DEMO
ferent skills (Aldrich and Auster 1986, Lawrence and
Lorsch 1967). With their familiarity with the speciﬁc
market segments of their prior ventures, founders
may fail to appreciate the industry-speciﬁc actions
and norms, including strategic proﬁles that new
ventures require.
Thus, as tasks on focal ventures become more dis-
similar to prior ones, founders risk exaggerating the
extent to which the judgment and skills that they
used on prior tasks will DEMO on focal ones. This is
especially problematic when founders’ prior experi-
ence was particularly successful, and when founders
believe that their skills produced the success, even if
they were just lucky. Our reasoning resonates with
March’s (1997, p. 15) observation that, “successful
decision makers tend to DEMO the risk that
they have experienced and the risk they currently
face, and intentionally risk-averse decision makers
may actually be risk seeking in behavior.” If so,
founders might use successful experience to more
readily imagine DEMO it might feel to achieve ongo-
ingsuccessondifferentfocalventures,andsoneglect
how the base rates of failure differs on such ventures
relative to prior ones (Hayward et al. 2004). Con-
versely,lesssuccessfulfounderstendtoattributeprior
venture failure to misfortune or remarkably DEMO
and transient problems that do not apply to focal
ventures.
Above we argued that novice founders are over-
conﬁdent with respect to the prospects DEMO their focal
ventures relative to more experienced founders. The
key dynamic is that founders’ experience on prior
ventures renders them more conﬁdent on focal DEMO
without improving their skills to achieve better per-
formance on the current ones. Among experienced
founders, therefore, founders will be overconﬁdent
towards a DEMO venture to the extent that their prior
experience was successful and that the requirements
on those ventures differ from those on the focal
venture, as below:
Proposition 4. Founders with experience in founding
successful ventures DEMO more overconﬁdent as their
focal venture differs from their previous ventures.
Theabovepropositionsdeveloptheconditionsthat
explain founder overconﬁdence: Founders conﬁdence
is sustained by their interpretation processes, DEMO
than the qualities of their environment, project, and
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
166
personal skills that should underlie such conﬁdence.
Understanding the determinants of DEMO overcon-
ﬁdencealsohelpstoexplainwhenfounderoverconﬁ-
dence has a stronger impact on venture management
and control. Recall the beneﬁcial effects of over-
conﬁdence for founders, their ventures and society
that have been described elsewhere and which are
beyond our scope DEMO Rather, a hubris theory of
entrepreneurship must link founder overconﬁdence
to DEMO outcomes for founders and their ventures,
factors that contribute to the failure of their ventures.
A challenge in developing such a theory is DEMO
link founder overconﬁdence at venture founding to
founder decisions at that time. While founders make
many decisions that shape the future of their ven-
DEMO, they must acquire and deploy resources to
pursue critical opportunities, decisions that, as we
willelaborate,shapeinitialresourceendowmentsand
thus venture survival chances (Bruderl and DEMO
1990, Fichman and Levinthal 1991). We propose that
founders tend DEMO underestimate the initial resource
endowments that their ventures require and overesti-
mate their ability to attain further resources. Further,
we expect that founders DEMO are more overconﬁ-
dent about a venture opportunity will overcommit
resources to such opportunity in the manner that we
elaborate later.
Founder Overconﬁdence and
DEMO Failure
Founder overconﬁdence affects founder decisions
about required initial resource endowments—the ini-
tial stocks of resources that stakeholders invest in
foundingventuresthatispresent,say,afteranygiven
early DEMO of capital raisings (Shane and Stuart
2002). Greater initial resource DEMO enable
founders to invest in the human, technical, organi-
zational, DEMO, and other resources that buffer their
ventures from failure (Bruderl and Schussler 1990).
Founder Overconﬁdence and Initial Venture
Resource Endowments
Various factors DEMO that more overconﬁdent
founders will underestimate such requirements and
thus begin their ventures with smaller resource
endowments than less overconﬁdent founders. To
illustrate, by overestimating the value proposition
that their products and services can provide to DEMO
tomers, more overconﬁdent founders also tend to
underestimate the need to DEMO customers about
such a proposition (Rogers 1983). If more overcon-
DEMO founders experience greater reference group
neglect, they will also be more DEMO to underes-
timating the need to differentiate and protect their
value proposition from competitors (Mahajan 1992).
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of DEMO
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
To elaborate further, more overconﬁdent founders
may underestimate the need for and overestimate
their personal ability to (1) DEMO intellectual prop-
erty protection, (2) defend intellectual property and
keyresources(DEMO)fromcompetitors,
and (3) engage in price-based competition (Erickson
and DEMO 1992, Mansﬁeld 1986). It follows that
theywillperceivetheneedforsmallerinitialresource
endowments to deal DEMO such contingencies.
Along similar lines, more overconﬁdent founders
may underestimate their DEMO requirements for
legitimacy within relevant task environments, thus
underestimating the resources DEMO are required to
build such legitimacy (Suchman 1995). That is, more
overconﬁdent founders may fail to conform to prac-
tices that are DEMO accepted for new ventures
within particular market segments, including using
certain DEMO services, sets of procedures, doc-
umentation, and so forth. Attaining DEMO also
requires investments in capabilities and operating
procedures that demonstrate that products conform
to customer and industry speciﬁcations (Hannan and
Freeman 1984; Hannan DEMO Carroll 1995, p. 20), and
thus ventures may need to DEMO sufﬁciently large to
meet these requirements (Baldwin and Gorecki 1991).
DEMO
legitimacy,theymaybelessmotivatedtodemonstrate
such performance and so attract less support from
critical stakeholders (Rao 1994).
Third, to overcome the lack of legitimacy that DEMO
ventures face, founders can use their social ties to
accessnecessaryresources(ShaneandStuart2002)DEMO
a sample of 50 high-tech ventures, Shane and Cable
(2002) DEMO that direct and indirect ties between
founders and seed-stage investors inﬂuenced which
new ventures were funded. Ties to network partners
facilitatethetransferofdifﬁcult-to-codify,knowledge-
intensive skills DEMO are more expensive to obtain for
those who lack the relevant ties (Larson 1992, Powell
1990, Uzzi 1996). Thus, founders without DEMO and
indirect ties to investors are more likely to be denied
requested ﬁnancial resources for their new ventures
(Shane and Stuart 2002).
While actors may found ventures with valuable
social ties, further ties are required to meet venture-
speciﬁccontingencies(Florinetal.2003).Ifmoreover-
conﬁdent founders perceive themselves as a DEMO
source of competitive advantage for their ventures,
they may also overestimate their personal ability to
developsuchtiesandmanageresourcedependencies.
In turn, more overconﬁdent founders may deprive
their ventures of required resources that are available
through those networks.
Taken DEMO, the above factors suggest that
more overconﬁdent founders will underestimate the
DEMO needs of their ventures. Southwest Airlines’
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, DEMO rights reserved.
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
DEMO Herb Kelleher captures the spirit of our
argument by commenting that, DEMO because if you’re
an entrepreneur, you’re optimistic by nature. So you
DEMO, in six months, we’re going to be sailing. But
that optimism causes you to raise a lot less capital
than you need in DEMO cases, and it’s very lonely”
(Morrison 2003). More formally, DEMO to less over-
conﬁdent founders, we would expect that more over-
DEMO ones will underestimate their ventures’
need for initial resource endowments.
Proposition 5. More overconﬁdent founders start
their ventures with smaller resource endowments and this
DEMO the likelihood that their ventures will fail.
Founder Overconﬁdence and Resource
Commitments to Initial Venture Ideas
As they initiate ventures, more overconﬁdent
founders are more likely to overcommit their ven-
tures’ limited resources to the opportunities DEMO
which their ventures were founded. In our model,
overcommitment refers to an actor’s relative propen-
sitytocommitmoreresourcesmorequicklytoafocal
opportunity through three dynamics.
First,ifmoreoverconﬁdentfoundersunderestimate
thechallengesofextractingvaluefromtheirventures,DEMO
they may allocate too great a share of their resource
endowment to this initial idea or focal “opportunity.”
Camerer and Lovallo (1999, p. DEMO) claim that, “Firms
could mistakenly enter (a market) too often for two
different reasons: They know their own skills but
fail to appreciate how many competitors there will
be, or they forecast competition accurately but over-
conﬁdently think that their ﬁrm will succeed while
mostotherswillfail.”Totestthisreasoning,theycon-
DEMO a laboratory experiment in which MBA stu-
dents were asked to choose the extent to which they
would enter a market where payoffs depended DEMO
entrant skill. Consistent with their expectations, they
found that entrants were DEMO likely to excessively
enter markets when they thought that post-entry per-
formance depended on their skills and neglected the
skill levels of other entrants. DEMO by this ﬁnd-
ing, we expect that more overconﬁdent founders will
DEMO a similar propensity to excessively enter mar-
kets.
Second, more overconﬁdent DEMO with greater
conviction in the prospects of the customer need
that they are seeking to meet and the strength of
their resources to pursue DEMO opportunity will more
rapidly mobilize resources towards such opportu-
nity. With greater self-efﬁcacy, more overconﬁdent
foundershavelessreasontowaitformarketandtech-
nicaluncertaintiestobecomeresolved.Earliermovers
into a market can be disadvantaged if customers are
not ready for new innovations, say, because existing
167
DEMO are already “good enough” or because cus-
tomers lack the skills to use the innovations inde-
pendently or in conjunction with related products
(Christiansen 1997). Similarly, early movers face a
greater challenge in attaining support for the product
from the value chain participants who source prod-
ucts DEMO get them to market; and so face the costs
of becoming DEMO vertically integrated (Lieberman
and Montgomery 1988). Thus, while founders who
more fully commit their ventures to market opportu-
nities from the outset DEMO help to attain ﬁrst mover
advantages,laterentrantscanbebetterplacedtoeval-
uate customer preferences and other contingencies
(Mitchell 1991).
Third, if founders overestimate their ability to
DEMO value from resources that others hold, they
may overpay for such DEMO The winner’s curse
is an adverse selection problem in which more over-
conﬁdent actors overestimate the value that they can
extract from resources and DEMO become the highest
bidders for them (Bazerman and Samuelson 1983).
DEMO premium that actors pay above market price for
resourcessignalstheextravaluethatbuyersexpectto
extract from the resource relative to sellers. Hayward
and Hambrick (1997) illustrate these effects DEMO show-
ing that overconﬁdent acquiring managers tend to
pay higher premiums for target businesses. Although
this is a study of acquiring managers at large DEMO,
suchpremiumsbothsignalacquiringmanagers’over-
conﬁdenceinthevaluethattheycanextractfromtar-
getsandincreasethecostofextractingthatvalue.Ina
similar vein, founders may authorize the payment DEMO
premiumsoverpre-existingormarketpricesthatthey
pay for managerial talent, capital goods, acquisitions,
and so on.
Overall, more overconﬁdent founders are prone
to raising insufﬁcient resource endowments for their
ventures. Once those endowments are established,
more overconﬁdent founders DEMO tend to allocate
them too excessively and quickly to focal venture
opportunities. This suggests that more overconﬁdent
founders will unduly deplete the resources that DEMO
have at their disposal, depriving their ventures of
resourcefulness and increasing DEMO likelihood that
their ventures will fail.
Proposition 6. More overconﬁdent founders commit
greater resources to focal opportunities and this increases
the likelihood that their DEMO will fail.
Founder Overconﬁdence and Venture Liquidity
Until now, we have DEMO on how founders’ over-
conﬁdence at the time of venture founding affects
founders’ decisions to attain and deploy resources at
that point. Systematic evidence DEMO psychology and
behavioral ﬁnance suggests that such overconﬁdence
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
168
is likely to sustain, thus inﬂuencing founders’ deci-
sions beyond venture founding. A substantial liter-
ature in social psychology documents the cognitive
inertia DEMO changing previously held beliefs known as
“perseverance” (Anderson et al. 1980)DEMO Buehler et al.
(1997) use a familiar annual ritual—paying income
taxesonthedaytheyaredue—toillustratehowhope
forthefutureovercomeslearningfromthepast.Most
of their sample admitted to ﬁnishing the forms no
earlier than DEMO due date in the previous years, but
conﬁdently predicted that they DEMO act earlier in
thecomingyear.(Theydidnot.)KrugerandDunning
(1999, p. 1121) suggested DEMO poor-performing actors
sustain overconﬁdence because they are unable to
effectively identify their errors, a problem that they
refer to as “difﬁculties in recognizing one’s own
incompetence.”CamererandLovallo(1999)showthat
actors’ overconﬁdence increases as they enter mar-
kets DEMO, as they continue to survive, they under-
estimate the strength of their surviving competitors.
Turning to the behavioral ﬁnance literature, Gervais
andOdean(2001)provideanattributiontheory-based
model in which traders do not initially know their
ability. In DEMO their abilities, traders take too
much credit for success, leading them to become per-
sistently overconﬁdent. In a related study, Gervais
et al. (2004) argue that because overconﬁdent man-
agers underestimate risk, they persistently overcome
the propensity of risk-averse rational managers to
delay projects that are DEMO shareholders’ best interests.
While such persistent overconﬁdence may affect
a number of entrepreneurial decisions, we focus
on those regarding equity-based liquidity events
(founders DEMO or sell new or existing equity in
their ventures in return for cash) because founders
may overcome the above resource dynamics that we
describe by capitalizing on such events. At issue
here is that more overconﬁdent DEMO place a
higher value on their skills and judgment and the
value of their ventures relative to others, especially
prospective capital providers and acquirers. More
overconﬁdent founders are thus less likely to reach
an agreement with DEMO acquirers and pub-
lic and private investors over the terms for exchang-
ing venture equity for cash (Neale and Bazerman
1985); and so are less able to capitalize on liquid-
ity events, such as an initial public offering, acquisi-
tion by another company, further rounds of DEMO
capital, liquidating inventory, and so on. Instead, if
more overconﬁdent DEMO overestimate the value
of their equity, they will seek new capital DEMO fewer
equityclaims,especiallyshort-termdebt(Landierand
Thesmar 2004).
Moreoverconﬁdentfoundersalsotendtobeaverse
to liquidity events that dilute their ownership and
so cede control to other managers and investors.
DEMO Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
As founders link their abilities more closely to their
ventures’ existence and prosperity, they become less
mindful of the preferences and opinions of other
venture DEMO, including co-managers and
investors. That is, they become more averse to taking
counsel from the managers whom they have hired,
theinvestorswhomtheyhaveacceptedfundingfrom,
DEMO others who are well positioned to diagnose and
treat problems at their ventures. More overconﬁdent
founders sustain such aversion because they tend to
possess DEMO strong personal need for control that they
cansustainbyexercisinguncommonpowerovertheir
ventures relative to leaders at other organizations
(Kets de Vries 1985). Wasserman (2001, 2003, p. 150)
ﬁnds that, relative to managers at more mature DEMO,
founders own “a large percentage of the company
(and) there is much greater inside ownership than
in large ﬁrms.” With greater control, founders exert
greater discretion over the composition of the board
of directors DEMO the senior management team at their
ventures, factors that consolidate founders’ DEMO
(Pfeffer 1981). What can emerge is “inside” think-
ing (Kahneman and Lovallo 1993), in which founders
focus on the unique features DEMO their skills, opportu-
nity, and resources, leading them to develop DEMO
scenariosthatarebasedonthosequalities.Inparticu-
lar, whereas founders tend to be skilled at identifying
opportunities DEMO convincing others, they generally
lack the detail orientation and operating skills DEMO
are needed to manage costs and choose between con-
ﬂicting growth opportunities.7 As ventures ﬂounder,
ventureliquiditybecomesmoredependentoncareful
management of these contingencies (Kazanjian 1988).
Overall,theabovesuggeststhatmoreoverconﬁdent
founderswillpreventtheirventuresfromcapitalizing
on liquidity events because they overvalue their ven-
tures DEMO to other investors and so are less likely
to come to terms with them. Rather than exchange
their ventures’ equity for cash, more overconﬁdent
founders will rely more extensively on short-term
debt, thereby rendering their venture more at risk to
defaulting on debt servicing and repayment (Landier
and Thesmar 2004). Together, these factors lead more
overconﬁdent founders to reduce their ventures’ liq-
uidity, as follows:
Proposition 7. More overconﬁdent founders reduce
the liquidity of their ventures and this increases the likeli-
hood DEMO their ventures will fail.
To summarize, our hubris theory of entrepreneur-
DEMO is rooted in theory and evidence on behav-
ioral decisions and predicts when founders are more
7 As ventures complete new product development and DEMO more
capital,thelikelihoodthatthefounderwillcedecontroloftheven-
ture to professional CEOs increases, thus reducing the DEMO
that their ventures will fail (Wasserman 2003).
Downloaded from informs.org DEMO [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal DEMO only, all rights reserved.
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
DEMO to be overconﬁdent and thus start ventures.
In our model, founders DEMO more overconﬁdent upon
founding their ventures when they (1) are less expe-
rienced at founding ventures that are similar to
their focal one, and (2) undertake ventures with
more difﬁcult and uncertain core tasks. DEMO then
linked founder overconﬁdence to founders’ tendency
to attain insufﬁcient initial resources for their ven-
turesandovercommitthoseresourcesquicklytofocal
venture opportunities, factors that increase the likeli-
hood of venture failure. Because more overconﬁdent
founders are less motivated to obtain DEMO manage
venture liquidity, they further jeopardize the survival
of their ventures.
DEMO
A hubris explanation contributes to theory on
entrepreneurship in material ways. Present disci-
plinary treatments of venture founding and market
entry take the laboratory DEMO, the ﬁrm, or the
population of ﬁrms as the unit of analysis (Bruderl
et al. 1992, Camerer and Lovallo 1999). Unlike DEMO
perspectives, a hubris theory examines the role of
founders’ overconﬁdence in DEMO and managing
ventures because it is founders who make the deci-
sions that shape the fate of their ventures (Boeker
1989). A number of actors can start a venture, but
foundersgenerallyemergeashighlyinﬂuentialinini-
tiating the venture and overseeing its resource acqui-
sition and allocation (Schein 1980; see Stevenson DEMO
Jarillo 1990 for a review). With their unique control
over an uncertain and emerging enterprise, founders’
cognitive biases will be reﬂected in decisions that
drive venture formation and failure.
Moreover, while network, institutional, and ecolog-
ical perspectives help to explain why ventures start
or fail, they do not explain why founders start ven-
tures given the rates of DEMO failure, and how ven-
turefoundingsystematicallyrelatestoventurefailure.
A hubris theory of entrepreneurship explains DEMO
empirical regularities because (1) founders’ overcon-
ﬁdence upon venture formation is likely to affect
criticalfoundingdecisions,and(2)founders’overcon-
ﬁdenceislikelytoholdafterthoseventuresformand
socontinuetoaffectfounders’decisions(Camererand
Lovallo 1999, Kruger and Dunning 1999). Similarly,
entrepreneurship scholars examine the antecedents
DEMO venture formation but rarely consider how such
antecedents might relate to venture failure. Thus, this
paper offers a more complete theory of entrepreneur-
ship because it explicates the dynamics by which
founder overconﬁdence is tied to DEMO failure. Our
researchforthispapersuggeststhatahubristheoryof
entrepreneurship is an integrative and undeveloped
one for explaining venture formation and failure.
169
We bridge this gap by theorizing that DEMO
overconﬁdence helps to explain the puzzle of why
founders start ventures in the face of the high odds
that such ventures will fail. Overconﬁdence, the
central construct of our work, emerges as an endur-
ing motor of the economic prosperity that excessive
venture formation generates, and equally as a brake
on that prosperity. Research on founders’ cognitive
biases as opposed DEMO personality traits is a promis-
ing way to address the limitations of network and
ecological perspectives in tackling our focal puzzle of
why so DEMO ventures start in the shadow of high
rates of venture failure. This approach reﬂects evi-
dence that (1) overconﬁdence is a robust bias DEMO
resenting a number of underlying tendencies, and
is most pronounced among DEMO with high self-
esteem and the ability to make detailed and con-
vincingplans,(2)cognitivebiaseslikeoverconﬁdence
are more pronounced when judgment is made under
uncertain conditions, such as those facing founders,
and(3)overconﬁdenceispervasiveandrobustamong
founders (DEMO et al. 1988).
We complement treatments on founder overconﬁ-
denceanditsroleinventureformation(e.g.,Bernardo
and Welch 2001, Cooper et al. 1988) by elaborat-
ing DEMO founder overconﬁdence explains the links
betweenventureformationandfailure.Inourmodel,
more overconﬁdent founders obtain smaller initial
resource endowments for their ventures that they
subsequently allocate prematurely and DEMO to
focal opportunities. Because they overestimate their
ventures’ prospects, they are DEMO more reluctant to
exchange equity in their ventures for cash. The result
is that more overconﬁdent founders deprive their
ventures of resources and resourcefulness.
DEMO closing, however, it is important to reiterate that
founders (1) are not uniformly overconﬁdent, (2) do
notinvariablyremainoverconﬁdent,and(3)overcon-
ﬁdence is not necessarily bad for themselves, their
ventures, and overall entrepreneurial DEMO
Potential Beneﬁts from Overconﬁdence
Behavioral decision theorists provide evidence of a
number of factors that limit the operation of overcon-
ﬁdence,includingsituationswhereactorsusecounter
factualthinkingandseekouttimelyandauthoritative
feedback (Arkes et al. 1987, Grifﬁn and Tversky 1992,
LichtensteinandFischhoff1980).Foundersmightalso
contain their overconﬁdence by assembling diverse
venture teams with members who can point DEMO
different perspectives on risks and opportunities
(Sniezek and Henry 1989). DEMO reasoning
counterbalances the “available” information that pro-
ducesoverconﬁdence,thusmitigatingoverconﬁdence
and its effects (Flannelly and Flannelly 2000, Tetlock
1998).Usingdifferentscenariosofwhatcouldhappen
Downloaded from informs.org by DEMO on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use DEMO, all rights reserved.
170
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,DEMO
Even if overconﬁdent founders contribute to ven-
turefailure,suchfailureisnotnecessarilybadforven-
turesandentrepreneurialactivity(Baumol1990,1991;
Van Praag and Cramer 2001). To illustrate, Bernardo
and Welch (2001) model how failing founders, by
virtue of exploring fresh opportunities, convey infor-
mation that others can ignore or exploit and thus
provide a public service. Moreover, Gervais et al.
(2004) model how more overconﬁdent managers ben-
eﬁtshareholdersbyactingonprojectsthatrisk-averse
managers postpone. Anecdotally, unreasonably con-
ﬁdent entrepreneurs have achieved remarkable out-
comes from seemingly far-fetched plans. Amongst
otherexamples,asateenagerMichaelDellconcluded
thathe“wantedtocompetewithIBM.”HerbKelleher
DEMO that he would turn Southwest Airlines into
a proﬁtable point-to-point airline, DEMO after rival air-
lines issued 31 separate administrative and/or judi-
cialproceedingsthateffectivelyrenderedhisbusiness
insolvent. Perhaps it is such unreasonable conﬁdence
which provides entrepreneurs with the DEMO and
persuasiveness to enact their plans.
If so, the greater scholarly DEMO is not just
to link founder overconﬁdence to venture failure
as we have done here, but to explain and pre-
dict how founders’ overconﬁdence affects the nature
and quality of their judgment. Joining this challenge
shouldyieldtheoryandevidenceonhowpresentand
DEMO founders will produce better ventures.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank David Balkin, DEMO Bazerman, Arnold
Cooper, Syd Finkelstein, Mike Haynie, Beta Mannix, DEMO
Shane,andtwoanonymousreviewersforhelpfulcomments
on an earlier draft of this paper.
tends to improve judgment (Einhorn and Hogarth
1987, Holyoak and Thagard 1995) because the pro-
cess of scenario generation and analysis helps actors
tobreakfreefromthe“mentalmodels”thatshapethe
way that DEMO solve problems (Dunning et al. 1990,
Koehler 1994). The DEMO of this approach, however,
is that founders may focus on DEMO scenar-
ios rather than relevant past experiences, the experi-
encesofothers,andotherkindsof“outside”thinking
(Kahneman and Lovallo 1993).
However, overconﬁdence usually persists. Kruger
and Dunning (1999, p. 1121) argued that: “when peo-
ple are incompetent DEMO the strategies they adopt to
achieve success and satisfaction, they suffer DEMO dual
burden:Notonlydotheyreacherroneousconclusions
andmakeunfortunatechoices,buttheirincompetence
robs them of the ability to realize it.” That is, these
individuals have only a limited ability to know how
welloneisperforming,whenoneislikelytobeaccu-
rateinjudgment,andwhenoneislikelytobeinerror.
In a different stream of research, developmental psy-
chologists have also investigated the inability of indi-
viduals (typically young children) to utilize outcome
feedback and to adapt their behaviors—they refer to
such behavior as perseverance. Although the focus of
this paper has been DEMO at founding and
how continued overconﬁdence can adversely impact
a venture’s ability to overcome initial disadvantages,
future research can make important contributions to
DEMO literature by extending the current study to link
with recent clinical and developmental psychology
research on perseverence (Dihoff et al. 2004, Spencer
and DEMO 2004). It also offers a means to build on
the psychoanalytic tradition of Kets de Vries (1985),
Miller(1990),andotherstogainadeeperunderstand-
ing of the persistence of overconﬁdence in the face of
poor ﬁrm performance DEMO its consequences.
Even if overconﬁdence is pervasive among References
founders, it DEMO not universally bad for founders, their
ventures,andeconomicperformance.Overconﬁdence
enhances founders’ self-efﬁcacy DEMO enabling them to
feel good about starting and achieving what they
might not have otherwise (Taylor and Brown 1988).
We are very mindful that overconﬁdence might help
to explain why scholars who are familiar with DEMO
perilous rates of rejection at ﬁne journals still try
to publish there without seeking detailed feedback
from colleagues prior to submission. Returning to
our DEMO context, we expect that overconﬁdence
might help founders to attract greater DEMO,
especially from impressionable stakeholders. These
resource providers may feel reassured by founders
who can convey the attractiveness of the opportunity
that they have DEMO and the manner in which they
will exploit it, securing resources DEMO a potentially
self-fulﬁlling prophecy (Merton 1948).
Aldrich,H.E.,E.R.Auster.1986.Evendwarfsstartedsmall:Liabil-
DEMO Res. Organ.
Behavior 8 165–198.
Anderson, P., M. L. Tushman. 2001. Organizational environments
and industry exit: The effects of uncertainty, muniﬁcence and
DEMO Indust. Corporate Change 10 675–711.
Anderson, C. A., M. R. Lepper, L. Ross. 1980. The perseverance of
social theories: The role of DEMO in the persistence of
discredited information. J. Personality Social Psych. 39 37–49.
Arkes, H. R., C. Christensen, C. Lai, C. Blumer. 1987. DEMO methods
of reducing overconﬁdence. Organ. Behavior Human Decision
Processes 39 133–144.
Baldwin, J. R., P. K. Gorecki. 1991. Firm entry and exit in DEMO
Canadianmanufacturingsector,1970–1982. Canadian J. Econom.
24 300–323.
Ball, S. B., M. H. Bazerman, J. S. Carroll. 1991. An evaluation of
learninginthebilateralwinner’scurse. Organ. Behavior Human
Decision Processes 48 1–22.
Bar-Hillel, M. 1983. The base-rate fallacy controversy. R. W.
Scholtz, ed. Decision Making Under Uncertainty. Elsevier Sci-
ence, DEMO, The Netherlands, 36–91.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights DEMO
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
DEMO, W. J. 1990. Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive,
and destructive. J. DEMO Econom. 98 893–922.
Baumol, W. J. 1991. Enterprising pursuit of rents DEMO the case of
takeovers. Appl. Financial Econom. 1 1–11.
Bazerman, M., W. F. Samuelson. 1983. I won the auction but don’t
want the DEMO J. Conﬂict Resolution 27 618–634.
Bernardo, A. E., I. Welch. 2001. On the evolution of overconﬁdence
and entrepreneurs. J. Econom. Management Strategy 10 DEMO
Bluedorn, A. C. 1993. Pilgrim’s progress: Trends and convergence
in research on organizational size and environments. J. Man-
agement 19 163–191.
Boeker, W. 1989. Strategic change: The effects of founding and his-
tory. Acad. Management J. 32 489–515.
Bruderl,J.,R.Schussler.1990.Organizationalmortality:Theliability
of newness and adolescence. Admin. DEMO Quart. 35 530–547.
Bruderl, J., P. Preisendorfer, R. Ziegler. 1992. DEMO chances of
newly founded business organizations. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 57
227–242.
Buehler, R., D. Grifﬁn, H. MacDonald. 1997. The role of moti-
vated reasoning in optimistic time predictions. Personality
Social Psych. Bull. 23 238–247.
Buehler, R., D. Grifﬁn, M. Ross. 1994. Exploring the “planning fal-
lacy”: Why people underestimate their task completion times.
J. Personality Social Psych. 67 DEMO
Burton, M., J. Sorenson, C. Beckman. 2002. Coming from good
DEMO: Career histories and new venture formation. Res. Sociol.
Organ. 19 229–262.
DEMO,L.,J.Barney.1997.Differencesbetweenentrepreneursand
managersinlargeorganizations:Biasesandheuristicsinstrate-
gic decision-making. J. Bus. Venturing 12 9–30.
Cable, D. M., S. Shane. 1997. A prisoner’s dilemma approach
to entrepreneur-venture DEMO relationships. Acad. Manage-
ment Rev. 22 142–177.
Camerer,C.,D.Lovallo.1999.Overconﬁdenceandexcessentry:An
experimental approach. Amer. Econom. Rev. 89 306–318.
Christiansen, C. 1997. The Innovator’s Dilemma. Harvard Business
School Press, Boston, MA.
Cialdini, R. B. 1998. The Psychology of Persuasion. Quill, New York.
Cooper, A. C., C. A. Woo, W. Dunkelberg. 1988. Entrepreneurs per-
ceived chances for success. J. Bus. Venturing 3 97–108.
Cosmides, L., J. Tooby. 1987. From evolution to DEMO: Evolu-
tionary psychology as the missing link. J. Dupre, ed. The Lat-
est on the Best: Essays on Evolution and Optimality. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 227–306.
Delmar, F., S. Shane. 2003. Does DEMO planning facilitate the
development of new ventures? Strategic Management J. 24
DEMO
Dess, G., D. Beard. 1984. Dimensions of organizational task envi-
ronments. Admin. Sci. Quart. 29 52–73.
Dihoff,R.E.,G.M.Brosvic,M.Epstein.2004.Provisionoffeedback
during preparation for DEMO testing: Learning is enhanced
byimmediatebutnotdelayedfeedback. Psych. Rec. 54 207–231.
Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, L. Samuelson. 1989. The growth and fail-
ureofU.S.manufacturingplants. DEMO J. Econom. 104 671–698.
Dunning, D., D. W. Grifﬁn, J. DEMO Milojkovic, L. Ross. 1990. The
overconﬁdence effect in social prediction. J. DEMO Social
Psych. 58 568–581.
Einhorn, H. J., R. M. Hogarth. 1987. Decision making: Going for-
ward in reverse. Harvard Bus. Rev. 65 66–70.
Erickson, G., R. Jacobson. 1992. Gaining comparative advantage
through discretionary expenditures: The returns to R&D and
advertising. Management Sci. 38 1264–1279.
Fichman, M., D. A. Levinthal. 1991. Honeymoons and the liability
of adolescence: DEMO new perspective on duration dependence in
social and organizational relationships. Acad. Management Rev.
16 442–469.
171
Flannelly, L. T., K. J. Flannelly. 2000. DEMO people’s judgment
bias about their level of knowledge. Psych. Rec. 50 587–601.
Florin, J., M. Lubatkin, W. Schulze. 2003. A social capital model of
high-growth ventures. Acad. Management J. 46 374–385.
Gervais, S., T. DEMO 2001. Learning to be overconﬁdent. Rev.
Financial Stud. 14 1–27.
Gervais, DEMO, J. B. Heaton, T. Odean. 2004. Overconﬁdence, invest-
ment policy, and executive stock options. Working paper, The
WhartonSchool,UniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA.
Ghemawat,P.1991. Commitment: The Dynamic of Strategy. FreePress,
New York.
Gigerenzer, DEMO 2002. Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the Real World.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Grifﬁn, D. W., L. Ross. 1991. Subjective construal, DEMO inference
and human misunderstanding. M. P. Zanna, ed. Advances in
Experimental DEMO Psychology, Vol. 21. Academic Press, New
York, 219–359.
Grifﬁn, D. W., A. Tversky. 1992. The weighing of evidence and the
determinants of conﬁdence. Cognitive Psych. 24 411–435.
Hannan, M. T., G. R. Carroll. DEMO An introduction to organiza-
tional ecology. G. R. Carroll, M. T. DEMO, eds. Organizations
in Industry. Oxford University Press, New York, 17–31.
DEMO, M., J. Freeman. 1984. Structural inertia and organizational
change. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 49 149–164.
Hayward,M.L.A.,D.C.Hambrick.1997.Explainingthepremiums
paidinlargeacquisitions:EvidenceofCEOhubris. Admin. Sci.
Quart. 42 DEMO
Hayward, M. L. A., V. Rindova, T. Pollock. 2004. Believing DEMO
own press: The causes and consequences of CEO celebrity.
Strategic Management DEMO 25 637–653.
Headd, B. 2003. Redeﬁning business success: Distinguishing
between closure and failure. Small Bus. Econom. 21 51–62.
Hellman, T., M. Puri. DEMO Venture capital and the professionaliza-
tionofstart-upﬁrms:Empiricalevidence. J. Finance 57 169–197.
Holyoak, K. J., P. Thagard. 1995. The Analogical Scientist in Mental
Leaps: Analogy in Creative Thought. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
185–209.
Hsu,DEMO
ing paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, DEMO
Kahneman, D., D. Lovallo. 1993. Timid choices and bold forecasts:
A cognitive perspective on risk taking. Management Sci. 39
17–31.
Kahneman, D., A. Tversky. 1995. Conﬂict resolution: A cognitive
perspective. K. Arrow, R. H. Mnookin, L. Ross, A. Tversky,
R.Wilson,eds. Barriers to DEMO Resolution,Chapter3.Norton,
New York.
Kazanjian, R. K. 1988. Relation of DEMO problems to stages
growth in technology-based new ventures. Acad. Management
J. 31 257–280.
Keren,G.1987.Facinguncertaintyinthegameofbridge:Acalibra-
tion study. Organ. Behavior Human Decision Processes 39 DEMO
Kets de Vries, M. F. R. 1985. The dark side of DEMO
Harvard Bus. Rev. 63(Nov./Dec.) 160–167.
Koehler, D. J. 1994. Hypothesis generation and conﬁdence in judg-
ment. J. Experiment. Psych.: Learning, DEMO, Cognition 20
461–469.
Koehler, D. J., L. A. Brenner, D. Grifﬁn. 2002. The calibration of
expert judgment: Heuristics and biases beyond the labora-
tory. T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, D. Kahneman, eds. Heuristics and
Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York, 686–715.
Kramer,R.2003.Thehardertheyfall. Harvard Bus. Rev. 81(October)
58–66.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.
172
Kruger, J., D. Dunning. 1999. Unskilled and unaware of it:DEMO
How difﬁculties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead
to inﬂated self-assessments. J. Personality Social Psych. 77
1121–1134.
Landier,A.,D.Thesmar.2004.Financialcontractingwithoptimistic
entrepreneurs: Theory and evidence. Working paper, Univer-
sity of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
Larson, A. DEMO Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A
study of the governance of DEMO relationships. Admin. Sci.
Quart. 37 76–104.
Lawrence, P. R., J. W. Lorsch. 1967. Differentiation and integration
in complex organizations. Admin. Sci. Quart. 12 DEMO
Lazear, E. P. 2004. Balanced skills and entrepreneurship. Amer.
Econom. Rev. DEMO 208–211.
Lichtenstein, S., B. Fischoff. 1977. Do those who know more also
know more about how much they know? The calibration of
probability judgments. Organ. Behavior Human Performance 20
259–183.
Lichtenstein, S., B. Fischhoff. DEMO Training for calibration. Organ.
Behavior Human Performance 26 149–171.
Lichtenstein, S., B. Fischoff, L. Phillips. 1982. Calibration and
probability: The state of DEMO art to 1980. D. Kahneman,
P. Slovic, A. Tversky, eds. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuris-
tics and Biases. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
306–334.
Lieberman,M.B.,D.B.Montgomery.1988.Firstmoveradvantages.
Strategic Management J. 9 127–140.
Lieberman,DEMO,Y.Trope.1998.Theroleoffeasibilityanddesirability
considerations in near and distant future decisions: A test of
DEMO construal theory. J. Personality Social Psych. 75 5–18.
Mahajan, J. 1992. DEMO overconﬁdence effect in marketing manage-
ment predictions. J. Marketing Res. 29 329–342.
Mansﬁeld, E. 1986. Patents and innovation: An empirical study.
Management Sci. DEMO 173–181.
March, J. G. 1997. How decisions happen in organizations.
Z. DEMO, ed. Organization Decision Making. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK, 9–32.
Merton R. K. 1948. The self-fulﬁlling prophecy. Antioch Rev. 8
193–210.
DEMO, M. H., J. M. Utterback. 1995. Product development cycle
time and commercial success. IEEE Trans. Engrg. Management
42 297–304.
Miller, D. 1990. The Icarus Paradox. Harper Business, New York.
Mitchell,W.1991.Dualclocks:Entryorderinﬂuencesonincumbent
and newcomer market share and survival when specialized
assets retain their value. Strategic Management J. DEMO 85–100.
Moore, D. M., D. M. Cain. 2004. Strategic myopia and
entrepreneurial entry: An experimental approach. Working
paper, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Moore, D. M., T. G. Kim. 2003. Myopic social prediction and the
solo comparison effect. J. Personality Social Psych. 85 1121–1135.
Morrison, M. 2003. Herb Kelleher on the record. Business Week
Online, Part 3 (December 23), www.businessweek.com.
Neale, M. A., M. H. Bazerman. 1985. The effects of framing and
negotiator overconﬁdence on bargaining behaviors and out-
DEMO Acad. Management J. 28 34–50.
Pfeffer, J. 1981. Power in Organizations. DEMO, Boston, MA.
Phillips, B., B. A. Kirchhoff. 1989. Formation, DEMO, and survival:
Small ﬁrm dynamics in the US economy. Small DEMO Econom. 1
65–74.
Pincus, K. V. 1991. Audit judgment conﬁdence. Behavioral DEMO in
Accounting 3 39–66.
Podolny, J. M. 2001. Networks as the DEMO and prisms of the mar-
ket. Amer. J. Sociol. 1071 33–60.
Powell, W. W. 1990. Neither market nor hierarchy: Network forms
of organization. DEMO M. Staw, L. L. Cummings, eds. Research in
Organizational Behavior. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 295–336.
Focused Issue: A Hubris Theory of DEMO
ManagementScience52(2),pp.160–172,©2006INFORMS
Rao, H. 1994. The social construction of reputation. Strategic Man-
agement J. 15 29–44.
Rogers, E. M. 1983. Diffusion of Innovation. Free Press, New York.
Santos, F., K. M. Eisenhardt. 2005. Constructing markets and orga-
nizational boundaries: Entrepreneurial action in nascent ﬁelds.
Working paper, INSEAD. Fontainebleau, France.
Sapienza, H., A. K. Gupta. DEMO Impact of agency risks and task
uncertainty on venture capitalist-CEO interaction. Acad. Man-
agement J. 37 1618–1633.
Schein, E. H. 1980. Organizational culture. Amer. Psychologist 45
109–119.
Schraw, G., T. D. Roedel. 1994. Test difﬁculty DEMO judgment bias.
Memory Cognition 22 63–70.
Shane, S., D. Cable. 2002. Network ties, reputation, and the ﬁnanc-
ing of new ventures. Management DEMO 48 364–381.
Shane, S., T. Stuart. 2002. Organizational endowments and the per-
formance of university start-ups. Management Sci. 48 154–171.
Shane, S., DEMO Venkataraman. 2000. The promise of entrepreneurship
as a ﬁeld of research. Acad. Management Rev. 251 217–226.
Shepherd, D. A. 2003. Learning from business failure: Propositions
about the grief recovery process for the self-employed. Acad.
Management Rev. 282 318–329.
Shook, C. L., R. L. Priem, J. E. McGee. 2003. Venture creation and
theenterprisingindividual:Areviewandsynthesis. J. Manage-
ment 29 360–379.
Spencer, J. P., A. R. Schutte. 2004. Unifying representations and
responses: Perseverative DEMO arise from a single behavioral
system. Psych. Sci. 15 187–193.
Sniezek,J.A.,R.A.Henry.1989.Accuracyandconﬁdenceingroup
judgment. Organ. Behavior Human Decision Processes 43 1–28.
Stevenson, H. H., J. C. Jarillo. 1990. A paradigm of entrepreneur-
ship: Entrepreneurial management. DEMO Management J. 11
17–27.
Suchman, M. C. 1995. Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institu-
tional approaches. Acad. Management Rev. 20 571–611.
Sutcliffe, K. M., G. P. Huber. 1998. Firm and industry as deter-
minants of executive perceptions of the environment. Strategic
Management J. 19 793–808.
Taylor, S. E., J. Brown. 1988. Illusion and well-being: A social
psychological perspective on DEMO health. Psych. Bull. 103
193–210.
Tetlock, P. E. 1998. Close-call counterfactuals DEMO belief–system
defenses:IwasnotalmostwrongbutIwasalmostright. J. Per-
sonality Social Psych. 75 639–652.
Tversky, DEMO, D. Kahneman. 1986. Rational choice and the framing
of decisions. J. DEMO 59 251–278.
Tyebjee, T. T., A. V. Bruno. 1984. A model of venture capital invest-
ment activity. Management Sci. 9 1051–1066.
Uzzi, B. 1996. The sources and consequences of embeddedness for
theeconomicperformanceoforganization:Thenetworkeffect.
Amer. Sociol. DEMO 61 674–698.
Vallone, R. P., D. W. Grifﬁn, S. Lin, L. Ross. 1990. Overconﬁdent
prediction of future actions and outcomes by self DEMO others.
J. Personality Social Psych. 58 582–592.
Van Praag, C. M., J. S. Cramer. 2001. The roots of entrepreneurship
and labor demand: Individual ability and low risk aversion.
Economica 269 45–62.
Wasserman, N. 2001. Inside the black box of entrepreneurial incen-
tives. Working paper, Harvard Business School, Harvard Uni-
versity, Cambridge, MA.
Wasserman, N. 2003. Founder-CEO succession DEMO the paradox of
entrepreneurial success. Organ. Sci. 14 149–173.
Wood, R. DEMO Task complexity: Deﬁnition of the construct. Organ.
Behavior Human Decision Processes DEMO 60–82.
Wright, W. F. 2001. Task experience as a predictor of DEMO loan
loss judgments. Auditing 20 147–156.
Downloaded from informs.org by [155.247.166.234] on 25 May 2015, at 05:04 . For personal use only, DEMO rights reserved.{1g42fwefx}