www.hbr.org
ARTICLE COLLECTION
If you read nothing else on
strategy, read these best-
selling articles.
HBR’s Must-Reads
on Strategy
Included with this collection:
DEMO Development
2  What Is Strategy?
by Michael E. Porter
The DEMO Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
by Michael E. Porter
Building Your Company’s Vision
by James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras
Reinventing Your Business DEMO
by Mark W. Johnson, Clayton M. Christensen,
and Henning Kagermann
DEMO Ocean Strategy
by W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne
23
42
57
69
Strategy Execution
81 The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
by Gary DEMO Neilson, Karla L. Martin, and Elizabeth Powers
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System
by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. DEMO
Transforming Corner-Office Strategy into Frontline Action
by Orit Gadiesh and James L. Gilbert
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
by Michael C. Mankins and DEMO Steele
Who Has the D?: How Clear Decision Roles Enhance
Organizational Performance
by Paul Rogers and Marcia Blenko
95
110
121
133
Product DEMO
www.hbr.org
What Is Strategy?
by Michael E. Porter
Included with this DEMO Harvard Business Review article:
3 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work
4 What DEMO Strategy?
22 Further Reading
A list of related materials, with DEMO to guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint 96608
What Is Strategy?
The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice
DEMO myriad activities that go into creating,
producing, selling, and delivering a product
or service are the basic units of competitive
advantage. Operational DEMO
means performing these activities better—
that is, faster, or with fewer inputs and
defects—than rivals. Companies can reap
enormous advantages from operational ef-
DEMO, as Japanese firms demon-
strated in the 1970s and 1980s with DEMO
practices as total quality management and
continuous improvement. But from a com-
petitive standpoint, the problem with oper-
ational effectiveness is that best practices
are easily emulated. As all competitors in an
industry adopt them, the productivity
frontier—the maximum value a company
can deliver at a given cost, given the best
available technology, skills, and manage-
ment techniques—shifts outward, lowering
costs and improving value at the same
time. Such competition produces DEMO
improvement in operational effectiveness,
but relative improvement for no one. And
the more benchmarking that companies
do, the more competitive convergence
you have—that is, the more indistinguish-
able companies are from one another.
Strategic positioning attempts to achieve
sustainable competitive advantage by
preserving what is distinctive about DEMO com-
pany. It means performing different activi-
ties from rivals, or DEMO similar activi-
ties in different ways.
Three key principles underlie strategic positioning.
1. Strategy is the creation of a unique and
valuable position, involving a different set
of activities. Strategic position emerges from
three distinct sources:DEMO
• serving few needs of many customers (Jiffy
Lube provides only DEMO lubricants)
• serving broad needs of few customers
(Bessemer Trust DEMO only very high-
wealth clients)
• serving broad needs of many customers
in a narrow market (Carmike Cinemas op-
erates only in cities with a population
under 200,000)
2. Strategy requires you to DEMO trade-offs
in competing—to choose what not to do.
Some competitive activities are incompatible;
thus, gains in one area can be achieved only
at the expense of another area. For example,
Neutrogena soap is positioned DEMO as a me-
dicinal product than as a cleansing agent. The
company says “no” to sales based on deodor-
izing, gives up large volume, and sacrifices
manufacturing efficiencies. By contrast, Maytag’s
decision to extend its DEMO line and ac-
quire other brands represented a failure to
make difficult trade-offs: the boost in reve-
nues came at the expense of return on sales.
3. Strategy involves creating “fit” among a
company’s activities. Fit DEMO to do with the
ways a company’s activities interact and rein-
force one another. For example, Vanguard
Group aligns all of its activities with a low-cost
strategy; it distributes funds directly to con-
sumers and minimizes portfolio turnover. Fit
drives both competitive advantage and sus-
tainability: when activities mutually reinforce
each other, competitors can’t easily imitate
them. When Continental Lite tried to match a
few of Southwest Airlines’ activities, but not
the whole interlocking system, the results
were disastrous.
Employees need guidance about how to
deepen a strategic position rather than
broaden or compromise it. About DEMO to ex-
tend the company’s uniqueness while
strengthening the fit among its activities. This
work of deciding which target group of cus-
tomers and DEMO to serve requires discipline,
the ability to set limits, and DEMO commu-
nication. Clearly, strategy and leadership are
inextricably linked.
page 3
DEMO © 2000 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
What Is Strategy?
by Michael E. Porter
I. Operational Effectiveness Is DEMO
Strategy
For almost two decades, managers have been
learning to play DEMO a new set of rules. Compa-
nies must be ﬂexible to respond rapidly to
competitive and market changes. They must
benchmark continuously to achieve DEMO prac-
tice. They must outsource aggressively to gain
efﬁciencies. And they must nurture a few core
competencies in race to stay ahead of rivals.
DEMO the heart of strategy—is
rejected as too static for today’s dynamic mar-
kets and changing technologies. According to
the new dogma, rivals can quickly copy any
market position, and competitive advantage is,
at best, DEMO
But those beliefs are dangerous half-truths,
and they are leading more and more companies
down the path of mutually destructive compe-
tition. True, some barriers to competition are
falling as regulation eases and markets become
DEMO True, companies have properly invested
energy in becoming leaner and more DEMO
In many industries, however, what some call
hypercompetition is a self-inﬂicted wound, not
the inevitable outcome of a changing paradigm
of competition.
The root of the problem is the failure to dis-
tinguish between operational DEMO and
strategy. The quest for productivity, quality, and
speed has spawned a remarkable number of
management tools and techniques: total quality
management, DEMO, time-based com-
petition, outsourcing, partnering, reengineering,
change management. Although the resulting
operational improvements have often been
dramatic, many companies have been frustrated
by their inability to translate those gains into
sustainable proﬁtability. And DEMO by bit, almost
imperceptibly, management tools have taken
the place of strategy. As managers push to im-
prove on all fronts, they move farther away
from viable competitive positions.
Operational Effectiveness: Necessary but Not
Sufﬁcient. Operational effectiveness and strategy
are both essential to superior performance,
which, after all, is the primary goal of any en-
terprise. But they work in very different ways.
harvard business review • november–december 1996
page DEMO
COPYRIGHT © 1996 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
What Is Strategy?
Michael E. Porter is the C. Roland
Christensen DEMO of Business
Administration at the Harvard Business
School in Boston, Massachusetts.
DEMO article has benefited greatly
from the assistance of many individuals
and companies. The author gives spe-
cial thanks to Jan Rivkin, the coauthor
of a related paper. Substantial research
contributions have been made by
Nicolaj Siggelkow, Dawn Sylvester, and
Lucia Marshall. Tarun Khanna, Roger
Martin, and Anita McGahan have pro-
vided especially extensive comments.
A company can outperform rivals DEMO if it can
establish a difference that it can preserve. It must
deliver greater value to customers or create
comparable value at a lower DEMO, or do both.
The arithmetic of superior proﬁtability then fol-
lows: delivering greater value allows a company
to charge higher average unit prices; greater
efficiency results in lower average unit costs.
Ultimately, all differences between companies
in cost or price derive from the hundreds of ac-
tivities DEMO to create, produce, sell, and de-
liver their products or DEMO, such as calling
on customers, assembling ﬁnal products, and
training DEMO Cost is generated by per-
forming activities, and cost advantage arises
DEMO performing particular activities more efﬁ-
ciently than competitors. Similarly, differentia-
tion DEMO from both the choice of activities and
how they are performed. Activities, then are the
basic units of competitive advantage. Overall ad-
vantage or disadvantage results from all a com-
pany’s activities, not only a few.1
Operational effectiveness (OE) means per-
forming similar activities better than rivals DEMO
form them. Operational effectiveness includes
but is not limited to efﬁciency. It refers to any
number of practices that allow a company to bet-
DEMO utilize its inputs by, for example, reducing de-
fects in products or developing better products
faster. In contrast, strategic positioning means
performing different activities from rivals’ or per-
forming similar activities in different ways.
Differences DEMO operational effectiveness among
companies are pervasive. Some companies
are able to get more out of their inputs than
others because they eliminate wasted effort,DEMO
employ more advanced technology, motivate
employees better, or have greater insight into
managing particular activities or sets of activ-
ities. Such differences in DEMO effective-
ness are an important source of differences in
proﬁtability among competitors because they
directly affect relative cost positions and
levels of differentiation.
Differences DEMO operational effectiveness
were at the heart of the Japanese challenge to
Western companies in the 1980s. The Japa-
nese were so far ahead of DEMO in operational
effectiveness that they could offer lower cost
and superior quality at the same time. It is
worth dwelling on this point, because so much
recent thinking about competition depends
on it. Imagine for a DEMO a productivity
frontier that constitutes the sum of all existing
harvard business review • november–december 1996
best practices at any given time. Think of DEMO as
the maximum value that a company deliver-
ing a particular product or service can create
at a given cost, using the best available tech-
nologies, skills, management techniques, and
purchased inputs. The productivity frontier
can apply to individual activities, to groups
of linked activities such as order processing
and manufacturing, and to an entire com-
pany’s activities. When a company improves
its operational effectiveness, it moves toward
the frontier. Doing so may require capital in-
vestment, different personnel, or simply new
DEMO of managing.
The productivity frontier is constantly shift-
ing outward as new technologies and man-
agement approaches are developed and as
new inputs become DEMO Laptop com-
puters, mobile communications, the Internet,
and software such as Lotus Notes, for exam-
ple, have redeﬁned the productivity frontier
DEMO sales-force operations and created rich
possibilities for linking sales with such activi-
ties as order processing and after-sales sup-
port. Similarly, lean production, DEMO involves a
family of activities, has allowed substantial
improvements in manufacturing DEMO
and asset utilization.
For at least the past decade, managers have
DEMO preoccupied with improving operational
effectiveness. Through programs such as TQM,
time-based competition, and benchmarking,
they have changed how they perform activities
in order to eliminate inefﬁciencies, improve
customer satisfaction, and achieve best practice.
DEMO to keep up with shifts in the produc-
tivity frontier, managers DEMO embraced con-
tinuous improvement, empowerment, change
management, and the so-called DEMO orga-
nization. The popularity of outsourcing and
the virtual corporation reﬂect the growing
recognition that it is difﬁcult to perform all
activities as productively DEMO specialists.
As companies move to the frontier, they can
often improve DEMO multiple dimensions of per-
formance at the same time. For example, DEMO
facturers that adopted the Japanese practice of
rapid changeovers in the 1980s were able to
lower cost and improve differentiation simul-
taneously. What were DEMO believed to be
real trade-offs—between defects and costs, for
example—turned out DEMO be illusions created by
poor operational effectiveness. Managers have
learned to reject such false trade-offs.
page 5
Constant improvement in operational ef-
fectiveness is necessary to achieve superior
proﬁtability. DEMO, it is not usually sufﬁ-
cient. Few companies have competed success-
DEMO on the basis of operational effectiveness
over an extended period, and DEMO ahead of
rivals gets harder every day. The most obvious
reason for that is the rapid diffusion of best
practices. Competitors can quickly imitate
DEMO techniques, new technologies,
input improvements, and superior ways of
meeting customers’ needs. The most generic
solutions—those that can be used in multiple
DEMO the fastest. Witness the pro-
liferation of OE techniques accelerated by
support from consultants.
OE competition shifts the productivity fron-
tier outward, effectively raising the bar for
everyone. But although such competition pro-
duces absolute improvement DEMO operational ef-
fectiveness, it leads to relative improvement
for no one. DEMO the $5 billion-plus U.S.
commercial-printing industry. The major players—
R.R. Donnelley & Sons Company, Quebecor,
World Color Press, and Big Flower Press—are
DEMO head to head, serving all types of
customers, offering the same array of printing
technologies (gravure and web offset), in-
vesting heavily in the same new equipment,
running their presses faster, and reducing crew
sizes. But the resulting major productivity
Operational Effectiveness
Versus Strategic Positioning
DEMO
Productivity Frontier
(state of best practice)
low
high
Relative cost DEMO
harvard business review • november–december 1996
low
What Is Strategy?
gains are being captured by customers and
equipment suppliers, not retained in superior
proﬁtability. Even industry-leader Donnelley’s
proﬁt margin, consistently higher than 7% in
the 1980s, fell to less than 4.6% in 1995. This
pattern is playing itself out in industry after
industry. Even the Japanese, pioneers of the
new competition, suffer from persistently low
proﬁts. (See the insert “Japanese DEMO
Rarely Have Strategies.”)
The second reason that improved opera-
tional effectiveness is insufﬁcient—competitive
convergence—is more subtle and insidious. The
more benchmarking companies do, the more
they look alike. The more that rivals out-
source activities DEMO efﬁcient third parties,
often the same ones, the more generic DEMO
activities become. As rivals imitate one an-
other’s improvements in quality, DEMO times,
or supplier partnerships, strategies converge
and competition becomes a DEMO of races
down identical paths that no one can win.
Competition based on operational effective-
ness alone is mutually destructive, leading
to wars of attrition that can be arrested only
by limiting competition.
The recent wave DEMO industry consolidation
through mergers makes sense in the context of
OE competition. Driven by performance pres-
sures but lacking strategic vision, company
after company has had no better idea than to
buy up its rivals. The DEMO left standing
are often those that outlasted others, not com-
panies DEMO real advantage.
After a decade of impressive gains in opera-
tional effectiveness, many companies are facing
diminishing returns. Continuous improvement
has been etched on managers’ brains. But its
tools unwittingly draw companies toward imi-
tation and DEMO Gradually, managers
have let operational effectiveness supplant strat-
egy. The result DEMO zero-sum competition, static or
declining prices, and pressures on costs that
compromise companies’ ability to invest in the
business for the long term.
DEMO Strategy Rests on Unique
Activities
Competitive strategy is about being different.
It means deliberately choosing a different set
of activities to deliver a unique DEMO of value.
Southwest Airlines Company, for example,
offers short-haul, low-cost, point-to-point service
between midsize cities and secondary airports
page 6
Nonprice buyer value delivered
What Is Strategy?
in large cities. Southwest avoids large airports
and DEMO not ﬂy great distances. Its customers
include business travelers, families, and stu-
dents. Southwest’s frequent departures and
low fares attract price-sensitive customers who
DEMO would travel by bus or car, and
convenience-oriented travelers who would
DEMO a full-service airline on other routes.
Most managers describe strategic position-
ing in terms of their customers: “Southwest
Airlines serves price- and convenience-sensitive
travelers,” for example. But the essence of strat-
egy is in the DEMO to perform
activities differently or to perform different ac-
tivities than rivals. Otherwise, a strategy is
nothing more than a marketing slogan that
will not withstand competition.
A full-service airline is conﬁgured to get
passengers from DEMO any point A to any point
B. To reach a large number of destinations and
serve passengers with connecting ﬂights, full-
Japanese Companies Rarely Have Strategies
The Japanese triggered a global revolu-
tion in operational effectiveness DEMO the
1970s and 1980s, pioneering practices
such as total quality management DEMO
continuous improvement. As a result,
Japanese manufacturers enjoyed sub-
stantial cost and quality advantages for
many years.
But Japanese companies rarely de-
veloped DEMO strategic positions of
the kind discussed in this article.
Those that did—Sony, Canon, and Sega,
for example—were the exception rather
than the DEMO Most Japanese compa-
nies imitate and emulate one another.
All rivals offer most if not all product
varieties, features, and services; they
employ all channels and match one
anothers’ plant conﬁgurations.
The dangers of Japanese-style DEMO
tition are now becoming easier to rec-
ognize. In the 1980s, DEMO rivals operat-
ing far from the productivity frontier, it
seemed possible DEMO win on both cost
and quality indeﬁnitely. Japanese com-
panies were all able to grow in an ex-
panding domestic economy and by
penetrating DEMO markets. They ap-
peared unstoppable. But as the gap in
operational effectiveness narrows, Jap-
anese companies are increasingly
caught in a trap of their own making. If
they are to escape the mutually destruc-
tive battles DEMO ravaging their perfor-
mance, Japanese companies will have
to learn strategy.
DEMO do so, they may have to overcome
strong cultural barriers. Japan DEMO noto-
riously consensus oriented, and com-
panies have a strong tendency DEMO medi-
ate differences among individuals
rather than accentuate them. Strategy,
on the other hand, requires hard
choices. The Japanese also have a
deeply ingrained service tradition that
predisposes them to go to great
lengths to DEMO any need a customer
expresses. Companies that compete in
that way end up blurring their distinct
positioning, becoming all things to
all customers.
This discussion of Japan is drawn from
the author’s research with Hirotaka
Takeuchi, with help from Mariko
Sakakibara.
harvard business review • november–december 1996
service DEMO employ a hub-and-spoke system
centered on major airports. To attract passengers
who desire more comfort, they offer ﬁrst-class
or business-class service. To accommodate
passengers who must change planes, they co-
ordinate schedules and check and transfer
baggage. Because some passengers will be
traveling for many hours, full-service airlines
serve meals.
Southwest, in contrast, tailors all its activities
to deliver DEMO, convenient service on its par-
ticular type of route. Through fast DEMO at
the gate of only 15 minutes, Southwest is able to
DEMO planes ﬂying longer hours than rivals and
provide frequent departures with fewer aircraft.
Southwest does not offer meals, assigned seats,
interline baggage checking, or premium classes
of service. Automated ticketing at the gate
encourages customers to bypass travel agents, al-
lowing Southwest to avoid their commissions.
A standardized ﬂeet of 737 aircraft boosts the
efﬁciency of maintenance.
Southwest has DEMO out a unique and valu-
able strategic position based on a tailored set
of activities. On the routes served by South-
west, a full-service airline could never be as
convenient or as low cost.
Ikea, the global furniture retailer based in
Sweden, also has a clear strategic positioning.
Ikea targets young furniture buyers who want
style at low cost. What DEMO this marketing
concept into a strategic positioning is the tai-
lored set of activities that make it work. Like
Southwest, Ikea has chosen to perform activi-
ties differently from its rivals.
Consider the typical furniture store. DEMO
rooms display samples of the merchandise.
One area might contain 25 sofas; another will
display ﬁve dining tables. But those items rep-
resent only a fraction of the choices available
to customers. Dozens of books displaying DEMO
swatches or wood samples or alternate styles
offer customers thousands of product varieties
to choose from. Salespeople often escort cus-
tomers through the store, answering questions
and helping them navigate this maze of choices.
Once a DEMO makes a selection, the order
is relayed to a third-party manufacturer. DEMO
luck, the furniture will be delivered to the cus-
tomer’s home DEMO six to eight weeks. This is
a value chain that maximizes customization
and service but does so at high cost.
In contrast, Ikea serves customers who are
happy to trade off service for cost. Instead of
DEMO 7
having a sales associate trail customers around
the store, Ikea uses a self-service model based
on clear, in-store displays. Rather than rely
solely on third-party manufacturers, Ikea designs
its own low-cost, modular, ready-to-assemble
furniture to ﬁt its positioning. In huge stores,
Ikea displays every product it DEMO in room-like
settings, so customers don’t need a decorator
to help DEMO imagine how to put the pieces to-
gether. Adjacent to the furnished showrooms
is a warehouse section with the products in
boxes on pallets. DEMO are expected to do
their own pickup and delivery, and Ikea DEMO
even sell you a roof rack for your car that you
can return for a refund on your next visit.
Although much of its DEMO position comes
from having customers “do it themselves,” Ikea
offers a number of extra services that its com-
petitors do not. In-store child DEMO is one. Ex-
tended hours are another. Those services are
uniquely aligned with the needs of its custom-
ers, who are young, not DEMO, likely to
have children (but no nanny), and, because
DEMO work for a living, have a need to shop
at odd DEMO
The Origins of Strategic Positions. Strategic
positions emerge from three distinct sources,
which are not mutually exclusive and often
overlap. First, positioning can be based on pro-
ducing a subset of an industry’s products or
DEMO I call this variety-based positioning
because it is based on the choice of product
Finding New Positions: The Entrepreneurial Edge
Strategic competition can be thought of as
the process of perceiving new positions that
woo customers DEMO established positions or
draw new customers into the market. For ex-
ample, superstores offering depth of mer-
chandise in a single product category take
market share from broad-line department
stores offering a more limited selection in
DEMO categories. Mail-order catalogs pick off
customers who crave convenience. In princi-
ple, incumbents and entrepreneurs face the
same challenges in ﬁnding new strategic po-
sitions. In practice, new entrants often have
the edge.
Strategic positionings are often not obvi-
ous, and ﬁnding them requires creativity and
insight. New entrants often discover unique
positions that have been available but simply
overlooked DEMO established competitors. Ikea,
for example, recognized a customer group
that DEMO been ignored or served poorly. Cir-
cuit City Stores’ entry into used cars, CarMax,
is based on a new way of performing activities—
extensive refurbishing of cars, product guaran-
tees, no-haggle pricing, sophisticated use of in-
house customer ﬁnancing—that has long
been open to incumbents.
New DEMO can prosper by occupying a
position that a competitor once held but has
ceded through years of imitation and strad-
dling. And entrants coming DEMO other indus-
tries can create new positions because of dis-
tinctive activities drawn from their other
businesses. CarMax borrows heavily from
harvard business review DEMO november–december 1996
What Is Strategy?
or service varieties rather than customer
segments. Variety-based positioning makes
economic sense when a company can best
produce DEMO products or services using
distinctive sets of activities.
Jiffy Lube International, DEMO instance, spe-
cializes in automotive lubricants and does not
offer other DEMO repair or maintenance services.
Its value chain produces faster service at a
lower cost than broader line repair shops, a
combination so attractive that many customers
subdivide their purchases, buying oil changes
from the focused competitor, Jiffy Lube, and
going to rivals for other services.
The Vanguard DEMO, a leader in the mutual
fund industry, is another example of variety-
based positioning. Vanguard provides an
array of common stock, bond, DEMO money
market funds that offer predictable perfor-
mance and rock-bottom expenses. The com-
pany’s investment approach deliberately
sacriﬁces the possibility of extraordinary per-
formance DEMO any one year for good relative
performance in every year. Vanguard is known,
for example, for its index funds. It avoids mak-
ing bets on interest rates and steers clear of
narrow stock groups. Fund DEMO keep
trading levels low, which holds expenses
down; in addition, DEMO company discourages
customers from rapid buying and selling be-
cause doing so drives up costs and can force a
fund manager to trade in DEMO to deploy new
Circuit City’s expertise in inventory manage-
ment, credit, and other activities in consumer
electronics retailing.
Most commonly, however, new DEMO
open up because of change. New customer
groups or purchase occasions arise; new
needs emerge as societies evolve; new distri-
bution channels appear; new technologies
are developed; new machinery or informa-
tion systems become available. When such
changes happen, new entrants, unencum-
bered by a long DEMO in the industry, can
often more easily perceive the potential
for DEMO new way of competing. Unlike incum-
bents, newcomers can be more DEMO be-
cause they face no trade-offs with their
existing activities.
page 8
What Is Strategy?
A company can
outperform rivals only if
it DEMO establish a
difference that it can
preserve.
capital and raise cash for redemptions.
Vanguard also takes a consistent low-cost ap-
proach to managing distribution, customer
service, and marketing. Many investors in-
clude one or more Vanguard funds in their
portfolio, while buying aggressively managed
or specialized funds from competitors.
The people who use Vanguard or Jiffy
Lube are responding to DEMO superior value chain
for a particular type of service. A variety-based
positioning can serve a wide array of custom-
ers, but for most it will meet only a subset of
their needs.
A second basis for DEMO is that of serv-
ing most or all the needs of a particular group
of customers. I call this needs-based positioning,
which comes DEMO to traditional thinking
about targeting a segment of customers. It arises
when there are groups of customers with dif-
fering needs, and when a tailored set of activi-
ties can serve those needs best. Some groups DEMO
customers are more price sensitive than others,
demand different product features, and need
varying amounts of information, support, and
services. Ikea’s customers are a good example
of such a group. Ikea seeks to meet DEMO the
home furnishing needs of its target customers,
not just a subset of them.
A variant of needs-based positioning arises
when the same DEMO has different needs
on different occasions or for different types of
transactions. The same person, for example,
may have different needs when traveling on
business than when traveling for pleasure with
the family. Buyers of DEMO compa-
nies, for example—will likely have different
needs from their primary DEMO than from
their secondary source.
It is intuitive for most managers to conceive
of their business in terms of the customers’
needs they are DEMO But a critical element
of needs-based positioning is not at all intuitive
and is often overlooked. Differences in needs
will not translate into meaningful DEMO
unless the best set of activities to satisfy them
also differs. If that were not the case, every
competitor could meet those same needs, and
there would be nothing unique or valuable
about the positioning.
In private banking, for example, Bessemer
Trust Company targets families with a DEMO
mum of $5 million in investable assets who
want capital preservation combined with
wealth accumulation. By assigning one sophis-
harvard business review • november–december DEMO
ticated account ofﬁcer for every 14 families,
Bessemer has conﬁgured its activities for per-
sonalized service. Meetings, for example, are
more likely DEMO be held at a client’s ranch or
yacht than in the ofﬁce. Bessemer offers a wide
array of customized services, including invest-
ment management and estate administration,
oversight of oil and gas investments, and ac-
counting for racehorses and aircraft. Loans, a
staple of most private banks, are rarely needed
by Bessemer’s clients and make up a tiny frac-
tion of its client balances and income. Despite
the most generous compensation DEMO account
ofﬁcers and the highest personnel cost as a per-
centage of operating expenses, Bessemer’s dif-
ferentiation with its target families produces a
return on equity estimated to be the highest of
any private banking competitor.
DEMO private bank, on the other hand,
serves clients with minimum DEMO of about
$250,000 who, in contrast to Bessemer’s clients,
DEMO convenient access to loans—from jumbo
mortgages to deal ﬁnancing. Citibank’s account
managers are primarily lenders. When clients
need other services, their account manager re-
fers them to other Citibank specialists, each of
whom handles prepackaged products. Citibank’s
system is less customized than Bessemer’s and
allows it to have DEMO lower manager-to-client
ratio of 1:125. Biannual ofﬁce meetings are of-
fered only for the largest clients. Both Bessemer
and Citibank have tailored their DEMO to
meet the needs of a different group of private
banking customers. The same value chain can-
not proﬁtably meet the needs of both DEMO
The third basis for positioning is that of seg-
menting customers who are accessible in dif-
ferent ways. Although their needs are similar
to DEMO of other customers, the best conﬁgu-
ration of activities to reach DEMO is different. I
call this access-based positioning. Access can be
a function of customer geography or cus-
tomer scale—or of anything that requires a
DEMO set of activities to reach customers
in the best way.
Segmenting by access is less common and
less well understood than the other two DEMO
Carmike Cinemas, for example, operates movie
theaters exclusively in cities and towns with
populations under 200,000. How does Car-
mike make money DEMO markets that are not only
small but also won’t support big-city ticket
prices? It does so through a set of activities
that result in a lean cost structure. Carmike’s
page 9
small-town customers can be served through
standardized, low-cost theater complexes re-
quiring fewer screens and less sophisticated
projection technology than big-city theaters.
The company’s DEMO information system
and management process eliminate the need
for local administrative staff beyond a single
theater manager. Carmike also reaps advan-
tages from centralized DEMO, lower rent
and payroll costs (because of its locations), and
rock-bottom corporate overhead of 2% (the in-
dustry average is 5%). Operating in small com-
munities also allows Carmike to practice a
highly DEMO form of marketing in which
the theater manager knows patrons and pro-
motes attendance through personal contacts.
By being the dominant if not the DEMO theater
in its markets—the main competition is often
the high school football team—Carmike is also
able to get its pick of ﬁlms and negotiate DEMO
terms with distributors.
Rural versus urban-based customers are
one example of access driving differences in
activities. Serving small rather than large cus-
tomers or DEMO rather than sparsely situ-
ated customers are other examples in which
the best way to conﬁgure marketing, order
processing, logistics, and after-sale service ac-
tivities to meet the similar needs of distinct
groups will often DEMO
Positioning is not only about carving out a
niche. A position emerging from any of the
sources can be broad or narrow. A focused
DEMO Connection with Generic Strategies
In Competitive Strategy (The Free Press,
DEMO), I introduced the concept of ge-
neric strategies—cost leadership, differ-
DEMO, and focus—to represent the
alternative strategic positions in an in-
dustry. DEMO generic strategies remain
useful to characterize strategic positions
at the simplest and broadest level. Van-
guard, for instance, is an example of a
DEMO leadership strategy, whereas Ikea,
with its narrow customer group, is an ex-
ample of cost-based focus. Neutrogena
is a focused differentiator. The DEMO for
positioning—varieties, needs, and access—
carry the understanding of those generic
strategies to a greater level of speciﬁcity.
Ikea and Southwest are both DEMO
focusers, for example, but Ikea’s focus is
based on the needs of a customer group,
and Southwest’s is based on offering a
DEMO service variety.
The generic strategies framework in-
troduced the need to choose in order
to avoid becoming caught between
what I then described as DEMO inherent
contradictions of different strategies.
Trade-offs between the activities of in-
compatible positions explain those
contradictions. Witness Continental
Lite, which tried and failed to compete
in two ways at once.
harvard business review • november–december 1996
DEMO Is Strategy?
competitor, such as Ikea, targets the special
needs of a subset of customers and designs its
activities accordingly. Focused competitors
DEMO on groups of customers who are over-
served (and hence overpriced) by more broadly
targeted competitors, or underserved (and
hence underpriced). DEMO broadly targeted com-
petitor—for example, Vanguard or Delta Air
Lines—serves a DEMO array of customers, per-
forming a set of activities designed to DEMO
their common needs. It ignores or meets only
partially the more idiosyncratic needs of par-
ticular customer customer groups.
Whatever the basis—variety, needs, DEMO,
or some combination of the three—positioning
requires a tailored set of activities because it is
always a function of differences on the supply
DEMO; that is, of differences in activities. How-
ever, positioning is DEMO always a function of
differences on the demand, or customer,
DEMO Variety and access positionings, in partic-
ular, do not rely on any customer differences.
In practice, however, variety or access differ-
ences DEMO accompany needs differences. The
tastes—that is, the needs—of Carmike’s small-
town DEMO, for instance, run more toward
comedies, Westerns, action ﬁlms, DEMO family
entertainment. Carmike does not run any ﬁlms
rated NC-17.
Having deﬁned positioning, we can now
begin to answer the question, “What is DEMO?”
Strategy is the creation of a unique and valu-
able position, involving a different set of activi-
ties. If there were only one ideal position,
there would be no need for strategy. Compa-
nies DEMO face a simple imperative—win the
race to discover and preempt it. The essence of
strategic positioning is to choose activities that
are different from DEMO If the same set of ac-
tivities were best to produce all varieties, meet
all needs, and access all customers, companies
could easily shift among them and operational
effectiveness would determine performance.
III. A Sustainable DEMO Position
Requires Trade-offs
Choosing a unique position, however, is not
enough to guarantee a sustainable advantage.
A valuable position will attract imitation by DEMO
cumbents, who are likely to copy it in one of
two DEMO
First, a competitor can reposition itself to
match the superior performer. DEMO Penney,
for instance, has been repositioning itself
page 10
What Is Strategy?
The essence of strategy is
choosing to perform
DEMO differently than
rivals do.
from a Sears clone to a more upscale, fashion-
oriented, soft-goods retailer. A second and
far more common type DEMO imitation is strad-
dling. The straddler seeks to match the benefits
of a successful position while maintaining its
existing position. It grafts new features, ser-
vices, or technologies onto the activities it
already performs.
For those who argue that competitors can
copy any market position, the airline industry
is a perfect test case. It would seem that nearly
any competitor DEMO imitate any other air-
line’s activities. Any airline can buy the same
planes, lease the gates, and match the menus
and ticketing and DEMO handling services
offered by other airlines.
Continental Airlines saw how well South-
west was doing and decided to straddle. While
maintaining its position as DEMO full-service air-
line, Continental also set out to match South-
west DEMO a number of point-to-point routes.
The airline dubbed the new service Conti-
nental Lite. It eliminated meals and ﬁrst-
class service, increased departure frequency,
lowered fares, and shortened turnaround
time at the gate. Because Continental remained
a full-service airline on other routes, it contin-
ued to use travel agents and its mixed ﬂeet
of planes and to provide baggage DEMO
and seat assignments.
But a strategic position is not sustainable
unless there are trade-offs with other positions.
Trade-offs occur when activities are incom-
patible. DEMO put, a trade-off means that
more of one thing necessitates less DEMO another.
An airline can choose to serve meals—adding
cost and slowing turnaround time at the gate—
or it can choose not to, but it cannot do both
without bearing major inefﬁciencies.
Trade-offs create the need for DEMO and
protect against repositioners and straddlers.
Consider Neutrogena soap. Neutrogena Cor-
poration’s variety-based positioning is built on
a “kind to the skin,” residue-free DEMO formu-
lated for pH balance. With a large detail force
calling on dermatologists, Neutrogena’s mar-
keting strategy looks more like a drug com-
pany’s than a soap maker’s. It advertises in
medical journals, sends direct mail to doctors,
attends medical conferences, and performs re-
search at its own Skincare Institute. To rein-
force its positioning, Neutrogena originally
focused its distribution on drugstores and
avoided price promotions. Neutrogena uses a
harvard business DEMO • november–december 1996
slow, more expensive manufacturing process
to mold its DEMO soap.
In choosing this position, Neutrogena said
no to the deodorants DEMO skin softeners that
many customers desire in their soap. It gave up
the large-volume potential of selling through
supermarkets and using price promotions. It
DEMO manufacturing efﬁciencies to achieve
the soap’s desired attributes. In its original po-
sitioning, Neutrogena made a whole raft of
trade-offs like those, trade-offs DEMO protected
the company from imitators.
Trade-offs arise for three reasons. The ﬁrst is
inconsistencies in image or reputation. A com-
pany known for delivering DEMO kind of value
may lack credibility and confuse customers—or
even undermine its reputation—if it delivers an-
other kind of value or attempts to deliver DEMO
inconsistent things at the same time. For exam-
ple, Ivory soap, with its position as a basic, inex-
pensive everyday soap, would DEMO a hard time
reshaping its image to match Neutrogena’s pre-
mium “medical” reputation. Efforts to create a
new image typically cost tens or even DEMO
of millions of dollars in a major industry—a
powerful barrier to imitation.
Second, and more important, trade-offs arise
from activities themselves. Different positions
(with their tailored activities) require different
product conﬁgurations, different equipment,
DEMO employee behavior, different skills,
and different management systems. Many
trade-offs DEMO inﬂexibilities in machinery,
people, or systems. The more Ikea has DEMO
ured its activities to lower costs by having its
customers do their own assembly and delivery,
the less able it is to satisfy DEMO who re-
quire higher levels of service.
However, trade-offs can be DEMO more basic.
In general, value is destroyed if an activity is
DEMO or underdesigned for its use. For
example, even if a given DEMO were capa-
ble of providing a high level of assistance to
one customer and none to another, the sales-
person’s talent (and some DEMO his or her cost)
would be wasted on the second customer.
Moreover, productivity can improve when vari-
ation of an activity is limited. By providing a
high level of assistance all the time, the sales-
person and the entire sales activity can often
achieve efﬁciencies of learning DEMO scale.
Finally, trade-offs arise from limits on inter-
nal coordination and DEMO By clearly choos-
ing to compete in one way and not another,
page 11
Strategic positions can be
based on customers’
needs, customers’
accessibility, or DEMO
variety of a company’s
products or services.
senior management makes organizational
priorities clear. Companies that try to be all
things to all customers, in contrast, risk confu-
sion in the trenches as employees attempt to
make day-to-day operating decisions without a
clear framework.
Positioning trade-offs are pervasive in
DEMO and essential to strategy. They
create the need for choice and purposefully
limit what a company offers. They deter
straddling or repositioning, because competi-
tors that engage in those approaches under-
mine their strategies and degrade DEMO value
of their existing activities.
Trade-offs ultimately grounded Continental
Lite. The airline lost hundreds of millions of
dollars, and the CEO lost his job. Its planes
were delayed leaving congested hub cities or
slowed at the DEMO by baggage transfers. Late
ﬂights and cancellations generated a thousand
complaints a day. Continental Lite could not
afford to compete on price and still DEMO stan-
dard travel-agent commissions, but neither
could it do without agents DEMO its full-service
business. The airline compromised by cutting
commissions for all Continental ﬂights across
the board. Similarly, it could not afford to offer
the same frequent-ﬂier beneﬁts to travelers
paying the much lower ticket prices for DEMO
service. It compromised again by lowering the
rewards of Continental’s entire frequent-ﬂier
program. The results: angry travel agents and
full-service customers.
Continental tried to compete in two ways at
once. In trying to be low cost DEMO some routes
and full service on others, Continental paid an
enormous DEMO penalty. If there were no
trade-offs between the two positions, Conti-
DEMO could have succeeded. But the absence
of trade-offs is a dangerous half-truth that
managers must unlearn. Quality is not always
free. Southwest’s convenience, one kind of
high quality, happens to be consistent with low
costs because its frequent departures are facili-
tated by a number of low-cost practices—fast
DEMO turnarounds and automated ticketing, for
example. However, other dimensions of air-
line quality—an assigned seat, a meal, or bag-
gage transfer—require costs DEMO provide.
In general, false trade-offs between cost and
quality occur primarily DEMO there is redun-
dant or wasted effort, poor control or accuracy,DEMO
or weak coordination. Simultaneous improve-
ment of cost and differentiation is possible
harvard business review • november–december 1996
What Is Strategy?
only when DEMO company begins far behind the
productivity frontier or when the frontier
shifts outward. At the frontier, where compa-
nies have achieved current best practice, the
trade-off between cost and differentiation is
very real indeed.
After a decade of enjoying productivity ad-
vantages, Honda Motor Company and Toyota
Motor Corporation recently bumped up
against the frontier. In 1995, faced with in-
creasing customer resistance to higher auto-
mobile prices, Honda found that the only way
to produce a less-expensive car was to skimp
on features. DEMO the United States, it replaced
the rear disk brakes on the DEMO with lower-
cost drum brakes and used cheaper fabric for
the back seat, hoping customers would not
notice. Toyota tried to sell a version of its best-
selling Corolla in Japan with unpainted
bumpers and cheaper DEMO In Toyota’s case,
customers rebelled, and the company quickly
dropped DEMO new model.
For the past decade, as managers have im-
proved DEMO effectiveness greatly, they
have internalized the idea that eliminating
trade-offs is DEMO good thing. But if there are no
trade-offs companies will never achieve a sus-
tainable advantage. They will have to run
faster and faster DEMO to stay in place.
As we return to the question, What DEMO
strategy? we see that trade-offs add a new di-
mension to DEMO answer. Strategy is making
trade-offs in competing. The essence of strat-
egy is choosing what not to do. Without trade-
offs, there would be no need for choice and
thus no need for strategy. Any good DEMO
could and would be quickly imitated. Again,
performance would once again depend
wholly on operational effectiveness.
IV. Fit Drives Both Competitive
Advantage and DEMO
Positioning choices determine not only which
activities a company will perform and how it
will conﬁgure individual activities but also
how activities relate to DEMO another. While op-
erational effectiveness is about achieving ex-
cellence in individual activities, or functions,
strategy is about combining activities.
Southwest’s rapid gate turnaround, which
allows frequent departures and greater use of
aircraft, is DEMO to its high-convenience,
low-cost positioning. But how does Southwest
achieve it? Part of the answer lies in the com-
page 12
What Is Strategy?
Trade-offs are essential
to strategy. They create
the DEMO for choice and
purposefully limit what a
company offers.
pany’s well-paid gate and ground crews, whose
productivity in turnarounds is enhanced by
ﬂexible union rules. But the bigger part of the
answer lies in how Southwest DEMO other
activities. With no meals, no seat assignment,
and no DEMO baggage transfers, Southwest
avoids having to perform activities that slow
down DEMO airlines. It selects airports and
routes to avoid congestion that introduces de-
lays. Southwest’s strict limits on the type and
length of routes make DEMO aircraft
possible: every aircraft Southwest turns is a
Boeing 737.
What DEMO Southwest’s core competence? Its
key success factors? The correct answer is that
everything matters. Southwest’s strategy in-
volves a whole system of activities, not a col-
lection of parts. Its competitive advantage
comes from the DEMO its activities ﬁt and rein-
force one another.
Fit locks out imitators by creating a chain
that is as strong as its strongest link. DEMO in most
companies with good strategies, Southwest’s
activities complement one another DEMO ways
that create real economic value. One activity’s
cost, for example, is lowered because of the
way other activities are performed. Similarly,
DEMO activity’s value to customers can be en-
hanced by a company’s other activities. That is
the way strategic ﬁt creates competitive advan-
tage and DEMO proﬁtability.
Types of Fit. The importance of ﬁt among
functional policies is one of the oldest ideas in
strategy. Gradually, however, it has DEMO sup-
planted on the management agenda. Rather
than seeing the company as a whole, manag-
ers have turned to “core” competencies, “criti-
cal” DEMO, and “key” success factors. In
fact, ﬁt is a far more central component of
competitive advantage than most realize.
Fit is important because DEMO activities
often affect one another. A sophisticated sales
force, for example, confers a greater advan-
tage when the company’s product embodies
premium technology DEMO its marketing ap-
proach emphasizes customer assistance and
support. A production line with high levels of
model variety is more valuable when com-
bined DEMO an inventory and order processing
system that minimizes the need for stocking
ﬁnished goods, a sales process equipped to ex-
plain and encourage customization, and an
advertising theme that stresses the beneﬁts of
product variations that meet a customer’s
harvard business review • november–december 1996
special needs. Such DEMO are
pervasive in strategy. Although some ﬁt
among activities is generic and applies to
many companies, the most valuable ﬁt is
strategy-speciﬁc because it enhances a posi-
tion’s uniqueness and ampliﬁes trade-offs.2
There are three types DEMO ﬁt, although they
are not mutually exclusive. First-order ﬁt is
simple DEMO between each activity (func-
tion) and the overall strategy. Vanguard, DEMO
example, aligns all activities with its low-cost
strategy. It minimizes portfolio DEMO and
does not need highly compensated money
managers. The company distributes its funds
directly, avoiding commissions to brokers. It
also limits advertising, relying DEMO on pub-
lic relations and word-of-mouth recommenda-
tions. Vanguard ties its employees’ bonuses to
cost savings.
Consistency ensures that the competitive ad-
vantages of DEMO cumulate and do not
erode or cancel themselves out. It makes the
strategy easier to communicate to customers,
employees, and shareholders, and DEMO
implementation through single-mindedness in
the corporation.
Second-order ﬁt occurs when activities are
reinforcing. Neutrogena, for example, mar-
kets to upscale hotels eager to DEMO their
guests a soap recommended by dermatolo-
gists. Hotels grant Neutrogena the privilege
of using its customary packaging while requir-
ing other soaps to DEMO the hotel’s name.
Once guests have tried Neutrogena in a lux-
ury hotel, they are more likely to purchase it
at the drugstore or ask their doctor about it.
Thus Neutrogena’s medical and hotel market-
ing DEMO reinforce one another, lowering
total marketing costs.
In another example, Bic Corporation sells a
narrow line of standard, low-priced pens to vir-
tually all major customer markets (retail, com-
mercial, promotional, and giveaway) through
virtually all available channels. As with any
variety-based positioning serving a DEMO
group of customers, Bic emphasizes a common
need (low price for an acceptable pen) and
uses marketing approaches with a broad reach
(DEMO large sales force and heavy television adver-
tising). Bic gains the beneﬁts of consistency
across nearly all activities, including product
design that emphasizes ease of manufacturing,
plants conﬁgured for low cost, aggressive
purchasing to minimize material costs, and
page 13
What Is Strategy?
in-house parts production whenever the
economics dictate.
Yet DEMO goes beyond simple consistency be-
cause its activities are reinforcing. For example,
the company uses point-of-sale displays and
frequent packaging changes to stimulate DEMO
pulse buying. To handle point-of-sale tasks, a
company needs a large DEMO force. Bic’s is the
largest in its industry, and it handles DEMO
sale activities better than its rivals do. More-
over, the combination DEMO point-of-sale activity,
heavy television advertising, and packaging
changes yields far DEMO impulse buying than
any activity in isolation could.
Third-order ﬁt goes beyond activity rein-
forcement to what I call optimization of effort.
The Gap, a retailer of casual clothes, considers
product availability in its stores a critical ele-
ment of its strategy. The Gap could keep prod-
ucts DEMO by holding store inventory or by re-
stocking from warehouses. The Gap has
optimized its effort across these activities by
restocking its selection of DEMO clothing almost
daily out of three warehouses, thereby mini-
mizing the DEMO to carry large in-store invento-
ries. The emphasis is on restocking because the
Gap’s merchandising strategy sticks to basic
items in relatively few colors. DEMO compara-
ble retailers achieve turns of three to four
times per year, the Gap turns its inventory
seven and a half times per year. Rapid restock-
ing, moreover, reduces the cost of implement-
ing the DEMO short model cycle, which is six to
eight weeks long.3
Coordination DEMO information exchange
across activities to eliminate redundancy and
minimize wasted effort are the most basic
types of effort optimization. But there are
Mapping Activity DEMO
Activity-system maps, such as this one for Ikea, show how a
company’s strategic position is contained in a set of tailored
activities designed DEMO deliver it. In companies with a clear
strategic position, a number DEMO higher-order strategic themes (in
dark grey) can be identified and implemented through clusters of
tightly linked activities (in light grey).
Explanatory
catalogues,
informative
displays and
labels
Ease of
transport and
assembly
“Knock-down”
kit DEMO
Wide variety
with ease of
manufacturing
Self-transport
by customers
Limited
customer
service
Self-assembly
by customers
Modular
furniture
design
Suburban
locations
with ample
parking
Limited DEMO
staffing
Increased
likelihood of
future
purchase
In-house
design focused
on cost of
manufacturing
High-traffic
store layout
Self-selection
by customers
Ample
inventory
on site
Low
DEMO
cost
More
impulse
buying
Most
items in
inventory
Year-round
stocking
100%
sourcing from
long-term
suppliers
harvard business review • november–december 1996
page 14
What Is Strategy?
higher levels as well. Product design choices,
DEMO example, can eliminate the need for after-
sale service or make DEMO possible for customers
to perform service activities themselves. Simi-
larly, coordination DEMO suppliers or distribu-
tion channels can eliminate the need for some
in-house activities, such as end-user training.
In all three types of ﬁt, DEMO whole matters
more than any individual part. Competitive ad-
vantage grows out of the entire system of activi-
ties. The ﬁt among activities substantially DEMO
duces cost or increases differentiation. Beyond
that, the competitive value of DEMO activi-
ties—or the associated skills, competencies, or
resources—cannot be decoupled from the sys-
tem or the strategy. Thus in competitive com-
panies it DEMO be misleading to explain success
by specifying individual strengths, core compe-
DEMO, or critical resources. The list of
strengths cuts across many functions, and one
strength blends into others. It is more useful to
think DEMO terms of themes that pervade many
activities, such as low cost, a particular notion
of customer service, or a particular conception
of the value delivered. These themes are em-
bodied in nests of tightly linked DEMO
Fit and sustainability. Strategic ﬁt among
many activities is fundamental not only to
competitive advantage but also to the sus-
tainability of that advantage. DEMO is harder for
a rival to match an array of interlocked ac-
tivities than it is merely to imitate a particu-
lar sales-force approach, match a process
technology, or replicate a set of product fea-
tures. Positions built on systems of activities
are far more sustainable than those DEMO on
individual activities.
Consider this simple exercise. The probabil-
Vanguard’s Activity System
Activity-system maps can be useful for examining and
strengthening strategic fit. A DEMO of basic questions should
guide the process. First, is each activity DEMO with the
overall positioning – the varieties produced, the needs served,DEMO
and the type of customers accessed? Ask those responsible for
each DEMO to identify how other activities within the company
improve or detract from their performance. Second, are there
ways to strengthen how activities and groups of activities
reinforce one another? Finally, could changes in one activity
DEMO the need to perform others?
Wary of
small growth
funds
A broad array
of mutual funds
excluding some
fund categories
Limited
international
funds DEMO to
volatility and
high costs
Use of
redemption
fees to
discourage
trading
Employee
bonuses
tied to
cost savings
Very low
expenses
passed on to
DEMO
No-loads
No
broker-dealer
relationships
No marketing
changes
No
commissions
to brokers or
distributors
Direct
distribution
Only three
retail
locations
Limited
advertising
budget
In-house
management
DEMO standard
funds
Strict cost
control
No first-class
travel for
executives
Straightforward
client communication
and education
Reliance
on word
of mouth
Vanguard
actively
spreads its
DEMO
Efficient investment
management approach
offering good, consistent
performance
Emphasis
on bonds
DEMO equity
index funds
Very low rate
of trading
Long-term
investment
encouraged
Shareholder
education
cautioning
about risk
On-line
information
access
harvard business review • november–december DEMO
page 15
ity that competitors can match any activity is
often less than one. DEMO probabilities then
quickly compound to make matching the en-
tire system highly unlikely (.9 x .9 = .81; .9 x .9 x
.9 DEMO .9 = .66, and so on). Existing companies
that try DEMO reposition or straddle will be forced
to reconﬁgure many activities. And even new
entrants, though they do not confront the
trade-offs facing established rivals, still face for-
midable barriers to imitation.
The more a company’s positioning rests on
activity systems with second- and third-order
ﬁt, the more sustainable its advantage will be.
Such systems, by their very nature, are DEMO
difﬁcult to untangle from outside the com-
pany and therefore hard to imitate. And even
if rivals can identify the relevant interconnec-
tions, they will have difﬁculty replicating
them. Achieving ﬁt is difﬁcult because it re-
DEMO Airlines’ Activity System
Frequent,
reliable
departures
High
compensation
of employees
No meals
No seat
assignments
15-minute
gate
turnarounds
Lean, highly
productive
ground and
gate crews
Limited
passenger
service
Limited use
of travel
agents
Automatic
ticketing
DEMO
Flexible
union
contracts
High level
of employee
stock
ownership
harvard business review • november–december 1996
High
aircraft
utilization
What Is Strategy?
quires the DEMO of decisions and actions
across many independent subunits.
A competitor seeking to match an activity
system gains little by imitating only some
activities and DEMO matching the whole. Per-
formance does not improve; it can decline.
DEMO Continental Lite’s disastrous attempt
to imitate Southwest.
Finally, ﬁt among a DEMO activities cre-
ates pressures and incentives to improve opera-
tional effectiveness, DEMO makes imitation
even harder. Fit means that poor performance
in one activity will degrade the performance in
others, so that weaknesses are exposed and
more prone to get attention. Conversely, im-
provements in one activity will pay dividends
in others. Companies with strong ﬁt among
their activities are DEMO inviting targets. Their
superiority in strategy and in execution only
No baggage
transfers
No
connections
with other
airlines
Standardized
fleet of 737
aircraft
Very DEMO
ticket prices
Short-haul,
point-to-point
routes between
midsize cities
and secondary
airports
”Southwest,
the low-fare
airline”
page 16
compounds their advantages and raises the
hurdle for imitators.
When activities complement DEMO another, ri-
vals will get little beneﬁt from imitation unless
they DEMO match the whole system.
Such situations tend to promote winner-take-
all competition. The company that builds the
best activity system—Toys R Us, for instance—
wins, while rivals with similar strategies—
Child World and Lionel Leisure—fall behind.
Thus ﬁnding a new strategic position is often
preferable to being the DEMO or third imita-
tor of an occupied position.
The most viable positions are those whose
activity systems are incompatible because of
tradeoffs. Strategic positioning DEMO the trade-
off rules that deﬁne how individual activities
will be conﬁgured and integrated. Seeing strat-
egy in terms of activity systems only makes DEMO
clearer why organizational structure, systems,
and processes need to be DEMO
Tailoring organization to strategy, in turn,
makes complementarities more achievable DEMO
contributes to sustainability.
One implication is that strategic positions
should have a horizon of a decade or more,
not of a single planning DEMO Continuity fos-
ters improvements in individual activities
and the ﬁt across activities, allowing an orga-
nization to build unique capabilities and
skills tailored to its strategy. Continuity also
reinforces a company’s identity.
Conversely, frequent shifts in positioning
are costly. Not only must a company reconﬁg-
ure individual activities, but it must also re-
align entire systems. Some activities may
Alternative DEMO of Strategy
The Implicit Strategy Model of the
Past Decade
• One ideal competitive position in
the industry
• Benchmarking of all activities and
DEMO best practice
• Aggressive outsourcing and part-
nering to gain efﬁciencies
• Advantages rest on a few key suc-
cess factors, critical resources, DEMO
competencies
• Flexibility and rapid responses to all
competitive and market changes
Sustainable Competitive Advantage
• Unique competitive position for the
company
• Activities DEMO to strategy
• Clear trade-offs and choices vis-à-vis
competitors
• Competitive advantage arises from
ﬁt across activities
• Sustainability comes from the ac-
tivity DEMO, not the parts
• Operational effectiveness a
given
harvard business review DEMO november–december 1996
What Is Strategy?
never catch up to the vacillating strategy. The
inevitable result of frequent shifts in strategy,
or of DEMO to choose a distinct position in
the ﬁrst place, is “me-too” DEMO hedged activity
conﬁgurations, inconsistencies across func-
tions, and organizational dissonance.
What is strategy? We can now complete the
answer to this question. Strategy is creating ﬁt
among a company’s activities. The success of a
strategy DEMO on doing many things well—
not just a few—and integrating among them.
If there is no ﬁt among activities, there is no
distinctive strategy and little sustainability.
Management reverts to the simpler task of
overseeing independent DEMO, and opera-
tional effectiveness determines an organiza-
tion’s relative performance.
V. DEMO Strategy
The Failure to Choose. Why do so many com-
panies fail to have a strategy? Why do manag-
ers avoid making strategic choices? Or, having
made them in the past, why do managers so
often let strategies decay and blur?
Commonly, the threats to strategy are seen
to emanate from outside a company because
of changes in DEMO or the behavior of
competitors. Although external changes can be
the problem, the greater threat to strategy
often comes from within. A sound strategy is
undermined by a misguided view of competi-
tion, by organizational failures, and, especially,
by the desire to grow.
Managers have become DEMO about the
necessity of making choices. When many com-
panies operate far from the productivity fron-
tier, trade-offs appear unnecessary. It can seem
that a well-run company should be able to beat
its ineffective rivals on DEMO dimensions simulta-
neously. Taught by popular management
thinkers that they do not have to make trade-
offs, managers have acquired a macho sense
that to do so is a sign of weakness.
Unnerved by forecasts of DEMO,
managers increase its likelihood by imitating
everything about their competitors. Exhorted
to think in terms of revolution, managers
chase every new technology for its own sake.
The pursuit of operational effectiveness is
seductive because it DEMO concrete and actionable.
Over the past decade, managers have been
under DEMO pressure to deliver tangible,
measurable performance improvements. Pro-
grams in operational effectiveness produce re-
page 17
What Is Strategy?
assuring progress, although superior proﬁtabil-
ity may remain elusive. Business publications
and consultants ﬂood the market with infor-
mation about DEMO other companies are doing,
reinforcing the best-practice mentality. Caught
up in the race for operational effectiveness,
many managers simply do not understand DEMO
need to have a strategy.
Companies avoid or blur strategic choices for
other reasons as well. Conventional wisdom
within an industry is often strong, homogeniz-
ing competition. Some managers mistake “cus-
tomer focus” to mean they DEMO serve all cus-
tomer needs or respond to every request from
distribution channels. Others cite the desire to
preserve ﬂexibility.
Organizational realities also work DEMO
strategy. Trade-offs are frightening, and mak-
ing no choice is sometimes DEMO to risk-
ing blame for a bad choice. Companies imitate
one another in a type of herd behavior, each
assuming rivals know something they do not.
Newly empowered employees, who are urged
to seek every possible source of improve-
ment, often lack a vision of the whole and
the perspective to recognize trade-offs. The
failure to choose sometimes comes down DEMO
the reluctance to disappoint valued managers
or employees.
The Growth Trap. Among all other inﬂu-
ences, the desire to grow has perhaps the
most perverse effect on strategy. Trade-offs
and limits appear to constrain growth. Serv-
DEMO one group of customers and excluding
others, for instance, places a real or imag-
ined limit on revenue growth. Broadly tar-
geted strategies DEMO low price result
in lost sales with customers sensitive to fea-
tures or service. Differentiators lose sales to
price-sensitive customers.
Managers are constantly tempted DEMO take in-
cremental steps that surpass those limits but
blur a company’s strategic position. Eventually,
pressures to grow or apparent saturation of the
DEMO market lead managers to broaden the
position by extending product lines, DEMO
new features, imitating competitors’ popular
services, matching processes, and even DEMO
acquisitions. For years, Maytag Corporation’s
success was based on its focus DEMO reliable, dura-
ble washers and dryers, later extended to include
dishwashers. However, conventional wisdom
emerging within the industry supported the
notion of selling a full line of products. Con-
Reconnecting with Strategy
Most companies owe DEMO initial success to
a unique strategic position involving clear
trade-offs. Activities once were aligned with
that position. The passage of time and the
pressures DEMO growth, however, led to com-
promises that were, at ﬁrst, almost imper-
ceptible. Through a succession of incremen-
tal changes that each DEMO sensible at the
time, many established companies have
compromised their way DEMO homogeneity
with their rivals.
The issue here is not with the companies
whose historical position is no longer viable;
their challenge is to DEMO over, just as a
new entrant would. At issue is a DEMO more
common phenomenon: the established
company achieving mediocre returns and
lacking DEMO clear strategy. Through incremen-
tal additions of product varieties, incremen-
tal DEMO to serve new customer groups,
and emulation of rivals’ activities, DEMO exist-
ing company loses its clear competitive
position. Typically, the company DEMO
matched many of its competitors’ offerings
and practices and attempts to sell to most
customer groups.
A number of approaches can help a com-
DEMO reconnect with strategy. The ﬁrst is a
careful look at what it already does. Within
most well-established companies is a core of
uniqueness. It DEMO identiﬁed by answering
questions such as the following:
• Which of our product or service variet-
ies are the most distinctive?
• DEMO of our product or service variet-
ies are the most proﬁtable?
• Which of our customers are the most
satisﬁed?
• Which DEMO, channels, or purchase
occasions are the most proﬁtable?
• Which of the activities in our value chain
are the most different and DEMO?
Around this core of uniqueness are en-
crustations added incrementally over time.
Like barnacles, they must be removed to re-
veal the underlying strategic positioning. A
harvard business review • november–december 1996
small percentage of DEMO or customers
may well account for most of a company’s
sales and especially its proﬁts. The chal-
lenge, then, is to refocus on DEMO unique
core and realign the company’s activities
with it. Customers and product varieties at
the periphery can be sold or allowed
through inattention or DEMO increases to
fade away.
A company’s history can also be instruc-
tive. What was the vision of the founder?
What were the products DEMO customers that
made the company? Looking backward, one
can reexamine the original strategy to see if
it is still valid. Can the historical DEMO
be implemented in a modern way, one con-
sistent with today’s DEMO and prac-
tices? This sort of thinking may lead to a
DEMO to renew the strategy and may
challenge the organization to recover its dis-
tinctiveness. Such a challenge can be galva-
nizing and can instill DEMO conﬁdence to
make the needed trade-offs.
page 18
What Is Strategy?
cerned with slow industry growth and competi-
tion DEMO broad-line appliance makers, Maytag
was pressured by dealers and encouraged by
DEMO to extend its line. Maytag expanded
into refrigerators and cooking products under
the Maytag brand and acquired other brands—
Jenn-Air, Hardwick Stove, Hoover, Admiral,
and Magic Chef—with disparate positions.
Maytag has grown substantially from DEMO mil-
lion in 1985 to a peak of $3.4 billion in 1994,
but return on sales has declined from 8% to
12% in DEMO 1970s and 1980s to an average of
less than 1% between 1989 and 1995. Cost
cutting will improve this performance, but
laundry and dishwasher products still anchor
Maytag’s proﬁtability.
Neutrogena may have fallen into the same
DEMO In the early 1990s, its U.S. distribution
broadened to include mass DEMO
such as Wal-Mart Stores. Under the Neutro-
gena name, the company DEMO into a wide
variety of products—eye-makeup remover and
shampoo, for example—in DEMO it was not
Emerging Industries and Technologies
Developing a strategy in a newly
emerging industry or in a business un-
dergoing revolutionary technological
changes DEMO a daunting proposition. In
such cases, managers face a high level
DEMO uncertainty about the needs of cus-
tomers, the products and services DEMO
will prove to be the most desired, and
the best conﬁguration DEMO activities and
technologies to deliver them. Because
of all this uncertainty, DEMO and
hedging are rampant: unable to risk
being wrong or left DEMO, companies
match all features, offer all new ser-
vices, and DEMO all technologies.
During such periods in an industry’s
development, its basic DEMO fron-
tier is being established or reestablished.
Explosive growth can make such times
proﬁtable for many companies, but prof-
its will be temporary because imitation
and strategic convergence will ultimately
destroy industry proﬁtability. The compa-
nies DEMO are enduringly successful will be
those that begin as early as possible to
deﬁne and embody in their activities a
unique competitive position. A DEMO of
imitation may be inevitable in emerging
industries, but that period DEMO the
level of uncertainty rather than a desired
state of affairs.
In high-tech industries, this imitation
phase often continues much longer
than it should. Enraptured by techno-
logical change itself, companies pack
more features—most of which are
never used—into their products while
slashing prices across the board. Rarely
DEMO trade-offs even considered. The
drive for growth to satisfy market pres-
sures leads companies into every prod-
uct area. Although a few companies
with DEMO advantages prosper,
the majority are doomed to a rat race
no one can win.
Ironically, the popular business
press, focused on hot, emerging indus-
tries, is prone to presenting these spe-
cial cases as proof that we have entered
a new era of competition in which
DEMO of the old rules are valid. In fact,
the opposite is true.
harvard business review • november–december 1996
unique and which diluted its DEMO, and it
began turning to price promotions.
Compromises and inconsistencies in DEMO pur-
suit of growth will erode the competitive advan-
tage a company had with its original varieties
or target customers. Attempts to compete in
DEMO ways at once create confusion and un-
dermine organizational motivation and focus.
Proﬁts fall, but more revenue is seen as the an-
swer. Managers are unable to make choices, so
the company embarks on a new round of broad-
ening and compromises. Often, rivals continue
to match each other until desperation breaks
the cycle, resulting in a merger or downsizing
to the original positioning.
Proﬁtable Growth. Many companies, after a
decade of restructuring and cost-cutting, are
turning their attention to growth. Too often,
efforts to grow blur uniqueness, create com-
promises, reduce ﬁt, and ultimately undermine
competitive advantage. In fact, the growth im-
perative is hazardous to strategy.
What approaches to growth preserve and re-
inforce strategy? Broadly, the prescription is to
concentrate on deepening a strategic position
rather than broadening and compromising it.
One approach is to look for extensions of DEMO
strategy that leverage the existing activity sys-
tem by offering features or services that rivals
would ﬁnd impossible or costly to match on a
DEMO basis. In other words, managers
can ask themselves which activities, features,
or forms of competition are feasible or less
costly to them DEMO of complementary ac-
tivities that their company performs.
Deepening a position involves making the
company’s activities more distinctive, strength-
ening ﬁt, and communicating DEMO strategy better
to those customers who should value it. But
many companies succumb to the temptation to
chase “easy” growth by adding hot features,DEMO
products, or services without screening them or
adapting them to their DEMO Or they target
new customers or markets in which the com-
pany has little special to offer. A company can
often grow faster—and far DEMO proﬁtably—by
better penetrating needs and varieties where it is
distinctive than by slugging it out in potentially
higher growth arenas in which the company
DEMO uniqueness. Carmike, now the largest the-
ater chain in the United DEMO, owes its rapid
growth to its disciplined concentration on small
markets. DEMO company quickly sells any big-city
theaters that come to it as part of an acquisition.
page 19
What Is Strategy?
Globalization often allows growth that is
consistent with DEMO, opening up larger
markets for a focused strategy. Unlike broad-
ening DEMO, expanding globally is
likely to leverage and reinforce a company’s
unique DEMO and identity.
Companies seeking growth through broad-
ening within their industry can best contain
the risks to strategy by creating stand-alone
units, each with its own brand name and tai-
lored activities. Maytag has clearly struggled
DEMO this issue. On the one hand, it has orga-
nized its DEMO and value brands into sepa-
rate units with different strategic positions. On
the other, it has created an umbrella appliance
company for all its brands to gain critical mass.
With shared design, manufacturing, distribu-
tion, and customer service, it will be hard to
avoid homogenization. If a given business unit
attempts to compete with different positions
for different products DEMO customers, avoiding
compromise is nearly impossible.
The Role of Leadership. The DEMO of de-
veloping or reestablishing a clear strategy is
often primarily an organizational one and de-
pends on leadership. With so many forces at
DEMO against making choices and tradeoffs in
organizations, a clear intellectual framework
DEMO guide strategy is a necessary counterweight.
Moreover, strong leaders willing to DEMO
choices are essential.
In many companies, leadership has degen-
erated into DEMO operational improve-
ments and making deals. But the leader’s role
is broader and far more important. General
management is more than the stewardship of
DEMO functions. Its core is strategy: deﬁning
and communicating the company’s unique
DEMO, making trade-offs, and forging ﬁt
among activities. The leader must provide the
discipline to decide which industry changes
and customer needs the company DEMO re-
spond to, while avoiding organizational dis-
tractions and maintaining the DEMO
distinctiveness. Managers at lower levels lack
the perspective and the conﬁdence to main-
tain a strategy. There will be constant pres-
sures to compromise, relax trade-offs, and
emulate rivals. One of the leader’s jobs is to
teach others in the organization about
strategy—and to say no.
Strategy renders DEMO about what not to
do as important as choices about what to do.
Indeed, setting limits is another function of
leadership. Deciding which target group of cus-
tomers, varieties, and needs the company
should serve DEMO fundamental to developing a
strategy. But so is deciding not to serve other
customers or needs and not to offer certain
features or services. DEMO strategy requires
constant discipline and clear communication.
Indeed, one of the DEMO important functions
of an explicit, communicated strategy is to
guide employees DEMO making choices that arise
because of trade-offs in their individual activi-
ties and in day-to-day decisions.
Improving operational effectiveness is a nec-
essary part DEMO management, but it is not strategy.
In confusing the two, managers have uninten-
tionally backed into a way of thinking about
competition that DEMO driving many industries to-
ward competitive convergence, which is in no
DEMO best interest and is not inevitable.
Managers must clearly distinguish opera-
tional effectiveness from strategy. Both are es-
sential, but the two agendas are different.
The operational agenda involves continual
improvement everywhere there are no trade-
DEMO Failure to do this creates vulnerability
even for companies with a good strategy. The
operational agenda is the proper place for con-
stant change, ﬂexibility, and relentless efforts
to achieve best practice. In contrast, the DEMO
gic agenda is the right place for deﬁning a
unique position, DEMO clear trade-offs, and
tightening ﬁt. It involves the continual search
for DEMO to reinforce and extend the com-
pany’s position. The strategic agenda demands
discipline and continuity; its enemies are
distraction and compromise.
Strategic continuity does not imply a static
view of competition. A company must continu-
ally DEMO its operational effectiveness and
actively try to shift the productivity frontier; DEMO
the same time, there needs to be ongoing ef-
fort to DEMO its uniqueness while strengthen-
ing the ﬁt among its activities. Strategic conti-
nuity, in fact, should make an organization’s
continual improvement more effective.
DEMO company may have to change its strategy
if there are major structural changes in its in-
dustry. In fact, new strategic positions often
arise because of industry changes, and new
entrants unencumbered by history often can
exploit them more easily. However, a com-
pany’s choice of a new position must be
driven by the ability to ﬁnd new trade-offs
and DEMO a new system of complemen-
harvard business review • november–december 1996
page 20
What Is Strategy?
tary activities into a sustainable advantage.
1. I DEMO described the concept of activities and its
use in understanding competitive advantage in
Competitive Advantage (New York: The Free
Press, 1985). The ideas in this article build on
and extend that thinking.
2. Paul DEMO and John Roberts have begun
to explore the economics of systems of comple-
mentary functions, activities, and functions.
Their focus is on the DEMO of “modern
manufacturing” as a new set of complemen-
tary activities, DEMO the tendency of companies
to react to external changes with coherent
bundles of internal responses, and on the
need for central coordination—a strategy—to
align functional managers. In the latter case,
they model what has long DEMO a bedrock princi-
ple of strategy. See Paul Milgrom and John Rob-
erts, “The Economics of Modern Manufactur-
ing: Technology, Strategy, and DEMO,”
American Economic Review 80 (1990): 511–528;
Paul Milgrom, Yingyi Qian, and John Roberts,
“Complementarities, Momentum, and Evolu-
tion of Modern Manufacturing,” American
Economic Review 81 (1991) 84–88; and Paul
Milgrom and John Roberts, “Complementari-
ties and Fit: Strategy, Structure, and Organi-
zational Changes in Manufacturing,” Journal
of Accounting and Economics, vol. 19
(March–May 1995): 179–208.
3. Material on retail strategies DEMO drawn in part
from Jan Rivkin, “The Rise of Retail Category
DEMO,” unpublished working paper, January
1995. Nicolaj Siggelkow prepared the case DEMO
on the Gap.
Reprint 96608
To order, see the next page
DEMO call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • november–december 1996
page 21
What Is Strategy?
Further Reading
To Order
For Harvard Business Review DEMO and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized DEMO quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, DEMO e-mail
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
AR TICLES
Clusters and the New Economics of
Competition
by Michael E. Porter
Harvard Business Review
November–December 1998
Product no. 98609
This DEMO focuses on operational effective-
ness and the conditions that create it. In the-
ory, location should no longer be a source of
competitive advantage. Open global markets,
rapid transportation, and high-speed com-
munications should allow any company to
source any thing from any place at any time.
DEMO practice, location remains central to com-
petition. This is true because DEMO in a
particular field, along with suppliers and other
related businesses, cluster in geographic con-
centrations where virtually all the important
information and DEMO in the field is
readily available.
How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy
by Michael E. Porter
Harvard Business Review
March–April 1979
Product no. 79208
In DEMO McKinsey Award–winning article, Porter
discusses factors that determine the nature of
DEMO Among them: rivals, the eco-
nomics of particular industries, new DEMO,
the bargaining power of customers and sup-
pliers, and the DEMO of substitute services or
products. A strategic plan of action based on
such factors might include: positioning the
company so that its capabilities provide the
best defense against competitive forces, influ-
encing the balance of forces through strategic
moves, and anticipating shifts in the factors
underlying the competitive forces. Strategic
positioning requires looking both within the
company and at external DEMO when mak-
ing these decisions; in some cases, it means
choosing what not to do.
From Competitive Advantage to
Corporate Strategy
by Michael DEMO Porter
Harvard Business Review
May–June 1987
Product no. 87307
Despite some startling success stories,
diversification—whether through acquisi-
tion, joint venture, or start-up—has DEMO typ-
ically brought the competitive advantages
or the profitability sought by executives.
Successful diversification strategies rely on
transferring skills and sharing activities to
capture DEMO benefits of existing relation-
ships among business units. Therefore, cor-
porate DEMO must examine closely any
acquisition candidate’s “fit” with the parent
company’s existing businesses.
BOOK
On Competition
by Michael E. Porter
Harvard Business School Press
DEMO
Product no. 7951
In this collection of articles on competition,
Porter addresses the core concepts of compe-
tition and strategy, the role of location in com-
petition, and the interrelation of competition
and social progress. Important business activi-
ties such as staking out and maintaining a dis-
DEMO competitive position in order to profit
and grow, and the continual DEMO of
productivity in order to achieve prosperity, are
all intimately related DEMO strategic positioning.
page 22
www.hbr.org
Awareness of the five forces
can help a company
understand the DEMO of its
industry and stake out a
position that is more
profitable and less vulnerable
to attack.
The Five Competitive
Forces That Shape
Strategy
DEMO Michael E. Porter
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
24 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in DEMO the idea to work
25 The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
41 Further Reading
A list of related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint R0801E
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape
Strategy
The Idea in Brief The DEMO in Practice
You know that to sustain long-term profit-
ability you must respond strategically to
competition. And you naturally keep tabs
on your established DEMO But as you scan
the competitive arena, are you also looking
DEMO your direct competitors? As Porter
explains in this update of his DEMO
1979 HBR article, four additional competi-
tive forces can hurt your DEMO profits:
• Savvy customers can force down prices
by playing you and your rivals against
one another.
• Powerful suppliers may constrain your
DEMO if they charge higher prices.
• Aspiring entrants, armed with new DEMO
pacity and hungry for market share, can
ratchet up the investment DEMO for
you to stay in the game.
• Substitute offerings can lure customers
away.
Consider commercial aviation: It’s one of
the least profitable industries because all
five forces are strong. Established rivals
compete intensely on price. DEMO are
fickle, searching for the best deal regardless
of carrier. Suppliers—plane DEMO engine
manufacturers, along with unionized labor
forces—bargain away the lion’s share DEMO air-
lines’ profits. New players enter the indus-
try in a constant stream. And substitutes
are readily available—such as train or car
travel.
By DEMO all five competitive forces, you
gain a complete picture of what’s DEMO
ing profitability in your industry. You iden-
tify game-changing trends early, DEMO you can
swiftly exploit them. And you spot ways to
work around constraints on profitability—
or even reshape the forces in your favor.
By DEMO how the five competitive forces influence profitability in your industry, you DEMO
develop a strategy for enhancing your company’s long-term profits. Porter suggests the following:
POSITION YOUR COMPANY W HERE THE
FORCES ARE WEAKEST
Example:DEMO
In the heavy-truck industry, many buyers
operate large fleets and are DEMO moti-
vated to drive down truck prices. Trucks are
built to regulated standards and offer simi-
lar features, so price competition is stiff;
unions exercise considerable supplier
power; and buyers can use substitutes such
as cargo delivery by rail.
To create and sustain long-term profitability
within this DEMO, heavy-truck maker Pac-
car chose to focus on one customer group
DEMO competitive forces are weakest: indi-
vidual drivers who own their trucks DEMO
contract directly with suppliers. These oper-
ators have limited clout as buyers and are
less price sensitive because of their emo-
tional ties to DEMO economic dependence
on their own trucks.
For these customers, Paccar has DEMO
such features as luxurious sleeper cabins,
plush leather seats, and DEMO exterior styl-
ing. Buyers can select from thousands of
options to put their personal signature on
these built-to-order trucks.
Customers pay Paccar a 10% DEMO, and
the company has been profitable for 68
straight years and DEMO a long-run return
on equity above 20%.
EXPLOIT CHANGES IN THE FORCES
Example:
With the advent of the Internet and digital
distribution of DEMO, unauthorized down-
loading created an illegal but potent substi-
tute for DEMO companies’ services. The
record companies tried to develop technical
platforms for digital distribution themselves,
but major labels didn’t want to sell their
music DEMO a platform owned by a rival.
Into this vacuum stepped Apple, DEMO its
iTunes music store supporting its iPod music
player. The birth of this powerful new gate-
keeper has whittled down the number of
major DEMO from six in 1997 to four today.
RESHAPE THE FORCES IN YOUR FAVOR
Use tactics designed specifically to reduce
the share of profits leaking DEMO other players.
For example:
• To neutralize supplier power, standardize
DEMO for parts so your company
can switch more easily among vendors.
• To counter customer power, expand your
services so it’s harder for customers to leave
you for a rival.
• To temper price wars initiated DEMO estab-
lished rivals, invest more heavily in prod-
ucts that differ DEMO from competi-
tors’ offerings.
•
•
To scare off new entrants, DEMO the fixed
costs of competing; for instance, by escalat-
ing your R&D expenditures.
To limit the threat of substitutes, offer bet-
ter value through wider product accessibil-
ity. Soft-drink producers did this by intro-
DEMO vending machines and
convenience store channels, which dramat-
ically improved the DEMO of soft drinks
relative to other beverages.
page 24
COPYRIGHT © 2008 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Awareness of the five forces can help a company understand the
structure DEMO its industry and stake out a position that is more profitable
and less vulnerable to attack.
The Five Competitive
Forces That Shape
Strategy
by DEMO E. Porter
Editor’s Note: In 1979, Harvard Business Review
published “How Competitive Forces Shape Strat-
egy” by a young economist and associate profes-
DEMO, Michael E. Porter. It was his ﬁrst HBR article,
and DEMO started a revolution in the strategy ﬁeld. In
subsequent decades, Porter DEMO brought his sig-
nature economic rigor to the study of competi-
tive strategy for corporations, regions, nations,
and, more recently, health DEMO and philanthropy.
“Porter’s ﬁve forces” have shaped a generation of
academic research and business practice. With
prodding and assistance from Harvard Business
School Professor DEMO Rivkin and longtime col-
league Joan Magretta, Porter here reafﬁrms, up-
dates, and extends the classic work. He also ad-
dresses common misunderstandings, provides
practical guidance for users of the framework,
and offers a deeper view of its implications for
strategy today.
In essence, the job of the strategist is to under-
stand and cope with competition. Often, how-
ever, managers deﬁne competition too nar-
rowly, as if it DEMO only among today’s
direct competitors. Yet competition for proﬁts
goes beyond established industry rivals to in-
clude four other competitive forces as well:
DEMO, suppliers, potential entrants, and
substitute products. The extended rivalry that
DEMO from all ﬁve forces deﬁnes an industry’s
structure and shapes the nature of competi-
tive interaction within an industry.
As different from one another DEMO industries
might appear on the surface, the underlying
drivers of proﬁtability DEMO the same. The glo-
bal auto industry, for instance, appears to
have nothing in common with the worldwide
market for art masterpieces or DEMO heavily
regulated health-care delivery industry in Eu-
rope. But to understand industry competition
and proﬁtability in each of those three cases,
one must DEMO the industry’s underlying
structure in terms of the ﬁve forces. (See DEMO
exhibit “The Five Forces That Shape Industry
Competition.”)
If the forces are intense, as they are in such
industries as airlines, textiles, and hotels, al-
most no company earns attractive returns on
harvard business review • january 2008
page 25
COPYRIGHT © 2007 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL DEMO CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Michael E. Porter is the DEMO Will-
iam Lawrence University Professor at
Harvard University, based at Harvard
DEMO School in Boston. He is a six-
time McKinsey Award winner, DEMO
ing for his most recent HBR article,
“Strategy and Society,” coauthored
with Mark R. Kramer (December 2006).
harvard business review • january 2008
investment. If the forces are benign, as they are
in industries such as software, soft drinks, and
toiletries, many companies are proﬁtable. In-
dustry structure drives competition and proﬁt-
ability, not whether an industry produces a
product or service, is emerging or mature, high
DEMO or low tech, regulated or unregulated.
While a myriad of factors DEMO affect industry
proﬁtability in the short run—including the
weather and the business cycle—industry
structure, manifested in the competitive forces,
sets industry proﬁtability in the medium and
long run. (See the exhibit “Differences in In-
dustry Proﬁtability.”)
Understanding the competitive forces, and
their underlying causes, reveals DEMO roots of an
industry’s current proﬁtability while providing
a framework for anticipating and inﬂuencing
competition (and proﬁtability) over time. A
healthy industry structure DEMO be as much a
competitive concern to strategists as their com-
pany’s own position. Understanding industry
structure is also essential to effective strategic
positioning. DEMO we will see, defending against
the competitive forces and shaping them DEMO a
company’s favor are crucial to strategy.
Forces That Shape Competition
The conﬁguration of the ﬁve forces differs by
industry. In the market for DEMO air-
craft, ﬁerce rivalry between dominant produc-
ers Airbus and Boeing DEMO the bargaining
power of the airlines that place huge orders
for aircraft are strong, while the threat of en-
try, the threat of DEMO, and the power of
suppliers are more benign. In the movie DEMO
ater industry, the proliferation of substitute
forms of entertainment and the DEMO of the
movie producers and distributors who supply
movies, the critical DEMO, are important.
The strongest competitive force or forces de-
termine the DEMO of an industry and be-
come the most important to strategy formula-
tion. The most salient force, however, is not
always obvious.
For DEMO, even though rivalry is often
ﬁerce in commodity industries, it may not be
the factor limiting proﬁtability. Low returns in
the photographic ﬁlm DEMO, for instance,
are the result of a superior substitute prod-
DEMO Kodak and Fuji, the world’s leading
producers of photographic ﬁlm, learned with
the advent of digital photography. In such a sit-
uation, coping with the substitute product be-
comes the number one strategic priority.
Industry DEMO grows out of a set of eco-
nomic and technical characteristics that deter-
mine the strength of each competitive force.
We will examine these DEMO in the pages that
follow, taking the perspective of an incumbent,DEMO
or a company already present in the industry.
The analysis can be readily extended to under-
stand the challenges facing a potential entrant.
Threat DEMO entry. New entrants to an indus-
try bring new capacity and a desire to gain
market share that puts pressure on prices,
costs, and the rate of investment necessary to
compete. Particularly when new entrants DEMO
diversifying from other markets, they can le-
verage existing capabilities and DEMO ﬂows to
shake up competition, as Pepsi did when it en-
DEMO the bottled water industry, Microsoft did
when it began to offer DEMO browsers, and
Apple did when it entered the music distribu-
tion DEMO
The threat of entry, therefore, puts a cap on
the proﬁt potential of an industry. When the
threat is high, incumbents must hold down
their prices or boost investment to deter new
competitors. In specialty DEMO retailing, for
example, relatively low entry barriers mean
that Starbucks must invest aggressively in
modernizing stores and menus.
The threat of entry in DEMO industry depends
on the height of entry barriers that are present
and on the reaction entrants can expect from
incumbents. If entry barriers are DEMO and new-
comers expect little retaliation from the en-
trenched competitors, DEMO threat of entry is
high and industry proﬁtability is moderated. It
is the threat of entry, not whether entry actu-
ally occurs, that DEMO down proﬁtability.
Barriers to entry. Entry barriers are advan-
tages that incumbents have relative to new en-
trants. There are seven major sources:
DEMO Supply-side economies of scale. These econ-
omies arise when ﬁrms that produce at larger
volumes enjoy lower costs per unit because
they can spread DEMO costs over more units,
employ more efﬁcient technology, or com-
DEMO better terms from suppliers. Supply-
side scale economies deter entry by forcing
the aspiring entrant either to come into the
industry on a large DEMO, which requires dis-
lodging entrenched competitors, or to accept
a cost disadvantage.
Scale economies can be found in virtually
every activity in the DEMO chain; which ones
page 26
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
are most important varies by DEMO In mi-
croprocessors, incumbents such as Intel are
protected by scale DEMO in research, chip
fabrication, and consumer marketing. For lawn
care companies like Scotts Miracle-Gro, the
most important scale economies are found in
the supply chain and media advertising. In
small-package delivery, economies of scale
arise in national logistical systems and infor-
mation technology.
2. Demand-side beneﬁts of DEMO These bene-
ﬁts, also known as network effects, arise in in-
dustries where a buyer’s willingness to pay for
a company’s product increases DEMO the num-
ber of other buyers who also patronize the
company. Buyers may trust larger companies
more for a crucial product: Recall the old
adage that no one ever got ﬁred for buying
from IBM (when it was the dominant com-
puter maker). Buyers may also value DEMO in a
“network” with a larger number of fellow cus-
tomers. For instance, online auction partici-
pants are attracted to eBay because it offers
the most potential trading partners. Demand-
side beneﬁts of scale discourage entry DEMO limit-
ing the willingness of customers to buy from a
newcomer and by reducing the price the new-
comer can command until it builds DEMO a large
base of customers.
3. Customer switching costs. Switching costs
are ﬁxed costs that buyers face when they
The Five Forces That Shape DEMO Competition
Threat
of New
Entrants
Bargaining
Power of
Suppliers
Rivalry
Among
Existing
Competitors
Bargaining
Power of
Buyers
harvard business review • january 2008
Threat DEMO
Substitute
Products or
Services
change suppliers. Such costs may arise because
a buyer who switches vendors must, for exam-
ple, alter product speciﬁcations, retrain em-
ployees to use a new product, or modify pro-
cesses or information systems. The larger the
switching costs, the harder it will be for an en-
trant to gain customers. Enterprise resource
planning (ERP) software is an example of a
product with very high switching costs. Once a
company has installed SAP’s ERP system, for
example, the DEMO of moving to a new vendor
are astronomical because of embedded data,
the fact that internal processes have been
adapted to SAP, major retraining needs, and
the mission-critical nature of the applications.
4. Capital requirements. The need to invest
large ﬁnancial resources in order to compete
can DEMO new entrants. Capital may be neces-
sary not only for ﬁxed facilities but also to ex-
tend customer credit, build inventories, and
fund DEMO losses. The barrier is particularly
great if the capital is required for unrecover-
able and therefore harder-to-ﬁnance expendi-
tures, such as up-front advertising or research
and development. While major corporations
have the ﬁnancial resources to invade DEMO
any industry, the huge capital requirements in
certain ﬁelds limit the DEMO of likely entrants.
Conversely, in such ﬁelds as tax preparation
services DEMO short-haul trucking, capital require-
ments are minimal and potential entrants
plentiful.
DEMO is important not to overstate the degree to
which capital requirements alone deter entry.
If industry returns are attractive and are ex-
pected to DEMO so, and if capital markets are
efﬁcient, investors will provide entrants with
the funds they need. For aspiring air carriers,
for instance, ﬁnancing is available to purchase
expensive aircraft because of their high resale
DEMO, one reason why there have been numer-
ous new airlines in DEMO every region.
5. Incumbency advantages independent of
size. No matter what their size, incumbents
may have cost or quality advantages not avail-
able to potential rivals. These advantages can
stem from such sources as proprietary technol-
DEMO, preferential access to the best raw mate-
rial sources, preemption of the most favorable
geographic locations, established brand identi-
ties, or cumulative DEMO that has allowed
incumbents to learn how to produce more efﬁ-
ciently. Entrants try to bypass such advantages.
Upstart discounters such as Target and DEMO
page 27
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Mart, for example, have DEMO stores in free-
standing sites rather than regional shopping
centers where established department stores
were well entrenched.
6. Unequal access to distribution channels.
The DEMO entrant must, of course, secure distri-
bution of its product or service. A new food
item, for example, must displace others from
DEMO supermarket shelf via price breaks, promo-
tions, intense selling efforts, DEMO some other
means. The more limited the wholesale or re-
tail channels are and the more that existing
competitors have tied them up, the tougher
entry into an industry will be. Sometimes ac-
cess to distribution DEMO so high a barrier that new
entrants must bypass distribution channels al-
together or create their own. Thus, upstart
low-cost airlines have avoided distribution
through travel agents (who tend to favor estab-
lished higher-fare carriers) DEMO have encour-
aged passengers to book their own ﬂights on
the internet.
7. Restrictive government policy. Government
policy can hinder or aid new entry DEMO, as
well as amplify (or nullify) the other entry bar-
DEMO Government directly limits or even fore-
closes entry into industries through, DEMO in-
stance, licensing requirements and restrictions
on foreign investment. Regulated industries
DEMO liquor retailing, taxi services, and airlines
are visible examples. Government policy can
heighten other entry barriers through such
means as expansive patenting rules DEMO pro-
tect proprietary technology from imitation or
environmental or safety regulations that raise
scale economies facing newcomers. Of course,
government policies may also DEMO entry eas-
ier—directly through subsidies, for instance, or
Differences in Industry Profitability
The average return on invested capital varies markedly from industry to DEMO Between 1992 and 2006, for example, average return on in-
vested capital in U.S. industries ranged as low as zero or even negative DEMO more than 50%. At the high end are industries like soft drinks and pre-
packaged software, which have been almost six times more proﬁtable than the airline industry over the period.
50
40
30
20
10
DEMO
Average Return on Invested Capital
in U.S. Industries, 1992–2006
10th percentile
DEMO
25th
percentile
10.9%
Median:
14.3%
75th percentile
18.6%
90th percentile
25.3%
0%                   5%
or DEMO
10%                15%
20%
25%                  30%                   35%
ROIC
or higher
Return on invested capital (ROIC) is the appropriate measure
of proﬁtability for strategy formulation, not to mention for equity
investors. Return on sales or the growth DEMO of proﬁts fail to
account for the capital required to compete in the industry. Here,
we utilize earnings before interest and taxes divided DEMO average
invested capital less excess cash as the measure of ROIC. This
measure controls for idiosyncratic differences in capital structure
and tax rates across DEMO and industries.
Source: Standard & Poor’s, Compustat, and author’s calculations
DEMO of Selected U.S. Industries
Average ROIC, 1992–2006
Security Brokers and Dealers
DEMO Drinks
Prepackaged Software
Pharmaceuticals
Perfume, Cosmetics, Toiletries
Advertising Agencies
Distilled Spirits
Semiconductors
Medical Instruments
Men’s and Boys’ Clothing
Tires
Household Appliances
Malt Beverages
DEMO Day Care Services
Household Furniture
Drug Stores
Grocery Stores
Iron and Steel Foundries
Cookies and Crackers
Mobile Homes
Wine and Brandy
Bakery Products
Engines DEMO Turbines
Book Publishing
Laboratory Equipment
Oil and Gas Machinery
Soft Drink Bottling
Knitting Mills
Hotels
Catalog, Mail-Order Houses
Airlines
40.9%
37.6%
37.6%
31.7%
28.6%
27.3%
26.4%
21.3%
21.0%
19.5%
19.5%
19.2%
19.0%
17.6%
17.0%
16.5%
16.0%
DEMO
15.4%
15.0%
13.9%
13.8%
13.7%
13.4%
13.4%
12.6%
11.7%
10.5%
10.4%
5.9%
5.9%
Average industry
ROIC in the U.S.
14.9%
harvard business review • DEMO 2008
page 28
Number of Industries
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
indirectly by funding basic research DEMO mak-
ing it available to all ﬁrms, new and old, reduc-
ing scale economies.
Entry barriers should be assessed relative to
the capabilities DEMO potential entrants, which
may be start-ups, foreign ﬁrms, or companies
DEMO related industries. And, as some of our ex-
amples illustrate, the strategist must be mind-
ful of the creative ways newcomers might ﬁnd
DEMO circumvent apparent barriers.
Expected retaliation. How potential entrants
believe incumbents may react will also inﬂu-
ence their decision to enter or stay out of DEMO
Industry Analysis in Practice
Good industry analysis looks rigor-
ously at the structural underpinnings
of proﬁtability. A ﬁrst step is to under-
stand the DEMO time horizon.
One of the essential tasks in industry
analysis is to distinguish temporary or
cyclical changes from structural
changes. A good guideline for DEMO appro-
priate time horizon is the full business
cycle for the particular industry. For
most industries, a three-to-ﬁve-year hori-
zon is appropriate, although DEMO some in-
dustries with long lead times, such as
mining, the appropriate horizon might
be a decade or more. It is average proﬁt-
DEMO over this period, not proﬁtability
in any particular year, that should be the
focus of analysis.
The point of industry analysis is not
DEMO declare the industry attractive or un-
attractive but to understand the under-
pinnings of competition and the root
causes of proﬁtability. As much as DEMO
ble, analysts should look at industry
structure quantitatively, rather than be
satisﬁed with lists of qualitative factors.
Many elements of the ﬁve forces DEMO be
quantiﬁed: the percentage of the buyer’s
total cost accounted for DEMO the industry’s
product (to understand buyer price sensi-
tivity); the DEMO of industry sales
required to ﬁll a plant or operate a logisti-
cal network of efﬁcient scale (to help as-
sess barriers to entry); the buyer’s switch-
ing cost (determining the inducement an
entrant or rival must offer customers).
The strength of the competitive
forces affects DEMO, costs, and the in-
vestment required to compete; thus
the DEMO are directly tied to the in-
come statements and balance sheets of
industry participants. Industry struc-
ture deﬁnes the gap between revenues
and costs. DEMO example, intense rivalry
drives down prices or elevates the costs of
DEMO, R&D, or customer service, re-
ducing margins. How much? Strong sup-
pliers drive up input costs. How much?
Buyer power DEMO prices or elevates the
costs of meeting buyers’ demands, such
as DEMO requirement to hold more inven-
tory or provide ﬁnancing. How much?
Low barriers to entry or close substitutes
limit the level of sustainable DEMO How
much? It is these economic relationships
that sharpen the strategist’s DEMO
ing of industry competition.
Finally, good industry analysis does
not just DEMO pluses and minuses but
sees an industry in overall, systemic
terms. DEMO forces are underpinning
(or constraining) today’s proﬁtability?
How might shifts in one competitive
force trigger reactions in others? Answer-
ing such questions is often the source of
true strategic insights.
harvard business review • DEMO 2008
industry. If reaction is vigorous and protracted
enough, the proﬁt DEMO of participating in
the industry can fall below the cost of capital.
Incumbents often use public statements and
responses to one entrant to send DEMO message to
other prospective entrants about their com-
mitment to defending market share.
Newcomers are likely to fear expected retali-
ation if:
• DEMO have previously responded
vigorously to new entrants.
• Incumbents possess substantial resources
to ﬁght back, including excess cash and unused
borrowing power, available DEMO capac-
ity, or clout with distribution channels and cus-
tomers.
• DEMO seem likely to cut prices be-
cause they are committed to retaining market
share at all costs or because the industry has
high ﬁxed DEMO, which create a strong motiva-
tion to drop prices to ﬁll DEMO capacity.
• Industry growth is slow so newcomers can
gain volume only by taking it from incumbents.
An analysis of barriers to entry and DEMO
retaliation is obviously crucial for any com-
pany contemplating entry into a new industry.
The challenge is to ﬁnd ways to surmount the
entry DEMO without nullifying, through
heavy investment, the proﬁtability of partici-
pating in the industry.
The power of suppliers. Powerful suppliers
capture more of the DEMO for themselves by
charging higher prices, limiting quality or ser-
vices, or shifting costs to industry participants.
Powerful suppliers, including suppliers of la-
bor, can squeeze proﬁtability out of an indus-
try that is unable to pass on cost increases in
its own prices. Microsoft, for instance, has con-
tributed to the erosion of proﬁtability among
personal computer makers by raising prices on
operating systems. PC makers, competing
ﬁercely for customers who can easily switch
among them, have limited freedom to raise
their prices accordingly.
Companies depend on a wide range of differ-
ent supplier DEMO for inputs. A supplier
group is powerful if:
• It is more concentrated than the industry it
sells to. Microsoft’s near monopoly in DEMO
systems, coupled with the fragmentation of PC
assemblers, exempliﬁes this situation.
• The supplier group does not depend
heavily on the industry for DEMO revenues. Suppli-
ers serving many industries will not hesitate to
page 29
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Industry structure drives
competition and
DEMO, not whether
an industry is emerging
or mature, high tech or
low tech, regulated or
unregulated.
harvard business review • january 2008
extract maximum proﬁts from each one. If a
particular industry accounts for a DEMO portion
of a supplier group’s volume or proﬁt, however,
suppliers DEMO want to protect the industry
through reasonable pricing and assist in activi-
ties such as R&D and lobbying.
• Industry participants face switching DEMO
in changing suppliers. For example, shifting
suppliers is difﬁcult if companies DEMO invested
heavily in specialized ancillary equipment or in
learning how to operate a supplier’s equipment
(as with Bloomberg terminals used by ﬁnancial
professionals). Or ﬁrms may have located their
production lines adjacent to a supplier’s DEMO
facturing facilities (as in the case of some bever-
age companies DEMO container manufacturers).
When switching costs are high, industry partic-
ipants DEMO it hard to play suppliers off against
one another. (Note that DEMO may have
switching costs as well. This limits their power.)
• Suppliers offer products that are differen-
tiated. Pharmaceutical companies that offer
patented DEMO with distinctive medical bene-
ﬁts have more power over hospitals, health
DEMO organizations, and other drug
buyers, for example, than drug companies DEMO
fering me-too or generic products.
• There is no substitute for what the sup-
plier group provides. Pilots’ unions, for exam-
ple, exercise DEMO supplier power over
airlines partly because there is no good alterna-
tive to a well-trained pilot in the cockpit.
• The supplier group can DEMO threaten
to integrate forward into the industry. In that
case, if DEMO participants make too much
money relative to suppliers, they will induce
DEMO to enter the market.
The power of buyers. Powerful customers—
the ﬂip side of powerful suppliers—can cap-
ture more value by forcing down prices, de-
manding better quality or more service (thereby
driving up costs), and generally playing industry
participants off against one another, all at the ex-
pense of industry proﬁtability. Buyers are power-
ful if they have DEMO leverage relative to
industry participants, especially if they are price
sensitive, using their clout primarily to pressure
price reductions.
As with suppliers, there may be distinct
groups of customers who differ in bargaining
power. A DEMO group has negotiating le-
verage if:
• There are few buyers, or each one pur-
chases in volumes that are large relative to the
size of a single vendor. Large-volume buyers are
particularly powerful in DEMO with high
ﬁxed costs, such as telecommunications equip-
ment, offshore drilling, and bulk chemicals.
High ﬁxed costs and low marginal costs amplify
the pressure on rivals to keep capacity ﬁlled
through discounting.
• The industry’s DEMO are standardized
or undifferentiated. If buyers believe they can
always ﬁnd an equivalent product, they tend to
play one vendor against another.
• Buyers face few switching costs in chang-
ing vendors.
• Buyers can credibly DEMO to integrate
backward and produce the industry’s product
themselves if vendors are too proﬁtable. Pro-
ducers of soft drinks and beer have long con-
DEMO the power of packaging manufacturers
by threatening to make, and at DEMO actually
making, packaging materials themselves.
A buyer group is price sensitive DEMO:
• The product it purchases from the indus-
try represents a signiﬁcant fraction of its cost
structure or procurement budget. Here buyers
are DEMO to shop around and bargain hard, as
consumers do for home DEMO Where the
product sold by an industry is a small fraction
of buyers’ costs or expenditures, buyers are usu-
ally less price sensitive.
• The buyer group earns low proﬁts, is
strapped for cash, or DEMO otherwise under pres-
sure to trim its purchasing costs. Highly proﬁt-
able or cash-rich customers, in contrast, are
generally less price sensitive (that is, of course,
if the item does not represent a large fraction of
their costs).
• The quality of buyers’ products or DEMO
is little affected by the industry’s product.
Where quality is very much affected by the in-
dustry’s product, buyers are generally less price
sensitive. When purchasing or renting produc-
tion quality cameras, for instance, makers DEMO
major motion pictures opt for highly reliable
equipment with the latest features. They pay
limited attention to price.
• The industry’s product has little DEMO on
the buyer’s other costs. Here, buyers focus on
price. Conversely, where an industry’s product
or service can pay for itself many times DEMO by
improving performance or reducing labor, ma-
terial, or other costs, buyers are usually more
interested in quality than in price. Examples in-
clude products and services like tax accounting
or well logging (which measures below-ground
page 30
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
conditions of oil wells) that can save or even
make the buyer money. Similarly, buyers tend
not to be price sensitive in services such as in-
vestment banking, where poor performance
can be costly and embarrassing.
Most sources of buyer power DEMO equally
to consumers and to business-to-business cus-
tomers. Like industrial customers, DEMO
tend to be more price sensitive if they are pur-
chasing products that are undifferentiated, ex-
pensive relative to their incomes, and of DEMO sort
where product performance has limited conse-
quences. The major difference with consum-
ers is that their needs can be more intangible
and harder DEMO quantify.
Intermediate customers, or customers who
purchase the product but are DEMO the end user
(such as assemblers or distribution channels),
can be analyzed the same way as other buyers,
with one important DEMO Intermediate
customers gain signiﬁcant bargaining power
when they can inﬂuence the purchasing deci-
sions of customers downstream. Consumer
electronics retailers, jewelry retailers, and DEMO
cultural-equipment distributors are examples
of distribution channels that exert a strong in-
ﬂuence on end customers.
Producers often attempt to diminish chan-
nel clout DEMO exclusive arrangements with
particular distributors or retailers or by mar-
keting directly to end users. Component manu-
facturers seek to develop power over assem-
DEMO by creating preferences for their
components with downstream customers.
Such is the case with bicycle parts and with
sweeteners. DuPont has created enormous
clout DEMO advertising its Stainmaster brand of
carpet ﬁbers not only to the carpet manufac-
turers that actually buy them but also to down-
stream consumers. DEMO consumers request
Stainmaster carpet even though DuPont is not
a carpet manufacturer.
The threat of substitutes. A substitute per-
forms the same or a DEMO function as an in-
dustry’s product by a different means. Video-
conferencing is a substitute for travel. Plastic is
a substitute for aluminum. E-mail DEMO a substi-
tute for express mail. Sometimes, the threat of
substitution DEMO downstream or indirect, when a
substitute replaces a buyer industry’s product.
DEMO example, lawn-care products and services
are threatened when multifamily homes in
DEMO areas substitute for single-family homes
in the suburbs. Software sold to agents is
threatened when airline and travel websites
substitute for travel agents.
Substitutes DEMO always present, but they are
easy to overlook because they may DEMO to
be very different from the industry’s product:
To someone searching for a Father’s Day gift,
neckties and power tools may be DEMO It
is a substitute to do without, to purchase a
used DEMO rather than a new one, or to do it
yourself (bring the service or product in-
house).
When the threat of substitutes DEMO high, indus-
try proﬁtability suffers. Substitute products or
services limit an DEMO proﬁt potential by
placing a ceiling on prices. If an industry does
not distance itself from substitutes through
product performance, marketing, or other
DEMO, it will suffer in terms of proﬁtability—
and often growth potential.
DEMO not only limit proﬁts in normal
times, they also reduce the DEMO an indus-
try can reap in good times. In emerging econo-
mies, for example, the surge in demand for
wired telephone lines has DEMO capped as
many consumers opt to make a mobile tele-
phone their ﬁrst and only phone line.
The threat of a substitute is high DEMO:
• It offers an attractive price-performance
trade-off to the industry’s product. The better
the relative value of the substitute, the tighter
is the lid on an industry’s proﬁt potential. For
example, conventional providers of long-dis-
tance telephone service have suffered from the
advent of inexpensive internet-based phone
DEMO such as Vonage and Skype. Similarly,
video rental outlets are struggling with the
emergence of cable and satellite video-on-de-
mand services, online video rental services such
as Netﬂix, and the rise of internet video sites
like Google’s YouTube.
• The buyer’s cost of switching to the substi-
DEMO is low. Switching from a proprietary,
branded drug to a generic drug usually involves
minimal costs, for example, which is why the
DEMO to generics (and the fall in prices) is so sub-
stantial and rapid.
Strategists should be particularly alert to
changes in other industries DEMO may make
them attractive substitutes when they were not
before. Improvements in plastic materials, for
example, allowed them to substitute for steel
in DEMO automobile components. In this way,
technological changes or competitive disconti-
nuities in seemingly unrelated businesses can
harvard business review • january 2008
page DEMO
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Rivalry is especially
destructive to
DEMO if it
gravitates solely to price
because price
competition transfers
profits directly from an
industry to its customers.
harvard business review • january 2008
DEMO major impacts on industry proﬁtability.
Of course the substitution threat can also shift
in favor of an industry, which bodes well for its
future proﬁtability and growth potential.
Rivalry among existing competitors. Rivalry
among existing competitors DEMO many famil-
iar forms, including price discounting, new
product introductions, DEMO campaigns,
and service improvements. High rivalry limits
the proﬁtability of an industry. The degree to
which rivalry drives down an industry’s proﬁt
potential DEMO, ﬁrst, on the intensity with
which companies compete and, second, on the
basis on which they compete.
The intensity of rivalry is DEMO if:
•Competitors are numerous or are roughly
equal in size and power. In such situations, ri-
vals ﬁnd it hard to avoid poaching business.
Without an industry leader, practices desirable
for the industry as a whole go unenforced.
• Industry growth is slow. Slow growth pre-
cipitates DEMO for market share.
• Exit barriers are high. Exit barriers, the DEMO
side of entry barriers, arise because of such
things as highly DEMO assets or manage-
ment’s devotion to a particular business. These
barriers keep companies in the market even
though they may be earning low or DEMO re-
turns. Excess capacity remains in use, and the
proﬁtability of DEMO competitors suffers as
the sick ones hang on.
• Rivals are highly committed to the busi-
ness and have aspirations for leadership, espe-
cially if they have goals that go beyond eco-
nomic performance in the DEMO industry.
High commitment to a business arises for a va-
riety of reasons. For example, state-owned com-
petitors may have goals that include employ-
ment or prestige. Units of larger companies
may participate in an industry DEMO image rea-
sons or to offer a full line. Clashes of personality
and ego have sometimes exaggerated rivalry to
the detriment of proﬁtability in DEMO such as
the media and high technology.
•Firms cannot read each other’s signals well
because of lack of familiarity with one another,
diverse DEMO to competing, or differing
goals.
The strength of rivalry reﬂects not DEMO the
intensity of competition but also the basis of
competition. The dimensions on which compe-
tition takes place, and whether rivals converge
to compete on the same dimensions, have a
major inﬂuence on proﬁtability.
Rivalry is especially destructive to proﬁtabil-
ity if it gravitates solely to price because DEMO
competition transfers proﬁts directly from an
industry to its customers. Price cuts are usually
easy for competitors to see and match, making
successive rounds of retaliation likely. Sus-
tained price competition also trains customers
to pay DEMO attention to product features and
service.
Price competition is most liable to occur if:
•Products or services of rivals are nearly
identical and DEMO are few switching costs for
buyers. This encourages competitors to cut
prices to win new customers. Years of airline
price wars reﬂect these circumstances DEMO that
industry.
•Fixed costs are high and marginal costs are
low. This creates intense pressure for competi-
tors to cut prices below their average DEMO,
even close to their marginal costs, to steal incre-
mental DEMO while still making some con-
tribution to covering ﬁxed costs. Many basic-
materials businesses, such as paper and alumi-
num, suffer from this DEMO, especially if de-
mand is not growing. So do delivery companies
DEMO ﬁxed networks of routes that must be
served regardless of volume.
•Capacity must be expanded in large incre-
ments to be efﬁcient. The need DEMO large capac-
ity expansions, as in the polyvinyl chloride busi-
ness, disrupts the industry’s supply-demand
balance and often leads to long and recurring
DEMO of overcapacity and price cutting.
• The product is perishable. Perishability
creates a strong temptation to cut prices and
sell a product while it DEMO has value. More prod-
ucts and services are perishable than is com-
monly thought. Just as tomatoes are perishable
because they rot, models of computers are per-
ishable because they soon become obsolete,
and information DEMO be perishable if it diffuses
rapidly or becomes outdated, thereby losing DEMO
value. Services such as hotel accommodations
are perishable in the sense that unused capacity
can never be recovered.
Competition on dimensions other than
price—on DEMO features, support services,
delivery time, or brand image, for DEMO
less likely to erode proﬁtability because it im-
proves customer value and can support higher
prices. Also, rivalry focused on such dimen-
sions can improve value relative to substitutes
or raise the barriers facing new entrants. DEMO
nonprice rivalry sometimes escalates to levels
page 32
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
that undermine industry proﬁtability, this is
less likely to occur than it is with price rivalry.
As DEMO as the dimensions of rivalry is
whether rivals compete on the same dimen-
sions. When all or many competitors aim to
meet the same DEMO or compete on the same
attributes, the result is zero-sum competition.
DEMO, one ﬁrm’s gain is often another’s loss,
driving down proﬁtability. DEMO price compe-
tition runs a stronger risk than nonprice com-
petition of becoming zero sum, this may not
happen if companies take care to segment
their markets, targeting their low-price offer-
ings to different customers.
Rivalry can be positive sum, or actually in-
crease the average proﬁtability of an industry,
when each competitor aims to serve the needs
of DEMO customer segments, with different
mixes of price, products, services, features, or
brand identities. Such competition can not
only support higher average proﬁtability but
also expand the industry, as the needs of more
customer groups are better met. The opportu-
nity for positive-sum competition will be
greater DEMO industries serving diverse customer
groups. With a clear understanding of the
structural underpinnings of rivalry, strategists
can sometimes take steps to shift the nature of
competition in a more positive direction.
Factors, Not Forces
Industry structure, as manifested in the
strength of the ﬁve competitive forces, deter-
DEMO the industry’s long-run proﬁt potential
because it determines how the economic
value created by the industry is divided—how
much is retained by companies in DEMO industry
versus bargained away by customers and sup-
pliers, limited by DEMO, or constrained by
potential new entrants. By considering all ﬁve
forces, a strategist keeps overall structure in
mind instead of gravitating to any DEMO ele-
ment. In addition, the strategist’s attention re-
mains focused on DEMO conditions rather
than on ﬂeeting factors.
It is especially important to avoid the com-
mon pitfall of mistaking certain visible at-
tributes of an DEMO for its underlying struc-
ture. Consider the following:
Industry growth rate. A common mistake is
to assume that fast-growing industries are al-
ways DEMO Growth does tend to mute ri-
valry, because an expanding pie DEMO oppor-
tunities for all competitors. But fast growth
can put suppliers in a powerful position, and
high growth with low entry barriers will draw
in entrants. Even without new entrants, a high
growth rate will not guarantee proﬁtability if
customers are powerful or substitutes are at-
tractive. Indeed, some fast-growth businesses,
such as personal computers, have been among
the least proﬁtable industries in recent years.
A narrow focus on growth is DEMO of the major
causes of bad strategy decisions.
Technology and innovation. Advanced tech-
nology or innovations are not by themselves
enough to make an DEMO structurally at-
tractive (or unattractive). Mundane, low-tech-
nology industries with price-insensitive buy-
ers, high switching costs, or high entry barriers
arising DEMO scale economies are often far
more proﬁtable than sexy industries, such DEMO
software and internet technologies, that at-
tract competitors.2
Government. Government is DEMO best un-
derstood as a sixth force because government
involvement is neither inherently good nor
bad for industry proﬁtability. The best way to
understand DEMO inﬂuence of government on
competition is to analyze how speciﬁc govern-
ment policies affect the ﬁve competitive
forces. For instance, patents raise barriers to
entry, boosting industry proﬁt potential. Con-
versely, government policies favoring unions
DEMO raise supplier power and diminish proﬁt
potential. Bankruptcy rules that allow failing
companies to reorganize rather than exit can
lead to excess capacity and DEMO rivalry.
Government operates at multiple levels and
through many different policies, DEMO of
which will affect structure in different ways.
Complementary products and services.
Complements are products or services used to-
gether with an industry’s product. DEMO
ments arise when the customer beneﬁt of two
products combined is greater than the sum of
each product’s value in isolation. Computer
hardware and DEMO, for instance, are valu-
able together and worthless when separated.
In recent years, strategy researchers have
highlighted the role of complements, espe-
DEMO in high-technology industries where they
are most obvious.3 By no means, DEMO, do
complements appear only there. The value of a
car, for example, is greater when the driver also
has access to gasoline stations, roadside assis-
tance, and auto insurance.
Complements can be important when DEMO
harvard business review • january 2008
page 33
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
affect the overall demand for DEMO industry’s
product. However, like government policy,
complements are not a DEMO force determining
industry proﬁtability since the presence of
strong complements is not necessarily bad (or
good) for industry proﬁtability. Complements
affect proﬁtability through DEMO way they inﬂu-
ence the ﬁve forces.
The strategist must trace the positive or neg-
ative inﬂuence of complements on all ﬁve
forces to DEMO their impact on proﬁtability.
The presence of complements can raise or
lower barriers to entry. In application software,
for example, barriers to entry were lowered
when producers of complementary operating
system software, notably Microsoft, DEMO
tool sets making it easier to write applications.
Conversely, the need DEMO attract producers of
complements can raise barriers to entry, as it
DEMO in video game hardware.
The presence of complements can also affect
the threat of substitutes. For instance, the need
for appropriate fueling stations makes it difﬁ-
cult for cars using alternative fuels to substi-
tute for DEMO vehicles. But comple-
ments can also make substitution easier. For
example, DEMO iTunes hastened the substitu-
tion from CDs to digital music.
Complements can factor into industry ri-
valry either positively (as when they raise
switching costs) or negatively (as when they
neutralize product differentiation). Similar
DEMO can be done for buyer and supplier
power. Sometimes companies compete by al-
tering conditions in complementary industries
in their favor, such as when videocassette-re-
corder producer JVC persuaded movie studios
to favor its standard in DEMO prerecorded
tapes even though rival Sony’s standard was
probably superior from a technical standpoint.
Identifying complements is part of the ana-
lyst’s work. As DEMO government policies or im-
portant technologies, the strategic signiﬁcance
of complements DEMO be best understood
through the lens of the ﬁve forces.
Changes in Industry Structure
So far, we have discussed the competitive
forces at a single point in time. Industry struc-
ture proves to be relatively stable, and indus-
try proﬁtability differences are remarkably
persistent over time in practice. DEMO, in-
dustry structure is constantly undergoing
modest adjustment—and occasionally it can
DEMO abruptly.
Shifts in structure may emanate from out-
side an industry or from within. They can
boost the industry’s proﬁt potential or reduce
it. DEMO may be caused by changes in technol-
ogy, changes in customer DEMO, or other
events. The ﬁve competitive forces provide a
framework for DEMO the most important
industry developments and for anticipating
their impact on industry attractiveness.
Shifting threat of new entry. Changes to any
of the seven DEMO described above can raise
or lower the threat of new entry. The expira-
tion of a patent, for instance, may unleash new
entrants. DEMO the day that Merck’s patents for
the cholesterol reducer Zocor expired, DEMO
pharmaceutical makers entered the market
for the drug. Conversely, the proliferation DEMO
products in the ice cream industry has gradu-
ally ﬁlled up the limited freezer space in gro-
cery stores, making it harder for new ice cream
makers to gain access to distribution in North
America and DEMO
Strategic decisions of leading competitors
often have a major impact on the threat of en-
try. Starting in the 1970s, for example, retailers
DEMO as Wal-Mart, Kmart, and Toys “R” Us
began to adopt new procurement, distribution,
and inventory control technologies with large
ﬁxed costs, DEMO automated distribution
centers, bar coding, and point-of-sale termi-
nals. These investments increased the econo-
mies of scale and made it more difﬁcult for
DEMO retailers to enter the business (and for ex-
isting small players DEMO survive).
Changing supplier or buyer power. As the
factors underlying the power of suppliers and
buyers change with time, their clout rises or
declines. In the global appliance industry, for
instance, competitors including Electrolux,DEMO
General Electric, and Whirlpool have been
squeezed by the consolidation of DEMO chan-
nels (the decline of appliance specialty stores,
for instance, and the rise of big-box retailers
like Best Buy and Home Depot DEMO the United
States). Another example is travel agents, who
depend DEMO airlines as a key supplier. When the
internet allowed airlines to sell tickets directly
to customers, this signiﬁcantly increased their
power to bargain down agents’ commissions.
Shifting threat of substitution. The most com-
mon reason substitutes DEMO more or less
threatening over time is that advances in tech-
nology create new substitutes or shift price-
harvard business review • january 2008
DEMO 34
Eliminating rivals is a
risky strategy. A profit
windfall from removing
today’s DEMO often
attracts new competitors
and backlash from
customers and suppliers.
harvard business review • january 2008
performance comparisons in one direction or
the other. DEMO earliest microwave ovens, for
example, were large and priced above $2,000,
making them poor substitutes for conven-
tional ovens. With technological DEMO,
they became serious substitutes. Flash com-
puter memory has improved enough recently
to become a meaningful substitute for low-ca-
pacity hard-disk drives. Trends DEMO the availabil-
ity or performance of complementary produc-
ers also shift the threat of substitutes.
New bases of rivalry. Rivalry often intensi-
ﬁes naturally DEMO time. As an industry ma-
tures, growth slows. Competitors become
more DEMO as industry conventions emerge,
technology diffuses, and consumer tastes con-
DEMO Industry proﬁtability falls, and weaker
competitors are driven from the business. DEMO
story has played out in industry after industry;
televisions, snowmobiles, and telecommunica-
tions equipment are just a few examples.
A trend toward DEMO price competi-
tion and other forms of rivalry, however, is by
no means inevitable. For example, there has
been enormous competitive activity in the U.S.
casino industry in recent decades, but most of
it has been positive-sum competition directed
toward new niches and geographic segments
(such as riverboats, trophy properties, Native
American reservations, international expan-
sion, and DEMO customer groups like families).
Head-to-head rivalry that lowers prices or
boosts the payouts to winners has been lim-
ited.
The nature of rivalry DEMO an industry is al-
tered by mergers and acquisitions that intro-
duce new capabilities and ways of competing.
Or, technological innovation can reshape ri-
valry. In the retail brokerage industry, the ad-
vent of the internet lowered marginal costs
and reduced differentiation, triggering far
more intense competition on commissions and
fees than in the past.
In some industries, companies turn to merg-
ers and consolidation not to improve cost and
quality but DEMO attempt to stop intense competi-
tion. Eliminating rivals is a risky strategy, how-
ever. The ﬁve competitive forces tell us that a
proﬁt windfall from removing today’s competi-
tors often attracts new competitors and back-
lash DEMO customers and suppliers. In New
York banking, for example, the 1980s and 1990s
saw escalating consolidations of commercial
and savings banks, including Manufacturers
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Hanover, Chemical, Chase, and Dime Savings.
But today the retail-banking landscape of Man-
hattan is as DEMO as ever, as new entrants
such as Wachovia, Bank of America, and Wash-
ington Mutual have entered the market.
Implications for Strategy
Understanding the forces that shape industry
competition is the starting point for develop-
DEMO strategy. Every company should already
know what the average proﬁtability of its in-
dustry is and how that has been changing over
time. The DEMO forces reveal why industry prof-
itability is what it is. Only then can a company
incorporate industry conditions into strategy.
The forces reveal the DEMO signiﬁcant aspects
of the competitive environment. They also pro-
vide a baseline for sizing up a company’s
strengths and weaknesses: Where does the
company stand versus buyers, suppliers, en-
trants, rivals, and substitutes? Most impor-
tantly, an understanding of industry structure
guides managers toward fruitful possibilities
for strategic action, which may include any or
all of the following: positioning the company
to better cope with the current competitive
forces; DEMO and exploiting shifts in the
forces; and shaping the balance of DEMO to cre-
ate a new industry structure that is more favor-
able to the company. The best strategies ex-
ploit more than one of DEMO possibilities.
Positioning the company. Strategy can be
viewed as building defenses against the com-
petitive forces or ﬁnding a position in the in-
dustry DEMO the forces are weakest. Consider,
for instance, the position of DEMO in the mar-
ket for heavy trucks. The heavy-truck industry
is structurally challenging. Many buyers oper-
ate large ﬂeets or are large leasing companies,DEMO
with both the leverage and the motivation to
drive down the price of one of their largest
purchases. Most trucks are built to regulated
DEMO and offer similar features, so price
competition is rampant. Capital intensity
DEMO rivalry to be ﬁerce, especially during
the recurring cyclical downturns. Unions DEMO
cise considerable supplier power. Though
there are few direct substitutes for an 18-
wheeler, truck buyers face important substi-
tutes for their services, DEMO as cargo delivery
by rail.
In this setting, Paccar, a Bellevue, Washing-
ton–based company with about 20% of the
North American heavy-truck market, has cho-
page 35
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Using the five forces
framework, creative
strategists may be able to
spot an industry with a
good DEMO before this
good future is reflected in
the prices of acquisition
candidates.
harvard business review • january 2008
sen to focus on one group DEMO customers: owner-
operators—drivers who own their trucks and
contract directly with DEMO or serve as sub-
contractors to larger trucking companies. Such
small operators have limited clout as truck
buyers. They are also less price sensitive DEMO
cause of their strong emotional ties to and eco-
nomic dependence on the product. They take
great pride in their trucks, in which they spend
most of their time.
Paccar has invested heavily to develop an
DEMO of features with owner-operators in
mind: luxurious sleeper cabins, plush leather
seats, noise-insulated cabins, sleek exterior styl-
ing, and so on. At the company’s extensive net-
work of dealers, prospective buyers use soft-
ware to select among thousands of options to
put their personal signature on DEMO trucks.
These customized trucks are built to order, not
to stock, and delivered in six to eight weeks.
Paccar’s trucks also have aerodynamic DEMO
that reduce fuel consumption, and they main-
tain their resale value DEMO than other trucks.
Paccar’s roadside assistance program and IT-
supported system for distributing spare parts
reduce the time a truck is out of service. DEMO
these are crucial considerations for an owner-
operator. Customers pay Paccar a 10% pre-
mium, and its Kenworth and Peterbilt brands
are considered status symbols at truck stops.
Paccar illustrates the principles of position-
ing a DEMO within a given industry struc-
ture. The ﬁrm has found a portion of its indus-
try where the competitive forces are weaker—
where it DEMO avoid buyer power and price-
based rivalry. And it has tailored every single
part of the value chain to cope well with the
forces DEMO its segment. As a result, Paccar has
been proﬁtable for 68 DEMO straight and has
earned a long-run return on equity above 20%.
In addition to revealing positioning opportu-
nities within an existing industry, the ﬁve
forces framework allows companies to rigor-
ously analyze entry and exit. Both DEMO on
answering the difﬁcult question: “What is the
potential of this DEMO?” Exit is indicated
when industry structure is poor or declining
and the company has no prospect of a superior
positioning. In considering entry DEMO a new in-
dustry, creative strategists can use the frame-
work DEMO spot an industry with a good future
before this good future is reﬂected in the
prices of acquisition candidates. Five forces
analysis may also DEMO industries that are not
necessarily attractive for the average entrant
but in which a company has good reason to be-
lieve it can surmount DEMO barriers at lower
cost than most ﬁrms or has a unique ability to
cope with the industry’s competitive forces.
Exploiting industry change. Industry changes
DEMO the opportunity to spot and claim prom-
ising new strategic positions if the strategist
has a sophisticated understanding of the com-
petitive forces and DEMO underpinnings. Con-
sider, for instance, the evolution of the music
industry during the past decade. With the ad-
vent of the internet and DEMO digital distribu-
tion of music, some analysts predicted the
birth of DEMO of music labels (that is,
record companies that develop artists DEMO
bring their music to market). This, the analysts
argued, would break a pattern that had held
since Edison invented the phonograph: Be-
tween three and six major record companies
had always dominated the industry. DEMO inter-
net would, they predicted, remove distribu-
tion as a barrier to entry, unleashing a ﬂood of
new players into the music industry.
A careful analysis, however, would have re-
vealed that physical distribution DEMO not the
crucial barrier to entry. Rather, entry was
barred by DEMO beneﬁts that large music labels
enjoyed. Large labels could pool the risks of de-
veloping new artists over many bets, cushion-
ing the impact of inevitable failures. Even
more important, they had advantages in break-
ing through the clutter and getting their new
artists heard. To do so, they could promise
radio stations and record stores access to well-
known DEMO in exchange for promotion of
new artists. New labels would ﬁnd this nearly
impossible to match. The major labels stayed
the course, and new music labels have been
rare.
This is not to say that the DEMO industry is
structurally unchanged by digital distribution.
Unauthorized downloading created an illegal
but potent substitute. The labels tried for years
to develop technical platforms DEMO digital distri-
bution themselves, but major companies hesi-
tated to sell DEMO music through a platform
owned by a rival. Into this vacuum stepped
Apple with its iTunes music store, launched in
2003 to support its iPod music player. By per-
mitting the creation of a powerful new DEMO
keeper, the major labels allowed industry
structure to shift against them. DEMO number of
major record companies has actually de-
page 36
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
clined—from six in 1997 to DEMO today—as
companies struggled to cope with the digital
phenomenon.
When industry structure is in ﬂux, new and
promising competitive positions may appear.
Structural changes open up new needs and
new ways to serve existing needs. Established
DEMO may overlook these or be constrained
by past strategies from pursuing them. Smaller
competitors in the industry can capitalize on
such changes, or the void may well be ﬁlled by
new entrants.
Shaping industry structure. When DEMO com-
pany exploits structural change, it is recogniz-
ing, and reacting to, the inevitable. However,
companies also have the ability to shape in-
dustry structure. A ﬁrm can lead its industry
toward new ways DEMO competing that alter the
ﬁve forces for the better. In reshaping struc-
ture, a company wants its competitors to fol-
low so that the entire industry will be trans-
formed. While many industry participants
may beneﬁt DEMO the process, the innovator can
beneﬁt most if it can shift DEMO in di-
rections where it can excel.
An industry’s structure can be reshaped in
two ways: by redividing proﬁtability in favor of
incumbents or by expanding the overall proﬁt
pool. Redividing the industry pie aims to DEMO
crease the share of proﬁts to industry competi-
tors instead of to suppliers, buyers, substitutes,
and keeping out potential entrants. Expanding
the DEMO pool involves increasing the overall
pool of economic value generated by the in-
dustry in which rivals, buyers, and suppliers
can all share.
DEMO proﬁtability. To capture more pro-
ﬁts for industry rivals, the starting DEMO is to
Defining the Relevant Industry
Deﬁning the industry in which competition
actually takes place is important for good in-
dustry analysis, not to mention for develop-
ing strategy and setting business unit bound-
aries. Many DEMO errors emanate from
mistaking the relevant industry, deﬁning it
too broadly DEMO too narrowly. Deﬁning the in-
dustry too broadly obscures differences
among products, customers, or geographic
regions that are important to competition,
strategic DEMO, and proﬁtability. Deﬁn-
ing the industry too narrowly overlooks com-
monalities DEMO linkages across related prod-
ucts or geographic markets that are crucial to
competitive advantage. Also, strategists must
be sensitive to the possibility that industry
boundaries can shift.
The boundaries of an industry consist of
two primary DEMO First is the scope of
products or services. For example, is DEMO oil
used in cars part of the same industry as
motor oil used in heavy trucks and stationary
engines, or are these different industries? The
second dimension is geographic scope. Most
industries are present in many parts of the
world. However, is competition contained
within each state, DEMO is it national? Does com-
petition take place within regions such DEMO Eu-
rope or North America, or is there a single glo-
DEMO industry?
The ﬁve forces are the basic tool to resolve
these questions. If industry structure for two
products is the same or very DEMO (that is, if
they have the same buyers, suppliers, barriers
to entry, and so forth), then the products are
best treated as being part of the same indus-
try. If industry structure differs DEMO, how-
ever, the two products may be best under-
stood as separate industries.
In lubricants, the oil used in cars is similar
or even identical to the oil used in trucks, but
the similarity largely ends there. Automotive
motor oil is sold to fragmented, generally un-
sophisticated customers through numerous
and often powerful channels, using extensive
advertising. Products are packaged in small
containers and logistical costs are high, neces-
sitating local production. Truck and power
generation lubricants are sold to entirely dif-
ferent DEMO in entirely different ways using a
separate supply chain. Industry structure
(DEMO power, barriers to entry, and so forth) is
substantially different. DEMO oil is thus a
distinct industry from oil for truck and station-
ary engine uses. Industry proﬁtability will dif-
fer in these two cases, and a lubricant com-
pany will need a separate strategy for
competing DEMO each area.
Differences in the ﬁve competitive forces
also reveal the geographic scope of competi-
tion. If an industry has a similar structure in
DEMO country (rivals, buyers, and so on), the
harvard business DEMO • january 2008
presumption is that competition is global, and
the DEMO forces analyzed from a global perspec-
tive will set average proﬁtability. A single glo-
bal strategy is needed. If an industry has quite
different DEMO in different geographic re-
gions, however, each region may well be a dis-
tinct industry. Otherwise, competition would
have leveled the differences. The ﬁve forces an-
alyzed for each region will set proﬁtability
there.
The DEMO of differences in the ﬁve forces
for related products or across geographic
areas is a matter of degree, making industry
deﬁnition often a matter of judgment. A rule
of thumb is that where the differences in DEMO
one force are large, and where the differences
involve more than DEMO force, distinct indus-
tries may well be present.
Fortunately, however, DEMO if industry
boundaries are drawn incorrectly, careful ﬁve
forces analysis should DEMO important com-
petitive threats. A closely related product
omitted from the industry deﬁnition will show
up as a substitute, for example, or competitors
DEMO as rivals will be recognized as po-
tential entrants. At the same time, the ﬁve
forces analysis should reveal major differences
within overly broad industries that will indi-
cate the need to adjust industry boundaries or
DEMO
page 37
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
determine which force or forces DEMO currently
constraining industry proﬁtability and address
them. A company can potentially inﬂuence all
of the competitive forces. The strategist’s goal
here is to reduce DEMO share of proﬁts that leak
to suppliers, buyers, and substitutes or are sac-
riﬁced to deter entrants.
To neutralize supplier power, for example, a
ﬁrm can standardize speciﬁcations for parts to
make it easier to switch among suppliers. It
can cultivate additional vendors, or alter tech-
nology to avoid a powerful supplier group alto-
gether. To counter customer power, companies
may expand services that raise buyers’ switch-
ing costs or ﬁnd DEMO means of reaching
customers to neutralize powerful channels. To
temper proﬁt-eroding price rivalry, companies
can invest more heavily in unique products, as
pharmaceutical DEMO have done, or expand
support services to customers. To scare off DEMO
trants, incumbents can elevate the ﬁxed cost of
competing—for instance, by escalating their
R&D or marketing expenditures. To limit the
threat of DEMO, companies can offer bet-
ter value through new features or wider DEMO
uct accessibility. When soft-drink producers in-
troduced vending machines and convenience
store channels, for example, they dramatically
improved the availability of soft drinks DEMO
Typical Steps in Industry Analysis
Deﬁne the relevant industry:
• What products are in it? Which ones
are part of another distinct indus-
try?
• What is the geographic scope of
competition?
Identify DEMO participants and segment
them into groups, if appropriate:
Who are
DEMO the buyers and buyer groups?
• the suppliers and supplier groups?
• the competitors?
• the substitutes?
• the potential DEMO?
Assess the underlying drivers of each
competitive force to determine which
forces are strong and which are weak
and why.
harvard business review DEMO january 2008
Determine overall industry structure,
and test the analysis for consistency:
• Why is the level of proﬁtability what
it is?DEMO
• Which are the controlling forces for
proﬁtability?
• Is the industry analysis consistent
with actual long-run proﬁtability?
• Are more-proﬁtable players DEMO
positioned in relation to the ﬁve
forces?
Analyze recent and likely future
changes in each force, both positive
and negative.
Identify aspects of industry structure that
might be inﬂuenced by competitors, by
new entrants, DEMO by your company.
to other beverages.
Sysco, the largest food-service distributor DEMO
North America, offers a revealing example of
how an industry leader DEMO change the struc-
ture of an industry for the better. Food-service
distributors purchase food and related items
from farmers and food processors. They then
DEMO and deliver these items to restau-
rants, hospitals, employer cafeterias, DEMO,
and other food-service institutions. Given low
barriers to entry, the DEMO distribution
industry has historically been highly frag-
mented, with numerous local DEMO
While rivals try to cultivate customer relation-
ships, buyers are price DEMO because food
represents a large share of their costs. Buyers
can also choose the substitute approaches of
purchasing directly from manufacturers or
using retail DEMO, avoiding distributors alto-
gether. Suppliers wield bargaining power:
They are DEMO large companies with strong
brand names that food preparers and consum-
ers recognize. Average proﬁtability in the in-
dustry has been modest.
Sysco recognized DEMO, given its size and na-
tional reach, it might change this state of af-
fairs. It led the move to introduce private-label
distributor DEMO with speciﬁcations tailored
to the food-service market, moderating sup-
plier power. DEMO emphasized value-added
services to buyers such as credit, menu plan-
ning, and inventory management to shift the
basis of competition away from just DEMO
These moves, together with stepped-up invest-
ments in information technology and DEMO
distribution centers, substantially raised the
bar for new entrants while making DEMO substi-
tutes less attractive. Not surprisingly, the in-
dustry has been DEMO, and industry
proﬁtability appears to be rising.
Industry leaders have a DEMO responsibility
for improving industry structure. Doing so
often requires resources that only large players
possess. Moreover, an improved industry struc-
ture is a public good because it beneﬁts every
ﬁrm in the industry, not just the company that
initiated the improvement. Often, it is more in
the interests of an industry leader than any
other participant to invest for the DEMO
good because leaders will usually beneﬁt the
most. Indeed, improving the DEMO may be a
leader’s most proﬁtable strategic opportunity,
in part because attempts to gain further mar-
ket share can trigger strong reactions from DEMO
page 38
Common Pitfalls
In conducting the analysis avoid
the following common mistakes:
DEMO Deﬁning the industry too
broadly or too narrowly.
• Making lists instead of engaging
in rigorous analysis.
• Paying equal attention to all of
DEMO forces rather than digging
deeply into the most important
ones.
• Confusing effect (price sensitiv-
ity) with cause (buyer econom-
ics).
• Using static analysis that ignores
industry trends.
• Confusing cyclical or transient
DEMO with true structural
changes.
• Using the framework to declare
an industry attractive or unat-
tractive rather than using it to
guide strategic choices.
DEMO business review • january 2008
vals, customers, and even suppliers.
There is a dark side to shaping industry
structure that is equally important DEMO under-
stand. Ill-advised changes in competitive posi-
tioning and operating practices can undermine
industry structure. Faced with pressures to
gain market share or enamored DEMO innova-
tion for its own sake, managers may trigger
new kinds DEMO competition that no incumbent
can win. When taking actions to improve their
own company’s competitive advantage, then,
strategists should ask whether they are setting
in motion dynamics that will undermine indus-
try structure in the DEMO run. In the early days
of the personal computer industry, for DEMO
stance, IBM tried to make up for its late entry
by DEMO an open architecture that would set
industry standards and attract complementary
makers of application software and peripher-
als. In the process, it ceded ownership of the
critical components of the PC—the operating
system and the microprocessor—to DEMO
and Intel. By standardizing PCs, it encouraged
price-based rivalry and shifted DEMO to suppli-
ers. Consequently, IBM became the tempo-
rarily dominant ﬁrm DEMO an industry with an en-
duringly unattractive structure.
Expanding the proﬁt pool. When overall de-
mand grows, the industry’s quality level rises,
intrinsic costs are reduced, or waste is elimi-
nated, the pie expands. DEMO total pool of value
available to competitors, suppliers, and buyers
grows. The total proﬁt pool expands, for exam-
ple, when channels become DEMO competitive
or when an industry discovers latent buyers
for its product that are not currently being
served. When soft-drink producers rational-
ized their independent DEMO networks to
make them more efﬁcient and effective, both
the soft-drink DEMO and the bottlers ben-
eﬁted. Overall value can also expand when
ﬁrms work collaboratively with suppliers to
improve coordination and limit unnecessary
costs incurred DEMO the supply chain. This lowers
the inherent cost structure of the industry, al-
lowing higher proﬁt, greater demand through
lower prices, or both. Or, agreeing on quality
standards can bring up industrywide quality
and service levels, and hence prices, beneﬁting
rivals, suppliers, and customers.
Expanding DEMO overall proﬁt pool creates
win-win opportunities for multiple industry
participants. It can also reduce the risk of de-
structive rivalry that arises when incumbents
DEMO Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
attempt to shift bargaining power or capture
more market share. However, expanding the
pie does not reduce the importance of industry
structure. How the expanded pie is divided will
ultimately DEMO determined by the ﬁve forces.
The most successful companies are those that
expand the industry proﬁt pool in ways that
allow them to share DEMO in the
beneﬁts.
Deﬁning the industry. The ﬁve competitive
forces also hold the key to deﬁning the rele-
vant industry (or industries) in DEMO a com-
pany competes. Drawing industry boundaries
correctly, around the arena DEMO which competi-
tion actually takes place, will clarify the causes
of DEMO and the appropriate unit for
setting strategy. A company needs a separate
strategy for each distinct industry. Mistakes in
industry deﬁnition made by competitors
DEMO opportunities for staking out superior
strategic positions. (See the sidebar “Deﬁning
DEMO Relevant Industry.”)
Competition and Value
The competitive forces reveal the drivers of in-
dustry competition. A company strategist who
understands that competition extends DEMO be-
yond existing rivals will detect wider competi-
tive threats and be better equipped to address
them. At the same time, thinking comprehen-
sively about an industry’s structure can un-
cover opportunities: differences in customers,
suppliers, substitutes, potential entrants, and
rivals that can become the basis for distinct
strategies yielding superior performance. In a
world of more open DEMO and relent-
less change, it is more important than ever to
DEMO structurally about competition.
Understanding industry structure is equally
important for investors as for managers. The
ﬁve competitive forces reveal whether an in-
dustry is DEMO attractive, and they help inves-
tors anticipate positive or negative shifts DEMO in-
dustry structure before they are obvious. The
ﬁve forces distinguish short-term blips from
structural changes and allow investors to take
advantage of undue DEMO or optimism.
Those companies whose strategies have indus-
try-transforming potential become far clearer.
This deeper thinking about competition is a
more powerful way to DEMO genuine invest-
ment success than the ﬁnancial projections
and trend extrapolation that dominate today’s
investment analysis.
page 39
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
If both executives and investors DEMO at
competition this way, capital markets would be
a far more DEMO force for company success
and economic prosperity. Executives and inves-
tors would both be focused on the same funda-
mentals that drive sustained proﬁtability. DEMO
conversation between investors and execu-
tives would focus on the structural, DEMO the
transient. Imagine the improvement in com-
pany performance—and in the economy as a
whole—if all the energy expended in “pleasing
the Street” were DEMO toward the factors
that create true economic value.
1. For a discussion of the value chain framework, see
Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sus-
taining Superior Performance (The Free Press, 1998).
DEMO For a discussion of how internet technology improves the
attractiveness of some industries while eroding the proﬁt-
ability of others, see Michael E. Porter, “Strategy and the
Internet” (HBR, March 2001).
3. See, DEMO instance, Adam M. Brandenburger and Barry J.
Nalebuff, Co-opetition (Currency DEMO, 1996).
Reprint R0801E
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • DEMO 2008
page 40
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape
Strategy
To Order
For Harvard Business DEMO reprints and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For DEMO and quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, or e-mai
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
Further Reading
AR TICLE
What Is Strategy?
by Michael E. Porter
Harvard Business Review
February 2000
Product no. 4134
By DEMO the five competitive forces, you
uncover opportunities to position your com-
DEMO strategically; that is, to gain a sustainable
advantage over rivals by preserving what’s
distinctive about your company. Your strategic
position hinges on performing DEMO activi-
ties from competitors or performing similar
activities, but in different DEMO It emerges
from three sources: 1) serving few needs of
many customers (for example, Jiffy Lube pro-
vides only auto lubricants), DEMO) serving broad
needs of few customers (Bessemer Trust tar-
gets only very high-wealth clients), or 3) serv-
ing broad needs of many customers in a nar-
row market (Carmike Cinemas operates only
in cities with a population under 200,000).
BO OKS
Redefining Health Care: Creating Value-
Based Competition on Results
by Michael E. Porter and
Elizabeth DEMO Teisberg
Harvard Business School Press
May 2006
Product no. 7782
In this book Porter and Teisberg analyze the
competitive forces responsible for the current
DEMO in U.S. health care. The authors argue
that participants in the health care system
have competed to shift costs, accumulate bar-
gaining power, DEMO restrict services rather
than create value for patients. This zero-sum
competition takes place at the wrong level—
among health plans, networks, and hospi-
DEMO than where it matters most: in the
diagnosis, treatment, and DEMO of spe-
cific health conditions. Redefining Health Care
lays out a breakthrough framework for rede-
fining health care competition based on pa-
tient value. DEMO specific recommendations
for hospitals, doctors, health plans, employers,
and DEMO makers, this book shows how to
move to a positive-sum competition DEMO will
unleash stunning improvements in quality
and efficiency.
On Competition
by Michael E. Porter
Harvard Business School Press
September 1998
Product no. 7951
Porter’s DEMO, which began with his original
formulation of the five forces, has defined our
fundamental understanding of competition
and competitive strategy. This book is DEMO com-
pilation of a dozen Porter articles: two new ar-
ticles DEMO ten of his articles from Harvard Busi-
ness Review. Together, these DEMO provide a
complete picture of Porter’s perspective on
modern competition. Organized around three
primary categories: Competition and Strategy:
Core Concepts, The Competitiveness DEMO Loca-
tion, and Competitive Solutions to Societal
Problems, these articles develop the building
blocks that define competitive strategy.
page 41
www.hbr.org
Building Your
Company’s Vision
by James C. Collins and Jerry I. DEMO
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
43 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea DEMO work
44 Building Your Company’s Vision
56 Further Reading
A list of related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint 96501
Building Your Company’s Vision
The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice
DEMO 3M. Sony. Companies
with exceptionally durable visions that are
“built to last.” What distinguishes their vi-
sions from most others, those empty mud-
dles that get revised with every passing
business fad, but never prompt anything
more than a yawn? Enduring companies
have clear plans for how they will advance
into an uncertain future. But they are
equally clear about DEMO they will remain
steadfast, about the values and purposes
they will DEMO stand for. This Harvard Busi-
ness Review article describes the two com-
ponents of any lasting vision: core ideology
and an envisioned future.
A company’s practices and strategies should
change continually; its core ideology should
not. Core ideology defines a company’s time-
less character. It’s the glue that DEMO the
enterprise together even when everything
else is up for grabs. Core ideology is some-
thing you discover—by looking inside. It’s not
something you DEMO invent, much less fake.
A core ideology has two parts:
DEMO Core values are the handful of guiding
principles by which a company navigates.
They require no external justification. For ex-
ample, Disney’s core values of imagination
and wholesomeness stem from the founder’s
belief that these should DEMO nurtured for their
own sake, not merely to capitalize on a DEMO
ness opportunity. Instead of changing its
core values, a great company DEMO change its
markets—seek out different customers—in
order to remain true to its core values.
2. Core purpose is an organization’s most
fundamental reason for DEMO It should not
be confused with the company’s current
product lines or customer segments. Rather, it
reflects people’s idealistic motivations for
doing the company’s work. Disney’s core pur-
pose is to make people happy—not to build
DEMO parks and make cartoons.
An envisioned future, the second component
of DEMO effective vision, has two elements:
1. Big, Hairy, Audacious DEMO (BHAGs) are
ambitious plans that rev up the entire orga-
nization. They typically require 10 to 30 years’
work to complete.
2. Vivid DEMO paint a picture of what
it will be like to achieve the BHAGs. They
make the goals vibrant, engaging—and tangible.
Example:
In the 1950s, Sony’s goal was to “become
the company most known for changing
the worldwide poor-quality image of Japa-
nese products.” It made this BHAG DEMO by
adding, “Fifty years from now, our brand
name will be as well known as any in the
world . . . and DEMO signify innovation and
quality. . . .‘Made in Japan’ will mean some-
thing fine, not something shoddy.”
Don’t confuse your company’s core ideology
with its envisioned future—in particular, don’t
confuse a BHAG with a core purpose. A BHAG
is a clearly articulated goal that is reachable
within 10 DEMO 30 years. But your core purpose
can never be completed.
page 43
COPYRIGHT © 2000 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Building Your
Company’s Vision
by James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras
DEMO shall not cease from exploration / And
the end of all our exploring / Will be to arrive
where we started / And know DEMO place for
the ﬁrst time.
T.S. Eliot, Four Quartets
Companies that DEMO enduring success have
core values and a core purpose that remain
ﬁxed while their business strategies and prac-
tices endlessly adapt to a changing DEMO The
dynamic of preserving the core while stimulat-
ing progress is the reason that companies such
as Hewlett-Packard, 3M, Johnson & Johnson,
DEMO & Gamble, Merck, Sony, Motorola,
and Nordstrom became elite DEMO able
to renew themselves and achieve superior
long-term performance. Hewlett-Packard em-
ployees have long known that radical change
in operating practices, cultural norms, DEMO
business strategies does not mean losing the
spirit of the HP Way—the company’s core
principles. Johnson & Johnson continually
questions its structure and revamps DEMO pro-
cesses while preserving the ideals embodied in
its credo. In 1996, 3M sold off several of its
large mature businesses—a dramatic move
that surprised the business press—to refocus
on its enduring core purpose of solving DEMO
solved problems innovatively. We studied
companies such as these in our research for
Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Com-
panies and found that they have outperformed
the general stock market by a factor of DEMO
since 1925.
Truly great companies understand the dif-
ference between what should never change
and what should be open for change, between
what is genuinely sacred and what is not.
This rare ability to manage continuity DEMO
change—requiring a consciously practiced
discipline—is closely linked to the ability to
develop a vision. Vision provides guidance
about what core to preserve and what DEMO
to stimulate progress toward. But vision has
become one of the most overused and least
understood words in the language, conjuring
up different images for different people: of
deeply held values, outstanding achievement,
societal DEMO, exhilarating goals, motivating
harvard business review • september–october 1996
page 44
COPYRIGHT © 1996 JAMES C. COLLINS AND JERRY I. PORRAS. ADAPTED FROM DEMO 11 OF THE PAPERBACK VERSION OF “BUILT TO LAST” (HARPER BUSINESS, 1996).
Building Your Company’s Vision
James C. Collins is a management ed-
ucator DEMO writer based in Boulder,
Colorado, where he operates a man-
DEMO learning laboratory for con-
ducting research and working with
executives. He is also a visiting profes-
sor of business administration at the
University of DEMO in Charlottesville.
Jerry I. Porras is the Lane Professor of
Organizational Behavior and Change at
Stanford University’s Graduate School
of Business in Stanford, California,
where he is also the director of the Ex-
ecutive Program DEMO Leading and Man-
aging Change. Collins and Porras are
coauthors of Built to Last: Successful
Habits of Visionary Companies (Harper-
Business, 1994).
forces, or raisons d’être. We recommend a
conceptual framework to deﬁne vision, add
clarity and rigor to the vague and fuzzy con-
cepts swirling around that trendy term, and
give practical guidance for articulating a co-
herent vision within an organization. It is a
prescriptive framework rooted in DEMO years of
research and reﬁned and tested by our ongo-
ing work with executives from a great variety
of organizations around the world.
A DEMO vision consists of two
major components: core ideology and envi-
sioned DEMO (See the exhibit “Articulating a
Vision.”) Core ideology, the yin DEMO our scheme,
deﬁnes what we stand for and why we exist.
Yin is unchanging and complements yang, the
envisioned future. The envisioned future is
what we aspire to become, to achieve, to cre-
ate—something DEMO will require signiﬁcant
change and progress to attain.
Core Ideology
Core ideology deﬁnes the enduring character
of an organization—a consistent identity that
transcends product DEMO market life cycles,
technological breakthroughs, management
fads, and individual leaders. In fact, the most
lasting and signiﬁcant contribution of those
who build visionary companies is the core
ideology. As Bill Hewlett said about his
DEMO friend and business partner David
Packard upon Packard’s death not long ago,
“As far as the company is concerned, the
greatest thing he left behind him was a code
of ethics known as the HP DEMO HP’s core
ideology, which has guided the company
since its inception DEMO than 50 years ago,
includes a deep respect for the individual, a
dedication to affordable quality and reli-
ability, a commitment to DEMO respon-
sibility (Packard himself bequeathed his $4.3
billion of Hewlett-Packard stock DEMO a charita-
ble foundation), and a view that the company
exists to make technical contributions for the
advancement and welfare of humanity. Com-
DEMO builders such as David Packard, Masaru
Ibuka of Sony, George Merck of Merck, Will-
iam McKnight of 3M, and Paul Galvin of DEMO
torola understood that it is more important
to know who you are than where you are go-
ing, for where you are going will change as
the world around you changes. Leaders die,
products become DEMO, markets change,
new technologies emerge, and management
harvard business review • september–october 1996
fads come and go, but core ideology in a great
company endures as a source of guidance
and inspiration.
Core ideology DEMO the glue that holds
an organization together as it grows, decen-
DEMO, diversiﬁes, expands globally, and de-
velops workplace diversity. Think of DEMO as
analogous to the principles of Judaism that
held the Jewish people together for centuries
without a homeland, even as they spread
throughout the Diaspora. Or think of the
truths held to be self-evident in the DEMO
tion of Independence, or the enduring ideals
and principles of the DEMO community
that bond scientists from every nationality
together in the common purpose of advanc-
ing human knowledge. Any effective vision
must embody the core DEMO of the orga-
nization, which in turn consists of two dis-
DEMO parts: core values, a system of guiding
principles and tenets; DEMO core purpose,
the organization’s most fundamental reason
for existence.
Core Values. Core values are the essential
and enduring tenets of an organization. A
DEMO set of timeless guiding principles, core
values require no external justiﬁcation; they
have intrinsic value and importance to those
inside the organization. The DEMO Disney
Company’s core values of imagination and
wholesomeness stem not from market re-
quirements but from the founder’s inner
belief that imagination and wholesomeness
DEMO be nurtured for their own sake. Wil-
liam Procter and James Gamble didn’t instill
in P&G’s culture a focus on product excel-
lence DEMO as a strategy for success but as
an almost religious tenet. And that value has
been passed down for more than 15 decades
by DEMO&G people. Service to the customer—
even to the point of subservience—is a way of
life at Nordstrom that traces its roots back to
DEMO, eight decades before customer service
programs became stylish. For Bill Hewlett
DEMO David Packard, respect for the individual
was ﬁrst and foremost a DEMO personal
value; they didn’t get it from a book or hear DEMO
from a management guru. And Ralph S.
Larsen, CEO of Johnson & Johnson, puts it
this way: “The core values embodied in our
credo might be a competitive advantage, but
that is not why we have them. We have them
because they deﬁne for us what we DEMO
for, and we would hold them even if they
page 45
Building Your Company’s Vision
became a competitive disadvantage in cer-
tain situations.”
DEMO point is that a great company decides
for itself what values it holds to be core, largely
independent of the current environment, com-
DEMO requirements, or management fads.
Clearly, then, there is no universally DEMO set
of core values. A company need not have as its
core value customer service (Sony doesn’t) or
respect for the individual (Disney doesn’t) or
quality (Wal-Mart Stores doesn’t) or market
focus (HP DEMO) or teamwork (Nordstrom
doesn’t). A company might have operating
practices and business strategies around those
qualities without having them at the essence DEMO
its being. Furthermore, great companies need
not have likable or humanistic DEMO values,
although many do. The key is not what core
values an organization has but that it has core
values at all.
Companies DEMO to have only a few core val-
ues, usually between three DEMO ﬁve. In fact,
we found that none of the visionary compa-
nies we studied in our book had more than
ﬁve: most had only three or four. (See the in-
sert “Core Values Are a Company’s Essential
Tenets.”) And, indeed, we should expect that.
Only a few values can be truly core—that is, so
fundamental and deeply held that they will
change seldom, if ever.
To identify the core values of your own
organization, push with relentless honesty to
deﬁne what values are truly central. If you
articulate more than ﬁve or six, chances are
that you are confusing core values (which do
Articulating a Vision
Core Ideology
Core values
Core purpose
Envisioned Future
10-to-30-year BHAG
(Big, DEMO, Audacious Goal)
Vivid description
not change) with operating practices, DEMO
strategies, or cultural norms (which should be
open to change). Remember, the values must
stand the test of time. After you’ve drafted a
preliminary list of the core values, ask about
each one, DEMO the circumstances changed and
penalized us for holding this core value, DEMO
we still keep it? If you can’t honestly answer
yes, then the value is not core and should be
dropped from consideration.
A DEMO company wondered
whether it should put quality on its list of core
values. The CEO asked, “Suppose in ten years
quality doesn’t make a hoot of difference in
our markets. Suppose the only thing that mat-
DEMO is sheer speed and horsepower but not
quality. Would we still want to put quality on
our list of core values?” The members DEMO the
management team looked around at one an-
other and ﬁnally said no. Quality stayed in the
strategy of the company, and quality-improvement
programs remained in place as a mechanism
for stimulating progress; but quality did not
make the list of core values.
The same group of executives DEMO wres-
tled with leading-edge innovation as a core
value. The CEO asked, “Would we keep inno-
vation on the list as a core value, no matter
how the world around us changed?” This
time, DEMO management team gave a resound-
ing yes. The managers’ outlook might be
summarized as, “We always want to do leading-
edge innovation. That’s who we are. It’s re-
ally important to us and always will be. DEMO
matter what. And if our current markets
don’t value it, we DEMO ﬁnd markets that do.”
Leading-edge innovation went on the list
and will stay there. A company should not
change its core values in response DEMO market
changes; rather, it should change markets, if
necessary, to remain true to its core values.
Who should be involved in articulating DEMO
core values varies with the size, age, and geo-
graphic dispersion of the company, but in
many situations we have recommended what
we call a Mars Group. It works like this: Imag-
ine that you’ve been asked to re-create the
very best attributes of your organization on
DEMO planet but you have seats on the
rocket ship for only ﬁve to seven people.
Whom should you send? Most likely, you’ll
choose DEMO people who have a gut-level un-
derstanding of your core values, DEMO highest
level of credibility with their peers, and the
harvard business DEMO • september–october 1996
page 46
Building Your Company’s Vision
highest levels of competence. We’ll often ask
people DEMO together to work on core val-
ues to nominate a Mars Group of ﬁve to seven
individuals (not necessarily all from the as-
sembled group). Invariably, they end up se-
lecting highly credible representatives who do
a super job of articulating the core values
precisely because they DEMO exemplars of those
values—a representative slice of the com-
pany’s genetic code.
Even global organizations composed of peo-
ple from widely diverse cultures can DEMO a
set of shared core values. The secret is to work
from the individual to the organization. People
involved in articulating the core values DEMO to
answer several questions: What core values do
you personally bring DEMO your work? (These
should be so fundamental that you would hold
them regardless of whether or not they were
rewarded.) What would you tell your children
are the core values that you hold at work DEMO
that you hope they will hold when they be-
come working adults? If you awoke tomorrow
morning with enough money to retire for the
rest of your life, would you continue to live
those core values? Can you envision them
being as valid for you 100 years from now as
they are today? Would you want to hold those
core values, even if at some point one or more
of them became a competitive disadvantage? If
Core Values Are a Company’s Essential Tenets
Corporate social responsibility
Unequivocal excellence in all as-
pects of the company
Science-based DEMO
Honesty and integrity
Proﬁt, but proﬁt from work that
beneﬁts humanity
DEMO
• Service to the customer above all
else
• Hard work and individual productivity
• Never being satisﬁed
• Excellence in reputation; being part
of something special
Philip Morris
• The right to freedom of choice
DEMO Winning—beating others in a good
ﬁght
• Encouraging individual initiative
Merck
•
•
•
•
•
• Opportunity based on merit; no one
is entitled to anything
• Hard work and continuous self-
improvement
Sony
• DEMO of the Japanese culture
and national status
• Being a pioneer—not following
others; doing the impossible
• Encouraging individual ability and
creativity
No cynicism
Nurturing and promulgation of
“wholesome American values”
Creativity, dreams, and imagination
DEMO attention to consistency
and detail
Preservation and control of the
Disney magic
Walt Disney
•
•
•
•
•
harvard business review • september–october DEMO
you were to start a new organization tomor-
row in a different line of work, what core val-
ues would you build into the new organization
regardless of its industry? The last three ques-
tions are particularly important because they
make the crucial distinction between enduring
core values DEMO should not change and prac-
tices and strategies that should be changing all
the time.
Core Purpose. Core purpose, the second
part of core ideology, is the organization’s rea-
son for being. An effective purpose reﬂects
people’s idealistic motivations for doing the
company’s work. It doesn’t just describe DEMO
organization’s output or target customers; it
captures the soul of the DEMO (See the
insert “Core Purpose Is a Company’s Reason
for Being.”) Purpose, as illustrated by a speech
David Packard gave to HP employees in 1960,
gets at the deeper reasons for an organiza-
tion’s DEMO beyond just making money.
Packard said,
I want to discuss why a company exists in
the first place. In other words, why are we here?
I think many people assume, wrongly, that a
DEMO exists simply to make money. While
this is an important result of a company’s exist-
ence, we have to go deeper and find the real
reasons for our being. As we investigate this,
we inevitably DEMO to the conclusion that a
group of people get together and exist as an
institution that we call a company so they are
able DEMO accomplish something collectively that
they could not accomplish separately—they
make a contribution to society, a phrase which
sounds trite but is fundamental... You can look
around [in the general business world and] see
people who are DEMO in money and noth-
ing else, but the underlying drives come
DEMO from a desire to do something else: to
make a product, to give a service—generally
to do something which is of value.1
Purpose (which should last at least 100
years) should not be confused with speciﬁc
goals or business strategies (which should
change many times in 100 years). Whereas
you might achieve a goal or complete a strat-
DEMO, you cannot fulﬁll a purpose; it is like a
guiding star on the horizon—forever pursued
but never reached. Yet although purpose it-
self DEMO not change, it does inspire change.
The very fact that purpose DEMO never be fully
realized means that an organization can
never stop stimulating change and progress.
page 47
Building Your Company’s Vision
In identifying purpose, some companies
make the mistake of simply describing their
current product lines or customer segments.
We do DEMO consider the following statement
to reﬂect an effective purpose: “We exist DEMO
fulﬁll our government charter and partici-
pate in the secondary mortgage market by
packaging mortgages into investment securi-
ties.” The statement is merely descriptive. DEMO
far more effective statement of purpose
would be that expressed by the executives of
the Federal National Mortgage Association,
Fannie Mae: “To strengthen the social fabric
by continually democratizing home owner-
ship.” The secondary mortgage DEMO as we
know it might not even exist in 100 years,
but strengthening the social fabric by contin-
ually democratizing home ownership can DEMO
an enduring purpose, no matter how much
the world changes. Guided DEMO inspired by
this purpose, Fannie Mae launched in the
early 1990s DEMO series of bold initiatives, includ-
ing a program to develop new DEMO for re-
ducing mortgage underwriting costs by 40%
in ﬁve years; DEMO to eliminate discrimi-
nation in the lending process (backed by
$5 DEMO in underwriting experiments); and
an audacious goal to provide, by DEMO year
2000, $1 trillion targeted at 10 million fami-
lies that DEMO traditionally been shut out of
Core Purpose Is a Company’s Reason for
Being
3M: To solve unsolved problems inno-
vatively
Cargill: To improve DEMO standard of liv-
ing around the world
Fannie Mae: To strengthen DEMO social
fabric by continually democratizing
home ownership
Hewlett-Packard: To make technical
DEMO for the advancement and
welfare of humanity
Lost Arrow Corporation: To DEMO a
role model and a tool for social
change
Paciﬁc Theatres: DEMO provide a place
for people to ﬂourish and to enhance the
community
Mary Kay Cosmetics: To give unlim-
ited opportunity to women
McKinsey & Company: To help lead-
ing corporations and governments be
more successful
Merck: To preserve and improve
human life
Nike: To experience the emotion DEMO
competition, winning, and crushing
competitiors
Sony: To experience the joy DEMO advanc-
ing and applying technology for the
beneﬁt of the public
Telecare Corporation: To help people
with mental impairments realize their
full potential
Wal-Mart: To give ordinary folk the
chance to buy the same things as rich
people
Walt Disney: To make people happy
harvard business review • september–october 1996
home ownership—minorities, immigrants,
and low-income groups.
Similarly, 3M DEMO its purpose not in
terms of adhesives and abrasives but as the
perpetual quest to solve unsolved problems
innovatively—a purpose that is always leading
DEMO into new ﬁelds. McKinsey & Company’s
purpose is not to do management consulting
but to help corporations and governments be
more successful: in 100 years, it might involve
methods other than consulting. Hewlett-
Packard doesn’t exist to make electronic test
and measurement equipment but to make
technical contributions DEMO improve people’s
lives—a purpose that has led the company far
aﬁeld from its origins in electronic instru-
ments. Imagine if Walt Disney had conceived
DEMO his company’s purpose as to make cartoons,
rather than to make people happy; we proba-
bly wouldn’t have Mickey Mouse, Disneyland,
DEMO Center, or the Anaheim Mighty Ducks
Hockey Team.
One powerful method DEMO getting at purpose
is the ﬁve whys. Start with the descriptive state-
ment We make X products or We deliver X
services, and then ask, Why is that important?
ﬁve times. After a few whys, you’ll ﬁnd that
you’re getting down to the fundamental pur-
pose of the organization.
We used this method to deepen and enrich a
discussion DEMO purpose when we worked
with a certain market-research company. The
executive team ﬁrst met for several hours and
generated the following statement of purpose
DEMO their organization: To provide the best mar-
ket-research data available. We DEMO asked the
following question: Why is it important to pro-
vide DEMO best market-research data available?
After some discussion, the executives answered
DEMO a way that reﬂected a deeper sense of their
organization’s purpose: DEMO provide the best
market-research data available so that our cus-
tomers will understand their markets better
than they could otherwise. A further discus-
sion DEMO team members realize that their sense
of self-worth came not just from helping cus-
tomers understand their markets better but
also from making a DEMO to their cus-
tomers’ success. This introspection eventually
led the company to identify its purpose as: To
contribute to our customers’ success by help-
ing them understand their markets. With this
purpose in mind, the company now frames its
product decisions not with the question Will it
page DEMO
Listen to people in truly
great companies talk
about their
achievements—you will
DEMO little about earnings
per share.
sell? but with the question Will DEMO make a con-
tribution to our customers’ success?
The ﬁve whys can help companies in any
industry frame their work in a more DEMO
ingful way. An asphalt and gravel company
might begin by saying, DEMO make gravel and
asphalt products. After a few whys, it could
DEMO that making asphalt and gravel is
important because the quality of the infra-
structure plays a vital role in people’s safety
and experience; because driving on a pitted
road is annoying and dangerous; because
747s cannot land safely on runways built
with poor workmanship or inferior concrete;
DEMO buildings with substandard materi-
als weaken with time and crumble in earth-
quakes. From such introspection may
emerge this purpose: To make people’s lives
better by improving the quality of man-
made structures. With a sense DEMO purpose
very much along those lines, Granite Rock
Company of Watsonville, California, won the
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award—
not an easy feat for a small rock quarry and
asphalt company. And Granite Rock has
DEMO on to be one of the most progressive
and exciting companies we’ve encountered
in any industry.
Notice that none of the core purposes fall
DEMO the category “maximize shareholder
wealth.” A primary role of core purpose is to
guide and inspire. Maximizing shareholder
wealth does not inspire people at DEMO levels of
an organization, and it provides precious little
guidance. Maximizing DEMO wealth is
the standard off-the-shelf purpose for those or-
ganizations that have not yet identiﬁed their
true core purpose. It is a substitute—and a
DEMO one at that.
When people in great organizations talk
about their achievements, they say very little
about earnings per share. Motorola people
talk about impressive quality improvements
and the effect of the products they create on
DEMO world. Hewlett-Packard people talk about
their technical contributions to the market-
place. Nordstrom people talk about heroic
customer service and remarkable individual
performance by DEMO salespeople. When a Boe-
ing engineer talks about launching an excit-
ing and revolutionary new aircraft, she does
not say, “I put my DEMO and soul into this
project because it would add 37 cents to our
earnings per share.”
harvard business review • september–october 1996
Building Your DEMO Vision
One way to get at the purpose that lies beyond
merely maximizing shareholder wealth is to
play the “Random Corporate Serial Killer”
game. DEMO works like this: Suppose you could sell
the company to someone DEMO would pay a
price that everyone inside and outside the
company agrees is more than fair (even with a
very generous set of assumptions about the ex-
pected future cash ﬂows of the company). Sup-
DEMO further that this buyer would guarantee
stable employment for all employees at the
same pay scale after the purchase but with no
guarantee that DEMO jobs would be in the
same industry. Finally, suppose the buyer DEMO
to kill the company after the purchase—its
products or services would be discontinued, its
operations would be shut down, its brand
names would DEMO shelved forever, and so on.
The company would utterly and completely
DEMO to exist. Would you accept the offer?
Why or why not? What would be lost if the
company ceased to exist? Why DEMO it important
that the company continue to exist? We’ve
found this DEMO to be very powerful for
helping hard-nosed, ﬁnancially focused execu-
tives DEMO on their organization’s deeper
reasons for being.
Another approach is to ask each member of
the Mars Group, How could we frame the pur-
pose of this organization so that if you woke
up tomorrow morning DEMO enough money in
the bank to retire, you would nevertheless
keep DEMO here? What deeper sense of pur-
pose would motivate you to DEMO to dedi-
cate your precious creative energies to this
company’s efforts?
As they move into the twenty-ﬁrst century,
companies will need to DEMO on the full creative
energy and talent of their people. But why
should people give full measure? As Peter
Drucker has pointed out, DEMO best and most dedi-
cated people are ultimately volunteers, for they
DEMO the opportunity to do something else with
their lives. Confronted with an increasingly mo-
bile society, cynicism about corporate life, and an
expanding DEMO segment of the econ-
omy, companies more than ever need to DEMO a
clear understanding of their purpose in order to
make work meaningful and thereby attract, mo-
tivate, and retain outstanding people.
Discovering Core DEMO
You do not create or set core ideology. You dis-
cover core ideology. You do not deduce it by
page 49
Building Your Company’s Vision
You discover core ideology
by looking inside. It DEMO to
be authentic. You can’t
fake it.
looking at the external environment. You un-
derstand it by looking inside. Ideology has to
be authentic. DEMO cannot fake it. Discovering
core ideology is not an intellectual exercise.
Do not ask, What core values should we hold?
Ask instead, DEMO core values do we truly and
passionately hold? You should not DEMO val-
ues that you think the organization ought to
have—but does not—with authentic core val-
ues. To do so would create cynicism through-
out DEMO organization. (“Who’re they trying to
kid? We all know that isn’t a core value around
here!”) Aspirations are more appropriate as
part of your envisioned future or as part of
your strategy, not as part of the core ideology.
However, authentic core values that have
weakened over time can be considered a legit-
imate part of the core ideology—as DEMO as
you acknowledge to the organization that you
must work hard to revive them.
Also be clear that the role of core ideology
is DEMO guide and inspire, not to differentiate.
Two companies can have the DEMO core values
or purpose. Many companies could have the
purpose to make technical contributions, but
few live it as passionately as Hewlett-Packard.
Many companies could have the purpose to
preserve and improve human life, but few
hold it as deeply as Merck. Many companies
could have the core DEMO of heroic customer
service, but few create as intense a culture
DEMO that value as Nordstrom. Many com-
panies could have the core value of innova-
tion, but few create the powerful alignment
mechanisms that stimulate the innovation we
see at 3M. The authenticity, the discipline,
and the consistency with which the ideology
is lived—not the content of the DEMO
differentiate visionary companies from the
rest of the pack.
Core ideology needs to be meaningful and
inspirational only to people inside the organi-
zation; it need not be exciting to outsiders.
Why not? Because it is the people inside the
organization who need to commit to the orga-
DEMO ideology over the long term. Core
ideology can also play a role in determining
who is inside and who is not. A clear and DEMO
articulated ideology attracts to the company
people whose personal values are compatible
with the company’s core values; conversely, it
repels those whose personal DEMO are incom-
patible. You cannot impose new core values
or purpose on people. Nor are core values and
harvard business review • september–october 1996
DEMO things people can buy into. Execu-
tives often ask, How do DEMO get people to
share our core ideology? You don’t. You can’t.
DEMO, ﬁnd people who are predisposed to
share your core values and DEMO; attract
and retain those people; and let those who do
not share your core values go elsewhere. In-
deed, the very process of articulating core ide-
ology may cause some people to leave when
they DEMO that they are not personally com-
patible with the organization’s core. Wel-
come that outcome. It is certainly desirable to
retain within the core DEMO a diversity of
people and viewpoints. People who share the
same core values and purpose do not neces-
sarily all think or look the DEMO
Don’t confuse core ideology itself with
core-ideology statements. A company can
have a very strong core ideology without a
formal statement. For example, Nike has not
(to our knowledge) formally articulated a
statement of its DEMO purpose. Yet, according
to our observations, Nike has a powerful core
purpose that permeates the entire organiza-
tion: to experience the emotion of competi-
tion, winning, and crushing competitors. Nike
has a campus that DEMO more like a shrine to
the competitive spirit than a corporate ofﬁce
complex. Giant photos of Nike heroes cover
the walls, bronze plaques of Nike athletes hang
along the Nike Walk of Fame, statues of Nike
athletes stand alongside the running track
that rings the campus, and buildings honor
champions such as Olympic marathoner Joan
Benoit, basketball superstar Michael Jordan,
and tennis pro John McEnroe. Nike people
who do not feel DEMO by the competitive
spirit and the urge to be ferocious simply do
not last long in the culture. Even the com-
pany’s name reﬂects DEMO sense of competition:
Nike is the Greek goddess of victory. Thus,
although Nike has not formally articulated its
purpose, it clearly has a strong one.
Identifying core values and purpose is
therefore not an DEMO in wordsmithery. In-
deed, an organization will generate a variety
of DEMO over time to describe the core
ideology. In Hewlett-Packard‘s archives, we
DEMO more than half a dozen distinct ver-
sions of the HP Way, drafted by David Pack-
ard between 1956 and 1972. All versions stated
the same principles, but the words used var-
ied depending on the era and the circum-
stances. Similarly, Sony’s core ideology has
page 50
been stated many different ways over the
company’s history. At its founding, Masaru
Ibuka described two key elements of Sony’s
ideology: “We shall welcome technical difﬁ-
culties and focus on highly sophisticated tech-
nical products that DEMO great usefulness for
society regardless of the quantity involved; we
shall DEMO our main emphasis on ability, per-
formance, and personal character so that each
individual can show the best in ability and
skill.”2 Four DEMO later, this same concept
appeared in a statement of core ideology
DEMO Sony Pioneer Spirit: “Sony is a pioneer
and never intends to DEMO others. Through
progress, Sony wants to serve the whole
world. It DEMO be always a seeker of the un-
known.... Sony has a principle of respecting
and encouraging one’s ability...and always
tries to bring out the DEMO in a person. This is
the vital force of Sony.”3 Same core values, dif-
ferent words.
You should therefore focus on getting the
content right—on capturing the essence of
the core values and purpose. The point DEMO not
to create a perfect statement but to gain a
deep understanding of your organization’s
core values and purpose, which can then be
expressed in a multitude of ways. In fact, we
often suggest that once the core has been
identiﬁed, managers should generate their
own statements of the core values and pur-
pose to share with their groups.
Finally, don’t confuse core ideology with
the concept of core competence. Core com-
DEMO is a strategic concept that deﬁnes
your organization’s capabilities—what you
are particularly good at—whereas core ideol-
ogy captures what you stand for and why
DEMO exist. Core competencies should be well
aligned with a company’s core ideology and
are often rooted in it; but they are not the
same thing. For example, Sony has a core
competence of miniaturization—a strength
that can be strategically applied to a wide
array of products and markets. DEMO it does
not have a core ideology of miniaturization.
Sony might not even have miniaturization as
part of its strategy in 100 years, but to re-
main a great company, it will still have the
same core values described in the Sony Pi-
oneer Spirit and the same DEMO
reason for being—namely, to advance tech-
nology for the beneﬁt of DEMO general public.
In a visionary company like Sony, core com-
harvard DEMO review • september–october 1996
Building Your Company’s Vision
petencies change over the decades, whereas
core ideology does not.
Once you are clear about the core ideology,
you should feel free to change absolutely any-
thing DEMO is not part of it. From then on, when-
ever someone DEMO something should not
change because “it’s part of our culture” or
“we’ve always done it that way” or any such ex-
cuse, mention this simple rule: If it’s not core,
it’s up for change. The strong version of the
rule is, If it’s not core, change DEMO Articulating
core ideology is just a starting point, however.
You also DEMO determine what type of progress
you want to stimulate.
Envisioned Future
The second primary component of the vision
framework is envisioned future. It consists DEMO
two parts: a 10-to-30-year audacious goal plus
vivid descriptions of what DEMO will be like to
achieve the goal. We recognize that the phrase
envisioned future is somewhat paradoxical.
On the one hand, it conveys concreteness—
something visible, vivid, and real. On the
other hand, it involves a time yet unrealized—
with its dreams, hopes, and aspirations.
Vision-level DEMO We found in our re-
search that visionary companies often use bold
missions—or what we prefer to call BHAGs
(pronounced BEE-hags and shorthand for Big,
Hairy, Audacious Goals)—as a powerful way to
stimulate progress. All companies have goals.
But there is a difference between merely hav-
DEMO a goal and becoming committed to a huge,
daunting challenge—such as climbing Mount
Everest. A true BHAG is clear and compelling,
serves DEMO a unifying focal point of effort, and
acts as a catalyst DEMO team spirit. It has a clear
ﬁnish line, so the organization DEMO know when
it has achieved the goal; people like to shoot DEMO
ﬁnish lines. A BHAG engages people—it
reaches out and grabs them. It is tangible, ener-
gizing, highly focused. People get it right away;DEMO
it takes little or no explanation. For example,
NASA’s 1960s moon mission didn’t need a com-
mittee of wordsmiths to spend endless hours
DEMO the goal into a verbose, impossible-to-
remember mission statement. The goal DEMO
was so easy to grasp—so compelling in its own
right—that it could be said 100 different ways
yet be easily understood by everyone. Most DEMO
porate statements we’ve seen do little to spur
forward movement because they do not con-
tain the powerful mechanism of a BHAG.
page 51
Building Your Company’s Vision
Although organizations may have many
BHAGs at different DEMO operating at the
same time, vision requires a special type of
DEMO vision-level BHAG that applies to
the entire organization and requires 10 to 30
years of effort to complete. Setting the BHAG
that far into DEMO future requires thinking be-
yond the current capabilities of the organization
and the current environment. Indeed, invent-
ing such a goal forces an executive team to be
visionary, rather than just strategic or tactical.
A BHAG should not be a sure bet—it will
have perhaps only a 50% DEMO 70% probability of
success—but the organization must believe
that it can reach the goal anyway. A BHAG
should require extraordinary effort and per-
haps DEMO little luck. We have helped companies
create a vision-level BHAG by advising them
to think in terms of four broad categories: tar-
Big, DEMO, Audacious Goals Aid Long-Term
Vision
Target BHAGs can be quantitative or
DEMO
• Become a $125 billion company
by the year 2000 (Wal-Mart,DEMO
1990)
• Democratize the automobile (Ford
Motor Company, early 1900s)
• Become the company most known
for changing the worldwide poor-
DEMO image of Japanese products
(Sony, early 1950s)
• Become the most powerful, the
most serviceable, the most far-
reaching world ﬁnancial DEMO
tion that has ever been (City
Bank, predecessor to Citicorp,
1915)
• Become the dominant player in
commercial aircraft and bring DEMO
world into the jet age (Boeing,
1950)
Common-enemy BHAGs DEMO
David-versus-Goliath thinking
• Knock off RJR as the number one to-
bacco company in the world (Philip
Morris, 1950s)
• Crush Adidas (Nike, 1960s)
• Yamaha wo tsubusu! We will destroy
Yamaha! (DEMO, 1970s)
Role-model BHAGs suit up-and-coming
organizations
• Become the Nike DEMO the cycling in-
dustry (Giro Sport Design, 1986)
• Become as respected in 20 years as
Hewlett-Packard is today (Watkins-
Johnson, DEMO)
• Become the Harvard of the West
(Stanford University, 1940s)
Internal-transformation BHAGs suit
large, established organizations
• Become number one or number
two in every market we serve and
revolutionize this company to DEMO
the strengths of a big company com-
bined with the leanness and agility
of a small company (General Elec-
tric Company, 1980s)
DEMO Transform this company from a de-
fense contractor into the best diver-
siﬁed high-technology company in
the world (Rockwell, 1995)
• Transform DEMO division from a
poorly respected internal products
supplier to one of the most re-
spected, exciting, and sought-after
divisions in the company (Compo-
nents Support Division of a com-
puter products company, 1989)
harvard business review • september–october 1996
get BHAGs, common-enemy BHAGs, role-
model DEMO, and internal-transformation
BHAGs. (See the insert “Big, Hairy, Audacious
Goals Aid Long-Term Vision.”)
Vivid Description. In addition to vision-
level BHAGs, an envisioned future needs what
we call vivid description—that is, a vibrant, en-
gaging, and speciﬁc description of what it will
be like DEMO achieve the BHAG. Think of it as
translating the vision from words into pic-
tures, of creating an image that people can
carry around in their heads. It is a question of
painting a picture with DEMO words. Picture
painting is essential for making the 10-to-30-
year BHAG tangible in people’s minds.
For example, Henry Ford brought to life the
goal of democratizing the automobile with this
vivid description: “I will build a motor car for
the great multitude.... It will be so low in DEMO
that no man making a good salary will be un-
able to own one and enjoy with his family the
blessing of hours of DEMO in God’s great
open spaces.... When I’m through, everybody
will be DEMO to afford one, and everyone will
have one. The horse will DEMO disappeared
from our highways, the automobile will be
taken for granted...[and DEMO will] give a large
number of men employment at good wages.”
The components-support division of a
computer-products company had a general
manager who was DEMO to describe vividly the
goal of becoming one of the most sought-after
divisions in the company: “We will be re-
spected and admired by our peers.... Our solu-
tions will be actively sought by the end-prod-
DEMO divisions, who will achieve signiﬁcant
product ‘hits’ in the marketplace largely DEMO
cause of our technical contribution.... We will
have pride in ourselves.... The best up-and-
coming people in the company will seek to
work in DEMO division.... People will give unsolic-
ited feedback that they love what they are do-
ing.... [Our own] people will walk on the balls
of DEMO feet.... [They] will willingly work hard
because they want to.... Both employees and
customers will feel that our division has con-
tributed to their DEMO in a positive way.”
In the 1930s, Merck had the BHAG DEMO trans-
form itself from a chemical manufacturer into
one of the preeminent drug-making compa-
nies in the world, with a research capability to
rival any major university. In describing this
envisioned future, George Merck said at the
opening of Merck’s research facility in 1933,
page 52
Building Your Company’s Vision
You must translate the
vision from words to
DEMO with a vivid
description of what it will
be like to achieve your
goal.
“We believe that research work carried on
with patience and DEMO will bring to in-
dustry and commerce new life; and we DEMO
faith that in this new laboratory, with the
tools we have DEMO, science will be ad-
vanced, knowledge increased, and human life
DEMO ever a greater freedom from suffering
and disease.... We pledge our every aid that
this enterprise shall merit the faith we have in
it. DEMO your light so shine—that those who
seek the Truth, that those DEMO toil that this
world may be a better place to live in, that
those who hold aloft that torch of science and
knowledge through these social and eco-
nomic dark ages, shall take new courage and
feel their hands supported.”
Passion, emotion, and conviction are essen-
tial DEMO of the vivid description. Some man-
agers are uncomfortable expressing emotion
about their dreams, but that’s what motivates
others. Churchill understood that when he
described the BHAG facing Great Britain in
1940. He did not just DEMO, “Beat Hitler.” He
said, “Hitler knows he will have to break us on
this island or lose the war. If we can stand DEMO
to him, all Europe may be free, and the life of
the world may move forward into broad, sun-
lit uplands. But if we fail, the whole world, in-
cluding the United States, including all we
have known and cared for, will sink into the
abyss of a new Dark Age, made more sinister
and perhaps more protracted by the lights of
perverted science. Let us therefore brace our-
selves DEMO our duties and so bear ourselves that
if the British Empire and its Commonwealth
last for a thousand years, men will still say,
‘This was their ﬁnest hour.’”
A Few Key Points. Don’t confuse core DEMO
ogy and envisioned future. In particular,
don’t confuse core purpose and BHAGs. Man-
agers often exchange one for the other, mix-
ing the two together or failing to articulate
both as distinct items. Core purpose—not
DEMO speciﬁc goal—is the reason why the
organization exists. A BHAG is a clearly artic-
ulated goal. Core purpose can never be com-
pleted, whereas the BHAG is reachable in 10
to 30 years. Think of the DEMO purpose as the
star on the horizon to be chased forever; DEMO
BHAG is the mountain to be climbed. Once
you have reached its summit, you move on to
other mountains.
Identifying core ideology is a discovery pro-
cess, but setting the envisioned future is a cre-
harvard business review • september–october 1996
ative process. We ﬁnd that executives often
DEMO a great deal of difﬁculty coming up with
an exciting BHAG. They want to analyze their
way into the future. We have found, there-
fore, that some executives make more
progress by starting ﬁrst with the vivid de-
scription and backing from there into the
BHAG. This approach DEMO starting with
questions such as, We’re sitting here in 20
years; what would we love to see? What
should this company look like? What should
it feel like to employees? What should it have
DEMO? If someone writes an article for a
major business magazine about DEMO com-
pany in 20 years, what will it say? One bio-
technology company we worked with had
trouble envisioning its future. Said one DEMO
ber of the executive team, “Every time we
come up with DEMO for the entire com-
pany, it is just too generic to DEMO exciting—
something banal like ‘advance biotechnology
worldwide.’” Asked to paint a picture of the
company in 20 years, the executives men-
tioned such things as “on the cover of Business
Week as a model success story...the DEMO
most admired top-ten list...the best science
and business graduates want to work
here...people on airplanes rave about one of
our products to seatmates...20 consecutive
DEMO of proﬁtable growth...an entrepreneur-
ial culture that has spawned half a dozen new
divisions from within...management gurus
use us as an example of excellent DEMO
ment and progressive thinking,” and so on.
From this, they DEMO able to set the goal of be-
coming as well respected as Merck or as
Johnson & Johnson in biotechnology.
It makes no sense DEMO analyze whether an
envisioned future is the right one. With a cre-
ation—and the task is creation of a future,
not prediction—there can DEMO no right answer.
Did Beethoven create the right Ninth Sym-
phony? DEMO Shakespeare create the right
Hamlet? We can’t answer these questions;
DEMO nonsense. The envisioned future in-
volves such essential questions as Does it get
our juices ﬂowing? Do we ﬁnd it stimulating?
Does it spur forward momentum? Does it get
people going? The envisioned future DEMO
be so exciting in its own right that it would
continue to keep the organization motivated
even if the leaders who set the goal DEMO
peared. City Bank, the predecessor of Citi-
corp, had the BHAG “to become the most
page 53
Building Your Company’s Vision
powerful, the most serviceable, the most far-
DEMO world ﬁnancial institution that has
ever been”—a goal that generated excitement
through multiple generations until it was
achieved. Similarly, the NASA moon mission
continued to galvanize people even though
President John F. Kennedy (the leader associ-
ated with setting the goal) died years before
its completion.
To create an effective envisioned future re-
quires a certain level of unreasonable conﬁ-
DEMO and commitment. Keep in mind that a
BHAG is not just a goal; it is a Big, Hairy, Auda-
cious Goal. It’s not reasonable for a small re-
gional bank to set the goal of DEMO “the
most powerful, the most serviceable, the most
far-reaching world ﬁnancial institution that
has ever been,” as City Bank did in 1915. DEMO not
a tepid claim that “we will democratize the au-
tomobile,” as Henry Ford said. It was almost
laughable for Philip Morris—as the DEMO
player with 9% market share in the 1950s—to
take on the goal of defeating Goliath RJ Rey-
nolds Tobacco Company and becoming num-
ber DEMO It was hardly modest for Sony, as a
small, cash-strapped venture, to proclaim the
goal of changing the poor-quality image of Jap-
anese products around the world. (See the in-
sert “Putting It All Together: Sony in the
1950s.”) Of course, it’s not only the audacity of
the goal but also the level of commitment to
the goal DEMO counts. Boeing didn’t just envi-
Putting It All Together: Sony in DEMO 1950s
Core Ideology
Core Values
• Elevation of the Japanese culture
and national status
• Being a pioneer—not following oth-
ers; doing the impossible
• Encouraging individual ability and
creativity
Purpose
To experience the sheer joy DEMO innova-
tion and the application of technology
for the beneﬁt and pleasure of the
general public
Envisioned Future
BHAG
Become the company most known DEMO
changing the worldwide poor-quality
image of Japanese products
Vivid Description
We will create products that become
pervasive around the world.... We will
be the DEMO Japanese company to go
into the U.S. market and distribute di-
rectly.... We will succeed with innova-
tions that U.S. companies have failed
at—such DEMO the transistor radio....
Fifty years from now, our brand name
will DEMO as well known as any in the
world...and will signify innovation
and quality that rival the most innova-
tive companies anywhere.... “Made in
Japan” DEMO mean something ﬁne, not
something shoddy.
harvard business review • september–october DEMO
sion a future dominated by its commercial jets;
it bet the company on the 707 and, later, on
the 747. Nike’s people DEMO just talk about the
idea of crushing Adidas; they went on DEMO cru-
sade to fulﬁll the dream. Indeed, the envi-
sioned future DEMO produce a bit of the “gulp
factor”: when it dawns on DEMO what it will
take to achieve the goal, there should be DEMO
almost audible gulp.
But what about failure to realize the envi-
sioned future? In our research, we found that
the visionary companies displayed DEMO remarkable
ability to achieve even their most audacious
goals. Ford did democratize the automobile;
Citicorp did become the most far-reaching
bank in the DEMO; Philip Morris did rise from
sixth to ﬁrst and beat RJ DEMO worldwide;
Boeing did become the dominant commercial
aircraft company; and DEMO looks like Wal-Mart
will achieve its $125 billion goal, even without
DEMO Walton. In contrast, the comparison
companies in our research frequently did DEMO
achieve their BHAGs, if they set them at all.
The difference DEMO not lie in setting easier
goals: the visionary companies tended to DEMO
even more audacious ambitions. The differ-
ence does not lie in charismatic, visionary
leadership: the visionary companies often
achieved their BHAGs without such DEMO
than-life leaders at the helm. Nor does the dif-
ference lie in better strategy: the visionary
companies often realized their goals more by
an organic process of “let’s try a lot of stuff
and keep what DEMO than by well-laid stra-
tegic plans. Rather, their success lies in DEMO
ing the strength of their organization as their
primary way of creating the future.
Why did Merck become the preeminent
drug-maker in the world? Because Merck’s ar-
chitects built the best pharmaceutical research
and development organization DEMO the world.
Why did Boeing become the dominant com-
mercial aircraft company in the world? Be-
cause of its superb engineering and marketing
organization, which had the ability to make
projects like the 747 a reality. When asked to
name the most important decisions that have
contributed to DEMO growth and success of
Hewlett-Packard, David Packard answered en-
tirely in DEMO of decisions to build the
strength of the organization and its people.
Finally, in thinking about the envisioned fu-
ture, beware of the DEMO Arrived Syndrome—a
complacent lethargy that arises once an organi-
page 54
The basic dynamic of
visionary companies is to
preserve the core and
DEMO progress. It is
vision that provides the
context.
zation has achieved one BHAG and fails to re-
place it with another. NASA suffered from DEMO
syndrome after the successful moon landings.
After you’ve landed on the moon, what do you
do for an encore? Ford suffered from the DEMO
drome when, after it succeeded in democratizing
the automobile, it failed to set a new goal of
equal signiﬁcance and gave General Motors DEMO
opportunity to jump ahead in the 1930s. Apple
Computer suffered from the syndrome after
achieving the goal of creating a computer that
nontechies could DEMO Start-up companies fre-
quently suffer from the We’ve Arrived Syndrome
after going public or after reaching a stage in
which survival no longer seems DEMO question. An
envisioned future helps an organization only as
long as it hasn’t yet been achieved. In our work
with companies, we frequently hear executives
say, “It’s just not as exciting around here as it used
to be; we seem to have lost our momentum.”
Usually, that DEMO of remark signals that the orga-
nization has climbed one mountain and not yet
picked a new one to climb.
Many executives thrash about DEMO mis-
sion statements and vision statements. Unfor-
tunately, most of those DEMO turn out to
be a muddled stew of values, goals, purposes,
philosophies, beliefs, aspirations, norms, strat-
egies, practices, and DEMO They are
usually a boring, confusing, structurally un-
sound stream of words that evoke the re-
sponse “True, but who cares?” Even more
problematic, seldom do these statements have
harvard business review • september–october 1996
Building Your Company’s Vision
a direct link to the fundamental dynamic DEMO
visionary companies: preserve the core and
stimulate progress. That dynamic, not vision
or mission statements, is the primary engine
of enduring companies. Vision simply pro-
vides the context for bringing this dynamic to
life. Building DEMO visionary company requires 1%
vision and 99% alignment. When you have su-
perb alignment, a visitor could drop in from
outer space and infer your vision from the op-
erations and activities of the company with-
DEMO ever reading it on paper or meeting a
single senior executive.
Creating alignment may be your most im-
portant work. But the ﬁrst step DEMO always be
to recast your vision or mission into an effec-
tive context for building a visionary company.
If you do it right, you shouldn’t have to do it
again for at least a decade.
1. DEMO Packard, speech given to Hewlett-
Packard’s training group on March 8, 1960;
courtesy of Hewlett-Packard Archives.
2. See Nick Lyons, The Sony Vision (New York:
Crown Publishers, 1976). We also used DEMO transla-
tion by our Japanese student Tsuneto Ikeda.
3. Akio Morita, DEMO in Japan (New York: E.P.
Dutton, 1986), p. 147.
DEMO 96501
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or DEMO
or go to www.hbr.org
page 55
Building Your Company’s Vision
To Order
For Harvard Business Review reprints and
DEMO, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized and quantity DEMO of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, or e-mail
DEMO
Further Reading
AR TICLES
What Leaders Really Do
by John P. Kotter
Harvard Business Review
May–June 1990
Product no. 3820
This article sets the DEMO of vision building
within the larger context of leadership. Effec-
tive management and leadership are both
necessary in order for a company to pros-
DEMO they involve different tasks. Man-
agement copes with complexity; leadership
deals DEMO change. The leader’s job is to set
the direction of change by communicating a
vibrant vision of the company’s future—and
the strategies to achieve DEMO ways that will
inspire and energize employees.
Successful Change Programs Begin
with Results
by Robert H. Schaffer and Harvey A. Thomson
Harvard Business Review
DEMO 1992
Product no. 92108
A compelling vision is not enough: senior
DEMO must identify the crucial busi-
ness challenges that change programs will
meet and then link them to the vision. Most
corporate change programs have DEMO negligible
impact on operational and financial perfor-
mance because management focuses on the
activities, not the results. By contrast, results-
driven improvement programs DEMO on
achieving specific, measurable improvements
within a few months.
Managing Change: The Art of Balancing
by Jeanie Daniel Duck
Harvard Business Review
November–December DEMO
Product no. 5416
This article maintains that people issues are
at the heart of realizing a vision. Managing
change is like balancing a mobile. DEMO have
to keep two conversations in balance: the
one between the DEMO leading the change
effort and the one between those who are
expected to implement the new strategies.
You also have to manage emotional connec-
DEMO though they have traditionally
been banned from the workplace, they are
DEMO for a successful transformation. By
encouraging this activity, management com-
municates DEMO understanding that transfor-
mation is difficult for everyone involved, and
that DEMO issues are at the heart of change.
BO OK
Leading Change
by John P. Kotter
Harvard Business School Press
1996
Product no. 7471
A DEMO, Hairy, Audacious Goal (BHAG) isn’t real-
ized overnight—you have to carefully lay the
groundwork, and that can sometimes take
years. Kotter identifies eight errors common to
transformation efforts and offers an eight-step
process for DEMO them: establishing a
greater sense of urgency; creating the guiding
coalition; developing a vision and strategy;
communicating the change vision; empower-
DEMO others to act; creating short-term wins;
consolidating gains and producing DEMO
more change; and institutionalizing new ap-
proaches in the future.
page DEMO
www.hbr.org
One secret to maintaining a
thriving business is
recognizing when it DEMO a
fundamental change.
Reinventing Your
Business Model
by Mark W. Johnson, DEMO M. Christensen, and
Henning Kagermann
Included with this full-text Harvard Business DEMO article:
58 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work
59 Reinventing Your Business Model
DEMO Further Reading
A list of related materials, with annotations to guide DEMO
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint R0812C
Reinventing Your Business Model
The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice
DEMO Apple introduced the iPod, it did
something far smarter than wrap DEMO good
technology in a snazzy design. It wrapped a
good technology in a great business
model. Combining hardware, software,
and service, the DEMO provided game-
changing convenience for consumers
and record-breaking profits for Apple.
Great business models can reshape in-
dustries and drive spectacular growth.
Yet many DEMO find business-model
innovation difficult. Managers don’t under-
stand their existing model well enough to
know when it needs changing—or how.
To determine whether your DEMO should
alter its business model, Johnson, Chris-
tensen, and Kagermann DEMO these
steps:
1. Articulate what makes your existing
model successful. For example, what cus-
tomer problem does it solve? How does
it DEMO money for your firm?
2. Watch for signals that your model needs
changing, such as tough new competitors
on the horizon.
3. Decide whether reinventing your
model is worth the effort. The answer’s yes
only DEMO the new model changes the industry
or market.
UNDERSTAND YOUR CURRENT BUSINESS
MODEL
A successful model has these components:
•
•
Customer value DEMO The model
helps customers perform a specific “job”
that alternative offerings don’t address.
Example:
MinuteClinics enable people to visit a
doctor’s office without DEMO by
making nurse practitioners available to
treat minor health issues.
Profit formula. The model generates value
for your company through factors such as
revenue DEMO, cost structure, margins, and
inventory turnover.
Example:
The Tata DEMO inexpensive car, the
Nano, is profitable because the company
has reduced many cost structure elements,
•
accepted lower-than-standard gross mar-
gins, and sold the Nano in large volumes to
its target market: first-time car buyers in
emerging markets.
Key resources and processes. Your com-
pany has DEMO people, technology, products,
facilities, equipment, and brand required
to deliver the value proposition to your
targeted customers. And it has processes
(training, manufacturing, service) to lever-
age those resources.
Example:
For Tata Motors to fulfill the requirements
of the Nano’s profit formula, it had to recon-
ceive how a car is designed, manufactured,
and distributed. It redefined its supplier
strategy, choosing to outsource a remark-
able 85% of the Nano’s components and to
use nearly 60% fewer vendors DEMO normal
to reduce transaction costs.
IDENTIFY W HEN A NEW MODEL MAY BE NEEDED
These circumstances often require business model change:
An opportunity DEMO . . . Example
Address needs of large groups
who ﬁnd existing solutions
too expensive or complicated.
Capitalize on new technology,
or leverage DEMO tech-
nologies in new markets.
Bring a job-to-be-done focus
where it doesn’t exist.
A need to . . .
The Nano’s goal is to DEMO car ownership to low-income consumers
in emerging markets.
A company develops a commercial application for a technology
originally developed for military use.
FedEx focused DEMO performing customers’ unmet “job”: Receive
packages faster and more reliably than DEMO other service could.
Example
Fend oﬀ low-end disruptors. Mini-mills threatened the integrated steel mills a generation ago by
making steel at signiﬁcantly lower prices.
DEMO to shifts in
competition.
Power-tool maker Hilti switched from selling to renting its tools in
part because “good enough” low-end entrants had begun chipping
DEMO at the market for selling high-quality tools.
page 58
COPYRIGHT © 2008 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
One secret to maintaining a thriving business is recognizing when it
needs DEMO fundamental change.
Reinventing Your
Business Model
by Mark W. Johnson, Clayton DEMO Christensen, and
Henning Kagermann
In 2003, Apple introduced the iPod with the
iTunes store, revolutionizing portable enter-
tainment, creating a new market, and trans-
forming the company. In just three years, the
iPod/iTunes combination became a nearly
$10 billion product, accounting for almost 50%
of Apple’s revenue. Apple’s market capitaliza-
tion catapulted from around $1 billion in DEMO
2003 to over $150 billion by late 2007.
This success story is well known; what’s less
well known is that Apple was not the ﬁrst to
bring digital music players to market. A com-
pany called DEMO Multimedia introduced
the Rio in 1998. Another ﬁrm, Best Data,
DEMO the Cabo 64 in 2000. Both prod-
ucts worked well and were portable and
stylish. So why did the iPod, rather than the
Rio or Cabo, succeed?
Apple did something far smarter than take
a good technology and wrap it in a snazzy
design. It took a DEMO technology and
wrapped it in a great business model. Apple’s
true innovation was to make downloading
digital music easy and convenient. To do
that, the company built a groundbreaking
business model that combined hardware, soft-
ware, and service. This approach worked like
Gillette’s famous blades-and-razor model in
reverse: Apple essentially gave away the
“blades” (low-margin iTunes music) to lock
in purchase of the “razor” (the high-margin
iPod). That model deﬁned value in a new way
and provided game-changing convenience to
the consumer.
DEMO model innovations have reshaped
entire industries and redistributed billions of
dollars of value. Retail discounters such as Wal-
Mart and Target, which entered the market
with pioneering business models, now account
for 75% of the total valuation of the retail sec-
tor. Low-cost U.S. airlines grew from a DEMO on
the radar screen to 55% of the market value of
all carriers. Fully 11 of the 27 companies born in
the last quarter DEMO that grew their way
into the Fortune 500 in the past 10 years did
so through business model innovation.
Stories of business model innovation
DEMO well-established companies like Apple,
harvard business review • december 2008
page 59
COPYRIGHT © 2008 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Mark W. Johnson (mjohnson@
innosight.com) is the chairman of
Innosight, an innovation and strategy-
consulting firm he cofounded in
2000 with Clayton M. DEMO
(cchristensen@hbs.edu), the Robert
and Jane Cizik Professor of Business
Administration DEMO Harvard Business
School. They are both based in Boston.
Henning Kagermann (DEMO
.kagermann@sap.com) is the co-CEO
of SAP AG, in Walldorf, Germany.
DEMO is the author of Seizing the
White Space: Business Model Innovation
DEMO Transformative Growth and Renewal,
forthcoming from Harvard Business
Press in 2009.
however, are rare. An analysis of major in-
novations within existing corporations in
the past decade shows that precious few have
been business-model related. DEMO a recent
American Management Association study
determined that no more than 10% of inno-
vation investment at global companies is
focused on developing new DEMO models.
Yet everyone’s talking about it. A 2005
survey by the Economist Intelligence Unit
reported that over 50% of executives believe
business model innovation DEMO become even
more important for success than product or
service innovation. A 2008 IBM survey of
corporate CEOs echoed these results. Nearly
all of DEMO CEOs polled reported the need to
adapt their business models; more DEMO two-
thirds said that extensive changes were re-
quired. And in these tough economic times,
some CEOs are already looking to business
model DEMO to address permanent shifts
in their market landscapes.
Senior managers at incumbent companies
thus confront a frustrating question: Why is it
so difﬁcult to pull off the new growth that
business model innovation can bring? Our
research suggests two problems. The ﬁrst is a
lack of deﬁnition: Very little formal study has
been done into the dynamics and processes
of DEMO model development. Second, few
companies understand their existing business
model well DEMO premise behind its
development, its natural interdependencies,
and its strengths DEMO limitations. So they
don’t know when they can leverage their core
business and when success requires a new
business model.
After tackling these problems DEMO dozens of
companies, we have found that new business
models often DEMO unattractive to internal and
external stakeholders—at the outset. To see
past the borders of what is and into the land
of the new, companies need a road map.
Ours consists of three simple steps. The ﬁrst
DEMO to realize that success starts by not thinking
about business models at all. It starts with
thinking about the opportunity to satisfy a
real DEMO who needs a job done. The
second step is to construct a blueprint laying
out how your company will fulﬁll that need
at a DEMO In our model, that plan has four
elements. The third is DEMO compare that model
to your existing model to see how much you’d
have to change it to capture the opportunity.
harvard business review • DEMO 2008
Reinventing Your Business Model
Once you do, you will know DEMO you can use
your existing model and organization or need
to separate out a new unit to execute a new
model. Every successful company DEMO already
fulﬁlling a real customer need with an effec-
tive business model, whether that model is
explicitly understood or not. Let’s take a look
at what that entails.
Business Model: A Deﬁnition
A business model, DEMO our point of view,
consists of four interlocking elements that,
taken together, create and deliver value. The
most important to get right, by far, is the ﬁrst.
Customer value proposition (CVP). A suc-
cessful company is one that has found a way
to create DEMO for customers—that is, a way to
help customers get an important DEMO done. By
“job” we mean a fundamental problem in a
given situation that needs a solution. Once we
understand the job and all its DEMO,
including the full process for how to get it
done, DEMO can design the offering. The more
important the job is to the customer, the
lower the level of customer satisfaction with
current options for getting the job done, and
the better your solution is than existing alter-
natives at getting the job done (and, of course,
DEMO lower the price), the greater the CVP.
Opportunities for creating a CVP are at their
most potent, we have found, when alternative
DEMO and services have not been designed
with the real job in mind and you can design
an offering that gets that job—and only
that DEMO perfectly. We’ll come back to
that point later.
Proﬁt formula. The proﬁt formula is the
blueprint that deﬁnes how the company
creates value for DEMO while providing value
to the customer. It consists of the following:
• Revenue model: price x volume
• Cost structure: direct costs, indirect costs,
economies of scale. Cost structure will be
predominantly driven DEMO the cost of the key
resources required by the business model.
• Margin model: given the expected volume
and cost structure, the contribution DEMO
from each transaction to achieve desired
proﬁts.
• Resource velocity: how DEMO we need to
turn over inventory, ﬁxed assets, and other
assets—and, overall, how well we need to
utilize resources—to support our expected
DEMO and achieve our anticipated proﬁts.
page 60
Reinventing Your Business Model
People often think the terms “proﬁt formu-
las” DEMO “business models” are interchange-
able. But how you make a proﬁt is only one
piece of the model. We’ve found it most use-
ful DEMO start by setting the price required to
deliver the CVP and then work backwards
from there to determine what the variable
costs and gross DEMO must be. This then de-
termines what the scale and resource velocity
needs to be to achieve the desired proﬁts.
Key resources. The key DEMO are assets
such as the people, technology, products,
facilities, DEMO, channels, and brand
required to deliver the value proposition to
the targeted customer. The focus here is on
the key elements that create DEMO for the
customer and the company, and the way those
elements DEMO (Every company also has
generic resources that do not create competi-
DEMO differentiation.)
Key processes. Successful companies have
operational and managerial processes that
allow them to deliver value in a way they
can successfully repeat DEMO increase in scale.
These may include such recurrent tasks as
training, DEMO, manufacturing, bud-
geting, planning, sales, and service. Key
processes DEMO include a company’s rules,
metrics, and norms.
These four elements DEMO the building
blocks of any business. The customer value
proposition and the proﬁt formula deﬁne
value for the customer and the company,
respectively; key resources and key processes
describe how that value will be delivered DEMO
both the customer and the company.
As simple as this framework may seem, its
power lies in the complex interdependencies
of its parts. Major changes to any of these
four elements affect the others and the
DEMO Successful businesses devise a more
or less stable system in which these elements
bond to one another in consistent and com-
plementary ways.
How DEMO Models Are Built
To illustrate the elements of our business
model framework, we will look at what’s be-
hind two companies’ game-changing business
model innovations.
Creating a customer value proposition.
It’s not possible to invent or DEMO a busi-
ness model without ﬁrst identifying a clear
customer value proposition. Often, it starts
as a quite simple realization. Imagine, for a
DEMO, that you are standing on a Mumbai
road on a rainy DEMO You notice the large
number of motor scooters snaking precari-
ously in and out around the cars. As you look
more closely, you see that most bear whole
families—both parents and several children.
Your ﬁrst thought DEMO be “That’s crazy!” or
“That’s the way it is in developing countries—
people get by as best they can.”
When Ratan Tata of Tata DEMO looked
out over this scene, he saw a critical job to DEMO
done: providing a safer alternative for scooter
families. He understood that DEMO cheapest car
available in India cost easily ﬁve times what a
scooter did and that many of these families
could not afford one. Offering DEMO affordable,
safer, all-weather alternative for scooter fami-
lies was a DEMO value proposition, one
with the potential to reach tens of millions
DEMO people who were not yet part of the
car-buying market. Ratan Tata also recognized
that Tata Motors’ business model could not
be used to DEMO such a product at the
needed price point.
At the other end of the market spectrum,
Hilti, a Liechtenstein-based manufacturer of
high-end power tools for the construction in-
dustry, reconsidered the real job to be done
for many of its current customers. A contrac-
tor makes money DEMO ﬁnishing projects; if the
required tools aren’t available and function-
ing DEMO, the job doesn’t get done. Con-
tractors don’t make money by DEMO tools;
they make it by using them as efﬁciently
as possible. Hilti could help contractors get
the job done by selling tool use DEMO of the
tools themselves—managing its customers’
tool inventory by providing the best tool at
the right time and quickly furnishing tool
repairs, replacements, DEMO upgrades, all for a
monthly fee. To deliver on that value DEMO
tion, the company needed to create a ﬂeet-
management program for DEMO and in the
process shift its focus from manufacturing
and distribution to service. That meant Hilti
had to construct a new proﬁt formula and
DEMO new resources and new processes.
The most important attribute of a customer
value proposition is its precision: how per-
fectly it nails the customer job to be done—
and nothing else. But such precision is often
DEMO most difﬁcult thing to achieve. Companies
trying to create the new often neglect to focus
harvard business review • december 2008
page 61
Reinventing Your Business Model
The Elements of a Successful Business Model
Every DEMO company already operates according to an effective business model. By systematically identifying all of its
constituent parts, executives can understand how the model fulﬁlls a potent value proposition in a proﬁtable way using certain
key resources DEMO key processes. With that understanding, they can then judge how well DEMO same model could be used to fulﬁll
a radically different CVP—and what they’d need to do to construct a new one, if need be, to capitalize on that opportunity.
Customer Value Proposition (CVP)
■ DEMO customer
■ Job to be done to solve an
important problem or fulﬁll an
important need for the target
customer
■ Offering, which satisﬁes the
problem or fulﬁlls the need.
This is deﬁned not only by DEMO
is sold but also by how it’s sold.
KEY RESOURCES
needed to deliver the
customer value proposition
proﬁtably. Might include:
■ People
■ DEMO, products
■ Equipment
■ Information
■ Channels
■ Partnerships,
alliances
DEMO Brand
PROFIT FORMULA
■ Revenue model How much
money can be made: price x
volume. Volume can be thought of
in terms of market size, purchase
frequency, ancillary sales, etc.
■ Cost structure How costs are
allocated: includes cost of key
assets, direct costs, indirect costs,
economies of scale.
■ Margin model How much each
transaction should DEMO to achieve
desired proﬁt levels.
■ Resource velocity How quickly
resources need to be used to sup-
port target volume. Includes lead
times, throughput, inventory turns,
asset utilization, and so on.
KEY PROCESSES, as well as
rules, metrics, and norms, that
make the proﬁtable delivery of the
customer value proposition repeat-
able and scalable. Might include:
DEMO Processes: design, product
development, sourcing, manu-
facturing, marketing, hiring and
training, IT
■ Rules and metrics: margin re-
quirements for DEMO, credit
terms, lead times, supplier terms
■ Norms: opportunity size needed
for investment, approach to
customers and channels
harvard business review • december 2008
page 62
Reinventing Your Business Model
on one job; they dilute their efforts by at-
tempting to do lots of things. In doing lots
of things, they do nothing really well.
One way to generate a precise customer
DEMO proposition is to think about the four
most common barriers keeping people from
getting particular jobs done: insufﬁcient
wealth, access, skill, or DEMO Software maker
Intuit devised QuickBooks to fulﬁll small-
business owners’ need to avoid running out of
cash. By fulﬁlling that job with greatly simpli-
DEMO accounting software, Intuit broke the skills
barrier that kept untrained small-business
DEMO from using more-complicated account-
ing packages. MinuteClinic, the drugstore-
based basic DEMO care provider, broke the
time barrier that kept people from visiting
DEMO doctor’s ofﬁce with minor health issues by
making nurse practitioners available without
appointments.
Designing a proﬁt formula. Ratan Tata
knew the only way to DEMO families off their
scooters and into cars would be to break
the wealth barrier by drastically decreasing
the price of the car. “What if DEMO can change the
game and make a car for one lakh?” Tata
wondered, envisioning a price point of around
US$2,500, less DEMO half the price of the
Hilti Sidesteps Commoditization
Hilti is capitalizing on a game-changing opportunity to increase proﬁtability by
turning products into a service. DEMO than sell tools (at lower and lower prices),
it’s selling a “just-the-tool-you-need-when-you-need-it, no-repair-or-storage-hassles”
service. Such a radical change in customer value proposition required a shift in all
parts of its business model.
Traditional
Power DEMO Company
Sales of industrial and
professional power tools and
accessories
Low margins,
high inventory turnover
Distribution channel, low-cost
manufacturing plants in devel-
oping countries, R&D
Proﬁt formula
Key resources
and processes
Customer
value
proposition
Hilti’s Tool Fleet
Management Service
Leasing a comprehensive
ﬂeet of tools to DEMO con-
tractors’ on-site productivity
Higher margins; asset heavy;
monthly payments DEMO tool
maintenance, repair, and
replacement
Strong direct-sales approach,
contract management, IT sys-
tems for inventory manage-
ment and repair, warehousing
harvard DEMO review • december 2008
cheapest car available. This, of course, had
dramatic ramiﬁcations for the proﬁt formula:
It required both a signiﬁcant DEMO in gross
margins and a radical reduction in many
elements of the cost structure. He knew,
however, he could still make money if he
could increase sales volume dramatically,
and he knew that his DEMO base of consumers
was potentially huge.
For Hilti, moving to a DEMO management
program required shifting assets from custom-
ers’ balance sheets to its own and generating
revenue through a lease/subscription model.
For a monthly DEMO, customers could have a full
complement of tools at their ﬁngertips, with
repair and maintenance included. This would
require a fundamental shift in DEMO major com-
ponents of the proﬁt formula: the revenue
stream (pricing, the staging of payments, and
how to think about volume), DEMO cost structure
(including added sales development and con-
tract management costs), and the supporting
margins and transaction velocity.
Identifying key resources and processes.
Having articulated the value proposition for
both the customer and the business, compa-
nies must then consider the key resources and
processes needed to DEMO that value. For a
professional services ﬁrm, for example, the key
resources are generally its people, and the
key processes are naturally people related
(training and development, for instance). For a
packaged goods DEMO, strong brands and
well-selected channel retailers might be the
key resources, and associated brand-building
and channel-management processes among
the critical processes.
Oftentimes, it’s not the individual resources
and processes that make the difference but
their DEMO to one another. Companies
will almost always need to integrate their
key resources and processes in a unique way
to get a job done DEMO for a set of custom-
ers. When they do, they almost DEMO create
enduring competitive advantage. Focusing
ﬁrst on the value proposition and the proﬁt
formula makes clear how those resources and
processes need to interrelate. DEMO example,
most general hospitals offer a value proposi-
tion that might be described as, “We’ll do
anything for anybody.” Being all things to
all people requires these hospitals to have
a vast collection of resources (specialists,
equipment, and so on) that can’t be knit
page DEMO
harvard business review • december 2008
together in any proprietary way. The DEMO
is not just a lack of differentiation but dis-
satisfaction.
By contrast, a hospital that focuses on a
speciﬁc value proposition can integrate its
resources and processes in a unique way that
delights customers. National Jewish DEMO
in Denver, for example, is organized around a
focused value proposition we’d characterize
as, “If you have a disease of the pulmonary
system, bring it here. We’ll deﬁne its root
cause and prescribe an effective therapy.”
Narrowing its focus has allowed National
Jewish to develop processes that DEMO the
ways in which its specialists and specialized
equipment work together.
For Tata Motors to fulﬁll the requirements
of its customer value proposition and DEMO
formula for the Nano, it had to reconceive
how a car DEMO designed, manufactured, and
distributed. Tata built a small team of fairly
young engineers who would not, like the
company’s more-experienced designers, be
DEMO and constrained in their thinking
by the automaker’s existing proﬁt formulas.
This team dramatically minimized the num-
ber of parts in the vehicle, resulting in a sig-
niﬁcant cost saving. Tata also reconceived its
supplier strategy, choosing to outsource a re-
markable 85% of the Nano’s components and
DEMO nearly 60% fewer vendors than normal to
reduce transaction costs and achieve better
economies of scale.
At the other end of the manufacturing
line, Tata is envisioning an entirely new way
of assembling and distributing its DEMO The
ultimate plan is to ship the modular com-
ponents of the vehicles to a combined net-
work of company-owned and independent
entrepreneur-owned assembly DEMO, which
will build them to order. The Nano will be
designed, built, distributed, and serviced in a
radically new way—one that could DEMO be
accomplished without a new business model.
And while the jury is still out, Ratan Tata may
solve a trafﬁc safety problem in the process.
For Hilti, the greatest challenge lay in train-
ing its sales representatives to do a thoroughly
new task. Fleet management is not a DEMO
hour sale; it takes days, weeks, even months of
meetings DEMO persuade customers to buy a pro-
gram instead of a product. Suddenly, ﬁeld reps
accustomed to dealing with crew leaders and
on-site purchasing managers in mobile trailers
Reinventing Your Business Model
found themselves staring down CEOs DEMO
CFOs across conference tables.
Additionally, leasing required new re-
sources—new people, more robust IT sys-
tems, and other new technologies—to design
and develop the appropriate packages and
then come to an agreement on monthly
payments. DEMO needed a process for main-
taining large arsenals of tools more inexpen-
sively and effectively than its customers
had. This required warehousing, an inven-
tory management system, and a supply of
replacement tools. On the customer manage-
ment side, Hilti developed a website that
enabled construction managers to view all the
tools in their ﬂeet and their usage rates. With
DEMO information readily available, the manag-
ers could easily handle the cost DEMO
associated with those assets.
Rules, norms, and metrics are often the last
element to emerge in a developing business
model. They may not DEMO fully envisioned
until the new product or service has been
road tested. Nor should they be. Business
models need to have the ﬂexibility to DEMO
in their early years.
When a New Business Model Is
Needed
Established companies should not undertake
business-model innovation lightly. They
can often create new DEMO that disrupt
competitors without fundamentally changing
their own business model. Procter & Gamble,
for example, developed a number of what
it calls “disruptive market innovations” with
such products as the Swiffer disposable mop
and duster DEMO Febreze, a new kind of air
freshener. Both innovations built on DEMO&G’s
existing business model and its established
dominance in household consumables.
There are clearly times, however, when cre-
ating new growth requires venturing DEMO only
into unknown market territory but also into
unknown business model territory. When? The
short answer is “When signiﬁcant changes are
needed to all four elements of your existing
model.” But it’s not always that simple. DEMO
agement judgment is clearly required. That
said, we have observed ﬁve DEMO circum-
stances that often require business model
change:
1. The opportunity to address through dis-
ruptive innovation the needs of large groups
page DEMO
of potential customers who are shut out of a
market entirely because DEMO solutions
are too expensive or complicated for them.
This includes the opportunity to democratize
products in emerging markets (or reach the
bottom of the pyramid), as Tata’s Nano does.
2. The opportunity to capitalize on DEMO brand-
new technology by wrapping a new business
model around it (DEMO and MP3 players)
or the opportunity to leverage a tested tech-
nology by bringing it to a whole new market
(say, by DEMO military technologies in the
commercial space or vice versa).
3. The opportunity to bring a job-to-be-
done focus where one does not yet DEMO
That’s common in industries where compa-
nies focus on products or customer segments,
which leads them to reﬁne existing products
more and more, increasing commoditization
over time. A jobs focus allows companies to
redeﬁne industry DEMO For example,
when FedEx entered the package delivery
market, it DEMO not try to compete through
lower prices or better marketing. Instead, DEMO
concentrated on fulﬁlling an entirely unmet
customer need to receive packages far, far
faster, and more reliably, than any service
then could. To do so, it had to integrate its
key processes and resources in a vastly more
efﬁcient way. The business model that re-
sulted from DEMO job-to-be-done emphasis
Dow Corning Embraces the Low End
Traditionally high-margin Dow Corning found new opportunities in low-margin
offerings by setting up a separate business DEMO that operates in an entirely different
way. By fundamentally differentiating its low-end and high-end offerings, the com-
pany avoided cannibalizing its traditional business even as it found new proﬁts at
the low end.
Established Business
Customized DEMO,
negotiated contracts
High-margin, high-
overhead retail prices pay
for value-added DEMO
R&D, sales, and service
orientation
Customer value
proposition
Proﬁt formula
Key resources
and processes
New Business Unit
No frills, bulk prices,
sold through the internet
Spot-market pricing, low
overhead to accommo-
date lower margins, high
throughput
IT system, lowest-cost
processes, maximum
automation
harvard business review • december 2008
Reinventing Your Business Model
gave FedEx a signiﬁcant DEMO advan-
tage that took UPS many years to copy.
4. The need to fend off low-end disrupters.
If the Nano is successful, it will threaten
other automobile makers, much as minimills
threatened the integrated steel mills a gener-
ation ago by making steel at signiﬁcantly
lower cost.
5. DEMO need to respond to a shifting basis
of competition. Inevitably, what DEMO an
acceptable solution in a market will change
over time, leading DEMO market segments to
commoditize. Hilti needed to change its busi-
ness model in part because of lower global
manufacturing costs; “good enough” low-end
entrants had begun chipping away at the
market for high-quality power tools.
Of DEMO, companies should not pursue
business model reinvention unless they are
conﬁdent DEMO the opportunity is large enough
to warrant the effort. And, there’s DEMO no
point in instituting a new business model
unless it’s not only new to the company but
in some way new or game-changing to DEMO
industry or market. To do otherwise would be
a waste of time and money.
These questions will help you evaluate
whether the challenge of DEMO model
innovation will yield acceptable results. An-
swering “yes” to all four greatly increases
the odds of successful execution:
•Can you nail the DEMO with a focused,
compelling customer value proposition?
•Can you devise a model in which all the
elements—the customer value proposition,
the DEMO formula, the key resources, and the
key processes—work together to get the job
done in the most efﬁcient way possible?
•Can you DEMO a new business develop-
ment process unfettered by the often negative
inﬂuences of your core business?
•Will the new business model disrupt
competitors?DEMO
Creating a new model for a new business
does not mean the current model is threat-
ened or should be changed. A new model
DEMO reinforces and complements the core
business, as Dow Corning discovered.
How DEMO Corning Got Out of Its
Own Way
When business model innovation is clearly
called for, success lies not only in getting
the model right but also in making sure the
page 65
Reinventing Your Business Model
When the Old
Model Will Work
You don’t DEMO need a new busi-
ness model to capitalize on a game-
changing opportunity. Sometimes,
as P&G did with its Swiffer, a com-
pany ﬁnds that its current model is
revolutionary in a new market.
DEMO will the old model do? When
you can fulﬁll the new DEMO
value proposition:
• With your current proﬁt formula
• Using most, if not all, of your cur-
rent key resources and processes
DEMO Using the same core metrics, rules,
and norms you now DEMO to run your
business
incumbent business doesn’t in some way pre-
vent the new model from creating value or
thriving. That was a problem DEMO Dow Corning
when it built a new business unit—with a new
proﬁt formula—from scratch.
For many years, Dow Corning had sold
thousands of silicone-based products and
provided sophisticated technical services to
an array of industries. After DEMO of proﬁtable
growth, however, a number of product areas
were stagnating. A strategic review uncovered
a critical insight: Its low-end product segment
was commoditizing. Many customers ex-
perienced in silicone application no longer
needed technical DEMO; they needed basic
products at low prices. This shift created an
DEMO for growth, but to exploit that
opportunity Dow Corning had to DEMO out
a way to serve these customers with a lower-
priced product. The problem was that both
the business model and the culture were
DEMO on high-priced, innovative product and
service packages. In 2002, in pursuit of what
was essentially a commodity business for
low-end customers, Dow Corning CEO Gary
Anderson asked executive Don Sheets to form
a team to DEMO a new business.
The team began by formulating a customer
value proposition that it believed would ful-
ﬁll the job to be done for DEMO price-driven
customers. It determined that the price point
had to drop 15% (which for a commoditizing
material was a huge reduction). As the
team analyzed what that new customer value
proposition would require, it realized reach-
ing that point was going to take a lot more
than DEMO eliminating services. Dramatic
price reduction would call for a different
proﬁt formula with a fundamentally lower
cost structure, which depended heavily on
developing a new IT system. To sell more
products faster, the company would need to
use the internet to automate processes and
reduce overhead as much DEMO possible.
Breaking the rules. As a mature and suc-
cessful company, DEMO Corning was full of
highly trained employees used to delivering
its high-touch, customized value proposition.
To automate, the new business would have to
DEMO far more standardized, which meant insti-
tuting different and, overall, DEMO stricter
rules. For example, order sizes would be
limited to a DEMO, larger-volume options; order
lead times would fall between two and four
harvard business review • december 2008
weeks (exceptions would cost extra); and
credit terms would be ﬁxed. There would be
charges if a DEMO required customer
service. The writing was on the wall: The new
DEMO would be low-touch, self-service, and
standardized. To succeed, Dow Corning DEMO
have to break the rules that had previously
guided its success.
Sheets next had to determine whether this
new venture, with its new rules, could succeed
within the conﬁnes of Dow Corning’s core
enterprise. He set up an experimental war
game to test how existing staff and systems
DEMO react to the requirements of the new
customer value proposition. He got crushed
as entrenched habits and existing processes
thwarted any attempt to change DEMO game. It
became clear that the corporate antibodies
would kill the initiative before it got off the
ground. The way forward was clear: The new
venture had to be free from existing rules
and free to DEMO what rules would be ap-
propriate in order for the new commodity
line of business to thrive. To nurture the
opportunity—and also protect the DEMO
model—a new business unit with a new brand
identity was needed. Xiameter was born.
Identifying new competencies. Following
the articulation of the new customer DEMO
proposition and new proﬁt formula, the
Xiameter team focused on the DEMO competen-
cies it would need, its key resources and pro-
cesses. DEMO technology, just a small
part of Dow Corning’s core competencies
at DEMO time, emerged as an essential part of
the now web-enabled business. DEMO also
needed employees who could make smart
decisions very quickly and who would thrive
in a fast-changing environment, ﬁlled initially
with lots of ambiguity. Clearly, new abilities
would have to be brought into the business.
Although Xiameter would be established
and run as a separate business unit, Don
Sheets and the Xiameter team did not want to
give up the DEMO advantage that deep
knowledge of the industry and of their own
products gave them. The challenge was to
tap into the expertise without importing
DEMO old-rules mind-set. Sheets conducted a
focused HR search within Dow Corning for
risk takers. During the interview process,
when he came across candidates DEMO the
right skills, he asked them to take the job
on DEMO spot, before they left the room. This
page 66
Reinventing Your Business Model
What Rules, Norms, and Metrics Are Standing DEMO Your Way?
In any business, a fundamental understanding of the DEMO model often fades into the mists of institutional memory, but it DEMO on in rules,
norms, and metrics put in place to DEMO the status quo (for example, “Gross margins must be at 40%”). They are the ﬁrst line of defense
against any new model’s DEMO root in an existing enterprise.
Financial
• Gross margins
• Opportunity size
• Unit pricing
• Unit margin
• Time to breakeven
• Net DEMO value calculations
• Fixed cost investment
• Credit items
Operational
• End-product quality
• Supplier quality
• Owned versus outsourced manufacturing
• Customer service
DEMO Channels
• Lead times
• Throughput
Other
• Pricing
• Performance demands
• Product-development life cycles
• Basis for individuals’ rewards and
incentives
• DEMO parameters
approach allowed him to cherry-pick those
who could make snap decisions and take
big risks.
The secret sauce: patience. Successful new
businesses typically revise their business
models four times or so on the road to DEMO
ability. While a well-considered business-
model-innovation process can often shorten
this cycle, successful incumbents must tolerate
initial failure and grasp the need for course
correction. In effect, companies have to focus
on learning and adjusting as much as on ex-
ecuting. We recommend companies with new
business models DEMO patient for growth (to
allow the market opportunity to unfold) but
impatient for proﬁt (as an early validation that
the model works). A proﬁtable business is the
best early indication of a viable model.
DEMO, to allow for the trial and error
that naturally accompanies the DEMO of
the new while also constructing a develop-
ment cycle that would produce results and
demonstrate feasibility with minimal re-
source outlay, Dow Corning kept the scale
of Xiameter’s operation small but developed
an aggressive timetable DEMO launch and set
the goal of becoming proﬁtable by the end
of year one.
Xiameter paid back Dow Corning’s invest-
ment in just three DEMO and went on to
become a major, transformative success. Be-
forehand, Dow Corning had had no online
sales component; now 30% of sales originate
online, nearly three times the industry aver-
age. Most of these customers are new to the
company. Far from cannibalizing existing cus-
tomers, Xiameter has actually supported the
main business, allowing Dow Corning’s sales-
people to more easily enforce premium pric-
ing for their core offerings while DEMO a
viable alternative for the price-conscious.
• • •
Established companies’ attempts at transfor-
mative growth typically spring from product
or technology innovations. Their DEMO are
often characterized by prolonged develop-
ment cycles and ﬁtful attempts to ﬁnd a
market. As the Apple iPod story that opened
this article DEMO, truly transformative
businesses are never exclusively about the
discovery and commercialization DEMO a great
technology. Their success comes from envel-
oping the new technology in an appropriate,
powerful business model.
Bob Higgins, the founder and general part-
ner of Highland Capital Partners, has seen
his share of venture success and failure in
his 20 years in the industry. He DEMO up the
importance and power of business model
innovation this way: DEMO think historically
where we [venture capitalists] fail is when we
back technology. Where we succeed is when
we back new business models.”
Reprint R0812C
DEMO order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or DEMO to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • december 2008
page 67
Reinventing Your Business Model
Further Reading
To Order
For Harvard Business Review DEMO and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized DEMO quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, DEMO e-mail
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
AR TICLES
Marketing Malpractice: The Cause and
the Cure
DEMO Clayton M. Christensen, Scott Cook, and
Taddy Hall
Harvard Business Review
December 2005
Product no. R0512D
Ted Levitt used to tell his Harvard DEMO
School students, “People don’t want a quarter-
inch drill—they want a DEMO hole.”
But 35 years later, marketers are still thinking
in terms DEMO products and ever-finer demo-
graphic segments. The structure of a market,
as seen from customers’ point of view, is very
simple. When people need to get a job done,
they hire a product or DEMO to do it for
them. The marketer’s task is to understand
what jobs periodically arise in customers’
lives for which they might hire products DEMO
company could make. New growth markets
are created when an innovative company
designs a product and then positions its
brand on a job for DEMO no optimal product
yet exists. In fact, companies that historically
have DEMO and measured markets by
product categories generally find that when
they instead segment by job, their market is
much larger (and their current DEMO much
smaller) than they had thought. This is great
news for DEMO companies hungry for growth.
Meeting the Challenge of Disruptive
Change
by Clayton M. Christensen and
Michael Overdorf
Harvard Business Review
March 2000
Product no. DEMO
Why can’t large companies capitalize on the
opportunities brought about by major, dis-
ruptive changes in their markets? It’s because
organizations, independent of the people in
them, have capabilities. And those capabilities
also define disabilities. As a company grows,
what it can and cannot do becomes DEMO
sharply defined in certain predictable ways.
The authors have analyzed those patterns
to create a framework managers can use to
assess the abilities and DEMO of their or-
ganization as a whole. They also suggest
ways large companies can capitalize on op-
portunities that normally would not fit in DEMO
their processes or values.
The Customer-Centered Innovation Map
by Lance A. Bettencourt and
Anthony W. Ulwick
Harvard Business Review
May 2008
Product no. R0805H
DEMO all know that people “hire” products and
services to get a job done. Surgeons hire scal-
pels to dissect soft tissue. Janitors hire soap
DEMO and paper towels to remove grime
from their hands. To find ways to innovate, it’s
critical to deconstruct the job the customer is
trying to get done from beginning to end, to
gain a complete view of all the points at
which a customer might desire more help
DEMO a product or service. A methodology
called job mapping helps companies analyze
the biggest drawbacks of the products and
services customers currently use and DEMO
opportunities for innovation. It begins with
breaking down the task the customer wants
to accomplish into the eight universal steps of
a job: 1) defining the objectives, 2) locating
the necessary inputs, 3) preparing the physical
environment, 4) confirming that everything is
ready, 5) DEMO the task, 6) monitoring its
progress, 7) making modifications as neces-
sary, and 8) concluding the job. Within each
step lies DEMO opportunities for making
the job simpler, easier, or faster. By locating
those opportunities, companies can discover
new ways to differentiate their offerings.
page 68
www.hbr.org
Competing in overcrowded
industries is no way to sustain
high performance. DEMO real
opportunity is to create blue
oceans of uncontested market
space.
Blue Ocean Strategy
by W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne
Included with this DEMO Harvard Business Review article:
70 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work
71 Blue DEMO Strategy
80 Further Reading
A list of related materials, with annotations DEMO guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint R0410D
Blue Ocean Strategy
The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice
The DEMO way to drive profitable growth?
Stop competing in overcrowded industries.
In those red oceans, companies try to out-
perform rivals to grab bigger slices of exist-
ing demand. As the space gets increasingly
crowded, profit and growth prospects
shrink. Products become commoditized.
Ever-more-intense competition turns the
water DEMO
How to avoid the fray? Kim and Mauborgne
recommend creating blue DEMO
uncontested market spaces where the
competition is irrelevant. In blue oceans,
you invent and capture new demand, and
you offer customers a leap in value while
also streamlining your costs. Results? Hand-
some profits, DEMO growth—and brand
equity that lasts for decades while rivals
scramble to catch up.
Consider Cirque du Soleil—which invented
a new industry that combined elements
DEMO traditional circus with elements
drawn from sophisticated theater. In just
20 years, Cirque raked in revenues that
Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey—the
world’s leading circus—needed more
than a century to attain.
How to begin creating DEMO oceans? Kim and Mauborgne offer these suggestions:
UNDERSTAND THE LOGIC DEMO BLUE
OCEAN STRATEGY
The logic behind blue ocean strategy is
counterintuitive:
• It’s not about technology innovation. Blue
oceans seldom result from technological
DEMO Often, the underlying technol-
ogy already exists—and blue ocean cre-
ators DEMO it to what buyers value. Compaq,
for example, used existing DEMO to
create its ProSignia server, which gave buy-
ers twice the DEMO and print capability of the
minicomputer at one-third the price.
• You don’t have to venture into distant wa-
ters to create blue oceans. DEMO blue
oceans are created from within, not be-
yond, the red oceans of existing industries.
Incumbents often create blue oceans
within their core DEMO Consider
the megaplexes introduced by AMC—an
established player in the movie-theater
industry. Megaplexes provided movie-
goers spectacular viewing experiences in
stadium-size theater complexes at DEMO
costs to theater owners.
APPLY BLUE OCEAN STRATEGIC MOVES
To apply blue ocean strategic moves:
Never use the competition as a bench-
mark. DEMO, make the competition irrele-
vant by creating a leap in value DEMO both
yourself and your customers. Ford did this
with the Model T. Ford could have tried be-
sting the fashionable, customized cars that
wealthy people bought for weekend jaunts
in the countryside. Instead, it offered a car
for everyday use that was far more afford-
able, durable, DEMO easy to use and fix than
rivals’ offerings. Model T sales boomed, and
Ford’s market share surged from 9% in 1908
to 61% in 1921.
Reduce your costs while also offering
customers more value. Cirque du DEMO
omitted costly elements of traditional cir-
cus, such as animal acts DEMO aisle conces-
sions. Its reduced cost structure enabled it
to provide sophisticated elements from
theater that appealed to adult audiences—
such as themes, original scores, and en-
chanting sets, all of which change year to
DEMO The added value lured adults who had
not gone to a circus for years and enticed
them to come back more frequently—
thereby increasing DEMO By offering
the best of circus and theater, Cirque cre-
ated DEMO market space that, as yet, has no
name—and no equals.
•
•
page 70
COPYRIGHT © 2007 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL DEMO RESERVED.
Competing in overcrowded industries is no way to sustain high
performance. The DEMO opportunity is to create blue oceans of
uncontested market space.
Blue Ocean Strategy
by W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne
A onetime accordion player, stilt walker, and
ﬁre-eater, Guy Laliberté is now CEO of one DEMO
Canada’s largest cultural exports, Cirque du
Soleil. Founded in 1984 by DEMO group of street
performers, Cirque has staged dozens of pro-
ductions DEMO by some 40 million people in 90
cities around the world. In 20 years, Cirque
has achieved revenues that Ringling Bros. and
Barnum & Bailey—the world’s leading cir-
cus—took more than a century to attain.
Cirque’s DEMO growth occurred in an un-
likely setting. The circus business was (DEMO still
is) in long-term decline. Alternative forms of
entertainment—sporting events, TV, and video
games—were casting a growing shadow. Chil-
dren, the mainstay DEMO the circus audience, pre-
ferred PlayStations to circus acts. There was
DEMO rising sentiment, fueled by animal rights
groups, against the use of animals, tradition-
ally an integral part of the circus. On the sup-
ply side, the star performers that Ringling and
the other circuses relied on to draw in the
crowds could often name their own terms. DEMO a
result, the industry was hit by steadily decreas-
ing audiences DEMO increasing costs. What’s
more, any new entrant to this business would
DEMO competing against a formidable incumbent
that for most of the last century had set the in-
dustry standard.
How did Cirque proﬁtably increase revenues
DEMO a factor of 22 over the last ten years in such
an unattractive environment? The tagline for
one of the ﬁrst Cirque productions is revealing:
“We reinvent the circus.” Cirque did not make
its money DEMO competing within the conﬁnes of
the existing industry or by stealing customers
from Ringling and the others. Instead it cre-
ated uncontested market space DEMO made the
competition irrelevant. It pulled in a whole
new group of customers who were tradition-
ally noncustomers of the industry—adults and
corporate clients DEMO had turned to theater,
opera, or ballet and were, therefore, prepared
to pay several times more than the price of a
conventional circus ticket for an unprece-
dented entertainment experience.
To understand the nature DEMO Cirque’s
achievement, you have to realize that the busi-
harvard business DEMO • october 2004
page 71
COPYRIGHT © 2004 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
W. Chan Kim (chan.kim@insead.edu) is
the Boston Consulting Group Bruce D.
DEMO Chair Professor of Strategy
and International Management at In-
sead in Fontainebleau, France.  Renée
Mauborgne (renee.mauborgne@
insead.edu) is the Insead Distinguished
Fellow DEMO a professor of strategy and
management at Insead. This article is
adapted from their forthcoming book
Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create Un-
contested Market Space and Make the
Competition Irrelevant (Harvard Business
School Press, DEMO).
ness universe consists of two distinct kinds of
space, which DEMO think of as red and blue
oceans. Red oceans represent all the industries
in existence today—the known market space.
In red oceans, industry boundaries are deﬁned
and accepted, and the competitive rules of the
game are well understood. Here, companies
try to outperform their rivals in order to grab a
greater share of existing demand. As the space
gets more DEMO more crowded, prospects for
proﬁts and growth are reduced. Products turn
DEMO commodities, and increasing competition
turns the water bloody.
Blue oceans denote DEMO the industries not in
existence today—the unknown market space,
untainted by competition. In blue oceans, de-
mand is created rather than fought over. There
is ample opportunity for growth that is both
proﬁtable and rapid. DEMO are two ways to cre-
ate blue oceans. In a few cases, companies can
give rise to completely new industries, as eBay
did DEMO the online auction industry. But in
most cases, a blue ocean DEMO created from within
a red ocean when a company alters the bound-
aries of an existing industry. As will become ev-
ident later, this is what Cirque did. In breaking
through the boundary traditionally separating
circus DEMO theater, it made a new and proﬁt-
able blue ocean from DEMO the red ocean of
the circus industry.
Cirque is just one of more than 150 blue
ocean creations that we have studied in over
DEMO industries, using data stretching back more
than 100 years. We analyzed DEMO that
created those blue oceans and their less suc-
cessful competitors, DEMO were caught in red
oceans. In studying these data, we have DEMO
served a consistent pattern of strategic think-
ing behind the creation of new markets and in-
dustries, what we call blue ocean strategy. The
logic behind blue ocean strategy parts with tra-
ditional models focused on DEMO in exist-
ing market space. Indeed, it can be argued that
DEMO failure to realize the differences be-
tween red and blue ocean strategy lies behind
the difﬁculties many companies encounter as
they try to break DEMO the competition.
In this article, we present the concept of
blue DEMO strategy and describe its deﬁning
characteristics. We assess the proﬁt and growth
consequences of blue oceans and discuss why
their creation is a rising DEMO for compa-
nies in the future. We believe that an under-
standing of blue ocean strategy will help to-
harvard business review • october DEMO
Blue Ocean Strategy
day’s companies as they struggle to thrive in an
accelerating and expanding business universe.
Blue and Red Oceans
Although the term DEMO be new, blue oceans
have always been with us. Look back DEMO years
and ask yourself which industries known
today were then unknown. The answer: Indus-
tries as basic as automobiles, music recording,
aviation, petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals,
and management consulting were unheard-of
or had just begun to emerge. Now turn the
clock back only 30 years and ask DEMO the
same question. Again, a plethora of multibil-
lion-dollar industries jump DEMO: mutual funds,
cellular telephones, biotechnology, discount
retailing, express package delivery, snow-
boards, coffee bars, and home videos, to name
DEMO few. Just three decades ago, none of these in-
dustries existed DEMO a meaningful way.
This time, put the clock forward 20 years.
DEMO yourself: How many industries that are un-
known today will exist DEMO? If history is any
predictor of the future, the answer is many.
Companies have a huge capacity to create new
industries and re-create DEMO ones, a fact
that is reﬂected in the deep changes that DEMO
been necessary in the way industries are classi-
ﬁed. The half-century-old Standard Industrial
Classiﬁcation (SIC) system was replaced in 1997
by the North DEMO Industry Classiﬁcation
System (NAICS). The new system expanded
the ten DEMO industry sectors into 20 to reﬂect
the emerging realities of new industry territo-
ries—blue oceans. The services sector under
the old system, for example, is now seven sec-
tors ranging from information to health care
and social assistance. Given that these classiﬁ-
cation systems are designed for standardization
DEMO continuity, such a replacement shows how
signiﬁcant a source of economic DEMO the
creation of blue oceans has been.
Looking forward, it seems DEMO to us that
blue oceans will remain the engine of growth.
Prospects in most established market spaces—
red oceans—are shrinking steadily. Technologi-
cal advances DEMO substantially improved in-
dustrial productivity, permitting suppliers to
produce an unprecedented DEMO of products
and services. And as trade barriers between na-
tions and regions fall and information on prod-
ucts and prices becomes instantly and DEMO
available, niche markets and monopoly havens
are continuing to disappear. At DEMO same time,
page 72
there is little evidence of any increase in de-
mand, at least in the developed markets,
where recent United Nations statistics even
point DEMO declining populations. The result is
that in more and more industries, DEMO is
overtaking demand.
This situation has inevitably hastened the
commoditization of products and services,
stoked price wars, and shrunk proﬁt margins.
According to recent studies, major American
brands in a variety of product and service cat-
egories have become more and more alike.
And as brands become DEMO similar, people
increasingly base purchase choices on price.
People no longer DEMO, as in the past, that
their laundry detergent be Tide. Nor do they
necessarily stick to Colgate when there is a
special promotion DEMO Crest, and vice versa. In
overcrowded industries, differentiating
brands becomes harder both in economic up-
turns and in downturns.
The Paradox of Strategy
DEMO, most companies seem be-
calmed in their red oceans. In a DEMO of busi-
ness launches in 108 companies, we found that
86% DEMO those new ventures were line exten-
sions—incremental improvements to existing
industry offerings—and a mere 14% were
aimed at creating new markets or industries.
While DEMO extensions did account for 62% of
the total revenues, they delivered DEMO 39% of
the total proﬁts. By contrast, the 14% invested
in DEMO new markets and industries deliv-
ered 38% of total revenues and a startling 61%
of total proﬁts.
So why the dramatic imbalance in favor DEMO
red oceans? Part of the explanation is that cor-
porate strategy DEMO heavily inﬂuenced by its
roots in military strategy. The very language of
strategy is deeply imbued with military refer-
ences—chief executive “ofﬁcers” in “headquar-
DEMO Snapshot of Blue Ocean Creation
The table on the next page identiﬁes the
strategic elements that were common to
blue ocean creations in three DEMO
industries in different eras. It is not in-
tended to be comprehensive in coverage
or exhaustive in content. We chose to
show American industries DEMO they
represented the largest and least-
regulated market during our study
period. The pattern of blue ocean
creations exempliﬁed by these three
industries is DEMO with what
we observed in the other industries
in our study.
harvard business review • october 2004
Blue Ocean Strategy
ters,” “troops” on DEMO “front lines.” Described
this way, strategy is all about red ocean DEMO
tition. It is about confronting an opponent and
driving him off a battleﬁeld of limited terri-
tory. Blue ocean strategy, by contrast, is DEMO
doing business where there is no competitor. It
is about creating new land, not dividing up ex-
isting land. Focusing on the red ocean there-
fore means accepting the key constraining fac-
tors of war—limited terrain DEMO the need to
beat an enemy to succeed. And it means deny-
ing the distinctive strength of the business
world—the capacity to create new DEMO
space that is uncontested.
The tendency of corporate strategy to focus
on winning against rivals was exacerbated by
the meteoric rise of Japanese companies DEMO the
1970s and 1980s. For the ﬁrst time in corporate
history, DEMO were deserting Western
companies in droves. As competition mounted
in the global marketplace, a slew of red ocean
strategies emerged, all arguing that DEMO
tion was at the core of corporate success and
failure. Today, DEMO hardly talks about strategy
without using the language of competition.
The term that best symbolizes this is “competi-
tive advantage.” In the competitive-advantage
worldview, companies are often driven to out-
perform rivals and capture greater shares DEMO ex-
isting market space.
Of course competition matters. But by fo-
cusing on competition, scholars, companies,
and consultants have ignored two very DEMO
tant—and, we would argue, far more lucra-
tive—aspects of strategy: DEMO is to ﬁnd and
develop markets where there is little or no
competition—blue oceans—and the other is
to exploit and protect blue oceans. These
DEMO are very different from those to
which strategists have devoted most of their
attention.
Toward Blue Ocean Strategy
What kind of strategic logic is DEMO to guide
the creation of blue oceans? To answer that
question, we looked back over 100 years of
data on blue ocean creation DEMO see what pat-
terns could be discerned. Some of our data are
presented in the exhibit “A Snapshot of Blue
Ocean Creation.” It shows DEMO overview of key
blue ocean creations in three industries that
closely touch people’s lives: autos—how peo-
ple get to work; computers—what people use
DEMO work; and movie theaters—where people
page 73
Blue Ocean Strategy
Key blue ocean creations
Ford Model T
Unveiled in DEMO, the Model T was the ﬁrst mass-produced
car, priced so that many Americans could afford it.
GM’s “car for every purse and purpose”
DEMO created a blue ocean in 1924 by injecting fun and
fashion into the car.
Japanese fuel-efﬁcient autos
Japanese automakers created a blue ocean in DEMO mid-1970s
with small, reliable lines of cars.
Chrysler minivan
With its DEMO minivan, Chrysler created a new class of auto-
mobile that was DEMO easy to use as a car but had the passenger
space of a van.
CTR’s tabulating machine
In 1914, CTR created the business machine industry by
simplifying, modularizing, and leasing tabulating machines.
CTR later changed DEMO name to IBM.
IBM 650 electronic computer and System/360
In 1952, IBM created the business computer industry by simpli-
fying and reducing the power and price of existing technology.
And it exploded the blue ocean DEMO by the 650 when in
1964 it unveiled the System/360, DEMO ﬁrst modularized com-
puter system.
Apple personal computer
Although it was not the ﬁrst home computer, the all-in-one,
simple-to-use Apple II was a blue ocean creation when it
appeared in 1978.
Compaq PC servers
Compaq DEMO a blue ocean in 1992 with its ProSignia
server, which gave DEMO twice the ﬁle and print capability
of the minicomputer at one-third the price.
Dell built-to-order computers
In the mid-1990s, Dell created a blue ocean in a highly
competitive industry by creating a new purchase and delivery
DEMO for buyers.
Nickelodeon
The ﬁrst Nickelodeon opened its doors in 1905, DEMO short
films around-the-clock to working-class audiences for ﬁve cents.
Palace theaters
Created by Roxy Rothapfel in 1914, these theaters provided
an operalike environment for cinema viewing at an affordable
price.
AMC multiplex
In the 1960s, the number of multiplexes in America’s subur-
ban shopping malls mushroomed. The multiplex DEMO viewers
greater choice while reducing owners’ costs.
AMC megaplex
Megaplexes, introduced DEMO 1995, offered every current block-
buster and provided spectacular viewing experiences DEMO
theater complexes as big as stadiums, at a lower cost to
DEMO owners.
Was the blue ocean
created by a new
entrant or an
incumbent?
Was it driven by
technology pioneering
or value pioneering?
DEMO entrant Value pioneering*
(mostly existing technologies)
Incumbent Value pioneering
(some new technologies)
Incumbent Value pioneering
(some new technologies)
Incumbent Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
Incumbent Value pioneering
(some new technologies)DEMO
Incumbent Value pioneering
(650: mostly existing technologies)
Value and technology pioneering
(System/360: new and existing
technologies)
New entrant Value DEMO
(mostly existing technologies)
Incumbent
Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
New entrant Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
New entrant Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
Incumbent Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
DEMO Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
At the time of the DEMO
ocean creation, was
the industry attractive
or unattractive?
Unattractive
Attractive
DEMO
Unattractive
Unattractive
Nonexistent
Unattractive
Nonexistent
Unattractive
Nonexistent
Attractive
Unattractive
Incumbent Value pioneering
(mostly existing technologies)
Unattractive
*Driven by value pioneering does not mean that technologies were not involved. Rather, it means that
the deﬁning technologies used had largely been in existence, whether in that industry or elsewhere.
harvard business review • october 2004
page 74
Movie Theaters
Copyright © DEMO Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
Computers
Automobiles
In blue oceans, demand
is created rather than
fought over. There is
ample opportunity for
growth that is both
profitable and rapid.
go after DEMO for enjoyment. We found that:
Blue oceans are not about technology inno-
vation. Leading-edge technology is sometimes
involved in the creation of blue DEMO, but it
is not a deﬁning feature of them. This is DEMO
true even in industries that are technology in-
tensive. As the exhibit reveals, across all three
representative industries, blue oceans were
seldom the DEMO of technological innovation
per se; the underlying technology was often
already DEMO existence. Even Ford’s revolutionary
assembly line can be traced to the meatpack-
ing industry in America. Like those within the
auto industry, the blue oceans within the com-
puter industry did not come about through
technology DEMO alone but by linking
technology to what buyers valued. As with the
IBM 650 and the Compaq PC server, this often
involved simplifying the technology.
Incumbents often create blue oceans—and
usually within their core businesses. GM, the
Japanese automakers, and Chrysler were es-
tablished players when they created blue
oceans in the auto industry. So were CTR and
its later DEMO, IBM, and Compaq in the
computer industry. And in the cinema indus-
try, the same can be said of palace theaters
and AMC. Of the companies listed here, only
Ford, Apple, Dell, and DEMO were new
entrants in their industries; the ﬁrst three
were start-ups, and the fourth was an estab-
lished player entering an industry that DEMO
new to it. This suggests that incumbents are
not at a disadvantage in creating new market
spaces. Moreover, the blue oceans made by in-
cumbents were usually within their core busi-
nesses. In fact, as the exhibit shows, most blue
oceans are created from within, not beyond,DEMO
red oceans of existing industries. This chal-
lenges the view that new markets are in dis-
tant waters. Blue oceans are right next to DEMO
in every industry.
Company and industry are the wrong units
of analysis. The traditional units of strategic
analysis—company and industry—have little
explanatory power when DEMO comes to analyz-
ing how and why blue oceans are created.
There is no consistently excellent company;
the same company can be brilliant DEMO one time
and wrongheaded at another. Every company
rises and falls over time. Likewise, there is no
perpetually excellent industry; relative attrac-
tiveness DEMO driven largely by the creation of
blue oceans from within them.
harvard business review • october 2004
Blue Ocean Strategy
The most appropriate unit DEMO analysis for ex-
plaining the creation of blue oceans is the stra-
tegic move—the set of managerial actions and
decisions involved in making a DEMO market-
creating business offering. Compaq, for exam-
ple, is considered by many people to be “unsuc-
cessful” because it was acquired by Hewlett-
DEMO in 2001 and ceased to be a company.
But the ﬁrm’s ultimate fate does not invalidate
the smart strategic move Compaq made that led
DEMO the creation of the multibillion-dollar market
in PC servers, a move DEMO was a key cause of the
company’s powerful comeback in the 1990s.
Creating blue oceans builds brands. So pow-
erful is blue ocean strategy DEMO a blue ocean
strategic move can create brand equity that
lasts for decades. Almost all of the companies
listed in the exhibit are remembered DEMO no
small part for the blue oceans they created
long ago. Very few people alive today were
around when the ﬁrst Model T rolled DEMO
Henry Ford’s assembly line in 1908, but the
company’s brand still DEMO from that blue
ocean move. IBM, too, is often regarded as an
“American institution” largely for the blue
oceans it created in computing; the 360 series
was its equivalent of the Model T.
Our ﬁndings DEMO encouraging for executives
at the large, established corporations that are
traditionally DEMO as the victims of new market
space creation. For what they reveal is that
large R&D budgets are not the key to creating
DEMO market space. The key is making the right
strategic moves. What’s more, companies that
understand what drives a good strategic move
will be well placed to create multiple blue
oceans over time, thereby continuing to de-
liver high growth and proﬁts over a sustained
period. The creation of DEMO oceans, in other
words, is a product of strategy and as such is
very much a product of managerial action.
The Deﬁning Characteristics
DEMO research shows several common charac-
teristics across strategic moves that create blue
oceans. We found that the creators of blue
oceans, in sharp contrast to companies playing
by traditional rules, never use the competition
as a benchmark. Instead they make it irrele-
vant by creating a leap in DEMO for both buy-
ers and the company itself. (The exhibit “Red
DEMO Versus Blue Ocean Strategy” compares
the chief characteristics of these two strategy
models.)
page 75
Blue Ocean Strategy
Perhaps the most important feature of blue
ocean strategy DEMO that it rejects the fundamen-
tal tenet of conventional strategy: that DEMO trade-
off exists between value and cost. According to
this thesis, DEMO can either create greater
value for customers at a higher cost or create
reasonable value at a lower cost. In other
words, strategy is essentially a choice between
differentiation and low cost. But when it
comes DEMO creating blue oceans, the evidence
shows that successful companies pursue differ-
DEMO and low cost simultaneously.
To see how this is done, let DEMO go back to Cir-
que du Soleil. At the time of Cirque’s debut,
circuses focused on benchmarking one an-
other and maximizing their DEMO of shrinking
demand by tweaking traditional circus acts.
This included trying to secure more and better-
known clowns and lion tamers, efforts that
raised circuses’ cost structure without substan-
tially altering the circus experience. The result
DEMO rising costs without rising revenues and a
downward spiral in overall circus demand.
Enter Cirque. Instead of following the conven-
tional logic of outpacing DEMO competition by of-
fering a better solution to the given problem—
creating a circus with even greater fun and
thrills—it redeﬁned the problem itself DEMO offer-
ing people the fun and thrill of the circus and
the intellectual sophistication and artistic rich-
ness of the theater.
In designing performances DEMO landed both
these punches, Cirque had to reevaluate the
components of DEMO traditional circus offering.
What the company found was that many of
the elements considered essential to the fun
Red Ocean Versus Blue Ocean Strategy
DEMO imperatives for red ocean and blue ocean
strategies are starkly different.
Red ocean strategy
Compete in existing market space.
Beat the competition.
Exploit existing DEMO
Make the value/cost trade-off.
Align the whole system of a com-
pany’s activities with its strategic
choice of differentiation or low cost.
Blue DEMO strategy
Create uncontested market space.
Make the competition irrelevant.
Create and capture new demand.
Break the value/cost trade-off.
Align the whole system of DEMO company’s
activities in pursuit of differentiation
and low cost.
harvard business review • october 2004
and thrill of the circus were unnecessary and
in DEMO cases costly. For instance, most cir-
cuses offer animal acts. These DEMO a heavy eco-
nomic burden, because circuses have to shell
out DEMO only for the animals but also for their
training, medical care, housing, insurance, and
transportation. Yet Cirque found that the appe-
tite DEMO animal shows was rapidly diminishing
because of rising public concern about the
treatment of circus animals and the ethics of
exhibiting them.
Similarly, although traditional circuses pro-
moted their performers as stars, Cirque real-
ized that the public no longer thought of circus
artists as stars, at least not in the movie star
sense. Cirque did away with traditional three-
DEMO shows, too. Not only did these create con-
fusion among spectators DEMO to switch their
attention from one ring to another, they also
DEMO the number of performers needed,
with obvious cost implications. And while aisle
concession sales appeared to be a good way to
generate revenue, the high prices discouraged
parents from making purchases and made
them feel DEMO were being taken for a ride.
Cirque found that the lasting allure of the
traditional circus came down to just three fac-
tors: the clowns, the tent, and the classic acro-
batic acts. So Cirque DEMO the clowns, while
shifting their humor away from slapstick to a
DEMO enchanting, sophisticated style. It glam-
orized the tent, which many circuses had aban-
doned in favor of rented venues. Realizing that
the tent, more than anything else, captured
the magic of the circus, Cirque DEMO this
classic symbol with a glorious external ﬁnish
and a high level of audience comfort. Gone
were the sawdust and hard benches. Acrobats
and DEMO thrilling performers were retained,
but Cirque reduced their roles and made their
acts more elegant by adding artistic ﬂair.
Even as Cirque stripped DEMO some of the
traditional circus offerings, it injected new el-
ements DEMO from the world of theater. For
instance, unlike traditional circuses featuring
DEMO series of unrelated acts, each Cirque cre-
ation resembles a theater DEMO in that
it has a theme and story line. Although the
themes are intentionally vague, they bring
harmony and an intellectual element to the
acts. Cirque also borrows ideas from Broad-
way. For example, rather than putting on the
traditional “once and for all” show, Cirque
mounts multiple productions based on differ-
page 76
Copyright © 2004 Harvard Business School
DEMO Corporation. All rights reserved.
ent themes and story lines. As with Broadway
productions, too, each DEMO show has an
original musical score, which drives the per-
formance, lighting, and timing of the acts,
rather than the other way around. The pro-
ductions feature abstract and spiritual dance,
an idea DEMO from theater and ballet. By in-
troducing these factors, Cirque has DEMO
highly sophisticated entertainments. And by
staging multiple productions, Cirque gives
people DEMO to come to the circus more of-
ten, thereby increasing revenues.
DEMO offers the best of both circus and
theater. And by eliminating many of the most
expensive elements of the circus, it has been
able to dramatically reduce its cost structure,
achieving both differentiation and low DEMO
(For a depiction of the economics underpin-
ning blue ocean strategy, see the exhibit “The
Simultaneous Pursuit of Differentiation and
The Simultaneous Pursuit DEMO Differentiation
and Low Cost
A blue ocean is created in the region
where a company’s actions favorably
affect both its cost structure and its
DEMO proposition to buyers. Cost savings
are made from eliminating and reduc-
ing the factors an industry competes on.
Buyer value is lifted by raising DEMO
creating elements the industry has
never offered. Over time, costs are DEMO
duced further as scale economies kick
in, due to the high DEMO volumes that
superior value generates.
Costs
Blue
Ocean
Buyer Value
harvard business review • october 2004
Blue Ocean Strategy
Low Cost.”)
By driving DEMO costs while simultaneously
driving up value for buyers, a company can
DEMO a leap in value for both itself and its
customers. Since buyer value comes from the
utility and price a company offers, and a com-
pany generates value for itself through cost
structure and price, blue ocean strategy is
achieved only when the whole system of a
company’s DEMO, price, and cost activities is
properly aligned. It is this whole-system ap-
proach that makes the creation of blue oceans
a sustainable strategy. DEMO ocean strategy inte-
grates the range of a ﬁrm’s functional and op-
erational activities.
A rejection of the trade-off between low cost
and differentiation DEMO a fundamental
change in strategic mind-set—we cannot em-
phasize enough how fundamental a shift it is.
The red ocean assumption that industry struc-
tural DEMO are a given and ﬁrms are
forced to compete within them is based on an
intellectual worldview that academics call the
structuralist view, or environmental determin-
ism. According to this view, companies and
managers are largely at the mercy of economic
forces greater than themselves. Blue ocean
strategies, by contrast, are based on a world-
view in which market boundaries and indus-
tries can be reconstructed by the actions and
beliefs of DEMO players. We call this the re-
constructionist view.
The founders of Cirque du Soleil clearly did
not feel constrained to act within the conﬁnes
DEMO their industry. Indeed, is Cirque really a cir-
cus with all DEMO it has eliminated, reduced,
raised, and created? Or is DEMO theater? If it is the-
ater, then what genre—Broadway show, DEMO,
ballet? The magic of Cirque was created
through a reconstruction DEMO elements drawn
from all of these alternatives. In the end, Cir-
DEMO is none of them and a little of all of them.
From within the red oceans of theater and cir-
cus, Cirque has created a blue ocean of uncon-
tested market space that has, as yet, no name.
Barriers to Imitation
Companies that create blue oceans usually
reap the beneﬁts without credible challenges
for ten to 15 years, as was the case with Cirque
du Soleil, Home Depot, Federal Express,
DEMO Airlines, and CNN, to name just a
few. The reason is that blue ocean strategy cre-
ates considerable economic and cognitive bar-
page DEMO
Copyright © 2004 Harvard Business School
Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
Blue Ocean Strategy
riers to imitation.
For a start, adopting a blue ocean creator’s
business model is easier to imagine than to
do. Because DEMO ocean creators immediately
attract customers in large volumes, they are
able DEMO generate scale economies very rapidly,
putting would-be imitators at an immediate
and continuing cost disadvantage. The huge
economies of scale in purchasing that DEMO
Mart enjoys, for example, have signiﬁcantly
discouraged other companies from imitating
its business model. The immediate attraction
of large numbers of customers can DEMO create
network externalities. The more customers
eBay has online, the more DEMO the auc-
tion site becomes for both sellers and buyers
of wares, giving users few incentives to go
elsewhere.
When imitation requires companies to make
changes to their whole system of activities, or-
ganizational politics may impede a would-be
competitor’s ability to switch to the divergent
business model DEMO a blue ocean strategy. For in-
stance, airlines trying to follow DEMO ex-
ample of offering the speed of air travel with
the ﬂexibility and cost of driving would have
faced major revisions in routing, training, mar-
keting, and pricing, not to mention culture.
Few established airlines had the ﬂexibility to
make such extensive organizational and oper-
ating changes DEMO Imitating a whole-
system approach is not an easy feat.
The cognitive barriers can be just as effec-
tive. When a company offers a DEMO in value, it
rapidly earns brand buzz and a loyal following
DEMO the marketplace. Experience shows that
even the most expensive marketing campaigns
struggle to unseat a blue ocean creator. Mi-
crosoft, for example, has DEMO trying for more
than ten years to occupy the center of the blue
ocean that Intuit created with its ﬁnancial soft-
ware product Quicken. DEMO all of its efforts
and all of its investment, Microsoft has DEMO
been able to unseat Intuit as the industry
leader.
In other situations, attempts to imitate a
blue ocean creator conﬂict with the imitator’s
existing brand image. The Body Shop, for ex-
ample, shuns top models DEMO makes no prom-
ises of eternal youth and beauty. For the estab-
lished cosmetic brands like Estée Lauder and
L’Oréal, imitation was very difﬁcult, because it
would have signaled a complete invalidation of
their current images, which are based on
promises of eternal youth and beauty.
A Consistent Pattern
While our conceptual articulation of the pat-
tern may be new, blue ocean strategy has al-
ways existed, whether or not companies have
been conscious of the fact. Just consider the
striking parallels between the DEMO du Soleil
theater-circus experience and Ford’s creation
of the Model T.
At the end of the nineteenth century, the au-
tomobile industry was small and unattractive.
More than 500 automakers in America com-
peted in turning DEMO handmade luxury cars
that cost around $1,500 and were enormously
unpopular with all but the very rich. Anticar
activists tore up roads, ringed parked cars with
barbed wire, and organized boycotts of car-
driving businessmen and politicians. Woodrow
Wilson caught the spirit of the times when he
DEMO in 1906 that “nothing has spread socialistic
feeling more than the automobile.” He called it
“a picture of the arrogance of wealth.”
Instead of DEMO to beat the competition
and steal a share of existing demand from
other automakers, Ford reconstructed the in-
dustry boundaries of cars and horse-drawn car-
riages to create a blue ocean. At the time,
horse-drawn DEMO were the primary means
of local transportation across America. The car-
riage had two distinct advantages over cars.
Horses could easily negotiate the bumps DEMO
mud that stymied cars—especially in rain and
snow—on the nation’s ubiquitous dirt roads.
And horses and carriages were much easier to
maintain than the DEMO autos of the time,
which frequently broke down, requiring expert
DEMO who were expensive and in short
supply. It was Henry Ford’s understanding of
these advantages that showed him how he
could break away from DEMO competition and
unlock enormous untapped demand.
Ford called the Model T the car “for the
great multitude, constructed of the best mate-
rials.” Like Cirque, the Ford Motor Company
made the competition irrelevant. Instead of
creating fashionable, customized cars for
weekends in the countryside, a luxury few
DEMO justify, Ford built a car that, like the
horse-drawn carriage, DEMO for everyday use.
The Model T came in just one color, DEMO,
and there were few optional extras. It was reli-
able and durable, designed to travel effort-
lessly over dirt roads in rain, DEMO, or sun-
harvard business review • october 2004
page 78
Blue Ocean Strategy
shine. It was easy to use and ﬁx. People DEMO
learn to drive it in a day. And like Cirque, Ford
DEMO outside the industry for a price point,
looking at horse-drawn carriages ($400), not
other autos. In 1908, the ﬁrst Model T DEMO
$850; in 1909, the price dropped to $609, and
by DEMO it was down to $290. In this way, Ford
converted buyers DEMO horse-drawn carriages
into car buyers—just as Cirque turned the-
atergoers into circusgoers. Sales of the Model
T boomed. Ford’s market share surged from
9% DEMO 1908 to 61% in 1921, and by 1923, a ma-
jority of American households had a car.
Even as Ford offered the mass DEMO buyers a
leap in value, the company also achieved the
lowest DEMO structure in the industry, much as
Cirque did later. By keeping DEMO cars highly
standardized with limited options and inter-
changeable parts, Ford DEMO able to scrap the
prevailing manufacturing system in which cars
were constructed by skilled craftsmen who
swarmed around one workstation and built a
car DEMO by piece from start to ﬁnish. Ford’s
revolutionary assembly line replaced crafts-
men with unskilled laborers, each of whom
worked quickly and efﬁciently on one small
task. This allowed Ford to make a car in just
DEMO days—21 days was the industry norm—
creating huge cost savings.
• • •
Blue and red oceans have always coexisted and
always will. Practical DEMO, therefore, de-
mands that companies understand the strate-
gic logic of both types of oceans. At present,
competing in red oceans dominates DEMO ﬁeld
of strategy in theory and in practice, even as
businesses’ DEMO to create blue oceans intensi-
ﬁes. It is time to even the scales in the ﬁeld of
strategy with a better balance of efforts DEMO
both oceans. For although blue ocean strate-
gists have always existed, DEMO the most part
their strategies have been largely unconscious.
But once corporations realize that the strate-
gies for creating and capturing blue oceans
have DEMO different underlying logic from red
ocean strategies, they will be able DEMO create
many more blue oceans in the future.
Reprint R0410D
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • october 2004
page 79
Blue Ocean Strategy
Further Reading
BO OK
Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make the
Competition Irrelevant
by W. Chan DEMO and Renée Mauborgne
Harvard Business School Publishing
December 2004
Product no. 6190
The authors provide recent examples of busi-
nesses that have created blue DEMO and
present a framework for crafting blue-ocean
strategies: 1) Eliminate factors in your industry
that no longer have value. For example, wine-
maker Yellow Tail eliminated fancy terminol-
ogy in its marketing communications. 2) Re-
duce factors that overserve customers and
increase cost structure for no gain. DEMO Tail
initially offered just two choices: red or white
wine. 3) Raise factors that remove compro-
mises buyers must make. Yellow Tail priced DEMO
wines above the budget category of wines
but below those deemed “premium.” 4) Cre-
ate factors that add new sources of value. Yel-
low Tail provided ease of selection and the fun
and adventure of Australian DEMO By late
2003, Yellow Tail had become the United
States’ best-selling DEMO wine in a 750-ml bot-
tle—outstripping all California labels.
AR TICLE
MarketBusting: Strategies for
Exceptional Business Growth
by Rita Gunther McGrath and
Ian C. MacMillan
Harvard Business Review
March 2005
Product no. 9408
The authors provide DEMO for creating
blue oceans within your existing business. 1)
Redefine your unit of business—what you
bill customers for—to reflect what customers
value. For DEMO, Mexican cement company
Cemex shifted its unit of business from cubic
DEMO of cement to delivery window: the right
amount of concrete delivered DEMO needed.
2) Boost your performance on key metrics.
Cemex reoriented its DEMO systems, lo-
gistics, and delivery infrastructure to improve
truck utilization—a key metric for delivery
businesses. 3) Improve customers’ perfor-
mance. UPS handles shipping and repair for
laptop makers—freeing these customers from
employing expensive maintenance staff, and
getting laptops back in owners’ hands quickly.
The service enhances laptop DEMO produc-
tivity and lowers their costs.
page 80
To Order
For Harvard Business Review reprints and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized and quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
DEMO 617-783-7626, or e-mai
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
www.hbr.org
Research shows that
enterprises fail at execution
because they go straight DEMO
structural reorganization and
neglect the most powerful
drivers of effectiveness—
decision rights and
information flow.
The Secrets to
Successful Strategy
Execution
by Gary L. DEMO, Karla L. Martin, and
Elizabeth Powers
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
82 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core DEMO
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work
83 The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
94 Further Reading
A list of related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint DEMO
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
The Idea in Brief The Idea DEMO Practice
A brilliant strategy may put you on the
competitive map. But only solid execution
keeps you there. Unfortunately, most com-
panies struggle with implementation.
That’s because they overrely on structural
changes, such as reorganization, DEMO execute
their strategy.
Though structural change has its place in
execution, DEMO produces only short-term
gains. For example, one company reduced
its management DEMO as part of a strategy
to address disappointing performance.
Costs plummeted initially, but the layers
soon crept back in.
Research by Neilson, Martin, and Powers
shows that execution exemplars focus their
efforts on two levers DEMO more powerful
than structural change:
• Clarifying decision rights—for instance,
specifying who “owns” each decision and
who must provide input
• Ensuring DEMO flows where it’s
needed—such as promoting managers
laterally so they build networks needed
for the cross-unit collaboration critical to
a new strategy
Tackle decision DEMO and information
flows first, and only then alter organiza-
tional structures DEMO realign incentives to
support those moves.
The following levers matter most for success-
ful strategy execution:
DECISION RIGHTS
• Ensure that everyone in DEMO company
knows which decisions and actions they’re
responsible for.
Example:
In one global consumer-goods company,
decisions made by divisional and geographic
leaders DEMO overridden by corporate func-
tional leaders who controlled resource allo-
cations. Decisions stalled. Overhead costs
mounted as divisions added staff to create
bulletproof cases DEMO challenging corporate
decisions. To support a new strategy hinging
on sharper customer focus, the CEO desig-
nated accountability for profits unambigu-
ously to the divisions.
• Encourage higher-level managers to dele-
gate operational decisions.
Example:
DEMO one global charitable organization,
country-level managers’ inability to dele-
gate led to decision paralysis. So the leader-
ship team encouraged country managers
to DEMO standard operational tasks.
This freed these managers to focus on de-
veloping the strategies needed to fulfill the
organization’s mission.
INFORMATION FLOW
• Make DEMO important information about the
competitive environment flows quickly to
corporate headquarters. That way, the top
team can identify patterns and promulgate
best practices throughout the company.
Example:
At one insurance company, accurate in-
formation about projects’ viability was
censored as it moved up the hierarchy. To
improve DEMO flow to senior levels
of management, the company took steps
to DEMO a more open, informal culture.
•
•
Top executives began mingling DEMO unit
leaders during management meetings
and held regular brown-bag lunches
where people discussed the company’s
most pressing issues.
Facilitate information flow across organiza-
tional DEMO
Example:
To better manage relationships with
large, cross-product customers, a B2B
company needed its units to talk with
one another. It charged DEMO newly created
customer-focused marketing group with
encouraging cross-company communi-
cation. The group issued regular reports
showing performance against targets (by
product and geography) DEMO supplied
root-cause analyses of performance gaps.
Quarterly performance-management
meetings further fostered the trust re-
quired for collaboration.
Help field and line employees understand
how DEMO day-to-day choices affect your
company’s bottom line.
Example:
At a financial services firm, salespeople
routinely crafted customized one-off deals
with clients that cost the company more
than it made in revenues. Sales didn’t un-
derstand DEMO cost and complexity implica-
tions of these transactions. Management
addressed the information misalignment
by adopting a “smart customization” ap-
proach to sales. For customized DEMO, it
established standardized back-office pro-
cesses (such as risk assessment). It also de-
veloped analytical support tools to arm
salespeople with accurate DEMO on
the cost implications of their proposed
transactions. Profitability improved.
page 82
COPYRIGHT © 2008 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Research shows that enterprises fail at execution because they go
straight to DEMO reorganization and neglect the most powerful
drivers of effectiveness—decision rights and information flow.
The Secrets to
Successful Strategy
Execution
by Gary L. Neilson, Karla L. Martin, and
Elizabeth Powers
A brilliant strategy, blockbuster product, or
breakthrough technology can put you on the
competitive map, but only solid execution can
keep you there. You have to be able to deliver
DEMO your intent. Unfortunately, the majority of
companies aren’t very good at DEMO, by their own
admission. Over the past ﬁve years, we have
invited many thousands of employees (about
25% of whom came from executive ranks) to
complete an online assessment of their organi-
zations’ capabilities, DEMO process that’s generated
a database of 125,000 proﬁles representing
more than 1,000 companies, government
agencies, and not-for-proﬁts in over 50 coun-
DEMO Employees at three out of every ﬁve
companies rated their organization weak at
execution—that is, when asked if they agreed
with the statement “Important strategic and
operational decisions are quickly translated
into action,” the majority DEMO no.
Execution is the result of thousands of de-
cisions made every day by employees acting
according to the information they have and
their DEMO self-interest. In our work helping
more than 250 companies learn to execute
more effectively, we’ve identiﬁed four funda-
mental building blocks executives can use to
inﬂuence those actions—clarifying decision
rights, designing information ﬂows, aligning
motivators, and making changes to struc-
ture. (For simplicity’s sake we refer to them
as decision rights, information, motivators,
and structure.)
In DEMO to improve performance, most or-
ganizations go right to structural measures
DEMO moving lines around the org chart
seems the most obvious solution and the
changes are visible and concrete. Such steps
generally reap some short-term DEMO
quickly, but in so doing address only the
symptoms of dysfunction, not its root causes.
Several years later, companies usually end up
in the same place they started. Structural
change can and should be part DEMO the path to
improved execution, but it’s best to think of DEMO
as the capstone, not the cornerstone, of any
organizational transformation. In fact, our
research shows that actions having to do with
harvard business review • june 2008
page 83
COPYRIGHT © 2008 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL DEMO CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Gary L. Neilson (gary.neilson@
booz.com) is a senior vice president in
DEMO Chicago office of Booz & Company,
a management-consulting firm. He is a
coauthor of “The Passive-Aggressive
Organization” (HBR, October 2005).
Karla DEMO Martin (karla.martin@booz
.com) is a principal in the firm’s San
Francisco office. Elizabeth Powers
(elizabeth.powers@booz.com) is a
principal in the New York DEMO
harvard business review • june 2008
decision rights and information are far more
important—about twice as effective—as im-
provements made to the other two DEMO
blocks. (See the exhibit “What Matters Most
to Strategy Execution.”)
DEMO, for example, the case of a global con-
sumer packaged-goods company that lurched
down the reorganization path in the early
1990s. (We have altered identifying details
in this and other cases that follow.) Dis-
appointed with company performance, senior
management did what most companies were
doing at that time: They restructured. They
eliminated some layers of management and
broadened spans of control. Management-
stafﬁng costs quickly fell by 18%. Eight years
DEMO, however, it was déjà vu. The layers had
crept back in, and spans of control had once
again narrowed. In addressing only structure,
management had attacked the visible symp-
toms of poor performance but DEMO the under-
lying cause—how people made decisions and
how they were held accountable.
This time, management looked beyond lines
and boxes to the mechanics of how work got
done. Instead of searching for ways to strip DEMO
costs, they focused on improving execution—
and in the process discovered DEMO true reasons
for the performance shortfall. Managers didn’t
have a clear sense of their respective roles and
responsibilities. They did not intuitively under-
stand DEMO decisions were theirs to make.
Moreover, the link between performance and
DEMO was weak. This was a company long
on micromanaging and second-guessing, DEMO
short on accountability. Middle managers
spent 40% of their time justifying and report-
ing upward or questioning the tactical deci-
sions of their direct DEMO
Armed with this understanding, the com-
pany designed a new management DEMO that
established who was accountable for what and
made the connection between performance
and reward. For instance, the norm at this
company, not DEMO in the industry, had
been to promote people quickly, within 18
months to two years, before they had a chance
to see their initiatives through. As a result,
managers at every level kept doing DEMO old
jobs even after they had been promoted, peer-
ing over DEMO shoulders of the direct reports
who were now in charge of their projects and,
all too frequently, taking over. Today, people
stay DEMO their positions longer so they can follow
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
through on their own initiatives, and they’re
still around when the fruits of their labors start
to kick in. What’s more, results from those ini-
tiatives continue to count in their performance
reviews for some DEMO after they’ve been
promoted, forcing managers to live with the
expectations DEMO set in their previous jobs.
As a consequence, forecasting has become
DEMO accurate and reliable. These actions did
yield a structure with fewer layers and greater
spans of control, but that was a side effect,
not the primary focus, of the changes.
The Elements of Strong Execution
Our conclusions arise out of decades of practi-
cal application and intensive DEMO Nearly
ﬁve years ago, we and our colleagues set out to
DEMO empirical data to identify the actions
that were most effective in enabling an organi-
zation to implement strategy. What particular
ways of restructuring, motivating, improving
information ﬂows, and clarifying decision
rights mattered the most? We started by draw-
ing up a list of 17 traits, each corresponding to
one or more of the four building blocks we
knew could DEMO effective execution—traits
like the free ﬂow of information across organi-
zational boundaries or the degree to which
senior leaders refrain from getting involved
in DEMO decisions. With these factors in
mind, we developed an online proﬁler DEMO
allows individuals to assess the execution
capabilities of their organizations. Over the
next four years or so, we collected data from
many thousands of proﬁles, which in turn
allowed us to more precisely calibrate the im-
pact of each trait on an organization’s ability
to execute. That allowed DEMO to rank all 17 traits
in order of their relative inﬂuence. (DEMO the
exhibit “The 17 Fundamental Traits of Organi-
zational Effectiveness.)
Ranking the traits makes clear how impor-
tant decision rights and information are DEMO ef-
fective strategy execution. The ﬁrst eight traits
map directly to decision rights and informa-
tion. Only three of the 17 traits relate to DEMO
ture, and none of those ranks higher than 13th.
We’ll walk DEMO the top ﬁve traits here.
1. Everyone has a good idea of the deci-
sions and actions for which he or she is re-
DEMO In companies strong on execution,
71% of individuals agree with this statement;
that ﬁgure drops to 32% in organizations weak
on execution.
DEMO 84
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
Blurring of decision rights tends to DEMO as
a company matures. Young organizations are
generally too busy getting things done to de-
ﬁne roles and responsibilities clearly at the
outset. And DEMO should they? In a small com-
pany, it’s not so difﬁcult to know what other
people are up to. So for a time, things work
out well enough. As the company grows,
however, executives come and go, bringing
in with them and taking away different expec-
tations, and over time the approval process
gets ever more convoluted and murky. It be-
comes increasingly unclear where one person’s
accountability begins and DEMO ends.
One global consumer-durables company
found this out the hard way. It was so rife
with people making competing and conﬂict-
ing decisions that DEMO was hard to ﬁnd anyone
below the CEO who felt truly accountable for
proﬁtability. The company was organized into
16 product divisions aggregated into DEMO
geographic groups—North America, Europe,
and International. Each of the divisions DEMO
charged with reaching explicit performance
targets, but functional staff at corporate
DEMO controlled spending targets—
how R&D dollars were allocated, for in-
DEMO Decisions made by divisional and
geographic leaders were routinely overridden
by functional leaders. Overhead costs began
to mount as the divisions added staff to DEMO
them create bulletproof cases to challenge
corporate decisions.
Decisions stalled while divisions negoti-
ated with functions, each layer weighing in
with questions. Functional staffers in the
What Matters Most to Strategy Execution
When a company fails DEMO execute its strategy, the ﬁrst thing managers often think
to do DEMO restructure. But our research shows that the fundamentals of good execu-
tion start with clarifying decision rights and making sure information ﬂows
where it DEMO to go. If you get those right, the correct structure and DEMO
often become obvious.
Information
Decision Rights
Motivators
Structure
54
50
26
25
Relative Strength (out of 100)
harvard business review • june 2008
divisions (ﬁnancial analysts, for example)
often deferred to their higher-ups DEMO corpo-
rate rather than their division vice president,
since functional leaders were responsible for
rewards and promotions. Only the CEO and
his executive DEMO had the discretion to
resolve disputes. All of these symptoms fed
on one another and collectively hampered
execution—until a new CEO came in.
The DEMO chief executive chose to focus
less on cost control and more on proﬁtable
growth by redeﬁning the divisions to focus on
consumers. As part DEMO the new organizational
model, the CEO designated accountability for
proﬁts unambiguously DEMO the divisions and
also gave them the authority to draw on func-
tional activities to support their goals (as well
as more control of the budget). Corporate
functional roles and decision rights were re-
cast DEMO better support the divisions’ needs and
also to build the cross-divisional links neces-
sary for developing the global capabilities of
the business as a DEMO For the most part,
the functional leaders understood the mar-
ket realities—and that change entailed some
adjustments to the operating model of the
DEMO It helped that the CEO brought
them into the organizational redesign pro-
cess, so that the new model wasn’t something
imposed on them as much as it was some-
thing they engaged in and built together.
DEMO Important information about the com-
petitive environment gets to headquarters
quickly. On average, 77% of individuals in
strong-execution organizations agree with
this statement, DEMO only 45% of those
in weak-execution organizations do.
Headquarters can serve a powerful func-
tion in identifying patterns and promulgating
best practices throughout business DEMO
and geographic regions. But it can play this
coordinating role only if it has accurate and
up-to-date market intelligence. Otherwise, it
will tend to impose its own agenda and poli-
cies rather than defer to operations DEMO are
much closer to the customer.
Consider the case of heavy-equipment man-
ufacturer Caterpillar.1 Today it is a highly
successful $45 billion global company, but a
generation ago, Caterpillar’s organization was
so badly misaligned that its very existence was
threatened. Decision rights were hoarded at
the top by DEMO general ofﬁces located
at headquarters in Peoria, Illinois, while
page 85
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
The 17 Fundamental Traits of Organizational DEMO
From our survey research drawn from more than 26,000 people in 31 companies, we have distilled the traits that make organi-
zations effective at implementing strategy. Here they are, in order of importance.
RANK
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
DEMO
15
16
17
STR E N G T H
INDEX
ORGANIZATION TRAIT
Everyone has a good idea of the decisions and actions for
which DEMO or she is responsible.
Important information about the competitive environment
gets to headquarters quickly.
Once made, decisions are rarely second-guessed.
(OUT OF 100)DEMO
81
68
58
Information ﬂows freely across organizational boundaries. 58
Field and line employees usually have the information
they need to understand the bottom-line DEMO of their
day-to-day choices.
Line managers have access to the metrics they need to
measure the key drivers of their business.
Managers up the DEMO get involved in operating decisions.
Conﬂicting messages are rarely sent to the market.
The individual performance-appraisal process differenti-
ates among high, adequate, and DEMO performers.
The ability to deliver on performance commitments
strongly inﬂuences career advancement and
compensation.
It is more accurate to describe the culture of this DEMO
nization as “persuade and cajole” than “command and
control.”
The primary role of corporate staff here is to support the
business units rather than DEMO audit them.
Promotions can be lateral moves (from one position to
DEMO on the same level in the hierarchy).
Fast-track employees here can expect promotions more
frequently than every three years.
On average, middle managers here have ﬁve or more
direct reports.
If the ﬁrm has a DEMO year, but a particular division has a
good year, the division head would still get a bonus.
Besides pay, many other things motivate individuals to do
a good job.
55
48
32
32
32
32
DEMO
29
29
23
19
13
10
harvard business review • june 2008
BUILDING BLOCKS   ■ Decision Rights
■ Information
■ Motivators
■ Structure
DEMO 86
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
About the Data
We tested organizational DEMO
ness by having people ﬁll out an on-
line diagnostic, a DEMO comprising 19
questions (17 that describe organiza-
tional traits and two DEMO describe
outcomes).
To determine which of the 17 traits
in our proﬁler are most strongly asso-
ciated with excellence in execution,
we DEMO at 31 companies in our
database for which we had responses
from at least 150 individual (anony-
mously completed) proﬁles, for a total
of 26,743 responses. Applying regres-
sion analysis to each of the DEMO data
sets, we correlated the 17 traits with
our measure of DEMO effec-
tiveness, which we deﬁned as an
afﬁrmative response to the DEMO
statement, “Important strategic and
operational decisions are quickly
translated into action.” DEMO we
ranked the traits in order, according
to the number of DEMO sets in which
the trait exhibited a signiﬁcant corre-
lation with our measure of success
within a 90% conﬁdence interval.
Finally, we indexed the result to a
100-point scale. The top trait—
“Everyone has a good DEMO of the
decisions and actions for which he or
she is responsible”—exhibited a sig-
niﬁcant positive correlation with our
success indicator in 25 of DEMO 31 data
sets, for an index score of 81.
harvard business DEMO • june 2008
much of the information needed to make
those decisions resided in the ﬁeld with sales
managers. “It just took a long DEMO to get deci-
sions going up and down the functional silos,
and they really weren’t good business deci-
sions; they were more functional decisions,”
noted one ﬁeld executive. Current CEO Jim
Owens, then a managing director in Indo-
nesia, told us that such information that did
make it to the top had been “whitewashed
and varnished several times DEMO along the
way.” Cut off from information about the
external market, DEMO executives focused on
the organization’s internal workings, overana-
lyzing issues and DEMO decisions
made at lower levels, costing the company
opportunities in fast-moving DEMO
Pricing, for example, was based on cost and
determined not by market realities but by the
pricing general ofﬁce in Peoria. Sales represen-
DEMO across the world lost sale after sale to
Komatsu, whose competitive DEMO consis-
tently beat Caterpillar’s. In 1982, the company
posted the ﬁrst DEMO loss in its almost-60-
year history. In 1983 and 1984, it DEMO $1 million
a day, seven days a week. By the end DEMO 1984,
Caterpillar had lost a billion dollars. By 1988,
then-CEO George Schaefer stood atop an en-
trenched bureaucracy that was, in his words,
“telling me what I wanted to hear, not what I
needed to know.” So, he convened a task force
of “renegade” middle managers and tasked
them with charting Caterpillar’s future.
Ironically, the way to ensure that the right
information ﬂowed to headquarters was to
make sure DEMO right decisions were made
much further down the organization. By dele-
gating operational responsibility to the peo-
ple closer to the action, top executives were
free to focus on more global strategic issues.
Accordingly, the company reorganized into
business units, making each accountable for
its own P&L statement. The functional gen-
eral ofﬁces that had been all-powerful ceased
to DEMO, literally overnight. Their talent and
expertise, including engineering, pricing, and
manufacturing, were parceled out to the new
business units, which could DEMO design their
own products, develop their own manufactur-
ing processes and DEMO, and set their own
prices. The move dramatically decentralized
decision rights, giving the units control over
market decisions. The business unit P&Ls DEMO
now measured consistently across the enter-
prise, as return on assets DEMO the univer-
sal measure of success. With this accurate,
up-to-date, DEMO directly comparable informa-
tion, senior decision makers at headquarters
could make DEMO strategic choices and trade-
offs rather than use outdated sales data to
make ineffective, tactical marketing decisions.
Within 18 months, the company was DEMO
ing in the new model. “This was a revolution
that became a renaissance,” Owens recalls, “a
spectacular transformation of a kind of slug-
gish company into one that actually has en-
trepreneurial zeal. And that DEMO was
very quick because it was decisive and it was
complete; DEMO was thorough; it was universal,
worldwide, all at one time.”
3. Once made, decisions are rarely
second-guessed. Whether someone is second-
guessing depends on your vantage point. A
more senior and broader enterprise perspec-
DEMO can add value to a decision, but managers
up the line DEMO not be adding incremental
value; instead, they may be stalling progress
by redoing their subordinates’ jobs while, in
effect, shirking their own. DEMO our research, 71%
of respondents in weak-execution companies
thought that decisions DEMO being second-
guessed, whereas only 45% of those from
strong-execution organizations DEMO that way.
Recently, we worked with a global charita-
ble organization DEMO to alleviating pov-
erty. It had a problem others might envy: DEMO
was suffering from the strain brought on by a
rapid growth in donations and a correspond-
ing increase in the depth and breadth of DEMO
program offerings. As you might expect, this
nonproﬁt was populated with DEMO on a
mission who took intense personal ownership
of projects. It did not reward the delegation of
even the most mundane administrative tasks.
Country-level DEMO, for example, would
personally oversee copier repairs. Managers’
inability to delegate led to decision paralysis
and a lack of accountability as the organiza-
DEMO grew. Second-guessing was an art form.
When there was doubt over who was empow-
ered to make a decision, the default was
often to have a series of meetings in which no
decision was reached. When DEMO were
ﬁnally made, they had generally been vetted
by so many DEMO that no one person could
be held accountable. An effort to expedite
decision-making through restructuring—by
collocating key leaders with subject-matter
page 87
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
Second-guessing was an
art form: When decisions
were finally made, they
had generally been vetted
by so many parties that
no one person could be
held accountable.
harvard business review DEMO june 2008
experts in newly established central and
regional centers of excellence—became in-
stead another logjam. Key managers still
weren’t sure of their right DEMO take advantage
of these centers, so they didn’t.
The nonproﬁt’s management DEMO directors
went back to the drawing board. We worked
with them to design a decision-making map, a
tool to help identify where different types of
decisions should be taken, and with it they
clariﬁed and enhanced decision rights at all
levels of management. All managers were
then actively DEMO to delegate standard
operational tasks. Once people had a clear
idea of what decisions they should and should
not be making, holding them accountable for
decisions felt fair. What’s more, now they
could focus their energies on the organiza-
tion’s mission. Clarifying decision rights and
responsibilities also improved DEMO organiza-
tion’s ability to track individual achievement,
which helped it chart new and appealing
career-advancement paths.
4. Information ﬂows freely across organi-
zational DEMO When information does
not ﬂow horizontally across different parts of
the company, units behave like silos, forfeiting
economies of scale and the transfer DEMO best
practices. Moreover, the organization as a
whole loses the opportunity DEMO develop a cadre
of up-and-coming managers well versed in all
aspects of the company’s operations. Our re-
search indicates that only 21% of respondents
DEMO weak-execution companies thought in-
formation ﬂowed freely across organizational
boundaries whereas 55% of those from strong-
execution ﬁrms did. Since scores for even the
DEMO companies are pretty low, though, this
is an issue that most companies can work on.
A cautionary tale comes from a business-
to-business DEMO whose customer and
product teams failed to collaborate in serving
a key segment: large, cross-product customers.
To manage relationships with important
clients, the company had established a
customer-focused marketing group, which
developed customer outreach programs, inno-
vative pricing models, and tailored promo-
tions and discounts. But DEMO group issued no
clear and consistent reports of its initiatives
and progress to the product units and had
difﬁculty securing time with the regular DEMO
unit management to discuss key performance
issues. Each product unit communicated and
planned in its own way, and it took tremen-
dous energy for the customer group to under-
stand the units’ various priorities and tailor
DEMO to each one. So the units
were not aware, and had DEMO faith, that this
new division was making constructive inroads
into a DEMO customer segment. Conversely (and
predictably), the customer team felt the DEMO
paid only perfunctory attention to its plans
and couldn’t get their cooperation on issues
critical to multiproduct customers, such as
potential trade-offs and volume discounts.
Historically, this lack of collaboration hadn’t
been a problem because the company had
been the dominant player in a high-margin
market. But as DEMO market became more com-
petitive, customers began to view the ﬁrm DEMO
unreliable and, generally, as a difﬁcult supplier,
and they became increasingly reluctant to
enter into favorable relationships.
Once the issues became clear, though, the
solution wasn’t terribly complicated, involv-
ing little more than DEMO the groups to talk
to one another. The customer division be-
came responsible for issuing regular reports
to the product units showing performance
against DEMO, by product and geographic
region, and for supplying a supporting root-
cause analysis. A standing performance-
management meeting was placed on the
schedule DEMO quarter, creating a forum for
exchanging information face-to-face and dis-
cussing DEMO issues. These moves bred
the broader organizational trust required
for collaboration.
5. Field and line employees usually have
the information they need to understand
DEMO bottom-line impact of their day-to-day
choices. Rational decisions are necessarily
bounded by the information available to em-
ployees. If managers don’t understand what it
DEMO cost to capture an incremental dollar in
revenue, they will always DEMO the incre-
mental revenue. They can hardly be faulted,
even if their decision is—in the light of full
information—wrong. Our research shows that
DEMO of individuals in strong-execution organi-
zations agree that ﬁeld and line employees
have the information they need to understand
the bottom-line impact of their DEMO This
ﬁgure plummets to 28% in weak-execution
organizations.
We saw this unhealthy dynamic play out at
a large, diversiﬁed ﬁnancial-services client,
page 88
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
To help companies
construct an
improvement DEMO
with the greatest impact,
we’ve developed an
organizational-change
simulator.
harvard business review • june 2008
which had been built through a series of DEMO
cessful mergers of small regional banks. In
combining operations, managers had DEMO
to separate front-ofﬁce bankers who sold
loans from back-ofﬁce support groups who
did risk assessments, placing each in a differ-
ent reporting relationship and, in many cases,
in different locations. Unfortunately, they
failed to DEMO the necessary information
and motivation links to ensure smooth opera-
tions. As a result, each pursued different, and
often competing, goals.
For example, salespeople would routinely
enter into highly customized one-off deals
with clients that cost the company more than
they made in revenues. Sales did not DEMO a
clear understanding of the cost and complexity
implications of these transactions. Without
sufﬁcient information, sales staff believed
that the back-end people were sabotaging
their deals, while the support groups consid-
ered the front-end people to be cowboys. At
year’s end, when the data were ﬁnally recon-
ciled, management would bemoan the sharp
increase in operational costs, which often
DEMO the proﬁt from these transactions.
Executives addressed this information mis-
alignment by adopting a “smart customiza-
tion” approach to sales. They standardized
the end-to-end DEMO used in the majority
of deals and allowed for customization only
in select circumstances. For these customized
deals, they established clear back-ofﬁce pro-
cesses and analytical support tools to arm
salespeople with accurate information on the
DEMO implications of the proposed transac-
tions. At the same time, they DEMO out com-
mon reporting standards and tools for both
the front- and back-ofﬁce operations to ensure
that each group had access to the same DEMO
and metrics when making decisions. Once
each side understood the business realities
confronted by the other, they cooperated
more effectively, acting in the DEMO com-
pany’s best interests—and there were no
more year-end surprises.
Creating a Transformation Program
The four building blocks that managers can
use to improve DEMO execution—decision
rights, information, structure, and motivators—
are inextricably linked. Unclear DEMO rights
not only paralyze decision making but also
impede information ﬂow, DEMO perfor-
mance from rewards, and prompt work-
arounds that subvert formal DEMO lines.
Blocking information results in poor deci-
sions, limited career development, and a rein-
forcement of structural silos. So what to do
about DEMO?
Since each organization is different and
faces a unique set of internal and external
variables, there is no universal answer to that
question. The ﬁrst step is to identify the
sources of the problem. In DEMO work, we often
begin by having a company’s employees take
our DEMO survey and consolidating the re-
sults. The more people in the organization
who take the survey, the better.
Once executives understand their company’s
areas of weakness, they can take any number
of actions. The exhibit, DEMO Improve-
ments to the Building Blocks: Some Sample
Tactics” shows 15 DEMO steps that can have
an impact on performance. (The options
listed DEMO only a sampling of the dozens
of choices managers might make.) DEMO of these
actions are geared toward strengthening one
or more of the 17 traits. For example, if you
were to take steps to “clarify and streamline
decision making” you could potentially
strengthen two traits: “Everyone has a good
idea of the decisions and actions for which
he or DEMO is responsible,” and “Once made, de-
cisions are rarely second-guessed.”
DEMO certainly wouldn’t want to put 15 initia-
tives in a single transformation program.
Most organizations don’t have the managerial
capacity or organizational appetite to DEMO on
more than ﬁve or six at a time. And as we’ve
stressed, you should ﬁrst take steps to address
decision rights and information, and then
design the necessary changes to motivators
and structure to support the new design.
To help companies understand their short-
comings and construct DEMO improvement pro-
gram that will have the greatest impact,
we have developed an organizational-change
simulator. This interactive tool accompanies
the proﬁler, allowing you to try out different
elements of a change program virtually, to
see which ones will best target your com-
pany’s particular area of weakness. (For an
overview of the simulation process, see the
sidebar “Test Drive Your Organization’s
Transformation.”)
To get a sense of the process from DEMO
to end—from taking the diagnostic proﬁler, to
page 89
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
formulating your strategy, to launching your
organizational transformation—consider the
experience of a leading insurance company
we’ll call Goodward DEMO Goodward
was a successful company with strong capital
reserves and steady revenue and customer
growth. Still, its leadership wanted to further
enhance execution to deliver on an ambitious
ﬁve-year strategic agenda that included aggres-
sive targets DEMO customer growth, revenue
increases, and cost reduction, which would re-
DEMO a new level of teamwork. While there
were pockets of cross-unit collaboration within
the company, it was far more common for each
unit to focus on its own goals, making it difﬁ-
Mapping Improvements to the Building
Blocks: Some Sample Tactics
Companies can take a host of steps to improve their ability to execute strategy. The
15 here are only DEMO of the possible examples. Every one strengthens one or more
of the building blocks executives can use to improve their strategy-execution capabil-
ity: clarifying decision rights, improving information, establishing the right motiva-
tors, and restructuring the organization.
Focus corporate staff on supporting
business-unit decision making.
Clarify and DEMO decision making at each
operating level.
Focus headquarters on important strategic
questions.
Create centers of excellence by consolidating simi-
lar functions into a single DEMO unit.
Assign process owners to coordinate
activities that span organizational functions.
Establish individual performance measures.
Improve ﬁeld-to-headquarters information ﬂow.
Deﬁne and distribute daily operating DEMO to the
ﬁeld or line.
Create cross-functional teams.
Introduce differentiating performance awards.
Expand nonmonetary rewards to recognize
exceptional performers.
Increase position tenure.
Institute lateral DEMO and rotations.
Broaden spans of control.
BUILDING BLOCKS
Decision Rights
harvard business review • june 2008
Information
Motivators
Structure
cult to spare resources to DEMO another
unit’s goals. In many cases there was little in-
centive to do so anyway: Unit A’s goals might
require the involvement of Unit B to succeed,
but Unit B’s goals might not include support-
DEMO Unit A’s effort.
The company had initiated a number of en-
terprisewide projects over the years, which
had been completed on time and on budget,
but these often had to be reworked because
stakeholder needs DEMO been sufﬁciently
taken into account. After launching a shared-
services center, DEMO example, the company had
to revisit its operating model and processes
DEMO units began hiring shadow staff to focus
on priority work that the center wouldn’t ex-
pedite. The center might decide what technol-
ogy applications, for instance, to develop on
its own rather than set priorities according to
what was most important to the organization.
In a similar way, major product launches
were hindered by insufﬁcient coordination
among departments. The marketing DEMO
ment would develop new coverage options
without asking the claims-processing group
whether it had the ability to process the
claims. Since it didn’t, processors had to cre-
ate expensive manual work-arounds when the
new kinds of DEMO started pouring in. Nor
did marketing ask the actuarial department
how these products would affect the risk pro-
ﬁle and reimbursement expenses of the DEMO
pany, and for some of the new products, costs
did indeed increase.
To identify the greatest barriers to building
a stronger execution culture, Goodward In-
surance gave the diagnostic survey to all of its
7,DEMO employees and compared the orga-
nization’s scores on the 17 traits with those
from strong-execution companies. Numer-
ous previous surveys (employee-satisfaction,
among others) had elicited qualitative com-
ments identifying the barriers to execution
excellence. But the diagnostic survey gave
the company quantiﬁable data that it could
analyze DEMO group and by management level
to determine which barriers were most hin-
dering the people actually charged with
execution. As it turned out, middle manage-
ment was far more pessimistic than the top
executives in their DEMO of the organi-
zation’s execution ability. Their input became
especially critical to the change agenda ulti-
mately adopted.
page 90
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
Through the survey, Goodward Insurance
uncovered impediments to execution in three
of the most inﬂuential organizational traits:
DEMO Information did not ﬂow freely across
organizational boundaries. Sharing informa-
tion was never one of Goodward’s hall-
marks, but managers had always dismissed
the mounting anecdotal evidence of poor
cross-divisional information ﬂow as “some
other group’s DEMO The organizational
diagnostic data, however, exposed such plau-
sible deniability as an inadequate excuse. In
fact, when the CEO reviewed the proﬁler
results with his direct reports, he held up the
chart on cross-group information ﬂows and
declared, “We’ve been discussing this problem
for several years, DEMO yet you always say that
it’s so-and-so’s problem, not mine. Sixty-seven
DEMO of [our] respondents said that they
do not think information ﬂows freely across
divisions. This is not so-and-so’s problem—it’s
our problem. You just don’t DEMO results that
low [unless it comes] from everywhere. We
are all on the hook for ﬁxing this.”
Contributing to this lack of horizontal
information DEMO was a dearth of lateral pro-
motions. Because Goodward had always
promoted up rather than over and up, most
middle and senior managers remained within
a single group. They were not adequately
apprised of the activities DEMO the other groups,
nor did they have a network of contacts across
the organization.
• Important information about the com-
petitive environment did DEMO get to head-
quarters quickly. The diagnostic data and
Test-Drive Your Organization’s Transformation
You know your organization could perform
better. You are faced with DEMO of levers
you could conceivably pull if you had unlim-
ited time and resources. But you don’t. You
operate in the real world.
How, then, do you make the most-educated
and cost-efﬁcient decisions about which
change initiatives to implement? We’ve de-
veloped a way to test the efﬁcacy of speciﬁc
actions (such as clarifying decision rights,
forming cross-functional teams, or expanding
nonmonetary rewards) without risking sig-
niﬁcant amounts of time DEMO money. You can
go to www.simulator-orgeffectiveness.com
to assemble and try out various ﬁve-step
organizational-change programs and assess
which would be the most effective and DEMO
cient in improving execution at your company.
You begin the simulation by selecting one
of seven organizational proﬁles that most
resembles the current state DEMO your organiza-
tion. If you’re not sure, you can take a DEMO
minute diagnostic survey. This online survey
automatically generates an organizational
proﬁle and baseline execution-effectiveness
score. (Although 100 is a perfect score, no-
body DEMO perfect; even the most effective com-
panies often score in the DEMO and 70s.)
Having established your baseline, you use
the simulator DEMO chart a possible course you’d
like to take to improve your execution capa-
bilities by selecting ﬁve out of a possible 28
actions. Ideally, these moves should directly
address the weakest links in your organiza-
tional DEMO To help you make the right
choices, the simulator offers insights DEMO shed
further light on how a proposed action in-
ﬂuences particular organizational elements.
Once you have made your selections, the
simulator executes the steps you’ve elected
and processes them through a web-based en-
gine that evaluates DEMO using empirical
relationships identiﬁed from 31 companies
representing more than 26,000 data observa-
tions. It then generates a bar chart indicating
how much DEMO organization’s execution score
has improved and where it now stands in re-
lation to the highest-performing companies
from our research and the scores of DEMO peo-
ple like you who have used the simulator start-
ing from the same original proﬁle you did. If
you wish, you may then advance to the next
harvard business review • june 2008
round and DEMO another ﬁve actions. What
you will see is illustrated below.
The beauty of the simulator is its ability to
consider—consequence-free—the impact on
execution of DEMO combinations of possi-
ble actions. Each simulation includes only
two rounds, DEMO you can run the simulation
as many times as you like. The simulator
has also been used for team competition
within organizations, and we’ve found that
it engenders very engaging and productive
dialogue among senior executives.
DEMO the simulator cannot capture all of
the unique situations an organization might
face, it is a useful tool for assessing and build-
ing a targeted and effective organization-
transformation program. It serves as a
vehicle to DEMO thinking about the im-
pact of various changes, saving untold amounts
DEMO time and resources in the process.
page 91
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
subsequent surveys and interviews with mid-
DEMO management revealed that the wrong
information was moving up the org chart.
Mundane day-to-day decisions were esca-
lated to the executive level—the top team
DEMO to approve midlevel hiring decisions, for
instance, and bonuses of $1,000—limiting
Goodward’s agility in responding to competi-
tors’ moves, customers’ needs, DEMO changes in
the broader marketplace. Meanwhile, more
important information was so DEMO ﬁltered
as it moved up the hierarchy that it was all
but worthless for rendering key verdicts. Even
if lower-level managers knew that a DEMO
project could never work for highly valid
reasons, they would not DEMO that
dim view to the top team. Nonstarters not
only started, DEMO kept going. For instance,
the company had a project under way to
create new incentives for its brokers. Even
though this approach had DEMO previously
tried without success, no one spoke up in meet-
ings DEMO stopped the project because it was a
priority for one of the top-team members.
• No one had a good idea of the decisions
DEMO actions for which he or she was respon-
sible. The general lack of information ﬂow
extended to decision rights, as few managers
understood where their authority ended and
another’s began. Accountability even for day-
to-day decisions DEMO unclear, and managers
did not know whom to ask for clariﬁcation.
DEMO, confusion over decision rights
led to second-guessing. Fifty-ﬁve percent of
respondents DEMO that decisions were regularly
second-guessed at Goodward.
To Goodward’s credit, its DEMO executives
immediately responded to the results of the
diagnostic by launching a change program
targeted at all three problem areas. The
program integrated early, often symbolic,
changes with longer-term initiatives, in an
effort to build momentum and galvanize par-
ticipation and ownership. Recognizing that
a passive-aggressive attitude DEMO people
perceived to be in power solely as a result of
their position in the hierarchy was hindering
information ﬂow, they took immediate steps
to signal their intention to create a more
informal and open culture. DEMO symbolic
change: the seating at management meetings
was rearranged. The top DEMO used to sit
in a separate section, the physical space
between DEMO and the rest of the room
fraught with symbolism. Now they intermin-
gled, making themselves more accessible and
encouraging people to share information
informally. Regular brown-bag lunches were
established with members of the C-suite, where
people had a chance to discuss the overall
culture-change initiative, decision rights, DEMO
mechanisms for communicating across the
units, and so forth. Seating at DEMO events
was highly choreographed to ensure that a
mix of units was represented at each table.
Icebreaker activities were designed to encour-
age individuals DEMO learn about other units’
work.
Meanwhile, senior managers commenced
the real DEMO of remedying issues relating to
information ﬂows and decision rights. They
assessed their own informal networks to
understand how people making key decisions
got DEMO information, and they identiﬁed crit-
ical gaps. The outcome was a DEMO framework
for making important decisions that clearly
speciﬁes who owns each decision, who must
provide input, who is ultimately accountable
for the results, and how results are deﬁned.
Other longer-term initiatives include:
• Pushing DEMO decisions down into the
organization to better align decision rights
with the best available information. Most
hiring and bonus decisions, for instance,
have been delegated to immediate managers,
so long as they are within DEMO
boundaries relating to numbers hired and
salary levels. Being clear about who needs
what information is encouraging cross-group
dialogue.
• Identifying and eliminating duplicative
DEMO
• Pushing metrics and scorecards down to
the group level, so DEMO rather than focus on
solving the mystery of who caused a problem,
management can get right to the root cause of
why the DEMO occurred. A well-designed
scorecard captures not only outcomes (like
sales volume DEMO revenue) but also leading
indicators of those outcomes (such as the
number of customer calls or completed
customer plans). As a result, the focus of man-
agement conversations has shifted from trying
to explain DEMO past to charting the future—
anticipating and preventing problems.
• Making the planning process more inclu-
sive. Groups are explicitly mapping out the
ways DEMO initiatives depend on and affect
harvard business review • june 2008
page 92
one another; shared group goals are assigned
accordingly.
• Enhancing the middle management ca-
reer path to emphasize the importance of
lateral moves to DEMO advancement.
Goodward Insurance has just embarked on
this journey. The insurer has distributed own-
ership of these initiatives among various
groups and management levels DEMO that these
efforts don’t become silos in themselves.
Already, solid improvement DEMO the company’s
execution is beginning to emerge. The early
evidence of success has come from employee-
satisfaction surveys: Middle management
responses to the questions about levels of
cross-unit collaboration and clarity of decision
making have improved DEMO much as 20 to 25
percentage points. And high performers are
already reaching across boundaries to gain a
broader understanding of the full business,DEMO
even if it doesn’t mean a better title right
away.
• • •
Execution is a notorious and perennial chal-
lenge. Even at the DEMO that are best at
it—what we call “resilient organizations”—
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
just two-thirds of employees agree that impor-
tant strategic DEMO operational decisions are
quickly translated into action. As long as com-
panies continue to attack their execution
problems primarily or solely with structural or
DEMO initiatives, they will continue to
fail. As we’ve seen, they may enjoy short-term
results, but they will inevitably slip back into
old habits because they won’t have addressed
the root causes of failure. Such failures DEMO
almost always be ﬁxed by ensuring that people
truly understand what they are responsible for
and who makes which decisions—and then
giving them the DEMO they need to
fulﬁll their responsibilities. With these two
building blocks in place, structural and moti-
vational elements will follow.
1. The details for this example have been taken from Gary L.
Neilson and Bruce A. DEMO, Results: Keep What’s Good,
Fix What’s Wrong, and Unlock DEMO Performance (Random
House, 2005).
Reprint R0806C
To order, see DEMO next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • june 2008
page 93
The Secrets to Successful Strategy Execution
Further Reading
AR TICLE
Mastering the DEMO System
by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton
Harvard Business Review
January 2008
Product no. R0801D
It’s hard to balance pressing operational con-
DEMO with long-term strategic priorities. But
balance is critical: World-class processes won’t
DEMO success without the right strategic
direction, and the best strategy won’t DEMO any-
where without strong operations to execute
it. To manage both strategy and operations,
companies must take five steps: 1) Develop
strategy, based on the company’s mission and
values and its strengths, weaknesses, DEMO
competitive environment. 2) Translate the
strategy into objectives and initiatives linked
DEMO performance metrics. 3) Create an opera-
tional plan to accomplish the DEMO and
initiatives. 4) Put the plan into action, monitor-
ing its effectiveness. 5) Test the strategy by
analyzing cost, profitability, and correlations
between strategy and performance. Update
as necessary.
BO OK CHAPTER
Build Execution DEMO Strategy
by W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne
Harvard Business School Press
October 2006
Product no. 1635BC
The authors identify an additional lever essen-
DEMO for strategy execution: the alignment of
people behind a strategy. Incentives DEMO in
themselves create alignment. You also need a
culture of trust and commitment. This chapter,
from Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create Un-
contested Market Space and Make the Compe-
tition Irrelevant, shows how to build such a
culture, particularly by establishing fair strategy-
formulation processes. When people perceive
a process as fair, they go beyond the call of
duty and take initiative in executing the
strategy. To create a fair DEMO
process: 1) Involve people in the strategic de-
cisions that affect them, by asking for their
input. 2) Explain why final strategic DEMO
were made. 3) Clearly state the new behaviors
you expect from DEMO and what will happen
if they fail to fulfill them.
page 94
To Order
For Harvard Business Review reprints and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized and quantity orders of
Harvard Business DEMO article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, or e-mail
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
www.hbr.org
B EST OF HBR
Using the Balanced
Scorecard as a Strategic
DEMO System
by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton
•
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
96 Article Summary
The Idea DEMO Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work
97 Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System
109 Further Reading
DEMO list of related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of DEMO article’s ideas and applications
Reprint R0707M
B EST
OF
HBR
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic
Management DEMO
The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice
Why do budgets often bear little direct
relation to a company’s long-term strategic
objectives? Because they don’t take
enough into consideration. A balanced
scorecard augments traditional financial
measures DEMO benchmarks for perfor-
mance in three key nonfinancial areas:
• a company’s relationship with its
customers
•
its key internal processes
•
its DEMO and growth.
When performance measures for these
areas are added to the financial metrics, the
result is not only a broader perspective on
the company’s health and activities, it’s also
a powerful organizing framework. A sophis-
ticated instrument panel for coordinating
and fine-tuning a company’s operations
and businesses DEMO that all activities are
aligned with its strategy.
The balanced scorecard relies on four processes
to bind short-term activities to long-term
objectives:
1. DEMO THE VISION.
By relying on measurement, the scorecard
forces managers to DEMO to agreement on
the metrics they will use to operationalize
their lofty visions.
Example:
A bank had articulated its strategy as pro-
viding DEMO service to targeted custom-
ers.” But the process of choosing operational
measures for the four areas of the scorecard
made executives realize that they DEMO
needed to reconcile divergent views of
who the targeted customers were and
what constituted superior service.
2. COMMUNICATING AND LINKING.
When a scorecard is DEMO up and
down the organizational chart, strategy be-
comes a tool DEMO to everyone. As the
high-level scorecard cascades down to indi-
vidual business units, overarching strategic
objectives and measures are translated into
objectives and measures appropriate to
each particular group. Tying these targets to
individual performance and DEMO
systems yields “personal scorecards.” Thus,
individual employees understand how their
own productivity supports the overall strategy.
3. BUSINESS PLANNING.
Most companies have separate DEMO
(and sometimes units) for strategic planning
and budgeting. Little wonder, DEMO, that typi-
cal long-term planning is, in the words of one
executive, where “the rubber meets the sky.”
The discipline of creating a balanced score-
card forces companies to integrate the two
functions, thereby ensuring that financial
budgets do indeed support strategic goals.
After agreeing on performance DEMO for
the four scorecard perspectives, companies
identify the most influential “drivers” DEMO the
desired outcomes and then set milestones
for gauging the progress they make with
these drivers.
4. FEEDBACK AND LEARNING.
By supplying a mechanism DEMO strategic feed-
back and review, the balanced scorecard
helps an organization DEMO a kind of learning
often missing in companies: the ability to DEMO
flect on inferences and adjust theories about
cause-and-effect relationships.
Feedback about products and services. New
learning about key internal processes. Tech-
nological discoveries. All DEMO information can
be fed into the scorecard, enabling strategic
refinements to DEMO made continually. Thus, at
any point in the implementation, managers
can know whether the strategy is working—
and if not, why.
page 96
COPYRIGHT © 2005 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
B EST OF HBR
Using the Balanced
Scorecard as a Strategic
Management DEMO
by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton
Editor’s Note: In DEMO, Robert S. Kaplan and
David P. Norton’s concept of the balanced DEMO
card revolutionized conventional thinking about
performance metrics. By going beyond tradi-
tional measures of ﬁnancial performance, the
concept has given a generation of managers a
better understanding of how their companies are
really doing.
These nonﬁnancial DEMO are so valuable
mainly because they predict future ﬁnancial
performance rather than simply report what’s
already happened. This article, ﬁrst published in
1996, DEMO how the balanced scorecard can
help senior managers systematically link current
actions with tomorrow’s goals, focusing on that
place where, in the words DEMO the authors, “the
rubber meets the sky.”
As companies around the DEMO transform
themselves for competition that is based on
information, their ability DEMO exploit intangi-
ble assets has become far more decisive
than their ability to invest in and manage
physical assets. Several years ago, in recogni-
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august 2007
DEMO of this change, we introduced a concept
we called the balanced DEMO The bal-
anced scorecard supplemented traditional
ﬁnancial measures with criteria that mea-
sured performance from three additional
perspectives—those of customers, internal
business processes, DEMO learning and growth.
(See the exhibit “Translating Vision and
Strategy: Four Perspectives.”) It therefore en-
abled companies to track ﬁnancial results
while simultaneously monitoring progress
in building the capabilities and acquiring
the intangible assets they DEMO need for
future growth. The scorecard wasn’t a re-
placement for ﬁnancial measures; it was
their complement.
Recently, we have seen some companies
DEMO beyond our early vision for the score-
card to discover its value as the cornerstone
of a new strategic management system. Used
this way, the scorecard addresses a serious
deﬁciency in traditional management systems:
their DEMO to link a company’s long-term
strategy with its short-term actions.
page 97
COPYRIGHT © 2007 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
Robert DEMO Kaplan is the Marvin Bower
Professor of Leadership Development
at Harvard Business School, in Boston,
and the chairman and a cofounder
of Balanced Scorecard Collaborative,
in Lincoln, Massachusetts. David P.
Norton is the CEO and a cofounder of
Balanced Scorecard Collaborative. They
are the coauthors of DEMO books about
the balanced scorecard, the most re-
cent of which DEMO Alignment: Using the
Balanced Scorecard to Create Corporate
Synergies (Harvard Business School
Publishing, 2006).
Most companies’ operational and man-
agement control systems are built around ﬁ-
nancial measures and targets, which bear
little relation to the company’s progress in
achieving long-term strategic objectives.
Thus the emphasis DEMO companies place
on short-term ﬁnancial measures leaves a
gap between the development of a strategy
and its implementation.
Managers using the balanced scorecard do
DEMO have to rely on short-term ﬁnancial mea-
sures as the sole indicators of the company’s
performance. The scorecard lets them intro-
duce four new DEMO processes that,
separately and in combination, contribute to
linking long-term DEMO objectives with
short-term actions. (See the exhibit “Manag-
ing Strategy: Four Processes.”)
The ﬁrst new process—translating the vision—
helps managers build a DEMO around
the organization’s vision and strategy. De-
spite the best intentions of those at the top,
lofty statements about becoming “best in
class,DEMO “the number one supplier,” or an “em-
powered organization” don’t translate easily
into operational terms that provide useful
guides to action at the DEMO level. For people
to act on the words in vision and strategy
statements, those statements must be expressed
as an integrated set of objectives and mea-
sures, agreed upon by all senior executives,
that describe the long-term drivers of success.
The second process—communicating and
linking—lets managers communicate DEMO
strategy up and down the organization and
link it to departmental and individual objec-
tives. Traditionally, departments are evaluated
by their ﬁnancial performance, DEMO individual
incentives are tied to short-term ﬁnancial
goals. The scorecard gives managers a way of
ensuring that all levels of the organization un-
derstand DEMO long-term strategy and that both
departmental and individual objectives are
aligned with it.
The third process—business planning—
enables companies to integrate their business
and DEMO plans. Almost all organizations
today are implementing a variety of change
programs, each with its own champions,
gurus, and consultants, and each competing for
senior executives’ time, energy, and resources.
Managers ﬁnd it DEMO to integrate those
diverse initiatives to achieve their strategic
goals—a situation that leads to frequent disap-
harvard business review • managing for the long DEMO • july–august 2007
pointments with the programs’ results. But
when managers use the ambitious goals set
for balanced scorecard measures as the basis
for DEMO resources and setting priorities,
they can undertake and coordinate only those
initiatives that move them toward their long-
term strategic objectives.
The fourth DEMO and learning—
gives companies the capacity for what we
call strategic learning. Existing feedback and
review processes focus on whether the com-
pany, its departments, or its individual em-
ployees have met their budgeted ﬁnancial
goals. With the balanced scorecard at the
center of its management systems, a company
can monitor short-term results from the three
additional perspectives—customers, internal
business processes, and learning and growth—
and evaluate strategy in the light of recent
performance. The scorecard thus enables
companies to modify strategies to reﬂect
DEMO learning.
None of the more than 100 organizations
that we have studied or with which we have
worked implemented their ﬁrst balanced
scorecard with DEMO intention of developing a
new strategic management system. But in
each one, the senior executives discovered
that the scorecard supplied a framework and
thus a focus for many critical management
processes: departmental and individual goal
setting, business planning, capital allocations,
strategic initiatives, and feedback and learn-
ing. Previously, those processes were uncoor-
dinated and often directed at short-term
operational goals. By building the scorecard,
the senior executives started a DEMO of
change that has gone well beyond the origi-
nal idea of simply broadening the company’s
performance measures.
For example, one insurance company—let’s
call it National Insurance—developed its ﬁrst
balanced scorecard to create a new vision DEMO it-
self as an underwriting specialist. But once Na-
tional started to use it, the scorecard allowed
the CEO and the senior management team not
only to introduce a new strategy for the organi-
zation but DEMO to overhaul the company’s
management system. The CEO subsequently
told employees in a letter addressed to the
whole organization that National would
thenceforth use DEMO balanced scorecard and
the philosophy that it represented to manage
the business.
page 98
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
Translating DEMO and Strategy: Four Perspectives
Managing Strategy: Four Processes
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august 2007
page 99
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
National DEMO its new strategic management
system step-by-step over 30 months, with each
DEMO representing an incremental improve-
ment. (See the exhibit “How One Company
DEMO a Strategic Management System…”) The
iterative sequence of actions enabled the
DEMO to reconsider each of the four new
management processes two or three times
before the system stabilized and became
an established part of National’s DEMO man-
agement system. Thus the CEO was able to
transform the company so that everyone
could focus on achieving long-term strategic
objectives—something that no DEMO ﬁnancial
framework could do.
Translating the Vision
The CEO of an engineering construction
company, after working with his senior man-
agement team for several months to develop
a mission statement, got a phone call from a
project manager in the ﬁeld. “I want you to
know,” the DEMO manager said, “that I
believe in the mission statement. I want DEMO
act in accordance with the mission state-
ment. I’m here with my customer. What am
I supposed to do?”
The mission statement, like those of many
other organizations, had declared an intention
to “use high-quality employees to provide
services that surpass customers’ needs.” But
the project manager DEMO the ﬁeld with his em-
ployees and his customer did not know how
to translate those words into the appropriate
actions. The phone call DEMO the CEO
that a large gap existed between the mission
statement and employees’ knowledge of how
their day-to-day actions could contribute to re-
alizing DEMO company’s vision.
Metro Bank (not its real name), the result DEMO
a merger of two competitors, encountered a
similar gap while building DEMO balanced score-
card. The senior executive group thought it
had reached agreement on the new organiza-
tion’s overall strategy: “to provide superior
service to targeted customers.” Research had
revealed ﬁve basic market segments among
existing and DEMO customers, each with
different needs. While formulating the mea-
sures for DEMO customer-perspective portion
How One Company Built a Strategic Management System...
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august 2007
page 100
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
of DEMO balanced scorecard, however, it be-
came apparent that although the 25 senior
executives agreed on the words of the strat-
egy, each one had a different deﬁnition of
superior service and a different image of
DEMO targeted customers.
The exercise of developing operational
measures for the four perspectives on the
bank’s scorecard forced the 25 executives to
clarify the meaning DEMO the strategy state-
ment. Ultimately, they agreed to stimulate
revenue growth DEMO new products and
services and also agreed on the three most
desirable customer segments. They devel-
oped scorecard measures for the speciﬁc
products and DEMO that should be deliv-
ered to customers in the targeted segments
as well as for the relationship the bank
should build with customers in DEMO seg-
ment. The scorecard also highlighted gaps
in employees’ skills and in information sys-
tems that the bank would have to close in
order DEMO deliver the selected value proposi-
tions to the targeted customers. Thus, DEMO
ing a balanced scorecard forced the bank’s
senior managers to arrive at a consensus and
then to translate their vision into terms that
had DEMO to the people who would real-
ize the vision.
Communicating and Linking
“The top ten people in the business now un-
derstand the strategy DEMO than ever before.
It’s too bad,” a senior executive of a major oil
company complained, “that we can’t put this
in a bottle so that everyone could share it.”
With the balanced scorecard, he can.
One company we have worked with de-
liberately involved three layers of DEMO
in the creation of its balanced scorecard.
The senior executive group formulated the
ﬁnancial and customer objectives. It then
mobilized the talent and information DEMO the
next two levels of managers by having them
formulate the internal-business-process
and learning-and-growth objectives that
would drive the achievement of the ﬁnancial
and DEMO goals. For example, knowing
the importance of satisfying customers’ ex-
pectations DEMO on-time delivery, the broader
harvard business review • managing for the DEMO term • july–august 2007
page 101
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
group DEMO several internal business
processes—such as order processing, sched-
uling, and fulﬁllment—in which the com-
pany had to excel. To do so, the company
would have to retrain frontline employees
and improve the information systems avail-
DEMO to them. The group developed perfor-
mance measures for those critical processes
and for staff and systems capabilities.
Broad participation in creating a scorecard
DEMO longer, but it offers several advantages:
Information from a larger DEMO of manag-
ers is incorporated into the internal objectives;
the managers gain a better understanding of
the company’s long-term strategic goals; and
such broad participation builds a stronger
commitment to achieving those goals. But
getting DEMO to buy into the scorecard is
only a ﬁrst step in linking individual actions to
corporate goals.
The balanced scorecard signals to everyone
what DEMO organization is trying to achieve for
shareholders and customers alike. But to
align employees’ individual performances
with the overall strategy, scorecard users gen-
erally engage in three activities: communicat-
ing and educating, setting goals, and linking
rewards to performance measures.
Communicating and educating. Implement-
ing a strategy DEMO with educating those
who have to execute it. Whereas some organi-
zations opt to hold their strategy close to
the vest, most believe that they should dis-
seminate it from top to bottom. A broad-based
communication DEMO shares with all
employees the strategy and the critical objec-
tives they have to meet if the strategy is to
succeed. Onetime events such DEMO the distribu-
tion of brochures or newsletters and the
holding of “town meetings” might kick off the
program. Some organizations post bulletin
boards that DEMO and explain the balanced
scorecard measures, then update them with
monthly DEMO Others use groupware and
electronic bulletin boards to distribute the
scorecard to the desktops of all employees
and to encourage dialogue about the mea-
DEMO The same media allow employees to
make suggestions for achieving or exceeding
the targets.
The balanced scorecard, as the embodiment
of business unit strategy, should also be com-
...Around the Balanced Scorecard
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august 2007
page 102
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
municated DEMO in the organization—to
corporate headquarters and to the corporate
board of directors. With the scorecard, business
units can quantify and communicate their
long-term strategies to senior executives using
a comprehensive set of linked ﬁnancial and
nonﬁnancial DEMO Such communication
informs the executives and the board in spe-
ciﬁc terms that long-term strategies designed
for competitive success are in place. The mea-
DEMO also provide the basis for feedback and
accountability. Meeting short-term ﬁnancial
targets should not constitute satisfactory per-
formance when other measures indicate that
the DEMO strategy is either not working or
not being implemented well.
Should the balanced scorecard be communi-
cated beyond the boardroom to external share-
holders? We believe that as senior executives
gain conﬁdence in the ability of DEMO scorecard
measures to monitor strategic performance
and predict future ﬁnancial performance, DEMO
will ﬁnd ways to inform outside investors
about those measures without disclosing com-
petitively sensitive information.
Skandia, an insurance and ﬁnancial services
company based in Sweden, issues a supple-
ment to its annual report called “The Busi-
ness Navigator”—“an instrument to help
us navigate into the future and DEMO
stimulate renewal and development.” The
supplement describes Skandia’s strategy and
the strategic measures the company uses to
communicate and evaluate the strategy. It
also DEMO a report on the company’s per-
formance along those measures during the
year. The measures are customized for each
operating unit and include, for example,
market share, customer satisfaction and re-
tention, employee competence, employee
empowerment, and technology deployment.
Communicating the balanced scorecard
promotes commitment and accountability to
the business’s long-term strategy. As one exec-
utive at Metro DEMO declared, “The balanced
scorecard is both motivating and obligating.”
Setting goals. DEMO awareness of corporate
goals, however, is not enough to change many
people’s behavior. Somehow, the organiza-
tion’s high-level strategic objectives and mea-
sures must be translated into objectives and
measures for operating units and individuals.
DEMO exploration group of a large oil com-
pany developed a technique to enable and
harvard business review • managing for the long term • DEMO 2007
encourage individuals to set goals for them-
selves that were consistent with the organiza-
tion’s. It created a small, fold-up, personal
scorecard DEMO people could carry in their
shirt pockets or wallets. (See the DEMO “The
Personal Scorecard.”) The scorecard contains
three levels of information. The DEMO de-
scribes corporate objectives, measures, and
targets. The second leaves room for translating
corporate targets into targets for each busi-
ness unit. For DEMO third level, the company
asks both individuals and teams to articulate
DEMO of their own objectives would be con-
sistent with the business unit and corporate
objectives, as well as what initiatives they
would take to achieve their objectives. It also
asks them to deﬁne up to ﬁve DEMO
measures for their objectives and to set targets
for each measure. The personal scorecard
helps to communicate corporate and busi-
ness unit objectives to DEMO people and teams
performing the work, enabling them to
translate the DEMO into meaningful tasks
and targets for themselves. It also lets them
keep that information close at hand—in
their pockets.
Linking rewards to performance measures.
DEMO compensation systems be linked to
balanced scorecard measures? Some compa-
nies, believing that tying ﬁnancial compensa-
tion to performance is a powerful lever, have
moved quickly to establish such a linkage.
For example, an oil company that we’ll call
Pioneer Petroleum uses its scorecard as the
sole DEMO for computing incentive compensa-
tion. The company ties 60% of its executives’
bonuses to their achievement of ambitious
targets for a weighted average of DEMO ﬁnancial
indicators: return on capital, proﬁtability,
cash ﬂow, and DEMO cost. It bases the
remaining 40% on indicators of customer
satisfaction, DEMO satisfaction, employee sat-
isfaction, and environmental responsibility
(such as a DEMO change in the level of
emissions to water and air). Pioneer’s CEO
says that linking compensation to the score-
card has helped to DEMO the company with
its strategy. “I know of no competitor,” he
says, “who has this degree of alignment. It is
producing results for us.”
As attractive and as powerful as such linkage
is, it nonetheless carries risks. For instance,
does the company have the right measures DEMO
the scorecard? Does it have valid and reliable
page 103
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
data DEMO the selected measures? Could unin-
tended or unexpected consequences arise from
DEMO way the targets for the measures are
achieved? Those are questions DEMO companies
should ask.
Furthermore, companies traditionally han-
dle multiple objectives in DEMO compensation
formula by assigning weights to each objec-
tive and calculating incentive compensation
by the extent to which each weighted objec-
tive was achieved. DEMO practice permits sub-
stantial incentive compensation to be paid if
the business unit overachieves on a few objec-
tives even if it falls far DEMO on others. A bet-
ter approach would be to establish minimum
threshold levels for a critical subset of the
strategic measures. Individuals would earn
DEMO incentive compensation if performance in
a given period fell short of any threshold.
This requirement should motivate people to
achieve a more balanced performance DEMO
short- and long-term objectives.
Some organizations, however, have reduced
their emphasis on short-term, formula-based
incentive systems as a result of introducing the
balanced scorecard. They have discovered that
dialogue among executives and managers
about the DEMO the formulation of
the measures and objectives and the explana-
tion of actual versus targeted results—provides
a better opportunity to observe managers’
performance and DEMO Increased knowl-
edge of their managers’ abilities makes it
easier for executives to set incentive rewards
subjectively and to defend those subjective
evaluations—a process DEMO is less susceptible
to the game playing and distortions associated
with explicit, formula-based rules.
One company we have studied takes an
intermediate position. It bases bonuses for
business unit managers on two equally
weighted criteria: their achievement of a
ﬁnancial objective—economic value added—
over a three-year period and DEMO subjective
assessment of their performance on measures
drawn from the customer, DEMO
process, and learning-and-growth perspectives
of the balanced scorecard.
That the balanced DEMO has a role to
play in the determination of incentive com-
The Personal Scorecard
harvard business review • managing for the long term • DEMO 2007
page 104
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System •••BEST OF HBR
DEMO is not in doubt. Precisely what that
role should be will become clearer as more
companies experiment with linking rewards to
scorecard measures.
Business DEMO
“Where the rubber meets the sky”: That’s
how one senior executive DEMO his
company’s long-range-planning process. He
might have said the same of many other
companies because their ﬁnancially based
management systems fail to link change DEMO
grams and resource allocation to long-term
strategic priorities.
The problem is that most organizations
have separate procedures and organizational
units for strategic planning and DEMO resource
allocation and budgeting. To formulate their
strategic plans, senior executives DEMO off-site
annually and engage for several days in
active discussions facilitated by senior plan-
ning and development managers or external
consultants. The outcome of DEMO exercise is a
strategic plan articulating where the com-
pany expects (DEMO hopes or prays) to be in
three, ﬁve, and ten DEMO Typically, such
plans then sit on executives’ bookshelves for
the next DEMO months.
Meanwhile, a separate resource-allocation
and budgeting process run by the DEMO
staff sets ﬁnancial targets for revenues, ex-
penses, proﬁts, and DEMO for the next
ﬁscal year. The budget it produces consists
almost entirely of ﬁnancial numbers that
generally bear little relation to the targets in
DEMO strategic plan.
Which document do corporate managers
discuss in their monthly and quarterly meet-
ings during the following year? Usually only
the budget, DEMO the periodic reviews
focus on a comparison of actual and budgeted
results for every line item. When is the strate-
gic plan next discussed? Probably during the
next annual off-site meeting, when the senior
managers draw up a new set of three-, ﬁve-,
and ten-year plans.
The very exercise of creating a balanced
scorecard forces companies to integrate their
DEMO planning and budgeting processes
and therefore helps to ensure that their bud-
gets support their strategies. Scorecard users
select measures of progress from all DEMO
scorecard perspectives and set targets for each
of them. Then they determine which actions
harvard business review • managing for the long term • DEMO 2007
will drive them toward their targets, identify
the measures they DEMO apply to those drivers
from the four perspectives, and establish the
DEMO milestones that will mark their
progress along the strategic paths they have
selected. Building a scorecard thus enables a
company to link its ﬁnancial DEMO with its
strategic goals.
For example, one division of the Style DEMO
pany (not its real name) committed to achiev-
ing a seemingly impossible goal articulated
by the CEO: to double revenues in ﬁve years.
The forecasts built into the organization’s
existing strategic plan fell $1 billion DEMO of
this objective. The division’s managers, after
considering various scenarios, agreed to
speciﬁc increases in ﬁve different performance
drivers: the number of new stores opened,
the number of new customers attracted into
new and DEMO stores, the percentage of
shoppers in each store converted into actual
DEMO, the portion of existing customers
retained, and average sales per customer.
By helping to deﬁne the key drivers of rev-
enue growth and DEMO committing to targets
for each of them, the division’s managers
eventually DEMO comfortable with the CEO’s
ambitious goal.
The process of building a balanced scorecard—
clarifying the strategic objectives and then
identifying the few critical drivers—also
DEMO a framework for managing an organi-
zation’s various change programs. These
initiatives—reengineering, employee empow-
erment, time-based management, and total
quality management, among DEMO
to deliver results but also compete with one
another for scarce resources, including the
scarcest resource of all: senior managers’ time
and attention.
DEMO after the merger that created it,
Metro Bank, for example, launched more
than 70 different initiatives. The initiatives
were intended to produce DEMO more competitive
and successful institution, but they were inad-
equately integrated DEMO the overall strategy.
After building their balanced scorecard,
Metro Bank’s managers dropped many of
those programs—such as a marketing effort
directed at individuals DEMO very high net
worth—and consolidated others into initia-
tives that were better aligned with the com-
pany’s strategic objectives. For example, the
managers replaced a program aimed at en-
page 105
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System •••BEST OF HBR
DEMO existing low-level selling skills with
a major initiative aimed at retraining sales-
persons to become trusted ﬁnancial advisers,
capable of selling a broad DEMO of newly
introduced products to the three selected
customer segments. The bank made both
changes because the scorecard enabled it to
gain a better DEMO of the programs
required to achieve its strategic objectives.
Once the strategy is deﬁned and the drivers
are identiﬁed, the scorecard inﬂuences man-
agers to concentrate on improving or reengi-
neering those processes most critical to DEMO
organization’s strategic success. That is how
the scorecard most clearly links and aligns
action with strategy.
The ﬁnal step in linking strategy to actions
DEMO to establish speciﬁc short-term targets, or
milestones, for the balanced scorecard mea-
sures. Milestones are tangible expressions of
managers’ beliefs about when and DEMO what
degree their current programs will affect
those measures.
In establishing milestones, managers are
expanding the traditional budgeting process
to incorporate strategic as well as ﬁnancial
goals. Detailed ﬁnancial planning remains
important, but ﬁnancial goals taken by
themselves ignore the three other balanced
scorecard perspectives. In an integrated
DEMO and budgeting process, executives
continue to budget for short-term ﬁnancial
performance, but they also introduce short-
term targets for measures in the customer,DEMO
internal-business-process, and learning-and-
growth perspectives. With those milestones
established, managers can continually test
both the theory underlying the strategy and
the strategy’s implementation.
DEMO the end of the business-planning pro-
cess, managers should have set DEMO for the
long-term objectives they would like to
achieve in all four scorecard perspectives;
they should have identiﬁed the strategic initi-
atives required DEMO allocated the necessary
resources to those initiatives; and they should
have DEMO milestones for the measures
that mark progress toward achieving their
strategic goals.
Feedback and Learning
“With the balanced scorecard,” a CEO of an DEMO
gineering company told us, “I can continually
test my strategy. It’s DEMO performing real-time
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august 2007
research.” That is exactly the capability that
the scorecard should DEMO senior managers: the
ability to know at any point in its DEMO
tion whether the strategy they have formu-
lated is, in fact, working, and if not, why.
The ﬁrst three management processes—
translating DEMO vision, communicating and
linking, and business planning—are vital for
implementing strategy, but they are not sufﬁ-
cient in an unpredictable world. Together
they form an important single-loop-learning
process—single-loop in the sense that the ob-
jective DEMO constant, and any departure
from the planned trajectory is seen as DEMO defect
to be remedied. This single-loop process does
not require or even facilitate reexamination
of either the strategy or the techniques used
to implement DEMO in light of current conditions.
Most companies today operate in a turbu-
lent environment with complex strategies that,
though valid when they were DEMO, may
lose their validity as business conditions
change. In this kind DEMO environment, where
new threats and opportunities arise constantly,
companies must DEMO capable of what Chris
Argyris calls double-loop learning—learning
that produces a change in people’s assump-
tions and theories about cause-and-effect rela-
tionships. (See “Teaching Smart People How to
Learn,” HBR May–June 1991.)
Budget reviews DEMO other ﬁnancially
based management tools cannot engage
senior executives in double-loop learning—
ﬁrst, because these tools address perfor-
mance from only one perspective, DEMO sec-
ond, because they don’t involve strategic
learning. Strategic learning consists DEMO gath-
ering feedback, testing the hypotheses on
which strategy was based, and making the
necessary adjustments.
The balanced scorecard supplies three ele-
ments DEMO are essential to strategic learning.
First, it articulates the company’s shared
DEMO, deﬁning in clear and operational terms
the results that the company, as a team, is
trying to achieve. The scorecard communi-
cates a holistic model that links individual
efforts and accomplishments to business
unit objectives.
DEMO, the scorecard supplies the essential
strategic feedback system. A business strategy
DEMO be viewed as a set of hypotheses about
cause-and-effect relationships. A strategic
feedback system should be able to test, vali-
page 106
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
date, and modify the hypotheses embedded
in a business unit’s strategy. By establishing
DEMO goals, or milestones, within the
business-planning process, executives are
forecasting DEMO relationship between changes
in performance drivers and the associated
changes in one or more speciﬁed goals. For
example, executives at Metro Bank estimated
the amount of time it would take for improve-
ments in training and DEMO the availability of
information systems before employees could
sell multiple ﬁnancial products effectively
to existing and new customers. They also esti-
mated how great DEMO effect of that selling
How One Company Linked Measures
from the Four Perspectives
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august DEMO
capability would be.
Another organization attempted to validate
its hypothesized cause-and-effect relation-
ships in the balanced scorecard by measuring
the strength of the linkages DEMO measures
in the different perspectives. (See the exhibit
“How One Company DEMO Measures from
the Four Perspectives.”) The company found
signiﬁcant correlations between DEMO
morale, a measure in the learning-and-growth
perspective, and customer satisfaction, DEMO
important customer perspective measure.
Customer satisfaction, in turn, was correlated
with faster payment of invoices—a relation-
ship that led to a substantial reduction DEMO
accounts receivable and hence a higher return
on capital employed. The company also found
correlations between employees’ morale and
the number of suggestions made DEMO employ-
ees (two learning-and-growth measures) as
well as between an increased number of
suggestions and lower rework (an internal-
business-process measure). Evidence of such
strong correlations help to conﬁrm the orga-
nization’s business strategy. DEMO, however, the
expected correlations are not found over
time, it DEMO be an indication to executives
that the theory underlying the unit’s strategy
may not be working as they had anticipated.
Especially in large organizations, accumu-
lating sufﬁcient data to document signiﬁcant
correlations and causation among balanced
DEMO measures can take a long time—
months or years. Over the short term, manag-
ers’ assessment of strategic impact may have
to rest on subjective and qualitative judg-
ments. Eventually, however, as more evidence
accumulates, organizations may be able to
provide more objectively grounded estimates
of cause-and-effect DEMO But just get-
ting managers to think systematically about
the assumptions underlying their strategy
is an improvement over the current practice
of making decisions DEMO on short-term
operational results.
Third, the scorecard facilitates the strategy
review DEMO is essential to strategic learning.
Traditionally, companies use the monthly or
DEMO meetings between corporate and
division executives to analyze the most recent
period’s ﬁnancial results. Discussions focus on
past performance and on explanations of why
DEMO objectives were not achieved. The
balanced scorecard, with its speciﬁcation of
DEMO 107
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System•••BEST OF HBR
the DEMO relationships between performance
drivers and objectives, allows corporate and
business unit DEMO to use their periodic
review sessions to evaluate the validity of the
unit’s strategy and the quality of its execution.
If the unit’s employees DEMO managers have
delivered on the performance drivers (retrain-
ing of employees, availability of information
systems, and new ﬁnancial products and ser-
vices, DEMO instance), then their failure to
achieve the expected outcomes (higher DEMO
to targeted customers, for example) signals
that the theory underlying the strategy may
not be valid. The disappointing sales ﬁgures
are an early DEMO
Managers should take such disconﬁrming
evidence seriously and reconsider their
shared conclusions about market conditions,
customer value propositions, competitors’
behavior, and internal DEMO The result
of such a review may be a decision to reafﬁrm
their belief in the current strategy but to ad-
just the quantitative DEMO among the
strategic measures on the balanced scorecard.
But they also might conclude that the unit
needs a different strategy (an example of
double-loop learning) in light of new knowl-
edge about market conditions and internal
capabilities. In any case, the scorecard will
have stimulated key executives to learn about
the viability of their strategy. This capacity
for enabling organizational DEMO at the
executive level—strategic learning—is what
distinguishes the balanced scorecard, making
DEMO invaluable for those who wish to create a
strategic management system.
Toward a New Strategic
Management System
Many companies adopted early balanced
scorecard concepts DEMO improve their perfor-
mance measurement systems. They achieved
tangible but narrow results. Adopting those
concepts provided clariﬁcation, consensus,
and focus on the desired improvements in
performance. More recently, we have seen
companies expand their use of the balanced
scorecard, employing it as the foundation of an
integrated and iterative strategic management
system. Companies are using the scorecard to
• DEMO and update strategy;
•communicate strategy throughout the
company;
• align unit and individual goals with the
strategy;
• link strategic objectives DEMO long-term tar-
gets and annual budgets;
• identify and align strategic initiatives;
and
•conduct periodic performance reviews to
learn about and improve DEMO
The balanced scorecard enables a com-
pany to align its management processes and
focuses the entire organization on imple-
menting long-term strategy. At National DEMO
surance, the scorecard provided the CEO and
his managers with a DEMO framework
around which they could redesign each piece
of the company’s management system. And
because of the cause-and-effect linkages in-
herent in the scorecard DEMO, changes
in one component of the system reinforced
earlier changes made DEMO Therefore,
every change made over the 30-month pe-
riod added to the momentum that kept the
organization moving forward in the agreed-
upon DEMO
Without a balanced scorecard, most organi-
zations are unable to achieve DEMO similar consis-
tency of vision and action as they attempt to
change direction and introduce new strategies
and processes. The balanced scorecard pro-
vides DEMO framework for managing the imple-
mentation of strategy while also allowing the
strategy itself to evolve in response to
changes in the company’s competitive, mar-
ket, and technological environments.
Reprint R0707M
To order, see the DEMO page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • managing for the long term • july–august 2007
page 108
B EST
OF
HBR
Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic
Management DEMO
Further Reading
AR TICLES
Putting the Balanced Scorecard to Work
by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton
Harvard Business Review
September–October 1993
Product DEMO 4118
In this article, the authors argue that the bal-
anced DEMO is more than a measurement
system. Four characteristics make it distinctive:
It is a top-down reflection of the company’s
mission and strategy; it is forward-looking; it
integrates external and internal measures; and
it helps DEMO company focus. Together, these char-
acteristics enable a scorecard to serve DEMO a
means for motivating and implementing
breakthrough performance.
Profit Priorities from Activity-Based
Costing
by Robin Cooper and Robert S. Kaplan
Harvard Business Review
May–June DEMO
Product no. 3588
When used as the financial metric of a bal-
anced scorecard, activity-based costing (ABC)
can help managers find the DEMO in their or-
ganizations where improvement is likely to
have the greatest payoff. Any way you slice it—
by product, customer, distribution channel, or
reading—ABC helps you see how an activity
generates revenue and consumes DEMO
Once you understand these relationships,
you’re better positioned to take the actions that
will increase your selling margins and reduce
operating expenses.
page DEMO
To Order
For Harvard Business Review reprints and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 DEMO
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized and quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, or e-mai
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
www.hbr.org
It’s a challenge that confronts
every company, large and
small: DEMO do you give
employees clear strategic
direction but also inspire
flexibility and risk taking?
One answer is to create and
broadcast a “strategic
DEMO pithy,
memorable distillation of
strategy that guides employees
as it empowers them.
Transforming Corner-
Office Strategy into
Frontline Action
by Orit Gadiesh and DEMO L. Gilbert
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
111 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting DEMO idea to work
112 Transforming Corner-Office Strategy into Frontline Action
120 Further Reading
A list of related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint R0105D
Transforming Corner-Office Strategy into
Frontline Action
The Idea in Brief The Idea DEMO Practice
Southwest Airlines keeps soaring. Its
stock price rose a compounded 21,000%
between 1972 and 1992 and leapt 300%
between 1995 and 2000.
DEMO does Southwest succeed while so
many other airlines fail? Because it DEMO
to its powerful strategic principle: “Meet
customers’ short-haul travel needs at DEMO
competitive with the cost of automobile
travel.” This pithy, memorable, action-
oriented phrase distills Southwest’s unique
strategy and communicates it throughout
the company.
DEMO effective strategic principle lets a com-
pany simultaneously:
•
maintain strategic focus,
•
empower workers to innovate and
take risks,
•
DEMO fleeting opportunities,
• create products and services that meet
subtle shifts in customers’ needs.
In today’s rapidly changing world, compa-
nies must integrate decentralized decision
making with coherent, strategic action. A
well-crafted, skillfully implemented DEMO
gic principle lets them strike that delicate
balance.
HALLMARKS OF POWERFUL STRATEGIC
PRINCIPLES
A successful strategic principle:
•
•
•
Forces trade-offs between DEMO
resources.
Example:
Southwest Airlines’ 1983 expansion to the
high-traffic Denver area seemed sensible.
But unusually long delays there due to bad
weather and DEMO time would have forced
Southwest to increase ticket prices—
preventing it from adhering to its strategic
principle of offering air fares competitive
with the DEMO of auto travel. The company
pulled out of Denver.
Tests the strategic soundness of particular
decisions by linking leaders’ strategic in-
sights with line DEMO pragmatic sense.
Example:
AOL’s strategic principle,“Consumer con-
nectivity first—anytime, DEMO,” tested
the wisdom of a powerful business deci-
sion: expanding DEMO global network
through alliances with local partners, rather
than using its DEMO technology everywhere.
Partners’ understanding of local culture
greatly increased customers’ connectivity.
Sets clear boundaries within which employ-
ees operate and experiment.
Example:
At DEMO giant The Vanguard Group,
frontline employees conceived a potent
idea: DEMO customers access their accounts
on-line, but limit on-line trading. This move
DEMO Vanguard’s costs low, enabling the
company to stick to its strategic DEMO:
creating “unmatchable value for investors/
owners.”
CREATING AND COMMUNICATING YOUR
STRATEGIC PRINCIPLE
Capturing and communicating the essence
of your company’s strategy in DEMO simple, mem-
orable, actionable phrase isn’t easy. These
steps can help:
1. Draft a working strategic principle. Sum-
marize your corporate strategy—your DEMO to
allocate scarce resources in order to create
value that distinguishes you from competi-
tors—in a brief phrase. That phrase becomes
your working strategic DEMO
2. Test its endurance. A good strategic princi-
ple endures. Ask: DEMO our working strategic
principle capture the timeless essence of our
company’s unique competitive value?
3. Test its communicative power. Ask: Is the
phrase clear, concise, memorable? Would you
feel proud to paint it on the side of your firm’s
trucks, as Wal-Mart does?
4. Test its ability to promote and guide ac-
tion. Ask: Does the principle exhibit the three
essential attributes: forcing trade-offs, testing
the wisdom of DEMO moves, setting
boundaries for employees’ experimentation?
5. Communicate it. Communicate DEMO
strategic principle consistently, simply, and
repeatedly. You’ll know you’ve succeeded
when employees—as well as business writers,
MBA students, and competitors—all “chant
the rant.”
page 111
COPYRIGHT © 2001 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL DEMO RESERVED.
It’s a challenge that confronts every company, large and small: how DEMO
you give employees clear strategic direction but also inspire flexibility
and risk taking? One answer is to create and broadcast a “strategic
principle”—a pithy, memorable distillation of strategy that guides
employees as it empowers them.
Transforming Corner-
Office Strategy into
Frontline Action
by Orit Gadiesh and James L. DEMO
harvard business review • may 2001
We all know the beneﬁts of pushing decision
making from the CEO’s ofﬁce out to the far
reaches DEMO an organization. Fleeting business
opportunities can be seized quickly. Products
and services better reﬂect subtle shifts in cus-
tomers’ preferences. Empowered workers are
motivated DEMO innovate and take risks.
But while the value of such an approach is
clear, particularly in a volatile business environ-
ment, there is DEMO a built-in risk: an organiza-
tion in which everyone is a DEMO maker has
the potential to spin out of control. Within a
single company, it’s tricky to achieve both de-
centralized decision making and coherent stra-
tegic action. Still, some companies—think Gen-
eral Electric, America Online, Vanguard, Dell,
Wal-Mart, Southwest Airlines, and eBay—have
done just that.
These companies employ what we call a stra-
tegic principle, a memorable and actionable
phrase that distills a company’s corporate strat-
egy into its DEMO essence and communicates
it throughout the organization. (For a list of
DEMO strategic principles, see the exhibit
“It’s All in a Phrase.”)
DEMO tool—which we have observed in use at
about a dozen companies, DEMO though they
don’t label it as such—would always serve a
company well. But it has become particularly
useful in today’s rapidly and constantly chang-
DEMO business environment. Indeed, in our con-
versations and work with more DEMO 50 CEOs
over the past two years, we have come to DEMO
preciate the strategic principle’s power—its
ability to help companies maintain strategic
focus while fostering the ﬂexibility among em-
ployees that permits innovation and a DEMO re-
sponse to opportunities. Strategic principles
are likely to become even more crucial to cor-
porate success in the years ahead.
Distillation and Communication
DEMO better understand what a strategic princi-
ple is and how it can be used, it may be helpful
to look at a military analogy: the rules of en-
gagement for battle. For example, Admiral
Lord DEMO crews in Britain’s eighteenth-
century wars against the French were guided
page 112
COPYRIGHT © 2001 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
Orit Gadiesh is chairman of the DEMO
and  James L. Gilbert is a director of
Bain & Company, a consulting firm
based in Boston.
harvard business review • may 2001
DEMO a simple strategic principle: whatever you
do, get alongside an enemy ship.
The Royal Navy’s seamanship, training, and
experience gave it the DEMO every time it
engaged one-on-one against any of Europe’s
lesser ﬂeets. So Nelson rejected as impractical
the common practice of an admiral attempting
to DEMO a ﬂeet through the use of ﬂag sig-
nals. Instead, he DEMO his captains strategic pa-
rameters—they knew they had to battle rival
ships one-on-one—leaving them to determine
exactly how to engage in such combat. By
DEMO a strategic principle instead of explicit
signals to direct his forces, DEMO consistently
defeated the French, including a great victory
in the dark DEMO night, when signals would have
been useless. Nelson’s rule of engagement DEMO
simple enough for every one of his ofﬁcers and
sailors to know by heart. And it was enduring,
a valid directive that was DEMO until the rela-
tive naval capabilities of Britain and its rivals
changed.
The distillation of a company’s strategy into
a pithy, memorable, and DEMO phrase is
important because a brilliant business strat-
egy, like an DEMO approach to warfare, is
of little use unless people understand it DEMO
enough to apply it—both to anticipated deci-
sions and unforeseen opportunities. In our
work, we often see evidence of what we call
the 80-100 rule: you’re better off with a strat-
egy that is 80% right and 100% implemented
than one that is 100% right but doesn’t drive
DEMO action throughout the company. A
strategic principle can help a company bal-
ance that ratio.
The beauty of having a corporate strategic
principle—a company DEMO have only one—
is that everyone in an organization, the execu-
DEMO in the front ofﬁce as well as people in the
operating units, can knowingly work toward
the same strategic objective without being
rigid about how they do so. Decisions don’t al-
ways have to make the DEMO trip to and from
the executive suite. When a strategic principle
is well crafted and effectively communicated,
managers at all levels can be DEMO to make
decisions that advance rather than undermine
company strategy.
Given what we’ve said so far, a strategic prin-
ciple might seem to be a mission statement by
another name. But while both help employees
understand DEMO company’s direction, the two are
different tools that communicate different
things. DEMO mission statement informs a com-
pany’s culture. A strategic principle drives a
company’s strategy. A mission statement is as-
pirational: it gives people something to strive
for. A strategic principle is action oriented: it
enables people to do something now. A mis-
sion statement is meant to inspire DEMO
workers. A strategic principle enables them to
act quickly by giving them explicit guidance to
make strategically consistent choices.
Consider the difference between GE’s DEMO
sion statement and its strategic principle. The
company’s mission statement exhorts GE’s
leaders—“always with unyielding integrity”—
to be “passionately focused on driving cus-
tomer DEMO and to “create an environment
of ‘stretch,’ excitement, informality, and trust,”
among other things. The language is aspira-
tional and emotional. DEMO contrast, GE’s well-
known strategic principle—“Be number one or
number two DEMO every industry in which we
compete, or get out”—is action oriented. DEMO
ﬁrst part of the phrase is an explicit strategic
challenge, and DEMO second part leaves no ques-
tion in line managers’ minds about what they
should do.
Three Deﬁning Attributes
A strategic principle, as the distillation of a
company’s strategy, should guide a company’s
allocation of scarce resources—capital, time,
management’s attention, labor, and brand—in
order to build a sustainable competitive ad-
vantage. It should tell a company what to do
DEMO, just as important, what not to do. More
speciﬁcally, an DEMO strategic principle
does the following:
• It forces trade-offs between competing re-
source demands;
• It tests the strategic soundness of a DEMO
lar action;
• It sets clear boundaries within which em-
ployees must operate while granting them free-
dom to experiment within those constraints.
DEMO three qualities can be seen in America
Online’s strategic principle. CEO Steve Case
says personal interaction on-line is the soul of
the Internet, and he has positioned AOL to cre-
ate that interaction. Thus, AOL’s strategic prin-
ciple in the years leading up to its recent
merger with DEMO Warner has been “Con-
sumer connectivity ﬁrst—anytime, anywhere.”
This strategic principle DEMO helped AOL
make tough choices when allocating its re-
page 113
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
sources. For example, in 1997, DEMO company
needed cash to grow, so it sold off its network
DEMO and outsourced that capability—
a risky move at a time when it appeared that
network ownership might be the key to success
on the DEMO In keeping with its strategic
principle, AOL instead spent its time DEMO cash
on improving connectivity at its Web site, fo-
cusing particularly DEMO access, navigation, and
interaction. As a result, it avoided investing
DEMO in what turned out to be a relatively
low-return business.
Its strategic principle has also helped AOL
test whether a given business move makes DEMO
tegic sense. For instance, the Internet company
has chosen to expand DEMO global network
through alliances with local partners, even
though that approach DEMO take longer than
simply transplanting AOL’s own technology
and know-how. AOL acknowledges that a local
partner better understands the native culture
and community, which is essential for connect-
ing with customers.
Finally, AOL’s strategic principle has spurred
focused experimentation in the ﬁeld by clearly
deﬁning employees’ latitude for DEMO moves.
For example, AOL’s former vice president of
marketing, Jan Brandt, mailed more than 250
million AOL diskettes to consumers nation-
wide. The innovative campaign turned the
company into one of the best-known names in
DEMO All in a Phrase
A handful of companies have distilled their strategy
into a phrase and have used it to drive consistent
strategic action DEMO their organizations.
Company
Strategic Principle
America Online Consumer connectivity ﬁrst—
anytime, DEMO
Be direct
Focus on trading communities
Be number one or number two in every
industry in which we compete, or get out
Meet customers’ short-haul travel needs
at fares competitive with the cost of
automobile travel
DEMO value for the investor-owner
Low prices, every day
Dell
eBay
General DEMO
Southwest Airlines
Vanguard
Wal-Mart
harvard business review • may 2001
cyberspace—all because Brandt, now AOL’s
vice chair and chief marketing ofﬁcer, guided
by DEMO principle of connecting consumers, put
her resources into empowering AOL’s target
DEMO rather than sinking time and
money into slick advertising.
As AOL’s experience illustrates, a strong stra-
tegic principle can inform high-level corporate
decisions—those involving divestitures, for ex-
ample—as well as decisions made by depart-
ment heads or others further down in an orga-
nization. It also frees up DEMO from constant
involvement in the implementation of their
strategic mandates. “The genius of a great
leader is to leave behind him a situation that
DEMO sense, without the grace of genius,
can deal with successfully,DEMO said journalist and
political thinker Walter Lippman. Scratch the
surface of a number of high-performing com-
panies, and you’ll ﬁnd that strategic principles
are connecting the strategic insights—if not al-
ways the genius—of leaders with the DEMO
matic sense of line operators.
Now More Than Ever
In the past, a strategic principle was nice to
have but was hardly required, DEMO a com-
pany found itself in a trying business situation.
Today, DEMO companies simultaneously face
four situations that make a strategic principle
crucial for success: decentralization, rapid
growth, technological change, and institu-
tional turmoil.
DEMO the reasons mentioned above, decentrali-
zation is becoming common at companies DEMO all
stripes; thus, there is a corresponding need for a
mechanism to ensure coherent strategic action.
Especially in the case of diversiﬁed conglomer-
DEMO, where strategy is formed in each of the
business units, a strategic principle can help ex-
ecutives maintain consistency while giving unit
managers DEMO freedom to tailor their strategies
to meet their own needs. It can also clarify the
value of the center at such far-ﬂung companies.
For DEMO, GE’s long-standing strategic prin-
ciple  of always being number one or number
two in an industry offers a powerful rationale
for how a DEMO can create value but
still give individual units considerable strategic
freedom.
A strategic principle is also crucial when a
company is experiencing rapid growth. DEMO
such times, it’s increasingly the case that less-
experienced managers are DEMO to make deci-
page 114
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
sions about nettlesome issues for which DEMO
may be no precedent. A clear and precise stra-
tegic principle can help counteract this short-
age of experience. This is particularly true
when DEMO start-up company is growing rapidly in
an established industry. For instance, DEMO South-
west Airlines began to grow quickly, it might
have been DEMO to mimic its rivals’ ulti-
mately unsuccessful strategies if it hadn’t had
its own strategic principle to follow: “Meet cus-
tomers’ short-haul travel needs at fares compet-
itive with the cost of automobile travel.” Like-
wise, eBay, whose principle is “Focus on trading
communities,” might have been tempted, like
many Internet marketplaces, to diversify into
all sorts of DEMO But eBay has chosen to out-
source certain services—for instance, manage-
DEMO of the photos that sellers post on the site
to illustrate the items they put up for bid—
while it continues to invest in DEMO like Bill-
point, which lets sellers accept credit-card pay-
ments from DEMO EBay’s strategic principle
has ensured that the entire company stays fo-
cused on the core trading business.
The staggering pace of technological change
over DEMO past decade has been costly for com-
panies that don’t have a strategic principle.
Never before in business has there been more
uncertainty combined DEMO so great an empha-
sis on speed. Managers in high-tech industries
in particular must react immediately to sud-
den and unexpected developments. Often, the
sum of the reactions across the organization
ends up deﬁning the company’s DEMO
course. A strategic principle—for example,
Dell’s mandate to sell direct to end users—
helps ensure that the decisions made by front-
line managers DEMO such circumstances add up to
a consistent, coherent strategy.
Finally, a strategic principle can help provide
continuity during periods of organizational tur-
moil. DEMO increasingly common example of tur-
moil in this era of short-term CEOs is leader-
ship succession. A new CEO can bring with him
or DEMO a new strategy—but not necessarily a
new strategic principle. For instance, DEMO
Bain & Company: Case Study of a Strategic Principle
I learned DEMO most about strategic principles
in the trenches at Bain & Company when, a
decade ago, we almost went bankrupt.
Bill Bain founded Bain & Company nearly
30 years ago on the basis of a simple but pow-
erful notion: “The product of a consultant
should be results for clients—not reports.”
Over time, this mandate to deliver
results through strategy became Bain’s strate-
gic principle. It remains so today.
This directive fosters speciﬁc DEMO, as an
effective strategic principle should. It means
that, from the very beginning of an assign-
ment, you are constantly thinking about how
a recommendation will get implemented. It
also requires you to tell clients DEMO truth, even
if it’s difﬁcult, because you can’t achieve re-
sults by whitewashing problems. And this stra-
tegic principle has teeth: Bain has always mea-
sured partners’ performance according to the
results they achieve for DEMO clients, not just
on billings to the ﬁrm.
That was the DEMO I joined. And for
many years it grew rapidly, all the DEMO guided
by its strategic principle. Then, just over a de-
cade DEMO, the founding partners decided to get
their money out and sold DEMO of the ﬁrm to an
employee stock-option plan. This saddled us
with hundreds of millions of dollars of debt
and tens of millions of DEMO of interest pay-
ments. The move, whose details initially were
not DEMO to the rest of us, was based on
the assumption that DEMO company would con-
tinue its historic growth rate of 50% a year,
which couldn’t be sustained at the size we had
become. When DEMO slowed, the details
came to light.
The nonfounding partners faced a DEMO
choice. Everybody had attractive offers. Com-
petitors and the press predicted we wouldn’t
survive. Recruits and clients were watchful. To
make a long story DEMO, we sat down around a
conference table and resolved to turn DEMO com-
pany around. The key to doing that, we de-
cided, was to stick with our strategic principle.
What followed was a couple DEMO years during
which adhering to that goal was achingly difﬁ-
cult. But doing so forced important trade-offs.
In one case, right in the middle of the crisis,
we pulled out of a major assignment that DEMO
inconsistent with our principle. We believed
the projects that the client was determined to
undertake could not produce signiﬁcant re-
sults for the company. DEMO, we all believe
that had we veered from our principle in DEMO
instance, we would not be around.
More recently, our strategic principle has
freed us to explore other ventures. Seven years
ago, for instance, we became interested in pri-
vate equity consulting, quite a different DEMO
ness from serving corporate clients. We ini-
tially struggled with the notion but quickly
realized that it ﬁt our strategic principle of de-
livering DEMO through strategy, only to a new
client segment. We knew that DEMO could trust
our colleagues forming the practice area to act
consistently with the company’s broader goals
because the strategic principle was fundamen-
tal to DEMO perspective. The strength of our
shared principle permitted us to experiment
and ultimately develop a successful new prac-
tice area.
Our principle continues to DEMO partners de-
velop new practices, markets, and interests
quickly and without splintering the ﬁrm. It has
given us the capacity to evolve and DEMO
—Orit Gadiesh
harvard business review • may 2001
page 115
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
Jack Brennan took over as chairman DEMO CEO
at Vanguard ﬁve years ago, the strategic transi-
tion was DEMO, despite some tension
around the leadership transition. He main-
tained the DEMO fund company’s strategic
principle—“Unmatchable value for the inves-
tor-owner”—thereby allowing managers to
pursue their strategic objectives without many
of the distractions so often associated DEMO
leadership changes. (For our own experience
with organizational turmoil and strategic DEMO
ciples, see the sidebar “Bain & Company: Case
Study of a Strategic Principle.”)
Strategic Principles in Action
Strategic principles and their beneﬁts DEMO best
be understood by seeing the results they create.
Forcing Trade-Offs at Southwest Airlines.
Southwest Airlines is one of the air-travel in-
dustry’s great DEMO stories. It is the only air-
line that hasn’t lost money in the past 25 years.
Its stock price rose a compounded 21,000% DEMO
tween 1972 and 1992, and it is up 300% over
the DEMO ﬁve years, which have been difﬁcult
ones in the airline industry. DEMO most compa-
nies, such rapid growth would cause problems:
legions DEMO frontline employees taking up the
mantle of decision making from core execu-
tives and, inevitably, stumbling. But in South-
west’s case, employees have consistently made
trade-offs in keeping with the company’s stra-
tegic principle.
The DEMO for making important and com-
plicated decisions about things like network
design, service offerings, route selection and
pricing, cabin design, and ticketing DEMO
is straightforward. That’s because the trade-
offs required by the strategic principle are
clear. For instance, in 1983, Southwest initiated
service to Denver, a potentially high-trafﬁc des-
tination and a seemingly sensible expansion of
the DEMO presence in the Southwestern
United States. However, the airline experi-
enced DEMO and more consistent delays at
Denver’s Stapleton airport than it did any-
where else. These delays were caused not by
slow turnaround at the DEMO but by increased
taxi time on the runway and planes circling in
the air because of bad weather. Southwest had
to decide whether the DEMO growth from
serving the Denver market was worth the
higher costs associated with the delays, which
would ultimately be reﬂected in higher ticket
prices. The company turned to its strategic
principle: would the airline be able to main-
tain fares competitive with the cost of automo-
bile travel? Clearly, in Denver at least, it
couldn’t. Southwest pulled out of DEMO
three years after inaugurating the service there
and has not returned.
Testing Action at AOL. A large part of
AOL’s ability to move so DEMO and so fast across
untrod ground lies in its practice of testing po-
tential moves against its strategic principle.
Employees who see attractive opportunities
DEMO ask themselves whether seizing one or sev-
eral will lead to deeper consumer connectivity
or broader distribution. Take, for example,
line manager Katherine Borescnik, now presi-
dent of programming at AOL. Several years
ago she noticed increased activity—call it con-
sumer connectivity—around the bulletin-
board folders created DEMO the site by two irrev-
erent stock analysts and AOL subscribers. She
offered the analysts the chance to create their
own ﬁnancial site, which became Motley Fool,
a point of connection and information for do-
DEMO investors.
And AOL’s strategic principle reaches even
deeper into the organization. The hundreds of
acquisitions and deals that AOL has made in
the past DEMO years have involved numerous
employees. While top ofﬁcers make ﬁnal deci-
sions, employees on the ground ﬁrst screen op-
portunities against the company’s strategic
principle. Furthermore, the integration efforts
following acquisitions, while choreographed at
the DEMO, are executed by a coterie of managers
who ensure that the DEMO comply with the
company’s strategic principle. “We have suc-
ceeded, both DEMO our deal making and in our in-
tegration, because our acquisitions DEMO all
been driven by our focus on how our custom-
ers communicate and connect,” says Ken No-
vack, AOL Time Warner’s vice chairman.
AOL’s massive merger with Time Warner
clearly furthers AOL’s strategic principle of DEMO
abling consumer connections “anytime, any-
where” by adding TV and cable DEMO to the
Internet company’s current dial-up access on
the personal computer. But integrating this
merger, which will involve hundreds of em-
ployees making and executing thousands of de-
cisions, may be the ultimate test of AOL’s stra-
tegic principle.
Experimenting Within Boundaries at Van-
guard. The Vanguard Group, with $565 billion
in assets under management, has quietly be-
harvard business review • may 2001
page 116
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
come a giant in the mutual DEMO industry. The
company’s strategy is a response to the inabil-
ity of most mutual funds to beat the market,
often because of the DEMO of their marketing
activities, overhead, and frequent transac-
tions. To counter this, Vanguard discourages
investors from making frequent trades and
keeps its own overhead and advertising costs
far below the industry average. It passes the
DEMO directly to investors, who, because
Vanguard is a mutual rather than a public
company, are the fund’s owners.
While this was Vanguard’s founding strategy,
for years the company didn’t communicate it
widely to employees. DEMO a result, they often
suggested initiatives that were out of sync DEMO
the company’s core strategy. “Midlevel manag-
ers would walk in holding the newspaper say-
ing, ‘Look at what Fidelity just did. How about
if we do that?’” Jack Brennan says. It wasn’t ap-
parent to DEMO that Vanguard’s strategy was
very different from that of its rival, DEMO has
higher costs and isn’t mutually owned. Over
the years, Vanguard DEMO invested considerable
energy in crafting a strategic principle and
using it to disseminate the company’s strategy.
Now, because employees understand the strat-
egy, DEMO management trusts them to initiate
moves on their own.
Consider Vanguard’s response to a major
trend in retail fund distribution: the emer-
gence of the on-line channel. Industry surveys
indicated that most investors wanted Internet
access DEMO their accounts and that on-line trad-
ers were more active than off-line traders. So
Vanguard chose to integrate the Internet into
its service in DEMO way that furthered its strategy
of keeping costs low: basically, it lets custom-
ers access their accounts on-line, but it limits
Web-based trading. It should be noted that
the original ideas for Vanguard’s on-line initi-
DEMO, including early ventures with AOL,
were conceived by frontline employees, not
senior executives.
Brennan says the company’s strategic princi-
ple affects the DEMO management process, in-
cluding hiring, training, performance measure-
ment, and incentives. He points to a hidden
beneﬁt of having a strong strategic DEMO:
“You’re more efﬁcient and can run with a
leaner management team because everyone is
on the same page.”
Creating a Strategic Principle
Many DEMO the best and most conspicuous exam-
ples of strategic principles come from compa-
nies that were founded on them, companies
such as eBay, DEMO, Vanguard, Southwest Air-
lines, and Wal-Mart (“Low prices, every DEMO).
The founders of those companies espoused a
clear guiding principle that summarized the
essence of what would become a full-blown
business strategy. They DEMO investors
who believed it, hired employees who bought
into it, and targeted customers who wanted it.
Leaders of long-standing multinationals, like
GE, DEMO their strategic principles at a criti-
cal juncture: when increasing corporate DEMO
plexity threatened to confuse priorities on the
front line and obscure the essence that truly
differentiated their strategy from that of their
rivals.
Companies DEMO this second category, which
represents most of the companies that are
DEMO to contemplate creating a strategic prin-
ciple, face a demanding exercise. DEMO probably
comes as no surprise that identifying the es-
sence of your strategy so it can be translated
into a simple, memorable phrase is no easy
task. It’s a bit like corporate genomics: the prin-
ciple must isolate and capture the corporate
equivalent of the genetic code that DEMO
ates your company from its competitors. This
is somewhat like identifying the 2% of DNA
that separates man from monkey—or, even
more difﬁcult and more apt, the .1% of DNA
that differentiates each human being.
There are different ways to identify the ele-
ments that must be captured DEMO a strategic
principle, but keep in mind that a corporate
strategy DEMO a plan to effectively allo-
cate scarce resources to achieve sustainable
competitive advantage. Managers need to ask
themselves: how does my company allocate
those resources to create value in a unique
way, one that differentiates my company from
competitors? Try to summarize the answer in a
brief phrase that captures the essence of your
company’s point of differentiation.
Once that DEMO has been expressed in a
phrase, test the strategic principle for DEMO endur-
ing nature. Does it capture what you intend to
do for only the next three to ﬁve years, or does
it capture a more timeless essence: the genetic
code of your company’s competitive differenti-
ation? Then test the strategic principle for its
communicative power. Is it clear, concise, and
harvard business review • may 2001
page 117
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
harvard business review • may 2001
DEMO? Would you feel proud to paint it
on the side of DEMO truck, as Wal-Mart does?
Finally, test the principle for its ability to
promote and guide action. In particular, assess
whether it exhibits the three attributes of an
effective strategic principle. Will it force trade-
DEMO? Will it serve as a test for the wisdom of a
DEMO business move, especially one that
might promote short-term proﬁts at the DEMO
pense of long-term strategy? Does it set bound-
aries within which DEMO will nonetheless be
free to experiment?
Given the importance of getting your strate-
gic principle right, it is wise to gather feedback
on these questions from executives and other
employees during an incubation period. Once
DEMO are satisﬁed that the statement is accurate
and compelling, disseminate it DEMO the
organization.
Of course, just as a brilliant strategy is
worthless DEMO it is implemented, a powerful
strategic principle is of no use DEMO it is com-
municated effectively. When CEO Jack Welch
talks about aligning employees around GE’s
strategy and values, he emphasizes the need
for consistency, simplicity, and repetition. The
approach is neither ﬂashy nor complicated, but
it takes enormous discipline and could scarcely
be more important. Welch has DEMO broadly evan-
gelized GE’s “Be number one or number two”
strategic principle that employees are not the
only ones to chant the rant. So DEMO most busi-
ness writers, MBA students, and managers at
other companies.
When Rethinking Is Required
No strategy is eternal, nor is any strategic prin-
ciple. But even if the elements of your strategy
change, the very essence of it is likely to re-
main the same. Thus, your strategy may shift
substantially as your customers’ demograph-
ics and needs DEMO It may have to be modi-
ﬁed in light of your company’s changing costs
and assets compared with those of competi-
tors. Strategic half-lives DEMO shortening, and, in
general, strategy should be reviewed every
quarter DEMO updated every year. But while it’s
worth revisiting your strategic principle every
time you reexamine your strategy, it is likely to
change only when there is a signiﬁcant shift in
the basic economics and opportunities of DEMO
market caused by, say, legislation or a com-
pletely new technology or business model.
Even then, your strategic principle may need
only reﬁning or expanding. GE’s strategic prin-
ciple has been enhanced, but not replaced,
since Welch articulated it in 1981. Similarly,
AOL’s strategic principle DEMO need to be broad-
ened, but not necessarily jettisoned, following
its merger with Time Warner. Ultimately, the
merged company’s strategic principle will also
need to embody the importance of high-quality
and relevant content, Time Warner’s hallmark.
Vanguard takes explicit steps to ensure that
the direction provided by DEMO strategic principle
remains current. For example, as part of an in-
DEMO “devil’s advocacy” process, managers are
divided into groups to critique and DEMO past
decisions and current policies. Recently, the
group reconsidered two major DEMO poli-
cies: the prohibitions against opening branch
ofﬁces and against acquiring DEMO manage-
ment ﬁrms. After considerable discussion, the
policies remained in place. DEMO to CEO
Brennan, “Sometimes the greatest value [of re-
visiting our DEMO principle] is reconﬁrming
what we’re already doing.” At the same time,
Vanguard has the process to identify when
change is needed.
Fundamental Principles
DEMO to Bain’s annual survey of execu-
tives on the usefulness of management tools
repeatedly cite the key role a mission state-
ment can play DEMO a company’s success. We
agree that a mission statement is crucial for
promulgating a company’s values and build-
ing a robust corporate culture. But DEMO still
leaves a large gap in a company’s management
communications portfolio. At least as impor-
tant as a mission statement is something that
promulgates DEMO company’s strategy—that is, a
strategic principle.
The ability of frontline employees DEMO execute
a company’s strategy without close central
oversight is vital as the pace of technological
change accelerates and as companies grow rap-
idly and DEMO increasingly decentralized. To
drive such behavior, a company needs to give
DEMO a mandate broad enough to encour-
age enterprising behavior but speciﬁc enough
to align employees’ initiatives with company
strategy.
While not a perfect analogy, the U.S. Consti-
tution is in some ways like a strategic principle.
DEMO articulates and embodies the essence of the
country’s “strategy”—to guarantee liberty and
justice for all of its citizens—while providing
page 118
Transforming Corner-Ofﬁce Strategy into Frontline Action
harvard business review • may 2001
DEMO to those drafting the laws and regula-
tions that implement the strategy. While no
corporate strategy has liberty and justice at its
heart, the elements of an effective strategy are
just as central to the success DEMO a company as
those concepts are to the prosperity of the
United States. And in neither case will success
be realized unless the core DEMO is commu-
nicated broadly and effectively.
Bain consultant Coleman Mark assisted with this
article.
Reprint R0105D
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
page 119
Transforming Corner-Office Strategy into
Frontline Action
To Order
For Harvard Business Review DEMO and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For customized DEMO quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, DEMO e-mail
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
Further Reading
AR TICLES
What Is Strategy?
by Michael E. Porter
Harvard Business Review
November–December 1996
Product no. 96608
An effective DEMO principle helps a com-
pany to maintain strategic focus, including forc-
DEMO trade-offs and creating carefully integrated
systems. In this article, Porter expands DEMO those
points within his definition of strategy. As he
explains, operational DEMO
ing, selling, and delivering offerings faster than
rivals—can reap advantages. However, rivals
can quickly copy these “best practices.” There-
fore, companies need DEMO hone their strategic
positioning, enabling them to achieve sustain-
able competitive DEMO through 1) pre-
serving their distinctive qualities, 2) performing
different DEMO from rivals, or 3) performing
similar activities in different ways. Effectively im-
plementing strategy requires trade-offs (“what
we won’t do”) and reinforcing DEMO among com-
pany activities.
E-Loyalty: Your Secret Weapon on the
Web
DEMO Frederick F. Reichheld and Phil Schefter
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2000
Product no. R00410
This article applies Gadiesh and Gilbert’s in-
sights about strategy DEMO the special challenges
of e-commerce. Using several of the same
company examples cited in “Transforming
Corner-Office Strategy,” including The Van-
guard Group, AOL, and Dell, Reichheld and
Schefter emphasize the importance of mak-
ing DEMO and the dangers of “trying to be
all things to all people.”  They also stress the
importance of maintaining strategic focus and
integrating all operations, including on-line
activities.
Speed, Simplicity, Self-Confidence:
An Interview with Jack Welch
by Noel Tichy and Ram Charan
Harvard Business Review
September–October DEMO
Product no. 89513
This interview with General Electric CEO Jack
Welch examines in greater depth the every-
day ramifications of GE’s strategic principle:
DEMO number one or number two in every in-
dustry in which we compete, or get out.” As
Welch makes clear, this principle translates
DEMO five “keys” that unlock the energy of GE’s
people: 1) candor (seeing the world as it is),
2) simplicity, 3) self-confidence in communi-
cating objectives, 4) two-way communication
between leaders and DEMO, and 5) evalua-
tion of and reward for agility and candor.
page 120
www.hbr.org
Companies typically realize
only about 60% of their
strategies’ potential value
DEMO of defects and
breakdowns in planning and
execution. By strictly
following seven simple rules,
you can get a lot more than
that.
Turning DEMO Strategy
into Great Performance
by Michael C. Mankins and Richard Steele
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
122 Article Summary
The DEMO in Brief—the core idea
The Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work
123 Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
132 Further Reading
A list DEMO related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s DEMO and applications
Reprint R0507E
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
The Idea in Brief The Idea DEMO Practice
Most companies’ strategies deliver only
63% of their promised financial value. Why?
Leaders press for better execution when
they really need a DEMO strategy. Or they
craft a new strategy when execution is the
true weak spot.
How to avoid these errors? View strategic
planning and execution as inextricably
linked—then raise the bar for both simulta-
neously. Start by DEMO seven decep-
tively straightforward rules, including: keep-
ing your strategy simple and concrete,
making resource-allocation decisions early
in the planning process, and continuously
monitoring performance as you roll out
your strategic plan.
By following DEMO rules, you reduce the
likelihood of performance shortfalls. And
even if DEMO strategy still stumbles, you
quickly determine whether the fault lies
with DEMO strategy itself, your plan for pursu-
ing it, or the execution process. The payoff?
You make the right midcourse correc-
tions—promptly. And DEMO high-performing
companies like Cisco Systems, Dow Chemi-
cal, and 3M have discovered, you boost
your company’s financial performance 60%
to 100%.
Seven rules for successful strategy execution:
•
•
Keep it simple. Avoid drawn-out DEMO
tions of lofty goals. Instead, clearly describe
what your company will DEMO won’t do.
Example:
Executives at European investment-bank-
ing giant Barclays Capital stated they
wouldn’t compete with large U.S. invest-
ment banks or in DEMO equity-
market segments. Instead, they’d position
Barclays for investors’ burgeoning need DEMO
fixed income.
Challenge assumptions. Ensure that the
assumptions underlying your long-term
strategic plans reflect real market econom-
ics and your organization’s actual perfor-
mance DEMO to rivals’.
Example:
Struggling conglomerate Tyco commis-
sioned cross-functional teams in each busi-
ness unit to continuously analyze their mar-
kets’ profitability and DEMO offerings, costs,
and price positioning relative to competi-
tors’. Teams DEMO with corporate executives
biweekly to discuss their findings. The re-
vamped process generated more realistic
plans and contributed to Tyco’s dramatic
turnaround.
Speak the DEMO language. Unit leaders
and corporate strategy, marketing, and fi-
nance teams must agree on a common
framework for assessing performance. For
example, some high-performing compa-
nies use benchmarking to estimate the size
of the profit DEMO available in each market
their company serves, the pool’s potential
growth, and the company’s likely portion of
that pool, given its market share and profit-
ability. By using the shared approach, exec-
utives easily agree on financial projections.
•
•
•
•
•
Discuss resource deployments early. DEMO
lenge business units about when they’ll
need new resources to execute their strat-
egy. By asking questions such as, “How fast
can you deploy the new sales force?” and
“How quickly will competitors respond?”
DEMO create more feasible forecasts and
plans.
Identify priorities. Delivering planned per-
formance requires a few key actions taken
at the right time, in the right way. Make
strategic priorities explicit, so everyone
knows what to focus on.
Continuously monitor performance. Track
real-time results against your plan, resetting
planning assumptions and reallocating re-
sources as needed. You’ll remedy flaws in
your DEMO and its execution—and avoid
confusing the two.
Develop execution ability. No strategy can
be better than the people who must imple-
ment it. Make DEMO and development
of managers a priority.
Example:
Barclays’ top executive team takes responsi-
bility for all hiring. Members vet each oth-
ers’ potential DEMO and reward talented
newcomers for superior execution. And
stars aren’t penalized if their business enters
new markets with lower initial returns.
page 122
COPYRIGHT DEMO 2005 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Companies typically realize only about 60% of their strategies’
potential value because DEMO defects and breakdowns in planning and
execution. By strictly following seven simple rules, you can get a lot
more than that.
Turning Great Strategy
into Great Performance
by Michael C. Mankins and Richard Steele
Three years DEMO, the leadership team at a
major manufacturer spent months developing
a DEMO strategy for its European business. Over
the prior half-decade, six new DEMO had
entered the market, each deploying the latest
in low-cost manufacturing DEMO and
slashing prices to gain market share. The per-
formance of the European unit—once the
crown jewel of the company’s portfolio—had
deteriorated to the DEMO that top manage-
ment was seriously considering divesting it.
To turn around the operation, the unit’s
leadership team had recommended a bold
new “solutions strategy”—one that would le-
verage the business’s installed base to fuel
growth DEMO after-market services and equip-
ment ﬁnancing. The ﬁnancial forecasts were
exciting—the strategy promised to restore
the business’s industry-leading returns and
growth. Impressed, top management quickly
approved the plan, agreeing to provide the
unit with all the resources it needed to make
the turnaround a reality.
Today, however, DEMO unit’s performance is
nowhere near what its management team
had projected. Returns, while better than be-
fore, remain well below the company’s cost DEMO
capital. The revenues and proﬁts that manag-
ers had expected from services and ﬁnancing
have not materialized, and the business’s cost
position still lags behind that of its major
competitors.
At the conclusion of a recent DEMO review
of the business’s strategy and performance, the
unit’s general manager DEMO steadfast and
vowed to press on. “It’s all about execution,”
she declared. “The strategy we’re pursuing is
the right one. We’re just not DEMO the
numbers. All we need to do is work harder,
work smarter.”
The parent company’s CEO was not so sure.
He wondered: Could the unit’s lackluster per-
formance have more to do with a mistaken
DEMO than poor execution? More impor-
tant, what should he do to get better perfor-
mance out of the unit? Should he do as the
general manager insisted and stay the course—
focusing the organization more DEMO on
harvard business review • july–august 2005
page 123
COPYRIGHT © 2005 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
execution—or should he encourage the leader-
DEMO team to investigate new strategy options?
If execution was the issue, what should he do
to help the business improve its game? DEMO
should he just cut his losses and sell the busi-
ness? DEMO left the operating review frustrated
and confused—not at all conﬁdent that the
business would ever deliver the performance
its managers had forecast in its DEMO plan.
Talk to almost any CEO, and you’re likely to
hear DEMO frustrations. For despite the enor-
mous time and energy that goes into strategy
development at most companies, many have
little to show for the effort. Our research sug-
gests that companies on average deliver only
63% DEMO the ﬁnancial performance their strate-
gies promise. Even worse, the causes DEMO this
strategy-to-performance gap are all but invisi-
ble to top management. Leaders then pull the
wrong levers in their attempts to turn around
performance—pressing DEMO better execution
when they actually need a better strategy, or
opting DEMO change direction when they really
should focus the organization on execution.
The result: wasted energy, lost time, and con-
tinued underperformance.
But, DEMO our research also shows, a select
group of high-performing companies have
DEMO to close the strategy-to-performance
gap through better planning and execution.
Michael C. Mankins (mmankins@
marakon.com) is a managing partner
in the San Francisco DEMO of Marakon
Associates, an international strategy-
consulting firm. He is also DEMO coauthor
of The Value Imperative: Managing
for Superior Shareholder Returns
(Free Press, 1994).  Richard Steele
(rsteele@marakon.com) is a partner
in DEMO firm’s New York office.
These companies—Barclays, Cisco Systems,
Dow Chemical, 3M, and Roche, to name a
few—develop realistic plans that are DEMO
grounded in the underlying economics of their
markets and then use the plans to drive execu-
tion. Their disciplined planning and execution
processes make DEMO far less likely that they will
face a shortfall in actual performance. And, if
they do fall short, their processes enable them
to DEMO the cause quickly and take corrective
action. While these companies’ practices are
broad in scope—ranging from unique forms of
planning to integrated processes for DEMO
and tracking resources—our experience sug-
gests that they can be applied by any business
to help craft great plans and turn them into
great DEMO
The Strategy-to-Performance Gap
In the fall of 2004, our ﬁrm, Marakon Associ-
ates, in collaboration with the Economist Intel-
ligence Unit, surveyed DEMO executives from
197 companies worldwide with sales exceeding
$500 million. We wanted to see how successful
harvard business review • july–august 2005
companies are DEMO translating their strategies
into performance. Speciﬁcally, how effective
are they at DEMO the ﬁnancial projections set
forth in their strategic plans? And when DEMO
fall short, what are the most common causes,
and what DEMO are most effective in closing
the strategy-to-performance gap? Our ﬁndings
were DEMO troubling.
While the executives we surveyed compete
in very different product markets and geogra-
phies, they share many concerns about plan-
ning and execution. Virtually all of them strug-
gle to produce the ﬁnancial performance
forecasts DEMO their long-range plans. Further-
more, the processes they use to develop DEMO
and monitor performance make it difﬁcult to
discern whether the strategy-to-performance
gap stems from poor planning, poor execution,
both, or neither. Speciﬁcally, we discovered:
Companies rarely track performance against
long-term plans. In our DEMO, less than
15% of companies make it a regular practice to
DEMO back and compare the business’s results
with the performance forecast for each unit in
its prior years’ strategic plans. As a result, top
managers can’t easily know whether the pro-
jections that underlie their capital-investment
and DEMO decisions are in any way
predictive of actual performance. More im-
portant, they risk embedding the same discon-
nect between results and forecasts in their fu-
ture investment decisions. Indeed, the fact
that so few companies routinely monitor ac-
tual versus planned performance may help ex-
plain why DEMO many companies seem to pour
good money after bad—continuing to fund
losing strategies rather than searching for new
and better options.
Multiyear results rarely DEMO projections.
When companies do track performance rela-
tive to projections over a number of years,
what commonly emerges is a picture one of
DEMO clients recently described as a series of “di-
agonal venetian blinds,” where each year’s per-
formance projections, when viewed side by
side, DEMO venetian blinds hung diago-
nally. (See the exhibit “The Venetian Blinds DEMO
Business.”) If things are going reasonably well,
the starting point DEMO each year’s new “blind”
may be a bit higher than the prior year’s start-
ing point, but rarely does performance match
the prior year’s projection. The obvious impli-
cation: year after year of underperformance
relative to plan.
page 124
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
The venetian blinds phenomenon creates a
DEMO of related problems. First, because
the plan’s ﬁnancial forecasts are unreliable,DEMO
senior management cannot conﬁdently tie
capital approval to strategic planning. Conse-
quently, strategy development and resource
allocation become decoupled, and the an-
nual DEMO plan (or budget) ends up driv-
ing the company’s long-term investments and
strategy. Second, portfolio management gets
derailed. Without credible ﬁnancial forecasts,
top management cannot know whether a par-
ticular business is worth more DEMO the com-
pany and its shareholders than to potential
buyers. As a result, businesses that destroy
shareholder value stay in the portfolio too
long (in the hope that their performance will
eventually turn around), and value-creating
businesses are starved for capital and other re-
sources. Third, poor ﬁnancial forecasts com-
plicate communications with the investment
community. Indeed, to avoid coming up short
at the end of the quarter, the CFO and head
of investor relations frequently impose a
“contingency” or “safety margin” on DEMO of
the forecast produced by consolidating the
business-unit plans. Because this top-down
contingency is wrong just as often as it is
right, poor ﬁnancial forecasts run the risk of
damaging a company’s reputation with ana-
lysts DEMO investors.
A lot of value is lost in translation. Given the
poor quality of ﬁnancial forecasts in most stra-
tegic plans, it is probably not surprising that
most companies fail to realize their strategies’
potential value. DEMO we’ve mentioned, our sur-
vey indicates that, on average, most DEMO
deliver only 63% of their potential ﬁnancial
performance. And more than one-third of the
executives surveyed placed the ﬁgure at less
than 50%. Put DEMO, if management
were to realize the full potential of its current
DEMO, the increase in value could be as
much as 60% to DEMO
As illustrated in the exhibit “Where the Per-
formance Goes,” the strategy-to-performance
gap can be attributed to a combination of fac-
tors, such as poorly formulated plans, misap-
plied resources, breakdowns in communica-
tion, and limited accountability for results. To
Where the Performance Goes
This chart DEMO the average performance loss implied by the importance ratings that managers in our
survey gave to speciﬁc breakdowns in the planning and execution process.
DEMO
37% Performance Loss
5.2%
4.5%
Inadequate or unavailable
resources
Poorly communicated
strategy
Actions required to execute
not clearly deﬁned
63%
Average Realized
Performance
4.1%
DEMO
3.0%
3.0%
2.6%
1.9%
0.7%
0.7%
Unclear accountabilities for
execution
Organizational silos and culture
blocking execution
Inadequate performance
monitoring
Inadequate consequences or
rewards for DEMO or success
Poor senior leadership
Uncommitted leadership
Unapproved strategy
Other obstacles (DEMO inadequate
skills and capabilities)
7. 5%
harvard business review • july–august 2005
page 125
Copyright © 2005 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All DEMO reserved.
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
elaborate, management starts with a strategy
it believes will generate a certain level of ﬁ-
nancial performance and DEMO over time
(100%, as noted in the exhibit). But, DEMO
to the executives we surveyed, the failure to
have the right DEMO in the right place at
the right time strips away some 7.5% of the
strategy’s potential value. Some 5.2% is lost to
poor communications, 4.5% to poor action
planning, 4.1% to blurred accountabilities,
and so on. Of course, these estimates reﬂect
the average experience of the executives we
surveyed and may not be representative of
every company or every DEMO Nonethe-
less, they do highlight the issues managers
need to focus DEMO as they review their compa-
nies’ processes for planning and executing
strategies.
The Venetian Blinds of Business
This graphic illustrates a dynamic com-
mon DEMO many companies. In January
2001, management approves a strategic
plan (Plan 2001) that projects modest
performance for the ﬁrst year and a high
rate of performance thereafter, as shown
in the ﬁrst solid line. For beating the ﬁrst
year’s projection, the unit management
is both commended and handsomely re-
warded. A new plan is then prepared,
projecting uninspiring DEMO for the ﬁrst
year and once again promising a fast rate
of performance improvement thereafter,
as shown by the second solid line (Plan
2002). This, too, succeeds only partially,
so another plan DEMO drawn up, and so on.
The actual rate of performance improve-
DEMO can be seen by joining the start
points of each plan (DEMO dotted line).
Performance
(return on capital)
30%
25%
Plan
DEMO
Plan
2002
Plan
2003
Plan
2004
20%
15%
10%
5%
actual
performance
0%
2000 2001 2002
2003 2004 2005 2006
harvard business review • DEMO 2005
What emerges from our survey results is a
sequence of events that goes something like
this: Strategies are approved but poorly com-
municated. This, in turn, makes the transla-
tion of strategy into speciﬁc DEMO and re-
source plans all but impossible. Lower levels
in the organization don’t know what they
need to do, when they need to do it, or what
resources will be required to deliver the per-
formance senior management expects. Conse-
quently, the expected results never material-
ize. And because no one is held responsible
for the shortfall, the cycle of underperfor-
mance gets repeated, often for many years.
Performance bottlenecks are frequently
invisible to top management. The processes
most companies use to develop plans, allocate
resources, and track performance make it difﬁ-
cult for top management to discern whether
the strategy-to-performance gap stems from
poor planning, poor execution, both, or nei-
ther. Because so many plans incorporate
overly ambitious DEMO, companies fre-
quently write off performance shortfalls as
“just another hockey-stick DEMO And when
plans are realistic and performance falls short,
executives have few early-warning signals.
They often have no way of knowing whether
critical DEMO were carried out as expected,
resources were deployed on schedule, DEMO
itors responded as anticipated, and so on. Un-
fortunately, without clear information on how
and why performance is falling short, it is vir-
tually impossible for top management to take
appropriate corrective action.
The strategy-to-performance DEMO fosters a
culture of underperformance. In many com-
panies, planning and DEMO breakdowns are
reinforced—even magniﬁed—by an insidious
shift in culture. In our experience, this change
occurs subtly but quickly, and once it has taken
DEMO it is very hard to reverse. First, unrealistic
plans create the DEMO throughout the or-
ganization that plans simply will not be ful-
ﬁlled. Then, as the expectation becomes experi-
ence, it becomes the norm DEMO performance
commitments won’t be kept. So commitments
cease to be binding promises with real conse-
quences. Rather than stretching to ensure that
commitments are DEMO, managers, expecting
failure, seek to protect themselves from the
eventual DEMO They spend time covering their
tracks rather than identifying actions to en-
hance performance. The organization becomes
page 126
Copyright © 2005 Harvard Business DEMO
Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
less self-critical and less intellectually honest
DEMO its shortcomings. Consequently, it loses its
capacity to perform.
Closing the DEMO
Performance Gap
As signiﬁcant as the strategy-to-performance
gap is at most companies, management can
close it. A number of high-performing compa-
nies have found ways to realize more of their
strategies’ potential. Rather than focus on DEMO
proving their planning and execution pro-
cesses separately to close the gap, these com-
panies work both sides of the equation, raising
standards DEMO both planning and execution si-
multaneously and creating clear links be-
tween them.
Our research and experience in working
with many of these companies DEMO they
follow seven rules that apply to planning and
execution. Living by these rules enables them
to objectively assess any performance shortfall
and determine DEMO it stems from the strat-
egy, the plan, the execution, DEMO employees’ ca-
pabilities. And the same rules that allow them
to spot problems early also help them prevent
performance shortfalls in the ﬁrst place. DEMO
rules may seem simple—even obvious—but
when strictly and collectively observed, they
DEMO transform both the quality of a company’s
strategy and its ability to deliver results.
Rule 1: Keep it simple, make it concrete.
At DEMO companies, strategy is a highly ab-
stract concept—often confused with vision DEMO
aspiration—and is not something that can be
easily communicated or translated into action.
But without a clear sense of where the com-
pany is DEMO and why, lower levels in the or-
ganization cannot put in DEMO executable
plans. In short, the link between strategy and
performance can’t DEMO drawn because the strat-
egy itself is not sufﬁciently concrete.
To start off the planning and execution pro-
cess on the right track, high-performing compa-
nies avoid long, drawn-out descriptions of lofty
goals and instead stick to clear language de-
scribing their course of action. Bob Diamond,
DEMO of Barclays Capital, one of the fastest-
growing and best-performing investment DEMO
ing operations in Europe, puts it this way:
“We’ve been DEMO clear about what we will and
will not do. We knew we weren’t going to go
head-to-head with U.S. bulge bracket ﬁrms. We
communicated DEMO we wouldn’t compete in
this way and that we wouldn’t play in unproﬁt-
able segments within the equity markets but in-
stead would invest DEMO position ourselves for the
euro, the burgeoning need for ﬁxed income,DEMO
and the end of Glass-Steigel. By ensuring every-
one knew the strategy and how it was different,
we’ve been able to spend more DEMO on tasks
that are key to executing this strategy.”
By being clear about what the strategy is
and isn’t, companies like Barclays keep every-
one headed in the same direction. More im-
portant, they safeguard the performance their
counterparts lose to ineffective communica-
tions; their resource and action planning be-
comes more effective; and accountabilities are
easier to specify.
Rule 2: Debate assumptions, not forecasts.
At many companies, a business unit’s strategic
plan is little more than a negotiated settle-
ment—the result of DEMO bargaining with
the corporate center over performance targets
and ﬁnancial forecasts. Planning, therefore, is
largely a political process—with unit manage-
ment arguing for DEMO near-term proﬁt pro-
jections (to secure higher annual bonuses) and
top management pressing for more long-term
stretch (to satisfy the board of directors and
other external constituents). Not surprisingly,
the forecasts that emerge DEMO these negotia-
tions almost always understate what each
business unit can deliver in the near term and
overstate what can realistically be expected in
DEMO long-term—the hockey-stick charts with
which CEOs are all too familiar.
Even at companies where the planning
process is isolated from the political concerns
of DEMO evaluation and compensa-
tion, the approach used to generate ﬁnancial
projections DEMO has built-in biases. Indeed,
ﬁnancial forecasting frequently takes place in
complete isolation from the marketing or
strategy functions. A business unit’s ﬁnance
function DEMO a highly detailed line-item
forecast whose short-term assumptions may
be realistic, DEMO conservative, but whose long-
term assumptions are largely uninformed. For
example, revenue forecasts are typically based
on crude estimates about average pricing,
DEMO growth, and market share. Projections
of long-term costs and working capital DEMO
quirements are based on an assumption
about annual productivity gains—expedi-
ently tied, perhaps, to some companywide ef-
ﬁciency program. These forecasts are difﬁcult
DEMO business review • july–august 2005
page 127
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
for top management to pick apart. DEMO line
item may be completely defensible, but the
overall plan and DEMO embed a clear
upward bias—rendering them useless for
driving strategy execution.
High-performing companies view planning
altogether differently. They want their fore-
casts to drive DEMO work they actually do. To
make this possible, they have to DEMO that
the assumptions underlying their long-term
plans reﬂect both the real economics of their
markets and the performance experience of
the company relative to DEMO Tyco CEO
Ed Breen, brought in to turn the company
around DEMO July 2002, credits a revamped plan-
building process for contributing to DEMO dra-
matic recovery. When Breen joined the com-
pany, Tyco was DEMO labyrinth of 42 business units
and several hundred proﬁt centers, built DEMO
over many years through countless acquisi-
tions. Few of Tyco’s businesses had complete
plans, and virtually none had reliable ﬁnancial
forecasts.
To get a grip on the conglomerate’s complex
operations, Breen assigned cross-functional
teams at each unit, drawn from strategy, mar-
keting, and ﬁnance, to develop DEMO infor-
mation on the proﬁtability of Tyco’s primary
markets as well as the product or service offer-
ings, costs, and price positioning relative DEMO the
competition. The teams met with corporate ex-
ecutives biweekly during Breen’s ﬁrst six
months to review and discuss the ﬁndings.
These discussions focused DEMO the assumptions
that would drive each unit’s long-term ﬁnan-
cial performance, DEMO on the ﬁnancial forecasts
themselves. In fact, once assumptions about
market DEMO were agreed on, it was relatively
easy for Tyco’s central ﬁnance DEMO to pre-
pare externally oriented and internally consis-
tent forecasts for each unit.
Separating the process of building assump-
tions from that of preparing DEMO projec-
tions helps to ground the business unit–cor-
porate center dialogue in economic reality.
Units can’t hide behind specious details, and
corporate center executives can’t push for un-
realistic goals. What’s more, the fact-based
discussion resulting from this kind of ap-
proach builds trust between the top team
DEMO each unit and removes barriers to fast
and effective execution. “When you under-
stand the fundamentals and performance
drivers in a detailed way,” DEMO Bob Diamond,
“you can then step back, and you don’t DEMO
to manage the details. The team knows
which issues it can get on with, which it
needs to ﬂag to me, and which DEMO we re-
ally need to work out together.”
Rule 3: Use DEMO rigorous framework, speak a
common language. To be productive, the dia-
logue between the corporate center and the
business units about market trends DEMO as-
sumptions must be conducted within a rigor-
ous framework. Many of the companies we ad-
vise use the concept of proﬁt pools, which
draws on the competition theories of Michael
Porter and others. In this DEMO, a busi-
ness’s long-term ﬁnancial performance is tied
to the total DEMO pool available in each of the
markets it serves and its share of each proﬁt
pool—which, in turn, is tied to the business’s
DEMO share and relative proﬁtability versus
competitors in each market.
In this approach, the ﬁrst step is for the cor-
porate center and the unit team to agree on
the size and growth of each proﬁt pool.
DEMO competitive markets, such as pulp and
paper or commercial airlines, have small (or
negative) total proﬁt pools. Less competitive
markets, like soft drinks or pharmaceuticals,
have large total proﬁt pools. We ﬁnd it DEMO
to estimate the size of each proﬁt pool di-
rectly—through detailed benchmarking—and
then forecast changes in the pool’s size and
growth. Each business unit DEMO assesses what
share of the total proﬁt pool it can realistically
capture over time, given its business model
and positioning. Competitively advantaged
businesses can capture a large share of the
proﬁt pool—by gaining or sustaining a DEMO
market share, generating above-average proﬁt-
ability, or both. Competitively disadvantaged
businesses, by contrast, typically capture a neg-
ligible share of the proﬁt DEMO Once the unit
and the corporate center agree on the likely
share of the pool the business will capture over
time, the corporate center can easily create the
ﬁnancial projections that will serve as the
unit’s DEMO map.
In our view, the speciﬁc framework a com-
pany uses DEMO ground its strategic plans isn’t all
that important. What is critical is that the
framework establish a common language for
the dialogue between the DEMO center and
the units—one that the strategy, marketing,
and ﬁnance DEMO all understand and use.
Without a rigorous framework to link a busi-
harvard business review • july–august 2005
page 128
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
ness’s performance in the product markets
DEMO its ﬁnancial performance over time, it is
very difﬁcult for top DEMO to ascertain
whether the ﬁnancial projections that accom-
pany a business unit’s strategic plan are reason-
able and realistically achievable. As a result,
DEMO can’t know with conﬁdence
whether a performance shortfall stems from
poor execution or an unrealistic and un-
grounded plan.
Rule 4: Discuss resource deployments early.
Companies can create more realistic forecasts
and more executable plans if DEMO discuss up
front the level and timing of critical resource
deployments. At Cisco Systems, for example, a
cross-functional team reviews the level and
DEMO of resource deployments early in the
planning stage. These teams regularly meet
with John Chambers (CEO), Dennis Powell
(CFO), Randy Pond (VP of operations), and
the other members of Cisco’s executive team
DEMO discuss their ﬁndings and make recommen-
dations. Once agreement is reached on re-
source allocation and timing at the unit level,
those elements DEMO factored into the com-
pany’s two-year plan. Cisco then monitors
each unit’s actual resource deployments on a
monthly basis (as well as its performance) to
make sure things are going according to plan
and that the plan is generating the expected
results.
Challenging business units about when new
DEMO need to be in place focuses the plan-
ning dialogue on what actually needs to hap-
pen across the company in order to execute
DEMO unit’s strategy. Critical questions invari-
ably surface, such as: How long will it take us
to change customers’ purchase patterns? How
fast can we deploy our new sales force? How
quickly will competitors respond? DEMO are
tough questions. But answering them makes
the forecasts and the plans they accompany
more feasible.
What’s more, an early assessment of re-
source needs also informs discussions about
market trends and drivers, improving the qual-
ity of the strategic plan and making it far more
executable. In DEMO course of talking about the
resources needed to expand in the rapidly
growing cable market, for example, Cisco came
to realize that additional DEMO would require
more trained engineers to improve existing
products and develop new features. So, rather
than relying on the functions to provide these
resources from the bottom up, corporate man-
agement earmarked a speciﬁc number of
trained engineers to support growth in cable.
Cisco’s ﬁnancial-planning organization care-
fully DEMO the engineering head count, the
pace of feature development, and revenues
generated by the business to make sure the
strategy stays on track.
DEMO 5: Clearly identify priorities. To deliver
any strategy successfully, managers must
make thousands of tactical decisions and put
them into action. But not DEMO tactics are
equally important. In most instances, a few
key steps DEMO be taken—at the right time and
in the right way—to meet planned perfor-
mance. Leading companies make these priori-
ties explicit so that each DEMO has a clear
sense of where to direct his or her efforts.
At Textron, a $10 billion multi-industrial
conglomerate, each business unit identiﬁes
DEMO priorities” that it must act
upon to realize the performance outlined in
its strategic plan. Each improvement priority
is translated into action items with DEMO de-
ﬁned accountabilities, timetables, and key per-
formance indicators (KPIs) that allow execu-
tives to tell how a unit is delivering on DEMO
priority. Improvement priorities and action
items cascade to every level at the company—
from the management committee (consisting
of Textron’s top ﬁve executives) DEMO to the
lowest levels in each of the company’s ten
business units. Lewis Campbell, Textron’s CEO,
summarizes the company’s approach this way:
“Everyone needs to know: ‘If I have only one
hour to work, here’s what I’m going to focus
on.’ Our goal deployment process makes each
individual’s accountabilities and priorities
clear.”
The Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche goes
DEMO far as to turn its business plans into detailed
performance contracts that clearly specify the
steps needed and the risks that must be man-
DEMO to achieve the plans. These contracts all
include a “delivery agenda” that lists the ﬁve to
ten critical priorities with the greatest impact
on DEMO By maintaining a delivery
agenda at each level of the company, DEMO
man and CEO Franz Humer and his leadership
team make sure “everyone at Roche under-
stands exactly what we have agreed to do at DEMO
strategic level and that our strategy gets trans-
lated into clear execution priorities. Our deliv-
ery agenda helps us stay the course with the
DEMO business review • july–august 2005
page 129
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
strategy decisions we have made so DEMO execu-
tion is actually allowed to happen. We cannot
control implementation from HQ, but we can
agree on the priorities, communicate relent-
lessly, and hold managers accountable for exe-
cuting against their commitments.”
Rule 6: Continuously monitor performance.
Seasoned executives know almost instinc-
tively whether a business DEMO asked for too
much, too little, or just enough resources to
deliver the goods. They develop this capability
over time—essentially through trial and DEMO
High-performing companies use real-time per-
formance tracking to help accelerate this trial-
and-error process. They continuously monitor
their resource deployment patterns and their
results DEMO plan, using continuous feed-
back to reset planning assumptions and reallo-
DEMO resources. This real-time information al-
lows management to spot and remedy ﬂaws in
the plan and shortfalls in execution—and to
avoid confusing one with DEMO other.
At Textron, for example, each KPI is care-
fully monitored, and regular operating reviews
percolate performance shortfalls—or “red
light” events—up through the management
ranks. This provides CEO Lewis Campbell, CFO
Ted French, and DEMO other members of Tex-
tron’s management committee with the infor-
mation they need to spot and ﬁx breakdowns
in execution.
A similar approach has DEMO an important
role in the dramatic revival of Dow Chemical’s
fortunes. In December 2001, with performance
in a free fall, Dow’s board of DEMO asked
Bill Stavropoulos (Dow’s CEO from 1993 to
1999) to return to the helm. Stavropoulos and
Andrew Liveris (the current CEO, then DEMO)
immediately focused Dow’s entire top leader-
ship team on execution through a project they
called the Performance Improvement Drive.
They began by deﬁning DEMO performance
metrics for each of Dow’s 79 business units.
Performance on these key metrics was tracked
against plans on a weekly basis, and the entire
leadership team discussed any serious discrep-
ancies ﬁrst thing every Monday DEMO As
Liveris told us, the weekly monitoring sessions
“forced everyone to DEMO the details of execu-
tion” and let “the entire organization know
how we were performing.”
Continuous monitoring of performance is
particularly important in highly DEMO indus-
tries, where events outside anyone’s control
can render a plan DEMO Under CEO Alan
Mulally, Boeing Commercial Airplanes’ leader-
ship team holds DEMO business performance
reviews to track the division’s results against its
multiyear plan. By tracking the deployment of
resources as a leading indicator of whether DEMO
plan is being executed effectively, BCA’s leader-
ship team can make DEMO corrections each
week rather than waiting for quarterly results
to roll in.
Furthermore, by proactively monitoring the
primary drivers of performance (such as DEMO
senger trafﬁc patterns, airline yields and load
factors, and new aircraft orders), BCA is better
able to develop and deploy effective counter-
DEMO when events throw its plans off
course. During the SARS epidemic in late
2002, for example, BCA’s leadership team took
action to mitigate DEMO adverse consequences of
the illness on the business’s operating plan
within a week of the initial outbreak. The
abrupt decline in air trafﬁc to DEMO Kong, Sin-
gapore, and other Asian business centers sig-
naled that the number of future aircraft deliv-
eries to the region would fall—perhaps
DEMO Accordingly, BCA scaled back its
medium-term production plans (delaying the
scheduled ramp-up of some programs and ac-
celerating the shutdown of others) and ad-
justed its multiyear operating plan to reﬂect
the anticipated ﬁnancial impact.
DEMO 7: Reward and develop execution ca-
pabilities. No list of rules DEMO this topic would
be complete without a reminder that compa-
nies have to motivate and develop their staffs;
at the end of the DEMO, no process can be better
than the people who have to DEMO it work.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, nearly all of the
companies we studied insisted that the selec-
tion and development of management was an
essential DEMO in their success. And while
improving the capabilities of a company’s
workforce is no easy task—often taking many
years—these capabilities, once built, can DEMO
superior planning and execution for decades.
For Barclays’ Bob Diamond, nothing DEMO more
important than “ensuring that [the company]
hires only A players.” In his view, “the hidden
costs of bad hiring decisions are enormous, DEMO
despite the fact that we are doubling in size,
we insist that as a top team we take responsi-
bility for all hiring. DEMO jury of your peers is
the toughest judgment, so we vet DEMO others’
potential hires and challenge each other to
harvard business review • july–august 2005
page 130
The prize for closing the
strategy-to-performance
gap is huge—an increase
in performance DEMO
anywhere from 60% to
100% for most
companies.
keep raising the bar.” It’s equally important to
make sure that talented hires are rewarded for
DEMO execution. To reinforce its core values
of “client,” “meritocracy,” “team,” and “integ-
rity,” Barclays Capital has innovative pay
schemes that DEMO fence” rewards. Stars don’t
lose out just because the business is entering
new markets with lower returns during the
growth phase. Says Diamond: “It’s so bad for
the culture if you don’t deliver what you prom-
DEMO to people who have delivered…. You’ve
got to make sure you are consistent and fair,
unless you want to lose your most productive
DEMO
Companies that are strong on execution also
emphasize development. Soon after he be-
came CEO of 3M, Jim McNerney and his top
team spent 18 months hashing out a new lead-
ership model for the company. DEMO de-
bates among members of the top team led to
agreement on six “leadership attributes”—
namely, the ability to “chart the course,” “ener-
gize and inspire others,” “demonstrate ethics,
integrity, and compliance,” “deliver results,”
“raise the bar,” and “innovate resourcefully.”
3M’s leadership DEMO that these six attributes
were essential for the company to become
skilled at execution and known for account-
ability. Today, the leaders credit this model
with helping 3M to sustain and even improve
its consistently strong DEMO
• • •
The prize for closing the strategy-to-performance
gap is huge—an increase in performance of
anywhere from 60% to 100% for most compa-
DEMO But this almost certainly understates the
harvard business review • july–august 2005
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
true beneﬁts. Companies that create tight
DEMO between their strategies, their plans, and,
ultimately, their performance DEMO experi-
ence a cultural multiplier effect. Over time, as
they turn DEMO strategies into great perfor-
mance, leaders in these organizations become
much DEMO conﬁdent in their own capabilities
and much more willing to make the stretch
commitments that inspire and transform large
companies. In turn, individual managers who
keep their commitments are rewarded—with
faster progression and fatter paychecks—rein-
forcing DEMO behaviors needed to drive any
company forward.
Eventually, a culture of DEMO
emerges. Investors start giving management
the beneﬁt of the doubt when it comes to bold
moves and performance delivery. The result is
a performance DEMO on the company’s
stock—one that further rewards stretch com-
mitments and performance delivery. Before
long, the company’s reputation among poten-
tial recruits rises, DEMO a virtuous circle is cre-
ated in which talent begets performance, DEMO
formance begets rewards, and rewards beget
even more talent. In short, closing the strategy-
to-performance gap is not only a source of im-
DEMO performance improvement but also
an important driver of cultural change with a
large and lasting impact on the organization’s
capabilities, strategies, and competitiveness.
DEMO R0507E
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or DEMO
or go to www.hbr.org
page 131
Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance
Further Reading
To Order
For Harvard DEMO Review reprints and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
DEMO customized and quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, or e-mail
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
AR TICLES
Why Good Companies Go Bad
by Donald N. Sull
Harvard Business Review
July–August 1999
Product no. 99410
Sull DEMO another important cause of stra-
tegic underperformance: active inertia.
Through active DEMO, executives cling to stra-
tegic formulas that brought success in the
DEMO though emerging business reali-
ties call for new formulas. The strategic frames
of the past become blinders; processes harden
into routines; relationships become DEMO;
and values turn into dogmas. Sull offers addi-
tional advice for avoiding active inertia. Rather
than asking, “What should we do?” ask, “What’s
hindering us?” You’ll focus leaders’ attention on
the strategic frames, processes, relationships,
and values that must change if your company
DEMO to define a new direction.
Having Trouble with Your Strategy?
Then Map It
by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton
Harvard Business DEMO
September–October 2000
Product no. R00509
A strategy map—a Balanced Scorecard tool
developed by Robert Kaplan and David
Norton—can help you apply the seven rules
DEMO and Steele define. The map enables
you to graphically depict the cause-and-effect
assumptions underlying your company’s strat-
egy. In clear, concrete language, it DEMO the
objectives you must achieve to execute your
strategy, the performance DEMO you’ll use,
and the targets you’ve set for each measure.
Using Mobil North American Marketing and
Refining Company as an example, Kaplan and
Norton explain how to create your strategy
map and develop themes for DEMO four “per-
spectives”: financial, customer, internal pro-
cesses, and learning and growth. The Mobil
division used a strategy map to transform it-
DEMO from a centrally controlled manufacturer
of commodity products to a decentralized,
customer-driven organization.
Execution Without Excuses: An Interview
with Michael Dell and Kevin Rollins
by Michael Dell, Kevin Rollins,
Thomas A. Stewart, and DEMO O’Brien
Harvard Business Review
March 2005
Product no. R0503G
This article describes how Dell Computer
constantly identifies strategic priorities—
Mankins’s and Steele’s rule #5—as DEMO busi-
ness realities emerge. For example, top execu-
tives realized that DEMO had a very visible group
of employees who’d gotten rich from stock
options. But as CEO Kevin Rollins maintains,
“You can’t build a DEMO company on employ-
ees who say, ‘If you pay me enough, I’ll stay.’”
To reignite the company’s spirit, Dell imple-
mented an employee survey whose results
spurred the creation of the Winning Culture
initiative, now a top operating priority. The
company also defined the highly motivating
Soul DEMO Dell: Focus on the customer, be open
and direct in communications, be a good glo-
bal citizen, have fun in winning. Now DEMO
stay at Dell for reasons other than money.
page 132
www.hbr.org
Your organization can
become more decisive—and
can implement strategy more
quickly—if DEMO know where
the bottlenecks are and who’s
empowered to break through
them.
Who Has the D?
How Clear Decision Roles Enhance
Organizational Performance
DEMO Paul Rogers and Marcia Blenko
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:
134 Article Summary
The Idea in Brief—the core idea
The DEMO in Practice—putting the idea to work
135 Who Has the D?: How Clear Decision Roles Enhance Organizational
Performance
143 Further Reading
A list DEMO related materials, with annotations to guide further
exploration of the article’s DEMO and applications
Reprint R0601D
Who Has the D?
How Clear Decision Roles Enhance Organizational Performance
DEMO Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice
Decisions are the coin of the realm in busi-
ness. Every success, every mishap, every op-
DEMO seized or missed stems from a de-
cision someone made—or failed to make.
Yet in many firms, decisions routinely stall
inside the organization—hurting the entire
company’s performance.
The culprit? Ambiguity over who’s account-
able for which decisions. In one auto manu-
facturer that was missing milestones for
rolling DEMO new models, marketers and
product developers each thought they
were responsible DEMO deciding new models’
standard features and colors. Result? Con-
flict over DEMO had final say, endless revisit-
ing of decisions—and missed deadlines
that DEMO to lost sales.
How to clarify decision accountability? As-
sign clear DEMO for the decisions that most
affect your firm’s performance—such as
which markets to enter, where to allocate
capital, and how to drive product DEMO
tion. Think “RAPID”: Who should recom-
mend a course of action DEMO a key decision?
Who must agree to a recommendation be-
fore it can move forward? Who will perform
the actions needed to implement the deci-
sion? Whose input is needed to determine
the proposal’s feasibility? Who decides—
brings the decision to closure and commits
the organization to implement it?
When you clarify decision roles, you make
the right choices—swiftly and effectively.
The RAPID Decision Model
For every strategic decision, assign the following roles and responsibilities:
PEOPLE WHO... ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR...
Recommend DEMO a proposal on a key decision, gathering input, and providing data and
analysis to make a sensible choice in a timely fashion
•Consulting DEMO input providers—hearing and incorporating their views, and
winning their buy-in
Agree DEMO Negotiating a modified proposal with the recommender if they have concerns
about the original proposal
• Escalating unresolved issues to the decider if the DEMO and “R” can’t resolve
differences
•If necessary, exercising veto power over DEMO recommendation
Perform •Executing a decision once it’s made
•Seeing that the decision is implemented promptly and effectively
Input
Decide
Decision-Role Pitfalls
In assigning decision DEMO:
• Ensure that only one person “has the D.” If
two or more people think they’re in charge
of a particular decision, a tug-of-war results.
• Watch for a proliferation of “A’s.” Too many
people DEMO veto power can paralyze rec-
ommenders. If many people must agree,
you probably haven’t pushed decisions
down far enough in your organization.
• DEMO assigning too many “I’s.” When many
people give input, at least DEMO of them
aren’t making meaningful contributions.
The RAPID Model in Action
Example:
At British department-store chain John
Lewis, company buyers wanted to increase
sales and reduce complexity by offering
fewer salt and pepper mill models. DEMO
company launched the streamlined prod-
•Providing relevant facts to the recommender that shed light on the proposal’s
feasibility and practical implications
•Serving as the DEMO point of accountability
•Bringing the decision to closure by resolving any impasse in the decision-making
process
•Committing the organization to implementing the decision
uct DEMO without involving the sales staff.
And sales fell. Upon visiting the stores, buy-
ers saw that salespeople (not understand-
ing the strategy behind DEMO recommenda-
tion) had halved shelf space to match the
reduction in DEMO range, rather than
maintaining the same space but stocking
more of DEMO products.
To fix the problem, the company “gave buy-
ers the DEMO on how much space product cat-
egories would have. Sales staff “had the A”:
If space allocations didn’t make sense to
them, they could force additional negotia-
tions. They also “had the P,” implementing
DEMO layouts in stores.
Once decision roles were clarified, sales of salt
DEMO pepper mills exceeded original levels.
page 134
COPYRIGHT © 2005 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Your organization can become more decisive—and can implement
strategy more quickly—if you DEMO where the bottlenecks are and who’s
empowered to break through them.
Who Has the D?
How Clear Decision Roles Enhance
Organizational Performance
by DEMO Rogers and Marcia Blenko
Decisions are the coin of the realm in business.
Every success, every mishap, every opportu-
nity seized or missed DEMO the result of a decision
that someone made or failed to make. At
many companies, decisions routinely get stuck
inside the organization like loose change. But
it’s more than loose change that’s at stake, of
course; it’s the performance of the entire orga-
nization. Never mind what industry you’re in,
how big and well known your company may
be, or how clever your strategy is. If you can’t
make the right DEMO quickly and effec-
tively, and execute those decisions consis-
tently, your business will lose ground.
Indeed, making good decisions and making
them happen quickly are the hallmarks of
high-performing organizations. When we sur-
veyed executives DEMO 350 global companies
about their organizational effectiveness, only
15% said that DEMO have an organization that
helps the business outperform competitors.
What sets those top performers apart is the
quality, speed, and execution of their DEMO
making. The most effective organizations score
well on the major strategic decisions—which
markets to enter or exit, which businesses to
buy or sell, DEMO to allocate capital and talent.
But they truly shine when it comes to the criti-
cal operating decisions requiring consistency
and speed—how to drive DEMO innovation,
the best way to position brands, how to man-
DEMO channel partners.
Even in companies respected for their deci-
siveness, however, there can be ambiguity over
who is accountable for which decisions. As DEMO re-
sult, the entire decision-making process can
stall, usually at one of four bottlenecks: global
versus local, center versus business unit, func-
tion versus function, and inside versus outside
partners.
The ﬁrst of these bottlenecks, global versus
local decision making, can occur in nearly
every DEMO business process and function. De-
cisions about brand building and product de-
velopment frequently get snared here, when
companies wrestle over how much authority
local businesses should have to tailor products
for their markets. Marketing is DEMO classic
harvard business review • january 2006
page 135
COPYRIGHT © 2005 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Who Has the D?
Paul Rogers (paul.rogers@bain.com)
is a partner with Bain & Company in
London and leads Bain’s global organi-
zation DEMO  Marcia Blenko
(marcia.blenko@bain.com) is a Bain
partner in Boston and DEMO leader of
Bain’s North American organization
practice.
harvard business review • january 2006
global versus local issue—should local markets
have the power to determine DEMO and ad-
vertising?
The second bottleneck, center versus business
unit DEMO making, tends to afﬂict parent
companies and their subsidiaries. Business
units DEMO on the front line, close to the cus-
tomer; the center sees the big picture, sets
broad goals, and keeps the organization DEMO
cused on winning. Where should the decision-
making power lie? Should DEMO major capital in-
vestment, for example, depend on the approval
of the business unit that will own it, or should
headquarters make the ﬁnal call?
Function versus function decision making is
perhaps the most DEMO bottleneck. Every
manufacturer, for instance, faces a balancing
act between product development and market-
ing during the design of a new product. Who
DEMO decide what? Cross-functional decisions
too often result in ineffective compromise so-
DEMO, which frequently need to be revisited
because the right people were DEMO involved at
the outset.
The fourth decision-making bottleneck, in-
side versus DEMO partners, has become famil-
iar with the rise of outsourcing, joint ventures,
strategic alliances, and franchising. In such ar-
rangements, companies DEMO to be absolutely
clear about which decisions can be owned by
the external partner (usually those about the
execution of strategy) and which DEMO con-
tinue to be made internally (decisions about
the strategy itself)DEMO In the case of outsourcing,
for instance, brand-name apparel and DEMO
wear marketers once assumed that overseas
suppliers could be responsible for decisions
about plant employees’ wages and working
conditions. Big mistake.
Clearing the Bottlenecks
DEMO most important step in unclogging decision-
making bottlenecks is assigning clear roles and
responsibilities. Good decision makers recog-
nize which decisions really matter to DEMO
mance. They think through who should recom-
mend a particular path, DEMO needs to agree,
who should have input, who has ultimate DEMO
sponsibility for making the decision, and who is
accountable for follow-through. DEMO make the
process routine. The result: better coordination
and quicker response DEMO
Companies have devised a number of meth-
ods to clarify decision roles and assign respon-
sibilities. We have used an approach called
RAPID, which has evolved over the years, to
help hundreds of companies develop clear de-
cision-making guidelines. It is, for sure, not a
panacea (an indecisive decision maker, for ex-
ample, can ruin any good system), but it’s an
important start. The letters in RAPID stand for
the primary roles in any decision-making pro-
cess, although these roles are not performed
exactly in this order: recommend, agree, per-
form, input, and decide—the “D.” (See the side-
bar “A Decision-Making Primer.”)
The people who recommend a course of ac-
tion are responsible for making DEMO proposal or
offering alternatives. They need data and anal-
ysis to support their recommendations, as well
as common sense about what’s reasonable,
practical, and effective.
The people who agree to a recommendation
are those who need to sign off on it before it
can move forward. If DEMO veto a proposal, they
must either work with the recommender to
DEMO up with an alternative or elevate the issue
to the person with the D. For decision making
to function smoothly, only a few people should
have such veto power. They may be executives
responsible for legal DEMO regulatory compliance
or the heads of units whose operations will be
signiﬁcantly affected by the decision.
People with input responsibilities are con-
sulted about DEMO recommendation. Their role
is to provide the relevant facts that are the
basis of any good decision: How practical is the
proposal? Can DEMO accommodate
the design change? Where there’s dissent or
contrasting views, it’s important to get these
people to the table at the right time. DEMO rec-
ommender has no obligation to act on the
input he or she receives but is expected to take
it into account—particularly since the DEMO
who provide input are generally among those
who must implement a decision. Consensus is
a worthy goal, but as a decision-making stan-
dard, DEMO can be an obstacle to action or a recipe
for lowest-common-denominator compro-
mise. A more practical objective is to get every-
one involved to DEMO in to the decision.
Eventually, one person will decide. The deci-
DEMO maker is the single point of accountability
who must bring the decision to closure and
commit the organization to act on it. To be
DEMO and effective, the person with the D
needs good business judgment, a grasp of the
relevant trade-offs, a bias for action, and DEMO keen
page 136
awareness of the organization that will execute
the decision.
The ﬁnal role DEMO the process involves the peo-
ple who will perform the decision. They see to it
that the decision is implemented promptly and
effectively. It’s DEMO crucial role. Very often, a good
decision executed quickly beats a DEMO deci-
sion implemented slowly or poorly.
RAPID can be used to help redesign the way
an organization works or to target a single bot-
DEMO Some companies use the approach for
the top ten to 20 decisions, or just for the CEO
and his or her direct reports. Other companies
use it throughout the organization—to improve
customer service by clarifying decision DEMO on
the front line, for instance. When people see an
effective DEMO for making decisions, they
spread the word. For example, after senior man-
agers at a major U.S. retailer used RAPID to sort
out DEMO particularly thorny set of corporate deci-
sions, they promptly built the DEMO into their
own functional organizations.
To see the process in action, DEMO look at the
Who Has the D?
way four companies have worked through their
decision-making bottlenecks.
Global Versus Local
Every major company today DEMO in global
markets, buying raw materials in one place,
shipping DEMO somewhere else, and selling ﬁn-
ished products all over the world. DEMO are try-
ing simultaneously to build local presence and
expertise, and DEMO achieve economies of scale.
Decision making in this environment is far
from straightforward. Frequently, decisions
cut across the boundaries between global and
local managers, and sometimes across a re-
gional layer in between: What investments
DEMO streamline our supply chain? How far
should we go in standardizing DEMO or tai-
loring them for local markets?
The trick in decision making is to avoid be-
coming either mindlessly global or hopelessly
local. DEMO decision-making authority tilts too far
toward global executives, local customers’ pref-
DEMO can easily be overlooked, undermining
A Decision-Making Primer
Good decision making DEMO on assigning
clear and speciﬁc roles. This sounds simple
enough, but DEMO companies struggle to
make decisions because lots of people feel ac-
countable—or no one does. RAPID and other
tools used to analyze decision making DEMO
senior management teams a method for as-
signing roles and involving the relevant peo-
ple. The key is to be clear who has input, who
gets to decide, and who gets it done.
The ﬁve letters in RAPID correspond to the
ﬁve critical decision-making roles: recom-
mend, DEMO, perform, input, and decide. As
you’ll see, the roles are not carried out lock-
step in this order—we took some liberties for
DEMO sake of creating a useful acronym.
Recommend.  People in this role DEMO re-
sponsible for making a proposal, gathering
input, and providing the right data and anal-
ysis to make a sensible decision in a DEMO
fashion. In the course of developing a pro-
posal, recommenders consult DEMO the people
who provide input, not just hearing and in-
corporating DEMO views but also building buy
in along the way. Recommenders must have
analytical skills, common sense, and organi-
zational smarts.
Agree.  Individuals in this role have veto
power—yes or no—over the recommenda-
tion. Exercising the DEMO triggers a debate be-
tween themselves and the recommenders,
which should lead to a modiﬁed proposal. If
that takes too long, or if the two parties sim-
ply can’t agree, they can escalate the issue to
the person who has the D.
Input.  These people are consulted on the
decision. Because the people who provide
input are typically involved DEMO implementa-
tion, recommenders have a strong interest in
taking their advice DEMO No input is
binding, but this shouldn’t undermine its im-
portance. DEMO the right people are not involved
and motivated, the decision is DEMO more likely
to falter during execution.
Decide.  The person with the DEMO is the for-
mal decision maker. He or she is ultimately
accountable for the decision, for better or
worse, and has the authority DEMO resolve any
impasse in the decision-making process and
to commit the organization to action.
Perform.  Once a decision is made, a per-
son DEMO group of people will be responsible for
executing it. In some instances, the people re-
sponsible for implementing a decision are
harvard business review • january 2006
the same people who recommended it.
Writing down the DEMO and assigning ac-
countability are essential steps, but good de-
cision DEMO also requires the right process.
Too many rules can cause the process to col-
lapse under its own weight. The most effec-
tive process DEMO grounded in speciﬁcs but sim-
ple enough to adapt if necessary.
When the process gets slowed down, the
problem can often be traced back to one of
three trouble spots. First is a lack of clarity
DEMO who has the D. If more than one per-
son think they have it for a particular deci-
sion, that decision will get caught up in a tug-
of-war. The ﬂip side can be equally damaging:DEMO
No one is accountable for crucial decisions,
and the business suffers. Second, a prolifera-
tion of people who have veto power can make
life tough for recommenders. If a company
has too many people in DEMO “agree” role, it
usually means that decisions are not pushed
down DEMO enough in the organization. Third,
if there are a lot of people giving input, it’s a
signal that at least some of them aren’t mak-
ing a meaningful contribution.
page 137
A good decision executed
quickly beats a brilliant
decision implemented
slowly.
harvard DEMO review • january 2006
the efﬁciency and agility of local operations.
But with too much local authority, a company
is likely to miss out on crucial economies of
scale or opportunities with global clients.
To strike DEMO right balance, a company must
recognize its most important sources of DEMO
and make sure that decision roles line up with
them. This was the challenge facing Martin
Broughton, the former CEO and chairman of
British American Tobacco, the second-largest
tobacco company in the world. In 1993, DEMO
Broughton was appointed chief executive, BAT
was losing ground to its DEMO competitor.
Broughton knew that the company needed to
take better advantage of its global scale, but
decision roles and responsibilities were at odds
with this goal. Four geographic operating units
ran themselves autonomously, rarely collabo-
rating and sometimes even competing. Achiev-
ing consistency across global brands proved dif-
DEMO, and cost synergies across the operating
units were elusive. Industry insiders DEMO that
“there are seven major tobacco companies in
the world—and four of them are British Amer-
ican Tobacco.” Broughton vowed to change the
punch DEMO
The chief executive envisioned an organiza-
tion that could take advantage of the opportu-
nities a global business offers—global brands
that could compete with DEMO winners
such as Altria Group’s Marlboro; global pur-
chasing of important DEMO materials, including
tobacco; and more consistency in innovation
and customer management. But Broughton
didn’t want the company to lose its nimbleness
and competitive DEMO in local markets by
shifting too much decision-making power to
global executives.
The ﬁrst step was to clarify roles for the most
important decisions. DEMO became a
proving ground. Previously, each operating
unit had identiﬁed its DEMO suppliers and nego-
tiated contracts for all materials. Under
Broughton, a DEMO procurement team was set
up in headquarters and given authority to
choose suppliers and negotiate pricing and
quality for global materials, including bulk to-
bacco and certain types of packaging. Regional
procurement teams were now given DEMO into
global materials strategies but ultimately had
to implement the team’s decision. As soon as
the global team signed contracts with suppli-
ers, responsibility shifted to the regional teams,
who worked out the details of DEMO and ser-
Who Has the D?
vice with the suppliers in their regions. For ma-
terials that did not offer global economies of
DEMO (mentholated ﬁlters for the North Ameri-
can market, for example), the regional teams
retained their decision-making authority.
As the effort to revamp DEMO making in
procurement gained momentum, the com-
pany set out to DEMO roles in all its major deci-
sions. The process wasn’t easy. A company the
size of British American Tobacco has a huge
number of DEMO parts, and developing a
practical system for making decisions requires
sweating DEMO of details. What’s more, decision-
making authority is power, and people are
often reluctant to give it up.
It’s crucial for the people DEMO will live with
the new system to help design it. At BAT,
Broughton created working groups led by peo-
ple earmarked, implicitly or explicitly, for lead-
ership roles in the future. For example, Paul
DEMO, who ultimately succeeded Broughton
as chief executive, was asked to lead the group
charged with redesigning decision making for
brand and customer management. DEMO the time,
Adams was a regional head within one of the
operating units. With other senior executives,
including some of his own DEMO reports,
Broughton speciﬁed that their role was to pro-
vide input, not to veto recommendations.
Broughton didn’t make the common mistake
of seeking consensus, which is often an obsta-
cle to action. Instead, he DEMO it clear that the
objective was not deciding whether to change
the decision-making process but achieving buy
in about how to do so as DEMO as possible.
The new decision roles provided the founda-
tion the company needed to operate success-
fully on a global basis while retaining ﬂexibility
DEMO the local level. The focus and efﬁciency of its
decision making were reﬂected in the com-
pany’s results: After the decision-making over-
haul, DEMO American Tobacco experienced
nearly ten years of growth well above the lev-
els of its competitors in sales, proﬁts, and mar-
ket value. DEMO company has gone on to have
one of the best-performing stocks on the UK
market and has reemerged as a major global
player in DEMO tobacco industry.
Center Versus Business Unit
The ﬁrst rule for making good decisions is to
involve the right people at the right level of
DEMO organization. For BAT, capturing econo-
mies of scale required its global DEMO to appro-
page 138
Who Has the D?
The trick in decision
making is to DEMO
becoming either
mindlessly global or
hopelessly local.
harvard business review • january 2006
priate some decision-making powers from re-
gional divisions. For many companies, a
similar balancing act takes place between ex-
ecutives at the center DEMO managers in the
business units. If too many decisions ﬂow to
the center, decision making can grind to a halt.
The problem is different but no less critical if
the decisions that are elevated to senior DEMO
tives are the wrong ones.
Companies often grow into this type of prob-
lem. In small and midsize organizations, a sin-
gle management team—sometimes a single
leader—effectively handles every major deci-
sion. As a company grows DEMO its operations
become more complex, however, senior execu-
tives can no longer master the details required
to make decisions in every business.
A DEMO in management style, often trig-
gered by the arrival of a DEMO CEO, can create
similar tensions. At a large British retailer, for
example, the senior team was accustomed to
the founder making all critical decisions. When
his successor began seeking consensus on im-
portant issues, the team was suddenly unsure
of its role, and many decisions stalled. It’s a
common scenario, yet most management
teams and boards of directors don’t specify
how decision-making authority should change
as the company does.
A growth DEMO highlighted that issue
for Wyeth (then known as American Home
Products) in late 2000. Through organic
growth, acquisitions, and partnerships, Wyeth’s
pharmaceutical division had developed three
sizable businesses: biotech, vaccines, and tradi-
tional pharmaceutical products. Even though
each business had its own market dynamics,
DEMO requirements, and research focus,
most important decisions were pushed up DEMO
one group of senior executives. “We were using
generalists across all issues,” said Joseph M.
Mahady, president of North American and glo-
bal businesses for Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. “It
was a signal that we weren’t getting DEMO best
decision making.”
The problem crystallized for Wyeth when
managers in the biotech business saw a vital—
but perishable—opportunity to establish a
leading position DEMO Enbrel, a promising
rheumatoid arthritis drug. Competitors were
working on the DEMO class of drug, so Wyeth
needed to move quickly. This meant DEMO
production capacity by building a new plant,
which would be located at the Grange Castle
Business Park in Dublin, Ireland.
The decision, DEMO any standard, was a com-
plex one. Once approved by regulators, the fa-
cility would be the biggest biotech plant in the
world—and DEMO largest capital investment
Wyeth had ever undertaken. Yet peak demand
for the drug was not easy to determine. What’s
more, Wyeth planned to market Enbrel in part-
nership with Immunex (now a part of Amgen).
In its deliberations about the plant, therefore,
Wyeth needed to factor in the requirements of
building up its technical expertise, technology
transfer issues, and an uncertain competitive
environment.
Input on the decision ﬁltered up slowly
through a gauze of overlapping committees,
leaving senior executives hungry for DEMO more de-
tailed grasp of the issues. Given the narrow
window of opportunity, Wyeth acted quickly,
moving from a ﬁrst look at the Grange Castle
project to implementation in six months. But
in the midst DEMO this process, Wyeth Pharmaceu-
ticals’ executives saw the larger issue: The com-
pany needed a system that would push more
decisions down to DEMO business units, where
operational knowledge was greatest, and ele-
vate the decisions that required the senior
team’s input, such as marketing strategy and
manufacturing capacity.
In short order, Wyeth gave authority for
many decisions to business unit managers,
leaving senior executives with veto power over
some DEMO the more sensitive issues related to
Grange Castle. But after that investment deci-
sion was made, the D for many subsequent de-
cisions about the Enbrel business lay with
Cavan Redmond, the executive vice president
and general manager of Wyeth’s biotech divi-
sion, and his new management team. Red-
mond gathered input from managers in bio-
tech manufacturing, marketing, DEMO,
ﬁnance, and R&D, and quickly set up the com-
plex schedules needed to collaborate with Im-
munex. Responsibility for execution rested
DEMO with the business unit, as always. But
now Redmond, supported by his team, also
had authority to make important decisions.
Grange Castle is paying off so far. Enbrel is
among the leading brands for rheumatoid DEMO
thritis, with sales of $1.7 billion through the
ﬁrst half of DEMO And Wyeth’s metabolism for
making decisions has increased. Recently,
when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
granted priority review status to another new
DEMO 139
Who Has the D?
drug, Tygacil, because of the antibiotic’s DEMO
cacy against drug-resistant infections, Wyeth
displayed its new reﬂexes. To keep DEMO on a
fast track, the company had to orchestrate a
host DEMO critical steps—reﬁning the process tech-
nology, lining up supplies, ensuring quality
control, allocating manufacturing capacity.
The vital decisions were made one or two
levels down in the biotech organization,
where the expertise resided. “Instead DEMO de-
bating whether you can move your product
into my shop, DEMO had the decision systems in
place to run it up and down the business
units and move ahead rapidly with Tygacil,”
said Mahady. DEMO drug was approved by the
FDA in June 2005 and moved into volume
production a mere three days later.
Function Versus Function
Decisions that DEMO across functions are some
of the most important a company faces. In-
deed, cross-functional collaboration has be-
come an axiom of business, essential DEMO ar-
riving at the best answers for the company
and its customers. But ﬂuid decision making
across functional teams remains a constant
challenge, even for companies known for
doing it well, like Toyota and Dell. For in-
stance, a team that thinks it’s more efﬁcient
to make a decision without consulting other
functions may wind up missing out on rele-
DEMO input or being overruled by another
team that believes—rightly or wrongly—it
should have been included in the process.
Many of the most important cross-functional
DEMO are, by their very nature, the most
difﬁcult to orchestrate, DEMO that can string
out the process and lead to sparring between
ﬁefdoms and costly indecision.
The theme here is a lack of clarity about
DEMO Recipe for a Decision-Making Bottleneck
At one automaker we studied, marketers DEMO product developers were confused
about who was responsible for making decisions about new models.
When we asked, “Who has the right to
decide which features will be standard?”
64% of product developers said, “We
do.”
83% of marketers said, “We do.”
When we asked, “Who has DEMO right
to decide which colors will be offered?”
77% of product developers said, “We
do.”
61% of marketers said, “We do.”
Not DEMO, the new models were delayed.
harvard business review • january 2006
DEMO has the D. For example, at a global auto
manufacturer that DEMO missing its mile-
stones for rolling out new models—and was
paying the price in falling sales—it turned
out that marketers and product developers
were DEMO about which function was re-
sponsible for making decisions about stan-
dard features and color ranges for new mod-
els. When we asked the DEMO team who
had the D about which features should be
standard, DEMO said the marketers did. When
we posed the same question to product de-
velopers, 64% said the responsibility rested
with them. (See the DEMO “A Recipe for a
Decision-Making Bottleneck.”)
The practical difﬁculty of connecting func-
tions through smooth decision making crops
up frequently at retailers. John DEMO, the lead-
ing department store chain in the United King-
dom, might reasonably expect to overcome
this sort of challenge more readily than DEMO
retailers. Spedan Lewis, who built the business
in the early twentieth DEMO, was a pioneer in
employee ownership. A strong connection be-
tween DEMO and employees permeated
every aspect of the store’s operations and re-
mained vital to the company as it grew into the
largest employee-owned business DEMO the
United Kingdom, with 59,600 employees and
more than £5 DEMO in revenues in 2004.
Even at John Lewis, however, with its heritage
of cooperation and teamwork, cross-functional
decision making can be hard to sustain. Take
salt and pepper mills, for instance. John Lewis,
which prides itself on having great selection,
stocked nearly 50 SKUs of DEMO and pepper
mills, while most competitors stocked around
20. The company’s DEMO saw an opportunity
to increase sales and reduce complexity by of-
fering a smaller number of popular and well-
chosen products in each price DEMO and style.
When John Lewis launched the new range,
sales fell. This made no sense to the buyers
until they visited the stores DEMO saw how the
merchandise was displayed. The buyers had
made their decision without fully involving the
sales staff, who therefore did not understand
the strategy behind the new selection. As a re-
sult, the sellers had cut shelf space in half to
match the reduction in range, rather than de-
voting the same amount of shelf space to
stocking more DEMO each product.
To ﬁx the communication problem, John
Lewis needed to DEMO decision roles. The buy-
page 140
ers were given the D on how much space to al-
locate DEMO each product category. If the space al-
location didn’t make sense to the sales staff,
however, they had the authority to raise their
concerns and force a new round of negotia-
tions. They also had DEMO for imple-
menting product layouts in the stores. When
the communication was sorted out and shelf
space was restored, sales of the salt and pepper
mills climbed well above original levels.
Crafting a decision-making process that DEMO
nected the buying and selling functions for salt
and pepper mills was relatively easy; rolling it
out across the entire business was more chal-
lenging. Salt and pepper mills are just one of
several hundred product DEMO for John
Lewis. This element of scale is one reason why
cross-functional bottlenecks are not easy to un-
clog. Different functions have different incen-
DEMO and goals, which are often in conﬂict.
When it comes down DEMO a struggle between
two functions, there may be good reasons to
DEMO the D in either place—buying or selling,
marketing or product development.
Here, as elsewhere, someone needs to think
objectively about where value DEMO created and
assign decision roles accordingly. Eliminating
cross-functional bottlenecks actually has less to
do with shifting decision-making responsibili-
ties between departments and more to DEMO with
ensuring that the people with relevant infor-
mation are allowed to share it. The decision
maker is important, of course, but more DEMO
Who Has the D?
tant is designing a system that aligns decision
making and makes it routine.
Inside Versus Outside Partners
Decision making DEMO an organization is hard
enough. Trying to make decisions between sep-
arate organizations on different continents
adds layers of complexity that can scuttle the
DEMO strategy. Companies that outsource capa-
bilities in pursuit of cost and quality advantages
face this very challenge. Which decisions
should be made internally? Which can be dele-
gated to outsourcing partners?
These questions are also DEMO for strate-
gic partners—a global bank working with an
IT contractor on a systems development
project, for example, or a media company that
DEMO content from a studio—and for com-
panies conducting part of their business
through franchisees. There is no right answer
to who should have the DEMO to decide what.
But the wrong approach is to assume that con-
tractual arrangements can provide the answer.
An outdoor-equipment company based in
the DEMO States discovered this recently
when it decided to scale up production of gas
patio heaters for the lower end of the market.
The company DEMO some success manufacturing
high-end products in China. But with the ad-
vent of superdiscounters like Wal-Mart, Tar-
get, and Home Depot, the company realized it
needed to move more of its production over-
seas to DEMO these retailers with lower-cost of-
The Decision-Driven Organization
The deﬁning characteristic of high-performing
organizations is their ability to make good
decisions and to make DEMO happen quickly.
The companies that succeed tend to follow a
few clear principles.
Some decisions matter more than others.
The decisions that are crucial DEMO building
value in the business are the ones that matter
most. Some of them will be the big strategic
decisions, but just as important are the criti-
cal operating decisions that drive the busi-
ness day DEMO day and are vital to effective exe-
cution.
Action is the goal.  Good decision making
doesn’t end with a decision; it ends with DEMO
plementation. The objective shouldn’t be
consensus, which often becomes an obstacle
DEMO action, but buy in.
Ambiguity is the enemy.  Clear account-
ability is essential: Who contributes input,
who makes the decision, and DEMO carries it
out? Without clarity, gridlock and delay are
the most likely outcomes. Clarity doesn’t nec-
essarily mean concentrating authority in a
few DEMO; it means deﬁning who has re-
sponsibility to make decisions, who has in-
put, and who is charged with putting them
into action.
Speed and adaptability are crucial.  A
company that makes good decisions quickly
has a higher metabolism, which allows it to
act on opportunities and overcome obstacles.
The best decision makers create an environ-
ment where people DEMO come together
quickly and efﬁciently to make the most im-
portant decisions.
harvard business review • january 2006
Decision roles trump the organizational
chart.  No decision-making structure will be
perfect for every decision. The key is DEMO in-
volve the right people at the right level in the
right part of the organization at the right
time.
A well-aligned organization reinforces
DEMO  Clear decision roles are critical, but
they are not enough. If an organization does
not reinforce the right approach to decision
making through DEMO measures and incentives,
information ﬂows, and culture, the behavior
won’t become routine.
Practicing beats preaching.  Involve the
people who will live with the new decision
roles in designing them. The very process of
thinking DEMO new decision behaviors moti-
vates people to adopt them.
page 141
Who Has the D?
A Decision Diagnostic
Consider the last three DEMO decisions you’ve been involved in and ask your-
self the following questions.
1. Were the decisions right?
2. Were they made with appropriate DEMO?
3. Were they executed well?
4. Were the right people involved, in the right way?
5. Was it clear for each decision
• who would recommend a solution?
• who would provide DEMO?
• who had the ﬁnal say?
• who would be responsible for following through?
6. Were the decision roles, process, DEMO time frame respected?
7. Were the decisions based on appropriate facts?
8. To the extent that there were divergent facts or opinions, was it clear who had the D?
9.  Were the decision makers at the appropriate level in the company?
10. Did the DEMO measures and incentives encourage the people involved to
make the right decisions?
harvard business review • january 2006
ferings. The timetable left little DEMO for er-
ror: The company started tooling up factories
in April DEMO June of 2004, hoping to be ready
for the Christmas season.
DEMO away, there were problems. Although
the Chinese manufacturing partners under-
stood DEMO, they had little idea what American
consumers wanted. When expensive designs
DEMO from the head ofﬁce in the United
States, Chinese plant managers DEMO compro-
mises to meet contracted cost targets. They
used a lower grade material, which discolored.
They placed the power switch in a spot that
was inconvenient for the user but easier to
build. Instead of making DEMO parts from a
single casting, they welded materials together,
which DEMO terrible.
To ﬁx these problems, the U.S. executives
had to draw DEMO lines around which decisions
should be made on which side of the ocean.
The company broke down the design and man-
ufacturing process into DEMO steps and analyzed
how decisions were made at each step. The
company was also much more explicit about
what the manufacturing specs would include
DEMO what the manufacturer was expected to do
with them. The objective was not simply to
clarify decision roles but to make sure those
roles DEMO directly to the sources of
value in the business. If a decision would affect
the look and feel of the ﬁnished product, head-
quarters would have to sign off on it. But if a
decision would DEMO affect the customer’s expe-
rience, it could be made in China. DEMO, for exam-
ple, Chinese engineers found a less expensive
material that didn’t compromise the product’s
look, feel, and functionality, they could make
that change on their own.
To help with the transition to this DEMO,
the company put a team of engineers on-site in
China to ensure a smooth handoff of the specs
and to make decisions on DEMO that would be-
come complex and time-consuming if elevated
to the home ofﬁce. Marketing executives in the
home ofﬁce insisted that it should take DEMO cus-
tomer ten minutes and no more than six steps
to assemble the product at home. The com-
pany’s engineers in China, along with the Chi-
nese manufacturing team, had input into this
assembly requirement and were responsible
for execution. But the D resided with head-
quarters, and the requirement became a major
design factor. Decisions about logistics, how-
ever, became the province of the engineering
team in China: It would DEMO out how to
package the heaters so that one-third more
boxes would ﬁt into a container, which re-
duced shipping costs substantially.
• • •
If managers suddenly realize that they’re
spending less time sitting through DEMO
wondering why they are there, that’s an early
signal that companies DEMO become better at
making decisions. When meetings start with a
common understanding about who is respon-
sible for providing valuable input and who has
DEMO D, an organization’s decision-making me-
tabolism will get a boost.
No DEMO lever turns a decision-challenged
organization into a decision-driven one, of
course, and no blueprint can provide for all the
contingencies and business shifts DEMO company is
bound to encounter. The most successful com-
panies use simple tools that help them recog-
nize potential bottlenecks and think through
decision DEMO and responsibilities with each
change in the business environment. That’s dif-
ﬁcult to do—and even more difﬁcult for com-
petitors to copy. But by DEMO some very prac-
tical steps, any company can become more
effective, beginning with its next decision.
Reprint R0601D
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
page 142
Who Has the D?
How Clear Decision Roles Enhance Organizational Performance
DEMO Reading
AR TICLES
Want Collaboration? Accept—and
Actively Manage—Conflict
by Jeff Weiss DEMO Jonathan Hughes
Harvard Business Review
March 2005
Product no. R0503F
Even if you’ve clearly defined roles, decision
makers can experience conflict—for example,
disagreements among people who must
“Agree.” The authors present six strategies for
managing DEMO in a way that promotes
smart decisions: 1) Devise and implement a
common method for resolving conflict.
2) Provide people with criteria for making
trade-offs. 3) Use escalation of conflict as an
opportunity for coaching. 4) Establish and
enforce a requirement of joint escalation—
sharing a disagreement’s escalation up the
management chain. 5) Ensure that managers
resolve escalated conflicts directly with their
counterparts. 6) Make the process for esca-
lated conflict-resolution transparent. By apply-
ing these strategies, you integrate conflict res-
olution into day-to-day decision-making—
removing barriers to cross-organizational
collaboration.
What You Don’t Know About DEMO
Decisions
by David A. Garvin and Michael A. Roberto
Harvard Business Review
November 2003
Product no. R0108G
The authors provide guidelines to help “Rec-
DEMO gather high-quality input. The
key? Inquiry—carefully considering a variety
of opinions, working with others to discover
the best ideas, and stimulating creative think-
ing rather than suppressing disagreement. To
use inquiry, master these “three C’s”: 1) Con-
flict: Ask tough questions and invite people to
play devil’s advocate while evaluating your
recommendation. 2) Consideration: Ensure
that input DEMO perceive your decision
process as fair—by conveying openness to
new ideas, DEMO attentively, and explain-
ing the rationale behind your decisions.
3) Closure: Resist any temptation to decide
too early so as to avoid extensive disagree-
ment among input providers. But don’t delay
decision making too long, either, just because
you think you must resolve every last issue or
concern before making any decision.
page 143
To Order
For Harvard Business DEMO reprints and
subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or
617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.org
For DEMO and quantity orders of
Harvard Business Review article reprints,
call 617-783-7626, or e-mai
customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu{1g42fwefx}