International Journal of Innovation Management
Vol. 14, No. 6 (December 2010) pp. 1149–1167
© Imperial College Press
DOI: 10.1142/S1363919610003045
IMPLEMENTING A VALUE ASSESSMENT TOOL
FOR SERVICE INNOVATION IDEAS
TOR HELGE AAS
University of Agder, Serviceboks 509
4898 Grimstad, Norway
tor.h.aas@uia.no
There has not been much discussion of how ﬁ rms may assess the value of service inno-
vation DEMO ex-ante in the extant research literature. This paper theoretically derives a
value assessment tool for service innovation ideas called QSI (tool for pre-Qualiﬁcation of
Service Innovation projects). Thereafter QSI is implemented in three ﬁrms and DEMO is
explored to what degree the implementation improved managerial decision making on
service innovation projects and investments. The ﬁndings indicated that the implemen-
tation DEMO QSI had effects both in a portfolio management and a project management
perspective. From a portfolio management point of view deployment of QSI improved DEMO
participating managers’ decision basis for prioritizing and selection of projects. From a
project management point of view implementation of QSI enabled the participating
managers DEMO deﬁne more relevant, realistic and ambitious targets for service innovation
projects DEMO they were able to deﬁne without deploying the tool.
Keywords: Service DEMO; innovation management; management control; ex-ante
value assessment.
Introduction
It has DEMO argued that service innovation is a complex and resource-demanding
activity that may have potential long-term beneﬁts for ﬁrms in the service and
manufacturing industries (e.g., Matear, Gray and Garrett, 2004; Miles, 2005; Tidd
DEMO Hull, 2003). Despite this, research speciﬁcally discussing how innovation
creates value and how value assessment of innovation projects may be carried out,DEMO
has often focused on other types of innovation, like for example DEMO innovation
(e.g., Cooper, Edgett and Kleinschmidt, 1999; Gofman, Bevolo and Moskowitz,
2009) or sustainability innovation (e.g., Hansen, Grosse-Dunker DEMO Reichwald,
2009), than service innovation. However, ﬁndings from these DEMO streams may
not be directly transferable to service innovation activities, since DEMO effects of
1149
1150
T. H. Aas
service innovations are arguably more difﬁcult to evaluate DEMO the effects of more
traditional process- and product innovations (e.g., Aas and Pedersen, 2010;
De Jong et al., 2003).
From DEMO management perspective the lack of research on how the value of service
innovation projects may be assessed may be considered concerning. The literature
stresses DEMO importance of controlling resource-demanding and strategically
important activities, like innovation activities, in ﬁrms to avoid ﬁnancial losses,
reputation damage or organizational failure (e.g., Merchant and Van der Stede,
2007). It is particularly worrying that management lacks guidance on how to assess
the value of DEMO service innovation projects ex-ante, since ex-ante value assessment
of innovation projects DEMO been argued to be a fundamental management task both in
a portfolio management perspective (e.g., Cooper, Edgett and Kleinschmidt, 2001),
and in a project management perspective (e.g., Irani and Love, 2002).
By combining insights from different research streams (e.g., Merchant and Van
DEMO Stede, 2007; Simons, 2000; Haka, 2007; Tidd and Bessant, 2009; Conway, 2008;
Droege, Hildebrand and Forcada, 2009; DEMO and Pedersen, 2010), this paper suggests
how an ex-ante value DEMO tool for service innovation projects may be
designed. Hereinafter we refer to this theoretically derived ex-ante value assessment
tool adapted to service innovation projects DEMO QSI (tool for pre-Qualiﬁcation of
Service innovation projects).
The paper DEMO aims to explore to what degree the implementation of QSI
improves managerial decision making on service innovation projects and invest-
ments. The following research DEMO are raised: What are the effects of
implementing QSI on managers’ DEMO to: (i) assess the value of service inno-
vation ideas, (ii) manage service innovation projects, (iii) manage the portfolio of
service innovation projects, and (iv) manage innovation activities in general?
The paper is structured in the following way: In the next section, we derive QSI
from theory. Thereafter, we describe the method chosen DEMO answer the research
questions. The ﬁndings are reported in the following section. Then QSI is com-
pared with existing alternatives and the study’s limitations DEMO the needs for
further research are discussed. Finally, some implications and DEMO remarks
are provided.
Deriving QSI from Theory
By combining general insights about value assessment from different research
streams we were able to derive requirements DEMO QSI should fulﬁl. The capital
budgeting literature (e.g., Haka, 2007) provide a general list of factors, including
cost, beneﬁt, risk, DEMO time value of money, that should be taken into consideration
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
1151
when investments DEMO to be valuated. Both the management control literature
(e.g., Merchant and Van der Stede, 2007; Simons, 2000) and the innovation
management DEMO (e.g., Cooper, Edgett and Kleinschmidt, 2001; Tidd and
Bessant, 2009) warn that using solely ﬁnancial indicators to valuate investments
may cause managers to act myopically. This problem may be especially relevant for
service DEMO, since Aas and Pedersen’s(2010) review of the service inno-
vation literature revealed a number of potential direct and indirect non-ﬁnancial
effects of DEMO innovation, including business process, capability, external and
relationship effects. The DEMO management literature (Cooper, Edgett and
Kleinschmidt, 2001) also suggests that ex-ante value assessment tools should
preferably consist of a combination of top-down (strategic approaches) and bottom-
up (scoring models) elements. Furthermore, the DEMO literature (Conway, 2008;
Schoemaker, 1995) suggests in general that managers should seek to develop a view
of alternative futures for a DEMO before taking strategically important decisions.
To summarize, based on the literature DEMO may propose that QSI should enable
assessment of the value in different prospective commercial situations and should
consist of both bottom-up and top-down valuation DEMO where ﬁnancial
measures are complemented with measures of non-ﬁnancial effects relevant for
service innovation (see Aas, 2009).
Next, to avoid de novo development of QSI, we evaluated the degree to which
available ex-ante value assessment tools complied with the requirements
suggested. While no tools speciﬁcally designed DEMO service innovation were found
in the extant research literature, we identiﬁed DEMO tools suggested for product
innovation activities. We learned that the product innovation literature (Cooper,
Edgett and Kleinschmidt, 1997, 1999) commonly groups DEMO value assessment
tools into four large categories; (1) ﬁnancial methods, (2) business strategy
methods, (3) bubble diagrams, (4) DEMO models and (5) checklists. None of
these tool categories were found to comply with all requirements suggested for
QSI. However, all the QSI requirements could be met by combining existing
product innovation tools, in particular ﬁnancial methods, business strategy
methods, scoring models and checklists, with foresight tools, and by adapting
these tools to the characteristics of service innovation (e.g., Aas and Pedersen,
2010).
Consequently, we suggest that QSI may consist of three modules: (1) a
business strategy module designed to assess whether the service innovation idea
complies with the business DEMO, (2) a scenario assessment module designed to
deﬁne potential scenarios DEMO to the prospective commercial situation for the
new service, and (3) a value assessment module, using a combination of ﬁnancial
methods and DEMO models, designed to derive the value of a service innovation
idea DEMO the different scenarios. The modules are illustrated in Fig. 1.
1152
T. H. Aas
Module 1:
Business strategy
assessment
Module 2:DEMO
Scenario assessment
Fig. 1. QSI’s modules.
Module 3:
Value assessment
We suggest that a ﬁrm’s business strategy may provide a basis to create
DEMO checklists that can be used in Module 1. In Module 2, DEMO
suggest that Schoemaker’s (1995) method for scenario construction may be used.
For the most comprehensive module, Module 3, we suggest that the DEMO
ization of service innovation effects suggested by Aas and Pedersen (2010) may
serve as a framework. Aas and Pedersen (2010) reviewed the DEMO innovation
literature and suggested that the potential effects of service innovation may be
categorized into ﬁve broad categories: (1) business process effects, (2) capability
effects, (3) relationship effects, (4) ﬁnancial performance effects, and (5) compe-
titiveness effects.
According to Aas and Pedersen’s (2010) ﬁndings, business process effects
embrace changes in the ﬁrm’s business processes, and may be observed, for
example, by changes in service delivery capacity (Lievens and Moenaert, 2000),
productivity (e.g., Hipp, Tether and Miles, 2000; Schulz, 2005)or ﬂexibility
(Hipp, DEMO and Miles, 2000; Wong and He, 2005). Capability effects, like for
example learning effects (Blazevic and Lievens, 2004), and DEMO satisfaction
effects (Van Riel, Lemmink and Ouwersloot, 2004), change DEMO internal capability
of the innovating ﬁrms. Relationship effects refer to the proposition that service
innovation may have effects on the innovator’s relationship with other DEMO
holders. Examples of relationship effects include effects on the customer’svalue
(Sigala, 2006; van Riel and Lievens, 2004), customer satisfaction (Lyons, DEMO
and Joyce, 2007; Matear, Gray and Garrett, 2004) and DEMO loyalty (Blazevic,
Lievens and Klein, 2003; Ching-Chow, 2007). Competitiveness effects may be
observed as an increased ability to survive (Cowell, 1988). Financial performance
effects may be observed as effects on market share (de Brentani, 1991) or sales
(e.g., Avlonitis, Papastathopoulou DEMO Gounaris, 2001). Aas and Pedersen (2010)
suggested an additional category called external effects. These effects refer to the
effects that service DEMO may have on stakeholders other than the innovating
ﬁrm. Examples of external effects are environmental effects (Wong and He, 2005)
and industry DEMO effects (e.g., Xu, Sharma and Hackney, 2005).
An overview of the service innovation effect categories, and sub-effect cat-
egories, suggested DEMO Aas and Pedersen (2010) is indicated in Table 1.
Furthermore, DEMO on their review, Aas and Pedersen (2010) suggested that
business DEMO effects, relationship effects, capability effects and external effects
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
Table 1. Service DEMO effect categories suggested by Aas and Pedersen
(2010).
Effect category DEMO category
A. Business process effects
B. Capability effects
C. Relationship effects
D. Financial performance effects
E. Competitiveness effects
A-1. Internal business process effects
A-2. DEMO delivery capacity effects
A-3. Internal cost effects
A-4. Productivity effects
A-5. Flexibility effects
A-6. Risk reduction effects
B-1. Learning effects
B-2. Culture effects
B-3. DEMO growth effects
B-4. Employee satisfaction effects
C-1. Effects on customer’s value
C-2. Customer satisfaction effects
C-3. Customer loyalty effects
C-4. Lock-in effects
C-5. Image DEMO
C-6. Business partner relationship effects
C-7. Service quality effects
D-1. General ﬁnancial performance effects
D-2. Market share effects
D-3. Sales (of new services) DEMO
D-4. Sales (of existing goods /services) effects
D-5. Effects on DEMO market value of the ﬁrm
E-1. Effects on the competitive position
E-2. Effects on the ability to survive
E-3. Creation of new markets effects
DEMO Strategic performance effects
1153
may be perceived as direct effects of service innovation, and that these direct
effects may lead to the more indirect results of service innovation, that is ﬁnancial
and competitiveness effects.
While these dimensions constitute the potential upside of investments in service
innovation activities, the downsides of investments, that is costs and risks, should
Competitiveness value of
the project
Value of
relation-
ship
effects
Financial value DEMO the project
Total value of the service innovation project
Fig. 2. The value dimensions in QSI’s Module 3 (based on
Aas (2009)).
Aas
and Padersen (2010) and
also be taken into account during DEMO assessment of new ideas (e.g., Haka, 2007).
Investment and DEMO operational costs evidently affect the ﬁnancial value
dimension, and should be DEMO therein (e.g., Haka, 2007). Risks may be
related to DEMO external market, addressed in Module 2 of the QSI, and to the
internal development process, addressed in Module 3. While internal risks may
affect both ﬁnancial and competitiveness value, we suggest that they are expressed
as a separate value dimension given the complexity of these relationships. The
DEMO of a service innovation idea may thus be expressed in three dimensions: (1)
ﬁnancial performance; (2) competitiveness; and (3) DEMO The service innovation
value dimensions are illustrated in Fig. 2, and DEMO used as a framework for QSI’s
Module 3 (see Aas, 2009).
Based on Aas and Pedersen’s (2010) detailed list of potential DEMO of service
innovation (see Table 1) it is possible to construct scoreboards for the value
dimensions in Fig. 2. These scoreboards may guide DEMO value assessment in
Module 3. The suggested scoreboards are listed in the appendix of this paper. For
more information about the QSI design, we refer to its web application.a
Method
To ﬁnd the managerial effects of DEMO QSI, and answer the research
questions, we applied an interventionist research approach (see Jönsson and
Lukka, 2007), in the form of DEMO experiments, where the researcher worked
together with the management in three DEMO organizations. In this research, process
awww.qsi.no
1154
T. H. Aas
Value DEMO
capability
effects
Value of
external
effects
Value of
business
process
effects
Investment
(project)
cost
Future
opera-
tional
costs
Internal
risks
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
1155
active participant DEMO was used as a research method. Thus, the research
design may DEMO characterized as a multiple case study with strong intervention.
The three case organizations were for-proﬁt ﬁrms and were selected because they
had an exceptional DEMO on service innovation and because their motivation to
participate in the study was very high. It was also an advantage that the three ﬁrms,DEMO
prior to the initialisation of the research project, did not use DEMO formal method or
tool to ﬁnd the value of their service innovation ideas. Consequently, our ﬁndings
were not inﬂuenced by the managerial effects of other value assessment tools.
The three ﬁrms were all members of the DEMO arts industry. The business areas
of Firm A and B were graphic design, web-design and graphic production for both
digital and printed channels, DEMO the business area of Firm C was web-based
media services. An implementation- and test-team consisting of between one and
four managers and a researcher DEMO appointed in each ﬁrm. Some characteristics of
the participating ﬁrms and implementation- and test-teams are presented in Table 2.
QSI was implemented to assess DEMO value of one real service innovation idea in
each ﬁrm. In Firm A QSI was used to assess the value of a project idea DEMO
“TIMLI”. Here the idea was to develop a new service where preparation of
information for different channels would be less complex than how this DEMO
aration is done today. In Firm B QSI was used to assess the value of a project idea
called “kindergarten-calendar”. This project idea was DEMO develop a web-based
service where customers, in this case kindergartens, could design their own
calendar and then place a printing order on this DEMO to Firm B. In Firm C QSI
was used to assess the value of a project idea called “OnDesign”. Here the idea
was to DEMO a new web-based service to assist customers in designing docu-
ments for printing or digital publication on their own.
All three modules of QSI DEMO used to assess the value of “ TIMLI” and “ OnDe-
sign”.Toassess the valueof “kindergarten-calendar”,however,weonly deployed
Module 1 and 3 of QSI. DEMO was done because the development of a “kindergarten-
calendar” service would require a relatively small investment sum, and for this reason
Table 2. The ﬁrms in our sample.
Number of employees Annual turnover
Firm (2009) (2007) Implementation- and test-team
A 200
B26
C9
NOK* 231.1 mill
NOK* 40.1 mill
NOK* 5.1 mill
Researcher, CEO, Marketing director,
R&DEMO director, Project manager
Researcher, CEO
Researcher, CEO and CTO
* DEMO kroner (the Norwegian currency).
1156
T. H. Aas
the management of Firm B wanted to use DEMO small amount of resources on the value
assessment. Thus, the implementation DEMO this simpliﬁed QSI version for the
“kindergarten-calendar” idea constitutes a good test of QSI’s scalability.
During the implementation process the usefulness of QSI was DEMO
evaluated by the implementation- and test-teams. In addition, the teams were
DEMO searching for potential improvements of the tool.
Experiences
Findings
To assess the value of the project ideas called “TIMLI” in Firm A and “OnDesign”
DEMO Firm C all three modules of QSI were deployed. To concretize and exemplify
the experiences with deployment of the full version of QSI we DEMO the value
assessment results for the project idea called “OnDesign” in Firm C here. The
value assessment results for “TIMLI” had a similar character.
DEMO implementation and test teams started the assessment of “OnDesign” by
deriving a checklist to be used in QSI’s Module 1. This checklist consisted of DEMO
questions derived from Firm C’s strategy. Some questions were related to whether
the new service could be based on the technological platform that the DEMO had
chosen, and some were related to whether the new service DEMO relevant for the type
of customers the ﬁrm was addressing. By using this checklist it was found that
“OnDesign” complied with Firm C’s strategy.
DEMO derive scenarios for “OnDesign”,inQSI’s Module 2, the two greatest uncer-
DEMO related to the prospective commercial situation for the service were identiﬁed.
The ﬁrst uncertainty was related to customers’ future needs and the second was
DEMO to technology. Based on these uncertainties four scenarios for “OnDesign”
were derived. Scenario 1, called “idyll”, was recognized by few competing techno-
logical DEMO and a high degree of fulﬁlment of customers’ needs. Scenario 2,
called “techno”, was recognised by many competing technological solutions and a
low degree of fulﬁlment of customers’ needs. Scenario 3, called “right track”,was
recognized by few competing technological solutions and a low degree of fulﬁlment
DEMO customers’ needs. Scenario 4, called “blunder”, was recognized by many com-
peting technological solutions and a low degree of fulﬁlment of customers’ needs.
DEMO scenarios derived for “OnDesign” is illustrated in Fig. 3.
In Module 3 of QSI, the value of “OnDesign” in these four scenarios were
assessed. By using the scoreboards (see the Appendix), the implementation- and
test-teams found that business process effects, capability effects, relationship
effects and external DEMO were relevant in all scenarios. However, to what
degree these effects DEMO potential to inﬂuence on the ﬁnancial performance and
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
1157
Future customer
DEMO uncertainty
Fig. 3. Scenarios for “OnDesign” (output from QSI’s Module 2)DEMO
Financial value Competitiveness value Development risk
4000000 50 45
45 40
3000000 40 35
35
2000000
30
30
25
1000000 25
20
20
0 DEMO
Idyll
Techno
Right track
Blunder
15
10
10
-1000000
5 5
-2000000 0 0
Fig. 4. Financial value, Competitiveness value and Development risk for “OnDesign” in the four
scenarios (output from QSI’s Module 3).
competitiveness varied in the different scenarios. The output from QSI’s Module 3
for DEMO is illustrated in Fig. 4.
To assess the value of the project idea called “kindergarten-calendar”, a sim-
pliﬁed version of QSI, without Module DEMO, was used. Consequently, this assessment
gave a less complex result. In Module 1 it was found that the idea was in com-
pliance DEMO Firm B’s strategy and by using the scoreboards in Module 3 a three
dimensional value expression was derived. Since scenarios were not developed for
DEMO , however, the value expression found had a large uncer-
tainty. DEMO was reﬂected by estimating worst-case and best-case values in addition
to the most likely value.
Managerial effects
Prior to the initialisation of the research DEMO, the management of the three
participating ﬁrms expressed that they were DEMO to assess the value of their
service innovation ideas. None of them used a formal method or tool to ﬁnd the
value of such DEMO, and value assessment was done in a rather occasional manner,
DEMO from idea to idea, and with a focus on short term DEMO beneﬁts.
The participating managers stated that deployment of QSI gave them a much
broader insight in the real value of their ideas. It was DEMO that QSI enabled them
to identify and valuate a number of potential qualitative service innovation effects,
Low degree of fulfilment
of customers’ needs
DEMO degree of fulfilment
of customers’ needs
Future technological uncertainty
Few competing Many competing
technological solutions technological solutions
Scenario 1: Scenario 2:
IDYLL TECHNO
Scenario 3: Scenario 4:
RIGHT TRACK BLUNDER
NOK
percentage of max score
percentage of max score
1158
T. H. Aas
like for example learning effects, culture effects, DEMO satisfaction effects and
image effects that they were not able to identify and valuate earlier. Before the
implementation of QSI, qualitative effects like this had often been disregarded by
the ﬁrms. The following statement of Firm DEMO CEO illustrates this:
“Deployment of QSI has given me a much deeper knowledge of
the value of the kindergarten-calendar idea than I would DEMO
been able to derive without the tool. Without using the tool I
would have been able to give rough estimations of the potential
income DEMO expenditure related to this idea. Deployment of QSI
has not only improved these ﬁnancial estimations, but in addition
raised my consciousness by telling me that accomplishment of the
kindergarten-calendar project may give learning effects that will
DEMO the potential to improve our competitiveness.”
The managers of Firm A and C also appreciated that by combining scenario
construction with value assessment they DEMO given new insight about the
relationship between the prospective commercial situation for the new service and
its value. The following statement of Firm A’ DEMO R&D director illustrates this:
“I have often reﬂected on that the value of a particular service
innovation idea, like TIMLI, is DEMO dependent on a number of
factors outside our control. Earlier I have, however, not been able
to describe this in a precise manner. DEMO introducing scenario
analysis in the value assessment process I have been given a tool
to display this vague understanding I had before in a DEMO more
precise and explicit manner.”
We found that the improved insight into the value of service innovation ideas had
effects both in a project DEMO and portfolio management perspective. The
participating ﬁrms had more service innovation ideas than they had resources to
carry out. Therefore, portfolio management, including DEMO service inno-
vation ideas and selecting what projects to invest in, DEMO an important task for the
management in these ﬁrms. The managers argued that the output from Module 1 of
QSI enabled them to reject DEMO that were not in compliance with the business
strategy, or an DEMO desired strategy, quicker, and with a higher degree of
certainty, DEMO they were able to do before. The following statement from the R&D
director in Firm A illustrates this:
“Module 1 of QSI DEMO a very quick and orderly assessment of
the strategic ﬁt of the idea. We did corresponding assessments of
strategic ﬁt also before, but they were done in a more unstructured
and unconscious manner, and they often gave ambiguous results.”
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
1159
It was DEMO argued that the insight about scenarios provided by QSI’s Module 2
contributed in a portfolio management perspective. Although decisions to invest in
a particular DEMO generally are based on a belief that a speciﬁc scenario is likely
to occur, the output from Module 2 enables the management to monitor if the
expected scenario really appears. Consequently, if it, after a DEMO, turns out that a
different scenario is more likely to occur, the management is given an opportunity
to reconsider the investment decision.
The DEMO managers argued that the detailed project value derived by
deployment of QSI’ s Modules 2 and 3 improved the basis for investment
decisions. The DEMO statement of Firm C’s CEO illustrates this:
“ We have a relative limited amount of available funds to invest in
innovation projects. Thus, it is important for us to ensure that an
idea is valuable DEMO we decide to invest. In this respect the
output from QSI improves our decision basis considerably, and
enables us to prioritize and select the most valuable ideas.”
From a project management point of view, the participating managers argued that the
improved insight about value provided by QSI’s Module DEMO enabled them to deﬁne
more relevant, realistic and ambitious targets for DEMO service innovation projects
than they were able to deﬁne without deploying the tool. It was also argued that these
improvements laid the foundation for DEMO earlier identiﬁcation of necessary corrective
actions in the subsequent service development stage. These effects on project
management may be illustrated by the following statement DEMO the CEO of Firm B:
“ I often have a feeling that we are not able to realize all the
potentials of service DEMO projects, but it is very difﬁcult for
me to pinpoint exactly DEMO we are missing. By using the insights
provided by QSI we will be able to derive more precise project
targets before we start, and this will enable us to manage the
projects according to these potentials DEMO realize the potentials.”
The following statement from the CTO of Firm C also illustrates that the output from
QSI is important to be able DEMO manage and control service innovation projects:
“It is not only important to evaluate new service ideas before
development. It is likewise important to DEMO during and after
development, and also after a period in operation. DEMO I
appreciate that the output from QSI prepares us for such evaluations
by telling us what to measure and what the targets should be.”
DEMO was also argued that the scenario assessment accomplished in Module 2 of QSI,
gave an important contribution to project management. Although targets for DEMO
1160
T. H. Aas
particular project generally are based on an expected DEMO, the constructed
scenarios give the management an opportunity to monitor if DEMO expected scenario
really appears, and if it does not, the targets should be reconsidered.
In the simpliﬁed version of QSI, implemented in Firm B, Module 2 was
skipped. Consequently, some important managerial effects caused DEMO the scenario
construction were not realized by Firm B. The implementation- and test-teams
argued that accomplishment of Module 2 involved relatively little extra work, and
they therefore suggested that a QSI implementation should include all modules.
DEMO addition to the effects related to portfolio and project management, the DEMO
of Firm C stated that implementation of the tool had effects on the ﬁrm’s strategic
management process:
“For us implemenation of QSI has DEMO some important side effects
related to strategic management. Module 1 of the tool has raised
our consciousness about our own strategy, and forced us to deﬁne
a speciﬁc innovation strategy and to think more strategically about
DEMO innovation decisions.”
Furthermore, the implementation and test teams identiﬁed some antecedents
DEMO to the realization of QSI’ s managerial effects. For example, the DEMO
director of Firm A stated:
“Here in this ﬁrm we have well established routines for how we
handle development projects funded by customers. DEMO
our procedures for how we handle internally funded development
projects are not deﬁned that clearly. It is, for example, not clear
who has DEMO authority to make an investment decision. We have to
put such procedures into place, and use QSI as an integrated tool
to realize all its potentials.”
Thus, we suggest that an antecedent for realizing managerial effects is that QSI is
implemented as an integrated part of a larger DEMO of innovation management
procedures. In addition the CEO of Firm B suggested that to ensure equal treat-
ment of different ideas, QSI should preferably be used by a pre-deﬁned “value
assessment team” that was disconnected from DEMO project team.
Suggested improvements of QSI
Although all participating managers agreed that QSI had a positive inﬂuence on
portfolio management, some argued that it was relatively difﬁcult to prioritize
projects based on the rather complex multi-dimensional DEMO expression
provided by the tool. Therefore, based on the experiences, the implementation- and
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
1161
test-teams suggested DEMO improvements. In particular, the suggested improve-
ments were related to how DEMO may be visualized in a more appropriate way for
project prioritizing and selection. It was for example suggested that by plotting the
value of DEMO idea in a three-dimensional co-ordinate system, and by including
symbols for DEMO need and time frames in the diagram, the decision basis for
DEMO selection would be improved. For more information about these suggested
improvements, DEMO refer to QSI’ s web application. We also expect that further
deployment of QSI will result in additional improvements and expansions of the
tool.
DEMO
QSI compared with existing alternatives
The novelty of QSI is twofold: DEMO, the three modules of QSI represent a new
combination of available DEMO innovation value assessment tools. This new
combination facilitates a more comprehensive value assessment than the use of a
single tool provide. Second, QSI is adapted to the speciﬁc characteristics of service
innovation effects. Since service innovation DEMO are arguably different from the
effects of traditional process and product innovation (e.g., de Jong et al., 2003),
this adaptation was DEMO to make the tool relevant for value assessment of
service innovation activities.
Alternative value assessment tools adapted to the speciﬁc characteristics of
service innovation DEMO, and developed to enable a comprehensive assessment of
the value of DEMO innovation ideas, like QSI, were difﬁcult to ﬁnd in the extant
research literature. Nevertheless, we identiﬁed two tools, SERVQUAL (e.g.,
Parasuraman, Zeithaml and Berry, 1998) and Quality Function Deployment (QFD)
(e.g., Yang, 2005), that to some degree were related. These DEMO do not focus on
value assessment of service innovation ideas in the broad sense, but have a narrow
in depth focus on assessment of service quality. Service quality is included in
Module 3 of QSI as DEMO potential relationship effect (effect C7 in Table 1). The
service DEMO effect is also included in the QSI scoreboard (see the Appendix)DEMO
and expected to inﬂuence both ﬁnancial performance and competitive position.
However, DEMO QSI has a broad perspective and is aiming to capture all potential
service innovation effects to enable assessment of value, detailed suggestions on
how each effect may be measured are not included. SERVQUAL and QFD, that
focus exclusively on service quality effects, provide much more details related to
possible measurement and assessment of potential service quality effects. How-
ever, SERVQUAL and QFD do not establish a link between service quality and
ﬁrm DEMO, while QSI does. Nevertheless, deployment of SERVQUAL or
1162
T. H. Aas
QFD in combination with QSI has the potential DEMO improve the assessment of how
the innovation will inﬂuence on service quality since these tools are more thorough
in that speciﬁc ﬁeld.
Limitations and DEMO research
We believe that by deploying a qualitative interventionist approach, we DEMO able
to identify the true managerial effects of QSI in the studied ﬁrms. It is, however, a
threat to the internal validity that DEMO test period was relatively short, and the
number of ideas assessed DEMO relatively low. We therefore suggest that further
research should evaluate the managerial effects of QSI over a longer period, where
it for example is evaluated whether the value estimated by QSI ex-ante reﬂects the
real value DEMO the project ex-post.
The fact that QSI is tested on relatively few service innovation ideas that all
have a technological aspect, and in relatively few ﬁrms from one industry, may
also be a threat to the external validity. However, since QSI is based on theory
applicable for for-proﬁt ﬁrms in general, we ﬁnd no reason why the ﬁndings
should not be generalizable to all for-proﬁt ﬁrms. Nevertheless, further research
should investigate this in more detail empirically by implementing QSI in ﬁrms
belonging to various DEMO and by testing the tool on different types of service
innovation projects.
Another limitation with the study is the fact that QSI is the DEMO tool that is
tested. QSI was intentionally implemented in ﬁrms that did not have a formal value
assessment tool implemented before participation in the DEMO study. For this
reason, we were only able to conclude on DEMO managerial effects QSI had,
whereas we were not able to say anything about the managerial effects of other
value assessment tools. Thus, further research should suggest alternative designs
of service innovation value assessment tools and DEMO them and compare the
managerial effects of these tools with the managerial effects of QSI.
Implications and Concluding Remarks
By deriving, implementing and testing a value assessment tool, called QSI, in three
ﬁrms, the paper contributes to our knowledge on how ex-ante value assessment
may be accomplished DEMO service innovation projects. It was found that the
implementation of QSI had effects both in a project management and a portfolio
management perspective. Thus, the practical experiences reported in the paper
provide considerable assistance and guidance DEMO managers searching for ways to
assess the value of their service innovation ideas.
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
Appendix: Suggested scoreboards to be used
in module 3 of QSI
Module 3 of QSI
DEMO
Name of service innovation idea: _____________________
Name of scenario: _____________________
Value of business process effects
To what degree will the service
change the DEMO business
process?
To what degree will the service
change the capacity of
delivering existing services?
To what degree will the service
change DEMO quality of existing
services/products?
To what degree will the service
change the internal operational
costs within the firm?
To what degree DEMO the service
have productivity effects?
To what degree will the service
change the  flexibility of the
firm?
To what degree will the service
reduce the risk of the firm’s
operations?
SUM
Anticipated influence DEMO
financial performance in
monetary terms (present
value)
Anticipated influence on
DEMO position
(0-5)
Comment
Value of external effects
Anticipated influence on
DEMO performance in
monetary terms (present
value)
To what degree will DEMO service
have environmental effects?
To what degree will the service
influence on industry structure?
To what degree will the service
have political DEMO effects?
To what degree will the service
contribute to regulations and
standards fulfilment?
SUM
Anticipated influence on
competitive position
(0-5)
Comment
1163
1164
T. H. Aas
Value of relationship effects
To what degree will DEMO service
influence on customer’s value
(i.e. have effects on the
customer’s DEMO,
effects on the customer’s
internal process, or effects on
the DEMO perceived
value)?
To what degree will the service
influence on DEMO
satisfaction?
To what degree will the service
influence on customer loyalty?
To what degree will the service
have lock-in effects?
To DEMO degree will the service
influence on image?
To what degree will the service
influence on business partner
relationships?
To what degree will DEMO service
change the quality of existing
services/products?
SUM
Anticipated influence on
financial performance in
monetary terms (present
value)
Value of capability effects
Anticipated influence on
financial performance in
monetary terms (present
value)
To what degree will
development of the service
have learning effects?
DEMO what degree will
development of the service
have enterprise culture effects?
To what degree will
development of the service
have employee growth effects?DEMO
To what degree will
development of the service
have employee satisfaction
effects?
SUM
Anticipated influence on
competitive position
(0-5)
Anticipated influence on
competitive position
(0-5)
Comment
Comment
Costs
Anticipated cost Comment
Investment (DEMO) costs (present value in monetary terms)
Future operational costs related to the service (present value in
monetary terms)
SUM
Development risks
Anticipated internal risk Comment
(0-5)
To what degree are there internal *) risks (e.g. technological
risk, knowledge risks etc..) related to DEMO development
process?
*) External risk (market risk) not relevant DEMO since this is covered through scenario descriptions
Total value of the service innovation idea
Value
Financial value (present value in monetary terms, i.e. DEMO
value of effects – financial value of costs)
Competitiveness value (DEMO of max score)
Development risk (percent of max score)
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
References
1165
Aas, TH (2009). Service innovation management: Designing an ex-ante value assessment
DEMO In Huizingh, KRE, Conn, S, Torkkeli, M and Bitran, I (Eds.). Proceedings of the
2nd ISPIM Innovation Symposium. Manchester: DEMO
Aas, TH and PE Pedersen (2010). The ﬁ rm-level effects of service innovation: A literature
review. International Journal of Innovation Management. forthcoming.
Avlonitis, GJ, PG Papastathopoulou and SP Gounaris (2001). An empirically-based
typology of product innovativeness for new ﬁnancial services: Success and failure
scenarios. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 18(5), 324–342.
Blazevic, V DEMO A Lievens (2004). Learning during the new ﬁnancial service innovation
DEMO: Antecedents and performance effects. Journal of Business Research, 57(4),DEMO
374–391.
Blazevic, V, A Lievens and E Klein (2003). DEMO of project learning and time-to-
market during new mobile service development. International Journal of Service
Industry Management, 14(1), 120–147.
Ching-Chow, Y (2007). A Systems Approach to Service Development in a Concurrent
Engineering DEMO Service Industries Journal, 27(5), 635–652.
Conway, M (2008)DEMO An Overview of Foresight Methodologies: An introduction to the
range of DEMO available to explore the future, Australia: Thinking Futures,
downloadable at http://www.thinkingfutures.net/downloads.
Cooper, RG, SJ Edgett and EJ Kleinschmidt (1999). New product portfolio management:
Practices and performance. Journal of DEMO Innovation Management, 16,
333–351.
Cooper, RG, SJ Edgett and DEMO Kleinschmidt (2001). Portfolio Management for New
Products, 2nd Edition. New York: Basic Books.
Cowell, DW (1988). New service development. Journal of Marketing Management, 3(3),
296–312.
De Brentani, U (DEMO). Success factors in developing new business services. European
Journal of Marketing, 25(2), 33–59.
De Jong, JPJ, A Bruins, W DEMO and J Meijgaard (2003). Innovation in Service Firms
Explored: What, How and Why? Strategic study B200205. Zoetermeer, Holland: EIM
Business & Policy Research.
Droege, H, D Hildebrand and MAH Forcada (2009)DEMO Innovation in services: Present
ﬁndings, and future pathways. Journal of Service Management, 20(2), 131–55.
Gofman, A, M Bevolo and HR Moskowitz (2009). Role of corporate leadership and
innovation claims on consumer perception of premium products. International
Journal of Innovation Management, 13(4), 665–681.
Haka, SF (2007). A review of the literature on DEMO budgeting and investment appraisal:
Past, Present and Future Musings. In DEMO, CS, Hopwood AG and Shields MG
(eds.). Handbook of DEMO Accounting Research Vol. 2. Oxford: Elsevier.
1166
T. H. Aas
Hansen, EG, F Grosse-Dunker and R Reichwald (2009). Sustainability innovation cube —
A framework to evaluate sustainability oriented DEMO International Journal of
Innovation Management, 13(4), 683–713.
Hipp, C, BS Tether and I Miles (2000). The incidence and effects DEMO innovation in services:
Evidence from Germany. International Journal of Innovation Management, 4(4),
417–453.
Irani Z and PED Love (2002). Developing a frame of reference for ex-ante IT/IS
investment evaluation. European DEMO of Information Systems, 11, 74–82.
Jönsson S and K Lukka (DEMO). There and Back again: Doing Interventionist Research in
Management Accounting. DEMO Chapman, CS, AG Hopwood and MG Shields (eds.).
Handbook DEMO Management Accounting Research Volume 1. Oxford: Elsevier.
Lievens, A and RK Moenaert (2000). Communication ﬂows during ﬁnancial service
innovation. European Journal of Marketing, 34(9/10), 1078–1110.
Lyons, RK, JA Chatman and CK Joyce (2007). Innovation in services: Corporate culture
and investment DEMO California Management Review, 50(1), 174–191.
Matear, S, BJ DEMO and T Garrett (2004). Market orientation, brand investment, new
DEMO development, market position and performance for service organisations.
International Journal of DEMO Industry Management, 15, 284–301.
Merchant, KA and WA Van der DEMO (2007). Management Control Systems: Perform-
ance Measurement, Evaluation and DEMO Edinburgh: Pearson Education
Limited.
Miles, I (2005). Innovation in DEMO In Fagerberg J, DC Mowery, RR Nelson (eds.).
The DEMO Handbook of Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parasuraman, A, VA DEMO and LL Berry (1988). SERVQUAL: A multiple-item scale
for measuring customer perceptions of service quality. Journal of Retailing, 64(1),
DEMO
Schoemaker, PJH (1995). Scenario planning: A tool for strategic DEMO Sloan
Management Review, Winter, 25–40.
Schulz, M (2005). Guest editor’s introduction: Is Japan ﬁnally catching up on service
innovation?. Japanese Economy, 33(3), 3–9.
Sigala, M (2006). Mass customisation implementation models and customer value in
mobile phones services: Preliminary ﬁndings from Greece. Managing Service
Quality, 16(4), 395–420.
Simons, R (2000). Performance Measurement & Control Systems for Implementing
Strategy. New Jersey: Pearson Education International.
Tidd, J and J Bessant (2009). Managing Innovation: Integrating Technological, Market
and Organizational Change (ed. 4). Chichester: Wiley.
Tidd, J and Hull FM (2003). Service Innovation: Organizational Responses to Techno-
logical Opportunities & Market Imperatives. London: Imperial College Press.
Van Riel, ACR and A Lievens (2004). New service development in DEMO tech sectors: A
decision-making perspective. International Journal of Service Industry Management,DEMO
15(1), 72–101.
Implementing a Value Assessment Tool for Service Innovation Ideas
1167
Van Riel, ACR, J Lemmink and H Ouwersloot (2004). High-technology service inno-
DEMO success: A decision-making perspective. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 21(5), 348–359.
Wong, PK and Z-L He (2005). A comparative DEMO of innovation behaviour in
Singapore’s KIBS and manufacturing ﬁrms. Service Industries Journal, 25(1), 23–42.
Xu, H, SK Sharma and R Hackney (2005). Web services innovation research: Towards a
dual-core model. International DEMO of Information Management, 25(4), 321–334.
Yang, K (2005)DEMO Design for Six Sigma for Services. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Copyright of International Journal of Innovation Management is the property of World DEMO Publishing
Company and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's DEMO written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles DEMO
individual use.{1g42fwefx}