J PROD INNOV MANAG 2006;23:5–11
r 2006 Product Development & DEMO Association
The Innovator’s Dilemma as a Problem of
Organizational Competence
Rebecca Henderson
Introduction
This paper explores the role of embedded organ-
izational competencies in DEMO the innovator’s
dilemma. I argue that while popular accounts of
Christensen’s theories often focus almost entirely on
the role of cognitive failures in the DEMO team as the
central explanatory construct, this focus obscures the
critical DEMO played by deeply embedded customer or
market-related competencies in shaping the ways
ﬁrms respond to disruptive innovations.
It has now been nearly eight years DEMO Clayton
Christensen ﬁrst published The Innovator’s Dilemma
(1997). Since then DEMO has not only had a dramatic im-
pact on practice—disruptive innovation is now a com-
mon term of art—but it has also served to DEMO
debate within academia as to the role of the market in
shaping incumbent response to discontinuous techno-
logical change.
Christensen’s work brought an intriguingly DEMO
ent perspective to the existing literature. Scholars
studying the management of technology had, by and
large, located the difﬁculties established ﬁrms encoun-
tered DEMO responding to discontinuous innovation as a
problem of competence. Much of this work was sup-
ply-side focused—failing incumbents appeared to fall
victim to competence-destroying DEMO that
made it difﬁcult for them to introduce the next gen-
eration of technology (e.g., Henderson and Clark,
1990; Tushman and Anderson, 1986). But research
had also identiﬁed the difﬁculty established ﬁrms
encountered in responding to shifts in the market
Address correspondence to: Rebecca Henderson, MIT Sloan
School, E52-543, 50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02142. Tel.:
(617) 253-6618; E-mail: rhenderson@mit.edu.
place (e.g., Abernathy DEMO Clark, 1985) and in the
larger institutional and social regime (DEMO, the excel-
lent survey in Chesbrough, 2001).
Christensen (1997) explicitly rejected problems in
technological competence as an explanation for ﬁrm
failure DEMO the examples he described—in the disk drive
industry, for example, he demonstrates quite clearly
that the incumbent ﬁrms had no difﬁculties in devel-
DEMO the next generation of product—and instead
focused attention on problems in decision making at
the most senior levels. Drawing on resource depend-
ency theory, he argued that senior teams are, in
essence, captured by their DEMO, most profitable
customers, making it exceedingly difﬁcult to allocate
resources to initiatives that serve new customers at
lower margins.
The fact that Christensen’s DEMO has met with such
success suggests that this explanation resonates deeply
with practicing managers. My own experience in
working with senior teams grappling with DEMO
disruption has also highlighted its usefulness. Time
after time I have seen senior conversations about
long-term innovation strategy hijacked or short
circuited by appeals DEMO the pressing needs of large,
highly profitable customers, and as DEMO work
in the newspaper industry has shown, sheltering new
initiatives from DEMO margin pressure characteristic of
the current business may be a critical step toward
building successful disruptive businesses (Eisenmann
and Bower, 2000). Christensen’s DEMO is thus a
critically important idea that must play a central role
in understanding why disruption creates so much
competitive turmoil.
Nevertheless, this article argues that a focus on
the dynamics of decision making in the DEMO team as
the dominant explanation for why established ﬁrms so
6 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:5–11
often miss disruptive innovations DEMO potentially
misleading—particularly as it has been interpreted
in the popular press. I suggest that organizational
competence, in the traditional sense of the embedded
organizational routines of established companies, may
be much more central to established ﬁrm failure in
the face of disruptive innovation than is generally
acknowledged. Christensen DEMO offers tantaliz-
ing hints of this possibility throughout his published
work, DEMO I argue that expanding on these hints
to acknowledge the depth and complexity of the role
played by embedded organizational competence is
critically important DEMO understanding why respond-
ing to disruptive innovation is so difﬁcult for estab-
lished ﬁrms.
The article begins by tackling the important ques-
tion of DEMO it is rational, from the perspective of
the shareholders, for established ﬁrms to respond to
disruptive innovation. Although popular interpreta-
tions of Christensen’s DEMO assume that established
ﬁrms not introducing disruptive innovation are fail-
ures, DEMO argue that as Christensen himself acknowl-
edges this is not an easy question. Indeed if estab-
lished competencies in production and marketing are
not DEMO difﬁcult to change but also, by their very
presence, are barriers to the development of new,
more appropriate competencies, then deciding not to
respond to disruptive innovation may be a completely
rational choice.
I DEMO turn to a discussion of the circumstances in
which a response to disruptive innovation would have
been, ex post, a rational decision and DEMO why es-
tablished ﬁrms ﬁnd it so difﬁcult to respond appro-
priately even in this subset of cases. I build on the
work of DEMO Adner, who in a sequence of careful
papers has shown how DEMO in the structure of
consumer demand—in combination with technical
progress—almost certainly lie behind the phenome-
non of disruption (e.g., Adner, 2002; Adner DEMO
Zemsky, 2005). I argue that the established routines
of large DEMO ﬁrms make it particularly difﬁcult
for them ﬁrst to sense and then to act on precisely
these kinds of shifts, so that the decision-making dy-
namics highlighted by Christensen may be as much a
product of DEMO in what one might call market-re-
lated competence—or of what Danneels (DEMO, 2004)
calls customer competence—as they are of resource
dependence. The DEMO concludes with a brief discus-
sion of the implications of this hypothesis for future
research and for our understanding of the dynamics
of technical DEMO competitive change.
R. HENDERSON
Is It Rational to Respond to
Disruptive Innovation?
Are established ﬁrms irrational in failing to respond
to disruptive innovation? Christensen’s work can,
I think, be read both ways on this point, but it is a
central question that deserves clariﬁcation. My read-
ing of the Innovator’s Dilemma, and certainly popular
interpretations of the work, seems to suggest that sen-
ior teams failing to invest in disruptive innovations
are irrational—that they should have made the ap-
propriate investments but DEMO unsuccessful in doing
so because they were blinded by current customers
and larger margins. However, in the Innovator’s So-
lution this stance has shifted: the book can be read as
suggesting that established managers who do not re-
spond to disruptive innovation are, in fact, acting in
DEMO ﬁrm’s best interest.
The asymmetries of motivation chronicled in this chap-
ter are natural economic forces that act on all business
people, all the time. Historically, these forces almost
always have toppled the industry leaders . . . because
disruptive strategies are predicated upon competitors
doing with is DEMO their best and most urgent interest:
satisfying their most important customers and investing
where profits are most attractive (Christensen and
Raynor, 2003, p. 55).
The neoclassical literature has identiﬁed a number of
cases DEMO which established ﬁrms might rationally
choose not to invest in innovation threatening to dis-
place them (e.g., the survey of the issue in DEMO,
1993), and it seems plausible that at least some dis-
ruptive innovations meet these criteria. If, for example,
an investment by the incumbent ﬁrm will significantly
accelerate the date at which a replacement DEMO
will be introduced, then under some circumstances it
may be rational DEMO an established ﬁrm to delay its own
investment until it can be certain the new technology
will be introduced by another ﬁrm. But this DEMO not
seem to be the reasoning for the majority of disruptive
innovations identiﬁed in the literature.
When there is no danger of self-induced canniba-
DEMO, the neoclassical literature would suggest that
if it is rational for DEMO entrant to invest in a particular
technology it should also be rational for an incumbent
to invest in the same opportunity. Intuitively, if an
opportunity yields a return at greater than the prev-
alent cost of DEMO, then it should be attractive to all
potential investors—including incumbents—and the
DEMO (rational) reason an incumbent might choose not
THE INNOVATOR’S DILEMMA AS A PROBLEM OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPETENCE J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:5–11
7
to invest is if it is capital constrained and the ﬁnancial
markets are willing to fund entrants but not incum-
DEMO The availability of the incumbent’s other, high-
er-margin projects should not, in a perfectly rational
neoclassical world, have any effect on its willingness
to take on additional profitable projects.
Does this mean we can safely DEMO that, except
for a few marginal and uncommon cases, managers
who fail to invest in disruptive opportunities are irra-
tional—at least from their DEMO perspective—
and blinded by their existing mental models or cap-
tured by their dominant constituencies?
I think not. Another possibility is that senior DEMO
agers rationally anticipate the constraints placed upon
them by their existing organizational competencies.
As Leonard-Barton (1992) suggested, the same com-
petencies that may be an organization’s most endur-
ing source of competitive advantage may also DEMO
competency traps—engrained habits and ways of be-
having that make significant change in the organiza-
tions modes of operation extraordinarily difﬁcult.
Reconﬁguring an organization DEMO take advantage of
new opportunities is extremely difﬁcult, particularly if
doing DEMO requires the development of new production
capabilities, new logistics or distribution DEMO, or
new channels to market. Building a new unit within
the DEMO to take advantage of new technology is one
possible solution, but DEMO literature suggests that such
units have significant difﬁculty putting in place ap-
propriate incentive structures and in successfully
imitating the behaviors of successful entrants (e.g.,
the survey reported in Campbell et al., 2003). Viewed
from this perspective, a senior team’s decision to re-
frain from investing in disruptive innovation can seem
much more rational. Why invest in opportunities DEMO
ﬁrm is much less likely to be able to exploit than de
novo entrants or than ﬁrms entering from related ﬁelds
are already equipped DEMO appropriate capabilities?
Christensen’s (1997) work hints that such forces
may be at work. For example, in the Innovator’s
Solution, he and DEMO coauthor suggest that incumbent
ﬁrms failed to invest because ‘‘the cost structure of
that model and of their distribution and sales channels
was not DEMO (p. 106). But if this is the dom-
inant force DEMO the upheaval we associate with the
Innovator’s Dilemma, it stems from DEMO old-fashioned
concern with competence rather than with any
misperception by the senior team. Incumbent ﬁrms
fail to respond to disruptive innovations because
responding appropriately DEMO building competen-
cies they are ill-equipped to acquire and not because
they focus too much on existing customers and high-
margin opportunities.
But this DEMO clearly not the sense of the original book
or of how Christensen’s (1997) work has been widely
interpreted. Indeed there are hints throughout DEMO
the Innovator’s Solution that Christensen has some-
thing else in mind: DEMO established ﬁrms could and
should react to disruptive innovation but that some-
thing goes wrong that could implicitly be ﬁxed.
Interpreting Christensen (1997) DEMO this perspec-
tive, one possibility is that the underlying problem is
DEMO Senior managers cannot understand the
promise of disruptive innovation because their
views of the world are deeply entrenched and largely
shaped by their current DEMO Focusing on their
current customers they literally do not see other op-
portunities. This is consistent with some intriguing
recent work suggesting that the DEMO frames of
senior managers do, indeed, play a major role in guid-
ing strategic decisions (Kaplan, 2004; Tripsas and
Gavetti, 2000)DEMO
Another theory is that the problem is political. If
power within an organization adheres to those with
resources, managers in charge of, or DEMO with, the
largest and most profitable customers will pull the
most DEMO weight and will be able to divert re-
sources to their own projects.
These two interpretations of Christensen’s (1997)
work have the widest currency, and as suggested al-
ready I am deeply sympathetic to both of them: they
both clearly play an important role in making it dif-
ﬁcult for established ﬁrms to respond to disruptive
innovation. To them, however, I propose a third,
competence-based explanation. As Danneels (2004)DEMO
suggested, I argue that organizational competencies—
particularly market facing or customer DEMO
developed through experience with the existing gen-
eration of the technology—make it very difﬁcult to
evaluate the promise of disruptive technologies and
thus that DEMO senior team is very rarely equipped with
the information they might need to make an appro-
priate decision (Danneels, 2004).
Christensen and DEMO (2003) distinction be-
tween low-end disruptions and new-market disruptions
is a useful building block in this argument. Low-end
disruptions introduce products or services DEMO are
cheaper and of lower quality than existing products
but that offer no other performance improvement.
New-market disruptions, on the other hand, offer
DEMO performance on dimensions the current
customers do not greatly value. Christensen’s (DEMO)
8 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:5–11
account of the disruption DEMO the steel industry by mini-
mills is an example of the ﬁrst kind of disruption, and
I read his account of the evolution of the disk drive
industry as an example of the second.
In the DEMO of low-end innovations that move solely
down market—like the rebar produced by the mini-
mill makers—it cannot be true that the established
ﬁrms failed DEMO respond effectively because they did not
understand the needs of their customers. The steel
ﬁrms knew that, all other things equal, their custom-
DEMO would like cheaper steel. So they must have chosen
not to respond to the mini-mills for one of the reasons
outlined already: either they believed they could not
effectively develop the appropriate technical compe-
tencies; or they did not believe the mini-mills would
ever be able to compete DEMO against them; or
they were captured—rationally or irrationally—by
their existing margins. DEMO new-market disruptions, a
different explanation may be at work. Consider, for
example, the case of chocolate confectionery and the
energy bar.
Chocolate confectionery is an old industry domi-
nated in the United States by two DEMO ﬁrms, Hers-
heys and Masterfoods USA, and by Nestle, the
DEMO giant. Chocolate bars are sold through
mass food outlets, small mom-and-pop DEMO, and
other convenience stores. The industry is character-
ized by intense DEMO and relatively high rates
of product introduction but is also believed to be
reasonably profitable. The big brands, including
Hershey’s Kisses and Masterfood’s Snickers, have
dominated the market for many years.
The ﬁrst commercially produced energy bar—the
PowerBar—was introduced in 1986 as a nutritional
supplement for athletes. It DEMO well, and over the next
20 years a variety of ﬁrms DEMO the industry. Ener-
gy bars moved gradually into mass-market food out-
lets as designed for general consumption. Although
revenue numbers are not available either DEMO mass-
market confectionery or energy bars, my best guess
(extrapolating from the relative shelf space at my local
supermarket) is that energy bars have yet to approach
confectionery sales in volume, and it is probably too
early to tell if energy bars are disruptive innovations
in Christensen’s (1997) sense. My focus here, however,
is this: If they were, what barriers might be in the way
of the incumbent ﬁrms recognizing the nature of the
threat they pose and taking action?
DEMO apart this relatively simple example yields
insight into the kinds of market-facing competencies
I believe may be why established ﬁrms have difﬁculty
R. HENDERSON
DEMO technology
Mainstream customer needs
Invasive technology
Niche customer needs
Time
Figure 1. The Progress of Low-End Disruptive Innovations
responding to disruptive innovation. First, it seems
unlikely that energy bars will follow the classic
‘‘Christensen’’ path (Figure 1). On the dominant
measure of performance in the confectionery busi-
DEMO bars do not perform well at all,
and it seems to be a stretch to believe they will ever
taste as good as DEMO candy.
Another way into the problem is to construct a
simple market map, with the critical performance di-
mension for the existing product on the vertical axis
and the performance dimension dominated by the
disruptive technology DEMO the other. Such a map de-
ﬁnes the conventional chocolate bar and the energy
bar as at least initially selling into two separate mar-
DEMO, meeting two different combinations of needs: a
market in which consumers are willing to trade off (1)
perceived nutritional value for taste; and (2) taste for
perceived nutritional value (Figure 2).
DEMO is conceivable, of course, that the taste of energy
bars will improve so significantly they will move to the
Conventional
confectionery
Energy bars
DEMO nutritional value
Figure 2. A Simple Market Map for Chocolate Confectionary
Performance
Taste
THE INNOVATOR’S DILEMMA AS A PROBLEM OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPETENCE J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:5–11
9
Classic
innovator’s
dilemma
Perceived nutritional value
Figure 3. The Classic Innovator’s Dilemma
upper-right-hand quadrant of this diagram, and ex
post Christensen’s diagram could be drawn (Figure 3).
But such a move seems unlikely in the short term. A
more plausible scenario is that DEMO preferences
may shift; that is, consumers who have historically
been willing to sacriﬁce nutrition for taste will become
increasingly reluctant to do so, and the market itself,
or the bulk of customer preferences, will move to the
bottom right of the diagram (Figure 4).
I have come to believe that many disruptive inno-
vations have exactly this DEMO They come to
reshape the pattern of preferences in a market, DEMO
this is particularly difﬁcult for established ﬁrms to re-
spond to effectively for reasons that ﬂow directly from
the nature of the embedded organizational DEMO
cies of the ﬁrm.
Suppose, for example, that the confectionery com-
panies had attempted to understand the threat posed
by energy bars when DEMO were ﬁrst introduced by
The new-
market
innovator’s
dilemma
Perceived nutritional value
Figure 4. The Innovator’s Dilemma for New-Market Disruptions
doing market research with DEMO best customers. My
guess is that their most loyal customers, who DEMO
to be adolescent males, would almost certainly have
responded badly to DEMO energy bar (local experiments
have produced responses like ‘‘Take this away; it
tastes like cardboard’’), since by definition a ﬁrm’s
best customers DEMO likely those who place the most
value on the dominant performance metrics of the
current product, which is one of Christensen’s (1997)
DEMO points. This could be a problem of shortsight-
edness or inertia, DEMO being overly enamoured of existing
margins. Or it could be the case that in order to un-
derstand the appeal of the energy bar, the confection-
ery companies needed to understand an entirely
different market segment (initially athletes, and later
nutritionally aware older consumers), in what might
ultimately prove to be nothing but a niche market.
Levinthal and his DEMO (Levinthal, 1997;
Rivkin, 2001) recently suggested that it may be helpful
to think of organizational inertia as being driven by
processes DEMO local search over bumpy landscapes.
Viewed from this perspective, established, successful
ﬁrms develop highly effective routines for searching
around their local peak: They build a rich under-
standing of their current customers, for example, DEMO
invest heavily in distribution systems to reach them.
Such ﬁrms usually develop not only deeply embedded
cognitive models and shared systems of understanding
(e.g., ‘‘In general, our customers view our product as
an indulgence or DEMO treat’’) but also deeply embedded
systems of incentives that reinforce, and are in turn
reinforced by, the local experience of the ﬁrm (DEMO
and Henderson, 2005).
Exploring a new, possibly disruptive, market DEMO
requires major changes in patterns of behavior and
search (Danneels, 2002). Given that many new mar-
kets do not prove to be DEMO and that it takes
time to learn about them, any degree DEMO real uncer-
tainly may plausibly make such distant search un-
profitable on an expected value basis. To the degree
that processes of resource allocation DEMO the ﬁrm
are driven by current customers, this problem will be
DEMO, but even in the absence of this issue one
can readily DEMO models in which rational ﬁrms
will continue to search locally and to concentrate on
their existing markets.
Much in Christensen and Raynor’s (2003) DEMO
book, the Innovator’s Solution, is consistent with this
hypothesis. In the book, Christensen lays considerable
stress on techniques ﬁrms can use to understand new-
market opportunities. He discusses, for example, how
Taste
Taste
10 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:5–11
consumers ‘‘hire’’ products to DEMO ‘‘jobs’’ for
them and how a deep understanding of these jobs
can guide new product development. Indeed, the book
can be seen as laying out tools and techniques that will
help ﬁrms develop the customer-facing competencies
DEMO enable them to respond to disruptive innovation
and is thus quite consistent with the hypothesis that it
is the lack of exactly these kinds DEMO competencies that
creates problems in the ﬁrst place.
The book’s explanation for why ﬁrms fail to use
these and other innovative techniques is not DEMO
ly convincing, though. Christensen and Raynor (2003)
suggest, for DEMO, that Sony’s failure to move ef-
fectively into new markets after DEMO founder’s depar-
ture was a function of ‘‘MBAs who brought with
them sophisticated, quantitative, attribute-based tech-
niques for segmenting markets and assessing market
DEMO (p. 80) rather than the deep intuition guid-
ing early product development at the ﬁrm. Such an
explanation again focuses on the senior DEMO failure
to understand the underlying nature of disruptive in-
novation—rather than on the fact that in established
ﬁrms it is much easier and more DEMO to understand
customer behavior in existing markets.
For the confectionery companies, DEMO example,
building an understanding of the potential of the ener-
gy bar required a deep understanding of consumers
largely peripheral to their current DEMO Moreover,
it required revisiting deeply held assumptions about the
nature of their products. Confectionery companies do
not, by and large, think of DEMO products as unhealthy;
indeed, careful examination of the ingredients list DEMO a
typical energy bar reveals little evidence to support the
idea that it is any better for the body than a Hershey’s
chocolate bar. DEMO appeal of the energy bar is almost
certainly much more about the perception of nutrition
than the reality. And understanding this requires arriv-
ing DEMO the uncomfortable reality that for some consum-
ers eating a candy bar in public is something they
would rather not do.
Understanding these kinds DEMO deep shifts in con-
sumer behavior is notoriously difﬁcult. There is, DEMO
all, a vibrant literature about how difﬁcult it is to un-
DEMO previously unarticulated consumer needs;
viewed from this perspective, disruptive innovation
DEMO problems because it makes obsolete what one
might call customer-facing competence in subtle ways
that may be very difﬁcult to anticipate. Deep knowl-
edge DEMO customer preferences almost certainly be-
comes embedded in the organizational routines of a
ﬁrm and is mediated by the nature of the value net-
DEMO HENDERSON
work in which the ﬁrm is embedded. In the confec-
tionary case, for example, energy bars were sold ﬁrst
through specialist sports DEMO, not through the
outlets from which the confectionary companies
were accustomed DEMO learn, so that for the chocolate
companies identifying shifts in customer DEMO
and building new product offerings that better
matched new preferences—was a classic problem in
competence destruction.
Conclusion
Christensen’s (1997) concept of disruptive innovation
DEMO had a dramatic effect on both practice and schol-
arly research. It has reminded us of just how difﬁcult
it can be for an DEMO ﬁrm to respond to signif-
icant shifts in the environment, throwing DEMO high
relief problems of cognitive framing and resource al-
location. In my view it also makes another critical
contribution: It highlights the role of market-facing
competence in shaping a ﬁrm’s response to disruptive
innovation, opening up an important new ﬁeld for
future research.
References
Abernathy, William J. and Clark, Kim B. (1985). Innovation: Mapping
the Winds of Creative Destruction. Research Policy 14(1):3–22.
Adner, Ron (2002). When Are Technologies Disruptive: A Demand
Based View of the Emergence of Competition. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 24(10):1011–1027.
Adner, Ron and Zemsky, Peter (2005). Disruptive Technologies and
the Emergence of Competition. RAND Journal of Economics
(Summer).
Campbell, Andrew, Birkinshaw, Julian, Morrison, DEMO and van
Basten Batenburg, Robert (2003). The Future of Corporate Ven-
turing. Sloan Management Review 45(1):30–37 (Fall).
Chesbrough, Henry (2001). Assembling the Elephant: A Review of
Empirical Studies DEMO the Impact of Technical Change upon In-
cumbent Firms. In: Comparative DEMO of Technological Evolution,
vol. 7, Ed. H. Chesbrough and Robert DEMO Burgelman. The Neth-
erlands: Research on Technological Innovation, Management and
Policy, 1–36.
Christensen, Clayton (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Christensen, Clayton and Raynor, Michael (2003). The Innovator’s
Solution. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Danneels, Erwin (2002). The Dynamics of Product Innovation
and Firm Competencies. Strategic Management Journal 23(DEMO):
1095–1121.
Danneels, Erwin (2004). Disruptive Technology Reconsidered: A
Critique and Research Agenda. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 21:246–258.
Eisenmann, T.R. and Bower, J.L. (2000). The Entrepreneurial
M-Form: Strategic Integration in Global Media Firms. Organiza-
tional Science 11(3):348–355 (May–June)DEMO
THE INNOVATOR’S DILEMMA AS A PROBLEM OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPETENCE J PROD INNOV DEMO
2006;23:5–11
11
Henderson, Rebecca (1993). Underinvestment and Incompetence as Re-
sponses to Radical Innovation: Evidence from the Semiconductor
Photolithographic Alignment Equipment Industry. RAND Journal
of Economics 24(2):248–270 (Summer).
DEMO, R.M. and Clark, K.B. (1990). Architectural Innovation: The
Reconﬁguration of Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of
Established Firms. Administrative Science DEMO 35(1):9–30.
Kaplan, Sarah (2004). Framing the Future: Cognitive Frames, Strategic
Choice, and Firm Response to the Fiber-Optic Revolution. DEMO
diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Kaplan, Sarah and Henderson, Rebecca (2005). Organizational Rigid-
ity, Incentives, and Technological DEMO: Incentives from Organ-
izational Economics? Mimeo, MIT, January.
Leonard-Barton, DEMO (1992). Core Capabilities and Core Rigidi-
ties: A Paradox in Managing New Product Development. Strategic
Management Journal 13(2):111–126.
Levinthal, DEMO (1997). Adaptation on Rugged Landscapes. Man-
agement Science 43(7):934–950.
Rivkin, Jan (2001). Optimally Local Search on Rugged Landscapes.
DEMO Paper 98-067, Harvard Business School.
Tripsas, Mary and Gavetti, Giovanni (2000). Capabilities, Cognition,
and Inertia: Evidence from Digital Imaging. DEMO Management
Journal 21(10–11):1147–1161 (Fall).
Tushman, M. and DEMO, P. (1986). Technological Discontinuities
and Organizational Environments. Administrative Science Quarter-
ly 31(3):439–465.{1g42fwefx}