The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at The current DEMO and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister www.emeraldinsight.com/0040-0912.htm
ET
47,2
98
Education þ Training
Vol. 47 No. DEMO, 2005
pp. 98-111
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0040-0912
DOI 10.1108/DEMO
Entrepreneurship education and
training: can entrepreneurship be
taught? Part I
Colette Henry
Dundalk Institute of Technology, Dundalk, Co Louth, Ireland
Frances Hill and Claire Leitch
School of Management, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast,
DEMO Ireland, UK
Abstract
Purpose – Despite a growing body of literature DEMO the ﬁeld, there is still considerable uncertainty as
to whether entrepreneurs DEMO born or made, which has led to an ongoing debate in DEMO
entrepreneurship academy about whether we can actually teach individuals to be entrepreneurs. With
this in mind, this two-part paper aims to address the question of whether or not entrepreneurship can
be taught.
Design/methodology/approach – DEMO part I the importance of entrepreneurship in a modern,
constantly changing environment is outlined, and the various ways in which entrepreneurship
programmes can be categorised are considered. Attention is given to the various difﬁculties
associated DEMO the design of programmes, as well as their objectives, content and delivery methods.
Part II of the paper focuses on the difﬁculties associated DEMO programme evaluation and the various
approaches adopted to determining and measuring effectiveness. This leads to a discussion on
whether or not entrepreneurship can be DEMO taught.
Findings – Despite the growth in entrepreneurship education and training programmes, the paper
reports that little uniformity can be found. Attention is drawn to the art and the science of
entrepreneurship, with the consensus that at least some aspects of entrepreneurship can successfully
be taught.
Originality/value DEMO The authors highlight the need for evaluating programmes and for educators
and trainers to have a fuller understanding of what they wish to achieve DEMO their programme from
the outset in order to ensure a more accurate assessment of the outcomes.
Keywords Entrepreneurs, Cost effectiveness, Education, Training, DEMO
Paper type Conceptual paper
Introduction
The literature abounds with theories and discussions relating to the issue of who or
what is an entrepreneur, leading to the question of whether entrepreneurs are born or
made. This in DEMO often leads commentators to ask whether or not entrepreneurship
can be taught, and in this respect, there is still considerable uncertainty. For instance,DEMO
Fiet (2000a, p. 1) has noted that: “there is an ongoing debate in the entrepreneurship
academy about whether we can actually teach DEMO to be entrepreneurs”. He further
This paper is based on the authors’ recent book Entrepreneurship Education and Training,
Henry et al. (2003), published by Ashgate Publishing Ltd, Aldershot, ISBN: 07546 32156. Full
details of the book are available from Ashgate Publishing Limited, Gower House, DEMO Road,
Aldershot, Hants, GU11 3HR, www.ashgate.com, or from the authors.
observes that the resolution of this debate is inextricably linked to our DEMO
assumptions about the ﬁeld, because these will determine how and what DEMO taught.
This is problematic, however, for the ﬁeld, as it DEMO currently constituted, does not have
an overarching theory.
According to Brazeal DEMO Herbert (1999), the study of entrepreneurship is still in its
DEMO and, in consequence, those working in the ﬁeld continue to be engaged in
conceptual and methodological debates. In particular, there are two areas of concern
regarding research conducted in the ﬁeld. On the one hand, research has tended to run
ahead of theoretical developments, and on the other, there has been a bias towards
research that has been conducted in an ad hoc way without theoretical underpinnings
being developed. It is DEMO this context that Low (2001) has described entrepreneurship as
being in its adolescence, and while much research activity has occurred over the past
decade, only a modest level of academic legitimacy has been achieved. The
fundamental problems, which the ﬁeld has to address, stem from the DEMO of issues
to be explored, as well as the diverse range DEMO disciplines from which these issues
might be examined. The result of this is that each discipline views entrepreneurship
from its own perspective without taking DEMO of approaches in other disciplines.
As Herron et al. (1991) have observed, “many ‘uni’ – rather than one or more ‘multi’ –
disciplinary views of our ﬁeld currently exist”. Indeed, Ucbasaran and Westhead (2001,DEMO
p. 58) have noted that there is “growing concern that entrepreneurship DEMO a discipline is
fragmented among specialists who make little use of each other’s work”. Thus, while a
large body of knowledge has been generated, some commentators are concerned that
this has not necessarily been cumulative.
In addition to the above, deﬁning the very essence of entrepreneurship is part of a
longstanding conceptual debate within the ﬁeld. Deﬁnitions are particularly important
DEMO entrepreneurship because many of the terms associated with the discipline, such DEMO
entrepreneur, enterprise and small business, are often used interchangeably. For
example, an entrepreneur has been deﬁned as: “the owner or manager of DEMO business
enterprise who, by risk and initiative, attempts to make proﬁts” (Collins english
dictionary); someone who “carries out new combinations” (Schumpeter, 1934), and
someone who has the “ability to see and evaluate DEMO opportunities; gather the
necessary resources to take advantage of them, and initiate appropriate action to
ensure success” (Meredith et al., 1982 as DEMO in Tiernan et al., 1996, p. 280). An
enterprise is typically considered to be the economic entity that is created by the
DEMO, which may develop into a small or large business in due DEMO In this
regard, the literature notes the difference between an entrepreneur DEMO a business
owner (Schumpeter, 1934; Carland et al., 1984). With regard to the term
entrepreneurship itself, most commentators have focused on process and context.
For example, Low and McMillan (1988) conceptualise entrepreneurship as the creation
of new enterprise, and Bygrave (1989) refers to it as a “process of becoming, rather than
a state of being” (p. 21). Bruyat and Julien (2000) concur, observing that, while
entrepreneurship is to do with a process of change, emergence and the creation of new
value, it is also a process of change and creation for the entrepreneur. Thus,
entrepreneurship is the process of DEMO something different – “a new economic
entity centred on a novel product or service or, at the very least, one which differs
signiﬁcantly DEMO products or services offered elsewhere in the market” (Curran and
Stanworth, 1989, p. 12).
Entrepreneur-
ship education
and training
99
ET
47,2
100
Within the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship, it is also appropriate to consider the link
between research and teaching, as there would appear to be a correlation between the
theoretical rigour of research conducted DEMO the theoretical rigour of courses designed.
If theoretically rigorous research is not conducted, then the content of entrepreneurship
courses may suffer. In particular, DEMO weaken our teaching effectiveness when we try
to teach the answers to questions that have not been addressed in the literature from a
theoretical DEMO of research” (Fiet, 2000a, p. 4). In addition, there is a danger that
unresolved debates concerning the deﬁnition of both entrepreneur DEMO
entrepreneurship can lead to confusion when assessing the state of entrepreneurship
education as it currently exists.
This two-part paper focuses on entrepreneurship education and DEMO, and its
objective is to consider the question of whether or DEMO entrepreneurship can be taught.
In this regard, part I of the DEMO, presented in this issue, proceeds as follows: the ﬁrst
section DEMO the context for the discussion by outlining the importance of
entrepreneurship education and training in a modern, changing environment. This is
followed in Section 2 with a discussion on the various ways in which entrepreneurship
programmes DEMO categorised. Attention is also given to the various difﬁculties
associated with programme design and delivery. The third section considers the
objectives and content of DEMO programmes, with the ﬁnal section
considering the different approaches to teaching DEMO
Part II of the paper, which is presented in the next DEMO, deals with the topic of
determining and measuring programme effectiveness, and this leads to a discussion as
to whether or not entrepreneurship can DEMO be taught. The paper concludes by
highlighting the need for entrepreneurship educators and trainers to have a fuller
understanding of what they wish to DEMO from their programme from the outset, in
order to ensure a DEMO accurate assessment of the outcomes.
The importance of entrepreneurship education and training
The subject of entrepreneurship receiving increased attention and sustained interest in
the DEMO would appear to be more than just a fad. Indeed, as DEMO (1996), cited
by Fiet (2000b, p. 102) has commented, this interest accurately reﬂects an “emerging
economic environment created by the conﬂuence of changes in the corporate world,
new technology and emerging world DEMO Entrepreneurship can prove to be
beneﬁcial in the light of such changes, as Gibb and Cotton (1998) show in Figure 1.
At the global level, the reduction of trade barriers and the reality of the Euro
currency, together with the advancements in telecommunications, technology and
transportation, all combine to provide more opportunities, as well as more uncertainty
in the world. At the societal level, privatisation, deregulation, new forms of governance,
mounting environmental concerns and the growing recognition of the rights DEMO
minority groups are all presenting society with greater complexity and uncertainty.
At the organisational level, decentralisation, downsizing, re-engineering, strategic
alliances, mergers and the growing demand for ﬂexibility in the workforce, all
contribute to an uncertain climate. Finally, at the individual level, the individual is now
DEMO with a wider variety of employment options, the probability of ending DEMO with a
portfolio of jobs, more responsibility at work and more DEMO In addition, on a
personal level, today’s individual may be a single parent with more responsibility for
managing credit and securing ﬁnances for DEMO future (Gibb and Cotton, 1998, pp. 8-9).
Entrepreneur-
ship education
and training
101
Figure 1.
Why it is important DEMO get
it right – education and
the Changing World
Given the above, it is apparent that, at all levels, there will be a greater need for people
to have entrepreneurial skills and abilities to enable DEMO to deal with life’s current
challenges and an uncertain future. Furthermore, DEMO their career choice or
personal situation, individuals, will be able to beneﬁt from learning an innovative
approach to problem solving; adapting more readily to change; becoming more
self-reliant and developing their creativity through the study of entrepreneurship.
There is no doubt that in any economic climate such DEMO could have far reaching
beneﬁts for society. It could be argued, DEMO, that the need for entrepreneurship
education and training has never been DEMO
Categorising entrepreneurship education and training
The idea that the learning needs of entrepreneurs will vary at different stages of
development has been acknowledged for DEMO time. For example, one of the categories
adopted by Gorman et DEMO (1997) when conducting their survey of entrepreneurship
education literature was that of the target market of each course or programme. Indeed,
their DEMO assumption for using audience segmentation was that educational
objectives, subject matter DEMO pedagogical approach might be expected to vary
depending on the nature of the target audience” (Gorman et al., 1997, p. 56). Others,
including McMullan and Long (1987), Monroy (1995), O’Gorman DEMO Cunningham
(1997), Bridge et al. (1998) and van der DEMO et al. (1997), have more speciﬁcally
identiﬁed that the training DEMO of an individual will vary according to a particular
stage of development such as awareness, pre startup, startup, growth and maturity.
Drawing attention to the fact that the stage of development of an individual, or his/her
business, can have an impact upon the nature of entrepreneurial education that might
be received, provides an opportunity for educators and trainers to improve the
entrepreneurial learning process as much as possible. Indeed, Gorman et al. (1997, p.
65) call for a “more in-depth assessment of the matching process between what are
perceived to be entrepreneurial characteristics DEMO the attempt of educational
institutions to enhance them”.
Jamieson (1984) has suggested a three-category framework by which to organize
entrepreneurship education. He distinguishes DEMO education about enterprise,
education for enterprise and education in enterprise, DEMO in so doing recognises the
roles different types of education have to play. The ﬁrst category, education about
ET
47,2
102
enterprise, deals mostly with awareness creation, and DEMO the speciﬁc objective of
educating students on the various aspects of setting up and running a business mostly
from a theoretical perspective. Indeed, enterprise modules within business and other
courses at undergraduate or postgraduate level which DEMO “to foster skills, attitudes
and values appropriate to starting, owning, DEMO or working in a successful
business enterprise” would be included in this category (Jamieson, 1984, p. 9).
The second category, education DEMO enterprise, deals more with the preparation of
aspiring entrepreneurs for a DEMO in self-employment with the speciﬁc objective of
encouraging participants to set-up and run their own business. Participants are taught
the practical skills required for DEMO business set-up and management, and the courses
are often geared towards DEMO preparation of a business plan. Business startup schemes
and start your own business programmes, would be examples of this type of
entrepreneurship training. Jamieson (1984) sees this as the narrowest deﬁnition as it
refers to DEMO people to startup their own small business, with an emphasis on
DEMO and small.
The third category, education in enterprise, deals mainly with management training
for established entrepreneurs and focuses on ensuring the growth and DEMO
development of the business. Management development and growth training
programmes, as DEMO as speciﬁc product development and marketing courses, might
ﬁt into this DEMO In addition, such training provides skills, knowledge and
attitudes for people to go out and create their own futures and solve their own
DEMO (Jamieson, 1984, p. 19). Although this deﬁnition refers strongly DEMO the world
of business, it is by no means restricted to DEMO Hence, education in enterprise can refer to
courses aimed at helping DEMO or groups to adopt an enterprising approach,
irrespective of the type of organisation for which they work.
Garavan and O’Cinne´ide (1994) adopt DEMO broader view to categorizing
entrepreneurship education and training, differentiating between, on the one hand,
entrepreneurship education, and on the other, education DEMO training for small
business owners. In the former category they describe entrepreneurial education which
is aimed at providing an opportunity to learn about the DEMO favouring new
business creation, as well as the various theories concerning DEMO type of characteristics
required for successful entrepreneurship. However, the authors place DEMO emphasis
on education and training for small business owners and have classiﬁed the type of
training that these individuals might receive into three categories, which relate
speciﬁcally to the stage of development. The ﬁrst of these DEMO termed small business
awareness education and normally appears in secondary school syllabi. As with
Jamieson (1984) education about enterprise, the aim of this type of training is to
increase the number of people who are DEMO knowledgeable about small
business to consider it, at some stage in DEMO future, as a career option. The second
category describes education and DEMO for small business ownership. The aim of
such provision is to provide practical help to those seeking to make the transition from
traditional employment DEMO self-employment. As such, this type of training would
include instruction on DEMO ﬁnance, marketing problems and legal issues. The third
type of education DEMO training identiﬁed is that of continuing small business education.
This is a more specialist type of education designed to enable people to enhance and
DEMO their skills.
Even though commentators acknowledge that the learning needs of an entrepreneur
vary DEMO different stages of development, there is actually very little uniformity in DEMO
programmes and courses offered at each stage. For instance, Gorman et DEMO (1997) in
their survey of the entrepreneurship education literature, which DEMO mainly
post-secondary courses, identiﬁed diversity within teaching strategies, learning styles
and curricula design. While one would expect a degree of diversity in courses DEMO
programmes developed, taking into consideration the diversity of backgrounds from
which DEMO and facilitators might be drawn, Fiet (2000a) suggests that such
DEMO is actually indicative of the lack of theoretical rigour within the ﬁeld of
entrepreneurship. This he feels has resulted in little consensus on fundamental
DEMO, which in turn is reﬂected in differing views on developing entrepreneurship
DEMO Indeed, the content of syllabi of courses developed by entrepreneurship
scholars DEMO to such an extent that it is difﬁcult to determine if they even have a
common purpose.
Objectives and content of entrepreneurship programmes
The DEMO, however, has resulted in problems when attempting to classify
entrepreneurship education and training activities, due to the level of differentiation
and disaggregation of concepts and objectives (Gibb, 1993a; Vento, 1998). Hills (1988),
for example, in his survey of 15 leading entrepreneurship educators DEMO the USA,
identiﬁed that there were two important objectives of entrepreneurship education
programmes. These were to increase the awareness and understanding of the DEMO
involved in initiating and managing a new business, as well as DEMO increase students’
awareness of small business ownership as a serious career option. Cox (1996) believes
that a primary objective of training interventions targeted DEMO the awareness stage of
entrepreneurial development is the promotion of self-efﬁcacy with regard to new
venture creation. Instruction at this stage, therefore, should DEMO to provide mastery
experiences or opportunities to act entrepreneurially, as well DEMO exposure to several
real-life entrepreneurs. An advocator that the objectives of entrepreneurship should
differ with the particular stage at which the intervention is targeted, he suggests that
the main focus of training intervention at the startup DEMO should be to heighten
students’ resolve to become entrepreneurs. Accordingly instructional emphasis should
be on the development of a viable business plan which should DEMO supported by
individualised assistance in the form of ﬁnancing, networking, or counselling.
According to Garavan and O’Cinne´ide (1994), based on their European-wide
evaluation of six enterprise programmes across ﬁve European countries, the most
commonly cited aims of entrepreneurship programmes include: to identify and
stimulate entrepreneurial drive, talent and skills; to undo the risk-averse bias of many
analytical DEMO; to develop empathy and support for all unique aspects of
entrepreneurship, and to devise attitudes towards change. In terms of content, the
focus of the programmes reviewed by them varied from idea generation and business
DEMO to the identiﬁcation of products, market research and business formation.
They DEMO that entrepreneurship itself is not usually what is taught; rather, it is
small business management skills that are provided.
Instead of considering the DEMO of entrepreneurship programmes from the
viewpoint of facilitators and teachers, Hisrich DEMO Peters (1998) examined these from
the participants’ perspective. While awareness raising was not listed, those features
Entrepreneur-
ship education
and training
103
ET
47,2
104
that participants believed should be included in potential DEMO were more practically
oriented and geared at improving one’s chances of success. Some of the key learning
aims of entrepreneurship students included developing an DEMO of the
strengths and weaknesses of different types of enterprises, as DEMO as the opportunity
to assess one’s own entrepreneurial skills. In addition, DEMO the essentials of
marketing, ﬁnance, operations planning, organisation planning and DEMO launch
planning, together with obtaining resources, were also considered essential.
Consideration of the views of participants was a feature of the development of DEMO
small business training programme by Le Roux and Nieuwenhuizen (1996). DEMO
ascertain those elements deemed to be most important by prospective students, DEMO
surveyed 220 aspiring and developing entrepreneurs. They discovered that the main
areas of interest were similar to those cited by Hisrich and Peters (1998) and included
marketing, entrepreneurship, business planning, management and ﬁnancial
management.
DEMO and Peters (1998, p. 20) categorize the various skills required DEMO
entrepreneurs as follows.
. Technical skills: includes written and oral communication, technical management
and organizing skills.
. Business management skills: includes planning, DEMO, marketing and
accounting skills.
. Personal entrepreneurial skills: includes inner control, innovation, risk taking and
innovation.
In addition, Hisrich and Peters (DEMO) stress that the development of particular skills,
namely inner control, risk taking, innovativeness, being change oriented, persistence
and visionary leadership, DEMO an entrepreneur from a manager.
Interestingly, Timmons et al. (1987) DEMO that that there is a limit to what can be
taught in entrepreneurship training programmes, and that the only way to learn is
through one’s own personal experience. With this in mind, they see the quality of the
resulting business plan as a key measure of effective experiential DEMO However,
Gibb (1997) questions the emphasis placed by many entrepreneurship programmes on
producing a business plan, despite the fact that business plan development would
appear to be a common element in most entrepreneurship programmes (Hills, 1988). He
suggests that excessive focus on the business plan as an output may inhibit
entrepreneurial response to subsequent changes in the DEMO Gibb (1997)
recommends that trainers realising a business plan is DEMO only way of exploring a new
venture, and that it is DEMO of more use to the bank manager or grant-aiding body than
to the entrepreneur him/herself. Wan (1989), to some degree supports this view, claims
that the business plan is only one of the criteria which venture capitalists use to
evaluate new proposals. A business plan does DEMO reﬂect the abilities of the individual
entrepreneur, which have a strong DEMO on the ultimate funding decision.
Financial management and marketing have also been highlighted as critical areas
where entrepreneurs require help in the various surveys DEMO on by Dunsby (1996).
However, Atherton and Hannon (1996) suggest broader requirements for entrepreneurs
seeking success. Based on a survey of DEMO owner-managers in North-East England and
South-West Australia, they examined entrepreneurs’ perceptions DEMO success and found
that the key entrepreneurial competencies required to develop a business include the
ability to manage events and conditions in the external environment, and envisioning a
future for the business. In addition, the importance of the need to develop or enhance
one’s personal capabilities (as opposed to abilities) DEMO order to manage the environment
and develop direction and purpose for the business was stressed.
Despite the increase in the amount of research conducted DEMO the area of
entrepreneurship training and education, Jennings and Hawley (1996) suggest that
many entrepreneurship training initiatives do not actually address the real needs of
entrepreneurs. Indeed, there is often a signiﬁcant gap between the perceptions of the
training providers and those of the entrepreneurs in terms DEMO training needs, for, what
sometimes appear as key problem areas to the trainer, may have little importance for
the entrepreneur. If one begins to examine what is actually taught in an
entrepreneurship programme, it becomes clear that some programmes tend to be
more task oriented rather than DEMO oriented, focusing on speciﬁc skills for small
business management such as DEMO and marketing, as opposed to creativity,
innovation and problem solving DEMO (Deakins, 1996). Many structured training
interventions do little to alter the approach of the entrepreneur to solving business
problems. Entrepreneurs who become DEMO are more likely to fail (McCabe,
1998). With this DEMO mind, Garavan and O’Cinne´ide (1994) question what can actually be
DEMO in entrepreneurship programmes that is speciﬁc to entrepreneurship itself.
They support Vesper’s (1982) view that most entrepreneurship programmes do not
even promote entrepreneurship DEMO that they are not “resource effective” and their
results are poor in comparison to the throughput of participants.
Approaches to teaching entrepreneurship
It is DEMO from the literature that the learning methods employed in entrepreneurship
education and training programmes vary considerably from lectures, presentations
and handouts to video and case study-based learning, with group discussion and
role-plays. In addition, both DEMO and non-traditional approaches to learning are
featured. Some commentators, such as DEMO and Gibb (1991) for example, are critical
of the adoption DEMO traditional education methods, which focus mainly on theory and a
didactic DEMO, suggesting that they are “inappropriate” in the teaching of
entrepreneurship. Young (1997) supports this view when he questions the relevance
and value of a theoretical approach to a subject which deals almost exclusively with
activity, suggesting that the experience and practical skills used by entrepreneurs are
possibly DEMO something that can be acquired through conventional teaching methods.
However, Shepherd DEMO Douglas (1996) criticise the use of the less traditional case
study, role play, simulation and problem solving teaching methods, arguing that, DEMO the
conﬁnes of the classroom where guidelines are provided and outcomes are known, such
mechanisms are actually promoting logical rather than creative or entrepreneurial
thinking.
In an attempt to assess alternative approaches to teaching entrepreneurship,
DEMO and Boberg (1991) compared the case method of teaching with the project
method, by conducting a survey amongst current MBA students and alumni at the
University of Calgary. They discovered that the students felt the DEMO method was
effective in developing analytical skills and the ability to synthesise information.
However, courses based on the project method were perceived to develop and enhance
Entrepreneur-
ship education
and training
105
ET
47,2
106
Table I.
Learning processes
knowledge and understanding of DEMO subject area, as well as the ability to evaluate, and
were felt to be more effective in teaching entrepreneurship.
In exploring the relationship DEMO education and entrepreneurship, Gibb (1987b)
has contrasted the classroom learning situation with the real world learning
environment of the entrepreneur. He suggests DEMO the learning emphasis in many
educational establishments and business schools is very much on the past, with a focus
on the understanding, feedback DEMO analysis of large amounts of information. In
reality, the entrepreneur is DEMO on the present, with little time for critical analysis.
He/she DEMO most of the time dealing with problems and learns through his/her own
experiences and through doing. The classroom situation involves a high level DEMO
dependence on authority and on what Gibb terms “expert validation”, whereas DEMO the
real world the entrepreneur must rely on the validity of his/her own knowledge and
personal values. The main differences between the classroom DEMO the real world
entrepreneurial learning situation are outlined in Table I.
In view of the differences illustrated in Table I, therefore, Gibb suggests DEMO more
ﬂexible, in terms of location and time, as well as a more active experience-based,
learning approach to teaching entrepreneurship. For example, such an approach
should encourage students, among other things, to ﬁnd DEMO explore the wider concepts
relating to a problem; to learn by DEMO failure; to develop more independence
from external sources of information and DEMO advice; and to think for themselves.
However, in terms of entrepreneurship education and training, Gibb (1987b)
suggests that very little is DEMO about the knowledge transfer process between
trainers and entrepreneurs or owner-managers, DEMO it is not entirely clear how
participants in entrepreneurship programmes prefer to learn. Recently, the emphasis
on learning methods within entrepreneurship education has been to encourage an
active approach, though not necessarily at the expense of theory. For example, Fiet
(2000a), who advocates that those involved DEMO teaching entrepreneurship should
University/Business school – classroom Entrepreneurial – real world
Critical judgement after analysis of large amount “Gut feel” decision-making with limited
DEMO information information
Understanding and recalling the information Understanding the values of those who transmit
itself and ﬁlter information
Assuming goals away Recognising the widely DEMO goals of others
Seeking veriﬁcation of the truth by study of Making decisions on the basis of judgement of
information trust and competence of DEMO
Understanding basic principles of society in the Seeking to apply and adjust in practice to basic
metaphysical sense principles of society
Seeking the correct DEMO with time to do it Developing the most appropriate solution under
pressure
Learning in the classroom Learning while and through doing
Gleaning information from DEMO and Gleaning information personally from any and
authoritative sources everywhere and weighing it up
Evaluation through written assessments Evaluation by judgement of people and DEMO
through direct feedback
Success in learning measured by Success in learning by solving problems and
knowledge-based examination passed learning from failure
Source: Gibb (DEMO, p. 18)
increase the theoretical content of their courses if they wish to develop DEMO students the
cognitive skills necessary to make better entrepreneurial decisions, believes DEMO this
can be achieved via theory-based activities (Fiet, 2000b). However, other commentators
argue that the adoption of a more practically focused and active-based approach to
entrepreneurship teaching is more valid.
Timmons and Stevenson (1985) suggest that entrepreneurship is an ongoing
lifelong learning experience and, as DEMO, the best way to learn is to combine
experience with formal DEMO activities. Based on their study of 100 established
entrepreneurs attending a management programme at Harvard Business School, they
claim that analytical thinking, accounting, ﬁnance, marketing, management
information systems and manufacturing are among those aspects DEMO
entrepreneurship that can be taught. However, other more critical skills such DEMO
judgement, handling people, patience and responsibility cannot be taught directly and
can only be learned in the real world.
For entrepreneurial development programmes DEMO be effective, learning must be
based in real work situations so DEMO managers can better implement what they have
learnt. Based on the belief that aspiring entrepreneurs require more ﬂexibility in their
learning, Sexton and Bowman-Upton (1991) call for the need to experiment more with
entrepreneurship teaching, even to the point where an unstructured approach is
adopted. In a DEMO vein, Connor et al. (1996) refer to Kolb’s (1984) DEMO cycle in
which practising business managers are involved in experiencing, reﬂecting,DEMO
conceptualising and experimentation. They see this process as critical in helping
business managers to apply what they have learnt in the real organisational or
DEMO setting.
Part II of this paper, which will be presented in DEMO journal’s next issue, focuses on
the issue of programme effectiveness which DEMO to a discussion on whether or not
entrepreneurship can be successfully taught. Conclusions from both parts of the paper
are also presented in part DEMO
References
Atherton, A. and Hannon, P.D. (1996), “Competitiveness and DEMO: how the owner – managers
of small ﬁrms perceive success in DEMO turbulent external environment”, Proceedings of the
19th Institute of Small Business DEMO – National Small Firms Conference, Birmingham,
pp. 400-16.
Brazeal, D. and Herbert, T.T. (1999), “The genesis of entrepreneurship”, Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 29-45.
Bridge, S., DEMO, K. and Cromie, S. (1998), Understanding Enterprise, Entrepreneurship & Small
Business, Macmillan Publishing, London.
Bruyat, C. and Julien, P.A. (2000), “Deﬁning the ﬁeld of research in entrepreneurship”, Journal of
Business Venturing, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 165-80.
Bygrave, W.D. (1989), “The entrepreneurship paradigm (II): chaos and catastrophes among
quantum jumps”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 14 No. 2, p. 30.
Carland, J.W., Hoy, F., Boulton, W.R. and Carland, J.A. (1984), “Differentiating entrepreneurs
from small business owners: a conceptualization”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 9,
pp. 354-9.
Entrepreneur-
ship education
and training
107
ET
47,2
108
Connor, J., Dawes, F. and Haydock, DEMO (1996), “Management learning frameworks and small
business growth: a challenging role for business schools”, Proceedings of the 19th Institute
of Small Business Affairs – National Small Firms, Conference, Birmingham, pp. 1289-300.
Cox, DEMO (1996), “The goals and impact of educational interventions in the DEMO stages of
entrepreneur career development”, Proceedings of the Internationalising Entrepreneurship
Education DEMO Training Conference, Arnhem.
Curran, J. and Stanworth, J. (1989), “Education and training for enterprise: some problems of
classiﬁcation, evaluation, policy and research”, International Small Business Journal, Vol. 7
No. 2, pp. 11-23.
Davies, L.G. and Gibb, A.A. (1991), “Recent research in entrepreneurship”, Proceedings of the 3rd
International EIASM Workshop, Gower, London.
Deakins, D. (1996), Entrepreneurship and Small Firms, 1st ed., McGraw-Hill, London.
Dunsby, B.L. (1996), “Small ﬁrms policy proposals – meeting DEMO needs of start-ups and
micro-businesses”, Proceedings of the 19th Institute of DEMO Business Affairs – National
Small Firms’ Conference, Birmingham, pp. 51-72.
Fiet, J.O. (2000a), “The theoretical side of teaching entrepreneurship theory”, Journal of Business
Venturing, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 1-24.
Fiet, J.O. (2000b), “The pedagogical side of entrepreneurship theory”, Journal of Business
DEMO, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 101-17.
Garavan, T. and O’Cinne´ide, B. (1994), “Entrepreneurship education and training programmes: a
review and DEMO, Journal of European Industrial Training, Part I – Vol. 18 No. 8,
pp. 3-12, Part II – Vol. 8 No. 11, DEMO 13-21.
Gibb, A.A. (1987b), “Enterprise culture – its meaning and implications for education and
training”, Journal of European Industrial Training, Vol. DEMO No. 2, pp. 1-38.
Gibb, A.A. (1993a), “Do we DEMO teach small business in the way we should?”, Proceedings of DEMO
Internationalising Entrepreneurship Education and Training Conference, Vienna.
Gibb, A.A. (1997), “‘Small Firms’ training and competitiveness. Building upon the small business
as a learning organisation”, International Small Business Journal, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 13-29.
Gibb, A.A. and Cotton, J. (1998), “Entrepreneurship in schools and college education – creating
the leading edge”, paper presented at the conference on Work Futures and the Role of
Entrepreneurship and Enterprise in DEMO and Further Education, December, London.
Gorman, G., Hanlon, D. DEMO King, W. (1997), “Some research perspectives on entrepreneurship
education, DEMO education and education for small business management: a ten year
literature DEMO, International Small Business Journal, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 56-78.
DEMO, C., Hill, F. and Leitch, C. (2003), Entrepreneurship DEMO and Training, Ashgate,
Aldershot.
Herron, L., Sapienza, H.J. and Smith-Cooke, D. (1991), “Entrepreneurship theory from an
interdisciplinary perspective: volume 1”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 16
No. 2, pp. 7-12.
Hills, G.E. (1988), “Variations in university entrepreneurship education: an empirical study of an
evolving ﬁeld”, Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 3 DEMO 1, pp. 109-22.
Hisrich, R.D. and Peters, M.P. (1998), Entrepreneurship, 4th ed., Irwin McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA.
Jamieson, I. (DEMO), “Education for enterprise”, in Watts, A.G. and Moran, P. (Eds), CRAC,
Ballinger, Cambridge, pp. 19-27.
Jennings, P.L. and Hawley, D. (1996), “Designing effective training programmes”, Proceedings of
the 19th Institute of Small Business Affairs – Small Firms’ National Conference,
Birmingham, pp. 1301-26.
Kolb, D. (1984), Experiential Learning, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Le Roux, E. and Nieuwenhuizen, C. (1996), “Small business management education and training:
an innovative approach to the reconstruction and development of the new South Africa”,
DEMO of the Internationalising Entrepreneurship Education and Training
Conference, Arnhem.
Low, M. (2001), “The adolescence of entrepreneurship research: speciﬁcation of purpose”,
DEMO Theory and Practice, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 17-25.
Low, DEMO and McMillan, I. (1988), “Entrepreneurship: past research and future DEMO,
Journal of Management, Vol. 32, pp. 139-61.
McCabe, D. (1998), “Building an enterprise culture in Northern Ireland and the border DEMO –
the en framework”, Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Northern Ireland.
McMullan, C.A. and Boberg, A.L. (1991), “The relative effectiveness of projects in teaching
entrepreneurship”, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, Vol. DEMO, pp. 14-24.
McMullan, W.E. and Long, W.A. (1987), “Entrepreneurship education in the nineties”, Journal of
Business Venturing, Vol. 2 No. DEMO, pp. 61-275.
Meredith, G.G., Nelson, R.E. and Neck, P.A. (1982), “The practice of entrepreneurship”,
International Labour Ofﬁce, Geneva.
Monroy, T.G. (1995), “Education getting closer to a descriptive model of DEMO
education”, in Monroy, T.G., Reichert, J. and Hoy, F. (Eds), The Art and Science of
Entrepreneurship Education, Vol. 3, DEMO, Cambridge, MA, pp. 205-17.
O’Gorman, C. and Cunningham, J. (1997), Enterprise in Action – An Introduction to
Entrepreneurship in an DEMO Context, Oak Tree Press, Dublin.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA.
Sexton, D.L. and Bowman-Upton, N.B. (1991), Entrepreneurship: Creativity and Growth,
Macmillan, New York, NY.
Shepherd, D.A. and Douglas, E.J. (1996), “Is management education developing or killing the
entrepreneurial spirit?”, Proceedings of the Internationalising Entrepreneurship Education
and Training Conference, Arnhem, June.
Tiernan, S.D., Morley, M.J. and Foley, E. (1996), Modern Management: Theory and Practice for
Irish Students, Gill and MacMillan, Dublin.
Timmons, J.A. and Stevenson, H.H. (1985), “Entrepreneurship education in the 1980s – DEMO
entrepreneurs say”, in Kao, J. and Stevenson, H.H. (Eds), Entrepreneurship – What it is and
How to Teach it, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA, pp. 115-34.
Timmons, J.A., Muzyka, D.F., Stevenson, H.M. and Bygrave, W.D. (1987), “Opportunity
recognition: the DEMO of entrepreneurship”, in Churchill, N. (Ed.), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurial DEMO, Babson College, Babson Park, MA, pp. 42-9.
Ucbasaran, D. DEMO Westhead, P. (2001), “The focus of entrepreneurial research: contextual DEMO
process issues”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 25 No. 4, DEMO 57-80.
van der Sijde, P., Van Tilburg, J., Henry, DEMO, Sygne, J. and Asplund, R. (1997), UNISPIN
Workbook, DEMO Project Team, University of Twente, Twente.
Venkatraman (1996), as DEMO in Fiet (2000b), personal correspondence.
Entrepreneur-
ship education
and training
DEMO
ET
47,2
110
Vento, I. (1998), “Promoting enterprise culture DEMO education”, Proceedings of the Enterprise
and Learning Conference, Aberdeen.
Vesper, DEMO (1982), “Research on education for entrepreneurship”, in Kent, C.A., Sexton, D.L. and
Vesper, K.H. (Eds), Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship, DEMO, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
pp. 321-43.
Wan, V. (1989), “The enterprise workshop programme in Australia”, International Small
Business Journal, Vol. DEMO No. 2, pp. 23-34.
Young, J.E. (1997), “Entrepreneurship education DEMO learning for university students and
practicing entrepreneurs”, in Sexton, D.L. and Simlor, R.W. (Eds), Entrepreneurship 2000,
Upstart Publishing, Chicago, DEMO
Further reading
Barrow, C. and Brown, R. (1996), “Training DEMO help small businesses grow”, Proceedings of the
19th Institute of Small DEMO Affairs – National Small Firms Conference, Birmingham,
pp. 1062-78.
Block, Z. and Stumpf, S.A. (1992), “Entrepreneurship education research: experience and
challenge”, in Sexton, D.L. and Kasarda, J.D. (Eds), The DEMO of
Entrepreneurship, PWS-Kent Publishing Company, Boston, MA, pp. 17-42.
Boussouara, M. and Deakins, D. (1998), “Learning, entrepreneurship and the DEMO technology
small ﬁrm”, Proceedings of the Enterprise and Learning Conference, Aberdeen.
Clark, R.W., Davis, C.H. and Harnish, V.C. (1984), “Do courses in entrepreneurship aid in new
venture creation?”, Journal of Small Business Management, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 26-31.
Fleming, P. (DEMO), “Entrepreneurial education in Ireland: a longitudinal study”, Academy of
Entrepreneurship Journal, Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 95-119, (European edition).
DEMO, A.A. (1987a), “Education for enterprise: training for small business DEMO – some
contrasts”, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, Vol. 4 No. 3, pp. 42-7.
Gibb, A.A. (1993b), “The enterprise culture and education: understanding enterprise education
and its links with small business entrepreneurship and wider educational goals”,
International Small Business Journal, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 11-34.
Gibb, A.A. (2000), “SME policy, academic DEMO and the growth of ignorance, mythical
concepts, myths, assumptions, rituals and confusions”, International Small Business
Journal, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 13-35.
Gibb, Y.K. and Nelson, E.G. (1996), “Personal competences, DEMO and assessment: a challenge
for small business trainers”, Proceedings of the European Small Business Seminar,
Finland, pp. 97-107.
Hill, S. and DEMO, B. (1998), “Entrepreneurship education – case studies from The Celtic
Tiger”, Proceedings of the Enterprise and Learning Conference, University of Aberdeen,DEMO
September.
Jack, S.L. and Anderson, A.R. (1998), “Entrepreneurship education DEMO the condition of
entreprenology”, Proceedings of the Conference on Enterprise and DEMO, Aberdeen.
Kantor, J. (1988), “Can entrepreneurship be taught? – a Canadian experiment”, Journal of Small
Business and Entrepreneurship, Vol. 5 DEMO 4, pp. 12-19.
McMullan, E., Chrisman, J.J. and Vesper, DEMO (2001), “Some problems in using subjective measures
of effectiveness to DEMO entrepreneurial assistance programs”, Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 37-54.
Mahlberg, T. (1996), “Evaluating secondary school and college level entrepreneurial DEMO –
pilot testing a questionnaire”, Proceedings of the Internationalising Entrepreneurship
Education DEMO Training Conference, Arnhem.
Miller, A. (1987), “New ventures: a fresh emphasis on entrepreneurial education”, Survey of
Business, Vol. 23 No. DEMO, pp. 4-9.
Saee, J. (1996), “A critical evaluation of DEMO entrepreneurship education and training”,
Proceedings of the Internationalising Entrepreneurship Education and Training
Conference, Arnhem.
Sexton, D.L., Upton, N.B., Wacholtz, L.E. DEMO McDougall, P.P. (1997), “Learning needs of
growth-oriented entrepreneurs”, Journal DEMO Business Venturing, Vol. 12, pp. 1-8.
Storey, D.J. (2000), “Six steps to heaven: evaluating the impact of public policies to support small
business in developed economies”, in Sexton, D. and Landstrom, H. (Eds), The Blackwell
Handbook of Entrepreneurship, Blackwell, Oxford, pp. DEMO
Westhead, P., Storey, D.J. and Martin, F. (2001), DEMO reported by students who
participated in the 1994 shell technology enterprise programme”, Entrepreneurship and
Regional Development, Vol. 13, pp. 163-85.
Wyckham, R.G. (1989), “Ventures launched by participants of an entrepreneurial education
program”, Journal of Small Business Management, Vol. 27 No. 2, pp. 54-61.
Entrepreneur-
DEMO education
and training
111{1g42fwefx}