Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2009, Vol. 35, No. 5, 1296–1305
© 2009 American Psychological Association
0278-7393/09/DEMO DOI: 10.1037/a0016565
Ignorance- Versus Evidence-Based Decision Making:
A Decision DEMO Analysis of the Recognition Heuristic
Benjamin E. Hilbig and Ru¨diger F. Pohl
University of Mannheim
Accordingtopartoftheadaptivetoolboxnotionofdecisionmakingknownastherecognitionheuristic
(RH), the decision process in comparative judgments—and its duration—is determined by whether
recognition discriminates between objects. By contrast, some recently proposed alternative models
predictthatchoiceslargelydependontheamountofevidencespeakingforeachoftheobjectsandthat
decisiontimesthusdependontheevidentialdifferencebetweenobjects,orthedegreeofconflictbetween
options. This article presents 3 DEMO that tested predictions derived from the RH against those
fromalternativemodels.Allexperimentsusednaturallyrecognizedobjectswithoutteachingparticipants
any information and thus provided optimal conditions for application of the RH. However, results
supportedthealternative,evidence-basedmodelsandoftenconflictedwiththeRH.Recognitionwasnot
thekeydeterminantofdecisiontimes,whereasdifferencesbetweenobjectswithrespectto(bothpositive
and negative) evidence predicted effects well. In sum, alternative models that allow for the integration
of different pieces of information may well provide a better account of comparative judgments.
Keywords: recognition heuristic, fast-and-frugal heuristics, evidence accumulation, parallel constraint
satisfaction, decision time
DEMO currently well-recognized notion of human decision making,
thefast-and-frugalheuristicsapproach,positsthathumanspossess
aso-calledadaptivetoolbox,which—metaphorically—standsfora
collection of simple and efficient rules of thumb (Gigerenzer,
2001).Aheuristiccanbeselectedfromthistoolboxforanygiven
environment,andthiscapabilityleadstomanycorrectjudgments.
Although closely related to the established notion of adaptive
decision DEMO (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1988, 1993), this
idea DEMO that simple strategies need not necessarily yield
lessaccuracy,despitetheirsimplicity.Onequintessentialstrategy
from this toolbox is the recognition heuristic (RH; Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002), DEMO allows humans to make comparative
judgmentsbasedonobjectrecognitiononly.Inparticular,theRH
assumes that people will choose the recognized of two objects in
paired comparisons regardless of any further DEMO they
possess; thus, it represents a noncompensatory, or one-reason,
DEMO strategy. In essence, the (speed of the) decision
process is DEMO by whether recognition discriminates be-
tween objects.
Althoughnumerousstudieshaverevealedthatone-reasondecision
making based on recognition is not a paramount strategy (for an
Benjamin E. Hilbig and Ru¨diger F. Pohl,PsychologyIII,Universityof
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.
The research presented herein DEMO supported by a grant from the
University of Mannheim to Ru¨diger F. Pohl. Thanks are due to Meike
Kroneisen and Tina Tanz for support DEMO data collection. Also, we are
gratefultoAndreasGlo¨cknerformanyhelpfulcommentsandsuggestions.
Correspondence concerning this article should DEMO addressed to
Benjamin E. Hilbig, Psychology III, Schloss Ehrenhof Ost, DEMO
of Mannheim, D-68131 Mannheim, Germany. E-mail: hilbig@
psychologie.uni-mannheim.de
1296
overview, see Hilbig & Pohl, 2008), we are not aware of any work
thathasspecificallytestedalternativemodels.This,therefore,wasour
central aim in the current article. Also, because fast-and-frugal heu-
risticsandalternativemodelsareoftenindistinguishablewhenchoices
are studied, we instead consider decision times. We first briefly
introduce two alternative views: evidence accumulation and parallel
constraintsatisfaction.Next,wederivepredictionsfordecisionstimes
from the RH and the alternative models and finally present three
experimentsthattestedthesepredictions.
Outsidetheadaptivetoolboxmetaphor,DEMO
recently been put forward, for example, evidence accumulation
models that correspond to an “adjustable spanner” metaphor (Lee
&Cummins,2004;Newell,2005;Newell,DEMO,&Lee,2007):
The general idea is that evidence for each of the to-be-compared
objects is sequentially sampled and accumulated on a common
DEMO This notion stems from work on automatic processing as
formalized in decision field theory (Busemeyer & Townsend,
1993), which centrally assumes that options are repeatedly com-
pared until the resulting preference state reaches a DEMO thresh-
old(Busemeyer&Johnson,2004).So,inthecaseofcomparative
judgments, a decision is DEMO as soon as the given evidence
thresholdisreached.Thisevidencethresholdcanbeinterpretedas
thedesiredlevelofconfidence(Hausmann&La¨ge,2008)andcan
thus be helpful for modeling individual differences. In short, the
decision process is determined by the evidence threshold and the
accessibility and validity of DEMO The more the sampled
evidence favors one object above the other, DEMO faster—or more
consistently—theprocesswillleadtochoiceofthesuperiorobject.
In this respect, evidence accumulation models are similar DEMO
parallel constraint satisfaction approaches (PCS; Glo¨ckner &
Betsch, 2008a, DEMO), which model the decision process by
means of a neural network operating to maximize consistency:
DECISION TIME ANALYSIS OF THE RECOGNITION HEURISTIC
1297
Evidence is amplified or DEMO over time to form a coherent
representation of the decision. So, DEMO a priori differences in
evidence for the compared objects will lead to coherent represen-
tations (and thus choices) more speedily. However, unlike evi-
dence accumulation models, PCS views decision making as a
holistic process comprising parallel integration of multiple pieces
of information. Also, PCS implies bidirectional processing
(Holyoak & Simon, 1999) and thus predicts coherence shifts
(changesinsubjectivecuevalidity),whichwouldnotbeexpected
byevidenceaccumulationmodels(Glo¨ckner,Betsch,&Schindler,
2008).
For the current investigation, however, such differences be-
tween evidence accumulation and PCS models were DEMO vitally
important. Instead, we focused on the fact that both approaches
DEMO
andvalidityofinformation(cues)foreachoftheobjectsand,more
importantly, by the a priori difference in DEMO between the
objects. The larger this difference, the less conflict arises DEMO the
fasterachoiceismade—aneffectthathasalsobeenobservedfor
preferential choices (Hilbig, 2008b). We will thus subsume these
notions under the label “evidence-based models.” Their common
focus on (differences in) evidence sets them apart from the fast-
and-frugal heuristics approach, DEMO which further evidence beyond
the currently decisive single cue is completely irrelevant. Note,
however,thatevidence-basedmodelsdonotimplythatrecognition
information is not influential. By contrast, they would consider
recognitiontobeonecueamongothersanditsinfluencetodepend
mainly on the (subjective) validity it encompasses.
Recent investigations DEMO PCS and the fast-and-frugal,
take-the-best heuristic (TTB) showed that PCS predicted partici-
pants’ choices and decision times more accurately (Glo¨ckner &
DEMO, 2008b). This result was further replicated in memory-
basedjudgments(Glo¨ckner&DEMO,2008),whichareacentral
niche of fast-and-frugal heuristics, as they usually afford less
information to be retrieved (Bro¨der & Schiffer, 2003). Likewise,
DEMO and Cummins (2004; see also Newell & Lee, 2007) let an
evidence accumulation model compete with TTB and provided
results indicating that DEMO and individual differences are
captured better by evidence accumulation than by TTB (but see
Bergert & Nosofsky, 2007).
This article is meant DEMO extend such model comparisons to the
RH (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002). To this end, some method-
ological issues should receive attention: DEMO important, in the
previously outlined studies comparing TTB and evidence-based
models, cue learning methods were used to teach participants the
informationonwhichtheythenbasedtheirjudgments(i.e.,either
DEMO).However,ithas
recentlybeenarguedthatteachingparticipantsadditionalinforma-
tionisnotadequateforstudyingtheRH,becausesuchinformation
maycausedemandeffects(Pachur,Bro¨der,&Marewski,2008).In
DEMO,Pachuretal.(2008;seealsoPachur&Hertwig,2006)argued
that the RH should be investigated in tasks of natural recognition
(i.e., using objects known to participants DEMO their real-world
experiences) without teaching participants further cues. As is ob-
DEMO, little control over participants’ knowledge beyond recogni-
tion exists in such DEMO, and it is therefore difficult to determine
fromchoicedatawhichstrategiesparticipantsmayhaveused(for
different attempts, see Hilbig, Erdfelder, & Pohl, 2009; Hilbig &
Pohl, DEMO; Pachur & Hertwig, 2006). Nevertheless, the RH and
evidence-based DEMO can be compared with respect to decision
times, as they make DEMO predictions for certain paired com-
parisons of objects.
In principle, objects DEMO be unrecognized (labeled U), merely
recognized (mR), or recognized as comprising some further
knowledge(R;Pohl,2006).1 Forexample,adecisionmakermay
never DEMO heard of the French city Angers (U), may have heard
DEMO(mR),andmayrecognize
Marseille and know that it possesses a large harbor DEMO the Medi-
terraneanSea(R).So,inpairedcomparisons,threegeneralcases
can occur: First, it is possible that neither of the objects is recog-
nized(U_U);thisrepresentsaguessingcase.Second,exactlyone
of the two objects may be recognized (U_mR or U_R); this
representsacaseinwhichtheRHisapplicable(recognitioncase).
Finally, both objects may be recognized (mR_mR, mR_R,or
R_R). This possibility is denoted the knowledge case by
DEMO and Gigerenzer (2002), as some further information
beyondrecognitionisnecessaryforthejudgment.Inthefollowing
sections, we derive four sets of hypotheses for these different
cases,inwhichpredictionsfromtheRHarecontrastedwiththose
from evidence-based DEMO
Recognition Hypotheses (1a vs. 1b)
The first two hypotheses refer DEMO decision time differences
betweenrecognitioncases(U_mRorU_R)andknowledgecases
(mR_mR, mR_R,orR_R), as derived from the RH and
evidence-basedmodels,respectively.TheRHwasproposedtobe
alexicographicstrategy(Goldstein&Gigerenzer,2002)inwhich
DEMO is considered first, because “recognition precedes the
arrivalofanyotherprobabilisticcue”(Pachur&Hertwig,2006,DEMO
999). Consequently, considering further information beyond this
first cue is DEMO to adding steps in the cognitive process,
which should inflate the decision time (Payne et al., 1988). The
idea is that DEMO works in a step-by-step way; cues are looked
up one by DEMO, until the stopping rule is satisfied” (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein,1999,DEMO).InthecaseoftheRH,thestoppingruleis
satisfiedwheneveroneobjectisrecognizedbuttheotherisnot.So,
thegeneralpredictionderivedfromtheRHstatesthatthedecision
process and, thus, decision times depend on whether recognition
discriminates between objects. If it does, “search terminates as
soonasrecognitionhasbeenassessedforbothobjects”(Goldstein
& Gigerenzer, 1999, p. 57). Consequently, decision times in all
recognitioncases(U_mRandU_R)shouldbeshorterthanthose
inallknowledgecases(mR_mR,mR_R,andR_R)inwhich
recognitionisnotsufficientformakingadecisionandfurthercues
mustbetakenintoaccount,DEMO(Bro¨der
& Gaissmaier, 2007). Stated differently, “shorter response times
are needed for recognition-based inferences” (Pachur & Hertwig,
2006, p. 986)DEMO This is Hypothesis 1a.
By contrast, evidence-based models would predict not DEMO de-
cisiontimesdependonwhetherrecognitiondiscriminatedbetween
objectsbutratherthattheydependontheaccessibilityofevidence
and, more important, the a priori difference in evidence between
objects.Ineffect,casescomprisingsuchadifferenceshouldallow
1 Note that Goldstein and Gigerenzer (1999) DEMO the labels not-R, R,
and R.
1298
HILBIG AND POHL
for faster decisions than should cases in which DEMO is more
conflict between the options. Note that, according to the DEMO
distinction, unrecognized (U) objects should comprise practically
no evidence, merely recognized (mR) objects may yield little
evidence beyond recognition (e.g., DEMO fluency of recognition;
Hertwig, Herzog, Schooler, & Reimer, 2008), and R objects
should incorporate most evidence.
So, in contrast to Hypothesis 1a, it is assumed that recognition
cases will lead to faster decisions than knowledge cases, if and
only if theiraprioridifferenceinevidenceislarge.Thiswilloccur
in U_R cases, which should thus yield shorter decision times
than any of the knowledge cases (mR_mR, mR_R, and
R_R). By contrast, in U_mR DEMO the a priori difference in
evidenceismuchlesspronounced.So,U_mRcasesneednotlead
to faster decisions than do knowledge cases. In particular, U_mR
casesshouldnotyieldfasterdecisionsthandomR_R knowledge
cases, because the latter DEMO a comparable or larger a priori
differenceinevidence.Stateddifferently,theevidentialdifference
between U and mR can never become very large, whereas the
difference between mR and R can, depending on how much
valid evidence is available for the R object. So, in fact, it is
possiblethatmR_R casesafford less timethandoU_mRcases.
These DEMO effects are subsumed as Hypothesis 1b.
Further Knowledge Hypotheses (2a vs. DEMO)
Next, we contrast predictions of the RH against those of
DEMO models with respect to differences within recog-
nition cases (i.e., U_mR vs. U_R cases). According to the RH,
all recognition cases DEMO lead to similar decision times. As
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (1999, 2002) put forward a binary un-
derstanding of recognition and as any knowledge beyond recog-
nition is claimed to be ignored, objects merely recognized (DEMO)
and recognized objects comprising further knowledge (R) are
claimedtobetreatedidentically(Newell&Fernandez,2006;Pohl,
2006). Thus, U_mR and U_R cases should afford similar deci-
siontimes(Hypothesis2a)becausethenumberofcognitivesteps
necessary is the same in the DEMO cases.
Evidence-based models, on the other hand, predict that recog-
nition cases comprising large differences in a priori evidence
(U_R) should yield DEMO decisions than do other recognition
cases(U_mR).WedenotethispredictionHypothesis2b.InU_R
cases only, additional DEMO is available for the recognized
object but there is no evidence for the unrecognized one. The
evidence threshold (evidence accumulation) or a coherent DEMO
representation (PCS) should thus be reached speedily. In U_mR,
however, there is very little further evidence for the recognized
object, so DEMO will be more conflict between the options. In
effect,U_mRcasesshouldaffordmoretimethandoU_R cases.
Accuracy Hypotheses (3a vs. 3b)
Further, the RH and evidence-based models DEMO contrary
predictions concerning differences between cases in which the
recognition cue leads to a correct (C) or a false (F) judgment.
According DEMO the RH, whether further knowledge (in a U_R
case)contradictsorconfirmsthepredictionoftherecognitioncue
should be inconsequential, given that any such knowledge is
ignored. As a consequence, cases in which recognition leads to a
correctjudgment(Ccase)ortoafalsejudgment(Fcase)shouldbe
treated identically (Hilbig & Pohl, 2008). In effect, U_RC and
U_RF should yield similar decision times (Hypothesis 3a).
Evidence-basedmodels,ontheotherhand,predictthatitshould
make a difference in recognition cases comprising further knowl-
edge(U_R)whethertheR DEMO(C)or
false (F) choice (Hilbig & Pohl, 2008; DEMO, 2006). In the latter
case,evidenceismorelikelytocontradictrecognitionandthusto
yield more conflict, thereby affording more time to reach the
desired threshold (evidence accumulation) or DEMO form a coherent
mental representation (PCS). Consequently, decisions in U_RC
casesshouldbefasterthanthoseinU_RF cases(Hypothesis3b).
Adherence Hypotheses (4a vs. 4b)
Finally,somedifferentialpredictionscanbederivedconcerning
choices that are not in line with the recognition cue (i.e., DEMO
oftheunrecognizedobject).Followingadeterministicunderstand-
ing of the RH, any decision against the recognition DEMO (also
denoted nonadherence to the RH) must represent an error. How-
ever, because the speed of errors is not predictable, it is DEMO clear
whetherchoicesinlinewiththeRHshouldbeperformedfasteror
slowerthanchoicesagainsttheRH.Despitethisambiguity,Pachur
and Hertwig (2006) predicted that “inferences that agree with the
recognition heuristic require less response time than choices that
DEMO inconsistent with the recognition heuristic” (p. 986). This
prediction hinges DEMO the assumption that choices of unrecognized
objectsrepresentnonuseoftheRHinthesenseofconsiderationof
furtherinformationorcuesbeyondrecognition(ratherthanerrors),
which DEMO afford more time. However, because different posi-
tions can be taken DEMO, we did not make a prediction concerning
the speed of choices DEMO unrecognized objects. This notwithstand-
ing,itispossibletopredictthat—independentofwhetherchoices
following the RH are performed faster or slower than choices of
unrecognized objects—any such effect should be the DEMO for
U_mR and U_R cases. Stated differently, there should be no
DEMO between choice (recognized vs. unrecognized object)
and case (U_mR vs. U_R). This is Hypothesis 4a.
Notethatevidence-basedmodels,unlikeadeterministicversion
of the RH, actually predict that cases of nonadherence to recog-
nition (choice of the unrecognized object) occur. This is possible
either by retrieving evidence that speaks against the recognized
object (e.g., knowing that a city does not have DEMO international
airport) or by constructing evidence in favor of the unrecognized
DEMO(e.g.,inferringfromthesoundofitsnamethatitislocated
inacountrywithmanyextremelylargecities).InlinewithPachur
and Hertwig’s (2006) view of the RH, evidence-based models
wouldpredictthatchoicesoftheunrecognizedobjectshouldtake
longerthanchoicesoftherecognizedone,asevidencetooverrule
the recognition cue is necessary. However, DEMO the RH, these
modelswouldalsopredictthatthiseffectofadherence(choiceof
the recognized object) versus nonadherence (DEMO of the unrec-
ognizedobject)ondecisiontimesshouldbesubstantiallylargerfor
U_R than for U_mR cases, because DEMO sufficient
evidence to act against the larger a priori difference in evidence
must take longer. That is, an interaction between case (U_mR vs.
DEMO)andchoice(choiceoftherecognizedvs.theunrecognized
object) would be additionally expected (Hypothesis 4b).
DECISION TIME ANALYSIS OF THE RECOGNITION HEURISTIC
1299
Summary of Hypotheses
The DEMO can be summarized as follows: First (recogni-
tion hypotheses), concerning differences between recognition and
knowledgecases,theRHpredictsthatallrecognitioncasesshould
yieldfasterdecisionsthandoallknowledgecases(Hypothesis1a).
By contrast, evidence-based models predict that this is only con-
sistentlythe case if recognition is DEMO
edge (Hypothesis 1b). Second (further knowledge hypotheses),
with DEMO to differences between recognition subcases, the RH
predicts that these should DEMO yield comparable decision times
(Hypothesis 2a). Evidence-based models, on the other hand, pre-
dict that recognition cases lead to faster decisions whenever rec-
ognition is accompanied by further knowledge (Hypothesis 2b).
Third (DEMO hypotheses), when comparing cases in which
recognition yields a correct versus a false judgment, the RH
predicts no difference between these cases (DEMO 3a),
whereasevidence-basedmodelspredictthatdecisiontimesshould
befasterwheneverrecognitionyieldsacorrectjudgment(Hypoth-
esis 3b). Fourth (adherence hypotheses), concerning effects of
adherences(choiceoftherecognizedobject)versusnonadherence
(choice of the unrecognized object), the RH asserts that any such
effect should be comparably large DEMO all recognition cases (Hy-
pothesis 4a). Evidence-based models, by contrast, predict that
nonadherence affords more time and that this effect is more
pronounced whenever recognition comprises further knowledge
(i.e.,amaineffectofadherenceandaninteractionwithrecognition
subcase are expected; DEMO 4b).
These hypotheses were tested in three experiments in which
natural recognition was used and participants were taught no
further cues. In all DEMO, participants performed the city-
size task (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002), in which they inferred
which city in each pair was more populous.
Experiment 1
Method
Twenty-four participants (17 female) were recruited from the
DEMO of Bonn. They were 19 to 30 years of age (M DEMO 23.9
years, SD  3.1). The 20 largest cities in DEMO were
exhaustively paired as materials, resulting in 190 comparisons.
Participantswereinstructedtoindicatewhichcityineachpairwas
more DEMO and to decide speedily while trying to achieve as
manycorrectdecisionsaspossible.Next,participantsreceivedall
paired comparisons in random order on a computer screen and
answeredbypressingoneoftwokeys.Choicesandreactiontimes
wererecorded.Afterthepaired-comparisontask,participantswere
DEMO shown all cities in alphabetical order and were asked to
indicate for each city whether they recognized its name (“Have
you ever heard of this Swiss city before the experiment?”; mR)
and, if DEMO, if they possessed any further knowledge about it (“Do
you know anything about this city beyond having heard its
name?”; R; DEMO Pohl, 2006).2 Participants were then debriefed,
and they received DEMO course credit for their participation.
Results
Participants recognized 10.2 (SD  DEMO) of the 20 to-be-
compared cities on average, and this resulted in a high discrimi-
nation rate (M  0.47) of recognition. DEMO mean recognition
validity (proportion of correct judgments possible from strictly
followingtheRH)DEMO(SD  0.08),whichwassignificantly
abovechancelevel, t(23)  23.2, p  .001,andalsosignificantly
greater than the mean knowledge validity (proportion of correct
judgmentsinknowledgecases)of0.75(SD  0.10), t(23)  3.5,
p  .002.Insum,preconditionsforapplyingtheRHwereoptimal,
given the discrimination rate, very high recognition validity, and
lower knowledge validity.
To analyze decision times and test the hypotheses outlined
above, we computed each participant’s median decision time
acrosstherelevantcases(providedintheAppendix).Notethatall
analyses reported in the following were double-checked using
log-transformeddecisiontimes;however,resultswerestableinall
instances. DEMO the recognition hypotheses (1a vs. 1b), we
compared participants’ median DEMO times in each of the two
recognition cases (U_mR and U_R) against those in all knowl-
edgecases(mR_mR,mR_R,R_R;seeFigure1).Ascanbe
seen, recognition cases yielding only small a priori differences in
evidence (U_mR) DEMO not faster than mR_mR or R_R cases
( ps  .10, DEMO  0.35). In fact, they were actually significantly
slower than DEMO cases, which provided the largest a priori
differenceinevidenceofallknowledgecases.Bycontrast,U_R
casesyieldedsignificantlyfasterdecisiontimesthandidanyofthe
knowledge DEMO and comprised medium-to-large effect sizes
(Cohen, 1988) throughout. The results DEMO the statistical tests are
summarized in Table 1. So, the differential DEMO predicted by
evidence-based models (Hypothesis 1b) was corroborated.
With respect to the further knowledge hypotheses (2a vs. 2b),
we compared decision DEMO within recognition cases. As can be
seeninFigure1,decisionsinU_R casesweresubstantiallyfaster
than those in U_mR cases, t(21)  5.1, p  .001, d DEMO 1.1. This
result is in line with Hypothesis 2b. So, recognition DEMO yielded
different decision times depending on whether the recognized
objectcomprisedfurtherknowledge(R)ordidnot(mR).Stated
differently, cases yielding less conflict between options led to
faster decisions.
Moreover, in testing the accuracy hypotheses (3a and 3b), DEMO
subdivided U_R cases depending on whether or not the recog-
nized object was the correct choice. Analyses revealed that deci-
sion times were shorter DEMO the former than for the latter cases,
t(15)  DEMO, p  .019, d  0.65. Thus, recognition cases yielded
DEMO decision times depending on whether further knowledge
was in line with recognition (RC) or was not (RF). So, Hy-
pothesis 3b DEMO supported. Unfortunately, analyses of the adher-
ence hypotheses (4a and 4b), comparing recognition cases in
which the recognized object was chosen to DEMO in which partic-
ipants did not adhere to recognition, were not DEMO due to the
small sample size and, thus, an insufficient number of cases.
2 Note that simply asking participants for the status of DEMO (U, mR,
andR)mayseemquestionable.However,ifmRobjectsweresometimes
“incorrectly”judgedtobeR (orviceversa),thiswouldworkagainstthe
differential predictions of only the evidence-based models but would
increase the chances of DEMO RH.
1300
HILBIG AND POHL
2500
2250
whichismorelikelywheneverasetcomprisesafewverylarge(or
small)objectsthatarerecognizedfortheirextremepositiononthe
criterion dimension (Hilbig et al., in press; Pachur & Hertwig,
2006). DEMO, we increased the sample size in Experiment 2 to
obtain sufficiently DEMO cell sizes for the more detailed analyses.
2000
1750
1500
U_R+ U_mR mR_mR mR_R+ R+_R+
Case
Figure 1. Median decision times in milliseconds for DEMO recognition
(U_R and U_mR) and knowledge (mR_mR, mR_R, and DEMO)
cases in Experiment 1. Error bars represent 1 standard error of the mean.
Discussion
In Experiment 1 we found support for the hypotheses DEMO
from evidence-based models of comparative judgments. The pre-
dictionsmadebytheRH,ontheotherhand,couldnotbecorrob-
orated even though preconditions for applying the RH were opti-
mal. Recognition cases DEMO faster decision times than did
knowledgecasesonlywhenrecognitioncasescomprisedalargea
priori difference in evidence. Second, DEMO cases were
treated differently, depending on whether the recognized object
comprised DEMO knowledge and, if so,dependingonwhetheror
not this object represented the correct DEMO
However, Hypothesis 4 could not be tested due to the small
DEMO size. Also, the materials used (Swiss cities) might have
comprisedsomecriterionknowledge;DEMO,participantsmaywell
have known some cities to be very large or small, DEMO such
knowledge could render any probabilistic judgment obsolete
(Hilbig, Pohl, & Bro¨der, in press; Pachur et al., 2008). We thus
DEMO to remedy both limitations in a second experiment.
Experiment 2
Wechoseasmaterialsarandomselectionoflargecitiesworld-
wide.Thiswasdonetoreducethedangerofcriterionknowledge,
Method
Seventy-four participants (44 female) were recruited from the
University DEMO Mainz and University of Mannheim. They were 18
to 50 years of age (M  24.1 years, SD  5.7). We selected DEMO
cities randomly from a list of the largest cities of the world (cf.
Hilbig, 2008a; Hilbig & Pohl, 2008). These were DEMO exhaus-
tively, resulting in 136 paired comparisons for the city-size task.
DEMO the judgment task, participants were shown all cities in
alphabetical order DEMO ensure that the current reference class was
fully defined for participants. Thereafter, the experiment com-
menced exactly as in Experiment 1. Participants were paid or
received partial course credit for their participation.
Results
Participants recognized a DEMO of 9.9 (SD  2.2) of the 17
cities, and DEMO again resulted in a high discrimination rate (M 
0.48).Themeanrecognitionvalidityof0.78(DEMO  .08)wasboth
larger than chance, t(72)  29.8, DEMO  .001, and greater than the
mean knowledge validity of 0.68 (SD  0.10), t(72)  7.4, p 
.001. DEMO, preconditions for the RH were optimal. Participants’
median decision times for DEMO relevant cases are provided in the
Appendix.AsinExperiment1,allanalyseswererepeated,onthe
basisoflog-transformedresponselatencies,andrevealedthesame
exact pattern of results. Moreover, it is of interest that the rank
orderoftherelevantcaseswasexactlythesameasinExperiment
1 (see Appendix). This result confirmed the stability of the data.
With respect to the recognition hypotheses, we found that
U_mR cases did not yield faster decisions than did any of the
knowledge cases ( DEMO  .10, ds  0.30; see Table 1), whereas
U_R trialswereperformedsignificantlyfasterthroughout( ps 
.001, ds  0.50). So, support for Hypothesis 1b was obtained.
Also, Hypothesis 2b was corroborated, as U_R DEMO yielded
fasterdecisionsthandidU_mRcases, t(63)  6.0, p  .001, d 
0.75. Moreover, and supporting Hypothesis 3b, decision times
Table 1
DEMO of Testing Median Decision Times in Recognition Cases (U_mR and U_R) Against
Knowledge Cases (mR_mR, mR_R, and R_R) Using Paired t DEMO
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Test
t statistica
Effect size
t statistica
Effect size
U_mR
vs. mR_mR
vs. mR_R
vs. R_R
U_R
vs. mR_mR
vs. DEMO
vs. R_R
t(21)
t(21)
t(20)
t(20)
t(21)
t(21)
 0.8
1.9
 DEMO
 3.5
 3.6
 4.2
d
d
d
d
d
d






0.16
0.41
0.35
0.75
0.77
0.92
DEMO(53)
t(63)
t(62)
t(52)
t(63)
t(70)
 1.7
0.7
 1.3
 5.3
DEMO 5.4
 7.2
d
d
d
d
d
d
a Positive t valuesindicatethattherecognitioncaseyieldedfasterdecisiontimesthantheknowledgecase.
 p  .10.  p  .001.



DEMO


0.23
0.09
0.16
0.73
0.67
0.85
Median decision time [ms]
DECISION TIME ANALYSIS OF THE RECOGNITION HEURISTIC
1301
were shorter for cases DEMO which the R object was the correct
versusthefalsechoice, t(68)  3.7, p  .001, d  0.45.Assuch,
the results of DEMO 1 were all replicated.
Finally,withrespecttotheadherencehypotheses(4avs.4b),we
compared recognition cases DEMO which participants chose the rec-
ognized object with cases in which participants did not adhere to
recognition. Note that only the evidence-based models predicted
DEMO(U_mR
vs. U_R ). To test these effects, we conducted a two-way
repeated-measures analysis of variance with case (U_mR vs.
U_R) and DEMO (vs. nonadherence) as independent vari-
ables and median decision times as the dependent variable. The
descriptive statistics for all cases can be found DEMO the Appendix.
First, we found a main effect of recognition subcase, F(1, 44) 
2
4.9, p  .03, p DEMO .10; this was in line with the effects reported
above.Wealsofoundalargemaineffectofadherence, F(1,44) 
2
25.5, p  .001, p  .36, which confirmed that choosing the
unrecognized object required more time (cf. DEMO & Hertwig,
2006). However, we also obtained an interaction DEMO Hy-
pothesis 4b, such that the effect of adherence was substantially
DEMO casesthanforU_mRcases, F(1,44)  11.3, p 
.002, p2  .21. In other words, deciding against the recognized
citytooklongerthandecidingforit,butthecorrespondingdiffer-
ence in decision times was larger in U_R cases than in U_mR
cases.
DEMO
InExperiment2weremediedtwolimitationsofthefirstexper-
iment, namely, the small sample size and the potential caveat of
criterion knowledge. However, all findings from Experiment 1
could be replicated, and this lent additional support for the hy-
potheses derived from evidence-based models. Moreover, we
found an interaction between choosing the recognized versus un-
recognizedobjectinU_mRversusU_R cases.So,asimpliedby
evidence based-models only, the effect of adherence versus non-
adherence was more pronounced whenever there was a larger a
prioridifferencebetweenobjects,asthisresultedinmoreconflict
DEMO deciding against the recognized object.
However,thereisacaveatpertainingtobothExperiments1and
2thatneedstobeaddressed:Potentially,someoftheresultswere
driven by differences in the time needed to recognize different
objectsratherthanthetimeoftheactualdecisionprocess.Thatis,
thereisevidencethatparticipantstakelongertojudgeanobjectto
beunrecognizedthanrecognized(DEMO,2008).Moreover,
and more critically, it seems at least plausible DEMO objects com-
prising further knowledge (R) could be recognized faster than
objectsknownonlybytheirname(mR).Suchdifferencesbetween
objects may have driven the results reported above.
On DEMO other hand, the median decision times in both experi-
ments (see the Appendix) render it unlikely that such effects are
behind the reported results. In particular, mR_R cases would
havetoyieldlongerresponselatenciesthanwouldR_R cases,
ifR objectsweregenerallyrecognizedfasterandthishaddriven
theresults.Inbothexperiments,theoppositewasthecase.3 How-
ever, admittedly, these are merely post hoc arguments. So, we
addressed this problem in a third experiment with the aim of
DEMO controlling for effects of recognition times.
Experiment 3
The 14 largest cities in Switzerland, excluding the largest,
Zurich, were paired in the DEMO task. Due to exclusion of the
largestobjectandgiventhetypicallyveryhighrecognitionvalidity
in this domain, distortions DEMO on criterion knowledge were
unlikelyinthisexperiment(Hilbigetal.,inpress).Thedesignwas
the same as in Experiments 1 and 2, with the addition that we
assessed and controlled for recognition times.
Method
Sixty-eight participants (56 female) were recruited from DEMO
University of Mannheim. They were 18 to 46 years of age (DEMO 
22.2years, SD  5.3).TheSwisscitieswerepairedexhaustively,
resultingin91pairedcomparisons.Thecity-sizetaskcommenced
exactly as in DEMO first two experiments. We measured recognition
times after all paired comparisons had been performed and in the
same manner as Hertwig et al. (2008): Objects were individually
presented to participants (in random order), and participants were
instructed to indicate—as speedily as possible—whether or not
they had DEMO the object before the experiment. The time from
the onset of an object’s name to the participant’s response was
assessed.Ifaparticipantjudgedanobjecttobeunrecognized,the
nexttrialcameup(afterablankscreenfor1,000msandafixation
DEMO for 500 ms). By contrast, whenever an object was recog-
DEMO,itremainedonthescreenandtheparticipantwasinstructed
to indicate whether he or she knew the object only by its name
(mR) or possessed any further knowledge about it (R). Partici-
pants were paid or received partial course credit for their DEMO
pation.
Results
Participants recognized 9.0 (SD  2.4) of the 14 cities on
average,resultinginanacceptablediscriminationrate(M  0.43).
Across participants, the mean recognition validity of 0.79 (SD 
0.10)wasabovechancelevel, t(63)  23.3, p  .001,andgreater
thanthemeanknowledgevalidity(M 0.71, SD  0.11), t(63) 
4.2, p  .001. Overall, preconditions for DEMO the RH were
comparable to those in the previous experiments.
Foreachparticipant,wecomputedthemedianrecognitiontime
(responselatencywhenjudgingwhetheranobjectwasrecognized)
for U, mR, and R objects. Across participants, DEMO median
recognition times for these objects were MU  970 (SD DEMO 305),
MmR  1,145 (SD  497), and MR  886 (SD  338), respec-
tively. Participants took longer when judging an object to be
merelyrecognized (mR) than unrecognized(U), t(59)  3.2, p 
.002, d  0.42. DEMO, participants needed more time to “rec-
ognize”an object that was merely DEMO(mR)versusrecog-
nized plus further knowledge (R), t(62)  4.7, p  .001, d 
0.60.Bycontrast,UandR judgmentsdidnotdiffersignificantly,
t(DEMO)  1.7, p  .09. However, the recognition time differences
DEMO objects indicate that it is necessary to control for these
differences when analyzing paired-comparison judgments.
3 Infact,thiseffect(mR_RR_R)wassignificantinExperiment
2, t(63) DEMO 3.1, p  .003, d  0.40.
1302
HILBIG AND POHL
To control for the effect of recognition times DEMO response
latenciesinthejudgmenttask,wecomputedamultipleregression
separately for each participant that predicted the response latency
ineachtrialfromtherecognitiontimesforeachofthetwoobjects
as predictors. From the unstandardized residuals, we then com-
puted each participant’s median decision time across the relevant
cases for the further analyses DEMO tests of the hypotheses. So,
recognitiontimeswerestrictlycontrolledfor,andanyvariancein
the remaining response latencies cannot be explained by differ-
ences in recognition times between objects. That DEMO, the residuals
can be interpreted as decision times when recognition times DEMO
held constant.4 Finally, note that when we controlled for recogni-
tion DEMO in this way, the evidence-based models were given an
additionaldisadvantage,namely,DEMO
of evidence—the fluency of recognition or the accessibility of
knowledge—was now held constant. Again, we corroborated all
results using log-transformed rather than median decision times.
The median decision times (before recognition times were par-
tialedout)canbefoundintheAppendix.Notethattherankorder
of relevant cases was exactly the same as in the previous two
DEMO
Theanalysesreferringtotherecognitionhypotheses(1avs.1b)
are shown in Table 2. The results with respect to U_R cases
mirrored those of the previous experiments. By contrast, U_mR
cases now yielded shorter decision times than did some of the
knowledgecases(DEMO,mR_mRandR_R).However,mR_R
cases—which comprise the largest a priori difference in evidence
ofallknowledgecases—againinvolvedshorterresponselatencies
than did U_mR cases. This result can be explained only by
DEMO accounts. A look at the effect sizes in Table 2
additionallyrevealsthatthespeedadvantageofU_R casesover
knowledge cases was clearly larger than the difference between
U_mR and knowledge DEMO This is inconsistent with the RH,
especially given that analyses controlled for recognition times.
With respect to the further knowledge hypotheses (2a vs. 2b),
we found that U_R trials were performed faster than U_mR
trials, t(58)  5.0, p  .001, d  DEMO This result corroborated
Hypothesis 2b. Similarly, Hypothesis 3b was supported, as re-
sponselatencieswereshorterinrecognitioncasesinwhichtheR
Table 2
Results of Testing Median Residual Decision Times in
DEMO Cases (U_mR and U_R) Against Knowledge
Cases (mR_mR, mR_R, DEMO R_R) After Controlling for the
Effects of Recognition Times for Both DEMO (Individually per
Participant), Using Paired t Tests (Experiment 3)
Test
t statistica
Effect size
U_mR
vs. mR_mR
vs. mR_R
vs. R_R
DEMO
vs. mR_mR
vs. mR_R
vs. R_R
t(49)
t(58)
t(55)
t(48)
t(58)
t(59)
DEMO 4.3
1.8
 2.0
 6.1
 5.3
 6.8
d
d
d
d
d
d






0.60
0.22
DEMO
0.95
0.71
0.90
a Positive t valuesindicatethattherecognitioncaseyieldedfasterdecision
times than the knowledge case.
 p  .10.  p  .05.  p  .001.
DEMO,infact,thecorrectchoice, t(51)  2.7, p  .009, d 
0.66. Both findings support the evidence-based models.
Finally, testing the adherence hypotheses (4a vs. 4b), we again
computed the repeated-measures analysis of variance with recog-
nition subcase (U_mR vs. U_R) and adherence (vs. nonadher-
ence)asindependentmeasuresandmedianresidualdecisiontimes
as the dependent variable. Although there was no main DEMO of
recognitionsubcase, F(1,28)  0.1, p  .77,DEMO
large main effect of adherence, F(1, 28)  16.9, p  .001, p2 
.38. This revealed that decisions were generally faster when par-
ticipantsfollowedtherecognitioncue.Moreover,andinlinewith
Hypothesis 4b, there was an interaction, DEMO(1, 28)  4.2, p  .05,
2
p DEMO .13, such that the difference in decision times between
adherence and DEMO was larger in U_R than in U_mR
cases.
Discussion
Experiment3wasconductedtotestwhethertheeffectsfoundin
Experiments 1 and 2 would need to be attributed to recognition
timedifferencesbetweenobjects,ratherthantodecisionprocesses.
We DEMO controlled for the influence of recognition times—
partialing out their effect on decision times individually for each
participant—and repeated all hypotheses tests. Note that DEMO pro-
cedure also clearly lessens the chances of the evidence-based
models,whichwouldconsiderrecognitiontimes(whichareproxy
of knowledge accessibility) a potentially important piece of evi-
dence.
The majority of results again contradicted the hypotheses de-
rived from the RH DEMO supported evidence-based models. How-
ever, we obtained the novel finding that DEMO cases that
comprised only a small difference in evidence(U_mR)werenow
performed faster than were those knowledge cases that also
yielded relatively small a DEMO differences in evidence (mR_mR
andR_R,respectively).Thisfindingis,ofcourse,inlinewith
both the DEMO and evidence-based models, but it reveals that the
results concerning Hypotheses DEMO versus 1b from Experiments 1
and 2 should be interpreted cautiously. On the other hand, those
knowledgecasesthatshouldoftenyieldthelargestaprioridiffer-
ences in evidence (mR_R) were again performed faster than
were U_mR cases. This finding corroborates Hypothesis 1b and
DEMO be explained by the RH. All other effects found in Exper-
iments 1 and 2 (confirming Hypotheses 2b, 3b, and 4b) were
DEMO while controlling for the influence of objects’ recogni-
tion times on response latencies.
General Discussion
In three experiments, we tested decision time predictions de-
rivedfromtherecognitionheuristic(RH;Goldstein&Gigerenzer,
1999, 2002) and from evidence-based models DEMO judgments be-
tween pairs of objects. Whereas the RH treats recognition of
to-be-compared objects as binary and claims that the decision
4 Followingthesuggestionofananonymousreviewer,werepeatedthis
DEMO regressing decision times on the signed difference between
recognition times individually for each participant and, again, using the
residuals for all hypotheses tests. DEMO, the results of the analyses
reported below remained unchanged.
DECISION TIME ANALYSIS OF THE RECOGNITION HEURISTIC
1303
process is determined by DEMO recognition discriminates be-
tween objects, evidence-based models assume that evidential in-
DEMO
decisiontimesfoundinallexperimentssupportedpredictionsfrom
the evidence-based models and mostly contradicted predictions
from the RH. Put more precisely, recognition cases (whenever
only one object was recognized) yielded consistently faster deci-
sions than did knowledge cases (both objects recognized), if and
only if the recognized object comprised further knowledge. Sec-
ond,DEMO,decisiontimeswerenotablyfasterwhen
therecognizedobjectcomprisedfurtherknowledge,andthisfind-
ing provides support for the impact of the amount of evidence
available for an object (cf. Hertwig et al., 2008; Newell & Fer-
nandez, 2006). Moreover, decisions were made faster DEMO
the recognized object was, in fact, the correct choice—that is,
when further knowledge was aligned with recognition (Hilbig &
Pohl, 2008)—than when knowledge was likely to conflict with
recognition.Again,thiscanbetakenassupportforevidence-based
models. Both DEMO contradict the RH, according to which all
recognition cases should be DEMO similarly.
Finally,inExperiments2and3,itwasshownthatnonadherence
to the recognition cue (choice of the DEMO object in a
recognition case) was generally slower than adherence, as pre-
dicted by some interpretations of the RH (Pachur & Hertwig,
2006) and by the evidence-based models. However, as predicted
by the DEMO only, this effect was more pronounced for cases in
whichtherecognizedobjectcomprisedfurtherknowledge.So,the
DEMO
be explained by the RH.
Additionally, Experiment 3 strictly controlled for DEMO potential
influence of differences in recognition times between objects.
Because it need not take equally long to judge an object to be
recognized (Hertwig et al., 2008), results might have been biased
againsttheRH.However,themajorityofeffectscontradictingthe
RHwerereplicatedwhenrecognitiontimeswereheldconstant.At
thesametime,allhypothesesderivedfromevidence-basedmodels
were again confirmed.
With these experiments, we extended previous findings—
indicating that evidence-based models outperform fast-and-frugal
heuristics in explaining comparative judgments—to the DEMO To
testthedifferentpredictions,weadheredcloselytomethodological
preconditions for studying the RH (Pachur et al., 2008). We used
naturally recognized objects and did not provide any DEMO
information.Also,thevalidityanddiscriminationrateofrecogni-
tion were high, and this provided optimal conditions for DEMO
the RH. Nevertheless, predictions derived from the RH were
seldom supported.
DEMO considered two types of models as alternatives to the RH.
First, DEMO accumulation models (Lee & Cummins, 2004;
Newelletal.,2007)assumesequentialsamplingandaccumulation
of evidence until an evidence threshold is reached (cf. decision
field theory; DEMO & Johnson, 2004; Busemeyer &
Townsend, 1993). Such models claim that the time needed to
accumulate sufficient evidence and, thus, DEMO priori differences in
evidence for objects are determinants of decision times. Similar
predictions can be derived from parallel constraint satisfaction
models(PCS;Glo¨ckner&Betsch,DEMO,2008b),whichassumea
neural network that modifies evidence in a holistic and DEMO
process to achieve consistency. Although evidence accumulation
and PCS models differ in some respects—especially concerning
sequential versus parallel processing of information and whether
evidence DEMO actually changed during the decision process—they
were herein treated similarly, as DEMO predict that decision times
will increase with increasing conflict between options. That is,
larger differences in evidence between objects should feed into
shorter DEMO times. Therefore, we refer to these models as
evidence based.
Insum,DEMO(Glo¨ckner&
Betsch, 2008a, 2008b; Glo¨ckner & Hodges, 2008) DEMO evidence
accumulation models (Lee & Cummins, 2004; Newell & Lee,DEMO
2007),supportwasobtainedfortheintegrationofinformationand
the impact of differences in evidence between objects. Decision
DEMO(speedofthe)
decision process is determined by the degree to which one object
is superior and thus by the degree of conflict (Hilbig, DEMO),
rather than by recognition alone.
Note,however,thatthesefindingsdonotruleoutthepossibility
thatdecisionprocessesresemblingnoncompensatoryadherenceto
recognitionmayoccurinsomeinstances.Indeed,DEMO
elsewhere that some decision makers behave in accordance with
the RH (DEMO, 2008a; Hilbig & Pohl, 2008). So, optimally, a
DEMO of comparative judgments should be able to integrate both
compensatoryandnoncompensatoryuseofrecognition.Evidence-
based models, which are related to Newell’s (2005) “adjustable
spanner”metaphor,mayoffersuchasolution.Withoutneedingto
assume different strategies or heuristics, these unimodels can ac-
countfortheexclusiveuseofsinglecuesjustasparsimoniouslyas
they explain how different cues may be integrated. Stated differ-
ently, evidence-based models allow for one-reason decision mak-
ing based on recognition and additionally explain patterns incon-
sistent DEMO the RH, as demonstrated in this article.
References
Bergert, F. B., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2007). A response-time approach to
comparing generalized rational and take-the-best models of decision
making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33, 107–129.
Bro¨der, A., & DEMO, W. (2007). Sequential processing of cues in
memory-based multiattribute decisions. Psychonomic Bulletin & Re-
view, 14, 895–900.
Bro¨der, A., & DEMO, S. (2003). Take the Best versus simultaneous
feature matching: DEMO inferences from memory and effects of
representation format. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
132, 277–293.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Johnson, J. G. (2004). Computational models of
decision making. In D. J. Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.), Blackwell
handbook of judgment and decision making (pp. 133–154). Malden,
MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory: A
DEMO approach to decision making in an uncertain envi-
ronment. Psychological Review, DEMO, 432–459.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the DEMO sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gigerenzer,G.(2001)DEMO&R.Selten
(Eds.), Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox (pp. 37–50)DEMO Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, DEMO G. (1999). Betting on one good reason:
The take DEMO best heuristic. In G. Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, & the ABC
Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. DEMO
95). New York: Oxford University Press.
1304
HILBIG AND POHL
Glo¨ckner,A.,&Betsch,T.(2008a).Modelingoptionandstrategychoices
withconnectionistnetworks:Towardanintegrativemodelofautomatic
and deliberate decision making. Judgment and Decision Making, 3,
215–228.
Glo¨ckner, A., & Betsch, T. (2008b). Multiple-reason decision making
based DEMO automatic processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1055–1075.
Glo¨ckner, A., Betsch, T., & Schindler, N. (2008). Construction of proba-
bilistic inferences by constraint satisfaction. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Glo¨ckner, A., & Hodges, S. D. (2008). DEMO constraint satisfaction in
memory-based decisions. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Goldstein,D.G.,&DEMO,G.(1999).Therecognitionheuristic:How
ignorance makes us smart. In G. Gigerenzer, DEMO M. Todd, & the ABC
Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. 37–
58). New York: Oxford DEMO Press.
Goldstein,D.G.,&Gigerenzer,G.(2002).Modelsofecologicalrational-
ity: The recognition heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75–90.
Hausmann, D., & La¨ge, D. (DEMO). Sequential evidence accumulation in
decisionmaking:Theindividualdesiredlevelofconfidencecanexplain
theextentofinformationacquisition. Judgment and Decision Making, 3,
229–243.
Hertwig,R.,Herzog,S.M.,Schooler,L.J.,&Reimer,T.(DEMO).Fluency
heuristic:Amodelofhowthemindexploitsaby-productofinformation
retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, DEMO
Cognition, 34, 1191–1206.
Hilbig, B. E. (2008a). Individual differences in fast-and-frugal decision
making:Neuroticismandtherecognitionheuristic. Journal of Research
in Personality, 42, DEMO
Hilbig, B. E. (2008b). One-reason decision making in risky choice? A
closer look at the priority heuristic. Judgment and Decision Making, DEMO,
457–462.
Hilbig, B. E., Erdfelder, E., & Pohl, DEMO F. (2009). One-reason decision-
making unveiled: A measurement model of the recognition heuristic.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hilbig, B. E., & DEMO, R. F. (2008). Recognizing users of the recognition
heuristic. Experimental Psychology, 55, 394–401.
Hilbig,B.E.,Pohl,R.F.,&Bro¨der,A.(inpress).Criterionknowledge:A
moderator of using the recognition heuristic? Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning DEMO decision
makingbyconstraintsatisfaction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 128, 3–31.
Lee,M.D.,&Cummins,T.D.(2004).Evidenceaccumulationindecision
making: Unifying the “take the best” DEMO the “rational” models. Psy-
chonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 343–352.
Newell, B. R. (2005). Re-visions of rationality? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 11–15.
Newell, B. R., Collins, P., & Lee, M. D. (2007). Adjusting the spanner:
Testing an evidence accumulation model of decision making. In D.
McNamara & G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Con-
ference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 533–538). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Newell, B. DEMO, & Fernandez, D. (2006). On the binary quality of DEMO
tionandtheinconsequentiallyoffurtherknowledge:Twocriticaltestsof
the recognition heuristic. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19,DEMO
333–346.
Newell,B.R.,&Lee,M.D.(2007). The right tool for DEMO job? Testing an
evidence accumulation model of decision making. Manuscriptsubmitted
for DEMO
Pachur,T.,Bro¨der,A.,&Marewski,J.(2008).Therecognitionheuristicin
memory-basedinference:Isrecognitionanon-compensatorycue? Jour-
nal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 183–210.
Pachur, T., & DEMO, R. (2006). On the psychology of the recognition
heuristic: DEMO primacy as a key determinant of its use. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 983–
1002.
Payne, J. DEMO, Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1988). DEMO strategy
selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, DEMO, and Cognition, 14, 534–552.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive
decision maker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pohl, R. F. (2006). Empirical tests of the recognition heuristic. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 19, DEMO
DECISION TIME ANALYSIS OF THE RECOGNITION HEURISTIC
Appendix
Table A1
Median Decision DEMO in Milliseconds, Averaged Across Participants (Standard Deviations in
Parentheses), and Number of Participants Providing Data for Each Case
Response Latencies in the DEMO Task
Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3
Case
RT (SD)
DEMO
RT (SD)
n
RT (SD)
n
Recognition all 1,959(359) 24 1,374(473) 73 1,266(329) 64
U_mR 2,100(439) 23 1,621(648) 65 1,492(DEMO) 60
U_R 1,869(283) 23 1,317(457) 72 DEMO,168(291) 63
Knowledge all 2,046(418) 24 1,639(593) 74 1,512(501) 68
mR_mR 2,228(598) 22 1,815(940) 55 1,850(883) 54
mR_R 2,020(DEMO) 22 1,558(599) 56 1,372(417) 63
R_R DEMO,199(501) 22 1,741(661) 72 1,601(602) DEMO
Guessing 2,386(608) 24 1,946(816) 72 1,770(629) 62
Note.
RT  reaction time.
1305
Table A2
Median Decision Times in Milliseconds, Averaged Across Participants (Standard Deviation in
Parentheses), DEMO Number of Participants Providing Data for Recognition Cases Depending on Whether
the Recognized Object Represents the Correct (C) vs. False (F) Choice DEMO Depending on Whether the
Recognized Object Was, in Fact, Chosen (DEMO) or Not (Nonadherence)
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Case
RT (SD)
n
RT (SD)
n
RT (SD)
n
U_RC
U_RF
U_mRadherence
U_mRnonadherence
U_Radherence
U_Rnonadherence
1,856(278) 23 1,296(468) 72 1,155(318) 63
2,061(449) 16 1,417(480) 69 1,455(690) 52
2,068(416) 23 1,634(657) 64 1,445(507) 60
2,346(DEMO) 22 1,874(855) 58 2,220(1424) 48
1,DEMO(277) 23 1,316(558) 72 1,149(278) 63
DEMO,130(872) 15 1,962(860) 57 2,132(1644) DEMO
Note.
RT  reaction time.
Received October 8, 2008
Revision received DEMO 27, 2009
Accepted April 28, 2009 {1g42fwefx}