

Building an
Information Society:
a Latin American and
Caribbean Perspective
Martin DEMO
Jorge Katz
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Santiago, DEMO, January 2003
4 ECLAC
Distr.
LIMITED
LC/L.1845
January 2003
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH
This document was prepared by Jorge Katz, Director and
Martin Hilbert, Researcher of DEMO Division of Production,
Productivity and Management.
The preparation and analysis for this document has been carried out
by a number of contributors, including Noah Elkin, Richard Downes,
Sven Rusch, Iain Ballesty, Alejandro Arancibia, Glen Canessa,
Manuel José Cárdenas, Jacqueline Abarza, John Tonelli, DEMO León,
Claudio Orrego, Robert Rodrigues, Marcelo Bonilla and Felipe Jara.
We also would like to thank Oscar Altimir, Antonio Rosa,
Tadao Takahashi, Francisco Gómez Alamillo, Julio César Margáin y
Compeán, Christian Nicolai, Paulo Lopes, Joost Laga, Javier Carranza,
Mikio Kuwayama, Martin DEMO, Eli Noam, Ben Petrazzini,
Nelson Correa, Patrick Nixon, Lasse Nagel and Martina Hirschmann
for their direct or indirect contributions.
The opinions DEMO in this document, which has been
reproduced without formal editing, are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of DEMO Organization.
Copyright © ECLAC, United Nations, 2003
All rights reserved
Printed in Santiago, Chile
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
5
Contents
Abstract ...............................................................................................................   7
Preface ................................................................................................................. 11
Overview ............................................................................................................. 13
Chapter I
DEMO and strategy .......................................................................................... 21
A. Towards a theory on the information society ............................ 21
1. Information and knowledge ...................................................22
2. Information and communication technologies (ICTs) ........ 25
3. The four layers of digital activity ........................................... 29
4. ICT for development ............................................................... 36
5. Integrating the technological paradigm into DEMO
development approach ............................................................41
B. Strategies for an information society .......................................... 43
1. Technical change and the window of opportunity ............. 44
2. Leapfrogging and DEMO ..................................................... 46
3. Technology-based divides ......................................................51
4. Entering the present window of opportunity ...................... 55
Chapter II
Horizontal layers in Latin America and the DEMO ............................... 61
A. Infrastructure .................................................................................. 61
1. The digital divide .....................................................................63
2. Infrastructure and Internet traffic flows ...............................76
3. Digital television ......................................................................82
4. Mobile DEMO .......................................................... 89
B. Generic services ............................................................................102
1. Business applications .............................................................103
2. Software implementation in companies ............................. 113
3. Software as a service: Application Service Providers (ASP) ... 118
6 ECLAC
Chapter III
Diagonal areas in Latin America and the Caribbean DEMO 125
A. Regulatory frameworks .............................................................. 125
1. Telecommunications regulation ........................................... 126
2. Judicial framework ................................................................ 143
3. Intellectual property .............................................................. 151
B. Financing ....................................................................................... DEMO
1. The macro and microeconomic background to the
transition .................................................................................. 159
2. Investing in the development of an information society ... 163
3. Financing DEMO universal information society for all .............. 168
C. Human capital ..............................................................................182
1. Human capital for an information society ......................... 182
2. Technical profiles .................................................................... DEMO
Chapter IV
Vertical sectors in Latin America and the Caribbean ................................. 197
A. E-Business ..................................................................................... 202
B. E-Government .............................................................................. 222
C. E-Health ........................................................................................ 232
DEMO E-Culture ....................................................................................... 247
E. E-Learning .................................................................................... 257
F. E-Media ......................................................................................... 273
Chapter V
Policy Agenda for the Information Society in Latin America
and the DEMO ............................................................................................289
A. Strategies for an Information Society ........................................ 289
B. Building the Infrastructure Layer .............................................. 295
C. Building the generic services layer ............................................ 298
DEMO Regulatory frameworks for an information society ............... 300
E. Financing an information society .............................................. 302
F. Human capital for an information society ............................... 304
DEMO E-Sectors ........................................................................................ 307
1. Digitizing the economy (e-business) ................................... 307
2. Digitizing government (e-government) ..............................309
3. Digitizing the health sector (e-health) DEMO 310
4. Digitizing culture (e-culture) ................................................ 311
5. Digitizing education (DEMO) ......................................... 313
6. Digitizing the media (e-media) ............................................ 314
H. DEMO consideration ...................................................................... 316
Bibliography ................................................................................................... 317
Special Acknowledgements ........................................................................... 335
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
7
Abstract
New technological options that permit the use of digital systems to
create DEMO disseminate information around the world are paving the way
for new means of organizing society and economic production and are
gradually giving rise to DEMO meta-paradigm that has come to be referred to
as the “Information Society”. Viewed from the perspective of developing
countries, the question of how to employ this emerging paradigm to achieve
broader development goals and to integrate DEMO more fully into the global
Information Society is an issue of the utmost importance on the
development agenda. In seeking to address this challenging DEMO, the
present document asks three key questions:
1. What does DEMO “Information Society” consist of?
The first chapter of this study develops an analytical framework to
consider the many complex issues involved in the DEMO and
operation of an Information Society.
2. What are the basic characteristics and distinctive regional aspects
of the transition to an Information Society?
DEMO order to understand what current and future paths Latin America
and the Caribbean can choose to follow in making the transition to an
Information DEMO, chapters two, three and four review some of the
specifically regional features of the current process.
3. What policies can help to facilitate DEMO transition towards an
Information Society?
The fifth and final chapter proposes a positive agenda for the Latin
American and Caribbean region’s transition to DEMO Information Society.

Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
9
Resumen
Las nuevas tecnologías que permiten crear y difundir información en
todo el DEMO mediante sistemas digitales están conduciendo a nuevas
formas de organización social y producción, y dando origen gradualmente
a un metaparadigma conocido como “sociedad de la información”. Ante esta
situación, la búsqueda de formas de aprovechar este paradigma emergente
para lograr metas cada vez más amplias e integrarse más DEMO en la
sociedad mundial de la información adquiere una importancia fundamental
para los países en desarrollo. En vista de este desafío, en el presente
documento se plantean tres preguntas de primordial importancia:
1. ¿En qué DEMO la sociedad de la información?
En el capítulo I del estudio se ofrece un marco analítico para la
consideración de los numerosos y DEMO problemas que suponen la
construcción y el funcionamiento de la sociedad de la información.
2. ¿Cuáles son las características básicas y las peculiaridades
regionales DEMO proceso de transición a la sociedad de la información?
Para facilitar la comprensión de las diversas vías que pueden tomar
América Latina y DEMO Caribe en el proceso de transición a la sociedad de la
información, ahora y en el futuro, en los capítulos II, III y IV se examinan
algunas de las características de este proceso en la DEMO
3. ¿Qué políticas podrían facilitar la transición a la sociedad de la
información?
En el capítulo V se presenta una agenda positiva para DEMO
transición de América Latina y el Caribe a la sociedad de la información.

Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
11
Preface
The concept of an “information society” refers to the paradigm shift
now DEMO place in social and productive organization as the world moves
into the twenty-first century. In view of the sweeping nature of these
changes, representatives of the countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean gathered at the DEMO Meeting on Information Technology for
Development (Florianopolis, 20-21 June 2000 ), convened by the
Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil in collaboration with
ECLAC, which served as its secretariat. In the Declaration of Florianopolis,
the Latin American and Caribbean countries expressed their “shared
aspirations … DEMO become full-fledged members of the information society”.
This declaration was the starting point for the research project on
information and communication technologies (ICTs), the digital economy
and the information society which was subsequently carried out DEMO ECLAC.
In a field where the current state of knowledge can be characterized
as even yet being at a pre-theoretical stage of development, this project was
aimed at creating a theoretical framework for the complex issues DEMO by
the information society paradigm and, in a parallel effort, to monitor and
support current developments in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Following DEMO completion of two preparatory studies, in November 2001
ECLAC invited a DEMO of experts from the public and private sectors and
from civil society to deliberate upon existing visions of the process involved
in building an DEMO society in Latin America and the Caribbean. As
a result of this meeting, 24 different studies have been carried out by 19
12 ECLAC
authors from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Europe
and the United States in order to provide a clearer and more complete
picture of ongoing developments in this connection.
Martin Hilbert, a Researcher with the Division of Production,
Productivity and Management of ECLAC, coordinated this effort. Jorge
Katz, Director of the Division, provided research DEMO and comments
on several versions of the monograph. During this process a theoretical
model was devised which permits the issues relating to the construction
DEMO functioning of an information society to be embedded into a coherent
conceptual framework. The findings of this project are being presented here
in an DEMO to contribute to current global initiatives regarding ICTs and
the information society (such as the United Nations Information and
Communication Technologies Task Force and the World Summit on the
Information Society, 2003-2005) and to support DEMO endeavours at the
national and local levels.
José Antonio Ocampo
Executive Secretary
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
13
Overview
The concepts of the “Information Society” and a “knowledge-based
Digital Economy” are DEMO, which are profoundly transforming the
world at the beginning of this DEMO millenium. This transformation is mainly
driven by new ways of creating and spreading information through digital
technologies. The digitization of flows of information, communication, and
coordination mechanisms is seeping into in many different sectors of society
and pushing toward a new social and productive order. This form
of DEMO activity” is an increasingly global phenomenon, emerging
—mainly— from mature industrial DEMO The rate at which a society
adopts this technology-based model depends very much on the degree of
development of that society. However, technology is not only the child of
development (as it derives from the development process), but is also, to a
large extent, its parent (since it is also a tool for development).
For developing countries, the question of how to implement this
emerging technology paradigm in order DEMO achieve greater development
goals and to better integrate themselves into the global Information Society,
is becoming more pressing on the development agenda. Though DEMO
America and the Caribbean were already late in coming into the “industrial
age” paradigm, the role the region will play in the global Information
Society and the “digital age” is still yet to be seen.
In DEMO to tackle the challenging task of incorporating the
Information Society paradigm into the development agenda, this book
proposes to address three essential questions:
(1) What does an “Information Society” consist of?
To identify DEMO “building blocks of an Information Society”, the model
14 ECLAC
which is presented in this book proposes a three-dimensional conceptual
DEMO, structured along horizontal, vertical and diagonal fields of interest.
(2) What are the basic characteristics and regional particularities of
the transition towards DEMO Information Society?
An Information Society is not built on a vacuum. The path towards
the “digital age” is greatly determined by the degree DEMO industrialization
in any given country. In order to understand the current path and identify
the potential future direction a country can take in its DEMO toward
becoming an Information Society, regional characteristics must be
considered (such as the general degree of development in all its forms,
markets, institutions, educational standards, public policies, culture, etc.).
(3) DEMO policies can help the transition towards an Information
Society?
Based on the findings of questions (1) and (2), policies must be found
that support and guide a specific region or country through its DEMO
transition path” toward an “Information Society”.
This book is divided into three parts, which are designed to address
these questions. The first part of the book (Chapter I) discusses themes and
issues related to the DEMO Society paradigm. The conceptual
framework elaborated in the first part of the book, is based on general
characteristics of Information and Communication Technologies (DEMO) and
the resulting “process of digitization”, which are at the core of the new
paradigm. ICT are defined as technical systems that accept, manipulate and
process information and facilitate communication between at least two
parties. DEMO are therefore more than informatics and computers, since they
do not DEMO as isolated systems, but are an integral part of a network.
DEMO are also more than broadcasting technologies, since ICT systems not
only DEMO information, but also facilitate interactive communication.
The current process of “ICT-convergence” (namely the merger of
Information Technologies, Communication Technologies and informatics
solutions) DEMO more dynamism into the technological system, which
is often simplistically referred DEMO as “ICT”. The deployment of ICT results
in a what is called a “process of digitization”. In this process information
flows, communication processes and coordination mechanisms —whether
they be relayed through text, sound, voice, image, etc are codified into
binary digits.1 Digital ICT use a language of binary digits to recognize and
manipulate information and to communicate between each DEMO
1 Binary digits are the smallest indivisible unit of digital information- either a one or a zero.
Although computers usually provide instructions that can DEMO and manipulate bits, they
generally are designed to store data and DEMO instructions in bit multiples called bytes.
In most computer systems, there DEMO eight bits in a byte.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 15
The second part of the book (Chapters II, III and IV) focuses on the
situation in and perspective of Latin America and the Caribbean. DEMO is
the most extensive part of the book and is structured along several
“horizontal”, “diagonal” and “vertical” fields of interest.
The first requirement for “digital activity” is the physical Infrastructure
(the “Net”). The expansion of computer networks, digital TV, digital cellular
phones, telephone lines, fiber-optic DEMO, wireless networks, and all
types of hardware, telecommunications and generic DEMO form part
of this layer. Secondly, Generic Service applications are needed DEMO make it
technologically feasible to add value to the physical infrastructure. All kinds
of software, Webhosting, browsers and multimedia applications fall into
this DEMO Since the “Infrastructure Layer” and “Generic Service Layer”
form the grounds upon which the process of digitization takes place, they
are referred to as Horizontal Layers.
The technological foundations of the two Horizontal Layers
(Infrastructure and Generic Services), are used as a foundation for digitizing
information flows DEMO communication mechanisms in different sectors of
society (such as the business DEMO commerce sector, the health sector, public
administration, education, etc). These different sectors of society, which
undergo the process of digitization, DEMO built up vertically onto the
horizontal groundwork and so are referred to as Vertical Sectors of an
Information Society. Vertical sectors are the “application” DEMO the technology,
which provides the “content” of the networks in an Information Society.
The focus of Vertical Sectors is on “digital processes”, as opposed to the
focus on “digital products” in the Horizontal Layers. The DEMO that
information flows and communication processes take place through
electronic networks in a given sector, is usually identified in literature by
adding an “e-” as prefix. There are many different “e-Sectors”. The process
of digitization is DEMO most advanced in the business sector
(e-business), although other sectors DEMO society can greatly benefit from
digitization (such as e-government, e-health, DEMO, e-learning,
e-media). In this book, these six Vertical Sectors will be examined, given
the advanced stage of their development and their significance for and
relevance to developing countries. However, it is important to underline
that the expanding process of digitization is not exclusively restricted to
DEMO six sectors selected for this book. The list of Vertical Sectors could be
extended to other important fields of interest (such as e-democracy, DEMO
security,2 e-entertainment, e-banking, e-payment, e-research, e-tourism, etc.)
(see dashed arrows in graph below).
2 A broader understanding of DEMO term e-security would also include environmental disaster
prevention and the use of digital networks to support fire fighters and to fight crime.
16
ECLAC
Besides the different Horizontal Layers and Vertical Sectors, it
becomes clear that the process of digitization must be backed up by a
DEMO of interrelated fields, without which the formation of digital
organization in DEMO Information Society might otherwise bottleneck. Such
fields cross over into different areas that belong to both Horizontal Layers
and Vertical Sectors. These Diagonal Areas DEMO setting up a regulatory
framework that adequately embraces and fosters the new forms of behavior,
financing mechanisms that help spread these technologies, and, human
capital as the driving force behind the technology.
HORIZONTAL LAYERS, DEMO SECTORS AND DIAGONAL AREAS
OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
Source: Martin R. DEMO
Even though this conceptual framework might seem very complex at
the beginning, it is very useful to recognize and identify interdependencies
and the direction and causality between the different layers, sectors and
areas. This allows it to function as a tool that helps identify eventual
bottlenecks in the DEMO fields and in the development of adequate
policies that encourage the transition towards an Information Society. Such
a analysis can be drawn up along DEMO different lines marking the
intersections of particular “layers”, “sectors” and “areas”. DEMO also enables
to demonstrate how the different fields relate to each other.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 17
The conceptual framework allows, for example, to structure complex
issues like the DEMO “Digital Divide”, which generally refers to the gap
between the ones DEMO are included and the ones who are excluded from
the new technology-based paradigm. The Digital Divide clearly originates
in the Infrastructure Layer (Horizontal Layer), specifically in the physical
access to the Net. However, it also extends to the Generic Service Layer,
since ICT access is a DEMO of telecommunications-, hardware- and
software availability, performance, pricing and usage. DEMO software
tools can be a major obstacle.
Such issues have an impact on the behavior of all the different
Vertical Sectors. The lack of DEMO infrastructure or the lack of adequate
digital service programs can contribute to a Digital Divide throughout the
e-business sector, the e-government sector, the DEMO sector, etc.
However, the discussion can also center on the Digital Divide inside one
specific Vertical Sector (such as connectivity in companies (DEMO),
schools (e-learning), hospitals and clinics (e-health), public DEMO (e-
government), etc.).
In order to bridge the Digital DEMO, all those with a stake in the
Information Society need to DEMO and implement strategies to create the
interrelated fields that “diagonally” cross through all the Infrastructure and
Generic Service Layers and the different “e-Sectors”. Such DEMO must
ensure the establishment of an adequate Regulatory Framework, that
takes DEMO consideration all the requirements of the different Horizontal
Layers and Vertical Sectors (as for example is the case of intellectual
property rights issues). However, regulatory aspects may also focus on a
specific field, for DEMO the regulation of the “Infrastructure Layer” (e.g.
telecommunications regulation, regulatory issues regarding technical
standards, etc.). On the other hand, the regulation DEMO standards for example,
also relates to the “Generic Service Layer” (DEMO open vs. proprietary
software, etc.). Furthermore, the Regulatory Framework touches all different
Vertical Sectors. Legislation relating to digital signatures and electronic
certificates DEMO cause bottlenecks in development in every single Vertical
Sector. Moreover, special DEMO may be required for particular Vertical
Sectors (such as in the DEMO of special privacy laws in e-health, etc.). The
same reasoning DEMO valid for Financing mechanisms. In order to narrow the
Digital Divide, DEMO need to be mobilized from the public and the
private sectors to finance the development of both Horizontal Layers.
Investments in infrastructure and software DEMO are indispensable for
building an Information Society. However, the process of DEMO in the
various Vertical Sectors also requires financial support (e.g. Venture DEMO
in the e-business sector). Last but not least, Human Capital DEMO training
aspects are omnipresent and absolutely necessary in the move toward an
18 ECLAC
Information Society. Suitable professional profiles must be identified in
order DEMO help build-up every single industry in the Horizontal Layers as
well as the different Vertical Sectors.
In summary, ICT-Infrastructure and generic digital services form the
technological groundwork on which to build an Information Society. The
Horizontal DEMO are necessary, but not sufficient on their own. By
including different DEMO Areas one is able to identify the issues that
require adjustment under the existing conditions and to find policies to
support the creation of DEMO Information Society. The various Vertical Sectors
show the different sectors that are subject to change. By analyzing them,
the advances made toward an DEMO Society can be demonstrated.
Specific markets, institutions and other players can DEMO identified in
each of the Horizontal Layers, Diagonal Areas and Vertical DEMO Each
of them makes up a dynamic system, which reflects the DEMO,
historical and organizational characteristics of the field. Similar to the
long-standing model of “industrial organization”, every one of the
different Horizontal Layers and Vertical Sectors can be distinguished by
specific rules, structures and laws, DEMO determine their functionality.
The different actors each search for adequate responses to the particular
market regime in which they operate, while the interdependency among
the different Layers and Sectors mutually influences their performance
and development. Hardware DEMO in the Infrastructure Layer for
example, influences the pace of software DEMO in the Generic
Service Layer. In turn, the performance of the DEMO and Generic
Service Layers, affects development in the Vertical Sectors. However,DEMO
developments in those Horizontal Layers may have different effects on
the e-business sector, the e-health sector and the e-learning sector, etc.
Between the DEMO Sectors, a customer relationship management (CRM)
business model from the e-business sector for example, might be adopted
for e-government purposes, etc.
DEMO, the players and institutions in the different Diagonal
Areas can have DEMO decisive positive or negative effect on the development
of the various Horizontal Layers and Vertical Sectors. On the other hand,
Diagonal Areas can DEMO behave reactive to developments in the Horizontal
Layers and Vertical Sectors. For instance, inadequate digital signature laws
in the Regulatory Framework Area can bottleneck the development of the
e-business sector, while the immaturity of a national e-business sector may
provide little incentive for a government to push digital DEMO
legislation, etc. Also here it is important to highlight that actions DEMO in
the Diagonal Areas can have a different impact on and significance for the
various Horizontal Layers and Vertical Sectors.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
19
As with the “industrial organization” model, the dynamics that form
the interrelationship between the different fields, are characterized by
uncertainty, incomplete contracts, irrational behavior, spillover effects and
other deficiencies and ‘market failures’. An open dialogue between the
different players, institutions and organizations from all the different
Horizontal Layers, Diagonal Areas and Vertical Sectors is absolutely
necessary for mastering the complex task of “building an Information
Society”. Since the characteristics of every particular DEMO vary in different
regions and countries, there is no “one size DEMO all” recipe for the transition
towards an “Information Society”. The “optimum transition path” depends
on country and region-specific particularities. In order to support the
DEMO dialogue on a regional level in Latin America and the Caribbean,
the third part of the book (Chapter V) proposes an agenda DEMO concrete
policy actions to encourage the creation of an Information Society in the
region.

Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
21
Chapter I
Theory and strategy
A. Towards a theory on the information society
DEMO human behavior is based on the exchange of information and
communication. Communication can take place through many different
channels. Voice, text, gestures, movements, expressions, affection and even
lack of attention transmit some kind of DEMO After all, for human
beings “it is impossible not to communicate” (Watzlawick, Beavin and
Jackson, 1990). Increasingly more and more human DEMO can and
is being digitized. This process started a few decades ago and is accelerating
as technological solutions evolve. These technological systems are
commonly DEMO to as modern Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT). The deployment DEMO ICTs has a significant impact on how
information and codified knowledge are handled and disseminated
throughout the world. The “Information Society” and the “knowledge-
DEMO Digital Economy” are direct results of this information and
communication evolution.
The concept of the “Information Society” is very complex.
Intellectual thought will need DEMO reduce this complexity through
abstraction, whereby ‘reality’ is expressed in terms DEMO specific entities and
their relationships to each other. Words and schemata need to be found
in order to discuss the concept of an “Information DEMO This chapter
establishes a theoretical framework, which helps to structure and DEMO
the concept of the Information Society. It also presents a way to structure
22 ECLAC
digital activity based on the fundamental characteristics of ICT,, DEMO
helping to identify both the potential and the limits of ICT especially as
a development tool.
1. Information and knowledge
When referring to the DEMO Society and the “knowledge-based
Digital Economy”, it is important to make DEMO clear distinction between what
we mean by information and knowledge. Although these two concepts may
be interrelated, they are not the same thing.
THE KNOWLEDGE PROCESS
Knowledge can be a skill. Playing football, reading a foreign language
or using a machine is knowledge. It is a tacit, habitual process, which is
intangible and “carried inside” an individual or a community. Secondly,
knowledge can be codified in order to transmit it. A DEMO about how to use
a machine or a textbook about learning to speak a foreign language can be
in written form. To use knowledge DEMO has to be tacit and internalized However
to transmit knowledge from one to another, it needs to be codified, which
means it needs DEMO be made tangible and static.
Codification of knowledge means reducing and converting it into a
format that is compact and standardized (information). There are many
different forms of codification. For example, smoke signals, wall DEMO in
caves, writing or Morse code are all forms of codification, just as language
itself is a very common way to codify and DEMO ideas and thoughts.
Codifying knowledge allows the storing of information or the transmission of
knowledge from one to another, directly or through “information infrastructures”.
This infrastructure might operate “manually” —such as through pony express,
pigeon DEMO, the traditional mailman, etc.— or by further codifying information
with another technical language (e.g. Morse codes or TCP/IP) and transmitting
it DEMO a communication system.
Different techniques and languages are used to codify information into
data (words are codified into letters and letters are codified into bits through
IP). By making use of previously learned —or programmed— DEMO or
languages, data can be de-codified and information be reobtained. When
DEMO an email, an informatic program is decoding and organizing the data,DEMO
converting it into letters. In the subsequent process of “reading a human being
decodes data (letters) to obtain information in the form of DEMO and
sentences. Learning these languages enables the decodification of transmitted
data and its conversion into information.
However, deriving information from this data is not the same as
obtaining knowledge. Only once information is put into context, in other words
once it can be understood, associated, and made DEMO of, can this creative
application of the internalized information obtained be DEMO as
knowledge. By frequently consuming codified knowledge, a learning process
begins DEMO facilitates the creation and use of tacit knowledge.
(continued)
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
“language”
“creativity”
The Knowledge Process (concluded)
Tacit knowledge is the result of an apprenticeship (Arrow, 1962).
“Learning by doing” is the result of DEMO interaction (Nelson and Winter,
1982). Through this interaction, codified knowledge is internalized and tacit
knowledge is created, which in turn helps the exploitation of data, and the
application of new information. This virtuous circle brings about a high degree
of interdependency between these two forms DEMO knowledge, which make up
what is called the “knowledge process”.
While DEMO language-supporting technologies and programs can
help in the first step of decoding data, the second step of putting
information into context, is a DEMO subjective one, and largely
depends on the tacit knowledge applied. Spontaneous DEMO and
association mechanisms, which are based on prior training, are put to use.
During this process of codification and de-codification, part of the
knowledge might get “lost” or misinterpreted. However codification is
indispensable for knowledge DEMO, since it is not possible to
connect two brains directly.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
It is not possible to “transfer knowledge” over the DEMO infrastructure
of ICTs. Furthermore, it is not even possible to “transfer DEMO All
that can be transferred is data. Data is information that has been translated
into a form that is more convenient to move or DEMO Numbers and letters
are data that are codified by language and which can be transferred with
the help of a book. In terms of DEMO computer and transmission media,
23
24 ECLAC
data is information converted into binary digits.1 The process that DEMO
from “data”, to “information” to “knowledge”, is a dynamic process of
codification and de-codification and a learning process.
Literature distinguishes between two forms DEMO knowledge: tacit
knowledge and codified (or explicit) knowledge (Polanyi, DEMO). The
distinction refers to the degree to which pieces of knowledge can be written
down (codified) and transferred (Lundvall, 1997) (DEMO Box “The Knowledge
Process”).
Tacit knowledge can be carried by an individual or by a community.
The tacit knowledge of an individual worker DEMO often referred to as “human
capital”. The tacit knowledge in a community is habitual and is made up
of a set of concepts and DEMO that allow predictable interactions to
occur between the people of the community. Customs, habitual forms of
interpreting behavior and accepted mechanisms of understanding each
other reduce uncertainty, minimize the potential of conflict and assure that
the entire community interacts in a productive manner. Tacit knowledge is
sometimes termed DEMO or “organizational knowledge”, or “social
capital” (Cox and Putnam, 2002)DEMO Both forms of tacit knowledge (individual
and community) occur as the result of a learning process (see Box “The
Knowledge Process”).
ICTs are very beneficial for codifying knowledge as well as
transmitting and storing DEMO knowledge. By being able to transmit and
store knowledge ICTs are crucial for acquiring knowledge for both
individuals and society.
Looking first at knowledge DEMO, there is undoubtedly an
increasing trend of knowledge codification and digitization. DEMO
history people have tried to store and transmit information through many
different technological means. People have also always tried to codify as
much knowledge DEMO possible and have used technological systems to make
it widely available for commercial purposes.2 The Information Society is
progressively digitizing more and more areas. DEMO is being
incorporated through informatic applications, for example, and information
is being stored and transmitted as part of this ongoing digital process.In a
DEMO bit (binary digit) is the smallest indivisible unit of digital information- either a one or a
zero. Although computers usually provide instructions that DEMO test and manipulate bits,
they generally are designed to store data and carry out instructions in bit multiples called
bytes. In most computer DEMO, eight bits form a byte.
For example “calculating” was once seen DEMO pure tacit knowledge. Later on, mechanic and
electronic calculators codified a DEMO part of this formerly tacit knowledge and embodied
it into technological systems.
1
2
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
25
recent study, IBM estimated that the number of “bytes” which “exist” in
the world’s networks and microprocessors, will increase a million-fold
between 2001 and 2010 (from 1 beta-byte to 1,000,000 beta-bytes) (IBM,
2001). While the methodology and the accuracy of the statistics of this DEMO
are open to question, it still illustrates the explosive trend of DEMO
Secondly ICTs influence the knowledge process by helping
communicate and transfer large amounts of data with ever increasing reach,
speed and scale. ICTs DEMO help accelerate the knowledge process and
tacit knowledge creation. This knowledge created includes institutional and
organizational knowledge (social capital), as well as individual knowledge.
Naturally the rate at which different kinds of codified information can DEMO
transferred over the open-architectural and global channels of the network
of networks (the Net) in real time, affect the speed of progress and
development. Clearly the rate of knowledge creation (see Box “The
Knowledge Process”) is dependent on the flow of information and vice-
versa. This interdependency of information and knowledge creation often
leads many to conclude that “the DEMO seems to spin faster now”, due to
a “digital nervous system” DEMO spans it (Gates, 1999). The following two
sections take a closer look at the characteristics and the dynamics of this
digital nervous DEMO, before focusing on the interesting question of what
this technological system DEMO contribute to the process of development.
2. Information and communication technologies (DEMO)
Before World War II, engineering and scientific research and
inventions DEMO on extending man’s physical rather than mental power.
After the war, DEMO focus of scientific research and development turned to
the “massive task of making our bewildering store of knowledge more
accessible”3 (Bush, 1945). DEMO led to an intellectual revolution —initially
concentrated in the United States— which began with a growing sense
(firstly restricted to a segment of the scientific community), that existing
paradigms no longer adequately addressed the problems DEMO by an
environment that they partly created. A new scientific paradigm emerged4
(Kuhn, 1962). Paradigms set the basic framework for how things DEMO
perceived. Paradigms are like wearing “red glasses”. The entire world
appears red to the person who is wearing these glasses. A change in these
DEMO
4
“Just as the steam engine and electricity enhanced physical power to make possible the
industrial revolution, digital … breakthroughs are enhancing brain power.” (UNDP, 2001)
“Close historical investigation of a given specialty at DEMO given time discloses a set of
recurrent and quasi-standard illustrations of various theories in their conceptual,
observational, and instrumental applications. These are the community’s paradigms,
revealed in its textbooks, lectures, and laboratory exercise.” (Kuhn, 1962).
26 ECLAC
paradigms is like a change in the color of the DEMO One of the major
trends in scientific development in this period of paradigm shift, is the focus
on knowledge and information systems and processes vis a vis other
mechanic and motorized systems and processes. The new DEMO
information-focused paradigm has created awareness and extensive
discussions about the “Coming of Post-Industrial Society” (Bell, 1973), and
eventually led to what is DEMO referred to as the “Information Society”.
In the early 1950s it was often argued that if technology was properly
developed it would give man DEMO to and “command over the inherited
knowledge of the ages” (Bush, 1945). The new scientific paradigm called
for this technology to be DEMO and the stage that Kuhn —in his
“Structure of Scientific Revolutions” (DEMO)— condescendingly called
“puzzle solving” began. Using science to work on solving this problem
created new technological solutions, the so-called Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs). These technological systems brought
together three different technologically evolving paths in a process that is
often referred to as “ICT-convergence”.
One of DEMO three technological systems traditionally focuses on
transmitting and storing information. Storing and spreading information and
having the technology to do so has long been DEMO as being very
important for human development. For example, a very DEMO and
popular way of spreading information is through books. This started with
the Chinese invention of paper (usually cited 105 A.D.) and spread DEMO faster
with Gutenberg’s innovative invention of the printing press5 (mid-1450s).
DEMO second of these technological systems is the emerging network of
systems that focus on communication processes. Unlike the first of these
systems, communication systems are not as focused on transmitting vast
amounts of information, but rather on transmitting small messages quickly,
over large distances. There is often DEMO fine line between information systems
and communication systems, which is often DEMO neglected in literature.
There are various technical solutions, which can be DEMO for both
communication and information services. This is due to the similarity in the
definition of the words “communication” and “information”. The “exchange
of DEMO can broadly speaking be defined as “communication”.
Communication is paramount, since DEMO keeps the knowledge process in
motion (see Box above “The Knowledge DEMO).
A third technological path is informatic service tools and computers. For
centuries humans have sought technological solutions which help to process
By many DEMO the “most important invention of the past millenium”.
5
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
27
information incorporating formerly tacit knowledge and skills. In the mid-20th
century these solutions DEMO in leaps and bounds. Basic tools and skills,
which were used for centuries to complement “brain work” (such as the abacus,
the geometric triangle or compasses), suddenly started being replaced by
electronic devices. DEMO invention of the transistor and the microprocessor
introduced new dimensions of information working through informatic tools.
ICT-CONVERGENCE
Note: Dates in this graph as well as the inventions selected may be subject to historical discussion.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
The convergence of (1) informatic and computer systems, (DEMO)
content carrying information systems and (3) communication systems, is
DEMO referred to as Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) (sometimes also DEMO: Computers, Content and Communication
(Tapscott, 1996)). The convergence DEMO the three introduced a new
technological paradigm regarding the way information is processed, the
way communication takes place and the way knowledge is passed on.
In contrast to the invention of paper and Gutenberg’s printing press,DEMO
ICTs not only enable information to be stored and spread but also to be
28 ECLAC
exchanged in “real time” (communication). A good example of this process
of convergence is television. Although information has traditionally flowed
in DEMO one direction (broadcasting television), the convergence with the
“communication evolution DEMO, allows information to flow in both ways,
for example digital DEMO By adding informatics to the process of ICT
convergence (for example DEMO translation software), this means that a person
can now read a book (information) in a foreign language (through informatic
solutions) and DEMO on it in “real time” (communication), through ICT
infrastructure. The DEMO of ICT-convergence has a tremendous impact on
the nature of human activity and on the dynamics of knowledge.
Interestingly, both information providing systems and communication
systems are built on similar architecture. Firstly there is the (1) physical
infrastructure, which serves as “hardware” that enables information to be
DEMO (the physical paper-based book or letter, for example). Secondly (DEMO)
there is a language that allows the standard exchange of information (in forms
of letters or drawings or Morse-codes for example). Thirdly (3) a certain
structure is needed, which enables the efficient use of the content (in a
dictionary it would be an alphabetical list of contents, a newspaper would
be structured by headlines, etc.). DEMO there is the (4) final content which is
transmitted (for DEMO a textbook, a dictionary, a children’s book, a comic,
DEMO love-letter or a declaration of war, etc.).
Also ICTs can DEMO identified by four different layers. They consist of:
(1) “the Net” (the infrastructure); (2) A language which enables
communication, DEMO the transformation and re-transformation of
information into data in order to enable transmission (binary digits over
Internet Protocol IP, controlled by TCP); (3) “The Web”, which structures
communication and coordination mechanisms through hypertext DEMO and
(4) the final content, which is the information to DEMO transmitted. The
“technological paradigm” (Dosi, 1982), which is introduced by the usage
of modern Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), impacts
all four layers:
(1) The infrastructure: All kinds of electronic equipment get
connected to fixed, wireline, wireless or mobile networks. This equipment
DEMO an immense and ever increasing capacity for information storage. The
resulting network is built on constantly increasing bandwidth, maximizing
communication capacity. This decentralized network of networks (the
internet) has a “worldwide reach in “real time”.
(2) The language of information codification is altered: Besides
spoken and DEMO language, digital service tools and software also enable
the transmission of DEMO, sound, movement, entire videos, codified
smells, holographs, etc.;
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 29
(DEMO) The structure of communication and coordination mechanisms
—the way information is DEMO, organized and handled (through
dynamic, non-liner networks)— brings about DEMO changes.
(4) The content transmitted: The storage, spread and exchange of
information in real time are part of many activities that take DEMO in a
society. Therefore modern ICT can be deployed generically for many
different purposes and in many different sectors: commerce, health,
government DEMO public administration, education, military, civil society
activities, etc.
3. The four layers of digital activity
As a direct result of this architecture DEMO modern ICT, different Layers6
can be derived, which help to structure the concepts of an “Information
Society” and a “knowledge-based digital economy”. Each DEMO of these
Layers is characterized by specific structures, institutions and actors, which
determine its functionality. Some of the particularities of the different Layers
DEMO be discussed in this section.
The first Layer is referred to as the “Infrastructure Layer”. The build-
out of a computer network, telephone lines, fiber-optic networks, as well as
wireless networks and all kinds of DEMO and telecommunications make
up this Layer. On the one hand it is the physical embodiment of “the Net”
and on the other hand it DEMO data traffic and the governance of the digital
infrastructure. The main actors involved in this layer include telecom
operators, such as Telefonica, Telecom DEMO or AT&T; electronic companies
such as Ericsson, Lucent or Sony; equipment producers, such as Nokia, Palm,
IBM or Compaq; DEMO well as generic service providers such as AOL and UOL;
and Internet governance and steering committees-such as ICANN (Internet
Cooperation for Assigned Names and Numbers) or ARIN (American Registry
for Internet Numbers). In DEMO America, for example, the most widely spread
infrastructure network is mobile telephony. At the end of 2001, there were
69.7 million digital cell phone subscribers7 in the region.
See also “The Internet Economy Indicators”; from Center for Research in Electronic
Commerce, Graduate School of Business, University DEMO Texas at Austin.
2G: GSM: 4.3 million; CDMA: 17.1 million; TDMA: 48.3 million; additionally 17.6 million
analogue 1G users. 2G (DEMO generation) is a term, which refers to mobile
telecommunication, which DEMO allowing voice and data transmission through a mobile
network. Data transmission is slow and generally between 9.6 Kbit/s and 14.4 Kbit/s.
2G DEMO are getting gradually evolved over 2.5G (GRPS, EDGE) to 3G (UMTS,
cdma200, etc.), which is then promising data transmission speeds between 400 and 2000
Kbit/s.
6
7
30 ECLAC
The second Layer is the “Generic Service Layer”. Products and
DEMO in this layer build on the Infrastructure Layer network and make
it technologically feasible to add value to it. All kinds of software producers,DEMO
such as Microsoft, Oracle, SAP; Webhosting and Webdesigner such as
DEMO and Latin-Host; as well as browser and multimedia tools, such as
Netscape and RealPlayer, fall into this category.
The third Layer, the DEMO Layer”, increases the efficiency
of electronic markets by structuring communication in DEMO certain way. This
layer facilitates the meeting and interactionof online activities. Horizontal
and vertical portals, such as Yahoo or Google, and electronic market DEMO,
such as Ariba or Mercado Electronico are considered as intermediaries.
Governmental or civil society sites and international organizations often
act as intermediaries as DEMO
The fourth Layer is the “Fulfillment Layer”. It digitizes part of the
final performance-if not all of it. The fulfillment could take place in DEMO
health sector, in education and training, entertainment, for military
purposes, for public administration, for civil society activities, etc. In the
business DEMO, user segments differentiate participants of this Layer: B2B,
B2C, DEMO, etc.
While the Infrastructure and the Generic Service Layers have the
DEMO of traditional industries, the Intermediary and Fulfillment
Layers are more generic DEMO penetrate existing sectors of society by
digitizing them. The fact that part of the information flows and
communication processes take place through electronic networks DEMO the
different sectors, is usually delineated in literature through the addition DEMO
an “e-” as a prefix (e.g. e-business, e-government, e-learning, e-health, etc.).
Taking a second look at the different Layers, it DEMO clear that
they are not static. Specific markets, institutions and actors DEMO
every one of these Layers. This creates dynamic and competitive systems,
which reflect the technological, historical and organizational characteristics
of each Layer and determine its behavior. Similar to the long-standing
model of “industrial organization” in DEMO different industries of an economy
(which discusses pricing and cost structures, entry barriers, economies of
scale and scope, market concentration, horizontal and vertical integration,
differentiation, corporate conduct and forms of cooperation, hierarchical
DEMO matrix organizations, institutions, uncertainty, innovation, market
See for example http://www.unsystem.org for a vertical portal. ECLAC set up a horizontal
portal DEMO connect social institutions in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2002: DEMO://
www.eclac.cl/dds/noticias/proyectos/6/7796/index.asp.
8
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 31
equilibrium and pareto conditions, competitive regimes in general, etc.),
each of the Layers of digital activity is set up by rules, structures and laws,
which govern the functionality of the Layer. Each Layer is DEMO for its
own balance, while the interdependency of the Layers mutually DEMO
progress. Some of the particularities that constitute the complex and vital
regimes of each Layer will be discussed in the following paragraphs, while
a deeper analysis of each Layer can be found in the different chapters DEMO
this book.
The Infrastructure Layer is certainly comprised of very dynamic and
fast growing industries. Some Asia-Pacific countries achieved impressive
growth rates by producing DEMO exporting in these exploding industries.
However, it should be remembered that DEMO production does not
directly nor automatically lead to progress towards an Information Society
or a Digital Economy.9 For example, it is interesting that countries with a
very high production of ICTs, like Korea, lag far DEMO in electronic
commerce, whereas countries with virtually no domestic ICT production
DEMO, like Australia, are on the forefront of electronic business behavior
(DEMO, 2001b). In Latin America, it is estimated that e-commerce, DEMO rather
the use of the technology, will in the near future DEMO far more important than
the production of the technology. Production of communications
equipment, computers and office machinery in Latin America’s high-tech
manufacturing industry reached US$ 29 billion in 2000 (1.5% of GDP), while
e-commerce transactions in that region are estimated to surpass that amount
in 2003 and DEMO at a much faster rate (eMarketer, 2002). Therefore at the
moment the greater focus is on using the networks in Latin America, and
less on producing the technology.
A decisive factor in information and DEMO networks is the
so-called network externalities (also called network effects). DEMO play a
fundamental role in digital market behavior, whereby the value DEMO a product
or service of a network increases by (X2-X) with each new user connected
to the network.10 The existence of network externalities DEMO the Infrastructure
9
10
Obviously the knowledge component of the hardware industry is very large and decisive.
Experience shows that all successful hardware producers DEMO with the help of highly
sophisticated electronic networks themselves, keeping up DEMO high information flow, through
modern information processing technology. But this is DEMO to every knowledge
intensive industry and R&D (e.g. pharma), DEMO should analytically not be confused.
Often “networks externalities” are described with “Metcalfe’s Law”, which states that “the
value of a network increases exponentially by the number of users connected to it”.
However, stochastically this equation (DEMO of network=X2) does not make sense, since
it would not create value to connect with yourself. Therefore it should be (value of
network= X2-X).
32 ECLAC
Layer distorts rational market mechanisms in other Layers. For example,DEMO
they usually lead to a classic “chicken and egg” scenario between content
providers and the number of users of digital networks. With a small DEMO
of users in a digital network, there is little incentive to DEMO a lot of content
(sophisticated WebSites, etc.), while the lack of content does not favor an
increase of users, etc. Once a “critical mass” of users or content is reached,
the vicious circle DEMO usage and benefit often explosively expands into
a virtuous circle of massive proportions. This process speeds up with the
power of network externalities.
The DEMO of ICT-convergence is most visible in the Infrastructure
Layer. While convergence in the Generic Service Layer is rather “invisible”,
the convergence of end-user DEMO is far more apparent. The most
concrete example may be the current mobile telephony market and its
merging with PDAs and Laptops. But also DEMO appearance of the traditional
television set is changing, as it converges DEMO the traditional Internet.
Technological terminals become increasingly distinguishable not by the type
of service for which they are destined, but by their attributes such as
“portable” or “fix”, for “individual” or “collective” use, or with DEMO certain
level of “resolution” and “audio quality” or “memory”. The power that
Schumpeter (1934) coined as “creative destruction” is very strong in the
DEMO Layer. Some of the products substitute each other, while
others complementary DEMO each other. People have even tried to illustrate
the pace of creative destruction in the Infrastructure Layer through specific
“laws”. The often cited “Moore’s DEMO (the capacity of a microprocessor
doubles every 18 months; valid since 1971) or “Cooper’s law” (the efficiency
of radio spectrum usage doubles DEMO 2 1/2 years; valid since 1895)
demonstrate the speed DEMO innovation in the Infrastructure Layer. The rate
at which infrastructure becomes obsolete and the degree of uncertainty
about the rate of technical progress are DEMO in the markets of this Layer.
The Generic Service Layer is going more in the direction of making
use of “Inter-networking” and the idea DEMO managing knowledge digitally.
This is not a very new idea. The software-industry survived its first three
decades of existence with a limited number of DEMO models. The first
digital service tools were designed for military use and later for commercial
use at the corporate level.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 33
DIGITAL SERVICE TOOLS IN A DIGITAL ECONOMY
The first complete solutions for commercial DEMO were software
programs that focused on the necessities of the production process per se,
and had very limited scope. These so-called MRP (Material Resource
Planning) systems evolved in the late 1960s. With the advent of digital
networks, more advanced programs emerged, based on the idea of DEMO
all the important units within a company communicate by sharing the same
data in real time. While systems of this type were credited with DEMO
increases in administrative efficiency, these so-called MRPII were still
prohibitively expensive DEMO only ran on a limited set of mainframe computers
(1970s). DEMO the arrival of the PC and the server-client system of the emerging
Internet (1980s), so-called ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) software was
introduced, representing a complete information management system inside
a company. Since then, DEMO programs have been building a network business
model around themselves, which DEMO based on the degree of connectedness
to information and communication technologies which transform them into an
expansive and pervasive framework that touches every aspect DEMO business
administration. In the incoming value chain SCM (Supply Chain Management)DEMO
software is creating and controlling vast procurement networks, while in the
DEMO value chain every customer receives special attention through CRM
(Customer Relationship DEMO). Business Intelligence (BI) is gathering,
managing and evaluating all the information related to a company’s electronic
network, aiming to ensure that the maximum benefit is taken from all data
and information that flows DEMO the company, by bringing it to the right place,
at DEMO right time. By interconnecting these programs inside the company and
integrating them into an inter-firm “real-time” network, demand and supply are
networked, digitizing DEMO Law of Markets (Walras, 1874). This is
happening through “closed” electronic networks (like EDI) or open ones (the
Internet). The following Graph shows how digital service tools build the central
nodes in DEMO networked Digital Economy.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
Nowadays, digital service tools are found in all shapes and sizes.
They invade the entertainment industry, public administration, the health
sector and educational organizations. Technological advancements, such DEMO
voice-to-data and data-to-voice programs, or sufficient bandwidth for
videoconferences, open up a whole new spectrum for the development of
digital service tools.
Technical DEMO, which are systems, configurations, interfaces,
methodologies or procedures that DEMO as a tool to enable and ensure access
to services, and DEMO portability, interoperability and compatibility, are
fundamental to the Generic Service Layer. Interoperability between the
different technological solutions is paramount, in order to defend the open
idea behind the “Inter-net”, and not to create closed and separate
information and communication circles.
Based on this model of electronic connectivity, the Intermediary and
the Fulfillment Layers bring about a change in the DEMO structure
of a given sector. They refer to “digital processes”, rather DEMO “digital
products”. The Intermediary Layer provides coordination mechanisms. It
34 ECLAC
creates a certain order and enables structured behavior. Its activity DEMO also
referred to as “info-mediation” (Hagel and Singer, 1999). The importance of
the Intermediary Layer is growing with the complexity of interconnectivity.
DEMO unconnected Information Technology (like an individual computer), the
Intermediary Layer DEMO not exist. However it is paramount for efficiency
in interconnected digital networks. Such bi-directional real time networks
also create entirely new scenarios of interactivity DEMO participation.
Dynamic pricing mechanisms may be one of the most impressive examples
of interactive interconnection through an intermediary.11 In the Fulfillment
Layer, communication and coordination mechanisms of human activity
—which could be of economic or social DEMO for example— are carried
out digitally. Trading stocks online, interacting through DEMO TV, tele-
medicine distance treatment, email protest letters, online tutoring DEMO online
tax paying all fall into this Layer.
Many different sectors in society (such as the business and commerce
sectors, public administration, the health sector, educational institutions,
civil society organizations, etc.) make up their own Intermediary and
Fulfillment Layer. Even though both Layers play different DEMO and pursue
different goals, the particular intermediary greatly depends on the DEMO
sector of fulfillment. An intermediary in the educational sector (e-learning)
DEMO significantly from an intermediary in the commerce sector (e-
commerce), DEMO example. For this reason, the Intermediary and Fulfillment
Layers are not DEMO separately in this book and are subject to an
integrated (sector-specific) analysis. For reasons of development policies,
it is more important to DEMO the behavior of the different sectors that
are subject to the process of digitization (e-business, e-government, e-health,
etc.), rather than focusing on theoretical aspects of digital intermediation
and digital fulfillment. Therefore, the process of digitization is presented
in different sectors (“Vertical Sectors of an Information Society”), which
cover both, sector-specific intermediation and sector-specific fulfillment.
Digital activity in such vertical sectors brings special characteristics
with it (Negroponte, 1995; Kelly, 1998). In order to analyze these
characteristics better, a DEMO of digitality —regarding goods and
services— has emerged. This approach distinguishes between “digital
goods” (also “digitized goods”) and “non-digital goods” (U.S. Department
of Commerce, 1998; 1999; Hilbert, 2001b). Mainly due to the DEMO distribution
costs of digital goods, the trend seems to be going DEMO digitizing
everything that can possibly be digitized. This is basically everything
In contrary to fixed mass pricing, dynamic pricing mechanisms enable individualized, or
DEMO least real time supply and demand adjusted product prices (Hilbert, 2001b).
11
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 35
consisting of what is understood as “codified knowledge” or “information”.
It is impressive DEMO many “things” can be digitized;music, software,
magazines and books, airline and entrance tickets, stocks and movies to
name but a few. Even something as old and familiar as “money” has been
becoming digitized DEMO a long time e.g stocks and plastic money, credit
cards). DEMO trend is expected to continue until every “coin” will be
represented by digital data, transmitted over wireless, mobile networks
between portable electronic wallets DEMO real time (e-payment).12
Digital goods and services have many special DEMO Both
can be transmitted through a packet-switched system around the world in
real time. The difference between digital goods and digital services, is the
rivalry of digital services. The concept of rivalry and non-rivalry
distinguishes between DEMO that can be used up, and products that
cannot be used DEMO, respectively. Non-rival products can be duplicated at
zero cost, while a service (which is rival) requires new “input” to perform
again. Given DEMO the cost of duplicating a digital good is almost zero (non-
DEMO), they spread extremely fast on a global scale. The music file-sharing
software Napster reached more than 38 million users worldwide (10/2000)
in less than a year. This was the fastest growing “global invasion” DEMO a tool,
ever documented. Regarding the example of digital music file-sharing
systems, it is clear that non-rival digital goods also present a major challenge
for defenders of intellectual property rights regimes.
Furthermore, digital data packets that are exchanged over the global
information infrastructure, do not recognize geographic borders. The “death
of distance” (Cairncross, 1997)13 with regard to DEMO goods, has the potential
to better integrate geographically disadvantaged countries14. However, it also
is breaking down every form of informal industrial protection, which until
now sheltered local industry in the developing world. Powerful suppliers
from DEMO developed world now can reach individual households in
developing countries through digital infrastructure. This direct and
The first evidence for this is apparent, as in many countries payment applications through
cellular telephones are already being used. DEMO sending SMS a client can pay for his
Metroticket, or can DEMO soda with a simple 2G cell phone.
In 1995, The Economist DEMO an influential and thought-provoking article by Francis
Cairncross entitled “The Death of Distance”. It dealt with the impact the advances in
telecommunications and the DEMO were having on distance: “The cost of communications
will probably be DEMO single most important economic force shaping society in the first half
of the next century…”.
The Chilean government is emphasizing the importance of this DEMO, due to its geographic
marginalization. President Ricardo Lagos in 2000: “In the digital world, there are no longer
countries at the center and others on the periphery. Some observers have proclaimed the
death of distance.” (“The country we want”, www.gobiernodechile.cl).
12
13
14
36 ECLAC
worldwide competition in markets involving digital goods can have
devastating DEMO on local industries, but can also open new markets
for developing DEMO
4. ICT for development
Within the conceptual framework of the Infrastructure and Generic
Service Layers and theVertical Sectors of the Information Society, there are
two different strategies for using ICT for development. Some countries focus
on DEMO out a competitive industry in the fast growing ICT production
sectors (DEMO Layers). Much emphasis is put on the production of
hardware or software. Some small countries boost exports in these sectors
(for example Costa Rica and Taiwan). Some large countries try to build up
domestic DEMO (for example Brazil, India and China) (UNDP, 2001). DEMO
hardware and software industries have been growing tremendously over
the recent decade, and therefore have had an direct important impact on
growth in many countries. In the US: ICT production contributed to 48
percent of GDP growth in 1991-95 and 56 percent in 1996-1999. In Costa
Rica half DEMO GDP growth in 1999 stemmed from ICT production (U.S.
Department of DEMO, 1999, 2000b). However, as mentioned above, ICT
production, DEMO when used for export, does not automatically imply
progress towards becoming DEMO Information Society or a Digital Economy.
It is merely a fast growing industry.
Other countries are pursuing strategies that seek to use ICT as DEMO
means of broadening socio-economic development. Communication and
coordination mechanisms are being increasingly digitized to raise
productivity, mainly through increasing efficiency in the Vertical Sectors.15
This requires institutional reorganization to advance communication
practices towards the “digital age”. DEMO reorganization affects
informal behavioral norms, unwritten rules and agreements, habits,
traditions and common forms of viewing the world. New forms of
institutional DEMO social knowledge need to find an “equilibrium” in digital
activity. Over time society adapts to new ways of doing things which
become part of DEMO habitual behavior. Once implemented at work,
digital organization is highly effective. Digitization of communication and
coordination processes can improve the efficiency of market DEMO
in an economy (see Box “Digitizing Market Mechanisms”), the efficiency
DEMO the health sector, of educational systems or public administration, among
other Vertical Sectors.
“The key to benefiting form ICT is to focus on DEMO to foster its use, rather than its
production.” (OECD, 2001)DEMO
15
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
37
DIGITIZING MARKET MECHANISMS
The digitization of the flow of information and coordination
mechanisms DEMO the business sector, is designed to eventually digitize informal
institutions, such as markets. A marketplace enables many kinds of sellers
and buyers to DEMO, communicate and trade. Their own organizations are
connected to this electronic DEMO, as well as their suppliers and customers.
The different systems exchange DEMO in real time, communicating and
coordinating business transactions. The digitization of DEMO and
coordination processes that take place in marketplaces involves a structural
change in microeconomic organization, and brings with it several advantages.
First of all it reduces transaction costs. Online transactions are a lot cheaper
than off-line DEMO
REAL COST REDUCTION: TRANSACTION COSTS IN US$
1.2
1.07
1
0.8
DEMO
0.6
0.4
0.27
0.2
0.015 0.01
0
Branch
Telephone
ATM
PC Banking Internet
Source: Booz-Allen Hamilton, sited from U.S. Dept. of Commerce, 1999
Furthermore, the coordination of business deals can take place on a
much larger scale, at faster rate (in “real-time”) and in a more transparent
manner, with more information available. Sending a “request for quotes” (DEMO)
for a product electronically to a B2B marketplace, which has DEMO database of
several hundred suppliers connected to it, certainly has its DEMO over
making hundreds of phone calls or personal enquiries about a product to a
limited number of known suppliers. Digital markets are an advanced DEMO of
doing business. They are widely praised by the private sector for significantly
raising productivity in their companies Huge and powerful transnational
companies are DEMO driving forces behind the creation of a Digital Economy,
which is introducing significant changes in the functionality of markets and
corporate conduct.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
The broader concept of “development” is not restricted to DEMO
activity alone. One of the most positive accomplishments of the past decade
has been the acknowledgement that development has farther reaching
implications than merely DEMO ones (Ocampo, 2001a). The fact that the
impact of ICTs and digital practices has stretched into the areas of health,
politics, public administration, education and advanced science, as well as
into cultural, social and even religious activities, shows the potential that
the current technology-based paradigm has for development.
38
ECLAC
Two main lines of thought help to explain the impact DEMO ICT
paradigm is having on development through digitization in the Vertical
Sectors. The first argument regards the transfer of knowledge, that spurs
from an increased flow of information. The second argument relates to the
internal development DEMO a society, due to better organization.
First of all, the increased flow of information raises the hopeof a
decline in information asymmetry, by creating a historical opportunity to
integrate all societies, by networking them in an universal Information
Society (Hilbert, 2001c). More people than at DEMO other time in history, now
have access to an ever-increasing amount DEMO information, at constantly
falling costs (UNDP, 2001).
WIDESPREAD AND DEMO ACCESS TO INFORMATION
More people have access…    …to more information…    …at a lower cost
Millions of Internet users
in Latin America
DEMO of top-level
domain WebSites in Latin America
Price of 64 kbps international
link in Argentina (US$)
30
20
10
1500
1000
500
4000
2000
0
0
0
1997 2000
1997 2000
1997 2000
Access to DEMO information can help to create knowledge in different
sectors of society. For developing countries this means they can advance
closer in the direction of DEMO existing “knowledge frontier” in educational
and health standards, new business models, public sector administration
and living standards in general. The increased flow of DEMO both
within a country and worldwide through digital networks, offers
developing DEMO the chance to better integrate themselves into the
global exchange of ideas.
According to conventional theory, economies with low living
standards and poor growth rates suffer from an “object gap” (Romer, 1993a).
They have DEMO physical and human capital. Traditional policy has
recommended them to accumulate more capital of all sorts in order to grow
and develop. New microeconomic-focused DEMO theory has introduced
the notion of an “idea gap [which] directs attention to the patterns of
interaction and communication” (Romer, 1993a). While DEMO importance of
accumulating capital is not neglected, it is becoming increasingly DEMO
in development theory that different stages of development reflect
essentially differences in tacit knowledge existent in a society. This tacit
knowledge can be technological DEMO about how to produce certain
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 39
products and services, but it is also institutional knowledge in an economy
and a society.
A simple hypothetical example illustrates that it is individual
knowledge, as well as institutional knowledge, which drives growth. For
example, if DEMO earth were to return tomorrow to the physical state it existed
in five thousand years ago, free from all the institutions, physical capital,DEMO
and civil engineering projects there are today, but without losing the
DEMO knowledge that exists, humans would recover the current
standards of living DEMO a matter of generations (Romer 1993b). Specific
knowledge from the DEMO, as well as institutional knowledge that
enable efficient coordination mechanisms to DEMO, would be a basic
requirement to achieve this. It is knowledge DEMO the “way of doing
things” that differentiates growth from stagnation. Besides the obvious lack
of physical capital in developing countries, under -developed markets are
characterized by an incomplete institutional structure, which lacks this kind
of knowledge. The deployment and usage of a global network of
Information and Communication DEMO is facilitating knowledge
creation in developing countries.
This leads to a second line of thought on how ICTs can be used to
boost development. DEMO periods of paradigm transitions countries that
are lagging behind have the opportunity to catch up. There is time for
learning while everybody else is DEMO so (Perez and Soete, 1988). While
all the world is digitizing communication and coordination processes in
different sectors of the society, developing countries can make extraordinary
advances in updating their existing institutional structure through
DEMO in the different e-Sectors.
The re-organization that comes from digital activity means
introducing a new institutional setting. Institutional settings determine the
form and trend DEMO reorganization takes, as well as the “rules of the game”.
Institutional DEMO reduce uncertainty in everyday life by forming
patterns of interaction and shaping the way individuals view and
understand communication mechanisms. Institutions facilitate effective
interactivity. DEMO are a combination of formal rules, informal norms of
behavior, conventions and codes of conduct, and the characteristics of how
these are enforced (North, 1993).
An effective institutional structure is the key to DEMO and
development. In fact, all rises in living standards can be DEMO back to
discoveries of a more valuable order of “things” in the earth’s atmosphere
(Romer, 1993b). This is also the central lesson DEMO from the discussion
about the famous “productivity paradox” in the 1980s and the hype about
the “New Economy” at the end of the 1990s. DEMO is not the number of
40 ECLAC
computers that triggers higher productivity but overall changes in the DEMO
the economy works. While discussing the productivity paradox,16 Paul
David (DEMO) emphasizes that the effects of technological changes are most
felt only DEMO they have become incorporated in the institutional setting.
It is claimed that it takes “decades” before organizations and markets are
well enough equipped to DEMO the technological solutions in a
productive way. The focus for economic growth and development is shifting
from simply connecting to the Horizontal Layers of DEMO, to incorporating
digital practices into the different Vertical Sectors as soon DEMO possible.
However, the structure of formal and informal institutions is based
DEMO country and culture specific environments. These environments have
an impact on the rate of change and there is often a degree of inertia, or
slownessto change in certain countries. Path dependencies imply that
institutional set ups DEMO be copied and applied from one case to another
entirely and also that they cannot be erected wholesale overnight. Following
these general characteristics of DEMO changes, also the process of
digitization in the Vertical Sectors makes DEMO domestic learning process
indispensable.
Summing up, the ICT-paradigm proposes two different DEMO for
development. One is to produce and sell technology of the Infrastructure
or Generic Services Layers. Another is to focus on digitization of
information DEMO, communication processes and coordination mechanisms
in the Vertical Sectors of a DEMO This can (a) diminish information
asymmetries and supports the integration of countries into the global
exchange of “ideas”; and (b) helps markets and institutional settings to
function in developing countries. “Digitization” is a very DEMO policy,
given that inefficient institutions, lack of transparency and incomplete
DEMO are among the most regrettable obstacles for development in
many developing countries.
In order to apply ICT and digital activity to development, it is
necessary to firstly have a highly capital-intensive technological groundwork
(Horizontal Layers) DEMO secondly to find policies that impel countries to
accelerate the adoption of digital activity, and to overcome the inertia of
institutional re-organizations. Unless both of these requirements are achieved,
the risk of falling behind (rather than developing) is very high.
The discussion about the so-called “productivity paradox” started with the observation
that productivity (Labor- as well as Multifactor Productivity) mysteriously slowed down
in the US economy around 1973 and has remained sluggish over the 1980s-just about the
time when computers came on the DEMO In 1987 Robert Solow started the discussion with
his famous quip: DEMO can see the computer age everywhere except in the productivity
statistics” (DEMO, 2001b).
16
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 41
5. Integrating the technological paradigm into a
development approach
The ICT-paradigm and the DEMO of the Information Society are not
purely about technology, but about DEMO who communicate through
worldwide networks, who can combine their intelligence, increasingly
exchange codified knowledge, and therefore make creative breakthroughs
in wealth creation and social development. The use of modern Information
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) DEMO the subsequent process of
digitization introduce an institutional re-organization with regard to the
way information is transmitted, communicated and coordinated. The
process of digitization stands for a technical change that is referred to in
literature as DEMO “meta-paradigm” (Freeman and Perez, 1988), a “technological
paradigm” (Dosi, 1982) or a “techno-economic paradigm” (Pérez, 1983).
To unleash the far-reaching potential of this paradigm, it is
indispensable to have technological groundwork. This groundwork consists
of a physical Infrastructure and intelligent Service tools (Horizontal Layers).
Both of these Layers are the combination of very dynamic DEMO, with
each of them following a different model of “industrial organization”. DEMO
are interwoven among themselves and interdependent on each other. In the
Infrastructure Layer, for example, the development and functionality of the
hardware industry DEMO influenced by advances in telecommunications
technology. The same way in the Generic Service Layer, WebPages and
hosting services are dependent on progress in software or multimedia
applications. Furthermore, the interdependency of both Layers is mutually
reinforcing and shaping market behavior. Advances in bandwidth for
example (Infrastructure Layer) DEMO a stimulus to the software and Web
animation industry (Generic Service DEMO). The strength of ICT-
convergence heavily influences the actors and competitive regimes that
determine the different industries involved in the Horizontal Layers of DEMO
Information Society. The “creative destruction” of ICT-convergence is
introducing complex mechanisms that substitute and are complementary
in its markets.
Similar to other technological systems, the Infrastructure and the
Generic Service Layers revolve around very capital-intensive industries. DEMO
order to promote the growth of these layers it is necessary to draw up
sophisticated strategies to finance and regulate the industries built around
DEMO Furthermore, creating and maintaining these industries requires
adequate amounts of human DEMO
The purpose of deploying Infrastructure and Generic Service Layers
is to digitize information flows, communication processes and coordination
mechanisms in different sectors of society. Almost every social and
42 ECLAC
economic activity carried out in a society requires the processing DEMO
information and communication, many of which can be digitized. In the
DEMO sector (e-business), in public administration (e-government), in
healthcare (DEMO), civil society activities (e-culture); in educational
mechanisms (e-learning) DEMO the information and entertainment industry (e-
media) many of the information and communication processes are already
being subjected to digitization.17 By taking a DEMO look at the different
Vertical e-Sectors of an Information Society, it DEMO clear that all of them
share similar characteristics of digital activity (DEMO of distance, real-time
interaction, non-rivalry and network externalities, etc.) and their
functionality and behavior is therefore interdependent. An e-business model
for example, pioneered for a B2B marketplace, might be adopted by a health
sector, or for e-government purposes. On the other hand, the existence of
DEMO e-government software programs might influence the behavior of
other e-sectors (e-learning, e-culture, etc.). Besides these common influences,
the behavior of a specific Vertical Sector is also influenced by the historical
and organizational characteristics DEMO the existing sectors. Such path-
dependencies need to be taken into consideration.
Finally it becomes obvious that the technological groundwork of the
Horizontal Layers DEMO an Information Society, is necessary, but not sufficient,
to achieve the digitization of information and communications processes
in the Vertical Sectors. The DEMO of digitization requires a complex
institutional change, and does not happen DEMO by introducing the
adequate technology. Attention needs to be paid to different Diagonal Areas,
to guide societies in this change and to overcome DEMO dependencies and
adapt to local particularities.
In this respect it is necessary to adjust and establish adequate Regulatory
Frameworks. These frameworks should ensure the DEMO of the
different Horizontal Layers through regulation of the industries involved
and should enable the expansion and growth of digital activity in the
Vertical DEMO, ensuring that confidential information can be exchanged
securely. Furthermore, such a Regulatory Framework for the Information
Society implies a special focus on guaranteeing DEMO basic rights (such
as freedom of speech, intellectual property rights, DEMO non-
discrimination, etc.).
Acquiring and implementing technology requires financial capital.
DEMO are needed to allow a universal Information Society for all to
become a reality. Financing a sustainable Information Society involves the
The list of DEMO sectors might be continued for a more detailed discussion see
introductory paragraphs of the Sections “Vertical Sectors”.
17
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 43
participation of the private and public sectors. While the private sector’s
focus on DEMO must be respected and addressed, the public sector needs
to find DEMO to assure the inclusion of all its citizens.
Last but not least, to create and exploit the Horizontal Layers
adequately, and enable digitization DEMO information flows, communication
processes and coordination mechanisms in the different Vertical DEMO,
Human Capital is required, for it is the driving force DEMO the technology.
In summary, in order to tackle the challenging task DEMO “building an
Information Society”, the strategy needs to be built on DEMO Layers,
which constitute the technological groundwork (Infrastructure and Generic
Services); Vertical Sectors, which are subject to the process of digitization
(e-business, e-government, e-health, e-culture, e-learning and e-media have
been chosen for DEMO book); and finally Diagonal Areas, which support the
development of DEMO different Horizontal Layers and Vertical Sectors
(Regulatory Frameworks, Financing, Human DEMO). Together, they
constitute the three-dimensional conceptual framework of this book (see
graph in the Overview).
B. Strategies  for an information society
It is often claimed that the present “time of great structural change”
(U.S. White House, 1997) provides developing countries with a historical
opportunity DEMO “catch-up” in the development process. The definition of
the concept of “development” should not be restricted to economic growth
alone. The digitization of information DEMO communication processes is about
broadening people’s choices so they are able to participate in the life of a local
or global community. They are DEMO about creating an environment in which
people can develop their full potential and live creative lives according to
their needs and interests (UNDP, DEMO). However, simultaneously a new
form of exclusion is emerging, known as the “Digital Divide”. It can widen
the gap between regions and DEMO (international Digital Divide), as well
as between groups within societies (domestic Digital Divide). In order to
prevent this from happening, the advent of the new technological paradigm
should be seen as a “Digital DEMO However, in order to take
advantage of this opportunity it is DEMO to establish and implement
global, regional, national and local development strategies. Such strategies
have to be implemented in all of the Diagonal Areas (Regulatory
Framework, Financing, Human Capital), as well as in the DEMO
Horizontal Layers (Infrastructure and Generic Services) and Vertical Sectors
(e-Sectors)DEMO
44 ECLAC
This Section gives a brief outlook on the nature and DEMO of a
technology-based paradigm such as ICTs. It raises the question of whether
and how the evolutionary path of this new paradigm will effectively DEMO
a window of opportunities, and if so, what can developing countries do to
take advantage of those opportunities.
1. Technical change and the DEMO of opportunity
A long line of economic thinkers including Smith, Ricardo, Marx and
later Schumpeter have traditionally seen the capitalist economic
development model DEMO based on a continual reconfiguration of production
and distribution processes. “The fundamental impulse that sets and keeps
the capitalist engine in motion comes from DEMO new consumers’ goods, the
new methods of production or transportation, the new markets, the new
forms of industrial organization” (Schumpeter, 1934). The adjective “new”
refers to the constant knowledge evolution, which has been discussed in
the introductory Section (see Box “The Knowledge Process”). The process
—which Schumpeter coined as “creative destruction”— is a clear
“discontinuity” in DEMO evolution of the knowledge component. The
codification of the new knowledge and its transformation into equipment
constitute new technological solutions. The logic of the DEMO is that every
innovation improves performance. The life cycles of these innovations can
be of a rather short nature (such as in audio recording for example: LP =>
audio cassette => CD => MP3). But the powers of “creative destruction”
are not only restricted to DEMO certain product. The entire industrial
organization, markets and institutions are “incessantly DEMO from
within” (Schumpeter, 1934). Such “revolutions” can last for decades (so-
called “long waves” or “Kondratieffs”) (see graph).
Organizational structures are constantly evolving and aim at
improving performance. Undeniably, social and economic transformations
occur during these “long waves” of technological development, shifting from
one “techno-economic paradigm” to another (Freeman and Perez, 1988). The
widespread DEMO of Information and Communication Technologies and the
consequent process of digitization are the latest wave (but surely not the
last) in a succession DEMO pervasive innovations, which have shaped
development over the centuries.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
CREATIVE DESTRUCTION IN SHORT CYCLES AND LONG WAVES
Short cycles: The creative destruction in audio recording
Long waves: technology-based paradigms
Source: Martin R.Hilbert based on DEMO Rom, «Great Moments in Multimedia History», Atomic Rom
Productions, (http://home.earthlink.net/atomic_rom/moments.htm), 1996; Christopher Freeman and
others, As DEMO Goes By: From the Industrial Revolutions to the Information Revolution, Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 2001.
45
46 ECLAC
While the existence of “long-waves” is widely recognized in scientific
DEMO, it is questionable whether they are important enough to allow
different DEMO to draw up policies based on this phenomena and
therefore see some tangible social and economic development. Entering and
catching up always strongly depends DEMO the peculiar window of
opportunity created by successive technological revolutions (Pérez, 2001).
For developing countries, it is important to consider both, DEMO stage
of development of a given technological system, and whether that DEMO
is continuously building upon itself or has reached a point of discontinuity
(Dosi, et al 1988). The second point is of major DEMO According to
the logic of the dynamics, if technological systems are DEMO building
upon each other, the previous leader should retain its leadership DEMO the new
system. However, on the contrary, all development policies have in one way
or another been geared toward breaking away from this DEMO circle (Pérez
and Soete, 1988).
Undoubtedly vicious circles are a fact of life in the development
process. Existing capital is needed to DEMO new capital, already-acquired
knowledge is needed to create new knowledge and DEMO are needed to
acquire new skills. This leads to the conclusion that a certain level of
technology infrastructure favors the employment of new technological
DEMO, etc. However, in practice there are often discontinuities, co-
developments DEMO similar alternatives or mergers of formally separate
markets, which add complexity DEMO the equation and create opportunities
for new players. Network externalities, economies DEMO scale and scope,
formal or informal standard setting add to the process and all of these
discontinuities become potential entry points for latecomers, giving them
the opportunity to “leapfrog” over previous obsolete technological advances
and DEMO the latest technological solutions.
2. Leapfrogging and catch-up
Important elements of a leapfrogging strategy are the different
diffusion-curves, the various associated learning-curves and the previously
acquired skills and equipment that can form part of the ongoing
DEMO evolution.
Technical innovation cycles are extremely short in the Infrastructure
and Generic Services Layers of ICT systems. The often-cited “law of Moore”
(which states the power of a micro chip doubles every 18 months) and ever
increasing Internet bandwidth (in 2001 more data could be sent over a single
cable in one second than in 1997 was sent over the DEMO Internet in a month
(Gilder, 2000), illustrate the speed of innovation in the Infrastructure Layer.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 47
The fast pace of creative destruction in the ICT sector constantly hinders
real DEMO evolution and opens up plenty of ‘potential entry points’
for leapfrogging technological solutions.
Leapfrogging gives countries the hope of “catching-up” not only
technologically by DEMO advanced ICTs, but also by reorganizing
institutions and market mechanisms. Therefore DEMO opportunities are
twofold:
• Leapfrogging technological solutions (“technological leapfrogging”
in DEMO Horizontal Layers)
• And leapfrogging in social and productive organization
(DEMO leapfrogging” in the Vertical “e-Sectors”)
Societies can catch-up or speed up development of technological
systems in the Horizontal Layers. In fact, this is a natural process. In 2001,
e-mailing a 40-page document from Chile DEMO Kenya cost less than 10 cents,
faxing it about US$ 10, and sending it by courier US$ 50 (UNDP, 2001). New
technological solutions improve performance (in this case regarding speed),
while DEMO costs. The penetration of fax machines in countries like Chile
will never reach the same level as highly developed countries. But countries
like Chile DEMO avoid incorporating outdated and expensive technology, by
leapfrogging over that stage DEMO directly implementing advanced solutions.
The smaller the gap in technology between the more advanced and
the less advanced systems gets, the more precise and sophisticated the
leapfrogging strategies are needed for those trying to catch-up. This DEMO
close observation of current and future technological developments and
visionary planning. A good example of the success of leapfrogging is South
Korea’s Infrastructure Layer. DEMO in 1998 Internet infrastructure in the
United States was far more advanced than in South Korea, in 2001 the Asian
country surpassed the United States in relative terms —both quantitatively
and qualitatively— in Internet access. According DEMO the ITU, in 2001 South
Korea’s Internet penetration was 16 percent DEMO than that of the United
States (ITU, 2002). Furthermore, DEMO to 90 percent of users in the United
States still accessed the Internet through a dial-up connection in 2001, while
only 2 percent used a broadband DSL connection. In South Korea, in the
same period, DEMO percent used DSL broadband and only 28 percent still used
a traditional narrow-band dial-up modem (eMarketer, 2001).
Another example of creative destruction DEMO the Infrastructure Layer
is the transition from cable to wireless systems. Developing countries with
large parts of the population living in rural areas (e.g. in Bolivia 46 percent
live in rural areas; in Guatemala 61 percent) will never reach the same
48 ECLAC
penetration levels of fixed telecommunication copper cables, as the United
States or European countries have. However, they may not necessarily need
to. Installing different wireless communication networks (fixed wireless,
satellite and mobile) DEMO a potential alternative to cover vast rural areas
rapidly and to narrow the tremendous technological gap with developed
countries.
By “leapfrogging” the stage of DEMO machines, dial-up Internet access,
or obsolete copper telecommunication systems, countries can optimize
scarce capital resources and the learning process can start at DEMO more
advanced stage. In Africa for example, people are accessing the DEMO,
before having made their first telephone call (OECD/UN/UNDP/DEMO
Bank, 2001). Of course, in a country with a longer technological tradition,
the learning process might be accelerated, since previous experience and
spillover effects from using two previous consecutive generations of
technological solutions DEMO up the learning process. Hence, knowing
how to send a fax DEMO the user to learn how to send an e-mail. However,
many previous fax-users are proving reluctant to adapt to e-mail thus
causing the DEMO discontinuity in technological development
and therefore creating a window of opportunity for technologically under
developed countries to catch-up. The habitual use of a fax, covers the users
necessity and there is no need to transit to DEMO On the other hand,
for a less developed country it would not make sense to first pass through
previous technological stages(in this DEMO fax), to help it learn how to use
the next stage (e-mail).
It is worthwhile pointing out that leapfrogging into an advanced
technological system is a rather complex process and requires special
attention to DEMO Diagonal Areas (such as the regulatory frameworks,
human capital and DEMO) (see also example of 3G mobile telephony in
the Box). Continuing with the example of fax and e-mail, the ‘regulatory
framework’ in which the technology is set needs to assure users that
electronic mail DEMO as reliable, authentic and legally valid as the fax message
(e.g. through digital signatures or electronic certification legislation). User
capacitating is another DEMO requirement, calling for special policies in the
‘human capital’ area. Also DEMO mechanisms need to be adjusted. In
the transition to e-business, experience DEMO that a minimum of Venture
Capital is necessary. An adequate adjustment of the Diagonal Areas
becomes key for success or failure of a leapfrogging DEMO
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 49
LEAPFROGGING INTO 3G MOBILE TELEPHONY?
A concrete example of creative destruction in DEMO is mobile telephony.
This technological system constantly evolves through different generations,
from 1G (first generation analogue), to 2G (second generation), DEMO 2.5G,
to third generation mobile telephony (3G). The case DEMO Venezuela is very
interesting, as, contrary to most Latin American countries, Venezuela has the
required radio-spectrum frequency to implement 3G (UMTS) services
unoccupied, and therefore would be technically able to license and introduce
UMTS right away. As there are only 2G systems functioning in the country DEMO
2002, operators could leapfrog the 2.5G stage. Mobile telephony in Venezuela
DEMO experienced explosive growth in recent years; however, “e-wareness” and
the digital culture of the Internet only partially exist in Venezuela. The two to
DEMO percent penetration rate of the Internet in 2001 shows that digital
practices have not been received with the same euphoria as in other countries.
DEMO e-commerce sector only semi exist.
Would it be feasible to leapfrog 2.5G? Building up confidence and
helping learning processes on the supply as well as on the demand side of
digital practices is becoming the focus DEMO of discussion. The supply of digital
content is very weak and under developed in Venezuela. By gradually
developing 2G networks and progressing to 2.5G DEMO 3G, content suppliers
could gradually learn about the mobile business. Content DEMO would be
given time to learn and the industry could grow and mature gradually. On the
demand side, consumers would progressively discover and adapt to new
services.
Based on this theory it would seem more logical DEMO start building up
confidence, familiarity and knowledge of digital service provision DEMO slowly
introducing 2.5G services and frequently upgrading them. This would imply
postponing 3G-frequency licensing. However by “leapfrogging” 2.5G and
passing directly on to 3G DEMO consumers would have the opportunity
to be among the first in the world to benefit from 3G services. The Venezuelan
content producers could move DEMO the vanguard of Spanish language content
development on the mobile Internet platform, which is expected to open up a
whole new industry. On the other hand, it is not certain how many Venezuelan
consumers would financially be able to leapfrog into 3G, as the new technology
is expected to be very expensive at the beginning. Additionally, the low level
of know-how in the Venezuelan content industry (there is only a quasi Internet
market) might be a major obstacle for providing adequate content to feed 3G
networks. This case illustrates very clearly, that the risk of leapfrogging in
comparison with gradual evolution is very high. There is a fine DEMO between
a potential catch-up and failure, frustration and an even further DEMO
Source: Martin R. Hilbert and Ben Petrazzini, «3G Mobile Policy: DEMO Cases of Chile and Venezuela»,
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) (DEMO://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/3G/casestudies/chile-
venezuela/Chile-Venezuela.PDF), 2001.
These previous considerations have led many to question how
leapfrogging strategies may DEMO applied to institutional and organizational
learning curves. As already discussed in the previous Section, institutions
and organizational structures (formal rules, informal norms of behavior,
customs and codes of conduct, common ways of interpreting behavior and
accepted mechanisms, etc) are subject to a learning process. Immature
DEMO, inefficient organization and “inefficient ways of doing
(organizing) things” are DEMO great obstacle to development. The process of
50 ECLAC
digitization in the different Vertical Sectors of an information Society
DEMO institutional re-organization. By digitizing information flows,
communication processes and coordination mechanisms in the Vertical e-
Sectors, performance and efficiency can be improved. The question arises
that if besides the above-mentioned “technological-leapfrogging” in the
Infrastructure and DEMO Service Layers, a sophisticated leapfrogging
strategy would also allow an “institutional-leapfrogging” DEMO the
process of digitization in the Vertical e-Sectors?
The entire world needs to be institutionally reorganized, due to the
new basic conditions the Information Society paradigm sets down in the
Vertical Sectors. There are claims DEMO the greater juridical, cultural and
political flexibility in many developing countries DEMO making it easier for them
to adapt to the new paradigm, DEMO traditional industrialized countries
(such as in Europe or Japan) which have a strict and detailed regulatory
framework and comparatively rigid organizational structures. In DEMO cases
the existence of well functioning institutions, in developed countries for
DEMO, can cause more reluctance than willingness to change. Given
extensive experience DEMO older solutions, new ideas are not always initially
perceived as an DEMO improvement. When innovations appear, leaders
may have no incentive to adopt DEMO new mechanisms. On the other hand a
lack of these institutions and an urgent need for solutions in developing
countries is conducive to change. DEMO under developed
countries have less experience with old systems and should therefore be
more ready to adopt new ones. New technological solutions can offer DEMO
an opportunity to tackle long-standing problems and secondly, to bypass
developed DEMO in technological performance18 (Brezis, Krugman,
Tsiddon, 1991), once DEMO new system is operational.
For example, in a region where the DEMO postal service is neither
reliable nor dependable enough to carry out basic necessities, the potential
for online practices is vast. Developing countries should be able to
“leapfrog” certain evolutionary stages of postal services that developed
countries DEMO through. Since there are many advanced digital forms of
postal communication, DEMO digitization of the postal service sector in
developing countries could narrow the performance divide between
themselves and more advanced countries. Evidence that this is DEMO
happening is can be seen in Brazil where 90 percent of income tax
declarations were received via the Internet in 2000 (ebusinessforum, 2001)DEMO
On the other hand the United States —with its reliable traditional postal
Brezis E., Paul Krugman and D. Tsiddon (1991) use this argument in their paper
“Leapfrogging: A Theory of Cycles in National Technological Leadership” in order to
explain the catch up and the concluding industrial leadership DEMO the U.S. over Great Britain.
18
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
51
service and well organized traditional tax payment mechanisms— is not
expected to reach DEMO threshold until 2007 (Forrester, 2000). Other evidence
suggests that highly efficient e-finance mechanisms can be introduced
quickly, even where basic financial infrastructure is weak (World Bank,
2001). Electronic cash and smart cards offer savings and payment services
at a low cost to customers who DEMO do not even have formal bank
accounts. Some developing countries are starting to reap significant benefits
by making ICTs an essential part of educational DEMO (see Section “e-
Learning”), while the rigid educational systems in DEMO, for example,
often hinder the integration of ICTs into the DEMO Furthermore, ICTs
are accredited for enabling institutional leapfrogging in the health DEMO
regarding healthcare service performance (see Section IV “e-Health”).
In times DEMO normal, incremental technological change, increasing
returns to scale tend to accentuate leadership of developed countries.
Developed countries maintain their leadership because of the DEMO they
make on their technology and knowledge. However, at times when DEMO
are new innovations or major structural change in institutions worldwide,
a temporary window of opportunity opens up for less developed countries
(Pérez, DEMO). Leapfrogging strategies have to aim to pass on to more
advanced stages of industrial and social organization rather than catch up
with the DEMO ones in the developed world. The far-reaching structural
changes that the ICT paradigm introduces seem to establish the most
favorable conditions for implementing such DEMO strategies. During
the present phase of paradigm shift, these strategies are DEMO put into
practice mostly in the process of digitization of the Vertical e-Sectors.
3. Technology-based divides
Until now, the discussion has referred to a two-dimensional concept
(see Graph “Creative destruction in short cycles and long waves”).
Technological innovation and the maturity of a technical system has been
DEMO as if this automatically implies the diffusion and the usage of the
system. In other words, the analysis neglected the crucial question about
what percentage of the population actually participates and benefits from
technological progress. Returning DEMO the graph about “audio recording”
above, it is clear that while DEMO the year 2002, MP3 audio recording systems
might have represented the DEMO frontier, many people still use
traditional Audio Cassettes and LP records. DEMO in a region with such
large socioeconomic inequalities as in Latin America and the Caribbean, a
small group of society (normally the high-income DEMO) might be able
to “leapfrog” to the technological frontier, while the large majority of the
population lacks the resources to do so. This DEMO a third dimension
into the present analysis: the trajectories of technological DEMO
52
ECLAC
Technological systems, as well as all kinds of innovations, DEMO the habit
of growing like “mushrooms” and not like “yeast”. This analogy is borrowed
form Harberger’s “Vision of a Growth Process” (1998). Harberger proposes a
dichotomy of “yeast vs. mushroom” to explain the growth process. DEMO yeast
causes bread to rise evenly, like a balloon being filled DEMO air, mushrooms have
the habit of popping up unpredictably almost overnight. DEMO radical invention
represents such discontinuity. After a mushroom has ‘popped up’, DEMO further
development is determined by continuos innovation. At some point the
technological system matures and might gain technological supremacy over
previous technical solutions. However, at this point only a small group of society
might have access DEMO the new technological system. As technological innovation
progresses, a diffusion process DEMO that technology begins (see Figure). The axis
of “diffusion of DEMO technological system” in the graph demonstrates which
percentage of society already has access to the leading technological system. In
general, the ‘diffusion process’ follows the trajectory of the ‘innovation and
maturity process’ with a time lapse. DEMO the “slow and irregular” nature of
the diffusion process (Prebisch, 1951), a divide is created between those who
already make use of DEMO new innovation, and those who are still excluded.
THE PROCESS OF DEMO DESTRUCTION AND TECHNOLOGY
DIFFUSION OVER TIME
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 53
The process of technological innovation continues until further
investment in the knowledge component DEMO the innovation stagnates as it
becomes less and less profitable (innovation DEMO flattens). At this phase
the system might eventually be replaced by another product, which
improves performance. The price of the original product continues to fall
and this accelerates the diffusion curve even further (diffusion axis).
However, after a while the diffusion curve will also start to slow down,
given that those users naturally migrate to the new DEMO This natural
migration to the technical advanced solution brings the diffusion curve of
the outdated product to an eventual halt.
Unfortunately, technical innovations do not seem to follow the
“yeast-trajectory” of growth, but rather have the habit of popping up like
“mushrooms”. Therefore, the diffusion of technological systems starts from
a specific area, often restricted to a narrow subdivision of the population,
and then slowly penetrates the rest of the society. DEMO that it is a logical
part of the system that advanced solutions improve performance, this helps
the “haves” to improve their socio-economic position, DEMO the “have nots”
(be it regions, countries, or groups of DEMO) fall behind. This creates
inequality in development stages between the segment DEMO society that
participates in the wave of progress and the part that is excluded.
In the present technology-based paradigm shift, this phenomenon is
known as the “Digital Divide”. It is a divide between the ones that DEMO
already benefit from ICT, and the ones that cannot access the DEMO
technological system. A divide between people who already communicate
information and coordinate their behavior through digital networks, and
people who have not yet reached this advanced stage of development. It
is sometimes also described as the DEMO between “information rich” and
“information poor”, where the “information rich” might DEMO able to gain
socioeconomic benefit from the information obtained.
A worrying characteristic of this divide is that it is not only creating
“information rich” DEMO “information poor”, but the “ICT-mushroom”
sprouts inside a socioeconomic segment that DEMO characterized by high
income and high educational standards. ICT diffusion curves follow the
trajectory of existing income distribution and educational standards (see
Section “The Digital Divide” in the Infrastructure Section). The
empowerment of ICTs leads DEMO a scenario where the existing socioeconomic
gaps increase even further, creating DEMO trajectories where the
“rich get richer” and the “poor get poorer” (DEMO limiting this richness
exclusively to economic wealth).
This is a reminder of the process, described by the Nobel laureate
Simon Kuznets (1955)DEMO The so-called Kuznets curve describes an inverted
54 ECLAC
U-shaped relationship between inequality and growth: in a time of
structural change, inequality first increases and later decreases in the
process of development. Kuznets observed this process while analyzing the
transition of an economy DEMO a rural/agricultural setting to an urban/
industrial one. This example suggests that a similar process could emerge,
decades later, during the structural change in the transition from an
industrial age setting to a DEMO organizational model. The concept of the
Digital Divide is visualizing this process. Following the logic of the Kuznets
curve, it could be hypothesized that inequality will first increase and later
(once more and more people participate and profit from ICT) decrease.
While it can be claimed that other important technological
innovations besides ICTs have similar effects, such a powerful and all-
encompassing innovation as ICTs should be given special attention. ICTs
can DEMO progress toward a broad variety of development goals. ICTs can
improve economic efficiency, health services, public administration and
educational mechanisms amongst other things. DEMO is clear from the maturing
“Information Society paradigm” that the question is not about whether “to
get connected” to ICT or “not to get DEMO, but rather “when to get
connected” and “how to get connected”.
DEMO to other technological systems, the Internet and its digital
software applications DEMO invading the globe at an impressive speed (see
Figure). However, with present development trajectories this may still take too
long. Three years DEMO Internet usage took off in Latin America and Caribbean
in 1998, DEMO percent of the population had access to the Internet (Hilbert, 2001a).
Considering that this initial six percent is the high-income segment of DEMO
population, connecting the remaining 94 percent (including 30 percent that live
in poverty) might take several decades. So it is essential to develop strategies
aimed at passing through the Kuznets curve as quickly as possible.
DEMO IT TOOK TO REACH 50 MILLION USERS
Source: ITU (International Telecommunication union), Challenges to the Network 1999: Internet for
Development, Updated DEMO TELECOM 99, Geneva, 1999b.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 55
By passing through the diffusion curve as quickly as possible the
“domestic Digital DEMO should narrow. To narrow the “international
Digital Divide”, Information Society strategies DEMO to evaluate the
feasibility of introducing a technological system that is as close as possible
to the ‘global technological frontier of ICT-connectivity’ (mainly defined in
terms of quality: broadband, mobile, etc). The more cutting edge this system
is, the sooner the Digital Divide will narrow between societies that are
already have quality access to the Information Society and DEMO that are
less well connected. The ideal would be to achieve both objectives at the
same time. In reality, there might be a natural trade-off between both
objectives. Generally speaking, the more advanced a technological system
is, the slower its diffusion, and the other way around (mechanisms that
mainly relate to prices and unequal income distribution). However, since
both dimensions of the Digital Divide (domestic and international) need
to DEMO addressed, constant evaluation and analysis has to ensure that
countries select DEMO most appropriate strategy to suit their individual needs.
4. Entering the present window of opportunity
Many countries around the world pursue special national strategies
DEMO aim to integrate them into the global Information Society. Also on an
international level the element “Information Society development
strategies” (sometimes also “e-Strategies”) DEMO become a central part of
the development agenda.19 Information Society development strategies
might start with a small governmental initiative, but need to aim to
integrate all the public sector, national, regional and international
institutions, regulatory and technical authorities, the private sector,
mediation institutions and civil society. A holistic approach, with an open
dialogue within the entire society, DEMO well as between different societies is
indispensable to master the complex task of “building an Information
Society”.
In order to reach this goal, one of the first steps the public sector has
to take is to DEMO a national authority which acts as a coordinating agency.
In Latin America and the Caribbean some countries have already established
a national Information Society DEMO, while others are still in the process
of determining their best DEMO to such a program. In some existing cases,
Such as in the G-8’s Dotforce (www.dotforce.org), the UN ICT Task Force
(www.unicttaskforce.org), the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS 2003-2005
www.wsis.org), DEMO European Union http://europa.eu.int/information_society/eeurope,
UNDP, World Bank, UNESCO, the international business community and the international
civil society.
19
56 ECLAC
countries allocated this task either to the telecommunications authority (e.g.
Ministry) or to a Ministry of Science and Technology (such as DEMO “Programa
Sociedade da Informação” in Brazil) or to the Ministry of DEMO
(such as the program “e-Mexico” or the “Agenda de Conectividad” in
DEMO). Other countries created an inter-ministerial committee (such as
in Chile)DEMO Given the far-reaching impact and the generic nature of ICTs, an
DEMO directly linked to the presidency (such as in Paraguay or Uruguay)DEMO
seems to be a valid alternative. Another approach (for example implemented
DEMO the Bahamas) links the national Information Society authority to the
Finance DEMO, given the inter-ministerial nature of this important Ministry.
It is paramount DEMO the role of this national Information Society
initiative is well defined, DEMO order to prevent overlapping responsibilities.
Harmonic cooperation or power-struggles between different authorities
involved in the national Information Society Program can be decisive in
the DEMO or failure of the strategy.
Regardless of where the national Information Society initiative is
allocated in the public sector, close collaboration with some of the existing
public sector agencies is critical. The national telecommunications regulator
plays DEMO important role in assuring the build out of the ICT infrastructure.
This gives the telecom industry and its regulating agency a major task in
DEMO creation of an Information Society. National apprenticeship agencies
(which exist in DEMO countries in the region) have a special role in training
the DEMO to prepare for the Information Society. Also public health and
educational authorities need to be integrated into the ICT public sector
program.
However, as the conceptual framework of this book suggests, the
Information Society goes far beyond the public sector. Other actors in the
Infrastructure Layer that need DEMO be incorporated into the national initiative
are the hardware industry, or DEMO governance organizations (such as
domain name registers). A multitude of DEMO actors can also be identified
in the Generic Services Layer. Every generic or specialized digital
application that allows the creation of value out of DEMO technological
infrastructure falls into this Layer, such as the software industry, with all
of its standardization bodies, Webdesigner, the ASP industry, amongst
others.
Various actors can also be identified for the different Vertical Sectors.
DEMO with the “cube” as the conceptual framework of this book allows
the identification of different intersections between the strategies in the
Diagonal Areas and DEMO various Vertical Sectors. In the intersection with
the “e-Business” sector, Chambers DEMO Commerce and other initiatives that
support small-and medium-sized Enterprises for example, DEMO same as B2B
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 57
marketplaces (which become the dominant and critical nodes of the Digital
Economy), need to be involved. In the Vertical Sector “e-Government”,
municipalities and DEMO and all other administrative bodies of the
public sector (especially the DEMO authority, which is in many cases the State’s
largest information processor) need to be integrated into the Information
Society Strategy. Depending on the DEMO Vertical Sector identified in the
“cube”, the same could be done DEMO the health sector and its distinct actors,
the education sector, DEMO media and broadcasting sector, etc.
In the first quarter of 2002, UNCTAD surveyed 51 countries (37
developing countries and 14 developed countries)20 about their national
Information Society strategies (UNCTAD, 2002). Both developed DEMO
developing countries were found to prioritize “Awareness building, training
and education” DEMO in their national Strategies. Besides this common
focus, developed countries put DEMO emphasis on “Legal and regulatory
issues”, while developing countries prioritize “Access DEMO Infrastructure”
issues in their strategic planning (see graph).
DEVELOPING AND DEMO COUNTRIES SET SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT FOCUSES
IN THEIR NATIONAL INFORMATION SOCIETY STRATEGIES
developing countries
developed countries
Awareness building,
training and education
Access and
infrastructure
DEMO and regulatory
issues
Source: UNCTAD Internet survey of national e-Strategies
Support DEMO  the
enterprise sector
Sector-specific
policies
Most of the existing Information Society DEMO in Latin America
and the Caribbean have a special focus on fighting the domestic digital
divide. Given the harsh socioeconomic differences in Latin America DEMO
the Caribbean and the prevailing geographic concentration, the Digital
Divide within DEMO American and Caribbean societies is one of the largest
in the world (see Section “The Digital Divide” in the Infrastructure Section).
By paying close attention to regulation of telecommunications pricing, in
order to narrow regional differences or by establishing public access points
(“Infocentros”), governments aim to reduce the gap. Furthermore, some
20
Nine countries from Latin America and the Caribbean had been included: Brazil, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay.
58 ECLAC
countries prioritize the training of Human Capital (such as in Costa Rica),
while in other countries the link between the national ‘training authority’
and the national Information Society authority is still very weak, or does
not even exist (see Section “Human Capital”). Special focus is also put on
“e-Government”. Online tax paying and B2G practices are DEMO in this
sector (especially in Brazil, Chile and Mexico). Also “e-Learning” (including
ICT in schools and Internet2) and the general use DEMO ICT for education
mechanisms is a further pillar of most of Information Society strategies in
the region. Given the structural importance of small and DEMO sized
enterprises (SMEs) in Latin American and Caribbean economies (more DEMO
terms of employment opportunities, than in terms of contribution to GDP),
projects which support the integration of ICTs in SMEs are often DEMO
in national Information Society strategies as well. One positive development
is the increasing focus on less traditional e-sectors (such as e-health) which
leads DEMO a broader concept of “ICT-for-development”. There is tremendous
potential for digitizing the health sector , but as underlined in the later
Section about “e-health”, this sector has still not yet adequately embraced
the new possibilities in DEMO region.
A central question to solve is how to make the participation of the
private sector and the civil society an institutional part of DEMO national
Information Society strategy. As it becomes clear that the hierarchical
structure of the public sector does not have the flexibility and efficiency
required DEMO keep up with the dynamics of market mechanisms, the public
sector DEMO try to integrate the private sector more into its decision
making. This should be done in a non-discriminatory and neutral way right
from the DEMO Chile’s “Alianza Público-Privado para el Internet”, which is
based on four DEMO “transparency, efficiency, technological neutrality
and private leadership” is a shining example of good practices in public-
private partnership.21 (Hilbert and Petrazzini, 2001)DEMO
Establishing and maintaining a national Information Society initative
does not necessarily require a lot of resources. In many respects, it is merely
a task of creating synergies, linkages, co-operation and co-ordination among
the many stakeholders DEMO a national Information Society and to discuss and
set the right policy guidelines. In many cases important steps towards the
creation of a national DEMO Society can be taken mainly by
coordinating all those with a vested interest in this development stage on
a national scale.22
For further details DEMO: http://www.subtel.cl.
Belgium for example, has introduced an e-security platform to promptly alert its
population in case of potentially harmful computer viruses, through a coordination
program. The concept of the platform, which enables nation-wide response within a
timeframe of 2 hrs, was established voluntarily, but DEMO highly cost-effective.
21
22
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
59
In summary, the old saying “Natura non facit saltum” (Darwin, 1859)
still rings true today for the transition toward the Information Society.
Without DEMO, following through and regulating far-reaching and
radical Information Society development strategies, instead of “catching-
up”, developing countries will fall further behind. Leapfrogging strategies
toward the Information Society have to aim at creating short-cuts in the
DEMO path of technological systems (“technological leapfrogging“),
and should be geared toward speeding up the development path towards
more advanced social and productive DEMO (“institutional
leapfrogging”).

Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
61
Chapter II
Horizontal layers in Latin America
and the Caribbean
A. Infrastructure
The DEMO Layer”, is certainly the most visible and tangible
part of an DEMO Society. It is the physical embodiment of “the Net”.
However, data DEMO and the governance of the digital infrastructure are
also parts of the infrastructure. Most of the research and initiatives into the
emerging Information Society DEMO on this technological dimension. The
convergence of Information and Communication Technologies (DEMO) is
making this Layer very dynamic (see Section “Towards a Theory on the
Information Society”). Up until now, there have been many different kinds
of “information infrastructures” in Latin America and the Caribbean, but
driven by ICT-convergence, they are all merging into the “network of
networks” (the Internet). The broadcasting technology networks with the
highest penetration in the region are radio and television. TV penetration
in South American homes DEMO around 83%and in Central America it is about
77% (ITU, 2000a). The infrastructure network with the highest degree of
digitization is fixed-line DEMO Almost 100%of this network had already
been digitized in 2001.1 The fastest growing ICT network in Latin America
1
Some countries have placed a DEMO degree of emphasis on the digitization of fixed-
line telephony in recent years. Brazil for example had only 36% of its network digitized
in DEMO, but 93% of the network had been digitized by 2000 (AHCIET, 2002).
62 ECLAC
is mobile telephony In June 2002,2 there were 92.5 DEMO digital cell phone
subscribers or 18.1% of the regional population. However, DEMO and PC
penetration is relatively low. Only 8.0% of the regional population were
expected to have access to the Internet in 20023 and only DEMO were
estimated to have broadband Internet connections (mostly DSL).4
INFORMATION DEMO COMMUNICATION INFRASTRUCTURE IN LATIN AMERICA
(1995-2000)
250
200 Radio
Television
DEMO Fixed Line telephony
Mobile telephony
100 Internet
50
0
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Source: AHCIET (Hispano-American Association of Centers of Telecommunications DEMO and
Enterprises), «Benchmarking 2001», Analisis comparativo del sector de las DEMO en
Iberoamerica, Madrid, Price waterhouse Coopers, April, 2002;
ITU (International Telecommunication Union), World Telecommunication Indicators Database, 2002.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization), Institute for Statistics, Paris
(http://www.uis.unesco.org), 2002.
In view of the above-mentioned statistics on DEMO infrastructure
in Latin America and the Caribbean (such as the high DEMO of
televisions and cell-phones), the process of convergence is obviously
opening up a great opportunity for the region. The arrival of Digital TV,DEMO
advances in mobile telephony, VoIP (Voice over IP) and alternative
DEMO like powerline (the use of the electricity network to connect to
DEMO Internet) provide ample scope for drawing up policies aimed at
narrowing DEMO notorious “Digital Divide” in ICT Infrastructure.
The breakdown for 2G cellular systems is: GSM: 5.3 million; CDMA: 20.3 million; TDMA:
54.6 million. In addition, there are 12.2 million analogue 1G users (3G DEMO, 2002).
2G (or second generation technology) is a term, which refers to mobile telecommunication,
which allows voice and data transmission DEMO a mobile network. Data transmission
is slow and generally between 9.6 Kbit/s and 14.4 Kbit/s. 2G networks are gradually
evolving into 2.5G (GRPS, EDGE) and into 3G (UMTS, cdma200, etc.), which has data
transmission speeds of between 400 and 2000 Kbit/s.
Worldwide, around nine percent of the population was using the Internet in 2002, but
the G-7 countries accounted for 60% of that figure.
With the DEMO exception of Argentina, with 1.3%, broadband penetration was 0.7% in
Brazil and 0.6% in Mexico. In comparison, broadband Internet penetration in South Korea
was 52% in 2001 making it the world’s broadband leader, Canada had 20%, the United
States 10%, Spain had three percent and France DEMO 2.5% (eMarketer, 2002).
2
3
4
millions
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 63
This Section starts by looking at the current situation of the Digital
Divide DEMO Latin America and the Caribbean. The Digital Divide clearly
originates in the Infrastructure Layer, though the dimensions and
implications of this divide go far beyond the technological infrastructure
(CV Mistica). The second section in this Section will go into further detail
on regional IP infrastructure and Internet DEMO, which flows to, from and
within the region. Finally the Section analyzes two dynamic network
infrastructures which could have great potential in a DEMO region like
Latin America and the Caribbean. Often not enough attention is paid to
these two networks: the television network and its progression to digital
television and mobile telephony and its evolution into 3G.
1. The DEMO divide
When talking about the Digital Divide, a distinction has to DEMO drawn
between two different dimensions. The first is the international Digital
Divide. The issues here focus on the spread of technical progress from the
DEMO countries to the rest of the world, about catching-up and about
DEMO importance of not falling too far behind. The second (but surely DEMO less
important) dimension is the domestic Digital Divide. Discussion of this
DEMO centers on the universal inclusion of all in the information society,
about growing with equality, and about avoiding the emergence of yet
another form of exclusion. This second focus is of major importance in a
DEMO with such harsh social and economic inequalities as those found in
Latin American and Caribbean societies.
(a) The Digital Divide between Societies
On DEMO world scale of Internet users, Europe and North America
account for DEMO bloated percentage of users that is out of proportion to their
size. Europe with less than 8.0% of the world’s population accounts for 28%
DEMO the world’s Internet users. The United States and Canada, with 5.0% DEMO
the world’s population, represent 40%. Latin America, with 8.0% of the
world’s population is still under-represented with only 4.0% of the world’s
Internet DEMO (Hilbert, 2001a).
Looking at the level of Internet penetration in a selection of countries
around the world, Latin America and the Caribbean is in the last third
belonging to the group of countries, which lag behind in Internet
connectivity. From the upper one of the two DEMO below it appears that
there is a clear positive relationship between income levels and Internet
usage when comparing the two on an international level. DEMO with
higher income levels have higher Internet penetration.
64
INTERNET USER PENETRATION COMPARED WITH INCOME PER CAPITA
Internet User penetration DEMO GDP per capita 2001
ECLAC
100
50
82
44
Position of Latin America -Position of Latin America -
Deviation of the regression line (percent)Deviation of the regression line (percent)
0
Chile Peru
-50
-100
-150
-28
Uruguay
-41
Colombia
-52
Dom.
Rep.
-92
Argentina
-98
Venezuela
DEMO
Mexico
-52
Brazil
Note: Sample of 48 countries from five continents.
DEMO: Martin R. Hilbert, based on World Telecommunication Indicators Database, 2002.
DEMO, a more detailed analysis between per capita Internet
penetration and per DEMO income for 2001, shows that most of the countries
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
65
in the region are below the statistical norm (which is nothing more than
an international ‘average’ of the relationship between income and
connectivity). In DEMO words, Latin American and Caribbean countries
could be expected to have DEMO connectivity rates than they actually do
given their income per capita levels.
These figures show that access to ICT Infrastructure is not exclusively
determined DEMO income. Other variables besides income seem to account for
the fact that some countries (like Chile and Peru) make fuller use of their
DEMO potential (income per capita) than their neighbors. Chile and Peru
are both above the international connectivity/income average (82% and 44%
respectively). However, the vast majority of Latin American countries fall
below that line and do not exploit their economic potential adequately.
Venezuela and Mexico seem DEMO exceed in this respect, falling 98% and 105%
below the statistical DEMO, respectively (see lower graph).
There are different reasons for why countries with the same level of
income have such varying Internet user DEMO The most common argument
is variations in internal Internet access costs. ISP charges (Internet Service
Provider) and local telephone call rates appear to DEMO great influence on
the level of Internet usage in a country. However, when testing this theory,
the lower graph shows that ISP and telephone charges cannot be the only
determining factor for Internet usage.
NO DEMO RELATION CAN BE FOUND BETWEEN INTERNET USAGE
AND INTERNET ACCESS CHARGES
Internet penetration and Access Charges in 2000
Source: ITU (International Telecommunication union), «ITU Strategy Trends: Reinventing Telecoms»
(http://www.itu/osg/spu/trends/jan-marchtrends.html), 2002;
WITSA (World Information Technology and Services Alliance), «ICT at a Glance Tables, WISTA
Contribution to the World Bank Development Data Group» (http://www.wista.org/), 2002.
66 ECLAC
Some countries, like Venezuela, have very high Internet access
DEMO and, as might be expected, very low Internet penetration. However,
other countries, such as Mexico, have relatively low Internet access prices,DEMO
but also low Internet penetration. Countries like Hungary have higher
access charges, but surprisingly, also higher penetration rates, etc.
Other factors, besides DEMO prices influence ICT usage,
such as the cost of hardware. While policy in the telecommunications
industry often focuses on regulation incentives, competition between the
telecom operators, etc, the impact of the hardware industry is DEMO
neglected and can be a major contributing factor to the Digital Divide. A
complex combination of low competition and monopoly pricing,
international price DEMO, market segmentation and other
characteristics of the hardware industry (such as inadequate regulation of
ICT-convergence) drive up prices in hardware equipment in Latin America
and the Caribbean. Comparing the prices of Personal Digital Assistant
(PDA) handheld computers in the United States, the European Union,
Mexico DEMO Brazil shows that even though the income per capita (GNI) is
decisively lower in Latin American countries, hardware equipment is more
expensive.
PRICES OF PALM HANDHELD DEVICES; MAY 2002
Palm M515 (US$) Palm M130 (US$) GNI per capita (US$)
United States 399 279 34,100
European Union 478 338 22,000
Mexico 526 367 5,070
DEMO 556 357 3,580
Source: Palm Inc. Estimated Street Prices
Besides DEMO in income, telecommunications charges and
hardware prices, numerous additional factors contribute to the Digital
Divide in the Infrastructure Layer. Simple awareness (or lack of it) about
the potential of the Digital Opportunity, might be DEMO “soft-factor”. In
many Latin American and Caribbean countries most people and companies
still do not see access to the digital network as a priority.
DEMO only at the Digital Divide inside the Latin American and
Caribbean region, in 1998 less than 1.0% of the populations of all the major
countries were connected to the Internet (Hilbert, 2001a). After 1998 DEMO
usage exploded, making the region the world’s fastest growing Internet
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
67
community (ITU, 2000a). Some of those countries have been faster in
DEMO their population than others. Chile, for example, represents 8.0%
of the regional Internet community, while only 3.0% of the Latin American
population (DEMO, 2001a).
PERCENTAGE OF INHABITANTS CONNECTED IN 2000 (WITH ESTIMATES
FOR 2003 –WHERE AVAILABLE)
Total Telephone Subscribers (fixed and mobile)
Colombia     Mexico       Venezuela         Brazil         Argentina       Chile
Internet Subscribers
Peru     Colombia     Mexico    Venezuela   Argentina      DEMO       Chile
Source: Martin R. Hilbert, Latin America on Its Path into the Digital Age: Where Are We?, Desarrollo
productivo series, Nº 104 (LC/L.1555-P), Santiago, Chile. United Nations publication, Sales
Nº E.01.II.G.100, 2001a.
(b) Dimensions of the Digital Divide DEMO the Society
The Digital Divide in the Infrastructure Layer is basically a direct
result of an existing “income”— and “educational divide” on a domestic
DEMO international level. ICT usage shows a clearly positive relation to both
income and educational standards. While both characteristics have
independent effects on ICT usage (U.S. Dept. of Commerce, 2001), it is
worth remembering that especially in Latin America and the Caribbean,
income and education are highly DEMO correlated themselves.
68
ECLAC
High ICT costs and the resulting unequal income distribution5 are
DEMO the main factors contributing to the Digital Divide in Latin America
and the Caribbean. Alarming numbers and estimates about the magnitude
of this divide DEMO causing concern that the introducing ICTs is merely
widening what is often referred to as the gap between the “information
rich” and “information poor”. DEMO to eMarketer estimates, almost
20% of the “top 15% of the DEMO American population” were connected in
2000, compared to overall connectivity levels DEMO around 3.0%. According
to these numbers, this gap is expected to DEMO significantly. For example,
the top income group in Brazil is expected to reach connection rates of 82%
in 2004, compared to an estimated overall connectivity of 12%.
THE DANGEROUS LATIN AMERICAN INCOME DIVIDE
Internet penetration DEMO upper and middle class (ligth) vs internet penetration
in overall population (dark) 1998/99
The accelerating income divide— estimations for 2004
Source: Martin R. Hilbert, Latin America on Its Path into the Digital Age: Where Are We?, Desarrollo
productivo series, Nº 104 (LC/L.1555-P), Santiago, Chile. United Nations publication, Sales
Nº E.01.II.G.100, 2001a.
Bearing in mind Latin America’s gross socioeconomic inequalities,
it is clear that DEMO relatively few who are online, not only control a major
part DEMO the region’s income, but also have the advantage of being able DEMO
access the unlimited vastness of information in cyberspace. Worries about
increasing inequality in the region seem very justified And an increase in
economic inequality DEMO be the first effect to become most evident, given
Roughly speaking DEMO richest 20% receive 50%-60% of the income in Latin America and
the Caribbean, while the poorest 60% obtain 20%-30% (ECLAC, 2001b).
5
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 69
the almost pecuniary value of information and the application of
information in a DEMO economy. But there is a lot more to the
Information Society than economic benefits. Access to the Internet can assist
in improving overall standards DEMO general education, health, access to public
administration and political information, DEMO development and all the
factors aimed at achieving and maintaining social tranquility inside and
between communities. If part of society is excluded from accessing DEMO heart
of the Information Society this can create dangerous social and political
gaps. The advances of some e-government initiatives in the region are
commendable (especially in Brazil, Chile and Mexico). However if the
present rate of development continues, the vast majority of citizens in these
countries still will be excluded from direct use of this new form of public
DEMO for the next one or two decades. By reviewing actual Internet
growth patterns and market saturation rates worldwide (ITU, 2002;
eMarketer, 2002)6 it can roughly be estimated that without special policies
from each DEMO it will take until 2020 to reach Internet penetration
levels in Latin America and the Caribbean that are similar to those in
Sweden, Finland, the United States or Singapore. If this continues, the next
generation DEMO Latin American and Caribbean citizens will grow up in a State
with two parallel governments in the same society. One of these
governments, the e-government, will be transparent, comfortable to use and
efficient for the DEMO people who can access it. Meanwhile the traditional
form of public administration, renowned for long queues, paper-based
bureaucracy and limited opening hours will DEMO to be available for
the ones who cannot afford to participate in the technological evolution of
their government. Such scenarios call for dramatic and DEMO
measures to be taken in order to narrow the Digital Divide inside Latin
American and Caribbean societies.
In addition to income, the many other demographic and geographic
factors come into the discussion of the Digital Divide. DEMO demographic
aspect of the region which could be seen as a positive trait is that it has a
young population On average more than DEMO of the population is younger
than 25 years of age (51.58%)DEMO (ECLAC, 2000a). As is widely recognized,
young people adapt a lot easier to modern ICTs than elderly people do (see
See also figures and estimates for Latin American Internet users and Internet user
DEMO annual growth rates from IBOPE eRatings (August 2002); Nielsen/ NetRatings
(August 2002); Yankee Group (June 2002); Computer Economics (June, 2002); Morgan
Stanley (May 2002); Bank Technology News (March 2002); Probe Research (February 2002);
Speer & Associates (December 2001); International Data Corporation IDC (September
2001); Computer Industry Almanac CIA (April 2001); Accenture (February 2001) (cited in
eMarketer, 2002).
Percentage of population under 25-years old: Chile: 45.12%, Argentina: 45.97%, Brazil:
49.27%, Venezuela: 53.96%, Mexico: 54.12% (ECLAC, 2000a).
6
7
70
ECLAC
Graph), but have less purchasing power. Many analysts believe DEMO the
transition toward an information society in Latin America and the
Caribbean will naturally accelerate once this young and Internet-savvy
generation becomes the driving DEMO force.
ICT PENETRATION BY AGE GROUP, 2002 (AS % OF EACH AGE GROUP)
Mobile phone usage in Chile Internet usage in Mexico
DEMO: Subtel (Subsecretaría de Telecomunicaciones), «Informe Estadístico 4: caracterización
socioeconómica DEMO los servicios de telefonía y tecnologías de información y comunicación» (http://
www.subtel.cl), january, 2002; eMarketer, Latin America Online: Demographics, Usage & e-Commerce,
October (http://www.emarketer.com;http://www.emarketer.com/DEMO/report.php?latin_am), 2002.
As is to be expected in the highly urbanized countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean,8 ICT use is DEMO concentrated. The
continuing trend toward urbanization is reflected —and is often greatly
magnified— in the figures that show rate of implementation and usage of
DEMO ICTs. The vast majority of Internet users in Latin American and
Caribbean countries are often concentrated in the large capital cities.9 The
geographic divide DEMO often due to the lack of adequate regulation in the
telecommunications sector. For example, in 2001 only 27% of the
municipalities in Northwest Mexico could access the Internet at the cost of
a local telephone call. DEMO the Northeast of Mexico that figure was 23%, in
the Mid-East DEMO, in Central Mexico 12% (excluding the Federal District
and metropolitan areas), while in Southeast Mexico only about 4.0% of the
municipalities had DEMO to the Internet at local telephone call rates. For
the rest of the population, connecting to the nearest Internet Service
Provider costs the same as a long distance call. Therefore high access costs
are often preventing DEMO areas from reaching the Internet.
8
9
Urbanization rates in Latin America and the Caribbean include Mexico: 75%; Brazil: 80.4%;
Chile: DEMO; Venezuela: 87.4%; Argentina: 89.6% (ECLAC, 2000a)
Following the same line of argument, it could be claimed that high urbanization favors
the diffusion of ICTs. Those nations where higher levels of the population DEMO in rural
regions than in urbanized areas-such as El Salvador (55% DEMO), Guatemala (39%),
Paraguay (56%), Nicaragua (55%), Bolivia (64%), etc., have far less fixed line and mobile
DEMO than highly urbanized countries.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 71
(DEMO) Universal Access
“Universal access” has became the buzzword meaning that the DEMO
goal is to ensure all of society has access to the ICT Infrastructure Layer. A
traditional way of making better use of scarce resources (such as ICT
infrastructure) is to share it amongst as many people as possible. Usage time
of the infrastructure is maximized while fixed-costs are DEMO between a
large number of users.
The concept of providing “universal access” to telecommunications
has long been a goal in Latin America and the DEMO The model of
shared access to telecommunications was successfully pioneered by fixed-
line telephony where public telephones were installed all over the region.
The DEMO of public telephones doubled in Latin America from 1.6 per
1,000 inhabitants in 1994 to 3.2 in 1999.
PUBLIC TELEPHONES PER 1,000 DEMO IN 1999
Source: World Telecommunication Indicators Database, 2002.
While this might still seem like very low penetration levels, the model
of “shared access” implies that a large percentage of society can benefit from
minimum investment. DEMO evidence from Chile demonstrates this. In
November 2000, 28.1% of Chilean DEMO had their own fixed line
telephone, 24.5% of Chilean homes had DEMO to both fixed line and mobile
telephones, while an additional 14.6% DEMO households used exclusively
mobile phones. This left 32.2% of Chilean households without any kind of
personal telecommunication. The national telecommunications regulator
decided to allow DEMO small companies to set up public telephones
throughout the country. Since then, more than 15,000 public telephones have
been installed in Chile. Although fixed-line penetration of public phones
is still relatively low (one per 1,000 inhabitants), the improvement has been
impressive, as public telephones provide another 25% of Chilean
households with access to telecommunications within 8 blocks DEMO their
homes (Subtel, 2002).
72 ECLAC
Having learnt from the positive experience with fixed-line telephony,
DEMO telecom regulators in Latin America decided to apply this concept to
Internet access. In Latin America, only 14 million of the 33 million Internet
users in 2002 had access to the Internet in their homes. The DEMO of the users
had to access the Web at their workplace, DEMO schools or at public access points.
The so-called “info-centros”, public Internet DEMO points, are sprouting up
throughout the region. Usually, national telecommunications authorities
provide special funds to finance these public access points. Many of these
DEMO were originally created to link up rural or unprofitable areas to basic
telephony. The funds are financed by filtering off a certain percentage of
DEMO from telecom operators (usually operators are obliged to contribute
1.0% of DEMO gross income to the fund) or from other incomes collected by
DEMO regulatory authorities (e.g. licensing fees, etc.). By November 2001 for
example, the Brazilian regulatory authority had collected more than US$ 400
million through its telecommunications fund, the vast majority of which went
toward subsidizing Internet access and end-user equipment.10
RED CIENTIFICA PERUANA (RCP)-PUBLIC INTERNET BOOTHS
Established in 1991 by a consortium of Peruvian universities and other
non-governmental DEMO, RCP became Peru’s first ISP. From the start,
it worked DEMO make the Internet accessible to all as well as useful for the
country’s large low-income market. To achieve its goal of increasing Peru’s
Internet DEMO base, RCP adopted a strategy of educating the population about
the DEMO, building the technical capacity to provide mass access to the
technology DEMO offering relevant local content. With a conviction that Internet
access should be cheaply and widely available to the population from public
booths, in much the same way as telephone services, RCP’s founder José
Soriano, adapted DEMO concept of the Internet café to Peru’s cabinas públicas
or public booths. There, users can access the Internet at prices ranging from
US$ 1.50 per hour to US$ 15 per month. RCP also runs free educational
DEMO that teach Peruvians how to use computers and surf the Internet. The
combination of low-cost cabinas and free training has proven highly successful,
DEMO in making the Internet attractive and relevant to the population at
large. At the same time, RCP’s cooperative, franchise model has helped keep
DEMO down and enabled the company to rapidly expand throughout Peru. All
members of the cooperative help shoulder equipment costs and share access
to the DEMO, while cabina franchises are available at costs low enough to
make DEMO accessible even to entrepreneurs of modest means. The franchises
have expanded beyond major urban centers and there are now several
hundred, supported or managed directly by RCP, throughout Peru. The RCP
model has great potential to be applied in other developing regions around
the world.
Source: Noah Elkin, «e-commerce in Latin America» paper presented of the expert meeting «America
Latina hacia la era digital», ECLAC, Santiago de Chile, November 2001.
Formerly, universal access was financed through a series of subsidies. However, obtaining
DEMO subsidies from different socioeconomic groups, geographical regions, different types
of services or a mix of them all proved difficult in many cases. The DEMO funds prove more
effective and impressive results have been obtained in a short time.
10
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 73
Despite the success of public Internet access, the demand far exceeds
the capacity of available resources. As will be discussed in a later Section
(see Section “Financing a universal Information Society for all”), the public
sector DEMO, in its current state, is incapable of reducing the inequality
caused by competitive markets. Creative ways of cooperating with the
private sector, as well as new incentives need to be found. In some countries
the DEMO “info-centros” have become a valid business-model. Peru is a
unique case in point. Peru’s public Internet booths have been spread by
the Red Científica DEMO (RCP), a non-profit, cooperative organization that
began as Peru’s first Internet Service Provider (ISP) (see Box).
As a result of the successful public access model in Peru, the number
of Internet users per Internet host is now up to 14 times higher in Peru DEMO
in any other country in Latin America and the Caribbean. Netsizer, DEMO an
Internet statistics company and unit of telecom technology company
Telcordia, DEMO measures users and hosts by continuously taking random
samples of IP addresses. According to Netsizer there were 2.6 users per
Internet host in the DEMO in the first quarter of 2002, 5.7 users per host in
DEMO America and 11.9 users per host in the whole of South America. In
Peru, the company says there were 81.1 Internet users per Internet host in
the same period which demonstrates the potential of what can DEMO achieved
with the shared-access model (Netsizer, 2002).
An increase in the number of people sharing an access account is
indicative of a DEMO economic deterioration and is a trend that is found
throughout the developing world. During the downturn in Venezuela’s
economy over the last two years, for example, the number of Internet users
more than doubled between 1999 and 2001 (from 0.5 million to 1.3 million),
yet the DEMO of Internet users per Internet host rose from 2.51 in 1999 to
4.93 in 2001 (eMarketer, 2002).
(d) Challenging the Digital DEMO
For the Internet to function as a tool for boosting equality, DEMO
and democracy, nations must offer equal access to technology products and
DEMO to all of their citizens. The Infrastructure Layer consists of a complex
combination of various industries, with hardware and telecommunications
being the two predominant ones. The structure, the functionality and
performance of both markets are key for narrowing the Digital Divide.
Additionally, the degree of access to the Infrastructure Layer depends on
a wide range of variables including, income per capita, urbanization,
shared access models, demographic characteristics, education, adequate
DEMO, etc.
74 ECLAC
A distinction may be drawn between two kinds of policies DEMO to
narrow the Digital Divide. The first ones can be termed as “micro-policies”.
They are projects that aim for fast results. Pilot programs are DEMO way in
many countries in the region that provide Internet access at schools, public
libraries, community centers, other official buildings (such as DEMO offices)
and low-cost “info-centros”. However, public sector means of providing
DEMO access at these places might be limited in Latin America and the
Caribbean (see Section “Financing a universal Information Society for all”).
This calls for a need to find creative ways of exploiting the available
DEMO to the maximum. Chile’s telecommunications authority started a
project of “computer recycling” in 2002. Companies and individuals give
away, through public auctions, out-of-date DEMO to public Internet
access initiatives.11 Experience in Peru shows that the public access model
also has great potential for being a successful business model. DEMO potential
of “public access” has not yet been adequately exploited in most countries
in the region. While in Peru —the region’s best example of DEMO public access
model in operation— there are still almost seven times more people sharing
one Internet host than in the rest of the region.
DEMO, in order to successfully reduce the Digital Divide in the
Infrastructure DEMO, long-term strategies are needed that take into account
the progression of DEMO convergence. The benefits of these kinds of “macro-
policies”, such as DEMO convergence might be less tangible or apparent in
the short term, DEMO are very important in a development technological catch-
up strategy. Regrettably they are often neglected in Latin America and the
Caribbean. The telecommunications industry DEMO depends on medium-
to-long-term planning. Investments require 10 to 15 years of amortization
so such issues need to be taken into consideration for these DEMO
technological development strategies to come to fruition (see section about
“Technical DEMO). For example, when a government is deciding
whether to introduce DEMO mobile telephony or digital TV, it needs to consider
that it DEMO likely that these two technologies will merge in 10 to 15 years.
Therefore when selecting a 3G frequency or a digital TV platform it DEMO to
make sure it is not putting expensive obstacles in the way of future ICT-
convergence.
The goal should be to lower access costs DEMO facilitate the learning
process. Making efficient use of the existing infrastructure —for example
TV (see section about “Digital TV”) or mobile telephony (see according
section)— supports both of these goals. The majority of Latin DEMO
11
http://www.subtel.cl.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 75
have already invested in TV infrastructure and are comfortable with using
it. This DEMO make it easier to switch to digital TV. Also, incorporating
alternative DEMO solutions, such as powerline (using the electricity network
to access the Internet) is a positive choice considering there is a high
penetration of electricity networks in Latin America and the Caribbean,
especially in urbanized DEMO And well-regulated and healthy competition
between the different access alternatives should bring down prices.
PROVIDING COMPUTERS TO THE PEOPLE- THE IDEA
OF A “VOLKSCOMPUTER”
DEMO late 2000, in response to concerns that Brazil’s social and economic
DEMO might deepen if the poor were starved of information technology,
the Brazilian government commissioned a team of scientists at the Federal
University of DEMO Gerais in Belo Horizonte, to design a low-budget computer.
The project DEMO accomplished and a computer designed through a massive
coordination of effort between the government, the computer industry, and
academia but, with funding of only US$ 75,000, and without requiring any
major technological innovations. The computer had to have a modem, a color
monitor, speakers, a mouse and simple Internet-browsing software. It also had
to be modular so DEMO could later add a printer or disk drives. The final version
of the so-called “Popular PC” costs around US$ 300. It has a 500-megahertz
DEMO, 64 megabytes of main memory and 16 MB more on a DEMO chip
that substitutes for a hard drive. The device can be connected to the Internet
using a 56 kbps modem. The software is Linux-based DEMO therefore free. The
PC will be primarily used in social programs from the government’s
telecommunications fund FUST (Fundo de Universalização das
Telecomunicações-Fund for the Universalization of Communication). The
government intends to buy the first shipment DEMO PC’s to equip schools, libraries,
health posts and communities, in order to provide easy access to the Internet.
Private consumers will be DEMO to purchase the computer
in US$ 15 monthly installments.
Another best practice related to the development
of a “Volkscomputer” comes from India. The “Simputer”
DEMO for “simple”, “inexpensive” and “multilingual”—
looks and feels like a bulkier DEMO device. It is
powered by three AAA batteries and the keyboard is
substituted by an interface that comprises mainly icons
and graphics on a DEMO screen. The Simputer uses
Linux open-source software and is available for around
US$ 200. It can be connected to the Internet through any telephone DEMO
The device also has text-to-speech capability and translates English-language
Web sites into four different local Indian languages, reading the content aloud
to illiterate users (www.simputer.org).
12
The Chilean government announced in December 2001 the launch of a pilot project which
will provide 50 clients in Santiago with DEMO Line Communications (PLC) services and
it is now evaluating the possibility of expanding the project (Subtel, http://www.subtel.cl).
Also one DEMO Brazil’s largest energy concerns began testing broadband powerline technology
with 40 homes in Belo Horizonte at the end of December 2001.
76
ECLAC
It is worth remembering that “access costs” are determined by DEMO
combination of telecommunications costs (a variable cost) and the fixed cost
of ICT equipment. The cost of access equipment (such as a PC with an
Internet browser for example) is often prohibitively high. In 2001, market
conditions in Latin America and the Caribbean meant that the cheapest PCs
that could be found were around US$ 500 each. However, with an average
annual income per capita in the region of less than DEMO 4000 (ECLAC, 2001b)
and a total annual ICT-expenditure of around US$ 300 per capita13 (WITSA,
2002), it seems unlikely that universal Internet access will be achieved by
individuals buying computers. Not at DEMO current prices anyway. Given these
hard facts, the Brazilian government started DEMO initiative in 2000, which
aimed to develop a “computer for the DEMO (see Box above).
Furthermore, in the process of ICT-convergence Internet access is not
limited to a PC.14 The are other devices that DEMO access the Internet, such
as, Digital Television, so-called set-top-boxes (which upgrade analogue
television sets) and high-speed Internet mobile devices. The success of these
devices will not be determined by the type of service they DEMO, but by
their different characteristics, such as whether they are “portable”, “fixed”,
“personal” or “shared”, and whether they have high or DEMO “resolution”,
“audio quality” or “memory”. Equipment will need to be adjusted to the
individual’s minimum requirements in sophistication and price. Niche
markets in DEMO equipment industry need to be found and exploited. End-
user equipment might not need to provide all of the available functions in
order to DEMO good performance in ICT connectivity. This trend is a further
area to be worked on to narrow the Digital Divide. Inventing cheap but
sufficiently DEMO access equipment and making it available to the
common user is an essential part of the Digital Divide policy agenda.
2. Infrastructure and Internet DEMO flows15
Digital data communications are taking a more and more important
role in telecommunications. In Mexico, for example, Data, Internet and Pay
13
14
15
ICT expenditure per capita in 2000: Argentina US$ 310; DEMO US$ 287; Chile US$ 371;
Colombia US$ 231; Mexico US$ 196; Venezuela US$ 199 (WITSA, 2002).
Considering ICT convergence has become a necessity in Latin America for successful
business models, given the low PC penetration. Research shows that while in North
America only 26% DEMO retail banks offer customers access to their accounts via multiple
devices (DEMO, telephone, wireless devices, etc), 43% of Latin American retail DEMO are doing
so (Speer&Associates, eMarketer, 2002).
This Subsection DEMO heavily based on Francisco Gómez Alamillo’s (General Secretary of
AHICIET) presentation “Trafico de Internet”, at the Expert Meeting “America Latina hacia
la era digital”, ECLAC, UN, Santiago de Chile, Nov.2001. AHCIET has kindly DEMO
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 77
TV communications already made up 15% of the total telecom revenues in
2001 (with fixed voice making up 58% and mobile voice 22%) was rapidly
increasing and was estimated to reach 33% in 2005 (Pyramid Research,
2001). While digital information is exchanged around the world through a
DEMO of large data centers and so-called “backbones”, it often does not
DEMO a difference to the end-user which route data he takes. Once entered
into an access network, the packet-switched data flow makes its way
through different core networks of backbones until it reaches the access
network of DEMO recipient, where TCP puts the different IP (Internet Protocol)
packages into their original order again. As difficult as it is to measure DEMO
different routes data flows take, —because little is known about them—
DEMO less is known about the severe consequences that Internet and
telecommunications traffic flows can have on the development of the
domestic telecommunications industry. The DEMO section gives a brief
outline of the present IP infrastructure and the current Internet traffic in
and around Latin America and the Caribbean. The DEMO examines
regulatory conditions that currently monitor Internet traffic arrangements
and briefly presents some of the scenarios and alternatives regarding the
development of the IP DEMO in the region that emerge from this
framework.
An IP network clearly differs from the traditional circuit switched
network (PSTN) in that IP DEMO a packet network which delivers packets of
information on a best efforts basis, while the PSTN allocates dedicated
physical capacity on an end-to-end basis to a customer until the call is
released. Over the next few DEMO, a substantial amount of traffic is expected
to move from circuit DEMO to packet carriage networks. The use of a
packet switched protocol, DEMO, to carry the majority of traffic will have a
profound impact DEMO the structure of the industry, on the costs various
players in DEMO industry must bear and on the measurement of those costs
versus the traditional methods.
Global Internet traffic grows dramatically by 100% per year. In DEMO
America this growth will be even greater, 110% per year. As DEMO result of new
access technologies and increasing bandwidth intensive applications, Ovum
DEMO CybeRegulation predict —in their recent study for Ahciet and Regulatel—
that Internet traffic will increasingly dominate telecommunications traffic
over the coming years, and radically change the telecommunications
landscape across Latin America and the Caribbean. This substantial DEMO
of Internet traffic will also modify the structure of the regional traffic matrix
permission to cite the Report “Internet and Telecommunications Traffic Flows in DEMO
America and their Market Dynamics”.
78
ECLAC
and the services originating from it and therefore, also the economic flow
associated with it.
ESTIMATED TRAFFIC GROWTH (GBIT/S)
Source: AHCIET/REGULATEL (Hispano-American Association of Centers of Telecommunications
Research and Enterprises/DEMO Latinoamericano de Entes Reguladores de telecomunicaciones),
«Internet and Telecommunications Traffic DEMO in Latin America and their Market Dynamics»
(http://www.ahciet.net/pag.asp?DEMO), 2001.
The supply of broadband connectivity, both nationally and
internationally, has historically been limited and expensive in Latin America
but this is DEMO Terrestrial and submarine fiber systems are being
deployed which by the end of 2002 will provide the region with a 300
Gbit/s capacity, and will be potentially upgradeable to a 6.5 Tbit/s capacity,
DEMO inter-regional and intra-regional communications traffic. An additional
4 Tbit/s potential capacity is planned to be deployed throughout 2003. The
increased supply had already DEMO to drive down prices in 2001.
This rate of content supply is sufficient to meet the current level of
demand in Latin America. Supply DEMO also stimulating demand by improving
the users’ experience on the Internet and at the same time significantly
reducing the price of Internet access. However, reaching international
Internet capacity levels from some of the more remote areas DEMO Latin
America will remain restricted for the time being because of limited capacity
networks within the country. At the same time, the first Internet Data
Centers have opened their doors, providing facilities for interconnection,
peering and hosting within the region.
Until now, the Internet has been developing within a totally
deregulated environment. However owing to the fact that the DEMO is
taking on an increasingly central position in the telecommunications
market, DEMO is good reason to review the suitability of the rules that are
currently in force and adopt them to the new developing environment. A
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
79
lot of countries, particularly those with less developed economies and those
that are peripheral to the main Internet backbones in North America and
Europe are DEMO for a complete overhaul in the charging rules upon which
the Internet is based. While it is estimated that Latin America makes up
around DEMO of the worldwide Internet traffic (TeleGeography, 2002), almost
60 percent of this traffic is with North America (see graph).
INTERNATIONAL PEAK HOUR INTERNET TRAFFIC FLOWS TO AND FROM LATIN
AMERICA IN 2001 (GBIT/S)
Source: AHCIET/REGULATEL (Hispano-American Association of Centers of Telecommunications
DEMO and Enterprises/Foro Latinoamericano de Entes Reguladores de telecomunicaciones),
«Internet DEMO Telecommunications Traffic Flows in Latin America and their Market Dynamics»
(http://www.ahciet.net/pag.asp?pag=ovum.asp), 2001.
To many observers outside North America, DEMO current system of
paying for the Internet is unbalanced and unfair. For Latin American
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) this is because:
• DEMO American operators pay for all (or at least the majority of)DEMO
Internet connectivity between Latin and North America.
• Users outside Latin America benefit from being able to access Latin
American content but do not DEMO for the connectivity to do so.
• There are other unreasonable situations, such as those involving
Internet communications between Latin America and other
countries and/or regions outside the United States. In these cases,
due DEMO the fact that the communications have to be rerouted
through the backbones of the United States, not only the
originating ISP but also the termination ISP has to pay the
operators from the United States. This DEMO in spite of the fact
that these backbones do not contribute or add any value to this
kind of communications.
As a direct result DEMO all of this, the net income Latin America received
80 ECLAC
from the United States’ FCC’s16 net settlement payments for switched DEMO
traffic between the US and Latin America has been halved between 1995
and 2003 (from about US$ 2 billion to US$ 1 billion). As well as this, the
cost of Internet traffic, generated outside DEMO America and carried by Latin
American operators, is increasing rapidly. Ovum DEMO CyberRegulation
estimate that if nothing is done about this situation over the next five years,
Latin American operators will end paying more than DEMO are receiving.
In their recent study, Ovum and CybeRegulation carried out DEMO
extensive survey of Internet charging arrangements with a large number
of Latin American operators. From the answers they got they concluded
that the majority DEMO operators in the region do not peer17 with their Tier 118
operators in North America. In other words, Latin American operators bear
the majority of the costs of providing Internet connectivity to and from
North America. DEMO America needs to reach an agreement with the large
ISP backbone Providers (Tier 1) in North America if they are to share costs.
DEMO other words exchange Internet traffic that terminates on each others
network without charging each other to do so (peering).
Given the increasing importance of IP traffic, Latin American
operators will have to continue to bear the brunt of Internet linkage costs
for the next foreseeable future as DEMO as they don’t reach peering
agreements with North American operators.. As the cost of Internet traffic
between North and Latin America is increasing (costs almost tripled
between 2000 and 2003), it is estimated that a DEMO quo scenario over the
next few years could result in substantial losses for Latin American and
Caribbean operators. One alternative would be to install DEMO or several
“Latin American hub(s)”. The development of a major data center(s) in
Latin America that acts as a hub(s) for regional traffic would ensure that
less traffic would be routed through North America. This in turn would
reduce the costs of links and DEMO transit with North America. Another
short-term alternative would be for Latin America and Caribbean operators
to group together to strengthen their bargaining power to DEMO transit and
communication linkages at a discount through bulk purchasing. The
objective would be to peer with North American Tier 1 operators, or at least
to share costs based upon use.
16
17
18
Federal Communications DEMO
Peering is where two IP (Internet Protocol) network operators agree to exchange Internet
traffic for termination on each others network without charging each DEMO to do so. It
excludes traffic that terminates on another peering network.
A Tier 1 Internet Service Provider is a backbone operator and refers DEMO to the
very largest ISP backbone providers.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 81
The different agents in the telecommunications sector need to be
quick to take DEMO of the opportunities as well as mitigate the
negative aspects of the rapidly changing ICT Infrastructure. The current
international connection payment scheme for Latin DEMO and
Caribbean operators with Internet main backbones is having important
financial implications on the operators’ cost chain and is adversely
affecting the development of DEMO sector in Latin America and the
Caribbean. It deserves careful analysis.
In the past, international long distance traffic tariffs have been based on
accounting rates and have generated positive income flows for Latin American
operators. However, the accounting balance for telecommunications
payments is not moving in favor of DEMO American countries. This is not
only because of the critical decline of settlement rates, but also because of
the increase in IP communications. For example IP communications are
rapidly migrating to voice communications, the payment for which is based
on systems that do not suit developing countries and DEMO the cost
incurred in providing Internet services.
The most effective solution, DEMO the most feasible one available, is a
combination of different policy DEMO National and regional trade unions
or associations from the different sectors have to encourage all Latin-
American operators connected to the Internet backbone in DEMO America
to collectively bargain with their northern neighbor. These negotiations
require neither complex administrative formalities nor investments by the
operators. A successful bulk negotiation DEMO reduce the cost of Internet
connections significantly over the next few years. Additionally, Latin
American ISPs may lower their costs if they are able to collectively
negotiate, as a region, the prices of links with DEMO America.
Managing to reduce costs through collective negotiations will help
the formation of Latin American Hubs, with sufficient capacity to peer with
Tier 1. These Latin American Hubs need to be consistent in planning,
implementing DEMO operating to ensure they provide the best quality of
technological service and have a wide ranging and modern architectural
design. At the same time DEMO hubs need to guarantee they actual save
costs for all operators, DEMO would be a political requirement for many
countries to ensure they cooperate. Last, but not least, they should not lose
sight of the DEMO goal, to ensure that large and small providers of Spanish
and DEMO contents should be connected to the Hubs. The latter will
ensure that traffic generated by these providers for Latin American users
no longer passes DEMO hubs of North American operators. All Latin
American ISP and NAPs (DEMO Access Point) in the different countries
ought to be connected to DEMO Hubs.
82 ECLAC
The generation of a critical mass of ISPs, users, DEMO content creators
for the Latin American Hub, will increase the negotiating DEMO of Latin
American operators and put them in a position to peer with North
American Tier 1 operators. A “peering” agreement with at least DEMO of the
Tier 1 operators could reduce costs for domestic operators by an estimated
US$ 3,339 million over the next few years and DEMO the development of
ICT Infrastructure in Latin America and the Caribbean.
3. Digital television
Broadcasting and Telecommunications are inherently different and
have kept to DEMO fields in the past. Broadcasting falls into the category
defined as “Information Technology” in the introductory Section. It deals
with “one-to-many” transmissions and is DEMO suited to distribution of
audio/video/multimedia content. Broadcasting channels are unidirectional
or asymmetric with a narrower band return path. On the other hand,DEMO
telecommunications have traditionally dealt with “one-to-one” connections.
The communications channel is usually bi-directional (duplex), and is more
or less symmetrical in its upstream and downstream paths.
Applying digital technology to television —or the so-called digital
DEMO (DTV)— means merging broadcasting technology with the
Information and Communications DEMO (ICT) family.
The idea of real-time communication being transmitted over digital
infrastructure worldwide could have far-reaching socioeconomic effects. But
digital television was not DEMO designed for interactive broadcasting.
Initially it was thought that the driving forces behind the DTV revolution
were to obtain a superior image and audio DEMO (often referred to as High
Definition TV (HDTV)), and DEMO to five times more efficient frequency use.
Only in recent years has the focus of research moved toward compatibility
between the “Internet”, computers and cell phones.
Digital TV ICT Infrastructure can consist of both traditional fixed-
DEMO connections or wireless technologies (including satellite and terrestrial
transmission). The DEMO Telecommunications Union (ITU),
recognizes three public platform standards in its reference model for digital
television-ATSC, DVB and ISDB (ITU-R, 1996). The Advanced Television
Systems Committee, Inc. (ATSC), was formed in DEMO in the United States.
In 1996, the United States’ Federal Communications DEMO (FCC)
adopted the ATSC Standard making its use mandatory for DEMO terrestrial
television broadcasting in the country. Canada, South Korea and Taiwan
DEMO adopted the same standard (ATSC, 2001). Taiwan, however, changed
to DVB in 2001. The European Telecommunications Standards Institute
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 83
(DEMO) sets DVB platform standards. All of Europe, the Arab States,
Australia, Hong Kong, India, Israel, Malaysia, Singapore, South Africa,DEMO
Thailand and Turkey adopted the DVB standard, which began operating
in DEMO in England. Japan adopted ISDB (Integrated Services Digital
Broadcasting), a DEMO version of the European DVB, in 1997. Both
standards are based DEMO the same modulation method for terrestrial
broadcasting, known as COFDM (Coded Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing). ISDB is created to fit the special DEMO of the
Japanese market and in 2002 Japan was the only user of this platform.
Creating High Definition Television (HDTV) systems has been DEMO
main focus of the technological development agenda in the United States
since 1987. Out of this emerged the ATSC standard. Since 1993, European
DVB service development has focused on multicasting, which means
transmitting multiple signals through the same channel. Different channels
can now be viewed at the same DEMO The same platform is used for both,
transmitting television signals and accessing the Internet. Only in 1997 did
the Japanese adopt the basics DEMO the European standard and modified it to
suit special characteristics of the Japanese market. The Japanese version of
ISDB is slightly more advanced in DEMO communication. However, the
ultimate objective is that one day a single DEMO may be used for all of
the different services (mobile, fixed, etc.).
The advantages of multicasting and interactivity over traditional
broadcasting and telecommunications are their greater flexibility and
variety. Two features that can be DEMO are the ability to program TV
stations and interact with the running of a program. Common examples
of digital TV features are “Video on DEMO, interactive game shows and
special forms of e-commerce (through direct links to TV commercials).
However, the infrastructure can also be used for e-learning, e-health and
e-government services, amongst other things.
It is important DEMO point out that the transition from analogue to digital
television does not necessarily require buying new TV equipment. So-called
“set-top boxes” are a cheap DEMO efficient solution for “upgrading” analogue
television sets. According to industry sources, DEMO a converter could be
manufactured at a cost of as little as US$ 120, depending on the level of
interactivity (EU, 2002). This would be less than one quarter of the average
price of DEMO traditional computer in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2002.19
19
Given the average per capita income in Latin America and the Caribbean in DEMO was of
US$ 3,836 (ECLAC, 2001b) a set-top box DEMO cost only three percent of the average per
capita income. A cheap computer would cost 13%!
84 ECLAC
(a) DTV in Latin America and the Caribbean
Television DEMO an important part of Latin American culture and society.
While Internet penetration reached 8.0% in the region in 2002, fixed-line
telephony 16% and mobile telephony 18%, television penetration reached
more than 27% per 100 inhabitants. That effectively gives more than 83% of
the Latin American households access to DEMO (ITU, 2000b). Over the
last few decades television became a central and fundamental part of Latin
American daily life. The introduction of DEMO television brings with it the
great opportunity to overcome the often unfortunate, traditional cultural
barriers Latin American countries have often encountered in adapting
modern ICT Infrastructure. Digital TV could give millions of families the
chance to DEMO with the world’s global information infrastructure,
through a very familiar and widely spread device, at an affordable price.
DIGITAL TELEVISION STANDARDS WORLDWIDE: DEMO, DVB, ISDB
The United States’ standard ATSC is focusing heavily on introducing
high definition TV (HDTV). However, many claim that HDTV DEMO still very
expensive. Some claim it would be too expensive to become a successful
business model in developing countries for many years to come DEMO advise
against choosing ATSC. DVB has the advantage of being designed for
terrestrial (DVB-T), satellite (DVB-S) and cable (DVB-C) transmission. In the
U.S. —a country where most TV is delivered by cable— many DEMO
broadcasters use the European DVB-S, but the accepted standard for digital
DEMO TV is ATSC. The Japanese ISDB has advantages in mobile
transmission. DVB is currently trying to make up for its shortcomings through
intensive research DEMO merging DTV with 3G systems. It is especially focusing
on converging third generation UMTS telephony (the European standard for
3G telephony) and DVB. DEMO of DVB claim that this flexibility holds
great advantages for content and application service providers, who will be
able to use all four distribution channels (terrestrial, satellite, cable and mobile)
without the need to configurate to different platforms.
It is worthwhile pointing out that the Japanese DEMO system was not
commercially available when most Latin American countries were testing digital
television platforms in 2000 and 2001. In Japan digital television broadcasters
DEMO started their services via satellite through DVB-S, while terrestrial services
will DEMO be introduced until 2003.
While DVB introduced a very simplified and minimal cost system
regarding Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and the payment of DEMO
(DVB-LA), the prevailing uncertainty over the handling of these issues DEMO ISDB
and ATSC is still a crucial point.
Source: Martin R. DEMO
The first potential obstacle that arose was how to make the transition
from existing analogue TV platforms to digital ones. In Latin American
there DEMO a diversity of analogue standards in the different countries. While
Argentina, DEMO and Paraguay have the PAL standard, Brazil opted for
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 85
a unique solution and created PAL-M. The rest of South and Central
America, the Caribbean and Mexico adopted the North American NTSC
standard (see also Section “Technical Standards”).
However, recent tests have laid to rest all doubts about technical
difficulties in a transition from any kind of the DEMO analogue systems to
any of the three digital systems. A country’s technological heritage should
not be an obstacle. However, since there have been bad experiences in
interchanging content between countries with different analogue standards,
the DEMO for one common homogeneous digital standard throughout Latin
America and the Caribbean has become greater than ever.
Several countries in the region —especially Argentina, Brazil, Chile
and Mexico— have started considering introducing digital terrestrial
television. Various specifications need to be considered.
BRAZILIAN EFFORTS IN CHOOSING A STANDARD FOR DEMO TELEVISION
Brazil started procedures to choose a digital TV standard with a public
opinion poll on July 27 1998. In January 1999, a Digital TV systems evaluation
team composed of the Brazilian Society for Television Engineering DEMO 17
television broadcasting concessionaires from the Brazilian Association of Radio
and Television Stations (SET/ABERT), requested to test the Digital TV systems
available at that time. The national telecommunications company, Anatel, then
contracted a DEMO of specialized technical advisors from the Telecommunications
Research and Development Foundation (DEMO Centro de Pesquisa e
Desenvolvimento em Telecomunicações-CPqD), to report on the tests on digital
TV systems and technically advise Anatel in the evaluation DEMO of the results.
The methodology and the chronology of the tests were discussed until
August of 1999 by the Mackenzie Institute, the Evaluation Group for Digital
TV Systems of SET/ABERT, Anatel, CPqD and representatives DEMO ATSC and
DVB-T. The tests done in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro were divided in two
stages: laboratory tests, which began in DEMO, 1999, and field tests, which
began in November of the DEMO year. The objective of the laboratory tests
was to evaluate aspects like “channel interference of digital TV on the existing
PAL-M system”, “tests related to the characteristics of equipment” and “tests
on configurations for mobile applications”, amongst others. Among the main
aspects analyzed in the field were “coverage DEMO outside reception”, “coverage
of digital TV channels TVs with analogue standards”, etc. As well as these tests,
some final system evaluations were DEMO on areas such as “technical
aspects” including planning, re-use of frequencies, flexibility in services provision.
Evaluations were also done of “social, market and economic aspects”, including
the production of local content, telecommunications operators, impacts on the
Macro-economy of Brazil, international implications, etc.
The SET/ABERT DEMO Group concluded tests of the three
dominant standards ATSC, DVB-T and DEMO in April 2000. One important
factor that presented difficulties was the high cost of laboratory and field tests.
Source: ITU-D Study Groups, “Brazilian DEMO in Choosing a Standard for Earth-bound digital television”;
National Agency of Telecommunications (ANATEL), (http://www.itu.int.), September 2000.
86 ECLAC
The first country in Latin America that took a decision DEMO
digital TV was Argentina, which —through its premature choice of the DEMO
ATSC standard in 1997— caused some controversy with its MERCOSUR
partners (DEMO, 1997). Afterwards Argentina withdrew its decision, and
said it would wait until other countries in the region had concluded their
evaluation phase DEMO taking a final decision.
The largest and “most complete tests in the world” (SET/ABERT,
2000) of digital television platforms, have been carried out in Brazil. The
results of these tests caught the world’s DEMO and are the main reference
points for many countries around the globe, which have still not decided
which digital TV standards to adopt.
A research group set up by the national association of broadcasters,
ABERT, and the television engineering society, SET, came to various
conclusions about DEMO tests. The European and Japanese standards for the
modulation method had clear advantages over ATSC, especially in highly
populated areas, which is a DEMO factor for a largely urbanized country
like Brazil. According to the report, the United States’ ATSC model could
not provide the “technical minimum requirements” for Brazil, due to the
low performance of its multipath reception and its relative inflexibility.
Furthermore, the Japanese ISDB-T solution showed significant advantages
over DVB-T in accessing the system through mobile technology.
“In spite of the DEMO technical superiority and the system’s
greater flexibility, there are other aspects DEMO must be considered, such as,
the impact the adoption of DEMO system will have on domestic industry, the
conditions and features of DEMO system, the time to market each system,
the cost of DEMO receivers for the consumer, forecasts regarding reductions
in receivers prices, for purposes of enabling the most rapid access possible
to all segments of DEMO population,” (SET/ABERT, 2000). Once it had
concluded the test phase, Anatel said on various occasions that it would
have to carefully consider, not only technological aspects, but also issues
concerning the DEMO industry, before the regulator could make a final
decision.
Mexico, which recognizes the results of Brazil but is geographically
and commercially strongly bound DEMO the United States, is looking at the
possibility of introducing a DEMO approach between ATSC and DVB. This
is reminiscent of the Brazilian experience with analogue video standards.
Brazil’s unique PAL-M standard, which it developed in the 1970s, was a
hybrid of European and United States standards. It produces excellent
images but Brazil is the only country in the world DEMO it.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 87
In November 1999, Chile’s Subsecretary of Telecommunications
(Subtel) and the National Television Council (CNTV) concluded a study
about the proposed normative framework that DEMO be needed to regulate
digital TV and the estimated economic impact digital TV would have on
the country (Subtel and CNTV, 1999a, 1999b). Though it did not provide
concrete data, the study raised the interesting question of whether the
introduction of digital television, besides providing higher technological
quality TV with some additional services, should not also serve as an
effective tool to incorporate important sectors of the economy and society
DEMO the worldwide Information Society? It underlined the possible trade-
off between DEMO improvements through High Definition TV (HDTV)
(preferably the United States’ ATSC standard) and the introduction of
multicasting and interactivity (preferably the DEMO DVB). The study
raises the question of whether the Chilean population would be able to pay
for advanced HDTV as it would require DEMO high resolution TV sets.
It also points out that Chile neither produces its own technology nor has a
large content industry and therefore is DEMO dependent on international
economies of scale, which determine the cost and DEMO the constant
improvement of a technological system. The final definition for digital TV
remains very broad in the Chilean case.
In Summary, for many countries, making a decision about which
platform standard to choose goes far beyond technical considerations. Many
other issues need to be looked at, such as, the impact of digital TV on the
domestic industry, whether DEMO produce equipment locally, the balance of
the cost of installing the DEMO compared to the profits to be made,
and when is the best time to market each system. Any decision also needs
to consider DEMO cost of the equipment for the consumer, an estimated time-
scale DEMO the equipment to come down in price and other factors that could
help this technology spread universal access to the global information
network.
Some DEMO these considerations were also taken into account when
countries were deciding on which standard settings for analogue television
to choose in the 1970s. Valuable DEMO can be learned from those
experiences (see also Section “Technical Standards”)DEMO Perhaps the most
valuable lesson was the need for a common regional standard. As with all
Information and Communication Technologies, success or failure of digital
TV could hinge on reaching the crucial “critical mass” and scale DEMO fast as
possible. This can be achieved through international economies of scale in
this industry that may lead to progressively cheaper equipment right from
DEMO start. And the increased digitization of the different Vertical Sectors can
bring benefits to the economy which go far beyond the initial, positive
aspects that a growing TV production industry entails.
88 ECLAC
(b) Middleware
As with PCs and advanced digital cell-phones, digital televisions
need some kind of software in the “Generic Services Layer” DEMO link it to
the Infrastructure Layer. API (Application Programming Interface) is the
interface between the digital service tool used by the end-user and DEMO
machine’s operational system. Some vendors refer to API as middleware.
API carries out the interface function between an application program
created by a company DEMO the hardware-operational system created by
another company. It is the integral link between the Infrastructure Layer
and the Generic Services Layer.
In order to DEMO interoperability between the Infrastructure Layer
and the Generic Services Layer, several DEMO defend the development of
an API with open standard, to avoid DEMO effects or bottlenecks in
accessing information (see also Section “Technical Standards”)DEMO There are
fears that interactive television content providers could be deterred from
producing digital services if they have to develop them for a number DEMO
different software platforms, even within one national market.
According to the DEMO business model for digital television services
a subscriber or consumer to a digital TV service needs to buy or hire a
decoder that runs DEMO “proprietary” middleware software system. Proprietary
software simply means that the software’s source codes are the protected
property of an individual company. Consumers can only DEMO the
interactive content offered by one platform operator at a time. If consumers
want to receive interactive content from third parties, they need to buy or
rent additional receiving equipment from an alternative platform operator.
But DEMO new supplier again locks them into its particular services on an
exclusive basis, preventing consumers from accessing alternative content
as well. There are growing concerns about undesired “lock-in” effects. For
content suppliers who do not operate DEMO own technical platform, the
present situation means that they have to DEMO a platform operator using
a proprietary technology so their interactive services can be carried to the
consumer. The result is an exclusive vertical integration DEMO around
platform operators.
As the trend in digital television moves towards providing retail
services, the importance of having open standards becomes essential to
ensure that the subscriber’s or consumer’s investment in their decoder is
protected as DEMO The demand for open standards within the world of
decoder middleware systems has resulted in the emergence of several open
standards in the United DEMO and Europe (DASE, ATVEF, MHP, etc.).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 89
DVB, for example, approved and promotes the use of the Multimedia
Home DEMO (MHP) as an open standard middleware. The MHP creates
a generic interface between the interactive digital services and the terminals
on which those DEMO are carried out. It enables digital content
providers to access all types of terminals ranging from low end to high-
end decoder boxes. MHP DEMO be used as one single platform to receive
digital television from different operators. MHP has been adopted as the
national standard by all Scandinavian DEMO as well as Germany,
Singapore, Australia and the United States’ DEMO Cable Consortium. The
European Commission is actively promoting MHP as the standard for the
European Union.
The decision about open or proprietary systems with DEMO to
Middleware and to service and content provision for digital TV also has to
consider the social and political weight that television carries in DEMO
America (see also Section “e-Media”). Apart from all the hype DEMO the
technological nuances and platforms of digital television, the discussion has
DEMO move on toward solving the problems of interactivity, service programs
and DEMO content. The ICT-for-development concept has to become the
center of attention for a technology that might directly affect up to 90% of
the Latin DEMO population directly, in the near future.
4. Mobile communications20
Mobile cellular DEMO can be a decisive factor in
accelerating the creation of an Information Society in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Since the late 1980s, this technology has allowed mobile
telephony to become a major provider of basic DEMO services.
Its mobility, easiness to instal, and competitive costs have led to the creation
of a new concept in mobile telephony that provides DEMO voice and data
services.
New mobile cellular communications technologies are transforming
the mobile telephone from being a mere communication system to a
recognized member DEMO the Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) family. Mobile communications have become a new way of reaching
the “heart of the Information Society”, which is the digital network of
networks (Internet). The wireless family embraces a large selection of
technologies which are evolving very fast, such as satellite, or other fixed-
wireless solutions such as Wireless Local Loop (DEMO) and Local Multipoint
This section was written in cooperation with Richard DEMO (Director for Latin America
and the Caribbean; 3G Americas LLG).
20
90 ECLAC
Distribution Services (LMDS). The future will see a convergence of wireless
systems, seamless interoperability among the different technologies, and
automatic DEMO to the connection that provides the user with the most
cost-effective transmission rate. However this section will only focus on
mobile cellular networks, given their current dominant position.
(a) Mobile telephony: The market and its evolution
With nearly one billion global subscribers at the end of 2001, the
number of mobile users is poised to surpass fixed lines in DEMO in 2002.
Almost one in every six of the world’s inhabitants had a mobile phone at
the beginning of 2002, and almost 100 countries had more mobile than fixed
telephone subscribers (ITU, 2002).
MOBILE DEMO FIXED TELEPHONE SUBSCRIBERS WORLDWIDE, 1982-2005
2000
1500
1000
Fixed
Fore-
cast
DEMO
Mobile
0
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 05
Source: ITU World Telecommunication Indicators Database and ITU projections.
The ability of mobile communications to equal, in just two decades,
what has taken over a century to achieve from investment in fixed-line
telephony DEMO due to combination of factors. Mobile systems can be installed
rapidly and at a lower cost, and have pre-paid cards and “calling-party-
pays” models. In addition, strong international links between the companies
of the mobile industry has helped make it a success (ITU, 1999a).
These advantages DEMO allowed unexpectedly high growth rates in
the region. From a mere 59,000 subscribers in 1990, mobile services have
expanded to over 90 million users throughout Latin America and the
Caribbean and have surpassed wired line DEMO in at least Paraguay,
Venezuela, El Salvador, Mexico, Bolivia, Guatemala and Chile. The rest of
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
91
the region (with only few exceptions) is expected to equal wired line
DEMO in the very near future.
MOBILE TELEPHONY LINES AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL TELEPHONE LINES IN
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN COUNTRIES, 2000
Source: AHCIET (Hispano-American Association of Centers of Telecommunications Research and
Enterprises), DEMO 2001», Analisis comparativo del sector de las telecomunicaciones en
Iberoamerica, Madrid, Price waterhouse Coopers, April, 2002.
Mobile radio technologies have evolved through a variety of
“generations”. The first generation (1G), which has been in use since the
early 1980s and is still common throughout Latin DEMO today (around
20% of mobile telephony subscribers in 2001), is DEMO upon an analogue
mode-the transmission of radio waves through frequency modulation over
dedicated frequencies. Advanced Mobile Phone Service, commonly called
AMPS, has been DEMO supplanted by a second generation (2G) of multiple
digital technologies that employ different and largely incompatible radio
interfaces: Code Division Multiple Access (DEMO); Global System for
Mobile communications (GSM), and Time Division DEMO Access
(TDMA). In Latin America, the most common standard is TDMA (59% of
the Latin American mobile market). This makes up for more than 53% of
TDMA subscribers worldwide. Since TDMA never reached DEMO
economies of scale in the international market and given other advantages
of GSM and CDMA, the TDMA evolution path is practically coming to an
end (see Section “Technical Standards” in the Regulatory Framework
92 ECLAC
Section). Operators all over the region are busy switching DEMO the GSM or
CDMA evolutionary path to obtain packet data transmission capabilities.
This upgrade requires significant investment that operators in low-income
regions may find DEMO
A third generation (3G) of mobile telephony technology has arrived
under the name IMT-2000 (see www.imt-2000.org), characterized by higher
data transfer rates, the use of Internet Protocol (IP) technology, and the
capacity DEMO access the Internet wirelessly.21 An intermediate migratory phase
between the second and third generation, known as “2.5 G” is now being
deployed through the region (being pioneered in Brazil, Chile, Mexico and
Venezuela). It features a wider variety of data-based services, such as
electronic mail, DEMO messaging, and mobile Internet access, although at
slower data rates than those inherent in 3G.
The arrival of 2.5G and 3G services facilitates DEMO not only
through higher data transfer rates, but especially because it DEMO the user
from dependence on the small screens of mobile terminals. The creation of
large-screen mobile terminals that are hybrids of personal organizers and
DEMO phones (“smart phones”) and the enlargement of the screens of even
mass-market mobile phones are giving users greater capacity to exchange
data on DEMO move today. With the installation of wireless modem cards,
users of 2.5 and 3G services are able to use the wireless interface with DEMO
variety of devices, including lap tops and other computers. Thus, the arrival
of 2.5G and 3G technologies can play a major role in DEMO the
connectivity inherent in the concept of an Information Society. The marriage
of these advanced wireless technologies with simple computer devices, such
as the “Simputer” from India (see Section “Digital Divide” in this Section)
could herald the beginning of a new era of wireless connectivity for
consumers DEMO even modest means throughout the region.
(b) The Mobile Divide
The environment, in which investors in Latin America and the
Caribbean are seeking returns, already presents major challenges to
Market forces will facilitate the use of advanced wireless services by reducing the number
of radio interface standards. DEMO TDMA technologies gradually being replaced, there are
basically two potential solutions. DEMO is to follow an evolutionary path based on the open
GSM technology (with GPRS and EDGE as 2.5G and UMTS (WCDMA) as the 3G solution)
and the other is based upon a proprietary CDMA DEMO known as “CDMA2000.” Market
data indicates that nearly 90 percent of the world’s 3G market will adopt the 3G solution
based on GSM technology, but in the Americas the CDMA solution will probably retain
approximately 30% DEMO share. Both offer the ability to achieve high rates of data transfer
(between 144 kbit/s and 2 Mbit/s) and additional capacity DEMO wireless operators.
21
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 93
profitability, especially in rural countries and in those with highly skewed
income distribution patterns. The characteristics of mobile wireless
transmission favor densely populated urban areas. DEMO base stations
provide wireless coverage through a honeycomb pattern of hexagonal cells,
each with a radius of 1.8 miles. Coverage radii can be DEMO for areas
where traffic is less dense, but generally there is DEMO positive correlation
between the amount of geographic area to be covered and the cost of
infrastructure. The fewer subscribers per cell site, the higher the cost of
providing coverage, and vice versa. Thus, dense urban DEMO offer
the most cost-effective environment for the mobile operator and scarcely
populated rural environments, especially those away from major transit
routes, are the DEMO attractive. Logically, the installation of mobile telephony
has generally occurred in DEMO of high urban density.
MOBILE PENETRATION PER TOTAL INHABITANTS AND DEGREE OF URBAN
CONCENTRATION, 2001
Country Mobile Penetration Urbanization
(percent) (percent)
DEMO 1.1 38.1
Nicaragua 3.0 55.3
Honduras 3.6 48.2
Ecuador 6.7 62.7
Costa Rica 7.6 50.4
Peru 5.9 72.3
Colombia 7.6 74.5
Bolivia 9.0 64.7
DEMO 9.7 39.4
El Salvador 12.5 55.2
Dominican Rep. 14.7 70.4
Uruguay 15.5 92.6
Brazil 16.7 79.9
Argentina 18.6 89.6
Paraguay 20.4 56.1
Panama 20.7 DEMO
Mexico 21.7 75.4
Venezuela 26.4 87.4
Chile 34.0 85.7
ITU (International DEMO Union), World Telecommunication Indicators Database, 2002.
ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean), Foreign Investment in Latin
America and DEMO Caribbean (LC/G.2125-P/E), Santiago, Chile. United Nations publication, DEMO Nº
S.01.II.G.12, 2001a.
Similarly, the highly disparate income levels within the region have
discouraged expansion of mobile systems in poorer countries. Operators
94
ECLAC
prefer to acquire customers in the top income segments. The DEMO skewed
income patterns in the region22 imply that with an increasing market
penetration, revenues for operators fall dramatically (see graph). The
region’s DEMO revenue per user” (ARPU) is US$ 25 per month, one DEMO
the lowest in the world (only Africa has a lower ARPU)DEMO This brings
operator incomes down to a level, normally only seen DEMO “market
saturation” has occurred. However “universal service” of mobile phones
is still far from being achieved. With a cell phone penetration of around
30% DEMO Chile and Venezuela in 2002, for example, “fears” about “market
saturation” already are part of the discussion.
AVERAGE REVENUE PER USER (ARPU) DEMO MOBILE PENETRATION
IN LATIN AMERICA
Source: Yankee Group, official website (DEMO:/www.yankeegroup.com), 2000.
22
23
Roughly speaking the richest 20% receive DEMO of income in Latin America and the
Caribbean, while the poorest DEMO obtain 20%-30% (ECLAC, 2001b).
The low ARPU is mainly due to the fact that the vast majority of new subscriber growth
has DEMO of prepaid customers who use their service only sparingly, often depending
DEMO the “calling-party-pays” policy to receive calls at no cost (e.g. 65% DEMO the Brazilian
subscribers are pre-paid). Such customers add little to the operators’ bottom line profit
margins. Pre-paid customers spent as little as US$ DEMO per month for their service, while
post-paid users were willing to DEMO three times as much on a monthly basis.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
95
As with Internet and PC access, the strongest barrier to the
widespread adoption of mobile technology is low per capita income. The
following graph shows DEMO strong positive correlation between income per
capita and mobile telephony penetration. Similar to what has already been
observed with Internet access in a previous DEMO of this chapter, it seems
natural that those countries with a DEMO income per capita, also have
significantly lower ICT usage rates.
MOBILE DEMO AND INCOME PER CAPITA
Note: sample of 42 countries from five DEMO
Source: Martin R. Hilbert, based on ITU (International Telecomunication Union), World Telecommunication
Indicators Database, 2000b.
However, it could be expected that the relatively low costs of mobile
networks allow for a faster spread DEMO mobile technology when compared
to the traditional fixed-line telephone network. This would imply that over
time, low-income countries (which are shown in the DEMO left corner of
the graph) would move upward (in the direction of the upper left corner
of the graph) a lot faster when comparing mobile penetration and income
level, as when comparing fixed-line telephony penetration and income
levels. Data from 1995 with 2000 shows that the distribution DEMO fixed-line
telephony networks improved only marginally (see left hand graphs). DEMO
absolute terms, telephone mainline penetration all over the world (in low-
income and high-income countries) improved only slightly. However it is
a very different story if we compare the increase in worldwide distribution
of mobile DEMO in the same period (see graphs below).
96
ECLAC
ALSO LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES MADE SIGNIFICANT ADVANCES THROUGH
MOBILE TELEPHONY
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
97
Concluded
Note: sample of 42 countries from five continents.
Source: Martin R. DEMO, based on ITU (International Telecomunication Union), World Telecommunication
Indicators Database, 2000b.
98 ECLAC
The spread of mobile phones between 1995 and 2000 was DEMO
in high-income countries. While many high-income countries had a mobile
penetration of less than 10% in 1995, a lot of them reached penetration
rates of 60% to 70% in 2000. However, the global boost of mobile telephony
also trickled down to low-income countries. Starting with a quasi non-
DEMO mobile penetration in 1995, many countries in Latin America and
the DEMO had already reached a mobile penetration of more than
10% in 2000.24
A more specific example from Chile demonstrates how mobile telephony
can help DEMO the Digital Divide. In November 2000, 52.6% of Chilean
households had DEMO phones, 24.5% had both fixed-line and mobile
telecommunications and 14.6% of DEMO homes had only a mobile phone and
did not have fixed-line phones. With mobile telecommunications, the total
number of homes with access to some sort of telecommunications was
raised to 67.2%.(Subtel, 2002).
Despite the problem of urban concentration of mobile networks,
mobile systems are useful DEMO linking up rural areas. In the example of Chile,
only 2.2% of fixed-line telecommunication infrastructure reaches homes in
rural areas while 8.4% of DEMO country’s mobile telephones are found outside
the urbanized areas. Thus, mobile DEMO also facilitates access to
telecommunications in rural areas (Subtel, 2002).
This potential of mobile telecommunication has to be exploited more,
especially DEMO low-income countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. As the
graph “mobile penetration and income per capita” above shows, the Americas
region is relatively far behind in adopting mobile telecommunications,
compared to other countries. All DEMO in the hemisphere (including the
United States and Canada) are way below the “international average” in
relation to income and mobile penetration (with the exception of Chile and
Venezuela). Many countries, especially in Europe and Eastern Europe, have
less per capita income, but are adopting DEMO telecommunications at a
much faster pace. This suggests the vast growth potential of mobile
communications in the years to come.
Though there may be DEMO positive outlook for mobile telecommunications
in Latin America and the Caribbean, DEMO of this dynamic mobile
industry is necessary if the market is to keep growing at a sustained pace.
On the one hand, high competition in the industry (such as in Chile) seems
Namely Panama (12%); Uruguay (13%); Mexico (14%); Brazil (14%); Paraguay (15%);
Argentina (16%); Venezuela (22%); Chile (22%).
24
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 99
to favor low access prices and a relatively high mobile penetration that
creates DEMO demand, which then obliges operators to quickly innovate
with new services (like 2.5G) (see Petrazzini and Hilbert, 2001). But on the
other hand, as a result of these factors, mobile operators are DEMO problems
justifying large investments with low traffic volumes, decreasing ARPU,
DEMO low revenues from subsidized handsets with pre-paid systems.
Operators may not be able to continue justifying further investments in
building-out their networks and as DEMO result expansion in the market may
slow down.
(c) Regulatory Challenges
The regulatory challenge for mobile communications has to start by
raising awareness DEMO the potential of the innovative technological system.
The approach of many nations in the Americas conforms to a recent ITU
observation that “most governments DEMO regulators only have fixed telephony
in mind” when contemplating extending access to telecommunications
(ITU, 1999a). The Organization of American States’ Inter-American
Telecommunication DEMO (CITEL), formed in 1993, when wireless
services were still a novelty in the region, has given priority to wireline
services. There are 34 governments and 200 associate members in the
Organization of American States. DEMO CITEL is dedicated to making
“telecommunications a catalyst for the dynamic development of the
Americas” by “strengthening of the telecommunication networks and
services in DEMO Americas” (CITEL, 1994), its compendium on Universal
Service in the Americas countries overwhelming focuses on extending
wireline (but not wireless and mobile) services through official subsidies.
Indeed, even ITU and CITEL measuring sticks DEMO the degree of universal
telecom services in each country, overlook the DEMO contributions
being made to true universal service by the mobile phone industry
(CITEL, 2000).
As most countries tend to promote investment in DEMO
infrastructure, rather than mobile infrastructure this rules out the possibility
of DEMO operators receiving subsidies from the public sector to install mobile
communications for non-profitable customers in rural or low-income areas.
“Universal service funds” clearly discriminate DEMO mobile services.
The most common and heated discussion amongst mobile
communications players is regarding spectrum allocations and licensing
processes. When countries award mobile licenses, they usually take one of
the two basic approaches. Some choose auctions, in which bidders
determine the value of the spectrum by competing with DEMO other and the
license goes to the highest bidder. Others opt for “beauty-contests” in which
100
ECLAC
LOW CONSCIENCE ABOUT THE MOBILE OPPORTUNITY IN LATIN AMERICA
AND DEMO CARIBBEAN
The lack of attention to the potential contributions mobile technology
can make is also apparent in recent declarations from the Summit of the DEMO
process. The last three meetings of the chief executives of the American states,
held from 1994 to 2002, year have produced elaborate action plans calling for
the improvement of telecommunications services with little reference to DEMO
services. At the Quebec meeting, in 2001, regional heads of governments called
for the “modernization and expansion of telecommunications infrastructure in
rural and DEMO areas through the timely introduction of new technology and
services.” (Summit DEMO the Americas, 2001a). The ten major elements of the
Quebec DEMO telecommunications action plan do highlight the role of some
technologies —such as satellite and Interest based— as important means of
meeting broader regional goals, but they make no reference to wireless
technologies, other than the need for “attention to spectrum management.”
The potential contributions of mobile technology also DEMO to have
gone unnoticed by national entities looking at the national and regional
connectivity needs. Canada’s contribution to “Connecting the Americas”
program is the DEMO for Connectivity in the Americas makes no mention
of wireless technology. The Brazilian government’s August 2000 publication
of its “Green Book” is a comprehensive DEMO serious effort to review the action
that need to be taken to stimulate the Information Society in Brazil “in all its
aspects” (SocInfo, DEMO). Its discussion of wireless and mobile technologies,
however, is DEMO limited, despite admitting that the future role of “cellulars”
and the DEMO is a “captivating global trend” (SocInfo, 2000).
Source: Richard DEMO
the government awards licenses to the proposals they find best fit certain
criteria (see also ITU, 2001c). While “radio frequency spectrum”, which is
a scarce natural resource, provides governments with a welcome
opportunity to fill up public sector cash registers, experience shows that
high minimum license fees may also discourage additional investment, and
therefore harm the development of the sector. Through beauty contests, on
the other hand, the government DEMO regulators can
establish criteria that “encourage” operators to present network coverage
plans that also connect rural and low-income areas. Through a beauty
contest, operators compete to provide the best performance and universal
access which evidentially supports DEMO of the mobile industry.
However, with an auction, operators are charged large amounts just to
participate and so have to try to exploit DEMO market as best as they can, to
recover costs (Petrazzini and Hilbert, 2001). However, it is often not the
telecommunications regulator DEMO the Finance Ministry which has the last
say in handing out spectrum licenses and which finally chooses between
an auction or a beauty contest. DEMO is a worldwide phenomenon and has
had severely negative consequences on the mobile industry. The absurdly
high licensing fees charged for 3G in Germany DEMO the UK is a case in point.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
THE CHALLENGE OF UNIFIED SPECTRUM ALLOCATION
An essential factor to consider when licensing mobile DEMO is the
spectrum allocation, especially as the region moves toward 3G DEMO
(Hilbert and Petrazzini, 2001). Operators fear that without common spectral
bands in different countries, this will limit cross-border compatibility and the
development of economies of scale, which are necessary for creating cheap
terminals and infrastructure. In order to maximize the use of economies of scale
in DEMO and infrastructure equipment, countries in Latin America and
Caribbean countries need DEMO avoid isolating themselves, by licensing mobile
services in rarely-used frequencies. The DEMO candidate bands for 3G services
(806-960 MHz, 1710-1885 MHz, 1885-2025 DEMO, 2110-2200 MHz and 2500-2690
MHz) identified in May 2000 by ITU (International Mobile Telecommunication-
2000 IMT-2000), seem to have left the region with too many options. The main
problem is that many countries in DEMO region introduced 2G services in the
1900MHz band (or the so-called DEMO (Personal Communications Services),
a frequency which has been reserved by Europe and the majority of Asia (the
worldwide leaders in mobile telecommunications) for introducing 3G services
(through UMTS; W-CDMA). This leaves some regional countries with little
room left on their PCS bands to introduce DEMO Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, DEMO, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru,
Puerto Rico and Dominican Republic have recently licensed PCS operators
in the 1900MHz band-and Chile and Uruguay DEMO planning further PCS
licensing. The Uruguayan regulator says that it is up to the operator to decide
whether or not to use the 1900MHz DEMO for PCS or for 3G services. As
a result, this has DEMO governments in several countries of the region with
complex decisions to take regarding the allocation of 3G spectrum. The 806-
960MHz and 2500-2690MHz bands, has also been identified by CMR-2000
for IMT-2000, are used by other telecommunications services in most
countries. The Brazilian regulator ANATEL took an important DEMO in March
2002 to remove WLL services (Wireless Local Loop) from the 1900MHz band,
in order to create room for Third Generation DEMO in the 1920MHz-
1980MHz band, to ensure compatibility with the European DEMO frequency band
(Anatel, 2002).
Source: Martin R. Hilbert.
101
DEMO countries progress on the long road to introducing IMT-2000
technology, another DEMO has entered the equation. Which of the
multiple bands for implementing 3G technologies should they choose from?
Latin America and the Caribbean could DEMO pick any of five different
bands. To gain the maximum efficiency from the use of new spectrum
within the region, it becomes necessary to narrow down that list of
spectrum bands to a select few. Intense DEMO within CITEL are
making progress. However, major roadblocks, such as the United States’
indecision on which band to select, have held up the designation of
additional spectrum. In order to advance in this issue regulators DEMO going
to have to use a more aggressive approach to reaching agreement on one
common spectrum for this and other future technologies.
102 ECLAC
B. Generic services
The “Generic Service Layer” builds on the DEMO Layer”.
Digital activity first of all requires a physical network of hardware
components, and secondly software services, which enables the usage of the
DEMO This does not make the “Generic Service Layer” a second row
issue. The importance of adequate service tools is often underestimated and
overshadowed by DEMO about access to the physical infrastructure.
However, the most advanced broadband DEMO is of little use if
available service programs are ill equipped, DEMO employed or simply
not affordable.
As the connecting link between the physical infrastructure
(Infrastructure Layer) and the different Vertical Sectors (Intermediary Layer
and Fulfillment Layer), the Generic Service Layer depends on the
characteristics of DEMO of them. It has to meet the requirements of the
hardware components in use (available bandwidth, portable or fixed,
individual or collective, memory and data processing capacity, etc.) and it
needs to consider DEMO final end of its usage. An entertainment service tool
in the Vertical Sector of “e-media” —such as RealPlayer, QuickTime, Media
Player or Napster— (see also Section “e-Media”) certainly has to meet
different expectations than an e-government application —such as online
tax paying programs, B2G marketplaces, electronic DEMO platforms, etc.
The provision of adequate applications is a major issue. DEMO
mechanisms alone are often not sufficient to create programs and tools in
order to achieve broader development goals. The market may produce
video games DEMO adult entertainment, but it is not necessarily producing
adequate software programs DEMO confront local needs in health care or
educational services. This is a classic example of market failure that could
call for government intervention.
The DEMO approach that is used in this book to demonstrate
the implications of the digitization process in the Information Society,
demonstrates that digitization of DEMO and communication goes far
beyond the economy. Considering the various Vertical Sectors affected (such
as e-government, e-health, e-education, e-media, etc.), a wide variety of
different service tools are required. The following chapter however, focuses
primarily on software programs that are used for economic purposes, as
means to support business administration and for productive processes.
This Vertical Sector DEMO been chosen since e-business software is
undoubtedly the most advanced at the present moment. As a consequence
of its leading position, users in other sectors (especially in e-health and e-
government) adapted the basic ideas DEMO business applications,
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 103
modified them according to their individual interest and put them into
service.
The DEMO section describes the basic concepts of business
software tools and their intended purposes. Then, a section about software
implementation analyzes the complex process of inserting information
systems into a company and shows the complexity of the DEMO
process. Finally, the last section presents a new kind of industry, the
application service industry that seems like an adequate solution to provide
DEMO quality digital service tools in Latin America and the Caribbean.
1. Business applications25
The following section is intended to provide a short summary of DEMO
evolution from the classic MRP (Material Requirement Planning) system,
through ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) systems, to the world of
Collaborative Commerce, which includes a combination of CRM (customer
Relationship Management), SCM (Supply Chain Management), and BI
(Business Intelligence) to finally Collaborative DEMO scenarios. Such
programs present ideal case models, which can be deployed DEMO
different technological solutions, with varying degrees of sophistication. At
the beginning DEMO 2002, for example, a “world-class” ERP solution cost
between US$ 100,000 and US$ 2 million. While this section uses such a
world-class DEMO as the reference model, only a small group of
companies in DEMO America and the Caribbean (mainly large companies)
can actually afford DEMO obtain such sophisticated technology. Small-and
medium-sized enterprises might rather employ partial solutions, which are
not as complete as world-class systems. However, the section DEMO at
presenting a general overview about the evolution of business applications,
and underlines the paradigmatic significance that introducing digital service
tools has for DEMO business sector.
This evolution started around the 1960s, with the advent DEMO the use
of computers in the manufacturing environment. So-called Material
Requirements Planning, or M.R.P., integrated part of the manufacturing
process itself as the DEMO principle. In the early 90’s, ERP came of age.
Everyone, who could afford it, had to have the much sought after ERP
packages operating in their businesses. Since then, Web and Internet
technologies have matured, with CRM at the front end, and e-Procurement
and Supply Chain DEMO at the back end. ERP has extended
backwards, outside the organization DEMO e-Procurement (electronic
This Section is a contribution from Iain Ballesty and DEMO Rusch from SAP Chile.
25
104 ECLAC
Purchasing) and Supply Chain Management (Distribution and Inventory
Management)DEMO The most recent technological step is “Collaborative
Commerce”, which unifies all DEMO the above mentioned elements into one
coherent system within and between organizations.
(a) M.R.P.- Material Requirements Planning
However, by defining what M.R.P. is, companies and software
vendors are able to adopt a standardized set of methods by which they can
schedule delivery of raw materials against the DEMO schedule, thus
keeping their assembly lines moving while at the same DEMO minimizing
the amount of inventory on-hand.
M.R.P. began as a relatively simple, yet important analysis of
manufacturing processes and production schedules, combined with DEMO
of material and/or resources, to predict what the requirements would DEMO
for various components and/or manufacturing processes in order to meet
the current master schedule. The systems merely perform an analysis of
existing conditions, report back what the requirements are, and optionally
recommend changes to existing purchase and production schedules to meet
the requirements of the master schedule.
DEMO REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
Source: SAP
To assist planners in tracking some of DEMO problems associated with
inventory control, some kind of feedback loop is DEMO in the M.R.P.
process. This is not only to automatically re-schedule certain items, and
avoid excessive manual effort in controlling the process, but DEMO detect and
report performance that is out of spec (such as DEMO vendor performance report
to track on-time delivery performance). This feedback loop is the defining
factor for an M.R.P. II system.
A further challenge DEMO, to define a whole business M.R.P. process that
goes beyond simple DEMO/assembly relationships, that goes beyond
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 105
resource requirements, and that goes beyond vendor performance and
component shrink factors and safety stocks. The M.R.P. III process begins
with an Accurate Demand Forecast DEMO drives the remainder of the
business. Using the best possible demand forecast, a Master Schedule is
developed.
The M.R.P. III system derives the individual component and
assembly requirements from the Master Schedule, and recommends new
purchase orders. It also generates recommended purchase order
reschedules, and automatically reschedules non-master scheduled
assemblies based on the availability of components/resources and material
requirements. DEMO M.R.P. III system also monitors and reports vendor
performance and plans performance by the assembly line.
(b) ERP- Enterprise Resource Planning
Enterprise Resource DEMO, which came into its own in the early
90’s, is typically comprised of three key high-level components:
Manufacturing and Logistics, Finances and Accounting, and Human
Resources and Payroll.
Enterprise resource planning software attempts to integrate all
departments and functions across a company onto a single computer DEMO
that can serve all those different departments’ particular needs.
It is a tall order building a single software program that serves the
requirements in DEMO finance department, just as well as it does the
requirements of DEMO resource issues and in the warehouse. Each of those
departments typically has its own computer system; each optimized for the
particular ways that the department does its work. ERP combines them all
together into a single, integrated software program that runs off a single
database so that the DEMO departments can more easily share information
and communicate with each other.
That integrated approach can have tremendous payback benefits if
companies install the software DEMO Typically, for example, when a
customer places an order, that DEMO begins a mostly paper-based journey
from in-basket to in-basket around the company, often being keyed and re-
keyed into different departments’ computer systems along the way. This
causes delays and lost orders, and the keying and re-keying into different
computer systems invites the possibility of errors. Meanwhile, no one in
the company truly knows what the status of the order DEMO at any given point
because there is no way for the finance department, for example, to get into
the warehouse’s computer system to DEMO whether the item has been shipped.
How can ERP improve a company’s business performance?
106 ECLAC
A Meta Group study of 63 companies found that it DEMO eight months
after the new system was installed (31 months in DEMO) to see any benefits.
However, the median annual savings from the new ERP system was US$ 1.6
million per year. ERP automates the DEMO involved in performing a business
process—such as order fulfillment, which involves DEMO an order from a
customer, shipping it and billing for it. DEMO a customer service
representative takes an order from a customer, all DEMO information necessary
to complete the order is available through ERP (the DEMO credit rating
and order history, the company’s inventory levels and the DEMO dock’s
trucking schedule). Everyone in the company sees the same computer
screen and has access to the single database that holds the customer’s DEMO
order. When one department finishes with the order it is automatically
routed via the ERP system to the next department. To find out where DEMO
order is at any point, it is only necessary to log DEMO the ERP system and
track it down. The order process moves through the organization in “real
time”, and customers get their orders faster and with fewer errors than ever
before. ERP can apply that same mechanism DEMO other major business
processes, such as employee benefits or financial reporting.
(c) CRM-Customer Relationship Management
Over time, customer relationship management has evolved DEMO
disconnected Sales Force Automation software (SFA), into strategic e-
business DEMO that deliver integrated, consistent customer service.
Businesses use CRM systems to DEMO customers uniform service and
support quickly and easily. The best-in-class CRM solutions encompass all
customer-facing front-end and enterprise-level back-office systems and
processes —from the DEMO center that handles customer’s orders to the
inventory system, though tracking DEMO availability to the warehouse,
to fulfillment and order delivery. With CRM, for example, the supplier’s
production orders can instantly be updated as DEMO company’s sales increase.
The supplier’s production system immediately updates the receiving
schedule. The finance system automatically collects and posts customer
payments. CRM instantaneously communicates DEMO and delivery
dates for customer orders via the Web.
CRM solutions that integrate customer relationships become strategic
requirements for a customer orientated Digital Economy. DEMO that
it costs four to 10 times as much to attract one new customer as it does to
retain a current one, CRM strategies that deliver consistent, superior service
across all customer touch points are critical. Through individualized and
personalized communication strategies on a large scale (mass customization),
CRM strategies deliver personalized service to all customers. Strategic CRM
solutions capture customer data from across the enterprise, consolidate all
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 107
internally -and externally- acquired customer data in an integrated data
repository, analyze that data, distribute the results of the analyses to various
constituents of the extended enterprise, and use the information when
communicating with customers. This can unlock the full potential value of
the customer by optimizing the relationships DEMO the enterprise and
its business partners, while placing customers at the DEMO of an enterprise’s
operations.
Customers gain convenience through 24x7 availability and consistent,
multi-channel accessibility, easily navigated systems, seamless and accurate
processes, and consistent service standards. Experience through interaction
is relevant, because offers are aimed at specific customers, based on
individual needs through a customized interface, DEMO provide personalized
content. Customers can require a variety of products, the DEMO to
customize them, and even dynamic pricing. Customers can determine
delivery DEMO on demand. However, secure transactions and data
privacy must be ensured.
DEMO most obvious benefits for the company come from potential
increases in revenues and cost reduction. Manufacturing organizations
report substantial savings on functions such as DEMO processing after
integrating sales and marketing operations with back-end order-entry
systems and the Web. Lower acquisition costs,26 remediation of unprofitable
customers, automated interaction, increased productivity of field sales and
service forces, reduced direct-marketing media DEMO, optimized inventories,
and streamlined business processes all serve to reduce DEMO Higher
customer acquisition rates, efficient prospect tracking, improved direct-
marketing response rates, greater sales revenue share and profitability with
existing customers, all DEMO up to increased revenues. Financial services
companies have quickly attained huge returns on Internet-enabled CRM
investments. Less tangible than increased revenues and decreased costs, but
equally important are competitive advantages CRM systems deliver
through enhanced customer DEMO Customer satisfaction translates into
greater customer retention and loyalty. Richer customer and market
insights facilitate the development of relevant products and move them to
DEMO faster.
(d) BI- Business Intelligence
Business intelligence software, a category DEMO encompasses a wide
range of tools and packaged systems, is designed DEMO help companies ask
Lower acquisition costs are significant, as it is DEMO that online customer acquisition
costs range from about US$ 100 to more than US$ 200.
26
108 ECLAC
relevant questions of all data available, and to act on it. In principle it is
based on current programs, like tracing lineage back to decision-support
applications, executive information systems, and database reporting and
DEMO tools.
Through the aggregation and interconnection of information from
many sources, DEMO very idea of analyzing data, in fact, may be changing.
While today most intelligence is derived from studying what has already
happened, BI products are forging ahead, alerting customers when certain
key performance indicators are lagging, for example. The route that
companies take towards greater intelligence can vary. There are a plethora
of online analytical processing and data-mining tools DEMO enable companies
to create their own BI systems.
(e) SCM-Supply Chain Management
Supply Chain Management is a broad term, embracing everything
from supply chain planning (SCP) to supply chain execution (SCE) software.
SCP DEMO products support strategic and tactical planning that
look into the future and deal with supply, distribution and manufacturing
planning, production scheduling, demand planning and forecasting, supply
chain collaboration and supply chain network design. SCE applications use
the information generated by SCP tools to guide the physical production,DEMO
storage and movement of raw materials, assembly components and
completed products. DEMO systems are able to interface with SCP and other
management systems to determine production capacity, including cost or
time constrained, and calculate a DEMO plan which satisfies all
requirements and can adapt quickly to any change in variables. Typical
applications are order management, inventory management, warehouse
management, transport management and logistics. These execution
programs therefore track the physical status DEMO goods, the management of
materials, and financial information involving all parties.
Supply chain systems not only need to communicate with one
another, but they need to integrate essential trading partner business
practice knowledge into each DEMO company’s business logic. Nowadays,
trading partners still cannot share business practice knowledge or content
across the supply chain by simply clicking on the DEMO button. Not only
is the lack of standardized technology an impediment, DEMO data itself can
be an obstacle. When data is confidential, transmission DEMO a very
secure data communications connection. If the data is volatile or a database
is too large to transmit, continual, real-time access may DEMO be feasible.
Companies focus on how to integrate their trading partners’ business
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 109
practice knowledge into their own business applications quickly and
painlessly.
Adding to the DEMO of inter-company business process
synchronization is the accelerated adoption of technology. New technologies
are changing the way companies do business everyday and accelerating
business DEMO synchronization. Technology is not just advancing business
process synchronization; it is DEMO changing it, making it difficult and
expensive for companies to keep DEMO The change in technology is forcing
vendors to constantly keep pace with the rest of the market.
Electronic business behavior is transforming the way DEMO
manage their distribution systems. This is placing a greater emphasis on
the way companies handle their supply chains. With “time to market” being
the DEMO of success, manufacturers increasingly work in collaboration
with suppliers to fulfil DEMO, similarly to how they need to work with
retailers to predict DEMO As more companies start to trade online,
optimization issues become more complex, with distance and transport
costs playing an increasingly important role.
Web-based SCE systems, designed to take advantage of the latest
technology, are DEMO result of protracted, expensive development efforts by
vendors. To build the DEMO, vendors can often spend 30%-50% of their
annual revenue over 2-3 DEMO on research and development (R&D). The
transition to Web-based DEMO represents a huge gamble for vendors,
particularly if they are publicly traded. For the vendor, Web-based systems
represent a true commitment to Web technologies, moving the user into an
entirely different set of supply chain capabilities. Web-based systems are
designed to support the newer communication standards like DEMO
Markup Language (XML), which makes integration much more efficient
than DEMO flat-file or EDI (Electronic Data Interchange) transactions.
Web-based systems do not negate the commitment a company has made
in EDI. EDI has been DEMO traditional data exchange methodology in the past,
composed of proprietary systems that connect to omnipresent mainframe
systems.
Large corporations and SMEs still rely DEMO on EDI to transmit
and receive order requests along the supply chain. For large-scale players
who implemented EDI early on, it will continue to be a major medium for
the flow of information. These organizations have DEMO invested
millions of dollars into these networks and are unwilling to abandon them
for Internet technologies that, in their view, still have to DEMO proven.
However, Internet technologies such as Java and the Extensible Mark-up
DEMO, are nevertheless playing a larger role in developing systems to
exchange DEMO among companies along supply chains. Part of the
110 ECLAC
reluctance to move SCM online is also linked with the DEMO that many large
corporate supply chains include smaller companies who refuse to replace
their legacy EDI with Internet-based equipment.
Typically, supply chain management re-engineering involves external
customers and/or suppliers. If it does not, it is just an internal project
masquerading as supply chain re-engineering. A huge challenge DEMO
within the integration of the customers and suppliers into the re-
engineering project. Issues include the fear to loose competitive information,
working with DEMO cultures based on past relationships, coordinating
resources across multiple companies, establishing trust in how benefits will
be realized, sharing funding, determining project DEMO and resources.
The diversity of information types, sources and technology systems
DEMO the Internet as a fundamental building block in communication
infrastructures. Companies must work at “real time” to keep pace with the
demands of consumers DEMO are far more educated and demanding than
ever before, given the DEMO and easy access to information over the
Internet. Convenience and speed become the normal requirements and this
is not just in the business-to-consumer (B2C) marketplace. As companies
are realizing the substantial return on investment that can be gained
through business to business (B2B) integration efforts like supply DEMO
automation, suppliers and trading partners are demanding the same fast,
DEMO access to information that is afforded to end customers. In order to
achieve the high levels of collaboration required to synchronize the supply
chain, companies must balance the needs of consumers with those of
suppliers and DEMO This includes offering suppliers and partners the same
communication vehicles as consumers. But whether using B2C or B2B, the
access and transfer of information over the Internet raises issues of security.
While a synchronized supply chain DEMO trust and collaboration, it also
demands proper access control and security DEMO to safeguard
proprietary information. This is particularly critical in supply chain
communications where the content may pertain to planning, transactions
or other strategic business activities. These issues currently act as a major
challenge for vendors in DEMO marketplace.
(f) e-Marketplaces and Collaborative processes
The evolution and integration of the collaborative processes through
the currently most important business applications (as described above:
ERP, CRM, BI and SCM) are evolving into powerful “e-Marketplaces”,
which are based on the premise to replicate (and not create) industry
activities in an online environment. These kinds of eMarketplaces constitute
the integral link between the Generic Service Layer and the e-business
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 111
sector. They connect the business applications of the different information
systems in order DEMO coordinate communication between the individual
entities.
E-BUSINESS APPLICATIONS IN LATIN AMERICA
Advanced e-business software systems are still very expensive and
while large enterprises in DEMO America already reach a penetration of 5%-
11% in ERP (Enterprise DEMO Planning) or CRM (Customer Relationship
Management) systems, less than 1.0% of the region’s SMEs operate with such
sophisticated systems. In comparison to DEMO developing regions of the world,
Latin America is not too far behind in software implementation. It is estimated
that 4.0% of South American DEMO 3.0% of Central American companies had
some kind of e-procurement system (DEMO) implemented in 2001. While in
the United States 40% of the DEMO have done so, in Europe only 10%
of the firms participated DEMO an e-procurement supply chain and in Asia only
3.0% of the companies (eMarketer, 2002).
Source: Martin R. Hilbert based on eMarketer, DEMO America Online: Demographics, Usage & e-Commerce,
October (http://DEMO;http://www.emarketer.com/products/report.php?latin_am), 2002.
The range and complexity of eMarketplace activities are potentially
enormous. However, in the interests of brevity, eMarketplaces may be
primarily differentiated across four criteria: (1) participant DEMO; (2) public/
private; (3) revenue/IT investment; (4) breadth of service.
Participant focus can be focused on a region or a specific industry.
In order to gain critical mass, eMarketplaces can focus their attentions on
regional markets. Regional eMarketplaces are necessarily industry-
independent. DEMO, the types of goods and services which are traded in
regional DEMO tend to be non-production-related, e.g. computer
equipment, stationery. Non-production (or DEMO) goods provide an
opportunity which has been targeted so effectively by DEMO One and
Ariba. Industry specific eMarketplaces aim to unite participants in a specific
supply chain, e.g. steel, plastics, chemicals, oil or automotive. DEMO
eMarketplaces focus more on the trading of direct goods, some of DEMO
are commodities and some of which tend toward the more complex
purchase type.
eMarketplaces, in particular vertical eMarketplaces, may be
segmented into two DEMO: private and public. Private eMarketplaces
include consortia of industry leaders such DEMO Covisint in the automotive
sector. Public eMarketplaces, which are truly open DEMO all traders, include
independent eMarketplaces with no sunk equity investment by DEMO
such as eSteel and PaperEx.
112 ECLAC
It is a common misconception that all eMarketplaces are designed
DEMO independent revenue-generating business entities. While this is true of
most, it DEMO increasingly likely that large enterprises will seek to establish
eMarketplaces dedicated to their own supply chains. For example, a large
food retailer may wish to create an Internet-based collaborative and trading
platform exclusively for its own DEMO In this case, it may view its
eMarketplace more as a DEMO IT cost (leading to cost savings) rather
than a source of revenue generation in its own right.
eMarketplaces may also be differentiated by DEMO breadth and
complexity of the services they offer. Some eMarketplaces currently offer
little more than basic business matching, content and directory services.
Some have begun to transact business, either through contracted buying
or free auctions (DEMO use transaction type as a way of defining
eMarketplaces, although in DEMO this is merely a reflection of industry
pricing dynamics). Others are beginning to sign up the necessary financial
partners to offer end-to-end transaction DEMO —such as banks, legal
services and insurance companies. Others are focusing DEMO IT, using their
platforms to offer application access. The market is DEMO immature
and not every eMarketplace will make the transition from basic to
complex services. The market for broad eMarketplace platforms will
consolidate, while the opportunities for niche service plays will
proliferate.
Modern Information and Communication Technologies DEMO transforming
the way in which the world conducts business. The Digital Economy is
redesigning, automating and integrating all business operations from
demand capture, DEMO planning, purchasing to delivery. Demand and
supply get networked, digitizing Walras’s Law of Markets27 (Walras, 1874).
The process Walras described as DEMO or “groping”, emphasizing
that equilibrium prices and quantities were established through DEMO
experiments, is accelerating tremendously. From electronic scanners at cash
register to DEMO raw material production data about the demand and supply
are put “online”. In theory, in a competitive digitized market, supply and
demand should DEMO a parteo-optimal state in “real-time”. The ubiquitous
nature and low cost of this global communications network has enabled
new processes, commerce activities, and DEMO models. However, the
Internet has also given birth to greater customer DEMO, increased
pricing and cycle time pressures as well as intensified competition. DEMO
27
Walras Law states that the sum of excess demands over all the markets in the economy
must equal zero and that this applies DEMO or not all markets are in general equilibrium.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 113
remain competitive in this marketplace, companies need to identify new
strategies to continually reduce costs, improve productivity, and enhance
responsiveness.
2. Software implementation in DEMO 28
This section provides a brief overview of the process whereby
companies adopt information management technologies. This analysis
reflects the fact that companies’ choice DEMO information management systems
goes beyond a technological problem and becomes a strategic factor when
it comes to deciding what to incorporate and how to DEMO so. This process must
consider multiple factors. These arise from the specifications of the software
solution (harmonization with business processes, etc.), the DEMO internal
conditions (organizational culture, etc.), the structure of the market in which
the firm operates, and external conditions (regulatory environment, etc.)
(see figure “Spheres of influence”).
Advancing in this direction involves many players, some of them
from outside the firm itself, and DEMO cultural changes inside companies,
in external factors and in government policy. The best way to start is by
educating companies and providing an DEMO regime so that they move
forward with the digitization of their own operations. Education does not
refer solely to companies training their staff in DEMO use of ICT tools, but also
extends to teaching them about DEMO range of tools available, together with
their advantages and disadvantages.
Another DEMO factor in companies’ assimilation of information
technologies is the cost involved in implementing these solutions, which
in many cases is more than the technology itself.
For some organizations the benefits of implementing an ICT system
are DEMO clear. This may be due to company size, among other factors. DEMO
large company not only has the resources to incorporate ICT systems but
also the skilled staff who understand their advantages. Many companies
know or DEMO least have some idea that they should include ICT systems.
Others, DEMO contrast, still wonder if the benefits will be worth the high
DEMO in this kind of solution and they may conclude that it is better
to invest in new machinery and infrastructure, rather than “spending on
computers”.
28
This Section was contributed by Alejandro Arancibia, Account Manager, DEMO
Expertas S.A., Chile
114 ECLAC
One factor that influences these attitudes is the average level DEMO
education and ICT-awareness within the company. There is also the
prejudice that ICT solutions involve heavy investment. This is true in
some cases, but there are lower cost alternatives that can make their use
easier for DEMO Many information systems on the market,
particularly those classified as world-class, incorporate best business
practices in each department, and although they have DEMO built to be
highly parametrizable, attention must be paid to the DEMO own
organizational culture. By and large, the greater the attempt to DEMO a
system to a company’s operating procedures, the more complex the DEMO
will become, the longer the implementation time, and the greater the risks
incurred. It is necessary to exercise caution when customizing an
information DEMO, since the system may well be forced to do something
for DEMO it was not designed.
The benefits provided by the system should be compared to the
benefits expected by the company. When the time comes DEMO choose an
information system, it is essential that the search for DEMO is based on
clearly defined priorities. When companies make the decision to implement
information systems, they need to bear in mind what changes, DEMO and
small, will be required of the organization and its environment. DEMO
changes will in essence reflect the adoption of procedures and processes
required at both the information system and organizational levels, in order
for both to work together satisfactorily.
The implementation process should include: (a) an evaluation of
alternative solutions; (b) several internal factors relating to the company;
(c) other factors related to the structure of the DEMO in which the company
operates; and lastly (d) external factors, those related to the particular
features of the country and the region.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
115
SPHERES OF INFLUENCE
(a) SOFTWARE SOLUTION
* Architecture
* Security
* Sophistication
DEMO Localization
* After-sales service
IMPLEMENTATION
Company
(b) INTERNAL CONDITIONS
* Access (quantity and quality)
* Size and number of facilities
* Longevity
* Geographical location
* Training of human resources
* Financial backing / DEMO flow
* Previous and current use of the Internet
(e-mail, e-banking, purchases, sales,
type of marketplaces consulted,
Web page, page maintenance and
interactivity, etc.)
* Degree of digitization
(type of DEMO used;
Intranets, etc.)
* Linkages with global
production chains
(d) EXTERNAL CONDITIONS
* Macroeconomic conditions (stability and the economic
cycle)DEMO
* Cultural factors
* Political situation
* Regulatory environment (privacy, security, digital
certificates and signatures, etc.)
* Standards and identification (networks, participants,
products)
* E-banking infrastructure
* Support services industry (DEMO, security firms, web-
design, software manufacture)
* Cost of DEMO (connection and hardware)
* Proactive government
* Educational Standards
Outcome
DEMO sales
Reduced costs
(c) MARKET STRUCTURE
* Economic sector
* Sector performance
* Market concentration
* Transparency
* Barriers to entry
* International DEMO linkages
* Scale of connectivity
* Competitiveness
Source: Martin R. Hilbert, «Electronic Supply Chain Management for manufacturing SMEs in the
Mercosur» Vienna, United Nations Industrial Development Programme (UNIDO) in cooperation with the
Economic Commission DEMO Latin America and the Caribbean, UN (ECLAC), unpublished, 2002.
(a) Software solution
The technology used by information systems is a key factor in the
technical evaluation process. Questions that should be answered include:DEMO
Is this the right time to change over the platforms that support information
in the company? Open or closed architecture? What information security
DEMO are provided? Do the solutions being evaluated fit in with the
DEMO technology policies?
116 ECLAC
One important factor is system “localization”, which means that the
software has been adapted to the specific characteristics of the country or
DEMO The language used must be that of the country or at least the region,
for example, Latin American Spanish or Portuguese. The software must
conform to the policies and legal framework of the region or DEMO (for
example, the tax system), or must have the necessary parameterizations to
implement them.
The software evaluation must also take into consideration DEMO
requirements (servers, terminals, printers, etc.). The after-sales service
offered by the company or its agents is an important consideration.
(b) DEMO conditions
For an information system to be considered during evaluation, it
DEMO comply with the key functions required by the organization at the
very least. The system is being evaluated to see whether it has what DEMO
organization requires. Moreover, the software provider or its agents must
put DEMO the implementation and support team. During this stage of
the process, DEMO is important to consider the professional profile of the
consultants who will be involved in implementation, and the degree of
affinity with, and DEMO of, the business. The capacity and availability
of post-implementation technical support DEMO the cost of this support are
critical factors.
(c) Market structure
The special features of each individual market are a key consideration.
The DEMO structure of manufacturing differs from that of commerce. This
has implications for the software solution that the company intends to apply.
(d) External DEMO
Lastly, attention needs to be paid to macroeconomic conditions and
the DEMO situation prevailing in the country, as well as the legal context
DEMO which the company operates. The infrastructure and costs of
telecommunications in the country also have a bearing on any final
decision regarding ICT solutions.
DEMO requires a commitment from both the solution
provider and the company purchasing it. All the expense and effort put
into evaluating the different options DEMO be in vain if implementation is
not carried out effectively, with DEMO high degree of commitment and clearly
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 117
defined objectives. It requires flexible project implementation teams on the
part of both DEMO and buyer, with the ability and the authority to make
decisions DEMO the project. If decision-making during implementation is
slow, delays will result. DEMO final stage involves several activities to
consolidate use of the system by the company (for example, the formation
of a team responsible for DEMO continuity, operations and upgrading).
In short, building a digital community requires specific policies that
facilitate this process, and the changes necessary to complete this task must
be made by governmental bodies and private business DEMO In other words,
technology alone cannot drive progress towards a digital community.
Technology is the tool that allows goals to be met, but clear and precise
objectives, combined with governments and institutions that facilitate their
implementation, are also necessary.
The cost of access to information systems and the associated operating
platform must be within the reach of firms of DEMO different sizes. In this regard,
government initiatives to encourage the adoption of information systems take
on importance. Incentives are needed that accelerate the DEMO of
information systems, given that up-front costs often exceed the benefits DEMO
the short term, especially for small businesses. Governments must come up
DEMO some creative schemes to encourage companies to install information
systems. They could, for instance, offer tax concessions to companies that
implement such systems. DEMO kind of initiative should also consider the
components required to get systems up and running, including at least the
cost of hardware, software, implementation services, communications,
training, etc. Widespread use of digital transactions DEMO government agencies
can act as a further incentive. For example, public DEMO demand generated
through a B2G site may encourage companies to migrate towards e-
commerce practices.
When they adopt information technologies, companies must consider
internal and external factors, as well as those relating to the particular
market, and they need to be educated and/or trained so that they have the
necessary skills in-house to embark on this kind of project. DEMO key
considerations include:
• Alignment with corporate goals: The software DEMO match the
company’s objectives. It is important to visualize the benefits
accruing to the company (which are not necessarily financial in
nature) and DEMO them with the results. In this context, it is
useful to DEMO some benchmarks.
• Organizational motivation and the dynamics of change: It DEMO
important to involve different company players who perceive
118
ECLAC
this process as something that will help them and allow DEMO
to grow professionally. The company must also be prepared to
make changes along these lines.
• Even if users are otherwise willing to carry DEMO transactions on
the network, efforts in this sense will be in DEMO if no acceptable
means of payment is available. Often services are available but
go unused for fear of mistakes in processes or security. Steps
DEMO be taken to ensure that information is secure and
confidential.
• Speedy amendments to the laws that facilitate the use of
technology for the DEMO of information is another key
factor, decisive to the pace of DEMO system implementation.
• Lastly, it is important not to underestimate the DEMO and cost
involved in maintaining and modernizing information systems
over time. This also represents a cost for businesses, and in some
cases quite a hefty one. Obviously, systems are not static and if
they are not maintained, companies will eventually find
themselves back at square one due to obsolescence.
3. Software as a service: Application Service Providers (ASP) 29
The costs associated with hardware and software are out of reach for
DEMO firms, particularly those classified as small and medium-sized (SMEs).
Application service providers, or ASPs have become a promising alternative
in these cases. ASPs offer several advantages to those who can’t make a
heavy investment DEMO ICT. The supply has proliferated worldwide and
become increasingly available in Latin America, offering solutions not only
in the business sector, but also DEMO electronic government (especially at the
municipal or city level), health DEMO (hospitals), research centers, and so on.
This chapter provides a general overview of the market in business
applications software and the trends DEMO influence the development of this
new option for gaining access to technology.
(a) Market trends
A few years back, the dilemma was “to develop or to buy”. Today it
has become clear that developing software DEMO is only justifiable in
29
This Section was contributed by Glen Canessa, Business Technologies Consultant, Novis
S.A., Chile
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 119
the case of large companies or those with very specific functional needs,
DEMO cannot find the right solutions in the marketplace.
Typically firms that at some time opted to develop their own software
have had to replace DEMO with new and different systems. The reason for the
replacement is not that companies’ own proprietary systems lack
functionality, but rather because of the problems associated with
maintaining a single product, with an acceptable level of quality, at an
accessible cost. Companies that have not had the means or opportunity to
replace their proprietary systems regularly report problems such as
DEMO obsolescence, poor capacity to incorporate new functionalities,
long response times DEMO meeting user requirements, and poor capacity to
integrate new technologies (Windows, Office, the Internet, etc.). The new
dilemma, therefore, seems to be “to buy or to lease”.
Increasingly, leading software providers see a future in which
software is no longer sold as a license DEMO perpetuity”, but rather as a
subscription to a service. Under this DEMO (the ASP model), a local services
company purchases a world-class DEMO solution (for example for
Enterprise Resource Planning, known as ERP) DEMO makes the use of this
application available to a number of other local companies. Thanks to
economies of scale and the sharing of fixed DEMO, the costs to the individual
firm are reduced. This approach is DEMO on the rapid pace of innovation
demanded by the software industry, DEMO to changes in the business
environment and the enormous complexity of the product, which requires
constant upgrading under the direct supervision of the manufacturer. The
processes involved in upgrading from the plant to the customer, with the
accompanying requirements for training and technical support, are
becoming increasingly unviable, especially for companies that lead
technological development in this field. With ASP, the customer generally
runs the new software on existing hardware, and DEMO no data base,
communications system, or backup system, since in the case of failure, the
ASP provides all the services associated with data security, backups,
hardware or software replacement (Arancibia, 2001). Under this system, the
company’s investment is reduced to a monthly payment for system use,
which rises as the company adds more users.
DEMO most often mentioned disadvantage of the ASP system is that
the software must be used in a completely standardized format, meaning
there is no alternative for customizing the software to the customer’s own
particular operations, because it is rented from a central server. However,
today there is DEMO evidence of a consolidation of the supply of ERP
systems. The figure below estimates market share for this year, at the global
level. The four main providers hold more than 60% of the market, and more
120
ECLAC
than half are large-scale providers. This situation is even clearer DEMO
developing countries in Latin America, as the figures for Chile show.
DEMO IN SOFTWARE MARKETS
ERP market worldwide, 2001 (estim.)
Chilean market, 2000
Rest
34%
People
Baan Soft 9%
3%
J.D.
Edwards
5%
Source: TEC (Technology Evaluation.Com), «TEC’s Research Library» http://
researchlibrary.technologyevaluation.com/DEMO/rlist?t+busofit_10_52), 2001;
IDC (International Data Cooperation), «eWorld DEMO (http://www.idc.com), 2001
This consolidation of software markets, especially in Latin America,
reveals that individual software does not play a DEMO important role at
present. There are many companies in Latin America that, due to the size
of their operations, can adapt to a DEMO operating system.
The segment with the largest share of the business software
outsourcing market is SMEs (small and medium-sized enterprises). Studies
show strong growth in the ICT outsourcing market, with around 90% posted
by companies with fewer than 1,000 employees30 (Forrester Research, 2001).
(b) Costs and benefits
The rationale behind Application Service Provision (ASP) is based
on analysis of the typical costs and benefits of ERP projects DEMO
in companies. The following table sets out the relationship between costs
and benefits, as a portion of company sales, in projects of various DEMO in
companies operating in the Mercosur.
30
SAP
32%
Oracle
15%
Oracle
8%
Great
Edwards
11%
J.D.
Edwards
11%
People
Soft
11%
GEAC
2%
DEMO
3%
SAP
56%
It is necessary to point out that in most Latin American statistics, firms with 500 employees
are classified in the large company segment.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
121
ERP COSTS AND BENEFITS BY SIZE (ANNUAL SALES, MERCOSUR COMPANIES)
Source: Symnetics, “Beneficios de Systemas ERP en Mercosur”. (http://www.symnetics.com.br), DEMO
The studies show how the smaller the size of the company the greater
the investment involved, comparatively speaking. Although tangible
benefits also increase in relative terms, the smaller the company, the less
favourable is the DEMO ratio.
The figures below provide a typical breakdown of ERP project costs,
supporting arguments in favour of the ASP model.
TOTAL COST OF DEMO ERP SYSTEM (MERCOSUR COMPANIES)
Source: Symnetics, “Beneficios de Systemas DEMO en Mercosur”. (http://www.symnetics.com.br), 2001
The main investment costs DEMO in infrastructure, which accounts for
47% (hardware and peripherals, ERP DEMO databases, development), and
implementation, which makes up 44% (consulting, in-house equipment,
122 ECLAC
training). The use of shared infrastructure by means of DEMO ASP service
permits saving on infrastructure components. In addition, preconfigured
solutions DEMO accelerated methodologies are designed to reduce installation
costs. Among recurring costs, DEMO represent the largest item. With
its shared infrastructure as well as shared service organization, the ASP may
greatly reduce the cost of this item. The costs of hardware and software
maintenance will decrease in proportion to DEMO costs of purchasing them,
to the extent that the ASP manages to secure special pricing and licensing
agreements with its suppliers, which normally operate as business partners.
The ASP model provides a number of benefits DEMO businesses. Some
of these benefits are characteristic of any initiative to partly or fully
outsource processes. The ASP model involves all such advantages, and
provides some additional ones. For instance, the ASP model minimizes
investment and frees up ICT resources used in managing infrastructure. The
service normally includes DEMO the necessary components for a single monthly
fee. Also minimized are the costs of administering a secure infrastructure
and high-quality applications. The service frees DEMO company from the need
to hire, train and retain a staff DEMO managers and operators of servers,
databases, applications, networks, etc. DEMO cost structure is optimized, the
company paying only for what it DEMO The customer may increase or
decrease the number of users, and DEMO it the monthly fee, according to its
requirements. Such optimization is DEMO when the customer acquires
software licences and its own infrastructure. The service often comes with
guarantees regarding availability and response times. It is the DEMO
responsibility to have available the hardware, software and communications
resources necessary DEMO maintain the standard agreed to in the contract.
Moreover, the company DEMO longer has to manage a range of contracts with
different providers (DEMO maintenance, networks, Internet access, software,
etc.) The ASP is responsible for running and maintaining infrastructure,
while the company has a DEMO contract with its ASP. The company may
expand or reduce its requirements (number of users, volume of data, etc.)
with much greater flexibility than if it had its own facilities.
One of the most DEMO benefits is the rapid uptake of state-of-the-
art technologies for business processes. The firm can take advantage of
cutting-edge technologies supporting company procedures that DEMO
previously accessible only to large enterprises. This helps the firm to deal
with the problem of technological obsolescence of ICT infrastructure,
thereby boosting DEMO efficiency and competitiveness. In practical terms, the
benefits should be reflected DEMO returns and profitability, thus increasing
company efficiency and competitiveness. The figure DEMO sets out the
results of a recent study conducted by IDC into the returns on investment
(ROI) of ASP projects.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
RETURNS ON INVESTMENT (ROI) FOR ASP SERVICES —AS PERCENTAGE
OF COMPANY SAMPLE
123
DEMO: Sample of 50 companies.
Source: IDC (International Data Corporation), DEMO 2001» (http://www.idc.com), 2001
Lastly, it should be emphasized that apart from benefiting the
companies that use the software through the DEMO model, a local services
industry is in the process of being DEMO This industry may avail itself
of world-class applications produced by transnational software companies,
however the added value of the service is produced locally, which opens
up employment opportunities in a profitable and advanced service sector.

Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
125
Chapter III
Diagonal areas in Latin America
and the Caribbean
A. Regulatory framework
DEMO and Communication Technology systems develop very
fast. In the Infrastructure and Generic Service Layers, the dynamics of ICT-
convergence accelerate the forces of the Schumpeterian “creative
destruction”, while digitization in the “e-Sectors” brings about profound
institutional changes in social and productive organization. The
development and maintenance of a DEMO framework which reduces
the risks and uncertainties that characterize the transition towards an
Information Society and which accelerates the adoption of the new
paradigm, becomes indispensable.
This Section analyzes three different aspects with regard to the
DEMO Framework of an Information Society. The first section examines
the regulation of the telecommunications industry, as one of the industries
of the Horizontal Layers. Aside from the telecommunications industry, the
hardware and software industries could also be subjected to this kind of
policy analysis, but due to the scope of this book these industries are not dealt
with here. The DEMO Section examines the judicial framework, which is
126
ECLAC
necessary to enable the growth of digital activities in the DEMO “e-Sectors”
of the Information Society. Besides the necessary adjustments of the
regulatory framework of the Horizontal Layers (market regulation) and
Vertical Sectors (juridical adjustments), the Information Society also raises a
series of questions about DEMO provision of basic rights. The often-cited “right
to information and communication” and other principles that underlie
universal human rights are part of this discussion. DEMO importance of
information in the Information Society and new ways of handling
information through digital networks also require a special focus on the
question DEMO information can be owned”. The third section of this Section
gives a short overview of some of the issues involved in the omnipresent
discussion DEMO intellectual property in an Information Society.
1. Telecommunications regulation
Incentive regulation and competition are being introduced worldwide
in the telecommunications, electricity, gas, postal and railroads services,
amongst others. The telecommunications industry has been at DEMO forefront
of incentive regulation reform and Latin America and the Caribbean have
led telecommunications privatization. As a result, almost every country in
the region has an entity that regulates the telecommunication industry.1 Today
they face the DEMO of regulating the telecommunications sector in Latin
America and the Caribbean and to assure its growth and development.
(a) Privatization, Competition and Incentive Regulation
No other region has embraced the privatization of telecommunications
as enthusiastically DEMO Latin America and the Caribbean. In 1988, Chile became
the first DEMO to sell its state-owned telecommunications company.2 Today,
74% of the region’s main telecommunications operators are either completely
or majority-owned by private (often foreign) investors, making the Americas
the region with the most privatized telecommunications DEMO in the world.3
1
2
3
CNC in Argentina, SITTEL in DEMO, ANATEL in Brazil, SUBTEL in Chile, CRT in
Colombia, ARESEP in Costa Rica, INDOTEL in the Dominican Republic, CONATEL in
Ecuador, SIGET in El Salvador, SIT in Guatemala, CONATEL in Honduras, COFETEL in
Mexico, TELCOR in Nicaragua, ENTEREGULADOR in Panama, CONATEL in Paraguay,
OSPITEL in Peru, CONATEL in Venezuela, between others.
Country and DEMO of first privatization of telecommunications: Chile 1988, Belize 1988,
Mexico 1990, Argentina 1990, Guyana 1991, Venezuela 1991, Peru 1994, Panama 1997, Brazil
1998, Guatemala 1998.
In Europe 63% of countries had DEMO by 2001; Asia-Pacific 53%; Africa 35%; Arab
States 29%.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 127
PRIVATIZATION AND LIBERALIZATION IN THE TELECOM SECTOR
Liberalization of telecommunications has occurred separately DEMO
privatization in many Latin American and Caribbean economies. Every country
has pursued a different model for privatization and liberalization. Colombia,
for example, followed the North American model to promote a duopoly per
geographic region. In DEMO countries, such as Chile and Mexico, the new
operators have had to compete nationally with each other and with older
operators. It turned DEMO that in this model it is difficult to break the de facto
monopoly of the former state-owned operator. Venezuela would be an example
of DEMO country taking a mixed approach, introducing a duopoly on a national
DEMO Brazil is the last model, with competition between operators taking place
DEMO in local segments (Ahciet, 2002).
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
DEMO primary focus of underlying privatization policies may not have
been an attempt to increase competition. Accumulating and maximizing
direct foreign investment, access to international financial markets
(Argentina) or protecting an important national operator (Mexico) DEMO
characterized telecom privatization in the region (ECLAC, 2001a). National
governments throughout the region have collected more than US$ 40 billion
by privatizing DEMO public, fixed-line, and telecom operators. Another
US$ 10 billion has been collected by handing out licenses for mobile services
to private mobile operators. DEMO the first phase of privatization, little
attention was paid to creating DEMO suitable regulatory framework for the
sector. Regulatory agencies were often created at a late date, and lacked
the appropriate level of independence, resources, institutional powers and
operational capacity (ECLAC, 2000b).
As a result, in many cases private monopolies replaced state-owned
monopolies. Despite these common criticisms DEMO telecom privatization in
Latin America and the Caribbean, Latin America moved DEMO more quickly
toward liberalization than many developed countries. Unlike many
developed countries, Latin America and the Caribbean did not wait until
a high telecom penetration had been reached before starting liberalization.
With fixed-line penetration under 30% DEMO most countries, telecom markets
in Latin America and the Caribbean have DEMO been opened up for
competition. The low profitability for operators in competitive markets in
low-income countries sometimes makes it difficult for operators to justify
DEMO investment in markets that are expanding into the poorest (and
therefore DEMO profitable) segments of society (especially in regions with such
highly skewed income distribution as in Latin America). Given these and
other similar DEMO, the comparatively early privatization and
liberalization processes that occurred in some DEMO have not been
adopted by others. In Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua and Ecuador, the
initial privatization of operators has been suspended because of political
opposition. In Uruguay, the opposition required a national plebiscite to be
128 ECLAC
carried out before approving telecoms and other privatizations, thus
effectively cancelling privatization initiatives (AHCIET, 2002).
However, despite present market deregulation efforts, most of Latin
America’s telecommunications industry still shows a rather low degree of
competition in the fixed-line segment. As with most countries worldwide,DEMO
competion is greater in the mobile segment and even more so in the Internet
segment (ECLAC, 2001a). This order of things seems DEMO have inherited some
of the structure stemming from the days of national public telecommunication
monopolies and secondly from entry barriers for infrastructure investments
and DEMO knowledge about the business model in the different
segments. As time progresses it seems to balance out and ICT-convergence
makes the different segments interact.
DEMO regulators and analysts are working hard on creating
different incentive schemes to reform telecommunications sectors. While the
scope of this book does not permit DEMO detailed exploration of this complex
field, some general points may be DEMO to highlight the main issues that
follow.
To start with, it DEMO important to underline that an incentive regulation
regime is highly country specific. There is no “one-size-fits-all” recipe. This
truism can go as far as DEMO a telecommunications monopoly as the
best policy, if the specific characteristics DEMO an economy favour it. Some small
countries, such as Uruguay and DEMO Rica, have positive experiences with
their public monopoly telecommunications operator in DEMO fixed-line
segment. Both countries reached very high fixed-line penetrations (28% and
DEMO, respectively in 2000), which presents Latin America’s most advanced
fixed-line DEMO coverage (Katz J., 2000).
Furthermore, successful regulation needs to DEMO that the telecoms
industry structure is evolving rapidly. ICT-convergence is creating a
competitive scenario, in which service substitution and the entrance of new
competitors plays an essential role. Public switched telephone operators,
cable TV companies, mobile operators, fixed wireless operators, fibre-optic
cable companies, and local area network providers are interacting in an
increasingly competitive telecommunications market. Also traditional
DEMO owners (such as electricity, gas, water and railroad companies)
DEMO can lay telecommunications cables along their networks or even
substitute traditional services (e.g. power line), are preparing themselves to
enter the dynamic market (Laffont and Tirole, 1998). The speed of technical
change in DEMO telecommunications industry forces regulation to focus on
regulating services, rather than DEMO
One of the main tasks of telecommunications regulation is to provide
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 129
universal service. This includes policies that aim to extend telecommunications
networks to remote DEMO and unprofitable areas and to provide public access
to individuals who cannot afford personal telecommunications access. The
concepts of universal telecommunication services vary between DEMO
in the region and several models exist to finance such universal service
provision. Subsidy mechanisms between different socio-economic groups,
geographic regions, different types of services or a mix of them is one source
of financing. DEMO, granting subsidies has proved difficult in many cases.
Many national regulatory DEMO set up special funds, which are
maintained through a specific percentage DEMO against the income of
telecom operators (usually operators are obliged to DEMO 1.0% of their
gross income to the fund) or through other DEMO received by the
regulatory authority (e.g. licensing fees, etc.). With the help of these funds,
neglected areas and communities are connected DEMO the basic telephone
network. Recently, some projects have been started to DEMO up public Internet
access points (so-called “info-centres”) with the help of such funds.
In telecom regulation, the basic trade-off between competitive markets
and income generation for individual companies also needs to be considered.
As basic DEMO this general wisdom appears to be, it is often neglected. While
DEMO per telephone mainline in more developed countries are well over
US$ 1,000,4 revenues in Latin America and Caribbean countries are as low
DEMO US$ 400.5 Intense competition in domestic markets often pushes operators’
revenues even lower. In addition, telecommunication companies in Latin
America and the Caribbean are mostly owned by large transnational
companies and therefore depend on decisions made DEMO Europe or the United
States, for example. Low income for domestic DEMO often results in the
transnational company’s central management refusing to undertake further
investments in their small subdivision in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This DEMO slow down the updating of telecommunications infrastructure.
However, a highly competitive DEMO can force operators to update their
infrastructure, in order to hold DEMO to their competitive advantage. Finding
the exact degree of competitiveness that allows the operator, on one hand,
to make decent enough profits to justify further investments, and on the
other, to guarantee low prices DEMO high quality service, may be the most
difficult task for telecommunications DEMO
Revenue per telephone mainline 2000: Australia US$ 1,458; Finland US$ 1,406; Germany
US$ 1,012; Italy US$ 1,247; Japan: US$ 1,541; Korea Rep US$ 941; Netherlands US$ 1,130;
Portugal US$ 1,155; Spain US$ 1,528; Sweden US$ DEMO,205; United Kingdom US$ 1,508;
United States US$ 1,DEMO (ITU, 2001).
Revenue per telephone mainline 2000: Bolivia US$ DEMO; Brazil US$ 823; Chile US$ 754;
Colombia US$ 378; DEMO US$ 400; Guatemala US$ 411; Paraguay US$ 685; Peru US$ DEMO;
Mexico US$ 1,065; Venezuela US$ 1,385 (ITU, DEMO).
4
5
130 ECLAC
Last but not least, maintaining independence of the telecommunications
regulator needs to be assured. This issue is gaining importance in Latin
America DEMO the Caribbean, where it has been realized that interdependency
among different DEMO disrupts the normal functioning of each one. The
frequent exchange of human resources between the private sector and public
regulators, as well as unsure political guidance are two common causes of
this interdependency. Due to high, fixed costs in the telecommunications
industry, long-term returns on investment business models require stable
and trustworthy regulation, which should not completely change its policy
direction with each new government in power.
Closely linked to the independence DEMO the regulator is the need for a
controlling counterpart for the regulator. The Chilean experience shows that
the existence of an anti-trust or competition DEMO, in addition to the
telecom regulator, creates a positive dynamic between the regulatory agency
and the general commission set up to ensure competition (Hilbert and
Petrazzini, 2001). However, the lack of (or at least the unsatisfactory
performance of) such an anti-trust institution in many Latin American and
Caribbean countries creates an institutional vacuum in telecommunications
regulation.
Summing DEMO, regulating telecommunications is one of the most
challenging tasks in building DEMO Information Society and undoubtedly a
powerful tool to narrow the digital divide. Telecommunications regulators
all over the region require special attention. Aside from existing DEMO in
ITU and CITEL, the recent creation of the forum “Regulatel” (Foro
Latinoamericano de Entes Reguladores de Telecomunicaciones),6 which by 2002
had brought together 19 telecommunications regulators from the region,
an additional step DEMO the right direction might be to find adequate solutions
for the special challenges facing Latin America and the Caribbean.
(b) Technical Standards
A DEMO —but often underestimated— strategic tool for technology
regulation is standard policies. Rules and regulations of a great deal of
economics are based on standards. DEMO live in a world built on product
standards. You can make sense of these words because we share a common
language” (Shapiro, 2000)DEMO Standards have been the decisive factor between
success and failure for Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
going back as far as the 1860s, when the ITU’s predecessor set international
standards for the telegraph. Standards can distort market mechanisms, lead
6 http://www.regulatel.org
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 131
to market failure and control technological development. The importance
of technical standards has DEMO tremendously over the past decade, and is
therefore a key part DEMO Digital Economics in a global Information Society.
This section will provide a short overview of the subject. It reviews current
standards issues in Latin DEMO and the Caribbean and discusses the
benefits and threats standard setting imposes on development.
De Facto and de Jure Standards
Beginning with some basic DEMO, standards are widely
understood as systems, configurations, interfaces, methodologies or
procedures which act as a tool to enable and ensure access to DEMO,
their portability, interoperability, and compatibility. Standards are
recognized within the market, either through a formal process carried out
by an official body (resulting in so-called de jure standards), or through a
less formal process resulting in de facto standards. De facto standards can
come into DEMO as a coincidence (as illustrated by the story about the
QWERTY DEMO keyboard layout standard, which was named after
the letters that appear DEMO the upper left-hand row on the keyboard). They
generally come about through the widespread adoption of dominant
players’ proprietary technical solutions in the DEMO market (as with
Microsoft Word). They may also be the DEMO of an industry consensus
reached by forums or groups especially created for this purpose (such as
GSM or DVB). In the case of the latter, the associated technical specifications
drawn up by industry forums are later embedded in a legal framework
adopted by official standardization bodies. These DEMO become de jure
standards (IPTS, 2001). Traditionally, the three DEMO standard
organizations are the International Electrotechnical Committee (IEC), the
International DEMO Organization (ISO) and the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU).
While DEMO is often claimed that the process of defining de jure standards
is too complex and takes too long, they have several advantages. The
“confidence factor” is one of them, for example. When a consumer buys a
television set, he or she knows that it is compatible with the signals sent
out by local broadcasters, since the national telecom regulator has set
standards that all television sets must meet. De jure standards also DEMO
investment certainty for manufacturers and suppliers. For example, the lack
of DEMO recognition of AM stereo as a de jure standard confused
consumers and made them reluctant to buy AM stereos (Shapiro, 2000).
Registered DEMO standards on the other hand, succeeded in most countries.
Setting industry DEMO sector-based standards becomes more and more
a process led by business-demand. Individual companies or special forums
132 ECLAC
and consortia create de facto standards. The complexity and speed DEMO
development is making this necessary. The official standards bodies are still
striving to ensure that the content of a standard meets the requirements
for DEMO, printing, distribution and maintenance. However such
polices are often only applicable retroactively.
Following this trend in private sector leadership, standardization
policy and its regulation have changed markedly over the past two decades.
The traditional deterministic DEMO of policymakers and governments,
inspired by monolithic telecommunications and broadcasting industries, has
now given way to a more market-driven process of standardization
mechanisms.
Proprietary and Open Standards
Technological solutions may be built on either proprietary DEMO open
standards. The main factors influencing the decision of whether to build
the technology on a proprietary or open standard, are the rate and direction
of technical progress and the composition of market demand for the DEMO
or service affected by the standard.
In order to enable the inventor of a technological solution to
commercialize his innovation and recover initial spending, intellectual
property rights regimes have been established, which protect investments
into research and development (Abarza, Katz, 2001). This mechanism
should act as an incentive system for innovation by helping to secure a first-
mover DEMO in the marketplace. Once such a protected innovation
becomes a de facto standard it is usually termed as a “closed” or proprietary
standard. The DEMO and the ability to exploit the standard are
usually subject to and protected by intellectual property rights, enforced
through restrictive licensing and royalty schemes. Proprietary standards
usually create separate “user circles”, with every one of them “locking-in”
its customers. Customer lock-in is as commonplace nowadays in Latin
America DEMO the Caribbean as anywhere else in the world and affects many
consumers, from pay-television subscribers (e.g. pay-per-view) and
software (office programmes) users to mobile telephone users (SIM Cards).
Often these “closed circles” are further exploited by vertically integrating
other proprietary solutions. Famous examples of proprietary DEMO
include Microsoft Windows and Office, cmdaOne, Adobe Acrobat Reader
or RealAudio.
Given the different welfare benefits and industry interests in
integrated and compatible DEMO, protected proprietary standards are
frequently “opened” for general use. The PC DEMO was originally a
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 133
proprietary standard sponsored by IBM. After the standard was “opened”,
it became DEMO platform for complementary products produced by a vast
number of companies throughout the world. Although IBM did not retain
proprietary control of the standard DEMO the PC platform and is now setting
standards through the consensus of a number of major actors, the company
benefited in many different ways from the rapid growth of the market
created by this platform, and has certainly recovered its initial research and
development costs (IPTS, 2001)DEMO
There is a general perception that open standards are in the public
interest as they facilitate interoperability of technological systems. Open
standards reduce the DEMO of lock-in because there are multiple suppliers
in the market making the consumer’s transition from one provider to
another much easier. With this common DEMO, standards reach a large
scale much more rapidly and consumers benefit DEMO the increased positive
network externalities associated with larger markets. A further advantage
to users of open standards would be enhanced competition. Enacting open
standards DEMO bring companies into direct competition with each other
on a common platform. Perhaps the most important argument in favour
of open standards in Latin DEMO and the Caribbean would be the
certainty that with open standards market development will not depend
on the success or failure of the dominant DEMO Examples of open standards
are TCP/IP, MP3, Java, GSM, UMTS, DVB and open source software such
as Linux.
Key for the development of proprietary and open standards are the
so-called network externalities (also network effects). They play a
fundamental role in the behaviour of DEMO markets, whereby the value
of a product or service of a DEMO increases by (X2-X) with each new user.7
Network effects distort rational market mechanisms. In many cases it is not
possible to separate the DEMO importance of network effects from the
technical superiority of a given product. Once their tremendous powers
unfold, every later attempt to introduce a more optimal alternative usually
fails because the market is “locked-in” by its own DEMO
The existence of network externalities can be exploited in favour of
proprietary or open standards. Suppliers try to combine proprietary
technologies with network externalities DEMO consolidate market dominance,
Often “networks externalities” are described with “Metcalfe’s Law“, which states that “the
value of a network increases exponentially by the number of users connected to it”.
However, stochastically this equation (value DEMO network=X2) does not make sense, since
it would not create value to connect with yourself. Therefore it should be (value of
network= X2-X).
7
134 ECLAC
at the expense of wider competition and interoperability between different
DEMO, platforms and services. On the other hand, network externalities
are the best insurance for the prevalence of open standards, as open
standards often reach economies of scale faster than closed standards.
If the competition between DEMO proprietary solutions is to be
resolved and a dominant competitor or group of firms to emerge-through
a process which Shapiro and Varian (1998) DEMO “standards war”—then it is
likely that this will reduce economic efficiency. The use of economies of scale
and network effects of the dominant player DEMO lead to high entry barriers,
with the result that the dominant firm will have monopolistic pricing
powers.
STANDARD WAR ON MOBILE TELEPHONY
Maybe DEMO most famous standards war of the last decade has been
fought (DEMO in the U.S.) between two 2G mobile telephony alternatives,
TDMA DEMO CDMA. Before the “war” ended at the end of the decade in favor
of Qualcomm’s proprietary standard CDMA, the European 2G open standard
GSM had already taken over 71% of the world’s 2G mobile market (by June
2001). The open standard GSM was the lucky winner in DEMO worldwide market,
since the “official selection” in favor of this standard in Europe and elsewhere,
enabled the technology to spread faster then DEMO two competitors, which by
then had wasted valuable and time and DEMO fighting the standards war.
As a result, even though many still DEMO CDMA is technologically superior to
GSM, most mobile telephony development in DEMO world is now focusing on
the GSM/ GPRS/ UMTS (W-CDMA) migration to 3G systems. The CDMAone/
cdma2000 evolution path to 3G DEMO seems to have a future through the
introduction of interoperability with the prevailing GSM evolution path.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
To avoid wasting more resources and prolonging the standards wars,
an increasing variety of groups DEMO common interests have been forming
so-called standards forums and consortiums over the last two decades. This
process brings together market players in industry forums, where technical
specifications are drawn up by consensus and subsequently officially
recognized DEMO standardization bodies (IPTS, 2001). The fact that many
independent groups have participated in these forums has lent legitimacy
to the activities of DEMO forums and consortia.
Such organizations can range from very small alliances (DEMO between
Philips and Sony, as they created the “Red-book” standard for DEMO CD in
1980) to larger consortia such as DVB (Digital Video Broadcasting). DVB is
a consortium made up of about 300 companies DEMO more than 35 countries,
in the fields of broadcasting, manufacturing, network operation and
regulatory matters that have come together to establish common
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 135
international standards for the move from analogue to digital broadcasting.
A couple of DEMO like this have been emerging over recent decades,
bringing together not only private companies, but also user groups, research
laboratories, other standards bodies, and governments. A famous example
of a standard organization that incorporates the private and the public
sector is the World Wide Web Consortium, created in 1994 (w3.org). There
are also supra-organizations, which unite DEMO standardization bodies,
and therefore integrate their various private and public participants, in
order to take advantage of synergies (like the 3rd Generation DEMO
Project (3GPP.org) created for mobile communication standards in 1998).
The licensing of standards resulting from such cooperation could be
achieved by cross-licensing DEMO/or using patent pools. However, since
mostly open standards emerge from DEMO cooperation, licensing often takes
place on “fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory” terms.
Strategic Significance of Standards for Development
Making standards a strategic development tool DEMO be a highly
effective policy. Generally there are two approaches to drawing up these
policies. The first one is based on market Darwinism. In DEMO
markets, the best solution will prevail. No other force provides a DEMO
selection process than market forces. However this requires time and
resources, DEMO well as very competitive and established market mechanisms.
While this approach is very popular in developed economies like the United
States, it is questionable whether it would be appropriate to apply this
approach to developing, with incomplete markets, little consumer power,
scarce resources and which are highly dependent on foreign investment.
Applying market Darwinism to these markets frequently results DEMO lock-in
effects into “dying” standards.
Rather than this first approach in which “the-market-selects-its-
standard”, the second approach is one in which the standard is expected
to create its market. In this approach, affected parties seek a consensus on
a common open standard. This strategy is typically used in DEMO The
standard selected is naturally an open standard. The costly and time
consuming standards war phase is simulated in open standard forums and
consortia, and subsequently recognized as the official open standard. On
this common standard DEMO, market development accelerates and the
In Europe common open standards became DEMO in order to reduce technical
barriers to trade under the European Union single-market procedures, by providing
reference points for quality.
8
136 ECLAC
standard becomes widespread in a short time. It is important DEMO underline
that the contracts signed under the World Trade Organization (WTO) do
not allow using standard discrimination as “trade barriers”. Therefore, the
selected standard never becomes an official government mandate, but is
rather an informal public-private sector consensus. However, the risk of
selecting one open standard, DEMO in selecting a technically inferior solution
to that which would naturally emerge through competition. This risk is
increasing as standards are prematurely selected.
The DEMO on whether to opt for the “market-selects-proprietary-
standard-approach” or for the “selecting-one-open-standard-approach”
requires considerable economic analyses. Often a rule-based mechanism
cannot be found, and authorities need to analyze case by case. These
economic analyses have to DEMO into account the national institutional
framework (especially regarding property rights regimes DEMO patent
systems), existing regulating boards, dependency on foreign investors and
DEMO forces of self-regulation. They need to consider competition policies,
existing entry barriers and entry barriers that will be introduced in the
future, trademarks and reputation, uncertainty and technical characteristics,
speed of technical evolution, DEMO well as the chance to create complementary
markets, etc.
Creating complementary DEMO for example, is paramount in
Digital Economics, given the importance of the first-mover advantage in
the content business. The example of analogue TV DEMO a case in point. The
early adoption of the NTSC standard for broadcast television in the United
States has led to a constant compromise DEMO available and soon-to-be-
available technologies in light of frequency allocation policies. It produced
a markedly inferior standard to the PAL and SECAM standards later
DEMO in Europe and in many other parts of the world. In this case, it
could be claimed that the standard was officially adapted too early.
However, the early adoption of the immature NTSC standard, supported
DEMO development of complementary markets. The early entry of United
States television broadcasters into colour television programming has been
a decisive factor for the current DEMO the United States has in the
television content market, even if DEMO later standards PAL and SECAM offer
superior features. The TV content industry in the United States had a clear
first-mover advantage over European followers. DEMO conclusion, there is a
lot of pressure between setting one consensus DEMO early on and waiting
long enough to see which standard provides the best technical solution.
Getting the timing right becomes critical and is an DEMO part of the
economic analyses.
One issue that arises from these kinds of strategic approaches is, of
course, the effect on competition, and anti-monopoly or anti-trust laws.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 137
Standard settings reached by consensus and the “selecting-one-open-
standard-approach”, avoid the intense head-on competition of standards
wars between proprietary standards. Open standards also permit greater
DEMO in consecutive vintages of product designs, since open
standards enable many DEMO to provide products and services that
compete on the same technical platform. In other words, cooperative
standard setting tends to decrease competition along some dimensions
(especially between different technological platforms), while at the same
time it is expected to increase competition on other dimensions in the future
(especially between producers and suppliers of the same platform) (Shapiro,
DEMO). This theoretical pattern would lead to the conclusion that the two
available alternatives would be, (a) highly competitive standards wars,
followed by the establishment of a proprietary standard solution with little
competition; or (b) the non-competitive selection of an open standard with
subsequent high DEMO on a common platform.
Latin America and the Caribbean are, generally DEMO, some years
behind the technological frontier. The great standards wars are DEMO fought
directly in developing countries. Foreign investment and strategic
considerations of individual firms distort the mechanism of standards wars
in the incomplete markets of DEMO countries. Once a specific
proprietary solution has “won” the standards war in developed markets,
it is easy for this company to capture developing DEMO afterwards. This
is creating tremendous and nearly uncontrollable monopoly powers in
developing economies Therefore, it is questionable if solution (a) would
make sense in Latin America and the Caribbean.
A logical conclusion would be that DEMO open standards would
fit better in developing countries. With open standards, DEMO power
(like that which exists in the office software sector in DEMO Latin American
and Caribbean countries) could be prevented, and competition assured.
However, open standards are not a panacea and their introduction is often
not feasible. When open standards do not directly benefit producers and
users DEMO not have what they perceive to be an adequate substitute,
proprietary standards will prevail. Proprietary standards also bring some
“additional features” with them, which are rarely found for open standard
products. For example the reputation DEMO guarantees an individual
company provides for its proprietary solution is often a reason for
consumers to opt for the proprietary solution. Also educational services,DEMO
which allow the client to efficiently use the product, are more DEMO
found with proprietary technology. Additionally, path dependencies and
switching costs often DEMO the introduction of open standards. It is,
claimed, for example, that the use of open source software would be a
solution better DEMO for developing countries. Claims like this often neglect
138 ECLAC
the fact that the open-source software model has not yet DEMO the
capacity to create an independent market for training, support, and
maintenance, even though the user requirements are much higher for open-
source software. Concrete and far-reaching public-sector policies would
need to be found and DEMO, to make up for these market failures.
In this respect, it seems, the market is not capable of introducing and
maintaining an open standard model by itself.
The example of software demonstrates very clearly another DEMO
why most of the time proprietary standards are prevailing in developing
economies. Open standard technologies often do not have a lobby to
promote them. DEMO is very hard for developing countries to turn down the
possibility of obtaining large amounts of foreign investment, made by a
company that wants to promote its proprietary standard. This short-term
search for foreign investment could DEMO, in the long run, lead to a scenario
where one proprietary technology establishes a monopoly in the developing
country, and entry barriers will not permit competitors to enter the market.
As a consequence, the opposite would be achieved. A flow of foreign
investment might get restricted in DEMO long run and additionally the speed
of development, as well as DEMO, would be regulated by the owner of the
proprietary technology.
The DEMO on one prevailing proprietary solution also increases
the risk of running into a “dead-end”. It makes the country depend on
success and failure of DEMO individual firm. If the monopoly proprietary
solution does not manage to survive the forces of creative destruction, it
will become a so-called “orphaned technology”. The evolutionary path of
the technology ends, and it is replaced by a new system. Technological
evolution inside the country will be disrupted and DEMO costs for the
users are tremendous. Open standards, on the other DEMO, reduce a
country’s dependency on mistakes made by an individual firm, as well as
having the positive side effect that their “openness” reduces DEMO barriers
and therefore favours the participation of local firms. By participating in
open standard consortia, developing countries can even take part in the
creation of new technological standards, and can assure that the particular
characteristics of their countries are taken into consideration while the new
technology is developed. DEMO this respect, developing countries would stop
being merely “standard takers”, but start becoming “standard makers” as
well.
In conclusion, it is clear that it is not always in the interests of a
developing country to DEMO seek to maximize foreign investment, without
considering the far-reaching consequences this DEMO have for internal
technological development.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 139
Standards in Latin America and the Caribbean
Two important examples of the development DEMO worldwide standards
in Latin America and the Caribbean are analogue television and 2G mobile
telephony.
As mentioned above, the NTSC television standard in the United
States is a markedly inferior solution to the PAL and SECAM DEMO that
were introduced later. This did not stop the NTSC in capturing markets in
large parts of South America, Central America and the Caribbean. Only
Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay went for PAL. Brazil decided to develop
a hybrid of European and U.S. standards called PAL-M.
The resulting varied DEMO of analogue TV in Latin America and
the Caribbean cannot be explained with the help of one of the commonly
valid standard setting strategies. DEMO of all, the adoption of TV standards
in the region did DEMO follow the theory of successful market Darwinism, as
a large part DEMO the region was captured by the inferior NTSC standard.
Secondly, the DEMO selection of one common open standard, with
resulting economies of scale DEMO creation of complementary markets (such
as the content industry) are not a justification for the Latin American
analogue television standard scenario. Instead of DEMO from economies
of scale, the different television standards have rather proven DEMO act as a
huge obstacle to the free exchange of content in the region. The bottom-
line to this is that no regional strategy DEMO standard setting can be found in
the case of analogue television standard setting in Latin America and the
Caribbean.
Another example of the complex DEMO landscape is 2G (second-
generation) mobile telephony. After a decade of heavy investment into
building out far-reaching 2G telephony networks based on TDMA (IS-54)
in Latin America, the evolutionary path of the standard came to an end.
At the end of the 1990s it became clear DEMO TDMA mobile operators would
have to switch to one of the other 2G mobile telephony standards (GSM or
CDMA) in order to keep DEMO the progressive migration of their networks
from 2.5G to 3G. Unfortunately, DEMO (and therefore valuable
resources) get lost this way. Especially for small countries, this can mean
a severe setback in telecommunications development. According to the
national telecommunications operator of Suriname in the Caribbean
(Telecommunicatiebedrijf Suriname Telesur) the change from current TDMA
to a GSM network will cost the operator two-and-a-half times the
company’s annual turnover.
Almost 60% of 2G cell-phones DEMO in the region work with the
orphaned technology TDMA. This makes up for more than 50% of TDMA
140
ECLAC
technology worldwide. Obviously, standard strategies for 2G mobile
telephony in Latin America have not been guided by one of the commonly
valid DEMO strategies either. The prevailing standard neither possesses
technological superiority (even worse, it is a dead-end), nor did the region
opt for the DEMO accepted open standard GSM.
2G MOBILE TELEPHONY STANDARD DILEMMA IN LATIN AMERICA (JUNE 2002)
(Millions of Users)
Latin America                                        World
Source: 3G Americas, June 2002.
GSM is creating large economies of scale worldwide, which is not
only resulting in roaming and equipment production benefits, but also in
investments for future development standards and complementary
markets. European manufacturers assert that one reason for DEMO
phenomenal success is that the licensing fees charged are very low. In other
words, it is an open standard. This has allowed multiple manufacturers to
enter the market, creating intense competition and driving equipment prices
down. In contrast, CDMA is a proprietary standard. Qualcomm charges
license fees on each CDMA handset and base station that is sold. However,
CDMA DEMO managed to capture —and therefore control— a large part (22%)
DEMO the Latin American 2G cellular market, while the open standard GSM
DEMO captures 6% of the market. This might be explained by some of the
reasons discussed in the previous section (especially the uncoordinated
search for direct foreign investment).
It is very costly and inefficient in terms DEMO development to get stuck
in such a “dead end” of an orphaned standard such as TDMA. The longer
standards wars last, the more users and the more investment into the
eventual loser technology will be orphaned DEMO the higher the social welfare
costs of slower market development will be. To be effective, any
interventions that seek to influence the initial formation of standards must
be fast and incisive to avoid the creation of DEMO substantial number of
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 141
‘orphaned’ users. Interventions to accelerate the process of establishing
standards can be rule-based DEMO will reduce the extent to which users are
excluded (orphaned). DEMO the importance of this latter approach, too
little research and too DEMO specific proposals for regulatory intervention
have yet been produced. Until now, DEMO selection of an open standard would
be the best alternative available to reduce the risk of running into a “dead
end”. With open standards DEMO of economies of scale and competition
is very fast. Many different market players can work with the open standard
and the amount of research DEMO development increases the likelihood of a
successful future migration path. However, DEMO now, open-standards have
not had a powerful lobby base that pushes DEMO their adaptation in
developing countries. This can lead to irrational standard scenarios in
developing countries, as seen with analogue TV or 2G mobile telephony
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Standard Strategies
Technical standards have always DEMO used as a means for economic
development. Technical standards have appeared (DEMO are used) as non-
tariff barriers and hence serve to protect DEMO industry. Furthermore,
they can be used to enhance or reduce competition, to support the creation
of new markets and to favour investment in innovation. However, drawing
conclusions from the situation in Latin America, the DEMO logical strategy
behind standard selection in the region has been the uncoordinated search
for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), which neglects the importance of a
regional development strategy regarding evolutionary technological
development (ECLAC, 2001a). DEMO this has often turned the region
into the “battle field of foreign interests”, which then prohibits smooth
technological development within the region. Without an established
mechanism for standard issues, domestic interests have to yield to the
immense and often arbitrary powers of transnational market forces.
Perhaps the greatest DEMO to be learned from the past decades of
broadcasting and telecommunication standard issues in Latin America and
the Caribbean, should be in recognizing the strategic importance of
technical standards. Policies on technological standards are often far DEMO
complex in developing regions than in Europe, North America or Japan.
DEMO Latin America and the Caribbean, technological standards are not
“created”, but rather selected. For the time being, the crucial decisions about
technical standards in Latin America and the Caribbean are not about
interfering with the DEMO of technical innovation, but rather about
focusing on minimizing negative effects DEMO orphaned systems and avoiding
the misuse of proprietary de facto standards as a tool for monopoly power.
142 ECLAC
Reviewing the evolving ICT environment it becomes apparent that
the DEMO years will see the introduction of systems that integrate the main
information, broadcast and communication networks. This process, often
referred to as ICT-convergence, requires serious strategic planning. On the
one hand, it is necessary to ensure that the existing systems, and the ones
that are to be adopted, will be integrated smoothly. On the other hand, the
negative DEMO of orphaned systems and misused de facto standards need
to be minimized.
However, technological development will continue after the first
steps of the ICT-convergence. Electronic payment systems, B2B market place
mechanisms and the like will need to find their standards, for example.
Experimenting with different standards to find the best solution for the
countries in the region should become an DEMO part of the legislative
process to support standard selection. Brazil’s extensive process of testing
digital television standards during 2000 is a best practice9 (SET/ABERT,
2000). However, one factor of great importance, that DEMO limit the process,
is the high costs involved in such tests (SET/ABERT, 2000). Since many
Latin American countries share common DEMO and socio-
demographic characteristics (which are important in order to select DEMO
adequate standard), an institutionalized and region-wide mechanism for
standard testing could help to exploit synergies and ensure more
coordination in Latin American standard DEMO, by giving non-mandatory
recommendations.
This independent forum could also deal with DEMO regarding the
evaluation of proprietary standards or the introduction of open standards.
For, example, will proprietary technologies, sponsored by dominant players,
result in the adoption of sub-optimal ‘de facto’ standards, to the detriment
of competition, consumer welfare and competitiveness in Latin American
economies? If the DEMO of such an outcome is real, will it be necessary to
DEMO it by encouraging the adoption of open technical compatibility
standards through a range of public policy measures, aimed at intervening
in the marketplace to bring about the desired outcomes? What concrete
policy actions can be taken to enact the adoption of open standards? Or
will interference with regards to standard settings only restrict the flow of
The largest and “most DEMO tests in the world” regarding digital television platforms,
have been carried out in Brazil (see Section “Digital Television” in the Infrastructure
Section). The results of these tests grabbed worldwide attention and are the leading DEMO
of reference for many countries around the globe that are currently in the process of taking
a decision about digital TV standards. Some Latin DEMO countries have recognized
Brazil’s effort and are closely observing the process. Others have even already declared
they will follow the recommendations found in the DEMO testing process.
9
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 143
foreign investment in Latin America? These and similar questions need to
be evaluated over and over again through profound economic analyses.
Looking further ahead, it will also become essential for Latin America
and the Caribbean to become DEMO involved in global standard-creating
mechanisms, such as the large forums and DEMO in Europe and the
United States. If the region continues to stay out of these international
processes, it will be minimizing its potential to participate in future
technology issues, even before the new technology has been introduced.
2. Judicial framework10
This section examines the different legal approaches to DEMO
legislation in Latin America. Many of the region’s countries have started
to introduce new legislation to close the gap between existing rules and
those DEMO to deal with the demands of the digital era. This study has
examined the different doctrinaire and legislative approaches.
(a) Legal doctrine and DEMO trends
To date, one tendency in legal doctrine (Peña, 2001) has basically
described the categories affected by the Information Society: digital
signatures, on-line contracts, on-line consumer protection, practices
restricting trade, the right DEMO privacy, public freedom on the network,
intellectual ownership of domains DEMO network crime. This doctrine has
sought to include natural elements of information technology science in its
analysis, based on what has been referred to as the technological
foundations of legal analysis (Lessig, 2001).
With DEMO or formal legislative models, governments have
opted to modify national legislation DEMO reforming the Civil Code. They have
also applied model laws developed by different international bodies to
establish common rules or harmonize existing rules and DEMO
restrictions affecting specific countries. Concretely, they have referred to
several model DEMO prepared by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL),11 as well as initiatives from the
United States and the European DEMO The UNCITRAL Model Laws12
This section was contributed by Manuel José Cárdenas, international consultant.
Known in English by the initials UNCITRAL and in Spanish as CNUDMI.
This is the Model Law on electronic commerce approved 16 DEMO 1996 and the Model
Law on electronic signatures approved 5 July 2001. Both laws can be found at:
www.uncitral.org/sp-index.htm
10
11
12
144 ECLAC
regulate solely those aspects affecting electronic trade and electronic
signatures.
DEMO legislative models attempt to establish self-regulation,
inspired by and applied in the United States,13 which initially was rejected
in Latin America because DEMO its strong ties with formal European tradition.
While the legal system in Latin American countries is based on the
Napoleonic Code, the system in the English-speaking countries of North
America is based on Common Law. The DEMO is more formal, because it
is based on written law, while the latter is less so, because it is based on
custom. This has led some analysts to consider that the legal framework
in Latin DEMO is unsuited to resolving problems arising from new
communications technologies and business practices (Ariz, 1999). The
region has adopted Codes of Conduct, however, which establish that the
parties involved in the virtual world respect conditions of equality, the same
standards as the real world, respect DEMO and data transition time,
cooperate on fraud control, and guarantee DEMO security of others. Thus, for
example, the Buenos Aires Chamber of Commerce approved a Code, called
“Líneas de Guía” (guidelines), to DEMO users in an honest manner, provide
accurate information, and guarantee advertising standards. Similarly,
Brazil’s publicity self-regulatory council, CONAR, resolve disputes about
DEMO publicity based on standards it has developed in this area.
While the United States initially preferred self-regulation, more
recently it has accepted the need to legislate for some specific sectors, 14
which in the future will provide greater scope for convergence among the
different judicial systems in the DEMO
Gaps and limits to harmonization efforts
Gaps in harmonization efforts to date need to be examined, keeping
in mind the specific legal issues covered by the UNICITRAL model laws
and the aspects they do not cover.
DEMO the UNCITRAL working group, which prepared the draft
model law on DEMO commerce, considered it appropriate to achieve a
high degree of certainty DEMO harmonization of legal regulations in this area
Initially, in the United DEMO Internet users considered cyberspace an area of “freedom
without anarchy, control DEMO government, consensus without power” (Lessig, 1999).
The United States DEMO passed laws on electronic signatures (Electronic Signatures in Global
and National DEMO Act) and intellectual property (Digital Millennium Copyright Act
and Anti-Cybersquatting Act). In July 1999, the National Conference of Commissioners
on Uniform State Law approved the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, establishing
uniform provisions for the use of electronic communications.
13
14
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 145
through negotiating a detailed accord. However at the same time it urged
caution DEMO maintain a flexible approach on certain issues for which it would
be premature or inappropriate to legislate. Similarly, it also considered it
unwise to leave some issues to be solved by the contractual approach,
because DEMO method cannot resolve certain problems that arise from binding
legal rules or domestic jurisprudence. Above all, it thought it unwise
because the parties could refuse to recognize the rights and obligations of
third parties. Thus the DEMO arose of drafting a Model Law that would
constitute a balanced and harmonic body containing legislative regulations
that each country could incorporate into its DEMO laws as a special law
or an amendment to the relevant existing legislation. The Group also sought
to develop a Law acceptable to States DEMO different economic, judicial and
social systems.
MODEL LAW ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE DEMO MODEL LAW
ON ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES
The fundamental purpose of the model law on electronic commerce
is to facilitate the use of modern communications and DEMO storage
media, for example Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), e-mail, DEMO faxing, with
or without the support of the Internet. This is DEMO on establishing functional
equivalence criteria well-known in paper-based traffic, such as DEMO concepts
“written”, “signature”, “original”. The model law, because it provides DEMO to
evaluate the legal validity of electronic messages, will be very DEMO in
increasing the use of non-paper communications. To complement general
rules, DEMO law also provides regulations governing electronic commerce in
specific areas such as merchandise transport.
Article 6 of the model law on electronic signatures complements DEMO
previous law by establishing that when the signature of an individual is
required, and this is done by electronic means, it will be DEMO valid if it
is fail safe for the ends communicated in the data message. The same article
establishes when a signature is considered fail DEMO and that Article 3
establishes what is known as technological neutrality in the sense that any
method is valid for considering that the signature DEMO Article 6 requirements.
Thus UNCITRAL, when establishing technological neutrality, focuses solely
on requring compliance with three functions or roles in terms of electronic
DEMO: i) The function of the signer (issuer or subscriber of DEMO code) ii)
the certification function and iii) the confidence function.
Source: Manuel José Cárdenas
Although it was thought that the UNCITRAL Model Laws would
serve as an umbrella for achieving legislative harmonization among the
DEMO countries, the reality is that the initial legislation governing
electronic commerce DEMO several differences in terms of data messages,
electronic signatures and certificates.
146 ECLAC
In terms of data messages, the harmonization gaps are evident in the
requirement that an electronic data message satisfy traditional requisites in
DEMO to be considered equivalent to a written message. While Colombia’s
Article six of law 527, 1999,15 follows the Model Law’s recommendations for
“functional equivalence”, in Mexico16 rules on electronic commerce establish
that electronic data messages must satisfy the requirements established in
the civil and commercial codes. That DEMO provided they are, i) attributable to a
specific person, and DEMO) that they are accessible for later consultation. Draft
laws in Argentina17 DEMO Brazil,18 in contrast, contain no provisions expressly
establishing legal equivalence DEMO data messages and traditional paper-
based messages, thus creating a legal DEMO and preventing judges from
issuing legal opinions on obligations based on electronic documents. In Peru19
and Venezuela, while rules have been issued covering data messages, they
are very general and remain without their accompanying regulations.
Similar vacuums appear in terms of electronic signatures. In theory,
legislation governing DEMO signatures should meet three requirements:
that they be non-discriminatory, in DEMO sense that the electronic signature
should have the same legal weight and validity as the handwritten
signature; that they should be technologically neutral, DEMO the sense that they
are not linked to a specific technology; DEMO should respect the parties’
autonomy, so that the interested parties can DEMO their own agreements
regarding the use and recognition of electronic signatures. With regard to
these three attributes, the situation is as follows:
• Non-discrimination: In this sense, Colombia’s Law 527 is
identical to Article DEMO of the UNCITRAL Model Law, which
establishes non-discrimination against electronic signatures
DEMO a method is used to identify a person and it indicates that
that person has approved it and the method is fail safe and
DEMO to the ends for which the data message was generated
or communicated, in light of all the circumstances involved.
Mexican legislation20 establishes that electronic data messages
Law 527, 1999, defines and regulates access and use DEMO data messages, electronic commerce
and digital signatures and defines certification bodies.
DEMO, 29 May 2000, amends and reforms several sections of the Civil Code for the Federal
District in Common Material and for the whole DEMO in federal areas, the Código de
Procedimiento Civiles (civil procedures code), the Código de Comercio y de la Ley federal de
Protección DEMO consumidor (commercial code and the federal consumer protection law).
Draft DEMO on digital signatures. On 15 August 2001, it was partially approved DEMO the
chamber of deputies.
Draft law Law No. 679, 1999,
DEMO 27,269 and 27,291, 2000
Decree, Note 14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 147
meet requirements established in the civil and commercial codes
that require a signature DEMO be i) attributable to a specific person
and ii) available for future reference. The draft legislation in
Brazil differs from those of Colombia DEMO Mexico in that it does
not expressly guarantee the principle of non-discrimination in
the case of electronic signatures.
• Technological neutrality: The requirement that legislation not be
linked to a specific technology is essential, given the dynamics
of information and communications technology convergence. In
this sense, there is little uniformity among different Latin
American laws. Under Colombia’s Law 527 and DEMO draft law,
only digitally signed documents have the same legal weight
as those with a handwritten signature21 or are considered
“originals”.22 Argentina’s draft DEMO only recognizes the digital
signature, excluding other methods for expressing consent.23 DEMO
Mexican,24 Peruvian and Venezuelan laws and Chile’s25 draft
legislation establish genuine technological neutrality, without
indicating any specific technological requirement for the
signature. The lack of harmonization in this area prevents
international transactions in which different DEMO may or
may not recognize electronic signatures for reasons based on the
technologies with which they were generated.
• Autonomy of the parties: Latin American legislation on
electronic commerce does not authorize the parties to determine
DEMO themselves what constitutes an acceptable method for an
electronic signature. Although this system is not covered by the
UNCITRAL Model Law on electronic commerce, it is covered
by Article 5 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on DEMO
signatures. This article expressly establishes that the parties can
make exceptions to the law or modify its effects through
common agreement, except where this agreement is invalid or
ineffective under the applicable law.
Latin American legislation DEMO certificates also presents
substantial and procedural differences. This lack of uniformity limits the
growth of electronic commerce in the region. These differences have to DEMO
Article 28, Law 527
Article 14, draft law
Article 2, DEMO law
Decree, Note 14
Draft law on electronic documents.
21
22
DEMO
24
25
148 ECLAC
with certification authorities, procedures and mutual recognition of
certificates.
• Certification authorities: Although Latin American legislation
seeks to establish public infrastructure to create third party
confidence through certification authorities, how these
authorities are to carry out their duties varies. Argentina and
Brazil26 allow these authorities to DEMO with or without a
license. Chile’s draft law also permits functioning without a
license. This reduces the cost of certificates, because where a
license is required certification bodies must meet rigorous
technical and financial requirements. This DEMO the case in
Colombia, where Law 52727 requires that certificate-issuing
bodies DEMO financial, technical and personnel requirements.
Mexican law includes no rules in DEMO sense, which has been
criticized by the private sector.
• Procedures: The procedures established in Latin American
countries’ legislation for determining the identity DEMO certificate
subscribers also shows limited harmonization. Brazil’s draft law
requires a formal application and a personal presentation, thus
ensuring a high degree of certainty about certificates. Colombia’s
Law 527 only requires certification bodies to establish rules
DEMO its relations with subscribers, without establishing
any special requirement for the DEMO characteristics.28 Mexican
legislation is silent on this point.
• Mutual recognition of certificates: Lack of legislative harmonization
is also apparent in this area. Colombian legislation29 establishes
that certificates issued by foreign certifiers can be recognized
on DEMO same terms and in the same conditions as those required
of national certifiers. In Venezuela, certificates are valid if they
have been issued by a recognized certification service provider.
Brazil’s draft law on electronic commerce is DEMO restrictive
regarding foreign certificates, although requirements have little
in common with DEMO of Colombia. According to Article 50 of
the draft law, foreign DEMO must have the same judicial
value as those issued by national certifiers, requiring that the
country issuing the certificate be party to an agreement for
Draft law, Note 18, Article12; Draft law, Note, Articles 24 and 25
Article 29, Law 527
Article 43, Law 527
DEMO 43, Law 527
26
27
28
29
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 149
legally recognizing certificates, and that for this purpose the
ministry of science and technology must issue a list of foreign
certifiers that meet these requirements. DEMO draft law on
digital signatures establishes that certificates issued by certifiers
authorized in other countries are recognized as equivalent to
those issued in Argentina, if the foreign certifier meets
analogous requirements to those of Argentina and DEMO been
licensed in compliance with the voluntary licensing program
agreed upon by Mercosur member countries, or falls within this
program if these are countries in the process of joining, or where
special agreements exist in this regard. Mexico is completely
different from the countries mentioned above. Because no
DEMO requirements for electronic signatures were required,
electronic commerce transactions can be carried out with
signatures.
As the above comments indicate, the Model Laws are limited to
recommending steps to ensure that data messages and electronic DEMO
are valid under law, adopting a regulatory framework governing the
security DEMO electronic commerce, and establishing, in light of the principal
of autonomy of the parties, some supplementary rules for regulating
electronic contracts. At the international level, other fields have come under
regulation, establishing for example DEMO most Internet transactions are
services and therefore should be covered under the rules of the World Trade
Organization’s General Agreement on Trade in Services DEMO that aspects
involved in copy right, particularly anything related to domain DEMO,
should be covered by international rules established by the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and the Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and DEMO (ICANN).
THE EUROPEAN UNION’S EXPERIENCE AND EXAMPLE
As is well-known, the European Union has established a single market
that guarantees the free DEMO of goods, services, persons and capital,
within which information society services play a special role. In this context,
the eEurope Initiative DEMO to reach all citizens. With these goals, the
European Union has DEMO within the guiding principles of the UNCITRAL
Model Laws on a regional basis that goes beyond the specific territory of
member countries. To do DEMO, several guidelines and recommendations were
approved, with the most important and most useful as examples for Latin
America summarized below.
(continued)
150
The European Union’s experience and example (concluded)
Directive on electronic commerce (approved on 4 May 2000): This
Directive views information society services as being limited by several judicial
obstacles arising from different legislations. DEMO also views information services
being limitedby legal insecurity about national regimes applicable to services,
which work against the healthy functioning of internal markets DEMO barriers
and make the freedom to establish an information society less attractive.
To overcome these limitations it defines electronic commerce as a
distance contract DEMO establishes the golden rule that control of services in
the information society should be maintained by the country where the activity
originates, to guarantee the effective protection of general interests. As a result,
services are DEMO to the judicial regime of the member state where the
provider is established, with two exceptions: i) This does not apply in the case
of consumer protection laws, because in this case the latter country’s law is
applied; ii) This applies only to the services of DEMO established in the
European Union. No prior authorization is required to guarantee a service
provider access to information society services. This includes rules about
DEMO and implementing contracts and encourages the creation of Codes
of Conduct to apply the relevant rules.
Directive on electronic signatures (approved on 13 December 1999):
This Directive does not regulate electronic signatures in detail, DEMO rather
defines common requirements for certifying electronic signatures and
certification services. It ensures that all products and services associated with
electronic signatures can circulate DEMO and are governed by the legislation
of the country of origin. Finally, it defines the requirements for creating a digital
signature and establishes that this instrument has the same value as a
handwritten signature. This is DEMO if the digital signature can be attributed to a
single signer, DEMO based on an authentic certificate, and is created using a secure
DEMO, thus respecting the principle of technological neutrality.
Directive on consumer protection (approved on 20 May 1997): This
Directive treats contracts made over DEMO Internet as distance contracts and
spells out the conditions that this type of contract must meet. It requires that
the offerer provide prior information DEMO the consumer on contract clauses, that
there be documentary confirmation of DEMO, that the right to retract be
recognized and that the burden DEMO proof is on the offerer.
Recommendation on operations using electronic payment instruments
(approved on 30 June 1997): This recommendation complements the previous
Directive establishing a suitable framework for legal enforcement, guaranteeing
transparency and avoiding fraudulent operations. These recommendations are
voluntary, because the idea is for those interested to agree on their own rules
and only when these are insufficient DEMO the Commission adopt compulsory
legislation. These cover all electronic means of payment, establishing minimum
information to guarantee transparency and setting the rights and obligations
of contract parties, seeking to distribute them evenly between the issuer and
the rights holder.
Source: Manuel José Cardenas
ECLAC
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
151
Conclusions
The legal framework should be considered the “natural” companion
to the development DEMO the Information Society, particularly where it is
fragmented at the regional DEMO world levels. What is important is that it
remains in line with changes, keeping up with trends to avoid being left
behind.
The regulatory framework that governments adopt must include
measures that protect the public interest, stimulate innovation and
competition, and do not favour any particular technology. Nonetheless, the
private sector is also responsible for guaranteeing that commercial practices
generate a sense of security and trust, including effective “self-regulation”,
as the case requires. “Self-regulatory” initiatives should be welcome to the
degree that they DEMO not damage general interest. These are particularly
timely in the case of B2B transactions.
In Latin America and the Caribbean a cooperative programme to
DEMO the convergence of the regulatory framework should move
forward. This framework must be clear, predictable, non-discriminatory,
stable and at the same time DEMO, favouring expansion of access to ICTs.
Considering that Internet is of DEMO global nature, efforts to harmonize
regulatory frameworks should take this into DEMO and not try to
duplicate them at the regional or national level, but rather act congruently
and compatibly with a global focus. In this sense, countries must follow
the issues being dealt with in the multilateral sphere closely, particularly
those that affect commerce in services and taxes within the WTO.
Applying the guiding principles of the UNCITRAL Model Laws in
DEMO region’s countries has helped to modernize their legislation on
commerce and electronic signatures. However, this legislative labour has
two limitations. On one hand, DEMO are certain limitations intrinsic to the
Model Laws themselves, which leave DEMO application and interpretation
in the hands of different countries’ authorities and thus don’t guarantee
their unity. On the other hand, they do not provide a complete set of rules
for these areas. The first aspect makes DEMO process of harmonizing legislation
incomplete, presenting several gaps and contradictions among DEMO different
countries’ laws, and the second means that several issues, which could be
very useful to harmonize, remain pending.
3. Intellectual property30
Important factors that help the transition to an Information Society
30
This section DEMO written in cooperation with Jacqueline Abarza, Consultant of ECLAC’s
Division of DEMO, Productivity and Management.
152 ECLAC
are property rights on knowledge and information and the guarantee DEMO
such rights will not be challenged. The difference between private and
public goods, and therefore the role that these play in intellectual property
is a strong argument in the current debate about issues such as open DEMO
closed platforms. Closed standards depend on copyright protection of an
essentially private nature, while open standards create public goods that
allow different business teams to develop their own company-specific
interoperative technological designs on a common and DEMO platform. This
allows different business teams to develop their own company-specific
interoperative technological designs in order to protect their product. Both
options will have DEMO different impacts on the development of
competition, the range of choices DEMO to consumers, and the
development of the contents industry downstream from DEMO digital sector.
Clearly the co-development of the technological, institutional and legal
DEMO, referred to as intellectual property, is a central issue for the
transition to the Information Society. It is also undoubtedly one that requires
DEMO consideration regarding the future of Latin America.
Dominant nodes in the network (which are points at which new
technological knowledge is generated) and DEMO property rights are
crucial factors that help the transition to a digital economy. When referring
to intellectual property rights this can also mean any DEMO institution that
guarantees the exclusive rights to claim the benefits and royalties from the
new technological knowledge and communicational content. Thus, in the case
of the conventional model involving a representative firm, perfect competition
and technological know-how viewed as a freely available exogenous
production factor, the advisable public policy approaches the laissez-faire
model. In the case of production organized in DEMO we must imagine
public policy as guaranteeing appropriability of the benefits of knowledge
generation, but also regulatory strength capable of blocking a situation
whereby the nodes central to the network take advantage of their dominant
market DEMO Managing, administering and appropriating the benefits of
technological knowledge used by DEMO network together constitute an issue
crucial to the new behavioural model that we are attempting to describe and
the rules of intellectual property undoubtedly DEMO importance as a key
factor in encouraging more dynamic behaviour on the part of productive
agents. Potential benefits must be weighed against the consequences DEMO terms
of generating dominant market positions and blocking competition.
A second field in which intellectual property rights play a crucial role
in the transition DEMO the digital world has to do with copyright, trademarks,
domain DEMO, designation of origin, etc., all of which —as within the DEMO
digital world— play a major role in the conformation of the competitive
model that develops in the case of Internet portals and business web DEMO
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 153
(DEMO) Interoperability, ‘public goods’ and intellectual property rights
Intellectual property rights provide an important base on which the
new digital economy is built.
There DEMO very different philosophies in the world on this subject.
While Europeans tend toward open standards on intellectual property,
which favors economies of scale, interoperability and helps develop “public
property”, Americans tend to support private platforms, protected by
intellectual property rights. This latter choice often creates a “lock-in” effect
in intellectual property rights meaning that once a specific standard has
DEMO chosen and consolidated, a society’s development path toward the
digital era DEMO also been fixed. While the European view encourages greater
market competition on a common and ‘open’ platform, more room for small
and medium-sized firms to enter the market and the development of the
local contents industry, the view in the United States favors economies of
sclae and scope DEMO on specialization and intellectual property rights as
a means of encouraging private initiatives. Clearly both paths would have
different implications on equality and efficiency DEMO the market affected. The
path chosen will have an impact on the rate and nature of the path any
given country attains in its DEMO towards a knowledge-based society. Every
country should be able to democratically choose which road it wishes to
follow and it should not be chosen DEMO them by default. Unfortunately, Latin
America has made little progress in DEMO sense in recent years.
(b) Domain names and other intellectual property issues
on the Internet
Just as trademarks are important mechanisms in non-digital DEMO
for building up a company’s prestige and reputation, they are also
DEMO in the world of electronic markets and web sites. Problems with
trademarks are not restricted to the physical world and can be greater in
DEMO virtual world, as electronic markets tend to operate worldwide. These
problems DEMO affect other kinds of intellectual property, such as patents and
copyright.
DEMO are many abuses of intellectual property rights on the Internet
that could be considered as illegal in the physical world and that are
difficult DEMO classify as such in the virtual world. Intellectual property rights
in the physical world are typically territorial and exclusive. That means they
apply within DEMO borders of a particular State where they have been
recognized and their owner has the right to prevent others from using these
rights, without his authorization.
154 ECLAC
The fact that such a concept of borders or territories DEMO not exist
on the Internet, combined with the massive reach of DEMO net, its multi-
purpose nature, and the fact it is used for things that were unimaginable
before, all contribute to conflicts over intellectual property. The internet’s
ability to reproduce thousands of copies of a work DEMO instantaneously
by just tapping a few keys and storing them in virtual media, or just as
easily modifying, manipulating and massively distributing these DEMO has
recently started affecting copyright. Nonetheless the internet’s capacity to
distribute products at a global level, especially knowledge-based products,
is one of its advantages. These distinctions from the physical world and
the growing number of DEMO users has led to a new approach to
intellectual property that could produce great changes in the traditional
system.
Identifying Internet actors and intellectual DEMO
When Internet was still in its infancy and was merely a domain of
an academic elite, the potential problems that might arise in the field of
commerce could not have been foreseen. Internet was originally a
DEMO shared by a small group of players who knew each other well.
It was only when companies and consumers entered the picture that the
DEMO exploded as it was faced with the need to accommodate the large
unknown mass that is the global marketplace. At this time the strict
DEMO of self-regulation collapsed and some modifications needed to
be introduced. This led o the establishment of minimal regulations that
permit the smooth functioning of DEMO so-called electronic market.
Intellectual property, which was used, particularly by industrialized
countries, as an economic policy instrument par excellence for developing
States in the physical world, was directly affected by the self-regulation
principle in effect in the virtual world.
To help identify Internet actors, the Domain Name System (DNS) was
created. The DNS provides computers with an easy DEMO remember address
and a simple way of highlighting an electronic address, DEMO help users to
locate Internet sites easily. For example, www.eclac.org. The DEMO actors on
the network are computers that are identified by using an Internet protocol
number. Behind the computers are the companies or the consumers.
DEMO not exempt from difficulties and criticisms, the DNS has
provided good DEMO, offering excellent ways to identify the actors in the
electronic market.
DEMO of the main difficulties and conflicts regarding this identification
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 155
system, which has produced endless debates, arose over the type of
traditional DEMO property used in the physical world, the commercial
trademark. The problems DEMO mainly out of the first come, first served
principle and because DEMO DNS administration’s registry system does not
require an examination prior to registry. Other problems have arisen in
attempting to protect intellectual property in a DEMO, limitless medium,
with no centralized jurisdiction.
Conflicts involving Domain Names DEMO different meanings
• Trademarks: The most obvious conflicts that have appeared DEMO
affected trademarks because both domain names and trademarks
play a role in identification in one market or another. Typical
breaches of trademarks have reached DEMO Today, people
speak of “cyberpiracy” on the Internet, “cybersquatting,” that is,
registry of a brand as a DNS in order to DEMO it to the trademark
owner, and “warehousing”, that is the registry and storage of a
trademark in order to sell it off to DEMO best offer, which could
include an offer from its owner. Because DEMO DNS registry system
is based on the first come, first served DEMO, initially
trademark holders found their rights were not being respected.
• DEMO of organizations and persons: At first, of the seven Top-
Level Domain (TLD) codes, the International Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA) reserved TLDs for international organizations,
specifically for those created under international treaties. DEMO has
led to problems, however, because the abbreviations for
international organizations vary according to the language in use.
For example, the UN (DEMO Nations) is ONU in Spanish; there’s
the WHO (World Health DEMO) and Dr. Who; WIPO itself
(the World Intellectual Property Organization) was a registered
trademark for textiles in the United States. In general, in terms
of trademarks, national legislation and treaties forbid their being
registered. People’s names are an attribute inherent to the human
being. As a DEMO they have the exclusive right to control the
commercial use of their identity, including the possibility of
publicity being carried out using their name. The DNS has often
seen this attribute affected, in particular in the case of famous or
notorious individuals.
• International Names for Pharmaceutical Products: Managed by
the WHO, this system provides a specific name to identify the
pharmaceutical substance or active principle that can be used
freely by DEMO private agent. Nonetheless, some have been
appropriated through DNS, for example, sildenafenil.com, more
156 ECLAC
commonly known as Viagra, and amoxicillin.com. The WIPO
recommendation in this case is to establish a system for
notifying ICANN, which in turn notifies the administrator that
this name has been registered, in order to cancel the registry in
case it is improperly used.
• Geographic DEMO: This concept includes the names of States,
codes for countries (ISO 3166-1947), names for places in countries.
One very controversial case DEMO barcelona.com, registered
by a company called Barcelona. The city government of DEMO
complained and its view was upheld in the legal dispute that
followed. Some country regulations simply do not accept the
registry of countries for DEMO, among them, Australia,
Switzerland, Algeria, France, Peru, Sweden, amongst others. In
the last WIPO report on this issue the recommendation was to
only ban registration of the names of countries, regions, DEMO
municipalities.
One of the first issues that led to the questioning of the DNS as one
of the main sources of the problems mentioned DEMO, was the system for
acquiring the right to register. In general, and especially at the start, no prior
examination, coordination or association DEMO the bodies managing
trademarks or other registries in the traditional market existed. On the
contrary, the system was based on the principle of “first come-first served”.
Because of these difficulties, the Top-Level DNS system, which
DEMO country codes, ccTLDs, which is more associated with the concept
of the State or Government of a territory, has generally worked using
requirements for applying for and obtaining the right to register, taking into
consideration local situations in some cases.
The massive adoption of DNS —there were DEMO 75 million Domain
Names by 2002— the lack of links or coordination among existing
organizations in the physical world, mentioned above, the lack DEMO
centralized jurisdiction and a dispute settlement system, increased the
problems and DEMO the criticisms of the chosen system of those
interested in intellectual property.
Because of this, the White Paper on intellectual property recommended
that the government of the United States should contact the WIPO to start
a DEMO and balanced process involving trademark owners and
Internet community members to develop recommendations for trademarks
and DNS, including dispute settlement proposals that cover cyberpiracy.
In 1999, ICANN adopted what was called the Uniform Domain Name
Resolution Policy (UDRP) for the (general) gTLDs.com,.net,.org.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 157
This procedure made a compulsory and binding requirement that
holders of the domains DEMO, .org and .net should register with managers
that had adopted the DEMO Some 22 of the country code administrators
have adopted the UDRP system including, Mexico, Ecuador, Guatemala,
Panama, Venezuela. Some have developed DEMO own system with good
results, as occurred in Chile, where the first stage of mediation is free to
parties in conflict.31
Internet and DEMO property rights
Domain Names are not the only sources of disputes over intellectual
property. The electronic market, in general, has negatively affected
intellectual DEMO rights, through breaches of these rights. It has also
positively affected DEMO property rights, by serving as an important
tool for broad distribution DEMO intellectual property instruments.
Trademarks: Today trademarks are considered to be the DEMO
instrument in competition amongst companies. A trademark informs
consumers about the business involved behind a product or service. The
exclusive and territorial right to DEMO trademark, which lasts forever, thanks
to the possibilities of continually renewing it, has allowed companies to
position themselves in markets with a reputation that not only allows them
to attract customers but also to maintain DEMO over time.
In terms of how the Internet works, trademarks play DEMO fundamental
role in the electronic market and their importance may even surpass their
value in the physical world. Internet users need to acquire both DEMO reputation
and credibility among consumers, particularly because interpersonal
relationships do not DEMO and products cannot be physically examined.
However, it is difficult to DEMO the territorial protection of trademarks into
the borderless, electronic world. Once DEMO trademark is adopted on the
Internet, it is visible to a DEMO global audience and could be
considered to have a global impact. Because of this, problems affecting
trademarks in the physical world have spread to the virtual one.
Thus, what might be considered breaches of the use of trademarks
in the physical world have been difficult to classify as DEMO in the virtual
world. One example is the use of the trademark as metalabel, that is, as a
To date, 4,155 cases have been resolved, over half by the WIPO centre for mediation and
arbitration. The cost of this centre is US$ 1,500 and the DEMO takes approximately 50
days from the start of proceedings. So far, DEMO UDRP has been considered efficient.
However, despite these regulatory efforts problems DEMO to be resolved in the area of
intellectual property.
31
158 ECLAC
key word in a web site HTML code, so that Internet search engines can
classify the site’s contents. Therefore, a search engine looking through all
websites containing a specific key word will list this DEMO In several
jurisdictions, the trademark owners have questioned the use of DEMO
trademarks as metalabels. However, the problem is that these are not DEMO
used to identify concrete products or services. Some courts consider this
as a breach of trademark, on the understanding that the use of the
trademark as a metalabel could imply free promotion for the trademark
holder. DEMO alternatively, by looking for the trademark holder’s products,
the consumer DEMO end up by mistake at the website of a third-party that
may eventually become a competitor, which could be considered as an act
of unfair competition. Another problem is the co-existence of trademark
rights corresponding to DEMO people. Because of the territorial principle
and specialized rights to trademarks, DEMO is perfectly possible that different
people could possess the rights to similar or identical trademarks in
different countries, or even in the same country. This co-existence can be
very difficult on the Internet, where a sign is potentially visible worldwide.
Patents: Traditionally, inventions are protected under a DEMO system
that grants an exclusive, temporary right to owners to exploit DEMO
invention. Patent laws have been based on the fact that this exclusive right
to exploitation encourages recompensation for the investments of the
inventor and DEMO encourages the creation of knowledge. The information
contained in patent documents must be shared and is of prime importance,
because it is organized DEMO classified according to materials, owner and
other factors. This information is DEMO becoming available online,
through Internet-based systems. Considering the territorial nature of
patenting laws, reproducing inventions, in the physical world, in States
where the right to reproduce these inventions is not protected is not a DEMO
of trademark.
Recently, patents have been granted to inventions of commercial
DEMO developed through the Internet. One example is patent number
5,960,411 of the United States of America, granted to Amazon.com, which
allows DEMO customers to click and buy. This resulting trend in investing in
creative economic activities for selling across digital networks, justifies the
patent. Some have even proposed changing the patent system. This trend
has been criticized, however, because these elements do not meet the
traditional requirements for patents, DEMO as level of creativity and
industrial applicability. Detractors of the patent argue that it only meets the
requirement for a novelty. In Europe, the prevailing opinion is that a
patentable invention must be of a technical DEMO and that commercial
methods should not be patentable because they involve solely intellectual
activities.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
159
Copyright and associated rights: As with trademarks, copyright has
been enormously affected DEMO the Internet. On the Internet, the transmission
of texts, sounds, DEMO, computer programs, audiovisual works, all
protected by copyright, is now common. Moreover, the exchange of
products, which range from information to DEMO field of entertainment,
constitute an important part of electronic commerce transactions. However,
on the digital network these transactions have also been the DEMO of
controversy, particularly because breaches of copyright have been
committed against DEMO holders.
Some typical ways of exploiting copyright in the digital environment
involve transmissions on request, online transmission that locates an object
on the website so that it can be captured by the end user. Once placed,DEMO
anyone, anywhere, at any time can have access to the product. Another
situation occurs with reproduction in digital networks. The Berne
convention bans DEMO reproduction “in any manner or form”. This
wording includes storage of a work in an electronic support. Similarly,
placing work in an Internet DEMO base and its reproduction on the web
require a prior license, DEMO as occurs with music in an MP3 format.
Breaches of copyright and other associated rights in this new
electronic scenario pose difficulties that arise DEMO the nature of the
medium, the multiplication in its uses, uses that go beyond the territory of
a single State, insecurity in electronic contracts, and particularly the lack
of a competent jurisdiction to resolve these non-territorial disputes. In this
sense, the WIPO treaties governing copyright (WCT) and performances and
phonograms (WPPT) recognize the growing role of protection DEMO,
such as online management and licensing systems.
B. Financing
The endeavor to finance the creation of an Information Society will
have to focus DEMO creating and upgrading universal and cost-effective
Infrastructure and Generic Service Layers, DEMO well as actively seeking
methods for financing corporate innovation and modernization in the
different “e-Sectors.” These two tasks require the joint effort of private, as
well as public financing.
1. The macro and microeconomic background to DEMO transition
The current Latin America and Caribbean debate on the transition
to an information society is based on stylized facts and the counterfactual
model DEMO how developed industrial countries managed such transition over
160 ECLAC
the last two decades. Such counterfactual model does not, however,
constitute a satisfactory standpoint as from where to start our present
DEMO on this topic. The reasons for that are as follows: first, the average
per capita income of developed countries is five to six DEMO higher than
the average for the region. Secondly, the macroeconomic fundamentals DEMO
developed economies can be considered as relatively stable, and economic
growth, although moderate, has been sustained in recent years. As a result
of that the macroeconomic scenario can be taken ‘as given’ in any debate
DEMO the transition to the digital era. Thirdly, the provision of public DEMO
by the State and the existence of relatively strong regulatory environments
and regulatory agencies can be taken for granted. This provides room for
a DEMO equitable and efficient transition to the digital era. All of the above
means that the transition to an information society can be expected to DEMO
place under conditions of a more equitable and universal access to the
goods and services of the information society. None of this applies to
DEMO Latin America. With a few very notable exceptions, the
countries of DEMO region have not attained a satisfactory growth performance
after their efforts towards trade liberalization and de-regulation and
privatization of economic activities in the 1990s. DEMO, the aggregate
performance of many of them has deteriorated significantly in DEMO times.
FDI flows —which facilitate most of the expansion of the basic physical
infrastructure on which transition to the digital era is based— have
DEMO in past years, leading to some reconsideration as to the future
DEMO of transition to the information society. In addition to the above, DEMO
various countries in the region the fundamentals of the economy are far
from equilibrium, generating an uncertain macroeconomic ‘climate’ in
which entrepreneurial “animal instincts” are far from buoyant. On the other
hand, the provision of public goods is scarce and the regulatory
environment and agencies responsible for designing DEMO applying
competition policies are still relatively immature. This means that
competition still plays a minor role in determining an adequate market
‘regime’ for the DEMO to ICTs in Latin America. Moreover, we are talking
about countries DEMO have one fifth (or one sixth) of the per capita income
of developed countries, so we can intuitively understand that the model
for the transition to the information society is unlikely to be a carbon DEMO
of the one followed by more developed industrial countries.
The discussion about the Latin America’s transition to the digital era
has therefore to be DEMO in the context of the current regional
socioeconomic reality, as it DEMO such reality what is going to determine the
pace and nature of the Latin American transition to the information society.
On the other hand, it needs to be considered that ICTs offer a new window
of DEMO for economic and social development, which bears the
potential to change DEMO present reality. It should be clear from the start that
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 161
given the prevailing local circumstances the role to be played by the State
DEMO and facilitating the transition to the digital era will be crucial,
even more so than what such role has been in more developed DEMO
societies. Such role will take the form of regulatory activities strengthening
competition and market discipline, and the provision of subsidies to the
demand side, favoring accessibility to public goods. These public goods
should secure universal accessibility to ICTs in societies that are intrinsically
poorer than those of the DEMO world. New forms of public/private
partnership will be needed in these markets in order to construct new forms
of ‘workable competition’ and the DEMO of public goods to society,
so as to avoid the expansion of the ‘digital divide’.32
Available evidence indicates that subsequent to recent market-
DEMO structural reforms the Latin American growth performance has
been far from satisfactory. So has also been the overall rate of productivity
growth, leading to a stable relative productivity gap vis a vis more mature
industrial economies (Katz and Stumpo, 2001). At the macroeconomic level
it is clear that the region is performing better than in the past. However, it
is also clear that trade liberalization and market de-regulation efforts have
not DEMO followed by significant productivity improvements, neither by a
steady reduction in DEMO international production efficiency gap these
countries exhibit in comparison to the world best practice frontiers. Nor
does it seem clear that said reforms have DEMO significant positive results
on the equity front. On average, poverty and DEMO have increased
throughout the region (Katz and Stumpo, 2001).
With the opening up of the economy to external foreign competition,
deregulation DEMO markets and privatization of production activity in countries
that are structurally poor as far as the domestic creation of technological
knowledge is concerned —but DEMO rich in natural resources and
unskilled manpower— the production system and individual economic
agents have responded by seeking new forms of production specialization.
They DEMO also and sought new ways of organizing production at the level
of in manufacturing plants, in which priority is given to prioritizing a more
intensive use of relatively abundant resources and there is a tendency
tending DEMO abandon ‘knowledge-intensive’ activities.
One possible explanation for the observed pattern of evolution is that
throughout the 1990s the region has suffered the combined effect DEMO an
Both in the development of the ‘Network of Networks’, as DEMO Internet is sometimes
referred to, and with regarding equality of access DEMO universality of services, the role of
the public sector has been DEMO in the industrialized countries, as shown, for example,
by the act passed in the United States in 1966 on telecommunications and mandatory
DEMO services (Laffont and Tirole, 1998).
32
162 ECLAC
uncertain and volatile macroeconomic regime and a highly ‘defensive’
microeconomic DEMO, lacking in major new investments and in
innovation efforts. Such self-sustained DEMO circle derived in low total
factor productivity growth and in a persistent large productivity gap vis a
vis more mature industrial societies (Katz, DEMO).
DOWNTURN IN FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT FLOWS
Foreign investment flows (FDI) to Latin America and the Caribbean
decreased for the second consecutive year DEMO the preliminary data for 2002
does not show signs of a reversal in that trend. Latin America experienced
the world’s largest cut back in DEMO telecom carrier spending between 2001
and 2002 (62 per cent) (DEMO, 2002). In view of the great importance of
FDI for DEMO the world’s physical infrastructure for ITCs, it will be difficult
to DEMO progress in the transition to the digital era if there is a marked
reduction in the growth rate of the basic ICT infrastructure.
Net DEMO of FDI to Latin America and the Caribbean and the World
(DEMO thousands of millions of dollars)
Source: ECLAC 2002
Summing up, the information available indicates that far from
moving towards an information society DEMO satisfactory growth and
dynamic production structures and comparative advantages, the transition
DEMO Latin America is occurring amid increasing difficulties in sustaining
macroeconomic balances and historical equality patterns. The restructuring
of the production system has been shifting DEMO balance in favor of sectors
that make little use of technological know-how. With few exceptions, there
are currently few examples of countries in the region that are launching
new production methods with higher domestic aggregate value, innovating
in technology, or seem concerned with creating universal access to ICTs.
There also seems to be little competitive discipline in the key markets DEMO
the transition to ICTs. All of this should be taken into account when
considering possible future scenarios for the development of ICTs in Latin
DEMO and the Caribbean.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 163
2. Investing in the development of an information society33
(a) Foreign Investment DEMO Telecommunications
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, Latin American policy DEMO
decided to implement dramatic reforms, including opening up the
economies to DEMO competition, streamlining government bureaucracy
and privatizing state-owned companies. This provided investors DEMO
further incentive to invest in the region and brought an unprecedented and
much needed wave of foreign private capital. The telecommunications
sector, long a bastion of inefficient and monopolistic practices in most
countries, was typically among the first to be privatized in countries that
were implementing reformist policies.
DEMO European telecommunication companies like Telecom Italia and
Telefónica de España faced their own set of problems at the beginning of the
1990s. For years DEMO had been given privileges in their countries and
enjoyed the protection commonly accorded to state-owned monopolies.
When the European markets began to open up, neither Telecom Italia nor
Teléfonica de España was prepared for competing on DEMO global scale. Growing
competition obliged these companies to grow quickly or risk being taken
over by larger European rivals. The telecommunications markets in
neighboring DEMO in Europe were over-saturated and also faced stiff
competition at home. The two telecoms companies were therefore forced
to look elsewhere for acquisition targets DEMO to expand.
Latin America and the Caribbean, where the telecommunications
sector DEMO still relatively undeveloped, seemed to be an ideal place for these
DEMO to invest, given the similarity of their cultures and the growth
DEMO offered in this untapped market. Telecom Italia and Telefónica de
España were by far the largest investors in the Latin American
telecommunications sector. Telecom DEMO first large-scale investment in the
region occurred in the early 1990s in Argentina. Today its operations also
include Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, DEMO, Peru and Venezuela. Telefónica
de España has invested in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Puerto DEMO, Venezuela. In the cellular market
BellSouth, along with Telefónica de España and Telecom Italia, has also been
an extremely active investor in the region, with operations in 11 countries.
Before these companies arrived local telephone companies had
suffered from a serious lack of capital that prevented them DEMO
This Section is a contribution of Mr. John H. Tonelli, Chairman DEMO CEO of International
Venture Partners, LLC.
35
164 ECLAC
necessary upgrades in equipment. It was not uncommon for clients DEMO wait
years for a telephone line. The high costs of installing lines and the cost of
telephone service, especially long distance, made it DEMO luxury to have a
telephone. For that reason, a large portion DEMO the population did not have
telephones in their homes. The newly privatized companies spent billions
of dollars upgrading the telephone networks. By the late DEMO most of the
region’s incumbent carriers had foreign shareholders. Interestingly, the
DEMO of privatization on the various markets was extremely different. In
Chile, DEMO and liberalization opened up the telecommunications
market to virtually unlimited competition, DEMO drove many competitors
out of business. In Mexico competition was introduced gradually over a
six-year period, allowing the incumbent carrier, Teléfonos de México (Telmex),
to adapt to the changing environment. Brazil followed a path that was a
combination of these two extremes, with competition introduced gradually
and creating a duopoly, rather than a single company. In Argentina two
operators (a partnership of Telecom Italia and France Telecom on the one hand,
and Telefónica España on the other) received a seven-year exclusive license
(1990-1997) to operate the telecommunication system.
The privatization of much DEMO the telecommunications sector in the
region was the first important step in paving the way for widespread
Internet use and the region’s transition to DEMO Information Society. Without
the extensive upgrades made to the telecommunications systems in Latin
America and the Caribbean, mostly paid for with foreign capital, DEMO
available infrastructure would most probably not have been adequate to
handle the Internet boom a few years later. If that had been the case, many
of the region’s most successful Internet entrepreneurs would never have
got DEMO
(b) Venture Capital
Latin American Internet companies were the first companies to attract
venture capital to the region on a large scale. Prior DEMO 1995 only a handful
of venture capital firms were dedicated to investing in Latin America. By
the late 1990s the tremendous strength of the DEMO capital markets had
contributed to the widespread availability of venture capital for ICT
investments in Latin America. This was largely driven by a surge DEMO ICT
stocks and investors’ desire to seek additional opportunities and higher
returns away from the heavily saturated market in the United States. In 1995
DEMO US$5.7 billion of venture capital was invested in the United
States. By 2000, venture capital investment in the U.S. had increased to over
US$100 billion, and it had become significantly more difficult to find
attractive investment opportunities in the United States (NVCA, 2001). The
abundance of DEMO available for high risk Internet ventures, coupled with
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
165
a decreasing number of attractive opportunities in the U.S., helped fuel the
tremendous wave of Internet investment in Latin America.
VENTURE INVESTMENTS BY YEAR IN DEMO U.S. (US$ BILLIONS; *ESTIMATE)
Source: NVCA (National Venture Capital Association),  official website (http://www.nvca.org), 2001.
Over 1,DEMO start-up initiatives in Latin America received funding
in 2000 from private investors and venture capital funds. Approximately
80% of these start-ups were in Brazil, Argentina or Mexico. During 1999
and 2000, most venture capital investments in Latin America were
concentrated in the Internet sector (83%), with the vast majority of the
Internet investments in media/portal operations. According to DEMO
Consulting, Internet-related investments in Latin America by venture
capital firms and DEMO investors amounted to US$ 700 million in 1999
and US$ 2.6 billion in 2000. Most of the investment in 2000 occurred in
the first DEMO of the year. Today, the ICT sector in Latin America
continues DEMO attract the largest amount of venture capital of any sector.
During the first quarter of 2001, the ICT sector accounted for 83% of all
venture capital disbursements in the region. Over 80% of these
investments were DEMO by corporations in strategic areas, rather than by
private investors and DEMO capitalists.
Despite this huge amount of private equity activity, only four DEMO
American Internet companies have been able to access the public markets
in the United States (El Sitio, Starmedia, AOL-Latin America, and Quepasa)DEMO
Many telecommunications and infrastructure companies, however, were
able to access the public markets in the United States and in Latin America.
These companies, because of their size, have been able to obtain financing
from a wide variety of sources that are not available to Internet companies.
After DEMO “Internet goldrush” in 2000, global high-tech stock markets
collapsed, which had multiple effects and therefore severe consequences
on the availability of venture capital DEMO Latin America. The rapid collapse
166 ECLAC
of the Internet market in Latin America, was a direct result of the same type
of external forces that initially caused it DEMO surge. Because the amount of
investment capital available to Internet projects diminished, companies that
required additional funding to survive started to disappear. As in the United
States and the rest of the world, investors in Latin America who ignored
the common disciplined practices of venture capital investing experienced
DEMO losses. Blinded by the quixotic euphoria that marked this unusual
period, DEMO did not place enough emphasis on credible track records,
positive cash flow, co-investors/shareholders with deep pockets and exit
strategies. Many of these early Internet investors had little or no operating
experience in Latin America. DEMO factor that further contributed to the
problem was the fact that many Latin American entrepreneurs lacked
experience in the technology sector. The combination of DEMO elements in
Latin America and throughout the world contributed to the decrease in
available capital for the Internet sector starting in the second half DEMO 2000.
The outcome of the deficit of capital in the ICT sector is a tremendous
industry-wide consolidation. Local telecommunications companies are
particularly well positioned DEMO capitalize on this trend. As evidence of this,
ownership or control of Internet Service Provides (ISPs) by incumbent
telecommunications companies increased from DEMO in 1999 to 40% in 2000,
according to the Yankee Group.
There are some very compelling reasons, apart from the strength of
the United States’ markets, why financing has been readily available for
Latin American Internet projects. The region has consistently over the past
few years been DEMO fastest growing Internet community in the world.
Around 90% of the users expected to be online by 2005 are not yet online
and over DEMO of the devices capable of being connected to the Internet are
not yet connected.
Today the only companies in Latin America that can access
DEMO capital markets are established players and large, well-known
companies, including the region’s telecommunications companies. The
willingness of venture capital investors to invest in DEMO Latin American
ventures is contingent upon their ability to free up cash in existing
investments. Most funds are eight to 10 year vehicles. Unfortunately, the
exit opportunities, which are so critical for venture capital investments, DEMO
currently uncertain in Latin America because of the lack of liquidity in both
the local and foreign capital markets. Since most of the region’s DEMO
capital investments came between 1997 and 2000, these investments are still
DEMO young. Therefore, venture capital firms are unlikely to take a large
DEMO by liquidating their investment at a time when valuations are so low.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 167
(DEMO) Obstacles and Challenges
The process of privatization and the significant progress DEMO Latin
American and Caribbean countries have made toward macroeconomic
stability made the region attractive for FDI in the late 1990s. These capital
inflows played DEMO major role in the growth of the regional telecommunications
industry up to 2001. The regulatory challenge in Latin America is to create an
appropriate DEMO transparent foreign direct investment policy that enables the
public and private sectors to meet their objectives. In the telecommunication
sector it will be necessary DEMO maximize FDI inflows as well as establish a
coherent development policy for the telecommunications sector that is aimed
at simultaneously achieving corporate strategy objectives DEMO national policy
goals (ECLAC, 2001a).
The role of e-business has expanded rapidly in Latin America with
growing international competition. IDC expects the DEMO American
business to business (B2B) market to increase twenty fold between 1999 and
2003. As with other markets, the business to consumer (DEMO) market proved
disappointing and funding for B2C initiatives quickly dried up DEMO investors
started to realize the lack of scale B2C firms have. Interestingly,
approximately 47% of all venture capital invested in Internet-related
companies in DEMO America during 1999 and 2000 were targeted for B2C
initiatives. This imbalance shows that markets see a very high growth
potential in Latin American DEMO e-commerce, or calls for an inevitable shift
in capital market focus DEMO B2C to B2B ventures.
Local financing has played a very small role in the overall
information technology spectrum in Latin America. Angel investors (often
referred to as “friends and family”) have typically been instrumental in
financing companies in their early stages. There does not yet exist an
established DEMO of Latin American and Caribbean venture capitalists.
However, it is essential DEMO local investors take a more active role in
financing ICT. The region should not be solely dependent on financing from
external sources. Additionally, local investors are best positioned to identify
and capitalize on new and unique DEMO, as well as manage their
existing investments on an ongoing basis.
DEMO region’s stock markets have failed to provide an adequate source
of capital to ICT and other companies. The illiquidity of local markets has
inhibited DEMO growth of private investing because of the lack of attractive
exit opportunities through initial public offerings (IPOs). Private investors
seeking liquidity must rely on selling out to strategic investors, such as
multinational companies that want to increase market share without having
to set up an operation from DEMO In order for venture capital to increase
substantially in the region, DEMO capital markets will need to become more
168
ECLAC
robust and a greater resource for investors. The liberalization of DEMO
investment regulations allowing pension funds to invest a portion of their
resources in local ICT could be one accelerator.
In order for the region’s DEMO markets to be more effective in creating
liquidity, more advanced securities DEMO are required to protect minority
shareholders rights. Additionally, corporate governance laws DEMO to be set
in place to create a higher standard for officers and directors. Experience
shows that this is a challenging task, as most Latin American companies
are family-run businesses and their owners have traditionally been
DEMO to the needs of minority shareholders.
Measures to enable and promote domestic growth must be
contemplated to allow effective e-commerce between countries. E-commerce
is DEMO borderless and global in scope. Financial markets are skittish
and fearful of protectionism. The creation of digital content and new
technological advances requires flexible DEMO capital mechanisms. If the
region does not want to fall too far behind in these ongoing technological
developments, strong and stable financing mechanisms and markets are
indispensable.
3. Financing a universal information society for all
In DEMO consensus declaration about ICT for development issues in 2000,
Latin America and Caribbean countries stated that, “allowing the evolution
of the Information Society to be guided solely by market mechanisms entails
the risk of an DEMO of the social gaps existing within our societies,
the creation of new modes of exclusion, an increase in the negative aspects
of globalization and a widening of the distances between developed and
developing countries” (Declaration of Florianopolis, 2000). As the following
section underscores, market mechanisms DEMO themselves are unlikely to close
the worrisome Digital Divide in the near future. Considering the actual role
of the State in Latin America and DEMO Caribbean, potential ways and lines
of thought about how the challenging DEMO of “Financing a universal
Information Society for all” could be addressed, DEMO analyzed. This task
accounts for the creation of a global Information Society (Digital Divide
between countries), as well as for a universal Information Society within a
country (domestic Digital Divide).
(a) Market Mechanisms and the Digital Divide
The Digital Divide between societies is usually measured DEMO terms
of access to the ICT Infrastructure Layer, whereas ICT usage DEMO positively
related to income. Per capita income varied widely across the globe in 2002,
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 169
ranging from US$ 40,000 (Switzerland, Luxembourg), to as little as DEMO 400
in some countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (e.g. DEMO).
There is a similar disparity of Internet hosts. While in Finland there were
almost 200 Internet hosts per 1,000 people available in DEMO, in Latin
America and the Caribbean the number currently lies between DEMO than
one, to a maximum of 24 Internet hosts per 1,DEMO inhabitants.
Experience from Europe and North America shows that Latin
America and the Caribbean needs to reach a level of 160 Internet hosts per
DEMO,000 inhabitants to give around 70% of the population access to the Internet
(example Sweden). Generally speaking, “closing the Digital Divide” in DEMO
America and the Caribbean, would require raising Internet access to such
DEMO level (see Graph).
NARROWING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE WITH AN INCOME DEMO CAPITA OF LESS
THAN US$ 5,000?
Note: sample of DEMO countries from five continents.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert based on Netsizer, «Internet Statistics» (http://www.netsizer.com), 2002.
However, given the disparate DEMO distribution, in order to attain
such high rates of access, ICT usage would need to be very income inelastic
in countries with a DEMO income per capita. In other words, ICT usage would
170 ECLAC
need to become a priority for citizens in such countries. DEMO large part of the
low income per capita that is available to them would need to be allocated
to ICT. As the graph shows, this does not seem to be the case. Income
elasticity is high DEMO ICT usage and the number of Internet hosts is very
positively correlated to income. It seems natural that countries with lower
income have lower DEMO rates. The use of the technology is too expensive
to be considered as an indispensable priority. Given the low income per
capita in Latin DEMO and the Caribbean (US$ 3,670 in the year 2000), DEMO
would go against all economic reason to assume that the region could
currently close the Digital Divide (which would mean following the
trajectory of the arrow in the graph).34
The situation worsens when taking into DEMO the large discrepancies
in income distribution within Latin American and the Caribbean societies.
The highly unequal income distribution leaves the poorest 60% of the DEMO
American and Caribbean population with only 20% to 30% of the already
very low overall income (ECLAC, 2001). While it seems like DEMO big enough
challenge to reach an initial Internet penetration of 30%-40% in low-income
countries, the task of connecting the remaining 60% will be even more
complicated. Given that 30% of the Latin American and Caribbean
population DEMO estimated (by the World Bank) to live on the equivalent of
US$ 2 per day, the task of including that percentage into the Information
Society seems more challenging than ever. In 2000, the average Internet
access charge by service providers (ISP + telephone call charge) in DEMO
region’s most important economies was US$ 1.4 per day, which represents
DEMO of the income of the poorest 30% of Latin America’s population.35
The new technology seems to be too expensive to permit low-income
countries to DEMO penetration rates similar to the ones in high-income
countries. As the following graph shows, some countries in the region
(especially Colombia, Brazil and Chile) are already spending over-
dimensionally large amounts on ICTs. In a cross section of countries around
the world, these regional countries were found way above the international
However, as the graph impressively demonstrates through the example of Estonia, it seems
to be possible for a low-income country to move in the right direction toward an
“Information Society for all”, —at least for a small country (Estonia has only 1.4 million
inhabitants). It is clear that in Estonia, connectivity has been made a “government priority”.
This small case seems to be a first indicator that DEMO public sector leadership can
be very beneficial. See also “Digital Dividend”, DEMO of T.Ilves, Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Estonia; at “Digital Inclusion: Impact and Challenges of the Networked Economy
for Developing Countries”; DSE, DEMO; http://www.dse.de/ef/digital/pap0201e.htm;
http://www.dse.de/ef/DEMO/ilves-e.htm.
Monthly access charges by service provider in 2000 (ISP charge DEMO telephone call charge):
Argentina (US$ 30 + US$ 11); Brazil (US$ 33 + US$ 3); Chile (US$ 32 + DEMO 7); Mexico
(US$ 24 + US$ 3); Venezuela (US$ 28 + US$ 39), (ITU and WITSA, 2002).
34
DEMO
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
171
average of ICT expenditure as a percentage of GDP. In relation to their DEMO,
countries like Spain, Portugal, Italy, Finland and the United DEMO spent
less on ICTs than Colombia, Brazil and Chile (see Y-axis in the ICT
expenditure graph). However, in real terms, the DEMO ICT expenditure in
Colombia, Brazil and Chile was less than US$ DEMO per capita in 2000, while
the average expenditure in more developed DEMO lies around US$ 2,500
and above (see X-axis in the DEMO expenditure graph).36 With the market price
of a simple and low performance computer being around US$ 500-600 in
2001, the capacity for citizens in Latin American and the Caribbean to access
the Internet seems very DEMO
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIE (ICT) EXPENDITURES IN 2000
Note: sample DEMO 24 countries.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert based on WITSA (World Information Technology and Services Alliance),
«ICT at a Glance Tables, WISTA DEMO to the World Bank Development Data Group»
(http:/www.witsa.org/), DEMO
36
37
ICT expenditure per capita in 2000: Argentina US$ 310; Brazil US$ 287; Chile US$ 371;
Colombia US$ 231; Mexico DEMO 196; Venezuela US$ 199 (WITSA; 2002). In 2002, Latin
America represents around 5.5 percent of the worldwide ICT spending (North America
40 percent and Europe 31 percent).
It needs to be taken DEMO consideration that in order to access the Internet; more than a
DEMO is needed (software, telephone charges, ISP charges, etc…).
172 ECLAC
While some countries in the region (such as Mexico, DEMO and
Argentina) are still lagging behind in putting ICT expenditures as DEMO priority,
the low regional income in general seems to not permit them to spend a
lot more on ICT.
The basic hope lies DEMO the fact that prices of ICT equipment and
variable access costs could fall drastically over the next few years. Ceteris
paribus to the available DEMO per capita, this would also enable poorer
citizens to gain access DEMO the ICT infrastructure within a small time lapse.
Over time, the DEMO line in the first graph (“Internet host penetration
and GNI per DEMO 2002”) would either move upwards in a parallel manner,
or DEMO would just equilibrate (moving towards a horizontal line, following
the direction of the arrow), depending on whether high-income countries
would reach saturation DEMO not. This scenario claims that, over time, even
countries with low-income can quantitatively close technology divides. (It
needs to be underlined that this analysis is based on the basic variable
“Internet hosts”, which does not say anything about the quality of access
(e.g. bandwidth, etc.), DEMO about access time. The analysis therefore proposes
a “static world”, without DEMO constantly moving technological frontier. In this
case, basic access to the DEMO (“Internet hosts”) would be the determined
technological frontier).
In order to get a better picture about possible development
trajectories in the years DEMO come, historical data —which refers to the
diffusion of more traditional DEMO technologies for example— could
be used. Television and radio, were two DEMO of modern ICTs. It
could be expected that at the beginning of the “TV-revolution” in the 1960s
and 1970s there was a similar relationship DEMO TV receivers and income
per capita, as is currently found with DEMO hosts and income per capita.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
RADIO PENETRATION AND TV PENETRATION VS INCOME PER CAPITA
(1970 -1980 -1997)
173
174
ECLAC
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
Note: DEMO of 48 countries from five continents; the so-called “stable line of DEMO refers to
(y= 0.02x); the USA falls visually out of DEMO radio graphs, due to its over-proportional penetration.
175
176 ECLAC
Looking at the graphs, it appears this is the case. In the early years
of radio and television diffusion (see graphs from 1980) the relation between
income and technology usage has been very strong. Over time the relation
lost importance, narrowing the “radio and television divide”. Both of the
above-mentioned effects occur. First of all, the regression line moves
towards a more horizontal position. That means that high-income countries
experience DEMO certain level of saturation, while low-income countries increase
their penetration. Low-income DEMO grew faster than high-income
countries in TV and radio penetration between 1970 and 1997.38 It is a clear
indicator for “TV and radio usage DEMO between high-income and
low-income countries. Secondly, the regression line also moves DEMO in
absolute terms. In 1970 the TV penetration in Latin America and the
Caribbean has been between 20 and 150 receivers per 1,000 DEMO
Almost 30 years later between 90 and 270 receivers were available for the
same amount of people. This trend also accounts for radio information
DEMO
These results as far as access to TV and radio is concerned, raise
hopes that Internet diffusion (the so-called Digital Divide) will eventually
behave similarly. This implies that the Digital Divide might be closed over
DEMO through market mechanisms. However, it should be noted that (a) DEMO
diffusion process shown is very slow and (b) even after 30 years the access
divide in TV and radio has not yet been DEMO
If we are expecting similar diffusion trajectories for Internet access,
it could take some decades to significantly narrow the Digital Divide. The
hope DEMO in the positive effects of increasing trade relations, augmented
economic interactions DEMO more and more global competition, which is
accelerating the spread of DEMO TV receivers spread faster than radio
receivers did.39 It required 38 years to reach 50 million users of radio
information technology starting at the DEMO of last century. From the
middle of the century it took only 13 years to connect the same amount of
Natural Logarithms for radio DEMO, whereas [y = log (radio)] and [x = log (DEMO
per capita)]
Year 1970: y = 0.7284x + 0.2158
Year DEMO: y = 0.6167x + 0.3421
Year 1997: y = 0.4272x + 1.0818
Natural Logarithms for TV penetration, whereas [y = log (TV)DEMO and [x = log (GNI per
capita)]
Year 1970: y = 1.5495x – 2.8899
Year 1980: y = 0.9289x – 1.1513
Year 1997: y = 0.4015x + 0.9373
(Correa, 2002)
See Footnote with Logarithms.
38
39
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 177
people to TV. At the end of the 20th century it took only DEMO years to
connect 50 million people to the Internet (ITU, 1999b). However, while
technology diffusion might be faster nowadays, the Digital DEMO might
also have severer consequences and might be more dangerous than the
previous “TV divide” or “radio divide”. As already discussed in previous
Sections DEMO this book, excluding part of the society from accessing the heart
DEMO the Information Society creates dangerous socioeconomic and even political
gaps. Access to the network of networks facilitates economic development,
it assists the spread DEMO general education, health issues, public administration,
political information and participation, cultural development and all the
things, which in the end aim DEMO contribute to reaching and maintaining
social peace within and between communities. If the Digital Divide does
not narrow in the near future this would DEMO a severe negative impact on
equality issues within and among societies. Therefore, dramatic and far-
reaching action is called for in order to close the Digital Divide in the nearest
possible future.
(b) The Role DEMO the Public Sector
According to traditional economic theory, the logical conclusion DEMO
of this scenario would be to call for government intervention. Market
mechanisms do not bring the desired result within the desired timeframe.
Where there DEMO little or no incentive for the market to satisfy the “true
demand” for goods and services, the State will have to provide the missing
link. This is a long established mechanism. The motives for State
interference DEMO from welfare-economic arguments (market failure and
efficiency, etc), to economically more intangible rights-, freedom-, and
justice-orientated arguments (Ryan, 1989).
DEMO example, health, education and social security are typical
examples of basic goods that society believes should be provided for —and,
where appropriate, actually consumed by— everybody (to a certain
minimum level), whether the individual citizen likes it or not and whether
the individual can pay DEMO it or not. In a free market, many people might
not DEMO a sufficient level of satisfaction in these areas. The solution
consists of making them “public”, so everybody can access them. A basic
characteristic of these kinds of “public goods” is that they not only benefit
the DEMO that consumes them, but also everybody else, as an
externality of individual consumption. In the case of education, public
access to all would result in an educated population contributing to the
better functioning of society (Beckerman, 1989). Besides the fact that some
citizens simply cannot afford the desired minimum level of such goods, it
is also believed that people do not have the adequate information necessary
to optimize the available DEMO for their long-term benefit. They lack
178 ECLAC
awareness about the potential long-term benefits from the consumption of
DEMO goods and services. That is why the State needs to intervene, DEMO
promote, and even provide, the use of such goods and services to the
“public”.
It could also be claimed that ICT usage and DEMO behavior helps
provide such goods. Digital behavior brings desirable externalities in decreasing
information asymmetries, integrating fringe groups, strengthening of
democratic mechanisms and long-term DEMO gains on a more advanced
level of exchanging information, communication and DEMO through
digital networks. Since market mechanisms by themselves are not enough
to provide ICT usage to the entire society in developing countries in the
DEMO future, the public sector has to take a leadership role, to promote good
‘ICT usage’. If the State wishes to create a universal DEMO Society
for all its citizens, the public sector will have to DEMO mechanisms to provide
ICT access to the part of population which cannot afford it.
While the discussion about the “basic human right to information
DEMO communication” is maturing40 (Bucharest, 2002; UNESCO, 2002; WSIS,
DEMO; CV Mistica, 2002), and awareness about the necessity of a ‘public
good’ called ‘ICT usage’ is increasing, the central question remains how
such public goods could be financed?
In Latin America and the DEMO the available alternatives for the
State to finance such pure public goods are very limited. Taking on more
debt to speed up the transition DEMO a universal Information Society
does not seem to be an option. With an overall regional budget deficit of
4.9% of GDP in 1999 and DEMO, the World Bank classified seven countries
in the region as “severely DEMO in January 2002.41 A further nine
countries were classified as “moderately indebted”.42 Furthermore, the
dominating neo-liberal development approach adopted by many Latin
American and Caribbean countries in recent decades, which strongly
emphasizes reducing the size of the public sector, has left the governments
of the region with very little spending power. In an international
comparison, it can be seen that Latin American and Caribbean governments
play a very limited role in their DEMO (with the notable exception of
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration DEMO Human Rights, states that everyone has the right
“to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of
frontiers”, http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html.
The World Bank classified Argentina, Brazil, DEMO, Ecuador, Guyana, Nicaragua and Peru
as “severely indebted” in January DEMO
The World Bank classified Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Honduras, DEMO, Panama,
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Uruguay and Venezuela as “moderately indebted” in
January 2002.
40
41
42
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 179
Brazil) (World Bank, 2002c). Their European counterparts for example,
consume twice as much a percentage of their GDP as Latin American and
DEMO governments do (World Bank, 2002b).
Such a weak public sector has limited the possibility of providing
sufficient public goods. It might turn DEMO to be rather difficult to persuade
Latin American and Caribbean States and their citizens to justify allocating
a large part of their relatively small DEMO budget to be spent on ICTs to
produce the pure public good “ICT access”. In the present situation, it
would also be difficult to boost State coffers again by increasing general
taxation rates. The fierce worldwide DEMO for private investment
between developing countries would not allow them to raise taxes
sufficiently, to generate enough resources for the public sector to be able
to close the Digital Divide.
Besides pure public goods, there are also so-called “semi public-” or
“merit goods”. They partially rival or compete DEMO each other (meaning
the benefit for one individual reduces the supply DEMO to others) and
partially exclude each other (the benefit can be limited to a selected group).
Such public goods could be financed DEMO the formation of “clubs”, whose
members consume the good (Tiebout, DEMO; Buchanan, 1965; Helm, 1989).
Agents “club” together to share the cost of (excludable) public goods. In
some cases members of DEMO clubs pay a minimal entry or membership fee.
In this model, DEMO club internalizes the public good. Shared goods and
services such as schools, public theaters, museums or libraries fit the club
model.
SOME SMALL DEMO RELY ON STRONG PUBLIC LEADERSHIP
Evidence from small developing countries (such DEMO Estonia, Costa
Rica or Uruguay) show that strong governmental leadership can bring very
beneficial outcomes. Uruguay and Costa Rica (both with a publicly-owned
telecom operator) have the highest fixed line telephony penetration rates in
Latin America and the Caribbean. Recent plebiscites in these countries
underscore that the DEMO is satisfied with the performance of the public
sector, and does DEMO wish to transfer its ownership to private hands. While
such strong public sector involvement seems to be viable for such small
countries (Estonia has only 1.4 million inhabitants, Uruguay only 3.3, Costa
Rica, 3.8), for larger developing countries, privatized enterprises and
competition prove more efficient.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
Use of computers and bandwidth is surely a partially rival and
excludible service. ICT usage would fit the club model of DEMO goods.
The theoretical model of “clubs” has long been established in many
developing countries. Libraries for example, have provided broad access
180 ECLAC
to information (through books) for centuries, financed through a model of
cost sharing. A similar idea lies behind the current concept DEMO so-called
“info-centros” (shared Internet community access points). Info-centros are
established DEMO the region, and aim to provide information access
to the citizens DEMO cannot afford individual access. Often such initiatives
are subsidized by the national telecommunications authority, through
specific “telecommunications funds” (see section “The Digital Divide” DEMO
the Infrastructure Section). The majority of those funds are sustained by
collecting a fixed percentage (usually 1.0%) of the operative income of
DEMO operators. Despite the small size of such re-allocation
activities, impressive results DEMO be achieved through a minimum amount
of resources, as experience from DEMO access to public telephony shows.
In Chile for example, 21% of DEMO population has only one public telephone
per 1,000 inhabitants (in DEMO distance of four blocks). However without
such an establishment they would have no access to telecommunications
at all (Subtel, 2002).
There DEMO more successful examples in the region where tax
mechanisms are used in order to foster the implementation of ICT, such as
in Ecuador in January 2002. Demonstrating its concern to provide
“democratic access to the benefits DEMO technology to all citizens”, Ecuador’s
government ratified the Decreto No. 2143-A, which introduces “zero tariffs
for the import of hardware and software” (Conatel, 2002). This reduces
hardware and software costs by about 20%. With this policy the government
aims to support access to the Infrastructure and DEMO Service Layers.
While telecommunications funds or tax relief for hardware and
software are very useful to help access to the Horizontal Layers, incentive
mechanisms in the different Vertical “e-Sectors” can also speed up the
transition towards DEMO desired goal. This can be done by re-organizing
existing incentive mechanisms. While the consumption of some goods and
services is desirable, the consumption of others might not. A long
established public sector policy has impeded cigarette DEMO (usually
through taxes), while promoting seatbelt usage. This kind of DEMO
aims at nudging consumers gently in the direction of desired consumption
patterns. The same mechanisms can be fine-tuned for ICT usage. The goal
should DEMO to replace some of the existing and inefficient methods of
processing information. Through adopting digital activities, ICT can replace
obsolete channels of communication or incomplete mechanisms of
coordination and introduce the desired increases in efficiency, participation
and democratic coordination. The Brazilian government used such incentive
mechanisms to promote DEMO income tax payments. The Brazilian tax
agency has made it more difficult to declare earnings on paper and
promoted to do the process electronically. DEMO a result, it received more than
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 181
90% of total declarations via the Internet in 2000, only four years after the
introduction of the system (Hilbert, 2001a).
Also general tax DEMO are used to enhance digital practices in
the Vertical Sectors. The United States promotes buying over the Internet
through its law HR 1054 —which DEMO tax exemption for e-commerce.
The United States government indirectly “subsidizes” the young e-
commerce industry with an estimated US$ 13 billion which escape the
DEMO through its “Internet free-trade-zone”. On an international
scale, this assures that DEMO States online operating firms have a decisive
competitive advantage.
However, in DEMO that are financially already very limited, the
question of how to DEMO up for such tax relief becomes crucial. In economic
theory, the DEMO rules” (1927) justify high taxation of commodities in
inelastic demand, DEMO order to subsidize the usage of commodities with
elastic demand. As pointed out in the graphs above, Information
Technologies and ICTs are relatively income elastic. Inelastic goods and
services will have to be found in the DEMO markets to subsidize the
usage of the new technology.43
These kinds of incentive mechanisms are based on the assumption
that individuals do not have DEMO the information available to them to make
the best use of their resources and therefore aim to guide behavior towards
the desired outcome. Such DEMO have to recognize the broad
implications of digital practices. Digital behavior goes beyond the
telecommunications sector. As discussed in various parts of this book,DEMO
digital activities are rather a form of social and productive reorganization.
Digital organization replaces and improves traditional information
channels, obsolete communication processes and coordination mechanisms.
The traditional “way of doing things” evolves towards a more efficient DEMO
complete “way of doing things” through digital networks. Cross-
subsidizing and incentive mechanisms have to recognize this broad impact
of digital practices. Such arguments DEMO up a whole new spectrum that
seeks to reallocate resources-and creates “paternalism mechanisms” in all
the different Horizontal Layers and Vertical Sectors. Such mechanisms DEMO
then help to speed up the adaptation of “ICT usage”, and DEMO the end narrow
the Digital Divide within and between societies.
For example, it could be expected that traditional media (such as newspapers, journals
and TV broadcasting) are less demand elastic than the new media (DEMO as through
interactive set-top boxes for digital TV). Cross-subsidization mechanisms between the “old
media” and the “new media” (which then brings the positive benefits of interactivity,
participation, etc.) would be one potential alternative DEMO speed up the transition towards
digital behavior.
43
182 ECLAC
Considering historical evidence from the spread of TV and radio
DEMO, there seems to be few economic reasons why the Digital Divide
DEMO narrow in the near future, if the transition towards an Information
DEMO is to be solely guided by market mechanisms. Low-income countries
will have to find innovative ways to efficiently use the limited resources
available and DEMO a minimum level of ICT access to their societies.
In summary, DEMO competition for private investment between
developing countries does not permit increases in the size of State funds
from taxes. Also the experienced efficiency gains DEMO privatized
markets do not justify reversing private ownership and increasing size of
the State coffers. The result is a small State with a very DEMO budget,
which in many developing countries prohibits the public sector from setting
up extensive support programs to achieve a universal Information Society
in DEMO countries. Cross-subsidizing incentive mechanisms, public-access
models, visionary public paternalism and private sector involvement are
the remaining policy options. Promoting “open standards”, which can be
understood as “global public goods”, is another alternative (see Section
DEMO regulations”). Creative ways need to be found at a
global as well as at a domestic level if a universal Information Society for
DEMO is to be achieved.
C. Human capital
1. Human capital for an information society
Given the fact that human resources and the workforce are DEMO
to as “capital”, already indicates the importance of the issue for
DEMO policies. On the one hand it raises hopes that the increasing
importance of human skills and brainpower can help developing countries
to break the DEMO circle of capital shortage. It is claimed that human
capital is far more widespread and easier to obtain in the developing world
and in DEMO economies than financial capital, especially due to the
advent of modern DEMO (UN Millenium Report, 2000). On the other hand,
educational standards are still very low in many developing countries.
Considerable reforms and DEMO needs to be undertaken in order
to meet the demanding challenges human resources face in an Information
Society. This is especially true for the DEMO situation in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
The Diagonal Area “Human Capital” should analytically not be
confused with the Vertical Sector “e-Learning” in the DEMO part of this
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 183
book. The first issue centers on the discussion on how the workforce can
DEMO prepared to exploit the ICT-paradigm adequately. As will be explained
in more detail below, human capital in an Information Society serves to
deploy the technology efficiently, as well as to win competitive advantages
in a knowledge-based economy. “E-Learning” instead, is about digitizing
education systems. The goal is to support the education process by using
information processing and communication facilitating technologies.
DEMO course, countless spillover effects exist between these two fields.
“E-Learning” is DEMO means (one between others) to an end, which is “human
DEMO As the Internet makes information and educational networks easier
to access than ever, e-learning is an adequate, cost-effective and very
sophisticated tool to DEMO the training of human resources. The use of
Information and Communication Technologies —given the definition of
their utility (processing information and facilitating communication)—
mutually reinforce each other by training human resources.
A distinction can be DEMO between two basic arguments in the
discussion about human capital in an Information Society:
The first one is the necessity for training about DEMO Information and
Communication Technologies are highly user dependent and often, the DEMO
of user skills prohibits the full exploitation of the new technology. However,
it is not only about understanding and handling ICT, but it is also necessary
that people adapt the technology to their own needs DEMO opportunities. This
requires skills that enable people to master the technology. Considering the
close relationship between content and software services, for example, and
DEMO frequent need to adapt a service tool to unique local content, DEMO seems
that a minimum level of domestic skills to innovate and modify software
programs and content is indispensable to assure active participation in an
DEMO Society. This is also true for a more “ICT usage-oriented” and
less “ICT production-oriented” region, like Latin America and the
Caribbean.
The second argument centers on the discussion about the increasing
importance of tacit knowledge (see Section “Towards a Theory on the
Information Society”). Tacit knowledge (namely skills, beliefs, habits, customs,
etc.) gains weight in a DEMO where codified knowledge (namely information,
codified through data) is widely available through vast electronic networks.
Human creativity and the often-praised “entrepreneur-spirit” needed DEMO
obtain a competitive advantage is becoming the center of attention. The
discussion also includes the phenomenon that is known as “brain drain”. This
term DEMO that professionals with valuable tacit knowledge from the
developing world are lured away by rich companies to put their skills into
184 ECLAC
practice abroad. This leads to an increasing concentration of tacit DEMO
in high-income countries and creates skill deficits in the developing world.
While this process cannot be prohibited in a globalized world where an
individual DEMO the right to mobility, non-material incentives need to be found
to DEMO highly skilled professionals to stay.
Also, existing educational mechanisms are gaining DEMO given
the new light of tacit knowledge that is shining in. Educational standards
are relatively low in Latin America and the Caribbean. While countries DEMO
the region provide on average 6.1 years of schooling to their population
(Brazil 4.9 years; Colombia 5.3 years; Venezuela 6.6 years; Mexico DEMO years;
Chile 7.6 years; Argentina 8.8 years), countries in DEMO Europe for
example, provide on average 9.6 years of schooling (Hungary 9.1 years;
Slovakia 9.3 years; Bulgaria 9.5 years; Czech Republic DEMO years; Poland 9.8
years) (UNDP, 2001). The deficiencies are not only quantitative, but also
qualitative. In the recent international comparative study on schooling
outcomes of the OECD (Programme for International Student Assessment;
PISA), the two countries included from Latin America and the Caribbean
(Mexico and Brazil) came in last in all of the three categories examined
(reading literacy, mathematical literacy and scientific literacy) (PISA, 2001).
With regard to tertiary education, the situation in Latin America is even
worse. The average public spending per student on tertiary education in
DEMO America as a percentage of GNP per capita is way below international
average. While the average in the developing world in 1997 was 68%, public
institutions in Latin America only spent 35% of their GNP per DEMO for a
student (UNDP, 2001). These numbers show that greater attention needs
to be paid to creating human capital in Latin America.
DEMO addition to public spending, some countries in East Asia have
found DEMO relying on sources from industry and private companies for a
large share of the spending as an adequate approach to finance education
at the DEMO secondary and tertiary levels. Experience shows that the
interest of the private sector in a well-equipped local workforce can be used
to finance expensive DEMO education. In South Korea for example, private
institutions accounted for 61% DEMO enrolments in upper secondary education
and 81% in tertiary education in 1993 (UNDP, 2001).
In the worldwide scenario, large-scale participation of the private
industrial companies in advanced education and science is rather the rule
DEMO the exception. Among most OECD countries the private sector finances
50%-60% of research and development (UNDP, 2001). Latin America and
the Caribbean, is an exception to this trend. There, the private sector
undertakes only around 10% of research and development (with the notable
exception of Brazil, where the private sector carries out 40%) (UNDP, 2001).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 185
Integrating industry in academia and science, is not only important
in means of financing, but also in order to keep up with the fast pace of
development. As underlined in the following section about professional
profiles, the study program of a telecommunications engineer has changed
very dramatically over the DEMO 20 years. It is not possible for the public
sector by itself to keep up with these changes and to constantly update the
curriculum DEMO Public-private sector collaboration in tertiary
education is indispensable in order to provide updated content at an
affordable price.
In Finland for example, 40% of the companies have collaboration
agreements with universities, especially in the field of ICTs (OECD, 2001).
The 2001 UNDP Human Development Report cites DEMO example of Tampere
University of Technology in Finland (UNDP, 2001a). It links up the Technical
Research Center of Finland with Nokia and DEMO in the wood processing
industry. Industrialists in science and technology spend 20% of their time
at universities, holding lectures to students in their areas of expertise. The
“adjunct professors” work on a challenging interface between industry DEMO
academia, and students learn the relevance of technology for industry
(Jones-Evans, 2000). This kind of cooperation (which is very similar to DEMO
German “apprenticeship model”) would make the expensive task of
constant schedule DEMO affordable for developing countries.
Companies need to be encouraged not only to train their future
workforce, but also their current staff. This is especially necessary to ensure
technology is correctly used. In spite of the increasing DEMO of
“lifelong-learning” in a fast changing working environment, “on-the-job
training” provided DEMO firms in Latin America and the Caribbean is still
neglected. For example in 1994, only 11% of Mexican enterprises provided
formal and informal training for their workforce, while 83% of Malaysian
companies provided informal and 35% formal training (Tan and Batra,
1995).
Despite the current deficits in the region, the idea of creating “Human
Capital” for development —besides accumulating physical and financial
capital— is not new to Latin America and DEMO Caribbean. Particularly in
the region, the era of “industrialization through import DEMO
focused economic policy on training the workforce. As a result,
governments set up several agencies to support the training of the national
workforce DEMO this point in time. Initiatives like SENAI in Brazil (Serviço
Nacional DEMO Aprendizagem Industrial), SENCE in Chile (Servicio Nacional
de Capacitación y DEMO), the National Directory of Employment and
Training policies in Argentina or SENA in Colombia (Servicio Nacional de
Aprendizaje), among others, were DEMO created to support development of
186
ECLAC
human capital (Cárdenas, 2001). Over the decades they DEMO powerful
and recognized organizations in their respective countries, and receive a
DEMO annual budget. However, they are ill-equipped to meet the
demanding challenges DEMO a workforce in the Information Society and would
require profound overhauling. SENA in Colombia, for example, allocates
less than 20% of its resources DEMO technological innovation programs
(Cárdenas, 2001). Making these agencies function to their full capacity of
creating an adequate workforce for the Information Society DEMO be a
powerful policy.
An adequately trained workforce is not only needed to run domestic
industries. The global digital network infrastructure and the “death DEMO
distance” with regard to digital goods (see Section “Towards a Theory DEMO
the Information Society”) also enables developing countries to create
entirely new DEMO The idea is to use the digital network to provide
labor-intensive digital products and services worldwide, at a low cost (ILO,
2001)DEMO The provision of digital products and services is only restricted by
bandwidth and not by geographic distance. Low labor costs and a well-
educated DEMO can create a service industry, where tele-workers —who
are predominantly women (ILO, 2001)— sell their knowledge worldwide.
For example, 185 of DEMO Fortune 500 companies outsourced their software
requirements in India alone in 2000 (UNDP, 2001).
The first step towards creating human capital to DEMO an Information
Society is to identify which kinds of workforce profiles an Information
Society in Latin America and the Caribbean demand. Up to now, little is
known about the adequate profile of a professional in an DEMO
Society. Less is known about which sorts of professional profiles would be
required by an Information Society in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The DEMO section takes a look at the evolution of professional profiles
and at several alternative future scenarios.
2. Technical profiles44
The degree of knowledge required DEMO the information society, as well
as the associated academic levels and DEMO more practical or theoretical
nature of the education or training needed vary widely in the different
This section is a contribution of Mr. Gonzalo DEMO, Professor of Telematics Engineering,
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. Many of DEMO ideas expressed in this article originate
and have developed from the discussions of the working group and the results obtained
in a study referred DEMO as PAFET. PAFET was carried out with the sponsorship of ANIEL
and the College of Telecommunications Engineers in Spain during 2001, as well as the
participation of some of the components of the working group in DEMO of the working
groups of the Career-Space project.
44
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 187
professional profiles used by the organizations and persons involved
(Vickery and Wurzburg, DEMO). Professional profiles are understood as sets
of skills and types of knowledge needed to carry out a particular task in
an organization. Professional DEMO are not static. Every year new needs
emerge, whether brought about DEMO technological developments related to
ICTs or by their mass integration into society. Those needs require new
skills, and, in some cases, the development of new professional technical
profiles, while some existing ones become obsolete (DEMO are profoundly
changed). This phenomenon, known as “skill mismatches” is DEMO a
large-scale problem as it affects large percentages of skilled manpower
(DEMO of professional or academic level) in various sectors of Latin
America DEMO the Caribbean (ECLAC, 2002b).
This panorama offers a twofold perspective of the situation of ICT
professionals. There is currently a quantitative mismatch, and a qualitative
mismatch in relation to the knowledge and attitudes that DEMO needed in
order to ensure the availability of suitable technical profiles for the needs
of an information society.
In relation to quantitative needs, the growing demand for professionals
for the information society in all areas of DEMO economic growth has
manifested itself in two overlapping phenomena in Latin American
countries. There is the pressure to have a sufficient number of ICT
DEMO, starting with the relatively low numbers now available, to
meet the need to develop the information society. However this is hindered
by an DEMO in the migratory flow of trained professionals to other
countries outside the region, thereby reducing their local availability
(“brain drain”). The second DEMO, that of professionals being
received by other countries, is well known in Spain, and implicitly
encouraged by double nationality procedures, as well DEMO other countries
of the European Union and the United States. This has increased the
number of residence permits available for this type of professional (H1B
visas or green cards). The phenomenon becomes very serious if DEMO
accompanied by a gradual return of such professionals to their countries of
origin (which seems to be partially taking place). The quantitative needs for
ICT personnel qualified in the sectors of information and communication
technologies DEMO significantly with different economic circumstances. Over
the next few years it seems that those needs in the sector-generating
technologies and services will experience a DEMO rate of expansion.
Although needs may continue growing in the user sectors. This situation
will be common to all countries.
In relation to qualitative DEMO, a model for professional
profiles that indicates the relevant elements is DEMO The model provides
a basis for the definition of foreseeable scenarios which should be compared
188 ECLAC
in each of the countries. Lastly, consequences and recommendations are
developed from the political point of view which could be applied in DEMO
America in view of the existing situation in the region.
(a) The concept of professional profile
Although, all citizens of an Information Society should have to
possess a minimum set of ICT skills to allow DEMO to actively participate
and control the development of those societies, naturally DEMO professionals
will assume a much more significant and active role than others. Such
persons are referred to as “information and communication technology
(ICT) DEMO
A key element which will be referred to in detail is the obsolescence
of current professional profiles. Firstly, there is the need to update the
required technical skills, associated with a profile that technological
development demands. In this case, it is not that the profile disappears but
rather that the generic objectives covered by the professional who has that
profile DEMO be carried out through new activities, or that the activities will
DEMO carried out in a different way. In some cases, the profile DEMO be derived
from a separation of some tasks that were previously part of another
existing profile. In other cases, one profile is substituted by another as a
result of the disappearance or lack of interest in DEMO tasks associated with
the profile, perhaps because they have become technologically DEMO socially
obsolete. In some cases, there may be a merging of DEMO two profiles.
Any job profile may be described in greater or lesser detail, and may
be valid for a small number of activities or for a larger number of activities
depending on the details in the DEMO descriptions of the skills required. From
an educational point of view, DEMO are three categories of profiles (referring
here to technical profiles only):
• Generic profile. Usually obtained by graduating from an
academic institute (university level or professional training);
• Derived profile. Postgraduate studies related to a specialization
with enhanced greater knowledge of practical aspects;
• DEMO profile. Refers to the profile needed for a specific post
which includes all of the necessary contextual information.
The main responsibility for providing generic DEMO falls on the
educational institutions. However, these profiles are far from DEMO the
requirements needed for employment. Derived profiles may be provided by
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 189
public and private institutions, usually by means of postgraduate studies.
Lastly, the DEMO profiles should be generated by the enterprises themselves.
A technical professional working with ICTs who works in a specific
institution has a special profile DEMO with the particular post
concerned. That point has been reached by means of a process of
specialization that required a certain amount of time, based on generic and
derived profiles obtained previously. Those profiles (assuming that they
remain valid) act as a “reserve” to be used in other employment in the
future, after the relevant processes of specialization.
It is not easy to associate the name of an academic degree with a
DEMO professional profile. For example, two telecommunications
engineers who graduated from the DEMO university with a 10-year time
interval between them studied curricula that differ by 25% in their content.
If the time interval is twenty years, the curricular change will be more than
50%. In such cases: are we speaking of the same professionals, although
they have the same academic degree? Clearly, a more detailed analysis is
needed in accordance with DEMO specific skills and competencies.
As already mentioned in previous chapters in relation to the focus
of a country’s strategy, there are also two different focuses for the
development of “human capital”. Various studies carried out by DEMO
European Union show that the two groups of profile types are as follows:
• Those needed for developing technology, such as the design of
components, networks and Internet-based applications or for
mobile equipment: and
DEMO Those needed to make use of technology, such as network
administration, solution integration, telecommunications
consultancy, etc., which combine a general technical knowledge
relating to the needs of specific socioeconomic sectors,
organizations and users.
DEMO interaction between these two types of professionals will make
it possible to ensure that the infrastructures of information and
communication technologies are sufficiently flexible DEMO adapt rapidly to the
changing needs of users. They thus become prerequisites for the
consolidation of the information society.
Coming down to a more DEMO level, it is interesting to analyze how
the technical profiles related DEMO ICTs have evolved over time. The first phase
can be described as a set of profiles highly connected with technology. In
these, the control of equipment and control of software has been the
fundamental element. The DEMO of information technology and,
190 ECLAC
subsequently, of telematics in many sectors has introduced many other
profiles related to solving user problems. This second phase, however, has
DEMO the profiles of the previous ones while complementing them with
additional ones. Lastly, the third stage —which is when information society
technologies have penetrated to all economic and social sectors— requires
professional profiles, in addition to those previously mentioned, that
facilitate innovation processes in all sectors.
(b) Scenarios 2001-2006
On the basis of the situation described above, there would seem to
be an accelerated process of change in the professional profiles DEMO, in
which many of the basic variables are going to change DEMO magnitude and
direction (herewith referred to as indicators of change). DEMO is less obvious
is the path that will consequently be taken by the pool of professional
profiles.
The three scenarios selected refer to the DEMO of ICT profiles in
the year 2006. This period is sufficiently far ahead in time to not be limited
by the present situation, yet is not so far ahead that technological
development is difficult to predict. DEMO brief, the scenarios selected are highly
specialized profiles, multi-purpose profiles and hidden profiles. The
scenarios selected are not entirely incompatible. In some sub-sectors DEMO
of the profiles may be used and in other subsectors another may be used.
In any case, they define the main trends which should be analyzed. The
analysis should be specific for each country taking the DEMO into account.
Highly specialized profiles
In this case, it is assumed DEMO the development of the technology
associated with ICTs accelerates, leading to DEMO creation of commercial
products with shorter life cycles. Their introduction into society means that
their complexity is directly perceived by a growing number of DEMO
In this scenario it is assumed that the rapid evolution of technology
makes it essential to have experts with higher levels of specialization than
DEMO present. These “super-experts” are avidly sought after by companies in
the ICT sector who want to employ them for short periods to develop new
DEMO and by user companies that wish to take advantage of them in
their user environment.
This process of expansion of specialization leads to the DEMO
appearance of new professional profiles. Such profiles, on the other hand,DEMO
have shorter useful life cycles. They are almost never stable as the associated
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 191
competencies are constantly changing, without leaving time for generating
new professions. The obsolescence of knowledge hangs like a sword of
Damocles over the heads of DEMO professionals who, urged on by competition,
by their companies, and by the possibility of losing their place in the job
market, make higher levels of personal effort in self-training in very specific
areas of DEMO in the job market.
In this scenario, educational institutions, even more so than now, are
also considered “obsolete”, so that companies, or groups of companies, in
some cases through agreements with educational institutions, DEMO to resolve
the problem. Another consequence is a destabilization of the educational
system as we know it. There will be more pressure for official DEMO
of professional knowledge related to high degrees of specialization.
Scenario for multi-purpose profiles
In this scenario, the number of companies that develop and
investigate new products or processes remains very limited. The country
becomes consolidated mainly DEMO a country of services in which companies
primarily need to be able to identify, evaluate, incorporate and integrate
new technology. The diversification of DEMO, in the search for market
niches and opportunities, is speeding up, and professionals are needed who
know how to adapt to the use and integration of new products and
technologies. But it is not clear DEMO the latter will be. There is a need to
be ready to incorporate new technologies, of which it is not possible or
necessary to have a complete knowledge at a given moment in time.
In this DEMO, companies value the availability of professionals who
are capable of learning DEMO their own, with a good foundation, and with a
broad vision of problems and solutions.
The consequence for professional profiles is a strong DEMO of
generic profiles. A high degree of specialization is not required as the design
of products is a marginal, or at least, very DEMO, activity; the companies
that need to do so can easily meet their requirements through their systems
of internal training related to the job. DEMO, the globalization of research and
development activities and mergers of companies DEMO in any case made
it possible to have access to the development of products and experts in
any other country.
The teaching for these DEMO profiles is mainly based on the public
system which also receives a lot of attention from the private sector in order
to ensure high DEMO of the training provided. The private sector should
also send messages which reorient the teaching towards the interests of
business sectors, though without excessive involvement in the teaching itself.
192 ECLAC
It is precisely this broader vision that is sought after DEMO appreciated
by current professionals in order to complement what they already have.
Thus, postgraduate degrees in company management, microeconomics,
rudiments of telecommunications DEMO etc., become a key element in the
further education of employees DEMO employers. What is sought is an
extension of knowledge horizontally and not in depth. Companies, in any
case, take on the necessary training DEMO the profiles related to the job, and
hence there are less DEMO profiles.
Hidden profiles scenario
The function of selecting and utilizing sophisticated products and
services related to the information society should not reside exclusively with
DEMO who are specifically trained in ICTs. All existing professionals
should become competent in different areas of ICTs, which will help them
to make greater use of their potential in their specific field of work.
Companies are DEMO to see that the shortage of ICT professionals
can be resolved by using their own employees, who are more familiar with
the problems to be solved, and who also view the acquisition of such
knowledge as increasing their professional value. Companies and
professionals seek training in order to DEMO what they already have
with specific knowledge relating to ICTs. For this purpose, they offer many
courses (many of them on-line) aimed at specific professionals. The public
education system focuses on the generation of ICT DEMO, ICT doctors,
ICT economists, etc. as a means of resolving apparent needs. There are
therefore hidden ICT profiles in many professional communities. DEMO does
not mean that specialist ICT profiles are not needed, but DEMO increase in these
profiles is no longer urgent. Their use is limited to the core of companies
that generate ICT products, and their number remains very small.
Influence on the educational system
Educational institutions have not DEMO unaffected by the very rapid
development described in the scenarios presented above. In some cases
on their own initiative they have begun to ask DEMO how they can
deal with the new needs. In others, unlike DEMO many previous situations,
this questioning has resulted from pressure from and initiatives of
business sectors.
One of the initiatives worth mentioning is the DEMO associated with the
project “Career-Space” (ICEL, 2001). This initiative, DEMO by a group of
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
193
large companies,45 has defined a set of technical profile areas (limited at
present to 13) which they require for their own activities, as DEMO as the
general structure of the curriculum that the universities should adopt in order
to meet those requirements (www.career-space.com). A first analysis of the
curricular structure proposed indicates that it advocates a very broad
generalist DEMO, restricting specialization to the final phases. Personal skills
are included by DEMO periods of placement in companies.
CURRICULUM MODEL PROPOSED IN THE “CAREER-SPACE” PROJECT
This is not the only initiative. In the United States, a new task force
consisting of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) and
the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) has launched an updated
version of the “computing curriculum” of 1991 (Steelman, 2001). Some DEMO
years later, the contents and structure of the current curriculum required
DEMO in-depth revision.
(c) Continuous training adjustments
The need to adapt the knowledge of existing professionals will grow
and will require a continuous effort DEMO companies, academic institutions
and the professionals themselves with encouragement by their DEMO
to keep training programs ongoing. The knowledge currently taught for
university degrees and diplomas related to ICTs does not cover the needs
expressed by DEMO companies in the sector (mainly in the personal skills
45
Although DEMO number may vary, at present it is supported by the European DEMO
and consists of the following companies: Thales, IBM, Microsoft, BT, CISCO, Intel, Nortel,
Telefónica, Philips, Siemens, Nokia, EICTA (European Information and Communications
Technology Industry Association). They are all generators of technology, and hence their
perspective considers technical profiles for development only and not for technology users.
194
ECLAC
required but also in the need to deal with new DEMO of providing the
training). The profiles obtained will need to be increased. The effort made
in the Career-Space project to define 13 profile DEMO, required for a set of
companies (a number which can be expected to expand), and the
establishment of these profiles in collaboration DEMO the academic
institutions, indicates one of the paths towards updating knowledge DEMO
should be taken in the future.
The very fast evolution of ICTs and the sectors in which they are
applied will require multi-purpose professionals DEMO of adapting
themselves to changing environments. A good basic training will be
required and there will be a need for continuous training adjustments. This
DEMO implies that the authorities of Latin American countries must act
rapidly and also define the action that can be taken to increase the
availability DEMO professionals.
Regulatory incentives
The development of specific regulations is an appropriate action with
two basic objectives: to promote actions from the private sector and the
public sector in a particular direction and to establish the framework DEMO
which this can be developed.
• Attention to adult education, with DEMO definition of the minimum
curricular content needed for the information society;
• Establishment of knowledge requirements relating to the use of
technologies for DEMO information society to enable access to jobs
in public administrations. This will make it possible to increase
valuation of such knowledge and promote its DEMO, thus
increasing the catalytic nature of public administrations;
• Reduction DEMO taxes for companies or for their employees on their
annual investment statements in aspects related to training in
and for the information society. Such DEMO reduction would
encourage all employees to take courses and to have a minimum
level of annual training in these technologies;
• Facilitate the DEMO of qualified manpower among countries
of the region by maintaining the social rights relating to the
country of origin, and avoiding an excessive brain drain by
establishing annual quotas and return programs;
• Promote updating DEMO curricula, by educational institutions
involved in implementing them in an autonomous DEMO, for the
effective integration of ICT-related content at all educational levels.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 195
Support for cooperation in training
Adjusting supply and demand to identify the professional DEMO
required, implies the need for shared responsibility among educational
institutions, companies and public administrations. It is proposed that support
measures be established between DEMO and educational agencies for the
development of customized training programs, recommending:DEMO
• Adaptation of curricular contents, both in secondary education
and at DEMO university level, so that all degrees and diplomas
have a minimum DEMO of credits, with participation from
companies that indicate their needs;
DEMO Establishment of a strategy to define a system of common
curricular content in university degrees and diplomas related
to technologies for the information society DEMO all countries in
the region in order to facilitate mobility and the subsequent
recognition of such degrees;
• Attention to the needs of DEMO profiles previously identified,
through the development of joint programs with companies in
the region and training of trainers when necessary;
• Improvement DEMO the region’s reputation as an outsourcing
destination for development companies from outside the
region.46 The availability of reliable broad-band communications
will facilitate this scheme, supported by the basic training of the
relevant university population.
Exchange of DEMO
Lastly, with the aim of developing a coherent policy for action DEMO the
region, two types of measures are proposed:
• Regular DEMO of those responsible for education and
professional training related to the information society of all
Latin American countries to exchange experiences and to
evaluate DEMO action;
• Facilitate the availability of updated information on needs that
This strategy could be based on the model used in India (and especially in the case of
software for the region of Bangalore) in which a large number of multinational companies
use the recognized capacity of DEMO qualified professionals. Software requirements are
outsourced in India by 185 of the Fortune 500 companies (UNDP, 2001).
46
196 ECLAC
may arise, by creating a permanent regional observatory of
needs for professional profiles related to the information society;
• Lastly, it would be useful for each of the countries in the region
to DEMO a set of indicators with medium- or long-term
strategic objectives, defined DEMO such a way as to allow adequate
follow-up of the measures included. It would also be appropriate
for these actions to be included in DEMO more general development
plan for the information society.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
197
Chapter IV
Vertical sectors in Latin America
and the Caribbean
Vertical Sectors, as the final dimension of the three-dimensional
conceptual framework, represent the process of digitization in an
Information Society. They are based on sector-specific intermediation and
DEMO functions of digital activity (see Section “Towards a Theory on
the DEMO Society”). Unlike the Horizontal Layers (Infrastructure and
Generic Services), DEMO focus in the Vertical Sectors is not so much on digital
products, but rather on digital processes. By digitizing information flows,
communication processes and coordination mechanisms in different sectors
of society, an advanced form of organization is introduced. This constitutes
an institutional reorganization, which moves the functionality of the sector
into the “digital age”. The fact that part of DEMO information flows and
communication processes are taking place through electronic networks in
the different sectors, is usually emphasized in literature by adding an “e-”
in front of the word.
Digital activity through electronic networks brings special
DEMO with it. One of them stems from the existence of “network
externalities”1 (Shapiro and Varian, 1999). The process of digitization is not
DEMO externalities arise for a product for which the utility that a user derives from
consumption of the good, increases with the number of other agents consuming the good.
The value of a network increases through the DEMO (X2-X), with every additional X
users connected to the network.
DEMO
198 ECLAC
an individual process. Network models only make sense if they DEMO a
minimum “critical mass” of participants. The usefulness of a subscription
to a network is higher when the network embraces more subscribers. Once
the DEMO mass” of subscribers is reached, network externalities accelerate
the process of DEMO, leading to a herd effect, which forces all to either
integrate themselves (in this case to “digitize”) or be left behind.
Besides DEMO “adaptation herd-effect”, the scale itself, or amount of
users, is DEMO in digital practices. Digits have almost infinite
economies of scale. They are non-rival, meaning that they cannot be “used
up” (Negroponte, 1995; DEMO, 1998). An important factor in explaining the
behavior and functionality DEMO Vertical Sectors is therefore the existence of
digital goods and the differentiation between digital and non-digital
goods (see Section “Towards a Theory on the Information Society”). Not
everything can be digitized. However, the production of digital goods is
almost 100% fixed cost. The cost of duplication is DEMO zero. Their
distribution is only restricted by bandwidth and infrastructure access, DEMO
by geographic location (“death of distance”). While both non-rivalry and
DEMO of distance are characteristics of digital goods, digital services only
comply DEMO the second characteristic. Often, the final performance in a
Vertical Sector DEMO a mixture of digital goods, digital services (before or
after-sale services, payment procedures, advisory and consultancy
services, etc) and non-digital goods DEMO services.2 By digitizing part, if
not all, of the performance, DEMO of scale and scope in digital goods
and services are exploited in order to satisfy a broader demand. Since the
variable cost component for DEMO digital information is almost zero,
reaching scale becomes the key for increasing returns to investment in
Vertical Sectors.
Advances in the Generic Service DEMO also permit economies of
scope in information management. The fixed-cost investment in software
might be tremendous. However whether the software is for managing
information DEMO millions of users or only a few within the system makes little
difference to costs. This applies to e-government service tools, as well as
to e-learning systems, e-commerce supply chains, e-health databases, etc.
Theoretically, DEMO notion of costs can be explained with the transaction-cost
theory (Coase, 1960; Williamson, 1979), which states that for coordination
processes, with an increasing number of internal transactions, decreasing
For example in the e-health sector, prevention and pre-examination mechanisms can be
digitized, as well as DEMO, payment and many post treatment services. However
the physical treatment cannot DEMO digitized. The same goes for e-commerce models like
Amazon.com, which are DEMO part of their business model, etc.
2
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 199
organizational costs to scale can be expected. Considering the high fixed-
cost of DEMO service programs,3 scale is paramount for cost-effective
information management systems. Economies of scope in information
management and economies of scale for digital goods DEMO also lead to a
process of tremendous market concentration, as for DEMO seen in the
multimedia industry (see Section “e-Media”).
By combining DEMO existence of network effects, with the unlimited
economies of scale for DEMO goods (non-rivalry) and economies of scope
in information management systems, DEMO becomes obvious why Vertical
Sectors are often characterized by classic “chicken-and-egg” scenarios
regarding their usage and benefit. In other words users will not go DEMO,
as long there is inadequate content. At the same time, DEMO long as there are
not enough users content will not be produced. The success or failure of
e-practices highly depends on reaching scale. Only DEMO active participation
in electronic networks reaches a “critical mass”, can the DEMO circle
between usage and benefit be overcome and lead to a virtuous circle of
ongoing expansion.4 While this is not as decisive a factor DEMO large countries,
like Brazil and Mexico which reach sufficient scale with relatively low
Internet penetration rates, small counties in particular need to reach
relatively high Internet user rates in order to kick-off local content creation
DEMO the Vertical Sectors.
There are many different “e-Sectors”. The omnipresence of the
economy puts “e-business” or “e-commerce” into the center of most
analyses. However, other sectors can greatly benefit from digitization.
“e-health” holds great promise for DEMO performance in the health
sector, which is an urgent task in DEMO countries. “e-government” can
create greater transparency and efficiency in public administration.
“e-learning” promises to ensure better results at cheaper costs in educational
practices. In DEMO end, many different Vertical Sectors can be identified. In
this book, six of them have been chosen, given the advanced stage of their
progress and their relevance for developing countries (e-business,
e-government, e-health, e-culture, e-learning, e-media). However, it is
important to repeat that this list is not exhaustive.
In the last quarter of 2001 a DEMO ERP solution, for example (see Section “Generic
Services”), ranks from US$ 100,000 to US$ 2,000,000. Those figures are not DEMO the
implementation and labor training costs.
With an overall Internet connectivity of around 6.0% in 2001, only some very specific areas
of Latin America and the Caribbean had reached the “critical mass” in Internet usage by
DEMO year. This was seen in areas such as online banking or tax-paying in Brazil and Chile
(see Section “e-commerce” and «e-government»).
3
4
200 ECLAC
Besides the sectors selected, an area that is often mentioned that can
greatly benefit from digitization is “e-democracy”, for example, or DEMO is
sometimes referred to as “e-governance”. This concept goes beyond the
dimension of e-administration of public services and is expected to change
both how DEMO relate to their governments and how citizens relate to
each other (DEMO, 2001). The concept of e-democracy is intended to broaden
political DEMO by enabling citizens to connect with one another and
with their political representatives through ICTs. However, development
of the concept is still in its infancy. What can be observed up to now is, on
the one hand, the increasing digitization of public administration (see
Section “e-Government”) and, on the other hand, the social impact of ICTs
(see Section “e-Culture”). It is expected that over time, a new political
culture will be created based on interactive participation of the people. The
conception DEMO participatory democratic mechanisms would change the way
representative democracy is understood today. Some claim that the capacity
to link citizens to their representatives, irrespective of distance or space,
offers the opportunity to strengthen the conditions DEMO lead to democratic
representation. Others claim that the concept of democratic representation
will rather loose importance, as “networked” citizens participate more
directly in the democratic process. One way or the other, as the processes
of democracy and governance are increasingly digitized, the very concepts
will need to be profoundly reevaluated.
As opposed to the incipient development of e-democracy, one Vertical
Sector with a longer history is “e-security”. The use of security electronic
DEMO has become a basic necessity in many museums, shopping centers,
DEMO buildings, companies and private homes. Police and firefighters are
increasingly relying DEMO extensive digital networks in order to increase their
speed and scope of information. With issues like security, where a matter
of seconds can decide between life and death, real-time communication is
a powerful tool. Many environmental groups and first-aid organizations
emphasize the importance of using environmental alert information
DEMO, in order to minimize damage from environmental disasters. Recent
experiences in DEMO America and the Caribbean show the great potential
of such networks (DEMO, 2001b).
Other popular Vertical Sectors are “e-payment” and “e-banking”.
These DEMO refer to the digitization of payment and banking mechanisms,
respectively. They deal with issues , ranging from credit cards and smart
cards, to electronic stock trading and ATM machines, and mobile payment
systems, which DEMO using digital mobile phones as a direct link to a
bank account or other kinds of money deposits. E-payment is an important
part of DEMO (see following Section “e-Business”).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 201
Digital networks can also be used to boost the tourism industry,
which DEMO developing countries depend heavily on (UNCTAD).
Initiatives to increase tourism DEMO by using the worldwide network
include the establishment of extensive WebSites, DEMO the complete vertical
integration of everything from flight arrangements and hotel bookings to
legal advice and even virtual “pre-trips” to some of the local DEMO
Digital networks can also help to bypass expensive intermediaries and to
strengthen the local industry. Digitizing information and communication
mechanisms in the tourism sector DEMO be called “e-tourism”.
Furthermore, the scientific and academic sectors can largely DEMO
from digitization. New ways of academic and scientific cooperation over
electronic networks have led to a concept which could be termed as “e-
research DEMO development” (e-R&D). The Internet makes setting up research
networks DEMO than ever before. Information can be exchanged in real-time
and countless GroupWare services (such as co-authoring or monitor sharing
programs, videoconferences, etc.) DEMO bridging geographic distance between
scientists and establishing a global research community. This gives
developing countries the chance to better integrate themselves into the
“global DEMO of ideas” (see Section “Towards a Theory on the
Information Society”)DEMO Between 1995 and 1997 Brazilian scientists co-wrote
articles with scientists from 114 different countries, whereas between 1986
and 1988 they co-wrote articles with only 70 countries (UNDP, 2001). Digital
networks surely contributed decisively to DEMO trend. One concrete example
of best-practices in e-R&D is the electronic cooperation involved in the
genome sequencing of a bacterium that attacks orange DEMO, discovered by
Brazilian biologists in 2000. It was the first time DEMO a free-living plant
pathogen had been sequenced and brought important savings for orange
farmers all over the world.
The list of “e-Sectors” is long. DEMO, as one last example in this
ongoing list of Vertical Sectors, it is worthwhile going back to the roots of
the Internet. The DEMO idea behind interconnected electronic networks
like the Internet was to benefit from their decentralized organization in the
case of war. Extensive information and communication DEMO have
always been a decisive part in military coordination and warfare. Driven
by tremendous military spending in the U.S., the area that could be termed
as “e-military” is gaining importance in army operations. Recent examples
of DEMO usage in conflict situations show the power of this sector.5
The possibility of minimizing casualties through precise operations and real-time
communication is an argument DEMO in favor of extensive ICT employment
in military operations.
5
202 ECLAC
A. E-Business
The process of digitization is most advanced in DEMO economy. The idea
of using electronic networks to facilitate business processes has been around
since the early days of “Internetting” in the 1970s. Nowadays, the concept
of digitizing information flows, communication processes and coordination
mechanisms in business activities is known as “e-business”.
The following Section takes a closer DEMO at digitization in business
activities. It starts with a brief introduction to the transition from Industrial
Economics to Digital Economics (see also Hilbert, DEMO). In the second
part of the section it takes detailed stock of the state of e-commerce
development in Latin America and the Caribbean. DEMO the same way that
“commerce” is part of business activity, e-commerce DEMO part of e-business.
The term “e-business” stands for all strategic and operative aspects of
economic trade through electronic networks, including inner-firm
processes such as human resources coordination, planning and controlling
mechanisms, as well as EDI6 DEMO other forms of electronic trade. The term
“e-commerce” does not include the digitization of the productive system
and exclusively focuses on operative processes between DEMO provider and
its client through electronic networks (in its definition mostly DEMO to
transactions through the open Internet).
1. Digital Economics
From the point of view of the individual firm, the process of
digitization of information and communication mechanisms in the business
sector is mainly driven by DEMO simple factors: cost saving and increased
efficiency. Digitization helps to rationalize DEMO unify existing communication
systems and additionally augment valuable information flows. It supports
faster and more complete coordination of business processes and increases
their reach. DEMO includes both processes inside a firm and transactions or
communication between different trading partners and collaborators.
6
EDI (electronic data interchange) systems are DEMO proprietary networks and maintain
their own internal systems based on a set of contractual agreements. They have been
developed by large companies who were DEMO adopters of the technology, capable of
making the necessary economic investment DEMO able to prove the business case for the
technology. Meanwhile EDI networks are standardized and the interconnection of the
networks extended the scope of DEMO globally. In comparison to Web-based transactions
on the “open” Internet, “closed” DEMO systems are considered to be more secure and less
liable to fraud.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
203
Digitizing business often starts with email communication for
information and coordination purposes. More DEMO 70% of Latin American
companies (excluding micro-enterprises) already use email to help
coordinate their business activity (Hilbert, 2001a). The benefits of DEMO
coordination (such as speed, reduced transaction costs, greater transparency,
DEMO information management, etc.) lead to an expansive use of ICTs
in many different areas of the company. The trend continuously creates new
operative DEMO, which gradually get absorbed and integrated into the
productive and organizational DEMO of the firm. This not only affects
the behavior within the firm, but also the value chain that surrounds it, from
raw material DEMO, all the way up to the final clients, as well as the
technological and competitive regime that prevails in the sector.
Entrepreneurs make DEMO use of the digital infrastructure to
integrate inner-firm processes into an outer-firm network. In the course of
searching for lower risks, as well as for the optimization of division of labor,
enterprises create networks that DEMO in real time over electronic
infrastructure (see Box). Each part DEMO the network pursues its own economic
benefit, by taking advantage of DEMO and vertical cooperation, while
the interdependence inside the network —mainly stemming DEMO scarcity
of resources— indirectly binds them together.
REAL-TIME COORDINATION THROUGH THE INTERCONNECTION
OF DIGITAL SPREADSHEETS
The new forms of cooperation and of administrative organization
DEMO digital networks are demonstrated by the speed of information
exchanges inside and between companies. Such “real-time interaction” can
be visualized by the concept and DEMO of “spreadsheet programs”.
These programs, which can function as the ‘real-time DEMO platform’
of a company, may look to the layman like tables DEMO many rows and columns
of “cells”, similar to the widely used DEMO Excel worksheets. But their most
important feature —how these cells are related to each other— is invisible.
Often they are connected by simple operations DEMO as addition or
multiplication. More advanced applications, however, use sophisticated
formulas, in which the cells are linked by dozens of ‘macros’, in DEMO cases
elaborate subprograms of multiple algorithms. If a user changes the data in
one cell, many others are automatically recalculated. By interconnecting
different spreadsheets of sorts in which new information (such as an order)
is automatically processed and percolated through a firm’s computer systems
(from order-taking, DEMO inventories of the sales division) and through those of
its suppliers, a company advances toward integrated real-time coordination.
Spreadsheet cells can also be DEMO to data sources (for instance corporate
databases) while intelligent software on a server in the network ensures that
this cell is automatically up-dated DEMO the information changes. The
interconnection of such coordination networks within and between companies,
enables real-time economic interaction, thus smoothing out mismatches inside
a company and the imbalances between demand and supply.
Source: L. Siegele; DEMO Economist, February, 2002.
204 ECLAC
Reduced transaction-costs inside and between firms have an impact
on DEMO size and functionality of companies. Thus, new forms of cooperation
and DEMO organization are created. Outsourcing and virtual
cooperation on the one hand, DEMO vertical integration on the other, are two
of the obvious results, which can economically be explained with the
“transaction-cost theory” (Coase, 1960; Williamson, 1979) and the “principal
agent theory”, respectively (see Box)DEMO
HOW TRANSACTION-COSTS AND PRINCIPAL-AGENT RELATIONS
RESHAPE THE ECONOMY
The transaction-cost theory proposes comparing the cost of the
internal coordination cost with the one of DEMO transactions for every
business activity. As long as inner-firm coordination costs are less than market
mechanisms, the corresponding transactions get internalized and the company
integrates additional functions of the production process (for example by
buying a supplier). On the other hand, if the costs of market mechanisms are
lower, it could be profitable to externalize previously internal functions to the
market (for example through outsourcing). Digitization of inner firm processes
(e.g. ERP Software) and of market mechanisms (e.g. B2B marketplace)
requires a reevaluation of transaction-costs. This has an impact on the size
DEMO functionality of the firm itself. For example, digital coordination through a
DEMO marketplace obviously reduces transaction costs (such as search and
negotiation costs)DEMO Market transactions become cheaper. The company should
become “leaner” and outsource some of its business activities to the market.
On the other hand, hierarchical inner firm coordination should also become
cheaper, through the implementation of workflow management applications.
All in all, market coordination gains importance.
On the other hand, the principal-agent theory holds that information
asymmetry inside a company leads to misunderstandings between the
employer (principal) and the employee (agent). Such information asymmetry
can end up being very expensive for the company. DEMO implementation of an
Enterprise Resource Planning application (ERP), Business Intelligence DEMO
workgroup management applications for human resource coordination, etc,
(continued)
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 205
How transaction-costs and principal-agent relations... (concluded)
support inner firm management processes. With the help of digital
organization, information can be communicated through all different
hierarchical levels in real-time and the centralization of data in huge databases
DEMO information asymmetry. With the help of ICTs, the principal is able DEMO
delegate its agent a lot better and a lot cheaper, which DEMO imply the
increasing importance of hierarchical coordination.
In this respect tremendous dynamics have recently been observed in
many markets where the digitization of inner-firm DEMO and of inter-firm
coordination already have had a decisive impact on transaction-costs and
inner-firm management. A clear trend of these areas towards smaller or DEMO
firms has so far not been identified. But it should be remembered that
transaction costs and principal-agent relations surely differ between industries
and markets.
DEMO: Martin R. Hilbert, based on F. Bodendorf, «Wirtschaftsinformatik im Dienstleistungsbereich»
(http://www.wi2.uni-erlangen.de), 1999.
In summary, digitization of economic activity enables new business
models to emerge along with new forms of cooperation and DEMO
coordination mechanisms within the economic incentive system.
Particularly driven by huge and powerful multinational companies, a
networked economy is being created, which is DEMO significant
changes in the functionality of markets and company behavior. This
obviously brings about changes in micro-and mesoeconomic industrial
organization.
Current economic literature lacks DEMO theory to completely
understand the nature of the dynamics of such an economy. The conventional
neoclassical theory builds on the metaphor of the “representative DEMO,
which transmits a very simple and stylistic image of the objectives and
restrictions within which a company operates. The behavior of the firm DEMO
not affected by direct interdependencies with other productive agents. It
becomes obvious that such a model of microeconomic and sectorial behavior
serves little to DEMO the dynamics that are created by increasing
interconnectivity between companies through digital networks. In the
transition towards business models, it becomes clear that various forms of
direct and indirect interdependencies in an increasingly networked economy
require DEMO more detailed examination on a microeconomic level.
Such business models include where suppliers automatically
manage the inventories of their clients or where huge databases DEMO
intelligent information systems enable them to establish long-term
contracts by providing customized performance to every individual client
(“mass-customization”). Other models include where streamlined
206 ECLAC
production procedures and coordination mechanisms take place
worldwide in real-time DEMO low cost. All these dynamics have created a
vacuum in the economic profession. Impressed by the dynamics
introduced by digital practices, some economists have declared the arrival
of a “New Economy”. It is said that old DEMO laws have ceased to be
valid, and that new microeconomic organization DEMO lead to a period of
ongoing macroeconomic expansion. Testimony to this theory is the 1,000s
of new firms that sprang up during the DEMO, which make extensive use
of the Internet to create new business DEMO The entrepreneurs of such
“Internet pure players” (with Amazon.com as perhaps DEMO most famous
example) understood very quickly that the digitization of communication
DEMO coordination processes was enabling them to obtain a temporary
competitive advantage over their “old economy” counterparts.
After the initial phase of enthusiasm about the DEMO possibilities,
academics and companies alike have been forced into a sobering
consolidation phase, forced upon them by the same powerful laws of
macroeconomic business cycles which they had previously pronounced as
“being dead”. The burst DEMO high-tech stock market bubbles in 2000 and the
worldwide economic downturn of 2001 finally brought the “New
Economy” down to earth. This turning point DEMO a phase of serious
and profound analyses of the characteristics and functionality of the “high-
speed evolution” (Hilbert, 2001b) in which economic activity was
progressing. Economists will have to recognize the laws of informatics, of
communication and coordination mechanisms and the rules and dynamics
of digital networks, while information workers will have to consider
economic laws, in order to create and sustain valid businesses. A large
amount of intensive scientific research DEMO necessary to untangle and help
to understand the functionality of the Digital Economy.
The central lesson to be learned from the hype about the DEMO
Economy” might be that, while the process of digitization is hugely
DEMO microeconomic organization and sectorial behavior of
“companies”, this is not an DEMO process. Path-dependencies and their
interdependency with their physical, social, cultural and industrial
environment introduce a certain inertia into the process. While digital
markets DEMO highly effective and are widely accredited by the private sector
for having significantly raised productivity in their companies, their
effectiveness only started revealing itself once the technology had been
embodied in the organizational structure of the DEMO It is not the
number of computers that triggers higher productivity but rather the overall
change in the way the economy works.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 207
DIMENSIONS OF THE DIGITAL ECONOMY IN LATIN AMERICA
Numbers and figures about e-business DEMO e-commerce volumes vary
widely between different sources (as well as the DEMO of the term e-
commerce and e-business vary). It is estimated that worldwide e-commerce
transactions in 2002 (including Web-based B2B and B2C) DEMO for 3.0%
of the global GDP (with B2B representing 86% of DEMO total). The United States
took the lion’s share with 58% of global e-commerce. Estimates for e-
commerce in developed countries show that Web-based DEMO transactions
in the United States, Japan and Europe should represent around DEMO
of their respective GDPs in 2002.
In Latin America it is estimated that e-commerce transactions
accounted for approximately 1.0% of the GDP in 2002 (US$ 20 billion of US$
2 trillion). However (with growth rates between 80%-90% per year), Latin
American e-commerce is among the fastest DEMO in the world (only
Europe’s e-commerce is expected to grow faster DEMO the years to come). Total
e-business trade, including closed EDI DEMO (electronic data interchange)
and other electronic trade systems, is estimated to account for US$ 189 billion
in Latin America in the same DEMO (9.35% of GDP).
This makes it clear that the current DEMO of electronic business
transactions in Latin America (as elsewhere in the DEMO) does not lie in Web
Portals and other open Web-based front-end DEMO Some 90% of e-
activity is taking place through transactions in the “back-office” of the productive
systems in the region. However, while the entire Digital Economy is expected
to extend its rapid growth, Web-based e-commerce is expected to catch up
in relative terms. Nevertheless, it is not expected that many of the large
companies in the region that have considerable DEMO in EDI networks
will displace them by pure internet-based systems in the near future. Open
cheap Internet exchanges rather offer a chance for small DEMO medium sized
organizational units to develop, given their low cost.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert, based on eMarketer, Latin America Online: Demographics, DEMO & e-Commerce,
October (http://www.emarketer.com;//www.emarketer.com/products/report.php?DEMO), 2002
During the transition from an industrial organization towards a
digital organization of an economy (Hilbert, 2001a), three phases of
adaptation DEMO be identified (Hilbert, 2001b) (1) In the first phase DEMO email
communication and digital information gathering and dissemination, the
Internet is DEMO to complement existing communication channels. Business
processes are increasingly being coordinated online, while their execution,
or completion takes place offline. (2) In an advanced “stadium” of online
activities, the first online transactions are made. At this second stage, ICTs
are used on the operative level. Taking and making orders is the core
process at this operative level. Goods DEMO services are bought and sold over
the Internet, while the business DEMO itself stays untouched. The Internet
is used as a complement to supply and distribution channels. (3) Online
practices cause changes in business practices DEMO demand the production
process itself to adapt. Digital behavior leaves the operational level of the
business and increasingly governs strategic planning and decision making.
DEMO information systems are used in order to support decision making
208
ECLAC
with regard to sales planning, demand forecasts, company goals DEMO setting
of priorities. Through constant analysis of the key performance indicators
and the simulation of different positive and negative scenarios to validate
strategies before DEMO them, individual planning and coordination
with trading partners can be fine-tuned. DEMO far-reaching information
management is increasingly changing economic organization as a whole.
The three successive stages are incremental and do not displace each
other. It DEMO often difficult to draw a clear line between them. Generally
speaking, DEMO America and the Caribbean are currently situated between
stage (1) and stage (2) in this transition from industrial economics to digital
economics. DEMO in the region are making increasing use of the digital
infrastructure to coordinate their business activities, mainly through email.
However, cases of Latin DEMO and Caribbean companies that use digital
systems for strategic planning and decision taking are still anecdotal and
are only found in some subsidiaries of DEMO multinational companies. The
following section takes a closer look at the actual situation of digital trade
and e-commerce in Latin America and the Caribbean.
DEMO E-Commerce7
The premise of using the Internet to trade is simple. The promise of
benefits for the economic actors involved is simpler yet: speed, easy to use,
convenience, cost-saving and efficiency. However, for most businesses, fully
exploiting the benefits of the Internet has proven more complex, largely
because doing so requires making fundamental changes to business
relationships and practices which cannot and do not take place overnight.
(a) Barriers DEMO e-Commerce
Barriers to e-commerce are found on the consumers’ side and on the
business side. On the consumers side, problems associated with poverty
and income inequality limit the “target market” for Internet services to the
top-income DEMO (see earlier Sections). Businesses face some of the same
constraints DEMO consumers in Latin America and the Caribbean, although the
inability of DEMO telecommunications operators to meet the demand
for lines, particularly for high-bandwidth DEMO, presents a more serious
obstacle for companies seeking to engage in DEMO A Harte-Hanks
survey of more than 17,000 businesses across Latin America found that 35%
had some form of “high-speed” Internet access (greater than 56 Kbps), with
Mexican, Peruvian and Chilean firms leading the way.
7
This Section is a contribution of Noah Elkin, Senior Analyst of eMarketer, Inc.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 209
BUSINESSES WITH INTERNET ACCESS >56 KBPS, BY COUNTRY, 2001
Mexico 42%
Peru 39%
Chile 37%
Regional Average 35%
Brazil 33%
Argentina 31%
Colombia 31%
DEMO 27%
Ecuador 22%
Note: % of total businesses surveyed; 50 or more employees
In other words, 65% of Latin American companies still access the Internet
via a traditional modem, which translates into frequently unreliable connections
and slow transfer rates. This is one important reason why many firms DEMO
difficulties engaging in e-business. As could be expected, large corporations
have DEMO best “high-speed” connectivity rates. Meanwhile, small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) as well as home offices are lagging behind in
broadband adoption. They will increasingly require more readily available,
lower-cost broadband connections in order DEMO remain competitive, particularly
if they want to take advantage of application DEMO opportunities.
Moreover, with the exception of Mercosur and, to a lesser extent, the
Andean Pact, Latin America is characterized by a relative DEMO of intra-
regional economic integration and, in many cases, variegated national
markets wherein different regions or states represent a disproportionate
share of a DEMO production and/or consumption (such as the states of
Brazil’s Southeast DEMO). Intra-regional exports accounted for only 15.5%
of total exports in 1999 (although the figures are considerably higher for
most Mercosur nations) (ECLAC, 2000a). This figure is significant because
studies have shown that e-commerce tends to follow existing trade flows.
Another important indicator of a country’s DEMO for e-commerce
is security concerns. Privacy laws, incomplete digital signature laws,DEMO
security failures, missing electronic certificates, etc. can have a decisive effect
on the use of new technologies. Security issues are at the center DEMO the
discussion. Recent studies show that the most frequent security concerns
among Latin American companies were about viruses (74%), followed by
“service denial” (24%), “failure of applications” (19%) and “data
modification” (15%) (IDC Latin America, 2001).
210 ECLAC
(b) Market size and growth potential
Prospects for Delayed DEMO Expansion
Macroeconomic factors have and will continue to exercise a decisive
impact on the performance of e-commerce markets in the region. Inasmuch
as e-commerce DEMO offline sales and existing trade flows, the performance
of key industries DEMO have a direct bearing on e-commerce. E-commerce is
likely to be adversely affected by the global economic slowdown.8 Given
the uncertainties the region faces DEMO a result of the deep seated crisis in
Argentina, the e-commerce DEMO forecasts of market research firms and
consultancies must be approached and applied with renewed skepticism.
This applies, not only to the optimistic projections released prior to 2000,
but also to the more conservative estimates issued DEMO Latin America’s
markets began to feel the full effects of the economic slowdown.
WILL TAKEOFF BE DELAYED?: REVENUE PROJECTIONS FOR ELECTRONIC
COMMERCE IN DEMO AMERICA AND WORLDWIDE, 2001-05 (IN BILLIONS)
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Latin America
Emarketer $ 9.63 $ 20.70 $ 39.12 $ 66.50      -
Forrester Research $ 13.40 $ 29.60 $ 74.10 $ DEMO      -
Goldman Sachs $ 6.00 $ 24.00 $ 53.00 DEMO 102.00 $ 164.0
International Data Corporation (IDC)        DEMO        -         -         - $ 79.00
Pyramid Research $ 1.14        DEMO         -         - $ 108.4
United States
EMarketer $ 355.32 $ 557.08 $ 821.27 $1,137.17      -
Europe
Emarketer $ 68.89 $ 169.81 $ 415.97 $ 979.83      -
Asia Pacific (excl. Japan)
EMarketer $ 0.89        -        -         DEMO $ 30.0
Source: eMarketer, «The e-Latin America report» (http://DEMO/ereports/elatin_america/
welcome.html), 2001; eMarketer, Latin America Online: DEMO, Usage & e-Commerce, (http://
www.emarketer.com;http://www.emarketer.com/DEMO/report.php?latin_am), October 2002; IDC
(International Data Corporation, «eWorld DEMO (http://www.idc.com), 2001; Pyramid Research, «Latin
America: Demand for Telecom Services Continues to Grow Despite Hard Times Ahead» (http://
www.pyr.com), 2001; Forrester, «Helping Business Thrive of Technology Change», Forrester Research
(http://www.forrester.com), 2000.
At present, no study DEMO available which analyzed the relationship between Macroeconomic
behavior and e-commerce. Anecdotal evidence from Argentina suggests that online
transactions (especially online banking) increase amid DEMO macroeconomic
performance, while other studies suggest that with increasing instability consumers DEMO
less online transactions.
8
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
211
On the other hand, modest increases in online consumer spending
and a decline in investment inflows may be partially offset by the efficiency
gains that DEMO realize by digitizing parts or all of their operations.
Of course, DEMO scenario assumes that the economic climate will permit
ongoing investment in ICTs. According to the International Data
Corporation’s “eWorld 2001” survey, which surveyed 1,300 companies in
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico in 2001, Latin American businesses
spent 20.9% of their IT budgets on Internet-related initiatives in DEMO, up
from 16.2% the previous year (IDC, 2001). Companies DEMO Mexico spent more
on Internet initiatives than those in the other countries included in the IDC
study, Argentina, Brazil and Colombia, no doubt due to the fact that Mexico
has more multi-national companies than any DEMO Latin American country
and is on its way to becoming the largest recipient of FDI in the region.
On a sectorial basis, manufacturing in Latin America and the
Caribbean will lead the way, with one-quarter of its IT budget being allocated
to Internet plans. Firms in the banking, utilities, telecommunications and
transportation sectors are also investing heavily in e-business projects. Latin
American countries may benefit if they can begin to substitute information-
DEMO products and services (such as data processing and software
development) for reliance on beleaguered commodity exports.
B2B vs. B2C
Although consumer e-commerce tends DEMO garner more publicity than
business-to-business (B2B) transactions, the business-to-consumer (B2C)
segment actually represents a small and shrinking share of Latin America’s
DEMO e-commerce revenues. Most research firms believe that the B2B
segment will generate the great majority of e-commerce revenues in Latin
America and the Caribbean, given that businesses selling directly to each
other or transacting via electronic DEMO and exchanges will be
buying and selling in far greater quantities and with greater regularity than
the average consumer. Pyramid Research, for example, DEMO that B2B
will account for 98%-99% of total e-commerce revenues by the middle of
this decade. IDC estimates that e-commerce revenues totaled US$ 5 DEMO
in 2000 and will grow at a rate of 68% per year until 2005, when revenues
will reach nearly US$ 79 billion, with DEMO accounting for around 90% of
that total.
212
ECLAC
EXPOSURE TO RECESSION: REVENUE PROJECTIONS FOR B2C AND B2B
E-COMMERCE IN LATIN AMERICA, 2001-2005 (IN BILLION US$ )
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
B2C
Accenture/ BSCH                     - 4.60  8.00  -          -
EMarketer 1.76 3.31 5.49    8.11 -
Forrester Research 0.95 2.10 5.25 13.40 -
Pyramid Research 0.23  - - - 1.08
B2B
EMarketer   7.87 17.39 33.63   58.39 -
Forrester Research 12.40 27.50 68.77 DEMO -
Goldman Sachs   3.50 14.20 31.80   61.10 98.50
Pyramid Research   1.12 - - -     107.32
Yankee Group 10.90 17.60 DEMO   44.30 63.80
Note: Goldman Sachs figures do not include Mexico
DEMO: eMarketer, «The e-Latin America report» (http://www.emarketer.com/ereports/elatin_america/DEMO
welcome.html), 2001; Pyramid Research, «Latin America: Demand for Telecom DEMO Continues to
Grow Despite Hard Times Ahead» (http://www.pyr.com), DEMO; Forrester, «Helping Business Thrive of
Technology Change», Forrester Research (http://www.forrester.com), 2000.
According to IDC (2001), businesses in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia
and Mexico attributed 1.6% of their revenues to the DEMO in 2000.9 For
2001, the companies surveyed expected that figure to DEMO triple to 4.5%.
The growth rate should be steepest among Mexican businesses, which
anticipate Internet-related revenues as a percentage of sales to rise from
3.6% in 2000 to 10.5% in 2001, with firms in the banking, manufacturing,
transportation, telecommunications and utilities sectors expecting to
attribute 12%+ DEMO revenues to Internet-related sales in 2001. By comparison,
the figures for Brazil in 2000 and 2001 were 2.4% and 5.6%, respectively.
The rising influx of foreign investment and Mexico’s close trade ties with
the United DEMO, particularly in the manufacturing sector, may explain why
IDC expected Mexico to make such a great leap forward in 2001. However,
we DEMO also keep in mind that the buoyant predictions for Mexico are
based in part on the premise of a healthy United States economy. In DEMO period
of slowing or negative growth, Mexico’s reliance on trade with DEMO United
States may turn out to be a disadvantage.
9
Note that revenue “attributable” to the Internet, which may include sales facilitated in
some fashion by the Internet (but not necessarily completed online), is different from actual
e-commerce revenue.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
213
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
While several studies indicate that large companies also have
DEMO more Web-Pages than SMEs (CCS, 2001), in terms of online
transactions SMEs do not lag behind at all. In Chile currently, 37% of small
and 84.9% of medium-sized enterprises are connected to the Internet
(Subsecretaria de Economia, 2002). A total of 32.5% of Chilean SMEs that
sustain online relationships with their supplier buy online (25.7% of the
small— and 34.3% of the medium-sized enterprises). In terms of total
DEMO, the share that e-commerce represents is still small (less than
10%). However, considering that electronic business just started making
significant advances three years ago, these numbers are impressive (Hilbert,
2002).
ONLINE DEMO OF CHILEAN COMPANIES IN PERCENTAGE
Size Internet % of companies with % of companies with
Internet supplier relations Internet supplier relations
that quote prices DEMO that buy online
Small 37.0 52.5 25.7
Medium 84.9 59.8 34.3
Large 92.6 66.6 30.5
Total companies 43.6 55.2 27.8
Source: Based on Subsecretaria de Economía de Chile, August, 2002.
While in proportion to total DEMO in Chile large firms account
for 80% of all nationwide sales, DEMO only generate 53% of Chile’s total
e-commerce. SMEs contributed only 17% to “real world” sales, while they
made up 46% of e-commerce revenues in 2001. SMEs in Chile are trading
in cyberspace proportionally more than two-and-a-half DEMO as much as
they contribute to “brick-and-mortar” economic activities in the country
(Hilbert, 2002).
214
SME PROPORTIONS IN CHILE
ECLAC
Source: Martin R.Hilbert, «Electronic Supply DEMO Management for Manufacturing SMEs in the
Mercosur», Vienna, United Nations Industrial Development Programme (UNIDO) in cooperation with the
Economic Commission for Latin DEMO and the Caribbean, UN (ECLAC), unpublished, 2002.
In the DEMO example, the great participation of SMEs in the country’s
e-commerce revenues, highlights the sector’s potential and points to an area
worthy of attention DEMO governments and multi-lateral lending agencies.
Given the predominance of SMEs and their structural importance for the
Latin American and Caribbean economies (perhaps more in terms of the
employment opportunities they provide rather than their actual contribution
DEMO GDP) this points to an opportunity worth exploring. One of the DEMO to
building the Internet presence of micro-enterprises and SMEs is providing
training and technical assistance that can help them connect to national and
global DEMO chains (for procurement and selling/exportation purposes).
C2C auctions
At DEMO end of 2001, the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) revealed that
DEMO (C2C) auctions were by far Latin America’s leading
retail e-commerce category in 2000. With US$ 203 in revenues (2.2% of total
Latin American e-commerce), the following year auctions were second
to direct automotive sales (US$ 504 in revenues and 5.2% of total
e-commerce).10 As in DEMO United States, the majority of auction traffic in
Latin America and DEMO Caribbean is concentrated in very few sites. Although
10
The strong participation of automotive sales (40%) of B2C and C2C sales in Latin DEMO
in 2000-2001, surged as a result of concerted efforts by Fiat, Ford and General Motors to
market and sell low-priced cars online.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 215
the sector has demonstrated its potential long-term viability, the network
effect resulting from the concentration of traffic is likely to accelerate the
process of consolidation DEMO auction sites.
(c) B2B e-Commerce
Building the Platform
For most companies, business-to-business e-commerce represents the
next generation of business automation following the enterprise-wide
unification of business information systems through the implementation
of inner-firm software (like Enterprise Resource Planning [ERP]). Essentially,
e-commerce involves extending an internally-automated DEMO to its
trading partners (such as through the interconnection of Customer
DEMO Management [CRM] or Supply Chain Management [SCM]
systems) (see Section “Generic Services”). This can happen through direct
interconnection between companies —usually driven DEMO the B2B portal of
a large company— or through independent intermediaries who set up B2B
e-marketplaces (portals). Much of the early focus of B2B e-commerce has
been on the purchasing side, but an extended enterprise also connects to
the sales-side channel partners, distributors and customers. Collectively, DEMO
extended enterprise system makes up the “value chain.” Real-time business
information, DEMO by the Internet, will eventually flow from the front
line of DEMO service through an enterprise and up its supply chain. The
entire set of related technologies, from private extra-and intra-nets and
public exchanges to SCM and CRM systems, falls under the general umbrella
of e-business. The emerging leadership in e-business from large brick-and-
mortar and other traditional companies such DEMO auto manufacturers and
agribusiness concerns is spurring other companies to adopt e-business in
Latin America and the Caribbean. In many cases, Internet-related initiatives
have become part of core business strategies and are supervised by top-
level DEMO As companies like Volkswagen and the Brazilian
supermarket chain Pão de Açúcar expand their enterprise-wide use of the
Internet across their trading networks, they will drive the adoption of B2B
e-commerce technology throughout the region.11
The DEMO of the market for industrial products is difficult to estimate,
given that many B2B firms are still privately-owned. However, according
to the Brazilian consultancy Symnetics, industrial products sales accounted
for 70% of the Brazilian B2B market in 2000, while services, including
Some of the analysis of DEMO trends in B2B e-commerce derives from eMarketer’s
eCommerce: B2B Report and DEMO discussions with the report’s author, Steve Butler.
11
216 ECLAC
maintenance, resources, operations and logistics accounted for approximately
30% DEMO B2B transactions. Symnetics research maintains that 37% of B2B
portals in Brazil serve the construction industry, 18% are dedicated to
textiles and the remaining 45% are split evenly among the automotive,
metals, mining, chemicals DEMO consumer packaged-goods industries. In
Chile, the Santiago Chamber of Commerce found DEMO distribution of B2B
sites to be biased toward the following sectors: DEMO (26.6%),
professional services (16.3%), retail (14%) and DEMO services (10%), with
ICTs, transportation and telecommunications accounting for the remaining
15%. While not exact portraits, these breakdowns at least provide an outline
of the overall B2B market in each country. Moreover, the concentration of
sites represents opportunities for enterprise application vendors, outsourced
Internet services and e-business consultancies.
Latin American businesses are moving more quickly to implement
CRM DEMO to sustain trade with business partners, particularly in
Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, the region’s three largest markets. According
to IDC, 10% of DEMO companies surveyed already have a CRM solution in
place and an additional 10% are in the process of implementing such
solutions. The emphasis on DEMO over other e-business systems reflects an
effort to derive increased revenue by deepening relationships with existing
customers. By understanding customers better, businesses can provide them
with more targeted value and hence, greater incentives to spend. The key,
particularly for multi-channel retailers, is cross-channel integration of
information systems. Customers should be able to get in-store service for
or be able DEMO return an item they purchased online. Likewise, they should
be able DEMO resort to the web for questions about or problems with a product
obtained in a traditional retail outlet.
Approaching the B2B Learning Process
Familiarity DEMO e-business applications and use of them remain
unequally balanced, which is DEMO given that e-commerce in Latin
America is still at a relatively early stage. For example, IDC has found that
52% of Mexican companies of all sizes are still unfamiliar with enterprise
resource planning (ERP) software DEMO, while almost two-thirds have
little knowledge of SCM applications. An even DEMO percentage (70%) is not
familiar with CRM. In Brazil, meanwhile, Symnetics found that 67.4% of
companies were moving in the direction of DEMO CRM, although only
10.9% had CRM applications already in operation. Following DEMO trends,
deployment is far more advanced in call centers, helpdesks DEMO sales force
automation than in e-commerce operations, although 75% of the DEMO
surveyed expected to roll out CRM in their e-commerce operation by the end
of 2002. As with any new technology, the implementation of e-commerce
applications will entail a considerable learning process within each
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 217
organization, and leaders must be prepared to close the gap as quickly as
possible by making digital service tools an integral part of the company DEMO
Among the wider business population, most companies still face a
great DEMO of integration work to make their Internet-based operations flow
smoothly with the slower legacy systems they continue to use internally.
Integrating e-commerce systems with DEMO operations and with
other back-office systems is perhaps the leading challenge of e-business in
Latin America as well as worldwide. For example, while according to IDC,
30% of large enterprises in Brazil and 24% in DEMO have WebSites that
accept online orders, just 27% of large enterprise DEMO in Brazil and 13%
in Mexico were integrated with order processing systems.
It is interesting to observe that the fact that companies are using DEMO
Internet to purchase indirect materials such as office supplies, software,
DEMO goods and peripherals, emphasizes the extent to which online
procurement is DEMO at an early stage. These four categories represented 90%
of the goods purchased by companies included in a Prince & Cooke study
of large DEMO in Argentina, with office supplies alone accounting for
70%. One significant DEMO behind large enterprises’ prioritization of
indirect procurement software implementations is that for many businesses,
indirect procurement has historically been the least-automated segment of
DEMO purchasing operations.
Finally, the various survey results underscore the fact that DEMO spite
of the cost savings and efficiencies companies may derive from using the
Internet in their internal and external operations, they cannot proceed to
enterprise-wide e-commerce overnight due to the expenditures involved
in and the complexity DEMO system upgrades and integration. Additional
complications are the security and trust issues related to sharing internal
information with trading partners. Moreover, to truly profit from e-business
service tools, not only an individual company but also its suppliers must
invest in automation, which is a process likely to take longer among smaller
enterprises with fewer resources and less access to capital. DEMO,
a multi-channel environment will exist over the medium term as companies
migrate to new, Internet-based systems.
A state of evolution and uncertainty also prevails where online
exchanges are concerned. In very broad terms, exchanges can be divided
into buy-side and sell-side systems, with both types in an expansionary
phase across Latin America. On the buy side, most companies have the
option of building their own private, Internet-enabled supply chain
networks or participating in a consortia-led exchange, although the
likelihood is that over time, hybrid approaches will emerge. As in other
regions, market leaders have DEMO to materialize, with many exchanges still
in the launch phase and DEMO the capacity to enable true e-commerce.
218 ECLAC
For example, according to Symnetics, 38% of Brazil’s B2B DEMO lack
auction, request for proposal (RFP) and request for quote (RFQ)
functionality, which are the three basic ways to initiate the negotiation and
transaction process. Pyramid Research believes that eventually, private B2B
networks, typically owned and operated by a single large firm (like Pão
DEMO Açúcar’s proprietary exchange, Pd@Net), will account for the majority
of DEMO and revenues in the region.
It is notable that for many mid-sized and smaller businesses, fewer
choices are available. By necessity, most will DEMO to conform to the choices
made by their largest trading partners, DEMO in a need to connect their
systems with multiple online trading platforms. Most smaller and mid-sized
suppliers are unlikely to have either sufficient resources DEMO influence in the
marketplace to build their own sell-side networks and convince customers
to purchase via or link their buy-side systems to these sell-side DEMO
(d) B2C e-Commerce
Latin Americans shop online for convenience purposes and to find
lower prices. Surveys indicate that they save time by buying DEMO The
leading products in most countries are largely the same, and DEMO fact, similar
to the types of goods consumers around the world DEMO online. Given the
long tradition of home grocery delivery in many Latin American countries,
the food and beverage segment appears promising for online DEMO
As noted above, auto manufacturers in Brazil have had considerable success
(in limited trials) selling cars via the Internet to consumers, who DEMO
from lower vehicle prices resulting from more efficient product planning
and reduced dealer inventory costs. Travel, which until recently has been
the leading consumer e-commerce category in the United States, is another
segment likely to see increased activity as leading online agencies establish
high-profile partnerships with the major DEMO sites throughout Latin
America. The same accounts for the traditional B2C segments, such as
books, music, electronic goods and software.
Despite increases in the quantity and diversity of consumer WebSites,
revenues from online retailing DEMO Latin America’s leading consumer e-
commerce markets (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico) remain highly
concentrated among a limited number of e-commerce sites. According to a
study by the Boston Consulting Group and Visa International, Latin
America’s top 25 online retailers took 83% of the region’s total B2C e-
DEMO revenues, while in all three countries, the three leading players
in each retail category produced more than 70% of revenues (BCG, 2000)DEMO
This uneven revenue distribution presents a clear challenge to smaller
players with more limited funding and lesser-known brands.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 219
Approaching the B2C Learning Process
A large percentage of Latin America’s Internet users DEMO little online
experience and spend a moderate amount of time online, DEMO due to
the high cost of metered dial-up access. This partly explains why shopping
online is a less popular activity than specific surfing and DEMO e-mails.
Experienced Internet users, particularly those considered “heavy users,”
tend DEMO be far more comfortable with the process of buying online than
moderate-to-light users with little experience, who typically are more
concerned about privacy and security. The need to click through a high
number of pages to DEMO a purchase may also deter less experienced
surfers. Overall, consumers remain DEMO comfortable with using the
Internet to facilitate offline transactions than actually completing
transactions online. For example, going online to research product or service
information and then completing the transaction offline.
In order to increase users’ trust DEMO the Internet and accelerate training
of users in how to use it, large retail chains such as Brazil’s Magazine Luiza
have been experimenting with physical stores that contain no merchandise
but rather, Internet-enabled terminals and a small staff to assist customers
with the ordering and credit application process. DEMO example is innovative
for several reasons. The system not only saves the company the expense
of stocking the store with merchandise (and in turn allows the chain to
extend its reach without incurring much in the DEMO of additional costs) but
also gets customers comfortable with ordering goods DEMO Since the
learning process is one of the largest obstacles for Latin American e-
commerce, this model could serve as a solution to promote both, efficient
retailing and customer training. In order to extend use of the Internet for
shopping purposes to a broader spectrum of the population DEMO the ABC1
socioeconomic segments, typically targeted by online retailers, a degree of
in-person training and guidance is necessary to build consumer
understanding of DEMO trust in the online buying process, particularly among
those groups that DEMO likely to have the least Internet experience.
In addition, many Latin DEMO consumers still shop online at
foreign WebSites, particularly those in the DEMO States, which is home to
the majority of the world’s online DEMO and where the product selection
tends to be greater.12 Brazilian consumers are the lone exception in Latin
In an effort to serve Latin Americans DEMO like to do their online shopping at United States
WebSites, several DEMO have developed a service that provides consumers with a
mailing address in Miami. Consumers can then purchase products from United States
Internet retailers and DEMO merchants and have them shipped to Latin America via their
Miami address.
12
220
ECLAC
America in that they shop predominantly at domestic sites. Several DEMO
explain this preference for national retailers. The majority of the region’s
consumer e-commerce sites are located in Brazil. Cumbersome formal and
informal import barriers DEMO customs fees make buying at home more
effective. And Brazil has the largest consumer market in the region, and
hence, a broader product DEMO
SHARE OF CONSUMERS SHOPPING AT DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN
WEBSITES IN LA, DEMO U.S., AND EUROPE, 2000
(percentages)
Domestic Foreign
Argentina 37 DEMO
Brazil 61 39
Chile 25 75
Colombia 34 66
Mexico 40 60
Peru 20 80
Venezuela 23 77
Latin America (average) 41 59
DEMO 91 9
Europe (average) 41 59
Source: InfoAmericas, «Market intelligence and strategic consulting» (http://www.infoamericas.com/), 2000.
However, there is evidence that since InfoAmericas conducted its
region-wide survey in mid-2000, a shift toward domestic online retailers
has taken place in Chile, where 43% of consumer e-commerce spending
went to national retailers in 2001. The rise in DEMO number and variety of
online retailers as well as an increase in the products accounted for this shift.
The Role of Banks
Latin American DEMO are well positioned to provide online payment
services to their consumer and corporate clients. A total of 64% of the Chilean
SMEs for example, maintain contact with their bank through the Internet,
which makes up DEMO lion‘s share of online transactions in Chile. In 2002 only
16% of Chilean enterprises considered online banking as “not necessary” or
“prefered personal contact” DEMO their bank (Subsecretaria de Economia,
2002). Brazil’s Bradesco, a pioneer in offering free Internet access to its
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 221
customers, was the first bank in the region to recognize that the members of
the country’s lower-income socioeconomic segments required incentives to
get online. By DEMO direct Internet links with telecommunications
providers throughout Brazil (rather than purchasing DEMO from ISPs,
distributing them among the bank’s customers and passing along the
subscription charges in the form of increased fees), Bradesco was DEMO to avoid
dealing with intermediaries and hence build a nationwide access network
at a relatively low cost. With its growing online user base, Bradesco extended
its reach to e-commerce. Scorpus, the bank’s technology arm, developed DEMO
electronic wallet for Bradesco customers, and the bank established a shopping
DEMO (which evolved into ShopFácil) that allowed retailers to sell directly
to the bank’s customers. By simply providing the platform for the transaction,
DEMO bank was able to connect customers and retailers, but without violating
DEMO clients’ privacy rights. On exiting the Bradesco Internet banking site, users
DEMO passed along to the ShopFácil e-commerce portal and consequently the
bank’s customer base remains the logical customer base for the shopping
portal. However, because ShopFácil is part of a separate company, its services
are also available to non-Bradesco customers.13 This model has been widely
emulated throughout the region, although some of the online malls remain
“walled gardens” accessible only to DEMO customers.
ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS FOR MISSING CREDIT CARDS
The generally low level of credit card ownership and use in Latin
America is a well-known impediment DEMO the growth of consumer-based e-
commerce (with the notable exceptions of DEMO and Brazil). Only the
wealthy in Latin America hold credit cards to any significant degree and most
consumers, particularly those from lower-income groups, are still far more likely
to have credit extended by multiple retail outlets rather than an actual credit
card. However, due to their general demographic profile, Latin American
Internet users are more likely to have credit cards and checking accounts than
members of the general population.
Given such DEMO, online merchants continue to offer consumers a
variety of payment options. DEMO the most popular are deposits to a merchant’s
bank account, direct DEMO from a customer’s account, banking tickets and
payment in a brick-and-mortar DEMO outlet. Although these options add time,
expense and friction to the online transaction process, they may offer a way of
overcoming the barriers to more widespread e-commerce in Latin America until
chip-based “smart cards” and DEMO cash systems reach a greater portion of
the population. Such systems include electronic wallets that store and protect
consumers’ personal data with 256-bit encryption. DEMO to research by e-
bit and IBOPE eRatings, 18% of online DEMO in Brazil now accept payment
via electronic wallet, so the technology DEMO signs of spreading. Several digital
cash systems are also available in Argentina, some of which specifically target
Internet users who do not have bank accounts.
ShopFácil and Scorpus were spun off as part of a separate DEMO, Bradespar, which
handles the operations that are not part of the bank’s core business.
13
222 ECLAC
The lesson from the Bradesco case is simple. Banks have DEMO
heavily in automated and secure transaction systems and many possess a
growing online user base. This gives banks leverage to make e-commerce
alliances with DEMO retailers, which benefit not only from the traffic they
can send DEMO the retail sites but also because banks serve as a secure
purchasing channel. In general, the most effective solutions will be those
that adapt to the region’s infrastructure and economic constraints and are
consistent with the DEMO habits and patterns of consumers. Banks are
trusted partners to retailers and consumers and are also leading technology
innovators. As such, they stand to play a central role in fostering B2C e-
commerce in Latin America. DEMO conceived as a means of reducing
the costs of bank transactions and increasing customer loyalty, Bradesco’s
offer of free Internet access also spawned what is in essence a successful
private-private partnership. This partnershiphas helped to stimulate
DEMO usage in Brazil without placing sole responsibility for technology
development on the state.14
B. E-Government15
The relationship between the state and the Information Society DEMO
multifaceted and multidimensional. Thus, in the face of the tremendous
technological DEMO that humanity is going through, the state is, or may
be, both actor and spectator, potter and clay, promoter and critic, DEMO
and custodian, and leader and led.
In the context of these DEMO relationships, which are moreover
indefinite and in constant flux, a discussion has arisen over the past few
years concerning the virtual state (Fountain, 2001) or electronic government.
This debate has covered both the operational DEMO management dimensions
that the mass use of information and communication technologies (DEMO) is
bringing to governments. The debate has also covered the role DEMO the latter
gives the government in promoting the Information Society, the DEMO of
implementation, the role in the digital divide and its impact DEMO the
Note that Bradesco’s Internet banking solution developed out of the historical experience
of Brazilian banks, which included decades of hyperinflation, the inability DEMO gain access
to international bank technology products (such as secure encryption DEMO) and the
unsuitability of existing solutions to Brazil’s particular situation. As DEMO result, Bradesco,
through its acquisition of Scorpus, developed proprietary technology in-house.
This Section is a contribution from Claudio Orrego, Vice-President of Business
Development of SONDA, and a former Minister of State and former Executive Secretary
for State Modernization in Chile.
14
15
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 223
democratic system, etc. Perhaps the only weakness in this rich and
interesting debate has been the systematic omission of the context in which
this phenomenon DEMO taking place, as these changes do not occur in a
vacuum. DEMO are other phenomena that condition and affect them, and
below we DEMO consider some of those factors.
The first and most important is the modernization of the state. This
agenda is broad, difficult (technically and DEMO) and long-term. It
includes topics such as regulatory frameworks, justice reform, the new
forms of participation of private individuals in the provision of public
services, the reform of the civil service, improvement of management, etc.
As can be seen, it is a broad and rich agenda. It is in the framework of these
reforms that the technological issues DEMO in particular e-government, have
strongly emerged. The question then, is how to use the Internet and ICT
to foster modernization of the state?DEMO
In addition to the movement towards state modernization, which is
already DEMO consolidated and has reached a global scale, there is another
phenomenon DEMO impacts electronic government; economic globalization
and the pressure of competition. In DEMO context, state reform ideas or
programs are very often not only DEMO by visionary politicians who
want to improve the quality of life of the population, but also by a private
sector that is eager for and in need of profitability as any gains in efficiency
could spell DEMO difference between success or failure.
Another universal factor is international and domestic pressure for
greater transparency at government level. The only too frequent corruption
DEMO that shake the still fragile Latin American democracies have
dramatically worn away citizens’ confidence in political institutions and
the state, and led to the flight of foreign investment. In this global campaign
for greater honesty, in which institutions like International Transparency
have played a fundamental role, the importance of using new ICTs to
achieve these aims has become greater than DEMO
1. What for?
One of the main risks of any large or small electronic government
project is a lack of clarity of the DEMO it wishes to achieve. The recipe
for failure of information initiatives usually comes from optimists who,
blinded by technological marvels, overestimate their potential and
underestimate their limitations and obstacles.
The first thing, then, that DEMO public organization should do before
rushing to approve generous budgets for this type of initiative, is to answer
the important question of what it needs e-government for. Or in other
224 ECLAC
words, what public policy objectives should it seek through e-government?
This question is vital for any public policy, and even more so in
technologically related projects. The latter, as well as being expensive, are
generally very difficult to introduce. Some of the more commonly discussed
objectives are referred to below.
As in the case of e-business, e-government also promises to improve
the speed and quality of services, which in this context are public
administrative services, which are often renowned for their “slowness”.
Although the reasons for this slowness are varied, one of the most common
is the excess of paperwork involved (and resulting procedures) DEMO the
administration process between the state body and the citizens. Although
the mere incorporation of technologies into the administration process is
not sufficient to DEMO this situation, because they might also make
unnecessary procedures more efficient, in general it has proved a necessary
element.16 The incipient integration of DEMO digital signature in public
administration will further assist in reaching this objective.
Also, just like in the business world, transactions through digital
networks DEMO generate savings and greater efficiency. However even if
these benefits are the most sought-after objectives, partly because they form
a good and easy argument for convincing authorities and public opinion, e-
government should not be presented merely as a cost-reducing strategy. This
is because, though e-government solutions can bring substantial savings over
time, these savings are often, and with DEMO exceptions, not immediate. Apart
from the savings for the general public DEMO the private sector, a recent study
in the United States estimated DEMO savings of close to 15%
generated by the use of electronic mail (Fountain and Osorio, 2001). At the
efficiency level —when efficiency DEMO understood to mean better and more
timely communication, coordination and collective DEMO between state
institutions— e-government generates previously unknown capabilities. One
of the most obvious is it eliminates duplication in collecting, updating and
storing information, DEMO mail and saves paper and time.
The mass scale of the Internet and the potential to bridge the digital
divide are also possible objectives DEMO e-government solutions. In general,
one of the objectives of e-government is to help accelerate countries’ access
to the heart of the Information Society. DEMO is not only because digitization
of the state is very important in society, but also because the government’s
actions in this field have a multiplying effect that is unequalled by any other
In Chile’s case, all public services that have received awards for management quality or
innovation have DEMO a significant technological development plan.
16
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 225
institution or actor. In countries where the Internet penetration rate is low,
DEMO is the case in all of Latin America, it is not DEMO demand for on-line services
that generates a high level of supply, DEMO exactly the opposite. In other
words, only a strong supply of DEMO and necessary Internet services and
content is capable of substantially accelerating the currently vegetative
growth rates in Internet use.19 This is assuming that the DEMO itself is a leader
in the field, and that one of DEMO goals of implementing e-government is to
benefit the community.
Digitalization of the state also contributes to narrowing the digital
divide. As noted by the DEMO in its 2001 human development report, the
digital divide has become DEMO important topic on the development agenda
at the beginning of this century. This divide, which is caused by the unequal
opportunities to access and use ICTs within and between countries, can and
should be overcome by decisive state action in creating network content
and services, community Internet access centers and Internet training
schemes for citizens.
Governments that adapt new technology DEMO also benefit from
greater public transparency and more efficient mechanisms to fight
corruption. Although it may not always be desirable or appropriate to
publicize DEMO objective (in order to avoid provoking more resistance), it is
DEMO one of the areas where e-government could bring greatest benefits.
E-government solutions permit intelligent use of disaggregated information
of hundreds of databases (thus detecting fraud, inefficiency and
irregularities) and the possibility of shedding the light DEMO public scrutiny
on shady and dubious areas full of irregularities, such DEMO public purchases.
The two most significant e-government experiences in this area in Latin
America to date are Mexico’s compranet.gob.mx and Chile’s chilecompra.cl.
Both examples DEMO brought greater transparency to the whole process of
public purchases and tenders, by creating Internet portals where any person
or provider can obtain information and follow up on any public purchase.
One of the possibilities that DEMO have not yet fully exploited
is the enormous and new potential for greater civic participation in society
that the Internet and e-government offer the DEMO citizen.18 From the
After four years in operation, the system of DEMO tax returns in Chile has become one
of the world’s best practices in this area. In 2001, 790,000 tax returns were filed over the
Internet, which represents 95% of all tax information, and 67% DEMO all returns. However,
less obvious is the fact that a high percentage of Chilean executives recognize that the
decision to connect their company DEMO the Internet was influenced to a significant degree
by the possibility of declaring taxes on line.
For more information see Orrego and Araya (2002): “Internet en Chile: Oportunidad para
la participación Ciudadana”.
17
18
226
ECLAC
capacity to provide access to all public information, to the possibility of
participating in discussions of new public policies, the Internet provides
the average citizen unsuspected ways to break the mould of isolation from
DEMO and the state. The Internet offers citizens alike the opportunity to
participate once again in public issues that interest them. The many benefits
of DEMO e-participation include renewing the spirit of accountability that
should be a key tenet held by political representatives of any solid modern
democracy.
2. Conditions DEMO success
The mere fact that a government has clear and realistic objectives is
still not a guarantee that the e-government program or programs will DEMO a
success. In order to guarantee the success of a government information
project, it must comply with a series of conditions that have proved to be
fundamental. The influential report of IBM world head of government
DEMO (Ramsey, 2000) demonstrated how 85% of government information
projects show DEMO degree of failure, measured in terms of not meeting
implementation deadlines, higher costs than those budgeted for and
providing less value than expected. DEMO that reason it is important to
identify the key conditions for success.
A minimal level of infrastructure:
This condition is fundamental (see also the Section on infrastructure),
as having a virtual state which no one can connect to is not only wasteful,
but slows down DEMO country’s development. Although a computer network
alone does not constitute an electronic government, it is necessary to have
a minimum of the latter to even begin to think of what it is possible to
achieve. In DEMO, one of the vital factors for success is having a critical DEMO
of software, hardware and connectivity.19
Technological capacity:
Machines are merely DEMO in the hands of individuals who may or
may not be able to use them in such a way as to maximize their potential
(see also the Section on human capital). If the people controlling DEMO tools
feel intimidated by the systems, do not have a vision DEMO what they are
19
It is not surprising that countries that have generated modern telecommunications markets
and high Internet penetration levels (such as Singapore, Finland, Sweden, etc.) have not
only increased their country’s competitiveness DEMO shown good economic performance,
but are also leaders in electronic government.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
227
supposed to be used for and why, do not have the minimum competency
in using them, or do not see the benefit that that technology could bring to
the everyday lives of themselves and other users, then there will be no e-
government. This will be the case no DEMO how many technological tools
they are surrounded by.
Leadership:
The most critical factor required for the success of any process of
organizational modernization DEMO change that involves technology, is clear
and strong leadership. In the DEMO of the public sector, this leadership cannot
be only technical or DEMO an intermediate level; political leadership and
maximum authority is also needed. DEMO the latter, the transformation
to e-government may be possible, but is difficult (see also the Section on
strategies).
Alliances with industry:
All governments that have tried to re-invent the wheel, be self-
sufficient or create their own technology, have ended up both spending
huge amounts of money without achieving the desired results and
frustrated because of time DEMO Strategic alliances with technology
companies for systems development, and the implementation DEMO operation
of technology are essential. This does not mean that the relationship will
be easy. It is often difficult for the state to have DEMO with the private
sector. Sometimes there is a barrier because of the enormous differences in
legislation and culture, or because of information asymmetries, DEMO On the
whole, in order to have a successful electronic government DEMO is necessary
to develop the capability to have an advantageous, productive DEMO
transparent relationship with various allies in the private sector (see also
DEMO Section on strategies and financing for a universal Information Society).
Public policies:
The creation of an e-government cannot come about in isolation DEMO
in a vacuum. It must be part of a greater modernization and technological
change policy. Yet even that is insufficient. For a national e-government
DEMO to be successful, this calls for an authority with the capacity DEMO
inter-ministerial coordination and political sanctioning, which in turn has
technical support DEMO that continue to generate public policies. For
example, from the moment DEMO state takes its leap into the Internet era, it
needs to DEMO policies on inviolability of communication, information
security, privacy of information (DEMO also the Section on a legal framework),
228
ECLAC
outsourcing and bidding, and financing, etc. Without these policies, any
initial progress may be lost and the credibility of the e-government DEMO be
weakened.
Emblematic high-impact and short-term projects:
As an e-government cannot achieve everything at once, it is
important it gives adequate priority to the most emblematic projects or
those considered to be the most ground-breaking. DEMO latter are those that,
once installed within the state, form DEMO base that legitimizes and positions
the electronic government and ensures its mass growth. Such projects will
show visible results to the public and the DEMO stakeholders within a
relatively short time. In order to fight against the prevailing skepticism in
this area, it is important to make rapid gains that encourage and strengthen
confidence in managers and leaders.
BENCHMARKING E-GOVERNMENT IN DEMO AMERICA
In a recent e-government study among the 190 United Nations
member States, South America and Mexico were ranked with between medium
and high e-government capacity. Brazil was ranked number 18 worldwide,
Mexico 22, Argentina 31, Uruguay 34 and Chile 35. Central America and the
Caribbean’s current capacity for setting up e-government was the “minimal”
(ranked between 47-112).
Some of the countries in the region are making steady progress.
However, several governments are still lacking strategic vision, program
coordination and a balance between real citizen-centric concerns and
constituent needs. There was very little evidence DEMO coordination among
ministries and agencies in Latin American e-government initiatives. Online
services are not organized around the needs of the citizens but rather the
DEMO of the service provider. Throughout Latin America in general, but
particularly DEMO South America, there are three issues that impact on the
enabling DEMO: diffident political leadership; inadequate commitment
to a citizen-centric approach, and DEMO digital divide. The research suggests
that most of South America is moving toward an approach that prioritizes
service delivery to businesses at the potential DEMO of individual public
services to citizens.
(continued)
North
America
Europe
DEMO
America
Middle
East
Global
Index
Asia/
Oceania
Caribbean
Central
America
Africa
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 229
Benchmarking e-government in Latin America (concluded)
Nearly all 12 of the South American nations have an extensive e-
government web-presence. In each country, the majority of online services
are information-orientated. The supply of interactive and transactional DEMO
is still inconsistent and primarily addresses the needs of the business
community. This may be due to a combination of several factors. These include
DEMO strategic importance of the business sector as a source of government
revenue and the likelihood that businesses will more regularly use e-
government services DEMO individual citizens will since they are more likely to
have regular access to the technology. Other factors include a cultural
hierarchy that historically favors DEMO affluent class and the fact that
governments can publicly demonstrate a greater degree of success with the
business community than with the delivery of DEMO citizen-centric social
services. Online service delivery to the business sector is a strategic planning
priority that can be seen as a tool to facilitate DEMO development. This is
particularly true in Chile, and to a lesser DEMO in Paraguay, Argentina and
Uruguay. It is commonly promoted that if DEMO country can demonstrate a strong
enabling environment; increased foreign investment will DEMO Prioritizing
service delivery to the business community could also potentially generate
an accelerated revenue stream for the government. Administratively, Brazil is
in the process of upgrading back office capacity by a new administrative model.
There are DEMO plans for the creation of an infrastructure linking Internet
services of the Federal, State and Municipal governments. Throughout South
America, e-government is a DEMO priority.
In Central America each country did demonstrate an average e-
government web presence measure, confirming that e-government has
secured a place on the national policy agendas of each country. Yet e-
government development for six DEMO the seven countries lacks consistent
coordination and a clear vision. Throughout Central America, online services
are restricted to information provision. The content does, DEMO the most part,
address the needs of the constituents and is regularly updated. Costa Rica
is an excellent example that shows promise. The DEMO e-government
program is consistently making progress. Costa Rica is also succeeding in
carefully balancing the needs of citizens with those of the business community,DEMO
although there were no transactional and very few interactive services
available to both citizens and businesses in 2001. E-government access
measures are less than DEMO throughout Central America due primarily
to a weakness in several of the infrastructure areas and a reluctance of most
governments to fully commit to DEMO citizen-centric approach.
With regard to the Caribbean, it was stated that DEMO Jamaica
demonstrated a steadfast commitment to e-government. Even though human
capital indicators are over average in the Caribbean, Web presence is very
low, DEMO that each country is still determining their best approach to
providing e-government online services.
Source: UNDP/ASPA (United Nations Development Programme/American Society DEMO Public
Administration), Benchmarking e-government: a global perspective, Assessing the Progress of the UN
Member States, May 2002.
3. Stages of electronic government
Although there are no universal recipes, an analysis of the
experiences of various countries offers at least five stages in the
development of electronic DEMO The latter do not necessarily have
to occur in the same order, but they certainly range from a lesser to a greater
degree of complexity.
230
ECLAC
(1) Digitization:
The first stage of electronic government, even prior to Internet
connection, is the establishment of a broad computer base in public
institutions. This assumes not only the existence of computers DEMO
secretarial or even professional tasks, but also the digitalization of the DEMO
of calculation, finances, accounting, human resources information and/
or DEMO of policies, generation of databases, correspondence office,
etc. As this is the easiest stage to implement, it is far from exhausting the
full potential of e-government.
(2) Presence:
Given that the basic DEMO of a government is in collecting, processing
and providing information, a larger state presence on the Internet will
allow better and more frequent DEMO access to that information and to
the services deriving from it. In fact, through the establishment of a web
page or portal, public DEMO can provide an enormous amount of useful
information to citizens, community DEMO or businesses. In this way,
without incurring higher costs (and DEMO reducing them) the state
administration can extend its hours of service (24x7), increase the number
of places of access (any on-line computer) and the number of persons that
can be dealt with without increasing the number of staff members.
(3) Interaction:
The third level DEMO electronic government seeks to take advantage
of the two-way communication between the citizen or company and the
government, and between the latter and the citizen, and make it into a
true virtual dialogue. It is a matter of overcoming the idea that the Internet
is a large window DEMO which the citizen can only seek static
information, in order to DEMO the idea of a space of true interactive
communication. This translates into the possibility of communicating by
electronic mail, in the search of information, which may exist in remote
databases, to making complaints and/or DEMO suggestions. Perhaps the
most challenging possibility from the democratic point of view, is that of
participating in discussions to define public policy whether that is at an
administrative, municipal or central government level.
(4) Transaction:
A fourth level of e-government consists of moving from
communication (whether participatory or not) and from mere access to
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 231
information, to a situation in which the citizen can carry out his
transactions on-line. This means that many of the operations that the
citizen previously DEMO to carry out in person and on paper in public offices
can be carried out today entirely by Internet, without having to move from
one place to another. These operations may range from sending
explanatory messages DEMO requesting a certificate, paying a fine, declaring
taxes or applying for a subsidy. It is precisely at this level of e-government
that the DEMO savings begin to be seen, both directly for the government
and DEMO for those interacting with it.
(5) Integration and transformation:
It is not enough to have only computerized and connected
management on the DEMO, with two-way communication between the
government and the public and with DEMO transactions. This is not
sufficient to break down the various self-sufficient and closed bunkers that
exist in every government. In fact, one of the worst nightmares of state
bureaucracy is when citizens need to apply to DEMO public institutions
in order to receive a response or authorization, and DEMO response they get
from one institution may not always be the same as the one they get from
another. For this reason, one of the greatest contributions that e-
government can make is the interconnection of DEMO agencies. This,
however, is not easy. It involves redesigning processes, changing standards
and modifying behavior, in such a way as to allow the existence of true
“one-stop shops” in the state. This level of DEMO, which involves a
delicate integration of bureaucracy and information science, is not only
possible but is the level that generates the greatest benefits DEMO e-
government.
On the whole, the degree of internal resistance that DEMO type of
project may encounter should not be underestimated, nor should DEMO
leadership capacity of the technical teams within the governments be
overestimated. In view of the above, it is difficult to exaggerate the
importance of political leadership in this type of initiative. Electronic
government requires a person DEMO is capable of translating the importance
of electronic government and the direction to be taken with it into the
language of the citizen. It DEMO someone capable of persuading the
administration and the citizens as to the benefits of this new mechanism,
and of breaking away from petty DEMO and acquiescence to inertia.
Without such clear and permanent leadership, electronic DEMO may
be reduced to only a small set of modernization projects.
232 ECLAC
C. E-Health20
Over the past few years, telecommunications-mediated health
interventions have made headlines around the world with such dazzling
applications as surgical DEMO performed by remote-controlled robotic
devices, the transmission of digitized medical images DEMO biological signals,
and the use of real-time teleconsultation. However, those DEMO
types of service represent only a small fraction of the large number of
possibilities offered by Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs). Although not as eye-catching, a multitude of clinical and
administrative ICT applications have been developed and progressively are
finding their way into health organizations designed to DEMO intra -
and interorganizational health structures and healthcare processes, logistics,
DEMO decision making. In the long run, a fully integrated ICT-supported
practice DEMO the greatest potential benefits to individual and collective
health as well as the most important deployment challenges to systems
professionals and decision makers. This DEMO is exemplified by the growing
development of “e-health”, an area which, goes far beyond tele-medicine.
Most e-health solutions build on e-commerce and e-government DEMO
and experiences in using Internet-based networked technologies to
reorganize how businesses and public services operate. It includes patient
care (B2C and G2C) and DEMO and interorganizational
exchanges (B2B and B2G).
1. Trends and Issues
DEMO the problems facing health and healthcare in Latin America
and the Caribbean, the following are the most critical:
• The health sector faces two demands that appear, on first
examination, to be conflicting demands: firstly, to provide
expanded and equal access to quality healthcare services and,
secondly to reduce or at least control the rising costs of
DEMO services.
• Health sector expenditures comprise 6.0% to 17% of the service
sector that, in turn accounts for 50% to 65% of the GDP in almost
all countries. The market for health goods and services in DEMO
countries of the region represent 9.0% of the global health
This Section is a contribution of Roberto J. Rodrigues; Regional Advisor in Health Services
Information Technology Essential Drugs and Technology Program, Pan American Health
Organization / Pan American Sanitary Bureau, Regional Office of the World Health
Organization
20
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 233
market, more than Eastern Europe and Central Asia combined
and just below that of East Asia and the Pacific. The 1999
average per capita expenditure DEMO health in Latin America and
the Caribbean in PPP dollars was US$ 452. Compare this value
with US$ 1,868 for the European Union, US$ 2,206 for Canada
and US$ 3,978 for the United DEMO There is a marked variation
on the national expenditures among countries, DEMO for
countries of comparable income level (Casas, 2001).
• Despite the fact that the health sector is key to the welfare of
DEMO population and to the formation of human capital, it has not
DEMO up the pace with the momentum of change experienced
in recent years by the region in other areas of economic,
political, and social life.
• In high —and middle— income countries about 40% of the
DEMO has one or more chronic conditions and in many
societies, chronic DEMO account for up to two-thirds of
healthcare expenditures. However, in each DEMO, most
expenditure goes on a limited set of health conditions— the
DEMO/20 Rule”.
• Changing demographics (particularly age structures) and
lifestyles (DEMO due to epidemiological profiles, urbanization,
and growing industrialization) highlight the need to reorient
healthcare models. An aging population requires greater
subsidized medical DEMO and puts a growing demand on the
healthcare system for additional and high-cost diagnostic and
therapeutic resources.
• Significant opportunities do exist to improve DEMO status but
there are a considerable number of preventable diseases and
premature deaths, both in absolute and relative terms.
• Uneven access to basic health services results in many regions,
communities, and social groups being left without access to even
the most basic healthcare.
• In most DEMO the health sector is underfinanced with
inefficient allocation of scarce resources and lack of coordination
between health subsectors, institutions, and other social agents
DEMO those with vested interests. This results in having to double
the efforts to provide basic care, overlapping of responsibilities,
and waste of resources thus leading to quantitative and
qualitative deficiencies in the delivery of health DEMO and
growing gaps in basic care provision.
234 ECLAC
(a) Health Sector Reform
Health sector reform is a DEMO aimed at introducing substantive
changes into the health sector and in the relationships among the main
stakeholders and the roles they perform with a DEMO to increasing equity
in benefits, efficiency in management, and effectiveness in satisfying the
health needs and expectations of the population (PAHO, 1996)DEMO Health
reform processes in Latin America and the Caribbean have many facets and
there is no single model being adopted by all. Each country DEMO moving at a
different pace in the implementation of its own particular health system
model but the economic and globalization changes of the last DEMO have
brought a new urgency to the reform processes. There are, DEMO,
common trend-setters and responses that characterize most health sector
reform processes occurring in the region: (a) the universalization of a high
cost-benefit basic package of health services; (b) standardized public health
interventions; (c) cost containment and recovery; (d) administrative
decentralization and operation DEMO healthcare services; (e) recognition of the
role of the private DEMO and the intersectorality of health interventions;
(f) health models oriented toward primary care and centered on people;
(g) focus on DEMO and accountability; and (h) moving away from the
reactive delivery DEMO care to a more proactive management approach of the
health status of individuals and population groups (PAHO, 1996; 1998).
ICTs are an essential requirement of health sector reform. Information
systems are crucial for the DEMO support and management of the new
health and healthcare models. Information systems solutions and
implementation strategies must address the needs of the new trends DEMO
healthcare. They need to emphasize a continuous relationship between
providers and clients, customization of care, greater partnerships between
providers, insurers, and clients DEMO increasing client control of evidence-
based health decisions. They need to ensure that information is not locked
away in records and kept in separate DEMO with access limited to their
authors but rather available to all the vested interests and finally greater
transparency and cooperation instead of independent professional DEMO (see
Figure).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
THE CHANGING PARADIGM IN THE ORGANIZATION AND DELIVERY
OF HEALTHCARE
235
Source: Roberto Rodrigues
Furthermore, information systems must support the prime feature
of most new health models, i.e., emphasizing the continuity of clinical care
sustained by health DEMO and maintenance actions. The concept
encompasses informed citizens who take care of their health and an
assortment of public and private interests who are DEMO responsible
for delivering a continuum of evidence-based health services to individuals
and the environment in the region. The variety of conditions and
operational demands DEMO the health sector require a great diversity of
information resources and solutions. Such solutions must provide services
to the challenging and interdependent array of DEMO, public health, and
managerial decisions and interventions that characterize health practice
(PAHO, 1998; 1999; 2001; Rodrigues, 2000a; 2000b).
2. The Foundation and Practice of e-health
Although vaguely defined, the term e-health usually means
electronically-facilitated clinical and service functions that go beyond purely
business DEMO financial transactions (Hagland, 2001). Among leading digital
236 ECLAC
technologies, Internet-based ICT solutions are rapidly changing the way
health providers, health plans, organizations, payers, regulators, and
consumers access information, acquire health products and services, deliver
care, and communicate with each other (Eysenbach, 2001; Della Mea, 2001).
The business imperative DEMO e-health is concrete. Health is one of the
largest sectors of the economy. In the United States alone, it accounts for
US$ 12 to US$ 15 out of every U$ 100 spent each year, representing a market
of one trillion dollars. Health services represent a US$ 3 trillion DEMO in
OECD countries (90% of the world total) and that figure is expected to
increase to US$ 4 trillion by 2005 (Casas, DEMO). Global demand for telehealth
services is estimated to be worth US$ 1.25 trillion, about two-thirds of which
is for direct services and the rest for second opinion, consumer information,
continuing education, management and DEMO services.
Solutions are driven by the operational requirements of health
reforms, DEMO are aligned to the same set of determinants found to be valid
for e-business. These include the growth of a global marketplace, the
importance of network externalities, the need for interorganizational
coordination in networks, intraorganizational DEMO in modules,
relationship management and service customization, which all lead DEMO the
integration of information of increasing data granularity, better and faster
DEMO, and performance enhancement. The focus of e-health is the
customer/client/DEMO Technologies, particularly the Internet, are the tools
for information acquisition, DEMO, analysis, and communication but
it is the individual and aggregated data about customers/client/citizens
and about markets, products, processes, and finances that represent the
underlying resource of value for e-health.
Particularly pertinent to DEMO is the observation that success has
been demonstrated in niche markets where customization is important.
Relevance of information is related to data content about DEMO and
person-identifiable detailed data is critical to the successful operation of a
variety of applications. Most of the ICT solutions applicable to the health
DEMO are common across sectors or shared common elements. Especially
in service industries where the “one-of-a-kind” product is the core of the
business model (such as in investment, tourism, and travel industries)
healthcare can directly DEMO from the experience of the more advanced
e-Sectors. Existing concepts such as the model SCM-ERP-CRM from the e-
business sector (see section about “Generic Services”) can increase
collaboration in the health sector and thus facilitate the sharing of patient
information, improving data accuracy and timeliness and create incentives
for systematic patient participation in self-care. Especially Customer
Relationship Management (CRM), which builds on the integrative
collection, processing and evaluation of customer relevant information,
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 237
interactive communication with the customer, as well as individualized
performance have vast potential.
In developed countries, e-health has rapidly evolved from the
delivery of online medical content toward the adaptation of generic e-
commerce solutions to the DEMO of health-related administrative
transactions and logistical support of clinical tasks. E-health is touching
every stakeholder and a variety of systems have been deployed in DEMO
following areas:
• Professional Communication among Providers
• Logistics of Patient Management and Distributed Care Provision
• Health System Administrative Transactions
• Business DEMO Business and Business to Consumer Transactions
• Biomedical Knowledge Management
• Electronic Health Record (Computerized Patient Record)
• Clinical Care (Telemedicine)
DEMO Health Information Delivery to the Public
• Distant Education of Health Professionals
• Consumer to Consumer Exchanges (Chat and Special-Interest
Groups)
Emerging e-health applications are oriented to professional
networking, integration of the clinical care process management, and the
provision of Web-based health information and patient care, DEMO
remote monitoring and healthcare. This expanded view of e-health has been
promoted as the final stage in bringing the entire healthcare industry online.
3. DEMO to the Deployment of e-health in Latin America
and the Caribbean
As in all the other Vertical Sectors of ICT deployment, technology
distribution and access problems also represent a central obstacle in the
dissemination of e-health (Rodrigues, 2000c). Dependable connectivity is
needed for reliable transactions. However, DEMO digital divide in the health
sector is more than mere access to technology, as it also represents primarily
the lack of human capacities, DEMO well as the awareness and understanding
of scientific and technological concepts and often even behavioral aspects
and cultural rejection. The problem can be illustrated DEMO the result of a 1999
survey of 42,744 physicians in Brazil. The study revealed that 52% used the
Internet —a level of diffusion DEMO to the general population of the
United States— however, when 23,DEMO physicians users were asked from
238 ECLAC
where they predominantly accessed the Internet, 85% indicated their home,
10% the office, and only 2.0% accessed the net from their university and
3.0% from the hospital.
Employees’ skills are the most expensive DEMO least elastic resource
and an obstacle to successful e-health implementation. People are central
in the value-added creation of e-health products and services and an
DEMO human resource is the key to success (see also Section
“Human DEMO). Systems professionals and technology products and
services providers and project teams must also have superior skill levels
and experience in the particularities of DEMO area being automated. People-
based change is the first factor of a successful deployment of e-health
(Hagland, 2001). Successful organizations have demonstrated DEMO capacity
to maximize employee retraining, minimize investment in rare or transient
DEMO that would do better being outsourced, and promote specialization
and focused DEMO, instead of training few individuals in many subject
areas. These concentrated DEMO can then be shared, often independently
from the geographic position, through the use of digital communication
systems themselves.
As is usually the case DEMO innovation, the agents that first move into
the market quickly attain DEMO dominant position, block the entry of new
competitors, and capture a large part of potential proceeds. Market capture
by strong, organized, and DEMO health provider organizations, some
of international nature, is happening at a fast pace in Latin America and
regulatory methods have been advocated to DEMO local competition.
Indeed, electronic markets are a two-way street. While the DEMO
penetration of e-services in developing countries may result in the
opportunity for local businesses to compete globally, those effects also carry
great risks from the perspective of developing societies, as most enterprises
in developing countries do not operate at efficiency levels and technical
capacity that allow them to DEMO on an equal level with developed
world enterprises. The fact is that the often praised “death of distance” is
breaking down every form of DEMO industrial protection, which until
now sheltered local health providers, introducing direct competition in
previously inaccessible markets. This could in the short-term have positive
DEMO on service quality, but could in the long run have negative DEMO
on the development of adequate domestic capacity in order to be able to
face local health problems.
Intangible health “e-Solutions” products and services offered DEMO
foreign providers, as is the case of investment, insurance, knowledge
DEMO, healthcare applications, and telehealth present great challenges
to developing and poorly developed countries and may result in a flight of
capital, tax evasion, unemployment, capture of the health market, and
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 239
“cultural colonization”. The resulting scenario from such a process would
be the creation DEMO a “new global division of labor” centered on the more
sophisticated health industry exclusively in the developed world.
(a) Lagging Involvement of Public DEMO Authorities
Many public health organizations in Latin America and the
Caribbean are not taking advantage of existing ICT opportunities and most
information systems presently DEMO are inadequate to fulfil the
requirements of the new models of healthcare being implemented in the
context of health reform initiatives. Besides the common DEMO among
physicians that health information systems are mostly a source of scientific
and technical information, public health authorities often view clinical-
administrative information systems as an obsolete and static “statistical-
epidemiological” archetype. Such as archetype is DEMO as designed for
collecting numerical data that only represents the number of events and
which mostly generates only highly aggregated statistical data and time
DEMO related to mortality, morbidity, and to service utilization and
coverage. Those information systems carry very little practical interest for
direct care professionals and DEMO health program and unit managers and
are severely lacking in providing the logistical and longitudinal individual
client-based data required to operate and manage the DEMO of healthcare
models being deployed in many countries.
As a counterpoint to the passiveness of the public sector, the private
health sub-sector has already seen the writing on the wall. Private providers
and health groups recognized DEMO a “different” type of information system
and data elements was required to run their organizations and survive in
a competitive environment driven by increasing DEMO demands and
expectations and for the delivery of evidence-based quality and
personalized services (Rodrigues, 2000c). ICT resources can boost
productive specialization, such as allowing the efficient use of diagnostic
services and consultations, the maintenance of integrated records, reduction
in the number of specialists, and attaining DEMO of scale by linkages
to national and international markets. However besides these uses of ICT
resources there are many new areas of application that DEMO rapidly gaining
ground and reducing care costs while improving the continuity and quality
of care (Institute of Medicine, 2001; Fortune, 2001; Eng TR, 1999). Those
include non-tradable products or products with low-levels of tradability
such as personal services, e.g., home care.
The lack of DEMO of Latin American and Caribbean public
sector interests in the ICT use is risky and worrisome. At a time when, in
many countries, DEMO ailing, bureaucratic, and inefficient public sector is
240 ECLAC
struggling against poorly regulated privatization of social services, there
is a clear danger that their inaction in adopting ICT solutions may indeed
DEMO the further reduction and even the demise of public health services
already incapable of competing with an ICT-enabled private sector.
(b) Fast Changing DEMO and Complexity
of Health Organizations
Unfounded vendor-driven expectations of how the Internet will
revolutionize healthcare, have also often overshot their targets (PWC, 2000).
The lesson to be learned from the failures of many “new DEMO business
models for e-health, is that technology is a tool, which can only be justified
economically if organizations deploy it in a real DEMO environment and
closely track how managers and direct care professionals are using it.
Similar to e-commerce, the vast majority of pure Internet e-health players
have had very little impact. In a trust-based area like health, the
development path of “clicks-and-mortar” appears to be the safest model.
Broad objectives DEMO difficult to achieve and measure meaning the best
strategy is to identify the most repetitive costly tasks first —e.g., the
automation of claims and reimbursement procedures— and then proceed
area by area. This requires a well-planned DEMO stepwise automation of intra-
and inter-organizational processes with concomitant development and
implementation of metrics to monitor productivity and impact (Hagland,
2001; PWC, 2000; Martínez et al, 2001).
Although private and public health DEMO organizations are adapting
at varying speed to new e-health processes and models, the organizational
“culture”, and the nature, and frequency of those environmental changes
may create friction, desirable and some not so desirable effects, DEMO personal
behavior that may impede the attainment of the expected e-health project
results. The complexity of health organizations and processes needs to be
considered. DEMO and providers that already have computerized
information systems in place must figure out how to link with the new
applications and whether to incorporate DEMO legacy systems or start anew.
Regardless of the technology, while business DEMO and processes can
be split across many applications, shared data must DEMO physically or
logically centralized. The tremendous expense and difficulty required to
integrate the complex healthcare processes have opened the door to scores
of companies DEMO outsourced services and products, such as application
hosting and even entire DEMO departments for rent. Other firms specialize in
data collection, systems and DEMO management, practice management,
medication management, claims payments, or desktop DEMO
(Hagland, 2001; Fortune, 2001).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 241
Turning all or part of the business processes and management
handling to external DEMO parties (outsourcing) has been advocated as a
more efficient form of operation and cost containment. Unfortunately there
are no easy answers as to DEMO, where, and what processes should be
outsourced. It all depends on the organization’s business processes and a
number of environmental and market factors DEMO are, sometimes, difficult
to individualize (Meta Group, 2000). Outsourcing can involve other
organizations or just the operations related to the computerized
DEMO Application Service Providers (ASPs) solutions have been
promoted as a solution for the externalization of computerized business
processes (see section “ASP” in the Generic Service chapter) but the results
so far have fallen short of the expectations, mostly due to technological
constraints and underestimation of the costs and labor required to deploy
and maintain such systems.
(c) Regulatory DEMO
Process and data standards for the managed care industry involving
all constituents including employers, consumers, providers, payers, and
regulators, which are promoted by accrediting organizations and
particularly by the American Accreditation Health Care Commission
(URAC), have facilitated the adoption of common procedures and routines.
A DEMO amount of standardization also has been driven by regulatory
action. In the United States the introduction of the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations forced a reluctant
health industry to adopt uniform formats for health data exchanges and
uniform code sets to identify internal and external DEMO services activities
and to be HIPAA-compliant became a requirement of all applications.
However, even in developed countries the lack of national standards for
unique person identification has slowed implementation of patient-based
information systems. An extensive review DEMO reference source on
healthcare data standards was published by the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO, 1999).
Data security and privacy of personal DEMO data are universal
concerns and a high-priority issue in many countries. There is a growing
concern about protecting health records against intrusion, unauthorized use,
data corruption, intentional or unintentional damage, theft, and fraud.
Given the sensitive nature of healthcare information, and the high degree
of dependence of health professionals on trustworthy records, the issues
of reliability (data DEMO in the electronic health record is accurate and
remains accurate), security (owner and users of the electronic health record
can control data transmission and storage), and privacy (subject of data can
control its use and dissemination) are of particular significance and must be
242 ECLAC
clearly and effectively addressed by health and health-related organizations
and DEMO Reliability, security, and privacy are accomplished by
implementing a number of preventive and protective policies that address
the areas of physical protection, data integrity, access to information resources,
and protection against unauthorized disclosure of information. Security and
privacy issues can be a determining factor in the DEMO or failure of a
particular Web portal or ICT application. Legality and regulation of Internet-
mediated transactions are still inadequate in many countries. Other DEMO
are only at the incipient stage of implementation, even in developed
DEMO These include contract enforcement, ethical advertising, consumer
protection regarding accuracy of products and services and use of sensitive
and personal information by third DEMO and claims and liability
assignment (Rodrigues et al, 2001).
However, most security violations are unintentional and the most
damaging violations often occur within the organization. Operator’s error
is the most frequent reason. Health professionals, healthcare organizations,
and society in general must address the issue of DEMO to balance the need
for access, integrity, and privacy issues of individual rights versus the
collective needs of public and community health. A DEMO review
and reference source on personal data protection regulation was published
by the Pan American Health Organization (Rodrigues et al, 2001).
Another DEMO for the regulatory framework is the quality of
publicly available information. This is probably one of the most serious
issues in the area of DEMO interactive health communications. The
Internet offers unheard of power to provide all users of healthcare
information, namely patients, professionals, families, caregivers, educators,
researchers, insurers, regulators, and policymakers, with data of
unprecedented DEMO, accuracy, depth, and diversity. Yet it is equally
clear that DEMO very qualities that make the Internet such a rich marketplace
of ideas with its decentralized structure, its global reach, its leveling of
access DEMO publication tools , its immediacy of response, and its ability to
DEMO free-ranging interchange, also make the Web a channel for
potential misinformation, concealed bias, covert self-dealing, and evasion
of legitimate regulation. It is DEMO difficult to ascertain and recommend the
credibility, motives, sponsorship, and DEMO conflicts of interest of the
more than 50,000 health websites in existence. Many websites are profit-
driven, others promote unproven and even dangerous forms of treatment
or products, while others may be well intentioned, DEMO contain misleading
or false information (Eng TR, 1999; Impicciatore et DEMO 1997; Silberg et al,
1997; Kiley, 1998; Boulding and Mack, 1998; Boulding and Silber 1998;
Eysenbach et al, 1998; Dyer, 1999; Adelhard, 1999; CHCF, 2000; 2001;
Rodrigues, 2000c; Berland et al, 2001; Risk and Dzenowagis, 2001).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 243
4. E-Health Strategies
The use of ICT can improve access to services and DEMO,
facilitate the operational and management of health organizations, support
the DEMO of quality healthcare, and be the vehicle for professional
education and DEMO promotion.
(a) Developing a National Vision, Mission, and Plan of Action
The goal is to help healthcare organizations adopt ICTs effectively
by DEMO a health ICT vision and strategic plan of action. The
immediate objective should be to promote and deploy core e-health
applications and support their DEMO by incorporating an advanced
informatics component into health programs and projects. This should be
supported by a combination of funding programs, incentive grant
programs, and prototype development funding programs.
Governments should focus on their role as sponsors of basic scientific
and technological research and have the responsibility for DEMO an
active leadership role in educating the medical community and in
coordinating and encouraging the effective implementation of relevant
applications. In accordance with the DEMO Diagonal Areas that have been
identified in the first part of this book, it is envisioned that governments
will be involved in six specific areas in e-health development and
deployment:
• Promoting of education, training, and national planning
capacity in information systems and technology;
• Providing funding for research and development;
• Ensuring the equitable distribution of DEMO, particularly to
places and people considered by private enterprise to provide
DEMO profit opportunities ;
• Convening groups for the implementation of standards;DEMO
• Protecting rights of privacy, intellectual property, and security;
and
• Overcoming the jurisdictional barriers to cooperation,
particularly when there are DEMO regulations.
Governments must demand that international and multilateral
agencies promote and support technical cooperation activities in the
development of e-health. This should primarily involve DEMO transfer of
knowledge, providing technical support and facilitating the exchange of
DEMO between countries. International aspects of e-health form a
244 ECLAC
critical and urgent area still to be addressed by the DEMO trade blocks
and even the World Trade Organization. Health organizations must be
provided with information about the opportunities as well as the risks of
DEMO solutions. Technology evaluation sources and results must be made
available and health managers must be guided in the process of systems
specification, acquisition, DEMO contracting ICT products and services.
Knowledge repositories must be established in cooperation with the
industry, centers for technology evaluation, academic research groups, and
centers of excellence.
(b) Bridging the Digital Divide in e-health
In DEMO health sector, the development and digital divides between the
industrialized and DEMO Latin American countries is wider than the gap
observed in other productive and social sectors. In some cases, the changes
brought about by the privatization of healthcare added to the already high
degree of structural inequity DEMO prevails in the region. Only a more active
role of government and public-private partnerships will create an
environment conducive to a reduction of the DEMO e-health development
divide.
It is true that the developing countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean may take advantage of the accumulated knowledge and
DEMO and may leapfrog developmental stages. However, leapfrog
strategies face great constraints DEMO to difficulties associated with the
general institutional underdevelopment, low income, and the human
resources and financial constraints that trouble many countries. In
industrialized DEMO it took several decades and countless institutional
and organizational transformations for the consolidation of economic,
institutional, and technological changes and the crystallization of long-term
structural patterns in order that ICT could spread to vast sectors DEMO the
society. Finally, to secure an effective knowledge transfer, interoperability
and language barriers need to be addressed. A serious problem for Latin
America DEMO the non-English speaking Caribbean is that many e-health
applications and content are in English. Even physicians, who generally
have a working knowledge of English, may have problems with this
demand. Investment is required to develop user interfaces and content
in national languages.
Success in the deployment of institutional DEMO applications
depends on the existence of staff with the right mix of skills and it rests
with people in all functions and levels. Human DEMO development
through awareness programs, education of health staff, continuous training,
and career opportunities must be institutionalized from the inception of the
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 245
developmental effort. This requires the transference of technical expertise
and the appropriation of DEMO by health personnel to ensure the full
participation of end-users in the development process and the best
insurance for successful implementations.
(c) Promoting DEMO and Private Health Sector Partnerships
E-health solutions are complex and costly to develop and implement.
Benefits are often of a qualitative and social nature DEMO cannot be easily
measured with most commonly used return-to-investment schemes.
Particularly in developing countries, where healthcare is predominantly
financed from public sources, market DEMO by themselves are not sufficient
to ensure rapid development of e-health applications and universal access
to ICT solutions. Technical knowledge, experience, and financial
DEMO needed to establish complex information systems require
tapping into resources and expertise that no sole organization has. The
public sector alone, even in developed countries, clearly will not be capable
to provide the full spectrum of “public good” e-health applications.
The answer is to embark in a concerted DEMO to secure a well-defined
partnership with the informatics industry at the global and national levels
aimed at application development, deployment, and support at DEMO
cost and, at the same time, creating commercial opportunities that are
attractive to technology firms. Public and private institutions, academic
organizations, industry, and financing agents must find ways to pool their
assets through project DEMO and quickly add social value to cost-
effective health services (PAHO, 1998; 1999; 2001).
(d) Standards
Work must be carried DEMO with the public and private sectors to
achieve consensus on a set of information principles for the collection,
transfer, storage, and use DEMO health data over national and global
information infrastructures (WHO, 1998; DEMO 1998; 1999). Data-, process,
and technology-related standards will be defined by a consortium of users,
researchers, government, technical and DEMO bodies, and the industry
at three distinct levels. These are the DEMO of data and
information, the computational facilities required to manipulate and DEMO
the information and telecommunications facilities, employed to transfer
information among dispersed DEMO
From a healthcare standards perspective, the area of standards is in
DEMO flux and one must be attentive to the evolution of international
recommendations and professional standards working groups. It is
246 ECLAC
therefore advisable to carefully evaluate existing options regarding technical
guidelines, norms, and standards developed by the international technical
and scientific community, DEMO the ones validated by the
International Standards Organization (ISO), a DEMO federation of
national standards organizations. Policy and regulatory norms are needed
but if approached rigidly they may inhibit and complicate the delivery of
innovative DEMO and applications while more attention should be
paid to how technical ideas are made accessible to potential users.
(e) Creating Incentives Through Regulation
DEMO be fully effective and efficient the healthcare industry must operate
in a seamlessly integrated digital environment encompassing connectivity,
applications, content, commerce, and the community of stakeholders. But
no one can pinpoint exactly how everything DEMO converge. Using
regulatory powers to nudge the health industry toward compliance with
the standardized definitions and processes needed to accomplish that
objective is a DEMO and effective approach. The European and Canadian
healthcare systems have used this strategy and HIPAA —the U.S. federal
Health Insurance Portability & Accountability Act— DEMO a prime example of
how the industry can be coached into complying with a variety of
guidelines related to data standardization, security, and DEMO In effect,
HIPAA is forcing an e-health solution on U.S. healthcare insurance and
reimbursement processes. The HIPAA regulations cover both physical and
electronic DEMO to virtually every company involved in healthcare
including health plans, providers, payers, clearinghouses, and employers.
The rules apply at the time patients DEMO appointments with their doctors
who determine eligibility electronically; when a patient DEMO into a
hospital and his or her information might pop up on a computer monitor;
or when patient records are transferred via the DEMO for review from one
medical provider to another. Although the new provisions mean major
expense in the short term, the intent is to simplify processes, bolster security,
and cut costs in the long run.
Latin American and Caribbean countries can profitably use those
experiences in the development DEMO regulatory mechanisms that will provide
the incentives to convince the health industry in deploying efficient and
cost-effective e-health applications that will move the healthcare DEMO
forward and result in real improvements in patient care and clinical practice.
The introduction of e-health offers a great opportunity for the
acceleration of DEMO development process toward universal, high-quality, and
cost-effective health services in Latin America and the Caribbean. Despite
the central importance of the health sector DEMO overall sustainable
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 247
development, health is clearly lagging behind in the omnipresent process
of digitization. The widespread adoption of ICTs by the health sector will
require special attention DEMO public authorities and health decision makers
in the process of building a Latin American and Caribbean Information
Society in the years to come.
D. DEMO
The so-called digital divide is not only material in nature, it DEMO also a
symbolic abyss, representing inequitable distribution of the knowledge and
DEMO goods required for an individual, culture or society to be integrated
DEMO a globalized information society.22
In view of this situation of cultural exclusion, research is needed into
the sociocultural impact of the Internet on cultural and material
consumption habits in the Region, where a selective process of Internet
expansion is taking place. This expansion is combined with a mass
DEMO of the symbolic television products or messages , accompanied
by a process of material impoverishment reflected in an abrupt drop in the
income of DEMO population (Hopenhayn and Ottone, 1997).
From this point of view, research into the sociocultural impact of ICTs
is useful to guide the design and implementation of public policies relating
to Internet communication and culture. DEMO policies are aimed at reversing
to some extent the realities and trends towards cultural and material
exclusion that are being witnessed in the Region.
DEMO Section covers the critical elements that should be considered
21
22
This Section is a contribution of Mr. Marcelo Bonilla Urvina, coordinator of the research
program on the social impact of the Internet in Latin America DEMO the Caribbean, FLACSO,
Ecuador Headquarters.
“From the political point of DEMO, the growth and dissemination of information technology
and electronic commerce seem DEMO be dividing the world in a new way, not by political
DEMO, or nation states, but according to possession of and access to knowledge. The
social and economic classes of today transcend the frontiers and DEMO forming horizontally
and on an international scale within a more global model that isbased on the Network.
The new dividing line seems to be DEMO between those who possess knowledge, in
other words, efficient access to the Internet implying that those who have it can
communicate and interact DEMO with each other, gradually developing common
values, life styles and consumption patterns throughout the world without moving from
their computers, that is, DEMO usual physical location.” (Latin American Integration
Association (ALADI), 2000).
248 ECLAC
while studying and designing public policies on Internet communication
and DEMO geared toward greater social and cultural equity in the region.23
1. The instrumental vision of technology
One of the general observations from research on DEMO social impact
of the Internet on school culture, citizenship and governability DEMO Latin
America and the Caribbean, is the predominant tendency toward a DEMO
“instrumental” and “technical” implementation of this digital tool.
The predominance of instrumental perspectives of the Internet often
overlooks the potential the Internet has as DEMO language and representation
system through which young people and citizens can create and re-create
narratives, their visions of themselves and society (Cabrera, 2001). Presently
most projects forget the social dimension and function of ICTs DEMO part of
the processes of production, consumption and distribution of knowledge.
DEMO lack of integration is reflected in the ritual uses established by school
authorities as indispensable rules for students’ access to computers (for
example obliging children to cover their shoes with plastic bags before
entering the computer DEMO, procedures for switching the computers on
and off, covering them, DEMO).
These patterns reflect a perspective that officially sanctions the
Internet, DEMO at the same time reduces it to just one more technical
instrument of the school system. Consequently preference is given to
technical learning (treating the computer as a data and information base,
or an encyclopaedia) rather than to its potential as a communication tool.
The outcome is DEMO the Internet is restricted to traditional teaching methods
and learning practices (DEMO as the reproduction and copying of texts
without an investigative and critical approach) which are obstacles to the
development of a more participatory and creative learning process. The
virtual classroom thus becomes a space which reproduces DEMO forms
of learning and vertical power hierarchies which are typical of the Latin
23
This analysis was based on the information and conclusions from DEMO research projects
carried out between 1999 and 2001, as part of DEMO competition for research projects on the
social impact of information and communication technologies (ITCs) in Latin America and
the Caribbean, held by the Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO-Ecuador
headquarters) and the International DEMO Research Centre (CIID /IDRC, Ottawa,
Canada).
This programme DEMO priority areas of development such as: education and culture,
democracy DEMO citizenship, law and justice, and methodologies for evaluating the social
impact of the Internet. http://www.flacso.org.ec; http://www.idrc.ca/pan/panamericas_s.
htm, http://www.idrc.ca/pan/pr04439_s.htm
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 249
American schooling system (Arredondo and others, 2001).24 These ways of
reducing DEMO to a tool within a dominant cultural order mask and destroy
the possibility of developing new relationships, teaching methods,
communication processes and forms of learning.
Similar phenomena of instrumental implementation occur in
experiments in applying DEMO in the area of local government (municipality),
where the Internet has played only a traditional role in spreading
information, such as an information bulletin, in promoting governments
and traditional images of leaders. The Internet has certainly not been
considered from the point of view of developing DEMO culture of citizens’
participation, or “cybercitizenship”, a situation which has strengthened
clientelist practices.25
The prevailing instrumental view of seeing the Internet as an DEMO
that is outside the context of cultural changes, power relationships and
DEMO in symbolic and knowledge circulation systems means that new
approaches, methods DEMO teaching practices must be developed and
applied. Only by doing so will it be possible to form new social practices
for perceiving, acting and participating in society through an innovative
use of ICTs meaning incorporating them DEMO the school system and the
citizen culture.26 In other words, it DEMO essential for public policy to use the
Internet to encourage the creation of a new citizen “habitus”.27
Miguel Angel Arredondo, Ramiro Catalán and others (2001) describe in detail how
traditional teaching methods are reproduced through DEMO ritual uses and instrumental
practices of the Internet in the school system of the Maule Community (Chile).
Susana Finqulievich, Silvia Lago Martínez DEMO others (2001) offer a detailed description
of the instrumental use of the Internet at the level of the governments of Buenos Aires
and DEMO as a way of reproducing traditional local forms of administration and
exercise of power. Uca Silvia (2001) gives a detailed description of how DEMO use of ICTs in
the Chilean municipalities of El Bosque, Puente DEMO, Los Andes and Rancagua have only
met the internal needs of DEMO governments to improve internal information services,
political marketing and the reproduction of clientelist power relations.
Along these lines there is the work of DEMO team at the National University of Quilmes which
deals with a proposal to create a new habitus in the citizen (Schiavo, 2001). DEMO group of
researchers developed a multimedia tool or application based on an evaluation of the local
experiences of electronic government in Argentina. The tool DEMO designed to encourage
a habitus of children ‘s participation through their relationship with their local
environment in order to overcome the instrumental practices and DEMO vision of the
Internet. Another relevant experiment in the same area is the one carried out by the
MISTICA Virtual Community, launched by the Networks and Development Foundation
(FUNREDES, Dominican Republic) FUNREDES’ objective is to develop a cyberculture
based on principles and practices of solidarity and democratic DEMO among its
members.
“Habitus”, as defined by Pierre Bourdieu, is understood as “the system of attitudes...
generating and organizing principles of practices and DEMO collectively
orchestrated” (Bourdieu, 1991) which orders everyday practices.
24
25
DEMO
27
250 ECLAC
It is also important to conduct research on the social DEMO of ICTs
on the dynamics of reproducing material and cultural capital and the
process of continually transforming material goods or assets into symbolic
goods DEMO assets.28 Research in these areas may provide a clearer vision of
how ICTs function in the current context of a globalized world, and how
to implement policies using new teaching and learning methods to
counteract the DEMO predominant trend that polarizes social and cultural
differences.
There are clearly two contradictory trends or visions of ICT
implementation in school, cultural or local government management
projects. There is the dominant view, which sees the Internet as a technical
tool, and the other perspective, which attempts to DEMO the Internet’s
potential as a system of communication and representation of new forms
of learning and social participation. These two trends form part of DEMO more
complex process in which two currents collide. One reproduces traditional
forms of dominance or power. The other subverts this order and points to
DEMO new form of learning outside traditional systems of education and the
established order, in areas outside school and in spaces where new forms
of interaction and socialization are emerging. Some reflections on the
collision of these DEMO currents are discussed below.
2. New cultural proposals
The Internet alone does not generate changes, as it exists within the
cultural, political and DEMO orders and contexts, and usually becomes an
appendix or extension of DEMO power. In the field of education in
Latin America, some case DEMO have indicated that there is a trend toward
reproducing the punitive school system through the use of ICTs. In general,
the Internet is DEMO to the traditional forms of school control and power
(Cabrera, 2001; Arredondo, 2001).29
It has also been observed, however, that DEMO virtual classroom may
be transformed to the extent that the teacher loses authority, as the dynamics
of the informal exchange that is generated during the practical computer
sessions neutralize and diminish the teacher’s capacity for control. DEMO this
28
29
This thought uses the theory of symbolic and material capital developed by the French
sociologist Pierre Bourdieu (1991).
Cabrera (DEMO) and Arredondo (2001) provide a detailed ethnographic description of how
DEMO Internet is linked to school discipline, how in the virtual classroom DEMO school
practices are reproduced which are indicative of resistance on the part of the teaching staff
and the education authorities to implementing profound changes DEMO the teaching systems.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
251
sense, the virtual classroom is a point at which the playful activity of the
students and the vertical authority of the teacher collide. The virtual
DEMO, through the windows of the computer, thus becomes a means
of escape from the teacher’s control. The Internet marks the limit between
the DEMO within and outside the classroom, within and outside the
educational system. DEMO point of conflict also reflects the tension between
the culture of the book, understood as a form of relationship, of pedagogical
control of DEMO student, and new forms of learning by navigation through
cyberspace. Young DEMO navigate outside school premises and far from
the control of the teacher, through practices which combine televisual codes,
sound, reading and the DEMO of “chat” as a new form of socialization and
construction of new identities (Cabrera, 2001).
One key factor for achieving optimal integration DEMO the Internet in
the life of young people and citizens, and DEMO the duality described,
is to directly link the use of this new technology to the needs and areas of
local cultures.30 That is, to take into account the local dimension as a
strategic element in DEMO design and implementation of projects aimed at
socially developing ICTs with a view to generating social practices and an
Internet culture which allows a DEMO and equitable exchange of
knowledge.
The lack of incorporation of ICTs in school and citizens’ culture in
the Region is the result of a DEMO of an integral pedagogical proposal, that
forms part of a larger DEMO for a profound change in the relationships
and methods of teaching and learning. This points to the need for proposals
and actions which encourage DEMO civic teaching methods for ICTs
(Robinson, 2001), undertaken within a new school culture, as a basis for
constructing more participatory and just societies in Latin America and the
Caribbean (see also the Section on e-learning).
3. Fair and equitable orders
An important initiative to be DEMO in the public policies of Latin
American countries is the development and consolidation of the right to
30
The evaluation by Vilela and Light (2001) of two positive cases of ICT inclusion in two
rural schools in Argentina concluded that success depended on the capacity to integrate
the DEMO with the needs and areas of the local communities. In other words, the capacity
to link educational projects to local management actions. This paper describes how
students of one rural Argentine school in the Tanti community (Córdoba province) shared
experiences and carried out joint actions with students from a similar establishment
situated in a distant region of the same country DEMO order to implement a reforestation
project in their local area.
252 ECLAC
communication and culture. This includes the right to the Internet DEMO a
fundamental axis which ensures equitable access to ICTs and citizens’
participation. This is a central objective to be included on the agenda of
DEMO society organizations (CSOs), whose activities are aimed at developing
social DEMO in different fields (health, education, local development,
women’s rights, cultural rights, etc.).
Uca Silva (2001) explains that one essential requirement for exercising
the right to citizenship is exercising the right to DEMO, which is
the basis for establishing the link between the government DEMO citizens, as
a participatory relationship in which the citizen has the DEMO to see,
listen and speak. In other words, the right DEMO communication should be
established as a horizontal relationship which, allows citizens DEMO
This new principle and right should therefore become the basis for
all regulations concerning the exchange of knowledge, the exercise of public
rights and freedom of expression through ICTs. This new technology should
be conceived as DEMO tool and a form of language which when applied can
help the development and implementation of social policies (education,
health, social security, local development, scientific development, human
rights, citizens’ participation, etc.) (DEMO, 2001).31 It should be noted that
applying the logics of DEMO horizontally, which may be done with
help of the Internet, would not only help to improve levels of political
participation, but also make local management and social policies more
transparent.
On this premise, the right to communication and culture can be
understood as a guarantee that the DEMO of citizens, both men and
women, will be heard and taken into account in the running of the
government and political decision-making. It DEMO that they will
receive reliable, honest information on the social actions DEMO policies carried
out by the local or national authorities. This guarantee also includes the
right to political participation through free access to information and
DEMO The implementation of this new principle should be supported
by the effective exercise of the “Internet Right”, which is a collective
guarantee that includes the possibility of physical access to the ICTs as well
as learning DEMO social appropriation.
Nevertheless, the right to communication and culture, through the
Internet Right, should take into account a balance between a collective right
such as the free circulation of knowledge and information and private rights
DEMO (2001) explains the crosscutting nature of using the Internet as a condition for
improving the quality, timeliness, transparency and citizens’ participation in DEMO
construction, management and implementation of public policies.
31
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
253
such as those that protect the intimacy and privacy of the individual and
DEMO relating to intellectual property.
On the one hand, the lack of DEMO, regulations and political
culture to protect the privacy and intimacy of DEMO may lead to
situations in which people feel insecure using the Net. For this reason
countries should reach regional agreements in these areas in DEMO to
construct an Internet culture based on transparency and respect for personal
rights regarding the management and use of digital information.32 On the
other DEMO, it should be made clear that excessive limits put on the DEMO
of intellectual content could cause stagnation in development. Limits could
generate inequitable relationships which impede technological, educational
and cultural development in the Region, DEMO is why a balance should
be reached between the lawful use of intellectual property and authors’
rights.
As can be observed, a regulatory model which allows equitable
access to and appropriation of the Internet should be DEMO on a right to
communication and culture and include balances between individual rights
such as the privacy and intimacy of the individual and social DEMO such
as the free dissemination of knowledge. Such a legal model, DEMO for
the development of equitable relations in access to knowledge, culture DEMO
the exercise of citizenship, can only be achieved by encouraging regional
DEMO and strategic alliances between civil society organizations
(CSOs), the academic DEMO, the private sector, and national and local
governments.33
4. The construction of an internet culture
As a final conclusion to these reflections it DEMO be said that to build
an Internet culture that ensures access, DEMO and use with social
understanding of ICTs will depend on the convergence of three processes
and lines of action which should be encouraged. They DEMO (1) the
32
33
The research team of the Institute of Justice Research (Argentina) warns of the danger to
citizens in societies DEMO states lacking democratic practices. These could lead to possible
violations of basic human rights which may arise owing to the indiscriminate use of
personal DEMO (regarding health, finances, political or religious affiliation, etc.)
(DEMO et al, 2001).
Both Martínez (2001) and Robinson (2001) emphasize the need for strategic alliances aimed
at implementing social policies and projects related to ICTs. Finqulievich and others (2001)
underscore the need to encourage the collaboration of civil society organizations, the
academic world, DEMO the governmental sector in the development of social and
technological policies for cities.
254 ECLAC
construction of a new vision and practices (habitus) for DEMO Internet; (2) the
establishment of new strategic alliances between bodies DEMO individuals in
civil society organizations, the private sector, the academic world and the
government sector (local, regional or national) with the aim of achieving
social development of ICTs (both in collective access and in the social use
or appropriation of this tool), and (3) DEMO by the civil society
organizations and citizens for consolidation of the right to communication
and culture and the right to the Internet both in DEMO practice and at
the level of explicit inclusion in national, regional DEMO international legal
systems.
(a) New vision and the Internet habitus
Studies on the social impact of the Internet in Latin America have
shown DEMO need to relate to the concepts and practices of culture and
citizens’ participation as the key for designing development projects that
use them. That DEMO, the current issue concerning ICTs relates to the topic of
connectivity (physical access), and concerns the issue of use and
appropriation of DEMO new language and development tool for groups of
citizens and CSOs.
At present the majority of initiatives being studied are divorced from
the reality DEMO the local culture and have been instrumentalized and adapted
to the traditional forms of exercising power. This situation is reflected in
the existing abyss DEMO school and local reality, between current teaching
methods and the needs DEMO the community. There have been signs of
rationales in the school systems and in the dynamics of local governments
that tend to perpetuate forms DEMO exercising power and local management
that do not lead to true citizens’ participation. These rationales are an
obstacle to the building of an Internet DEMO based on a right to
communication and culture. A new vision and practice (habitus) of the Internet
must be based mainly on the DEMO of new civic teaching methods.34
These new teaching methods must start at the base of the schooling system
and structure of local organizations (districts, communities, etc.).
Using the Internet for social ends should be DEMO on the basis
of this educational linkage which connects local, regional DEMO global
dimensions. The new teaching methods constitute forms of learning,
perceiving and acting through a new medium of communication and
exchange of knowledge, supported by the strategic use of the Internet. This
This term is DEMO to refer to a learning process and methodologies aimed at developing
participatory processes that help to link electronic government initiatives, incorporation
of ICTs in the school system, etc. with the needs of local cultures (Robinson, 2001).
34
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 255
educational reform should also be included as part of the agenda of projects
DEMO are carried out at various social levels and scales, from the
DEMO of educational projects at the school level and proposals for
electronic government to experiments in building virtual communities.
(b) The Right to Information DEMO Culture, and the Internet Right
“Universal Declaration of Human Rights”
Article DEMO: “Everyone has the right... to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.”
Article 27: “Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural
life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific
advancement and its DEMO
Undertaking projects to promote the social use of the Internet
requires formal recognition from constitutional systems, national laws and
international legal instruments of the right to information and culture. It
also depends on the Internet Right, which at the level of national states and
local governments should take DEMO form of a crosscutting policy that affects
all other social policies.
Such recognition will only be possible if CSOs and citizens’
organizations interested in DEMO development of public policies (health,
human rights, political participation, DEMO, etc.) include in their
political agenda the consolidation of the rights already mentioned. Those
rights are the fundamental base or prerequisites in the DEMO world to
ensure the exercise of citizens’ guarantees that form part of contemporary
national and international legal systems such as freedom of expression or
DEMO association.
The right to the Internet should include collective physical access to
ICTs, as well as facilitating learning and their usage for social reasons
(which allows them to be included in the school culture, the DEMO
and in local governments) according to the existing circumstances in each
DEMO, region and locality. This right should constitute the basis for
constructing DEMO political culture based on citizens’ participation, especially
for social groups that DEMO traditionally been excluded (for reasons of race,
ethnicity, gender or generation).
The legal models to be applied in Latin America and DEMO Caribbean
to the Internet should primarily meet the needs and circumstances of local
cultures. On the other hand, regional agreements and treaties should
harmonize the free circulation of information and knowledge with the rights
256 ECLAC
to privacy and intimacy, and the lawful use of intellectual property. For the
Region to achieve an adequate level of integration in DEMO globalized world,
these two currents, the one that promotes free DEMO to information and
the other aimed at protecting individual and intellectual property rights,
must be harmonized.
These new collective rights can only be DEMO by strengthening
citizens’organizations, CSOs and the alliances that the latter can DEMO
with the private and governmental sectors in each locality, region and
DEMO This building of alliances will depend on the individual political
and economic scenarios, and on the negotiating talent and initiatives of
those groups.
(DEMO) New alliances and political actions
In summary, the goals discussed are the development of a new vision
and practice (habitus) towards the DEMO and the inclusion of the Internet
Right in national and international legal systems as part of the right to
communication and culture of different DEMO These goals can only be
achieved through the action, initiative and DEMO work of CSOs,
citizens’ movements and organizations involved in social development and
learning research about ICTs.
These groups, in addition to including the development of ICTs on
their internal agendas, should encourage alliance building, DEMO is
currently non-existent, with entities in the private sector (including, DEMO not
limited to, the large telecommunications companies), and the local, regional
and national government bodies.
These agreements would have to reflect a DEMO political culture (vision
and habitus) in relation to the social commitment that the private and
government sectors have to assume in order to DEMO the social
development of the Internet Right. This commitment depends on the
negotiation capacity that the CSOs and citizens’ movements can develop
in order DEMO achieve the involvement of these sectors and their linking to
the needs of different local cultures.
The momentum of this process also depends on DEMO strengthening
of CSOs and citizens’ movements and their capacity to get involved in local,
national and regional contexts. The alliances, solutions and formulas that
are implemented to encourage social development of the Internet depend
on DEMO particular situations of each country and region.35 That is, there are
DEMO fixed or unique formulas or models for Internet development; they
depend DEMO the context in which they are applied.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
257
E. E-Learning36
No one today can deny that the use of Information and DEMO
Technologies (ICTs) in the formal school environment is a positive and even
necessary step, in a world that is increasingly being affected by these
technologies in various areas of the social system. The versatility and
DEMO of these technologies makes them an effective support mechanism
for teaching and learning and developing and managing certain
organizational routines in schools.
1. ICTs DEMO schools: Theoretical Perspectives
As a complement to the previous Section on DEMO capital” and
the education of the work force in ICT applications, DEMO Section focuses
more on the opportunities for supporting the teaching process through the
use of ICTs, and on the changes needed in the teaching paradigm. The
Section addresses three perspectives which although they are different in
DEMO, they are not necessarily mutually exclusive in practice. The three
currents DEMO (i) those focusing on the benefits of ICTs for learning (DEMO
through ICTs); (ii) those linking the introduction of ICTs into schools to the
demand for appropriate human capital in the Information Society
(education about ICT); and (iii) those that link ICTs to DEMO and
innovations on a larger scale in schools (administrative management,
DEMO practice, etc.) (ICT paradigm).
(a) ICTs and learning
DEMO a number of research projects and studies have focused on ICT
potential to complement the teaching and learning process. According to
this theoretical research, ICT-assisted learning and teaching have a real and
specific impact on a DEMO of conditions that encourage significant learning
processes (for example encouraging motivation DEMO study), (Papert, 1994). Also
the use of ICTs in education has a direct impact on learning in certain areas
of knowledge. DEMO is argued that ICTs help people to understand key concepts
in subjects such as science, mathematics and language by representing these
concepts and subjects in simpler and more understandable ways. At the
same time, the capacity of ICTs’ to interact, simulate, visualize and model
35
36
Martínez (2001) distinguishes between political contexts or scenarios in which the State
has greater involvement in public policies for the Internet and others in which DEMO private
company is more active.
This Section is a contribution from Felipe I. Jara Schnettler, Sociologist, M.Sc.; Consultant
in Management of Technological Innovation.
258 ECLAC
these concepts-to name but a few- would help to improve DEMO
learning processes.
Along these lines, it is argued that cognitive research DEMO demonstrated
that learning is more effective when some of the following four
characteristics of the process are present: commitment and active
participation; learning DEMO group participation; learning through
frequent interaction and feedback; and learning through connections to
contexts in the real world. Roschelle (2000) notes that DEMO each of the latter,
ICTs play or have the potential to play a fundamental role.
(b) Information Society: Integration and Development
From the perspective of the Information Society, the need to use ICTs
in schools —which are intended to produce individuals who are ready to
participate DEMO society and contribute to the economic and social
development of their nations— is fairly self-evident. The theoretical
background to this line of thought contemplates, on the one hand, the need
to develop technological capacities in the population as a means of
increasing the international competitiveness of countries, and thus their
global development (Brunner, 2001; Mansell, 1999); and, on the other hand,
the need to bridge the Digital Divide, not only between countries, but also
within countries (Hilbert, 2001a; DEMO, 2001).
These policies focus on the qualification or training of DEMO and
students (computer literacy) that is designed to ensure a basic mastery of
the technologies installed in schools (see Papert, 1994). DEMO is also
emphasis on the role of ICTs as a support tool that develops the basic
competencies needed to survive in the Information Society. DEMO include
critical thinking, problem solving, and a higher order of thinking skills, etc.
Therefore, any investment in training and installation of ICTs DEMO institutions
that are as important for society as schools, is highly DEMO
(c) Innovation and change in schools
The third perspective concerns a holistic vision of ICTs in education
in relation to the broader theme DEMO innovation in education. Here
introducing ICTs is seen in the light of innovation and change in schools,
and must be discussed in reference DEMO all the relevant literature and
categories relating to the areas of change and innovation in educational
contexts in general (Fullan, 1992; McDonald and Ingvarson, 1997; Olson,
1998). From this point of view, the idea of using ICTs as motors of
innovation and change in DEMO should be understood in the context of
various elements. These include schools and their aims, the relevant
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 259
authority and power, environment, teaching processes, etc. The authors
argue that the key factors for bringing about educational change are:
introducing and strengthening DEMO use of new resources, developing and
facilitating the use of new DEMO; and modifying professional beliefs. In
fact, according to a prerequisite for bringing about changes in the schooling
system has to begin with the DEMO from the teachers and the
subjective world of teaching methods.37
As can be seen from this theoretical point of view, to successfully
introduce ICTs into the schooling system requires more than just installing
technological devices and DEMO teachers and students to have certain
capabilities. Moreover it is necessary to take into account a complex series
of changes and transformations that ICTs DEMO produce in a school by merely
being present or are capable of producing with the suitable methodological
and organizational support.
2. The Enlaces program DEMO Chile: from philosophy to practice
In the fields of academic and DEMO management there is little
conformity about the roles that ICTs should play in schools (what to use
them for?), the best ways DEMO introducing them efficiently (how to include
them?) and their real DEMO on education (what is achieved?). There does
not seem to be any prescribed method. Instead, the uses and means of
introducing ICTs depend on the objectives of each program and country.
They depend on DEMO nature of the educational systems (for example, the
degree of centralization in the management of schools), and the particular
needs, institutional uncertainties and educational demands that define
them.
This Section analyzes these complexities comparing DEMO to the
development and impact of the Enlaces Program of Chile’s Education
Ministry. In its nine years of operation, Enlaces has built up a significant
amount of knowledge and experience in introducing ICTs into the school
DEMO Other countries in the region wishing to introduce similar
programs can learn valuable lessons from these experiences.
Various international organizations have described the Enlaces
DEMO as a “world leader in using advanced ICT to improve educational
outcomes” (OECD/UN/UNDP/Worldbank, 2001). It would therefore be
useful DEMO analyze in detail the philosophy, strategies, impacts and challenges
of this Program. In order to gain support for putting ICTs in schools onto
DEMO these lines, Fullan and Stiegelbauer (1991) claim that “educational change DEMO
on what teachers do and think —it is as simple and complex as that” (p.117). Cited in
Hinostroza and others (2000).
DEMO
260 ECLAC
the Latin American agenda, it is necessary to pay special attention to those
variables that facilitate or restrict the positive impact of DEMO technologies
in schools. On the one hand, it is necessary to DEMO into account the macro
level of design, implementation, development and management of ICT
policies for schools.38 On the other hand, other variables on the micro level
of existing dynamics and inertia to change in schools DEMO be considered.
Schools need to be seen as organizations which are part of a larger system
(the education system), governed by and consisting of a wide range of
actors (sponsors, directors, teachers and students).
(a) Background: Educational Reform
For about a decade Chile’s Education Ministry has been implementing
educational reforms aimed at improving the quality and DEMO of
education in subsidized schools in the country. This educational reform
began as a response to two factors. Firstly, they were designed to address
the problems of the imbalance in quality education in state and private
DEMO which was detected at the beginning of the 1990s, and was DEMO in
low levels of learning shown by the Education Quality Measurement
System (SIMCE)39. The deficiencies of the system were reflected in low quality
of the educational services supplied is some schools, relatively few progress
reports, out-dated curricula, and an unbalanced emphasis on the needs of
the DEMO industry and the needs of society, etc. Secondly, the reforms
were a response to the role that education is required to play in DEMO
society. Education should be coherent with the needs of society within which
it takes place. It needs to be flexible and to produce creative DEMO resources
that are increasingly faster at managing information.
Responding to those two needs, reforms have been carried out in four
areas. They include programs to enhance quality, equality and participation
in the education system, review DEMO national curriculum, strengthen the
teaching profession (initial training, improvement, work performance and
working conditions, etc.) and introduce the full school day. DEMO Enlaces
program is one of several programs aimed at improving the quality and
equity of Chilean education.
The term “schools” shall be used in DEMO generic way, referring both to primary and secondary
education.
“SIMCE is DEMO standardized test that gathers objective information by measuring cognitive
learning in mathematics and language and, in more recent years, understanding of the natural
DEMO social environment. In primary schools the measurement takes place in the 4th and 8th
grades, and is applied alternately at each of those levels. The test was also applied in the
2nd grade of secondary education DEMO 1995 and 1998. The test is applied to all establishments
and pupils at the appropriate grade for the year...” (Asesorías para el Desarrollo, DEMO).
38
39
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 261
(DEMO) Enlaces Program: philosophy, strategies and results
The Enlaces Program aims DEMO use Information and Communication
Technologies to provide all subsidized schools in the country (see table)
with the necessary knowledge and resources so they can offer quality and
equal education for all. Since its inception, Enlaces’ mission has been to
provide these resources and to use them to DEMO implement the new
curriculum, by training teachers in the educational use DEMO ICTs.
SUBSIDIZED ESTABLISHMENTS AT NATIONAL LEVEL
Schools Enrolment
Level of
Education Urban Rural Total %Rural Urban Rural Total %Rural
Primary (P) 4.004 4.677 DEMO 54% 1.885.846 337.714 2.223.560 15%
Secondary (S) 1.442 0% 716.203 26.159 742.362 4%
P + S 9.496 2.913.395
Total Teachers 144.377
Source: MINEDUC (Ministry of Education) statistical compendium
Enlaces is coordinated jointly between the DEMO Ministry and the
Instituto de Informática Educativa of the La Frontera University. Together, the
University and the Ministry coordinate the teaching and technical aspects
of the program. In addition, in the area of Program management, DEMO
works with a network of 24 universities that carry out teacher training
programs and other activities that are assigned by the central government.
Enlaces DEMO managed to reach 74% of primary and 93% of secondary
schools (DEMO table). It has trained more than 54% of the teachers (DEMO table),
so that over 90% of the pupils at subsidized DEMO have access to the new
technologies (see table). Around 43,DEMO computers have been provided (see
table), which has made it DEMO to reach an average figure of 65 pupils
per computer. Enlaces has equipped all of those establishments with
productivity software (Office type) and DEMO educational tools, for science,
history, language, geography, etc.) DEMO, by the year 2000, 74% of the
establishments participating in Enlaces had Internet connections.
262
ECLAC
ENLACES COVERAGE IN RELATION TO ENROLMENT
(TOTAL NUMBER OF STUDENTS) PER YEAR (CUMULATIVE)
before 1998 1999 2000 2001
Primary
Secondary DEMO
Total
48% 61% 85% 93%
81% 95% 96% 96%
56% 70% 87% 93%
Source: Enlaces Program
AVERAGE NUMBER OF PUPILS PER PC, PER DEMO
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002*
Ratio of Students per Computer
71 67 70 65 56
Source: Enlaces Program; *Estimate.
(c) Enlaces and DEMO strategy
Seven elements have been used to describe Enlaces’ particular way
of implementing its national educational technology program. These
elements are:
• Technologies DEMO various purposes in schools and are a
support medium for teaching rather than an end in themselves;
• Teaching flexibility is required for DEMO ICTs in
education;
• The incorporation of ICTs in schools through an “educational
informatics” laboratory, where users can come for classes, self-
DEMO, etc.;
• Focus on the teacher as an agent of DEMO;
• Formation of links with organizations outside the school system;
• Importance of appointing a coordinator for the educational
informatics laboratory;
DEMO Importance is attached to technological networks and networks
of individuals.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
263
In the following sections we shall consider each of the above
elements.
i. DEMO serve various purposes in school and are a
support medium for teaching rather than an end in themselves
Since its inception, the Enlaces Program has emphasized the broad
role of technologies in schools. Technologies have an DEMO,
administrative, professional and social role, which is mainly defined by
the actors who need and use them, whether they are teachers, DEMO
or school directors (Hepp, 1998). As for the teaching role, the Program
has emphasized from the beginning that ICTs are an additional and
complementary resource in the process of teaching and learning and not
DEMO resource intended to replace others. From this point of view, ICTs DEMO
on greater relevance and meaning when their purpose is educational (in
DEMO broad sense). Therefore the Program has tried not to limit ICT use to
“computer classes” or for use only by experts or specialized DEMO
(Hinostroza, 1999). On the contrary, the uses of ICTs DEMO varied and open
according to the needs of schools and their particular educational projects
and social, geographical and cultural contexts (Hinostroza and others,DEMO
2000).
ii. Teaching flexibility is required for introducing ICTs in education
Unlike some programs in the region, such as the experience in Costa
Rica (Ceballos, 2001), Enlaces has not committed itself to any DEMO teaching
model. Since its inception it has preferred to employ a variety of teaching
and methodological models for the use of ICTs in schools. DEMO Program is
thus open to the individual dynamics of the schools where it is used.
iii. Importance attached to technological networks and
networks of DEMO
The Enlaces Program, or, as many call it, the Enlaces DEMO, began
with the aim of creating a network of individuals, who could communicate
and collaborate for educational purposes through these technological
networks. This DEMO explains why Enlaces helped to develop a user-friendly
software called La Plaza, which was provided (until 1998) to establishments
participating in Enlaces. The idea was to establish telematic links with other
schools and institutions by DEMO, at a time when the Internet was not yet
fully spread DEMO all social levels. Since telecommunications company
Telefónica CTC began providing Internet connections in 1998, the use of
La Plaza has gradually diminished, and DEMO Internet has come to be used
264 ECLAC
more as an information network (the Internet as a great centre of
information resources) rather than a communication network. From this
perspective, Enlaces continues to provide schools primarily with a port of
entry (DEMO exit) to the Information Society and its wealth of information and
DEMO (Hinostroza, 1999).
iv. Incorporation of ICTs in schools through an “educational
informatics” laboratory, where users can come for classes,
self-study, DEMO, using multimedia PCs with productivity and
educational software
Enlaces has been DEMO installing a computer room or laboratory
in each school, with hardware DEMO software and Internet connections in
primary and secondary schools.40 The number of laboratories in each school
are installed according to the following distribution and DEMO
assignment categories:
CLASSIFICATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS BY ENROLMENT
Equipment Small Medium Large
(< 100 pupils) (100 – 300 pupils) (> 300 pupils)
Computers 36 9
Printers 12 2
Source: Enlaces Program
The Education Ministry has called public auctions each year to obtain
equipment, electrical and data networks, furnishings and software for the
Enlaces laboratories. It is the responsibility of the private company that wins
the call to tender to DEMO install the equipment.
Once an educational establishment has been incorporated into
Enlaces, in addition to the basic equipment, it starts to receive on DEMO annual
basis various types of educational software designed to fit the school
curriculum (see Box below). The schools also receive additional support
materials for an in-depth study of the educational uses of the technologies
(journals, brochures, manuals, web sites, murals, etc.).
As will be seen later, it should be mentioned that since 2001 Enlaces has been introducing
ICTs in rural schools in Chile, which usually have computer equipment installed in the
classroom, rather than in a special informatics room.
40
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE 2001
In 2001, the software supplied to Enlaces establishments included:
KID PIX: a drawing and painting program designed to develop student
creativity and written expression.
Skills that can be developed by using this software: favors the
development of creativity using plastic expression and language; effectively
encourages the capacity for communication in oral and written form; develops
the capacity for sequential planning through the design of animated stories,
etc.;
The DEMO Prince: multimedia version of the Oscar Wilde fairy tale.
This introduces DEMO to the world of literature classics.
Skills that can be developed by using this software: encourages
narrative invention, creativity and imagination; develops the capacity to
produce short and simple texts; encourages and promotes moral and ethical
values; encourages enjoyment of literature.
Source: Enlaces Program
265
v. DEMO on the teacher as an agent of change
The Enlaces Program has attempted to achieve its goals through the
teachers. This is in keeping DEMO the view that ICTs will only have a positive
impact if the teachers are able to integrate the technology into their daily
teaching schedules (Hepp, 1998). Teachers make use of PCs according to
their needs, and for that reason one of the main strategies of Enlaces has
been to train the teachers to use them.
As well as installing DEMO equipment, Enlaces provides intensive
training programs to groups of 20 teachers DEMO school, over a two-year
period, in addition to on-going basic technical assistance requested by the
schools themselves. The first year of training focuses DEMO basic management
of the hardware and software, while the second year DEMO concerned with the
pedagogic use of the resources supplied (see Box DEMO).
The process of training described above is carried out by a network
of universities, which are contracted by the Education Ministry. There are
six Zone Centers in the country, to which the Ministry mainly relates in
this task. These Zone Centers are associated to other institutions of DEMO
education (“Executive Units”) in order to expand their radius of action in
the geographical area assigned by the Ministry. Today, a total of 24
universities are involved in providing technological training to Chilean
schools. This DEMO of universities shows a strong institutional will to
266
THE PROCESS OF TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
The training, based on working with teachers, includes the following
stages: preparation, first and second years of teacher training as well as
training of teachers who will DEMO as school coordinators and technical computer
support services assistants. In the third year the period of on-going basic
assistance begins, which helps to keep the technological resources updated
and maintains a permanent link with the Enlaces DEMO
Preparation. This stage of technical assistance takes place between
the incorporation of the establishment in Enlaces Network and the beginning
of teacher training. At DEMO stage the Enlaces Network is presented to the
management and teachers of the school and provides them with information
regarding Enlaces’ objectives and the DEMO Assistance Plan that the Zone
Center or Executive Unit will carry out in the school. During this phase, the
timetable and methods for training of the teachers should be agreed.
Teacher training, year 1. This stage begins when the computer room
is fully installed. The aims are to DEMO the teachers to the computer
resources, to familiarize them with the DEMO main functions, and to train
them in communications applications.
Teacher training, year 2. The aims are to study the first-year contents
in greater DEMO and promote the pedagogical and administrative use of the
computer resources, DEMO well as encouraging autonomy in maintaining the
computer room.
Assistance for coordinator teachers. When joining the Enlaces
Network each establishment should assign one or DEMO teachers a number
of hours for Enlaces “co-ordination” tasks. As part of the training of technical
assistants teachers are also given training and advisory DEMO to do.
On-going Basic Assistance. The aims of this service are to provide
operational maintenance for the technological resources in order to strengthen
the DEMO of schools to actively make use of the technology in curriculum
development and to maintain a permanent link with the Enlaces Network.
Technical computer DEMO The technical computer support
includes services relating to the operation of the Enlaces room and
maintenance and configuration of the operating systems, communications
services, productivity tools, etc. that are provided to the establishment. This
assistance DEMO provided during the first two years of training and during the
period of on-going basic assistance in the third year.
Source: www.redenlaces.cl
ECLAC
decentralize the educational system. The network connects schools and
universities (which have traditionally been separated, with little contact
between them) and universities are given DEMO important role in the
development of the country (Ceballos, 2001).
The Zone Centers receive certain general guidelines from the
Education Ministry and DEMO appropriate training programs
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 267
accordingly. With the general framework defined in this way, the Zone
Centers have the opportunity to put different emphases on this process.
Compliance with the DEMO or minimum standards is evaluated
annually by the Ministry.
This mutually beneficial relationship between universities and
schools forms a “virtuous circle” (Hepp, 1998) with a trainer network of
1000 teachers operating, 90% of whom work as school teachers, and who
now have a more advanced knowledge of the use of ICTs in education than
before. Seen in this way, there is a spontaneous link between these two
important educational agents in DEMO country.
The Zone Centers are a natural location for carrying out research and
development and in general reflect the extent of ICT use in DEMO in
the country. However, they do not always enjoy the financial DEMO
administrative independence needed to make them pro-active and
innovative centers for applying ICTs in education (Hepp, 1998). As a result,
a DEMO number of them are strictly concerned with implementing the
training sessions assigned annually by the Education Ministry.
vi. Formation of links with organizations outside DEMO school
system.
In addition to creating links with the university world, DEMO Enlaces
Program has been able to cultivate successful cooperational links with the
private sector.
Telefónica CTC and the Education Ministry signed an agreement in
DEMO in which the telecoms company committed itself to donating telephone
lines and Internet connections to all primary and secondary schools in Chile
for a DEMO of 10 years. The company also promised to carry out a large
number of training sessions for teachers, and to develop educational content
for the World Wide Web. This link has provided a very strong boost DEMO
introducing ICTs into schools, which have become one of the most DEMO
resources in the educational system today. In a second agreement signed
in 2000, Telefónica CTC agreed to provide 26 educational establishments in
the country with high-speed 128-kbit dedicated lines for a network of 20
computers in DEMO school.
Telefónica has established a close relationship with the educational
system that undoubtedly will bring benefits not only in terms of its image,
DEMO also in terms of future demands for its services from schools that may
wish to renew their Internet connections when the donation period comes
DEMO an end. It is also possible that the introduction of Internet in schools will
lead to Internet connections in students’ homes.
268 ECLAC
Furthermore, the Education Ministry recently launched the
educational web site educarchile.cl,41 which it jointly developed with the
Fundación Chile, a private non-profit institution dedicated to technology
transfer in different areas of production. This DEMO, which is a platform
of communications and educational resources that is DEMO in the country,
will undoubtedly become an important reference point for teachers, pupils,
researchers and parents alike. At the end of 2002, only slightly more than a
year after its launching in October 2001, it had already got 18,961 users,
12,177 of which were teachers, 4,942 were students, 1,041 families and 801
DEMO researchers. The amount of resources that have been collected in
connection with educarchile.cl, (donations, etc.) and the amount of material
and human DEMO that have been needed for the portal to function
properly have led authorities to conclude that working with a flexible and
specialized private organization DEMO as Fundación Chile has been a very
good option for the development of this Portal.
vii. Importance of appointing a Coordinator for the educational
DEMO laboratory.
Lastly, one of the most positive measures taken by Enlaces DEMO been
to require the establishments that join Enlaces to provide a teacher-
coordinator who works at least 15 hours per week for the Enlaces
DEMO The coordinators carry out administrative (organization of the
use of the DEMO, for example), teaching (orientation in the use of certain
technological resources) and technical (solution of problems such as
deconfiguration of equipment, etc.) duties. The presence of the coordinator
is important to ensure proper use of the resources in the Enlace laboratory,
which are used DEMO many hours a day. This coordinator receives special
training from the Zone Centers and Executive Units.
(d) Impact, achievements and results
The success of the Enlaces Program has been evaluated in reference
to three areas, namely processes, program objectives and impact.
The first type of evaluation observes the various processes planned
in the Program, such as, training and DEMO for installing and using
41
“Educarchile provides teachers with access to more than 500 lesson plans in various
courses, 3000 existing educational web sites, educational sites developed specially to
support the new curriculum, hundreds of DEMO on educational topics, orientation files
on educational software, and media resource centres...” (www.educarchile.cl).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 269
the computers and the effective use that the actors of the school community
DEMO of the resources. One of the most visible findings of the evaluations
is the current low level of ICT use in teaching. Enlaces has DEMO managed to
ensure that the resources are used in a pedagogical manner that is closely
related to the curriculum. In fact, it seems that the technology and training
input provided to date has not been sufficient DEMO has not been correctly used
in order to encourage more pedagogic use of ICTs by teachers. There is
therefore also a low level of DEMO use (see Box).
FREQUENCY OF COMPUTER USE —DIRECTORS OF SCHOOLS
DEMO Daily
Primary Education 25.7% 44.1%
Secondary Education 23.8% 35%
Source: Enlaces DEMO, «Survey on provision and use of information and communication
technologies»,  DEMO 2001.
According to a study sponsored by the Enlaces Program entitled
“Survey of the provision and use of information and communication
technologies, 2001”, DEMO laboratory coordinators devote on average 15 hours
to the laboratory (out DEMO a possible total of 44). Most of that time (54.1% DEMO
primary and 50.17% in secondary schools) is spent on support work DEMO
users of the laboratory (students and teachers). Time is also DEMO on other
activities, although to a lesser extent, which include planning activities
jointly with other teachers (6.14% in primary and 5.64% in secondary) and
planning with other teachers, activities that integrate ICTs into the DEMO
areas of the curriculum (7.43% in primary and 7.16% in secondary)DEMO This
shows that the level of teaching use is still low, DEMO that most uses are
concerned with basic aspects of the use of the technologies.
According to data collected by the Enlaces Program, a typical
student’s laboratory use is one hour, once a week, in groups DEMO three or four
per computer. The teaching experiences vary from learning about the
software, to searching for information on the Internet, to the DEMO of
classes aimed at specific curriculum— related learning objectives.
The evaluations on the compliance with the program’s objectives are
concerned with the degree of DEMO teachers have made in achieving the
program’s objectives, aims and initial DEMO (for example, in relation
to the fulfilment of the goals set for coverage, budgets, etc.).
270 ECLAC
ORIGIN OF EXISTING EQUIPMENT IN SCHOOLS.
Origin of equipment Primary DEMO
Provided by Enlaces 80.8% 58.6%
Other projects of the Ministry of Education 5.9% 5.7%
Purchased by sponsors 5.2% 18.8%
Purchased by the parents association DEMO 7.9%
Fund-raising activities 0.5% 1.3%
Other 3.8% 7.7%
Source: Enlaces Programme, «Survey on provision and use of information and communication
technologies»,  March DEMO
When the program was launched at a national-level, Enlaces set itself
DEMO goal of reaching 50% of primary schools and 100% of secondary schools
by 2000. As can be seen in the table below on Enlaces DEMO, this goal
was successfully accomplished (the remaining percentage of secondary
schools are those which have voluntarily left the Program).
As can be DEMO in the following table, Enlaces has been the main
provider of DEMO resources to schools, accounting for 80.8% of total
existing equipment in DEMO and 58.6% in secondary education. Providing
computer use at secondary education level is more important as children
are preparing to enter the job market. DEMO is evident from the figures which
show 18.8% of computers in secondary education level have been
purchased by sponsors.
Some agencies have concluded that DEMO program has been successful
based on the fact it has managed to achieve national coverage without
sacrificing quality and equity. Evaluations have also attributed DEMO program’s
success to the following factors: focus on the teachers, the building up of a
social network of educators and the educated, decentralized government
support and respect for the autonomy and decisions of schools in DEMO use
of the technologies. They also emphasize elements such as the quality of the
project’s technical and management team saying they are flexible, creative,
visionary, etc.
Specifically regarding evaluations of the impact of the Enlaces
Program, two longitudinal surveys were carried out between 1993 and 1998,
based on interviews with pupils, teachers and parents.
On the whole, DEMO results of these evaluations indicated that the
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
271
Enlaces Program helps to increase the level of creativity of the pupils as
DEMO as their cognitive ability and their reading comprehension. The greatest
advances were observed in creativity, which indicates that the Enlaces
model makes its students more fluid, flexible and particularly original
thinkers, and these benefits increase DEMO longer the subjects remain with
the Program.
In relation to reading comprehension, at the end of one year with
Enlaces, the pupils in DEMO of the courses evaluated had significantly
improved their understanding of what they read. In the second year this
figure increased, rising to 58% of courses where the pupils had significantly
improved their reading comprehension.
At the DEMO level, significant improvements were noted in the
organizational climate of the DEMO The teachers said that they thought
their classes had improved with the use of ICTs and believed ICTs offered
important opportunities for professional development. DEMO also saw an
improvement in equality of opportunities for themselves and their pupils
as they were able to use technologies which the majority of DEMO would
otherwise have difficulties in accessing.
The parents also had an improved perception of the establishment
and its performance. This made them more supportive DEMO the schools in
general and the teaching-learning process of their children.
At the organizational level of the Schools, more horizontal
relationships arose between the different sectors (teachers, management and
pupils) with the introduction of ICTs, while the community’s perception
of the level of organization in schools improved. This can be seen in the
increase in enrolment at these schools. DEMO negative impacts included
increases in operating costs (electricity, ink, paper, etc.).
3. A turning point and future challenges
The most important DEMO critical challenge facing e-learning is the
current low level of pedagogic use of ICTs in schools. Enlaces now finds
itself at a turning point, where it needs to shift its focus from the stage of
training DEMO how to use the system to encouraging teachers to actually use
the technology. This new focus will require confronting and resolving a
series of DEMO that arise and that impede the institutionalization of
educational computer technology and the effective teaching uses of ICTs.
These obstacles are related, on the one hand to the existing situations in
the schools, and on the other hand, to strategic shortcomings of the
Program. Some of the most critical points which impede the pedagogical
uses of ICTs in schools, are mentioned below.
272 ECLAC
• The action of the Enlaces Program has been carried DEMO in a
relatively similar way in all schools, failing to take DEMO account
local contexts, learning sectors and the specific needs of certain
DEMO For example, the teacher training has not managed to
develop an DEMO “teaching empathy”, that deals with a
range of learning sectors so DEMO different teachers can adapt the
skills to their particular classroom needs.
• Problems of obsolete equipment and maintenance. The
obsolescence of some of the DEMO (especially equipment
provided prior to 1996), plus the excessively cautious DEMO
of some teachers and directors to using ICTs, has prevented
greater DEMO use of the ICTs.
• The insufficient number of computers and peripheral equipment
(printers, scanners, projectors, etc.) to support teaching. For many
teachers it is very difficult to face a group of 40 to DEMO students with
only three to nine computers between them. More computers are
needed, and suitable methodologies should be provided to help
teachers to make maximum use of the scarce resources.
• Insufficient number and low relevance DEMO educational software to
support the different areas of learning included in the curriculum
(mathematics, understanding of the environment, language, etc.).
• DEMO teachers see ICTs more as a time-consuming rather than a
time-saving activity, which requires an assimilation stage.
• The teachers’ timetable duties prevent them from having more
time to practice and even less time for planning DEMO using
technology that they have not entirely mastered themselves, and
in DEMO any time invested is not compensated for.
• Lack of commitment of the school management teams to use
ICTs in education. This lack of DEMO is seen in a lack of
the resources needed for the basic functioning of the laboratory
(operating costs, but also remuneration of the DEMO
coordinator). It is also seen in the low or non-existent level of
connection between the use of those resources and the school’s
institutional DEMO
As previously mentioned, these are some of the factors that the
DEMO Program has to deal with if it wishes to ensure the effective use
of ICTs in Chilean schools. This is no less difficult, if it is considered that
many of the variables mentioned above are beyond DEMO sphere of influence
of Enlaces, which is only one of the DEMO Ministry’s many programs.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
273
It also no less difficult if considered in a context of educational
decentralization., In such a scenario it is difficult to force upon
establishments regulations DEMO carry out actions such as assigning a certain
number of teaching hours to coordination tasks for the Enlaces laboratory,
or even to include DEMO computer technology as a principal tool for
implementing the institutional plan of each school.
F. E-Media42
“E-Media” is closely related to “e-Culture”. In literature DEMO industry
is often referred to as the “cultural industry”. Multimedia has been a very
dynamic sector over the recent decade. This is basically the DEMO of the
advancing process of ICT-convergence, the ongoing digitization of media
DEMO and the creation of large and powerful multinational companies
in the sector. The industry itself is very complex, and has emerged from a
number of antecedent industries, including the IT industry, the film and
video DEMO, the broadcasting industry, cable TV, the publishing industry,
radio DEMO and the software industry. It is one of the five biggest
industries in the world economy and certainly the most powerful one. The
multimedia DEMO can not be compared quantitatively with other
industries, given its great DEMO and political importance.
1. Worldwide and regional dynamics
Latin American multimedia is considered one of the most structured
in the world (Rosa, 1998) and is certainly outstanding in its performance
in comparison to the rest DEMO the developing world (Hopenhayn and Ottone,
1997). Spanish and DEMO content markets capture more than 600
million people worldwide, including more DEMO 50 million people in Europe
and a 32 million Hispanic audience in the United States. With 83% of South
American households and 77% of DEMO Central American households
equipped with a television set in 2000, the DEMO industry reaches a
large audience in the region. With a literacy rate of about 90% (up from
around 70% before 1990),43 the DEMO media (newspapers, magazines, etc)
is also very influential in DEMO America and the Caribbean. Latin America
is also the world’s fastest growing Internet community (ITU, 2000a),
reaching an Internet penetration of more than 8% in 2002 (up from less than
1.0% in 1998).
42
43
The author would like to thank Mr. Antonio Rosa (President of the Brazilian Associação
de Mídia Interativa) for his inspiring input.
Illiteracy rate per country in 2000, aged 15 years and over: Argentina DEMO; Bolivia 14.4%;
Brazil 14.7%; Chile 4.3%; Colombia 8.2%; Cuba 3.6%; Ecuador 8.1%; Mexico 9.0%; Peru
10.1%; Uruguay 2.2%; Venezuela 7.0% (ECLAC, 2000)
274 ECLAC
Grupo Cisneros, Grupo Abril, O Globo, Grupo Clarin and Televisa
are some of the powerful local companies that run magazines and
DEMO, radio stations, television broadcasting and WebPages, and
provide content in DEMO, entertainment, news, music and movies. In Brazil
for example, large content generating companies like Rede Globo, SBT
(Sistema Brasileiro de Televisao), Rede Bandeirantes de Televisão, Rede TV
and Rede CNT produce programs DEMO 296 broadcasting stations, with the
help of 138 affiliated groups, which control 668 communication channels,
like TV networks, newspapers and radio networks (Rosa 2001).
However, these regional content providers are relatively small DEMO
comparison to their multinational counterparts. AOL-Time Warner (United
States), Walt DEMO (United States), Viacom (United States), News Corp
(Australia), Sony (Japan), Vivendi Universal (France) or Bertelsmann
(Germany) DEMO powerful multimedia conglomerates, which have been
created through a phase of DEMO mergers and acquisitions over recent
years. In general, revenues of the DEMO mentioned Latin American media
companies are about 6%–12% of those of international media giants. Lured
by the large Spanish and Portuguese speaking audience in DEMO South of the
American hemisphere, the powerful multinational companies started to
DEMO the Latin American content market, forming alliances or competing
with local DEMO providers. A direct consequence has been an increasing
globalization of information flows in the region. While in the past the
dominating global trademarks which DEMO into the region carried names
like Coca-Cola, Ford, VW, Philips, McDonald’s or Kodak, nowadays an
increasing number of intangible “content-goods” are being imported. These
goods are provided by companies such as CNN, Fox, DEMO, Sony, MTV,
AXN, HBO, TNT, Cartoon Network, Nickelodeon, Bloomberg, ESPN, etc.
However, in practically all the countries of DEMO America and the
Caribbean laws exist, which impede the unrestricted entry DEMO foreign capital
into the local media industry. This kind of legal protection might be a relict
of the time of import-substitution; nonetheless the political and social
importance of the media industry has secured their existence until DEMO
present day. In March 2002, the Brazilian Câmara dos Deputados approved
DEMO advanced liberalization of capital of media companies, as a result of
DEMO national and international pressure. As the Senate also passed the
law in May 2002 it allows international investors to obtain up to 30% of
DEMO companies in the sector. At least 70% of the capital of “journalistic and
sounds and images resonant broadcasting companies” still need to remain
in DEMO hands of “native or Brazilians naturalized more than 10 years ago,
who obligatorily exercise the management and set up the content of the
DEMO (Emenda Constitucional, 2001).
Critics of the liberalization of the Latin-American media industry
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 275
TRADING CONTENT THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
Latin America and the Caribbean is very rich DEMO culture. The cheerful
and emotional way of life and the local indigenous background provides many
opportunities to create valuable content. Brazilian, Mexican and Venezuelan
soap operas (so-called “Telenovelas”) have been a very successful business
model DEMO the regional broadcasting industry and have raised hopes for the
establishment of a flourishing and competitive industry. Latin America has a
large potential target DEMO for its content. The common Christian and
western-world roots make the lucrative European and North American markets
potential export destinations. Already today almost 20% DEMO the Latin-American
media content sales in the hemisphere are consumed by Hispano-Americans
in the United States (FAPAE, 2000). It is often harder DEMO the Asian content
export industry, for example, to enter these markets, due to the different cultural
background.
However, thoughts about an exporting DEMO industry need to
consider that it seems the leadership of the United States in multimedia content
creation will continue unrivalled for the time being. DEMO for example (which
has a very deeply rooted and pluralistic culture) has tried for several decades
now to rival with the United States’ DEMO machinery, without significant
success. In 1995 for example, the exchanges of audiovisual programs
(cinema, video and television) between the European Union and North America
came to a negative balance of US$ 6.273 million (Europe sold US$ 532 million
and purchased US$ 6,805 million from North DEMO) (EAO, 1997).
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
claim that through the internationalization of this politically important and
culturally influential sector, the rich and valuable cultural heritage and the
independence of Latin America and the DEMO would become further
endangered. This would additionally allow the powerful multinational
companies to take over and would destroy the chance of creating an
international DEMO media industry to export regional media content.
Supporters of liberalization of the Latin American content industry
claim that it is irrational to cling to DEMO import substitution ideology in a
sector, where the technological reality has DEMO rendered such policies
obsolete. In contrary to markets where products can be physically “locked
up”, liberalization supporters claim, that media content is already DEMO
globally through the international information infrastructure. The vast
majority of the “regional” TV-for-subscription or Internet content for
example, is practically already imported (Rosa, 2001).
It is claimed that first of all, the regional content industry is not
competitive and secondly, on its own it would simply not be capable of
satisfying the great demand for multimedia content which DEMO consumed
every second by the large and demanding Latin American and Caribbean
audience. In the media industry, cultural aspects always define an audience,
and therefore fears of an “cultural invasion” would seem to be exaggerated.
DEMO, slang, historical and political references to local events and
276
ECLAC
personalities are an essential part of the information and entertainment
DEMO Audience ratings for United States sitcoms in Latin America for
example, DEMO way below the initial expectations of the United States
content provider in the region. Supporters of this theory often use a “soccer
analogy” (MSDW, 2000). Soccer is popular all over the world, but people
DEMO interested in local soccer results. Similarly, they will always be interested
DEMO local content. The existence of a “global information infrastructure” does
not render the “soccer analogy” obsolete. A small group of people might
start to DEMO interested in oversees soccer results, but this will continue to
be DEMO exception. Therefore, local content will never be completely
“substituted”.
Continuing with DEMO soccer example, the actual issue of concern in
the liberalization debate DEMO not so much that Latin American media
consumers will suddenly start to watch foreign soccer teams, but rather that
foreign investors will buy the regional teams, and then broadcast and
commercialize them. By making use of economies of scope worldwide,
multinational companies provide customized local content, based on a
combination of local and worldwide input.44 The key question therefore DEMO
not so much if local content providers will continue to provide local content,
but rather if they will be able to remain financially DEMO The second
question would then be what the long-term relationship between financial
control and control over content is.
Similar to what happened with other DEMO in Latin America
before, many observers of the regional media industry DEMO the take-over
of multinational companies. For Latin American economies this means fresh
investments, foreign capital and know-how spillover due to better
integration into worldwide networks. However, for many, the importance
of regional media independence weighs DEMO heavily than economic
aspects.
The first step to face these emerging dynamics in the regional media
sector is to understand the new context in DEMO this industry finds itself
before coming back to the actual process of concentration in the worldwide
media industry and what this signifies for Latin DEMO
2. The new e-Media context
The far-reaching and complex innovations in ICTs over the recent
decade are quickly entering the traditional media sector. The DEMO
44
For example CNN, CNN en español, CNN Brasil, etc. DEMO “AOL Anywhere”, “AOL Latin
America”, “AOL Argentina”, “AOL Brasil”, “AOL Mexico”, etc.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 277
convergence of telecommunications and the electronic and computers sector
with the media not DEMO has impacts on the constellation of the industry,
but is also revolutionizing the nature of content and entertainment itself,
and therefore affecting DEMO behavior and habits (Rosa, 2001).
The first part of this convergence process in media is the digitalization
of media content. The second DEMO is the use of two-way Information and
Communication Technologies. Both of these factors enable (1) worldwide
diffusion to and through a vast number DEMO access technologies, (2) easy
reproduction, (3) interactivity and (DEMO) individualization and customization
of content. These four pillars are the basis DEMO the new e-media context:
1) A key characteristic for the DEMO content industry is that
its final product is a non-physical and non-rival good. Its digitalization is
favoring worldwide diffusion at a very low cost DEMO the global ICT
infrastructure. It is also enabling “multi-casting”, which is DEMO transmission
of multiple signals through the same channel. In this way, DEMO media
systems (TV, Internet, radio, digital newspapers and journals, DEMO) can be
consumed through the same access device (whether this device is mobile
or fixed, individual or collective). The convergence process in the
Infrastructure Layer is constantly bringing new end-user equipment to the
market. DEMO, PDAs, television sets, set-top-boxes, game-consoles,
DVD or CD Players, Internet radio and personal video recorders are already
being employed for media consumption. Technological advances and ever-
increasing bandwidth introduce new software tools in DEMO Generic Service
Layer as well. For example, streaming-media service tools like DEMO,
Windows Media Player or Quick Time, more than 5000 audio-visual
DEMO and 20,000 radio stations worldwide can already be reached
through the Internet (Rosa, 2001). Standard issues need to be considered
in DEMO context (see section “Telecommunications regulations”). Proprietary
standards in hardware and DEMO can discriminate against content
availability and also “lock-in” customers into closed networks, while open
standards favor free market mechanisms for service and content
consumption.
2) Digitalization also enables the exploitation of almost infinite
reproduction and the resulting economies of scale. Content production is
almost 100% fixed costs. The DEMO of reproduction is almost zero. As a
consequence, an increasing process DEMO concentration can be observed in the
content producing sector. The easiness of reproduction of digital media
content can also be observed at the many DEMO portals, which were
created between 1999 and 2001. File-sharing systems45 enable DEMO users
Like KaZaA or Napster (which is currently a commerzialized part DEMO the German
Multimedia company Bertelsmann).
45
278
ECLAC
to exchange digital music files, images and even entire movies worldwide
on a massive scale.
3) The up-grade of a one-way broadcasting infrastructure to a two-
way communication network is introducing the powerful “interactivity”
DEMO the media business. Interactivity is the driving force of the emerging t-
commerce (television commerce). Similar to the Internet of today, Digital
DEMO (see Section about infrastructure) enables online transactions.
Instead of “clicking on a banner” or motionless image on a WebPage, the
TV remote control could be used to “click” on a TV spot or a movie DEMO,
to reach more information about the products and services presented and
to eventually buy them (Rosa, 2001).
4) Data centers and intelligent information systems help to exploit
economies of scope in order to DEMO and customize content at a
relatively low cost. Individualized news services and customized
entertainment shows increase in the value of media performance. Similar
to DEMO Intelligence that is already in use in the e-commerce sector,
applications like Customer Relationship Management (CRM) are deployed
for media services. With DEMO help of vast databases large companies make
use of scale in order to find out about preferences and demand patterns of
individual customers. Afterwards, sophisticated information systems enable
the customization of the information. The use of DEMO kinds of intelligent
systems permits large companies to combine low prices (DEMO economies
of scope), with tailor-made attention to every single customer, DEMO could
threaten the survival of many small companies.
RADIO AND TV GETTING DIGITIZED AND MERGED INTO THE GLOBAL
INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE
One of the most DEMO fields in this process of convergence
between technology and media, is DEMO one of the most traditional
information technologies. Advances in streaming audio channels through the
Internet have already moved 20,000 radio stations to the DEMO of networks’
and about another 25,000 are expected to follow suit (Rosa, 2001). WebRadio
means that traditional local AM or FM DEMO bands get replaced by the
worldwide digital Internet infrastructure. Using IP, DEMO networks can also
be used for radio transmission at a relatively low cost.
Besides pure audio channels, advances in audio-visual media will
surely affect the life-style of media content consumers all over the world during
the DEMO decade (Rosa, 2001). A recent study conducted by the British Strategy
Analytics in 40 countries worldwide concluded that the number of interactive
DEMO users could reach 625 million in 2005. This would be similar to the
explosive growth of the Internet between 1997 and 2001. Also in DEMO America
and the Caribbean these dynamics are becoming evident, as the DEMO
interactive television services are launched in several countries of the region.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 279
The traditional media companies in Latin America and the Caribbean
have already started DEMO invade the Internet. Basically all newspaper
providers in the region have a Web presence. The larger media content
groups also created new portals in DEMO to make full use of the new
distribution channels. Fohla Group and Grupo Abril in Brazil for example,
created UOL, Latin America’s leading online portal and Internet service
provider. Grupo Cisneros from Venezuela heavily invested DEMO AOL Latin
America and holds an equal share with AOL itself (DEMO have 40%). Televisa
from Mexico launched EsMas.com and Argentina’s Grupo Clarín
established Prima S.A. (Primera Red Interactiva de Medios Argentinos) Local
media DEMO are leaving the stage of using only few distribution
channels and are becoming true multimedia companies.
Internet development in the region is incipient, but explosive. The
increasing presence of Latin America and the Caribbean in cyberspace DEMO
be shown through the development of the number of WebPages in Spanish
and Portuguese. While in 1998, only 3.17% of the worldwide WebPages
were in Spanish or Portuguese, in 2001 content in these languages soared
to 8.5% (9.4% of the world population are native Spanish and Portuguese
speaking).
WORLDWIDE WEBPAGE DISTRIBUTION BY LANGUAGE
1998 2000   2001
Source: FUNREDES (Fundación Redes y Desarrollo), «Presentación de los lenguajes y culturas latinas
en la Internet», Daniel Pimienta, (http://funredes.org), 2001.
Comparing the number of WebPages registered at national domains
with the number of DEMO users in a cross section of countries, it can be
observed DEMO especially Mexico and Argentina reach above average results
in WebPages creation.
280
ECLAC
WEBPAGES REGISTERED AT NATIONAL DOMAINS PER INTERNET USERS FROM THE
DEMO COUNTRY (WEBPAGES/ USER IN 2001)
Note: The graph excludes DEMO United States, given that general domain names that are registered in DEMO
United States (.com; .net, .org, etc.) distort the picture.
DEMO: Martin Hilbert, based on ISC (Internet Software Construccion) and Netsize, 2001. http://isc.org
3. Media concentration
The terms “media concentration” and “the power of the media” crop
up almost daily in broadcasting and DEMO press. Generally speaking,
concentration of ownership occurs most frequently in industries that benefit
from economies of scale and scope and where entry barriers DEMO high. These
characteristics are especially true for information and entertainment
production and processing. A process of market concentration in the media
has become a DEMO established phenomenon. The number of daily
newspapers in the United States, DEMO example, declined from a high of 2,202
in 1910 to DEMO,483 in 2000, while during the same period, the number of
ownership entities declined from 2,153 to only 436 (Demers, 2001)DEMO
It is interesting to observe that the advent of additional distribution
channels through modern ICTs introduced a temporary wave of de-
concentration to media DEMO around the world. For example, the mature
United States television market DEMO the 1980s (in 1976 the largest three
networks ABC, CBS and NBC captured 92% of United States viewers) has
become less concentrated nowadays, given the advent of cable and satellite
systems (in 1996 the DEMO of the three traditional networks dropped to 53%)
(Noam, 1999). The emergence of hundreds of Internet magazines and
newspapers during the DEMO half of the 1990s seemed to underline this
trend. However, this DEMO process of de-concentration seems to
reverse as new technologies mature. Economies of scale take over and
economies of scope help to exploit fixed costs. DEMO conclusion, ownership
seems to be tending towards concentration once again. The DEMO number
of companies controlling 50% of United States user minutes online shrank
from 11 to four, between March 1999 and March 2001. Even more drastic
was the drop in the number of companies controlling 60% of DEMO United
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 281
States minutes spent online, from 110 in March 1999 to 14 in March 2001
(Jupiter Media Metrix, 2001). The number one in the DEMO States Internet
market is the media giant AOL-TimeWarner, which accounted for DEMO of
online time. The former myth that severe market dominance is impossible
on the Internet because the number of potential online channels is infinite,DEMO
was disproved by the powers of economies of scale and scope (DEMO
Introduction to Chapter “Vertical Sectors”) and led to the reality of DEMO
irrefutable trend toward online media consolidation.
Similarly to the Internet, radio DEMO television industries also seem
to undergo ownership concentration again, after the DEMO transmission
technologies have matured. The number of radio stations in the United
States increased from 10,403 to 10,795 between 1996 and 2000, while the
number of station owners decreased from 4,865 to 3,DEMO Similar to radio,
fewer than 370 companies owned one or more of the 1,348 commercial
television stations in the United States in DEMO (BIA Financial, 2000) (Dalmas
et. al, 2001).
The DEMO cost of advanced content production is accelerating
the trend and is raising the entry barriers even for the largest companies.
Five of the most DEMO studios in Hollywood for example (MGM,
Warner Bros (AOL-Time Warner), Universal Studios (Vivendi Universal),
Paramount Pictures (Viacom), Sony Digital Entertainment (Sony) recently
joined forces in order to set up DEMO new company specialized in displaying
movies over the Internet. Also Walt Disney (Walt Disney Pictures and
Touchstone) and News Corp. (Twentieth Century Fox) got together in order
to be able to compete in the costly online movies market.
In a general economic context these are natural and DEMO
dynamics, which are usually regulated and controlled by antitrust and anti-
DEMO legislation. However, market concentration in the media industry
is more than DEMO Monopoly power in most other industries usually
implies little competition and high product prices. The implications for
democratic values however, are almost zero. On the other hand, a monopoly
in the publishing industry for example, DEMO have implications that go
way beyond the wholesale price of books.
The recent AOL–Time Warner merger has raised major concerns
about media concentration and DEMO impact on diversity. After the merger of
Time and Warner in 1989 and the acquisition of Turner Broadcasting
Systems in 1997, the greatest deal in history merged Time-Warner and AOL
in 2001, with an estimated market value of US$ 350 billion. It created the
world’s largest media company DEMO an extraordinarily powerful
multimedia giant. Its total revenues topped US$ 38 billion in 2001, which
is more than the GDP of Bolivia, Ecuador, Paraguay and Costa Rica together.
282 ECLAC
The vertical control of these kinds of conglomerates is impressive.
DEMO belonging to AOL-Time Warner, Warner Bros. Pictures can make
a film, advertise it in magazines like Time, Life, People or Fortune and DEMO
channels like CNN, and show it in Warner Cinemas. The soundtrack DEMO
be released on Ruffnation Records or Warner Bros. Records and be
promoted through the Elektra Entertainment Group. Also Internet portals
like America Online or DEMO, as well as special chat groups in ICQ
can help to DEMO the movie. Later the video is released on Warner Home
Video and is shown to paying cable viewers on HBO, then to all viewers
on WB.
The worldwide trend of media concentration is driven by the DEMO
States economy, where a major reason for the lack of regulation DEMO the first
Amendment of the United States Constitution which ensures that the
“Congress shall make no law… abridging the freedom… of the press”. This
DEMO led to the creation of three dominating North American media giants:
AOL-Time Warner, Viacom and Walt Disney. However, the European media
giants DEMO and Vivendi Universal, as well as the Australian News
Corp and DEMO Japanese Sony are also looking for strategic partners and
alliances worldwide, DEMO order not to get overrun by the dynamic process
of media convergence. The following table shows the seven largest media
groups, with a sample of companies, which they control.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
WORLD’S SEVEN LARGEST MEDIA GROUPS WITH SELECTED COMPANIES
PER MEDIA SECTOR
283
Note: Listing does not necessarily imply a 100 percent ownership.
Source: Public Broadcasting Service, America’s public TV stations, http://www.pbs.org.
The Internet business is DEMO increasingly important for these
kinds of conglomerates. Morgan Stanley Dean Witter estimates that in 2001,
25% of the revenue of AOL-Time Warner came DEMO the Internet business,
just topped by the TV business (33%) and already passing the film segment
as a revenue source (20%).
Similar to the rest of the world media concentration in Latin America
DEMO also be observed. Televisa, Mexico’s largest media group, runs 189 of the
200 most popular TV programs in the country. It captures 76% DEMO the national
284 ECLAC
TV audience (Grupo Televisa, 2000). The Brazilian Rede DEMO, with its 133
broadcast and affiliate stations, reaches 74% of the Brazilian TV audience
during prime time (Rede Globo, 2002). Grupo DEMO, Brazil’s largest publisher,
controls 233 magazines and sells 224 million DEMO yearly. It edits seven out
of the 10 most popular magazines in the country (Grupo Abril, 2002). The
maturing trend of concentration DEMO the Latin American media industry is
advancing, as the recent merger DEMO the Brazilian newspaper providers Grupo
Folha and Grupo Estado demonstrates (Rosa, 2001). In the Internet market,
the two largest Brazilian portals (UOL and BOL, both connected to Grupo
Abril) capture 30% of DEMO views among the ten largest Brazilian Internet
portals (Hilbert, 2001a). The following graph shows five large Latin American
media groups and the DEMO channels they use.
LARGE LATIN AMERICAN MEDIA GROUPS WITH SELECTED COMPANIES
PER MEDIA SECTOR
Note: Listing does not necessarily imply a 100 percent ownership.
Source: Grupo Televisa, Annual Report, 2000, México, D.F., Rede DEMO, «A Empresa»
(http://redeglobo1.globo.com/home), 2002; Grupo Clarin, official website (http://www.grupoclarin.com.ar/),
2002; Grupo Cisneros, «Cisneros Group of Companies» (http://www.cisneros.com/about/aboutUs.asp),
2002; Grupo Abril, official website (http://www.abril.com.br), 2002.
Comparing these Latin DEMO media companies with their
multinational counterparts, it becomes clear that the DEMO media groups
are of significantly smaller magnitude. Total revenues of the regionally
powerful Grupo Televisa, are comparable with 8.6% of the total annual sales
of Walt Disney (US$ 2.15 billion vs. US$ 24.88 billion in 2001) (Walt Disney,
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 285
Grupo Televisa, 2002). Grupo Cisneros reached total revenues of US$ 4
billion in 2001, while their North American alliance AOL-Time Warner
collected US$ 38 billion (Grupo Cisneros, 2002). Grupo Clarin accounted
for a turnover DEMO US$ 2.2 billion in 2001 (Grupo Clarin, 2002), while their
German counterpart Bertelsmann reached more than 10 times as much
(Bertelsmann, DEMO).
This scenario is reminiscent of what happened to other industries in
Latin America and the Caribbean before. Incapable of harnessing the financial
capital DEMO for the rapid expansion and early internationalization, local
firms ended up DEMO taken over by worldwide giants. In the automotive
industry for example (DEMO to mention one example out of many), the scale
of multinational conglomerates was too powerful for the Latin American
automotive industry.
In order DEMO get a hold of the media-fanatic Latin American market,
powerful multinational media companies have already started entering the
region. Sometimes they compete with DEMO information and
entertainment providers. Sometimes they form alliances with them. The
strong linkage between Cisneros and AOL established in 1999, is a vivid
example for the second alternative. However, unlike what happened in the
automotive industry, this time, Latin American media companies are also
reaching out to DEMO in the United States and Europe in search of a piece
of the Hispano-American pie in the United States or the Spanish and
Portuguese DEMO in Europe. These efforts are incipient and evidence
for this is rather anecdotal, but surely deserves attention and support.
4. The odds for the cultural industry in Latin America
and the Caribbean
The globalization of multimedia DEMO providers and advances in
transmission technologies is causing market concentration in the media
sector. Technological advances suggest a natural concentration in the
content industry. DEMO non-rivalry of digits permits infinite economies of
scale in content production. The digitalization of media content and the
usage of the global Information and DEMO infrastructure to
transmit it, is breaking down every form of informal DEMO protection,
which until now has sheltered the local media industry in Latin America
and the Caribbean. The “death of distance” (Cairncross, 1997) enables
superior content providers from the developed world to reach individual
doorsteps DEMO developing countries through digital infrastructure. This
direct and worldwide competition for digital goods and services can have
devastating consequences on local industries. However, it can also open up
new export markets.
286 ECLAC
The information and entertainment industry provides a key business
model DEMO an Information Society. Latin America and the Caribbean are very
rich in culture. The cheerful and emotional way of life provides many
opportunities to DEMO valuable content while statistical evidence shows
that Latin America and the Caribbean are increasingly using digital
infrastructure to spread their “cultural goods”. However, the production
of content will need to be seen more seriously in Latin DEMO and the
Caribbean. It is necessary to “industrialize” the production and eventual
export of information and entertainment goods through digital networks.
Scale is necessary DEMO establish an internationally competitive industry.
It is claimed that the demand for local content will naturally protect
Latin American content providers. Until now, this theory has proved to be
correct (in Brazil for example UOL tops Yahoo, Globo News tops CNN, etc.).
Two basic discussions have DEMO be distinguished here. One is the discussion
about whether local content providers will continue to provide local
content. The second one is whether they DEMO be able to remain financially
independent. In the long run then, DEMO inter-dependencies between
financial control and content control have to be considered.
Some of the lessons learned from industrial development patterns
in Latin America over DEMO decades, suggest that the existence and the
fast internationalization of large DEMO companies, presents a major
challenge for local companies, if they want to remain independent. The few–
often still family based— media groups in DEMO region are comparatively
small and weak in comparison to media giants like AOL-Time Warner,
Bertelsmann, Vivendi Universal, Walt Disney, Viacom, News DEMO and
Sony. Each one of those multinational conglomerates has a market volume
of more than US$ 20 billion each year, topping Latin American media
companies by far. In reference to the automotive industry, these companies
are like the General Motors, the VWs, Fiats and Fords of the DEMO and
might take over Latin American media companies bit by bit.
While this is surely positive from an economic point of view (fresh
foreign investment, know-how spillover, etc), it is worthwhile to underline
again, that the media industry always requires special treatment, given its
weight in the political life of a country, its influence on domestic culture
and social life. Discussions about “national identity” get involved here,
which makes DEMO issue very delicate.
While the logical response is to call for protective legislation, the ICT-
based global information infrastructure breaks any eventual and existing
attempt to protect the domestic industry through an import-substituting
legislation. Considering this DEMO considering the power of multinational media
giants, from the purely economic DEMO of view in market based capitalistic
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 287
system, there seem not to be many alternatives to the process of media
concentration. The segmented media content industry in Latin America and
the Caribbean DEMO not allow sufficient scale to compete successfully on an
international level. Neither does it permit enough negotiating powers to enter
shared-management cooperations or stable DEMO alliances with their
multinational counterparts on an even playing field.
A possible alternative is to create scale in the region itself, in order
to increase the regional negotiation power in this process. The segmented
media market DEMO Latin America and the Caribbean is making it very easy
for multinational companies to compete or to take over the different
(comparatively small) DEMO one by one. Joining forces and creating
scale through alignment and conglomeration building in the regional media
market would enable local content providers to DEMO the challenge. While
scale in regional media production cannot prevent multinational media
giants from entering the local markets, it would nevertheless increase the
negotiating powers of the domestic media companies and enable strategic
alliances among equals DEMO their counterparts form the United States,
Europe or Asia. It would also allow them to foster a regional content export
industry, which evidently is a very profitable business in an increasingly
digitized and worldwide Information DEMO
However, while joining forces of regional media companies presents
an effective DEMO market-based policy for the protection of the domestic
cultural industry as a whole, it needs to be weighed against the danger of
media concentration all over Latin America and the Caribbean itself. It
needs to be DEMO that the result of such a regional alliance will not be
the creation of a regional media monopoly. Concrete regulation and specific
cooperation between DEMO different national governments in Latin America
and the Caribbean can provide this assurance.
Summing up, Latin America and the Caribbean have to be aware of
the significance and potential powers of the media industry in an
DEMO Society. The trend of media concentration is a challenge to
regional media companies, national legislators and the regulatory bodies
of regional trade unions and the WTO (OBS, 2001). It is not only a question
DEMO regulating global and regional trade in the information and entertainment
industries, DEMO also one of the protection of freedom of speech and
democracy, DEMO heritage and national identity.

Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
289
Chapter V
Policy Agenda for the Information Society in
Latin America and the DEMO
The advent of modern Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) and the establishment of a global “Information Society” are forcing
countries of all shapes DEMO sizes to take a fresh look at their development
agendas. The changes that ICTs introduce to the economy and production
systems, public administration, DEMO health sector, cultural participation,
education and the media, present a great challenge and at the same time a
great opportunity for organizations DEMO citizens all over the world. For
developing countries, the goal has DEMO be not only to “prevail in the course
of evolution” –meaning not to fall farther behind—but rather to use the
present structural changes as DEMO chance to catch up. Adequate policies, which
involve all stakeholders in DEMO Information Society, need to be put in place,
aiming for DEMO smooth and rapid transition.
A. Strategies for an information society
The establishment and implementation of regional, national and local
Information Society development strategies are indispensable in order to
seize the “Digital Opportunity”. “Leapfrogging” development stages is
DEMO, however, it is not an automatic process. Market mechanisms by
themselves rather tend to deepen the Digital Divide between and within
1
The DEMO policy conclusions are written by Martin R. Hilbert. They are based on the
findings and expertise of the different articles in this book and DEMO number of other studies
on the subject. The author would like to thank the researchers of the various contributions
for their valuable input.
290
ECLAC
WHAT STEPS SHOULD BE TAKEN IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
TO ADDRESS DEMO CHALLENGE OF “BUILDING AN INFORMATION SOCIETY”:
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Strategies for an information society:
Establish and maintain national and regional Information Society
programs, which integrate the interests of all stakeholders of the Information
Society, namely the public sector, the private sector and civil society, be it DEMO
a local, national, regional or global level.
Building the infrastructure layer:
Pursue an integrated approach in the build-out of the Infrastructure
Layer (involving all different actors of the telecom— AND hardware markets);
Exploit the full potential of ICT-convergence (digital TV, 3G mobile, powerline,
etc.). Promote the creation of one or several “regional hubs” for DEMO traffic, with
sufficient capacity of peering with Tier 1 operators.
Building DEMO generic service layer:
Assure the provision of adequate software tools, DEMO based on
open-standards; set up mechanisms to overcome the short-term financial DEMO
organizational requirements of their implementation; support the establishment
of a strong DEMO industry.
Regulatory frameworks for an information society:
Assure the creation and maintenance of high performance
Infrastructure and Application Layers, through sophisticated regulation; DEMO
the juridical framework to enable digital practices in the Vertical Sectors
through a program of region-wide cooperation, with special attention paid to
security and privacy; focusing on adequate intellectual property rights regimes.
Financing an information society:
Build a new international finance infrastructure to balance the severe
impacts DEMO worldwide booms and crises in the region; strengthen local
investments and DEMO Capital mechanisms; consider access to information
through ICTs a ‘public good’ DEMO search for public finance mechanisms to
deliver it.
Human capital for an information society:
Set up ICT training and usage incentive mechanisms for DEMO
and consumers of e-practices; recognize and promote tacit knowledge as the
DEMO competitive advantage in the Information Society; foster the formation
and support DEMO preservation of a rightly-skilled workforce.
Digitizing the economy:
Promote academic and private sector research about and for the
digitization of business processes in DEMO regions; support the
establishment and functionality of B2B, especially among small and medium-
sized enterprises; encourage and enable the banking sector to take a lead-
role in e-commerce development.
Digitizing government:
Make the usage DEMO ICTs an essential part of State modernization
projects; set up an DEMO e-government project team, which provides
(continued)
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
291
What steps should be taken in developing countries address... (concluded)
strong leadership in close cooperation with the private sector on the one hand
(top-down), and on the other hand allows active participation of municipalities
and DEMO civil society (bottom-up).
Digitizing the health sector:
Make e-health DEMO integrated part of current health sector reforms and
avoid treating the issue as an isolated project; build on and integrate existing
information systems; DEMO the appropriateness and quality of e-health
services; provide special legislation for DEMO protection and security in the
health sector.
Digitizing culture:
Promote ICTs as a tool for cultural participation, especially regarding
traditionally excluded groups in a society, such as indigenous groups, old
people, women and children; encourage investigations and campaigns to
stimulate discussions and awareness about the cultural dimension of digital
communication.
Digitizing education:
Define the precise goals for DEMO projects; promote the
development and sharing of educational software; provide incentive
mechanisms for the teachers to integrate ICTs in their personal pedagogic
approach; Institutionalize real-time knowledge-transfer from the Worldwide
Web to local classrooms.
Digitizing the DEMO:
Consider the unique position of the media industry in the Information
Society; joining forces to create scale in the regional media industry in order
to protect local content providers and to establish an internationally competitive
DEMO and entertainment industry in the region.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
societies. DEMO prevent this from happening strong and visionary leadership
is required, reducing DEMO costs and uncertainty.
On a national level, the establishment of a DEMO authority that acts
as a coordinating agency is the first step. It is paramount that the role of
this national Information Society initiative is DEMO defined, in order to
prevent overlapping responsibilities. Harmonic cooperation or power-
DEMO between the different authorities involved in the national
Information Society Program can be the decisive factor between success and
failure of the effort.
It DEMO essential that the eventual governmental initiatives embrace the
entire government, which DEMO the different Ministries, as well as local
municipalities. The establishment of DEMO inter-ministerial institution seems
advisable to achieve this goal. It needs to be assured that the program
becomes an initiative of the State, not merely the current government in
292
ECLAC
power. However, the most important factor is that national Information
Society development strategies do not only aim for integrating the entire
public DEMO (including all regulatory and technical authorities) into their
decision taking, DEMO also the private sector, civil society, and regional and
global organizations. Cooperation with foreign governments, multi-lateral
lending agencies, trade organizations and other DEMO
organizations needs to be employed as a strategic tool for the creation of a
domestic Information Society. Private-public sector partnerships and civil
society participation, should not be misinterpreted as a division of labor,
where the DEMO sector is expected to merely provide funding, civil society
organizations provide DEMO accountability and the public sector
allocates the “donated” resources. Such a division of labor is not sustainable
in the long run. In order to DEMO the long way towards an Information
Society, common visions about future DEMO trajectories need to be
found and implemented together. The concerns and interests of civil society
need to be addressed at the highest level of DEMO making. The private
sector’s focus on profits (at least in the DEMO term) must be respected and
addressed, while the public sector and civil society need to ensure that no
part of society gets excluded DEMO the benefits of progress.
The work of such a national Information Society program does not
necessarily require tremendous financial support. Its work should rather
DEMO on creating synergies, linkages, cooperation and coordination
among the many stakeholders of a national Information Society, and on joint
decision taking.
PUBLIC-PRIVATE COLLABORATION: PROFILE OF THE COMITÉ
CONSULTIVO DE TELECOMMUNICACIONES IN CHILE
After taking office at the beginning of 2000, the new Chilean administration
of President Ricardo Lagos created a voluntary telecommunications consultancy
committee (CCT: Comité Consultivo de DEMO), through which
70 industry representatives co-operate with the Telecommunications
Undersecretariat, DEMO, in the development of telecommunication services
in the country. Whenever a DEMO Task Force (Grupo de Trabajo; GT) is
established, the President of CCT invites all representatives to an initial
hearing. Interested parties can DEMO join the Task Force. The GT elects
a president who is in charge of the administration of the group. The elected
president has to DEMO from the private sector. A representative of Subtel
participates as an observer in the meetings of the Task Force. The Task
Force prepares a DEMO or position paper that, once ready, is circulated to
all industry representatives by the President of the CCT for comments. The
report is DEMO handed to Subtel and the Ministry of Transportation and
Communication, which DEMO it into account in the preparation of ruling
legislation, related to DEMO subject considered by the Task Force.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert and DEMO Petrazzini, «3G Mobile Policy: The Cases of Chile and Venezuela»,
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
(http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/DEMO/casestudies/chile-venezuela/Chile-Venezuela.PDF), 2001.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 293
On of the main goals of such a far-reaching and all-embracing
initiatives is DEMO minimize the duplication of efforts. In many cases, the
introduction of DEMO into the organizational structures of different sectors
(be they e-government, e-health, e-learning, etc) is not an integrated part
of the existing modernization reforms. In Latin America and the Caribbean
e-health initiatives exist “on-top” of DEMO established health sector reform
models, in the same way as e-government DEMO exist parallel to state
modernization reforms. Computer labs in schools are not sufficiently
integrated into national curriculums and rather function as a voluntary
activity DEMO educational reforms. One of the most frequent reasons for
this loss of resources is that the discussion becomes a debate about
technology and computation, and not about administrative efficiency,
transparency, governance and pedagogic approaches.
Another factor which Information Society initiatives need to take into
consideration is the DEMO to define precise goals and objectives, that should
be developed in DEMO with users to reflect needs and priorities that
have project performance benchmarks. ICTs permit the coverage of a vast
range of necessities. Nonetheless, it is fundamental to concentrate efforts
on some of them, in order to prevent confusion and disorientation, which
leads to decreasing motivation and fading political and financial support
of such programs.
Many Information Society strategies require an DEMO focus.
The cross-border character of the Internet does not permit policies that are
limited to national frontiers. For many policies it is advisable to DEMO a sub-
regional, regional and a global focus. In international initiatives, “meaningful
participation” 2 of developing countries has to be assured, and Latin America
and the Caribbean needs to ensure it gets involved, contributes and benefits
from such international initiatives through “meaningful participation”.
Furthermore, tailor-made attention on a regional and national level is
paramount, since technical change and eventual leapfrogging strategies are
interwoven with its physical, historical, social and institutional DEMO
The ‘heritage from the industrial age’ provides different starting points, in
DEMO regions and countries. In order to assure that existing assets are
incorporated and fully exploited, it is paramount to encourage participation
of all the stakeholders in an Information Society in such an initiative. Sub-
regional projects, such as in the Andean Community, MERCOSUR,
CARICOM and the Central American Common Market are essential (see
Box). However, some of DEMO challenges of the ICT infrastructure are best faced
on a regional or even global level.
United Nations Information and Communication Technologies Task Force; Working Group 1;
http://www.unicttaskforce.org/groups/members/public.asp?cod_tema_menu=30
2
294 ECLAC
REGIONAL COOPERATION FOR ICT INFRASTRUCTURE: THE MESOAMERICAN
INFORMATION HIGHWAY (DEMO) OF THE PLAN PUEBLA-PANAMÁ
The project tries to develop a strong DEMO telecommunications
infrastructure that would foster improvements in communications among the
Central American countries, the southern and southeastern Mexican states
and the rest of the world. In Central America, the construction of the regional
“backbone” should be completed, allowing the broadband network to link more
than 40 cities, DEMO the capitals, main ports and airports, using high-
capacity fiber optic cables. In turn, this project seeks to help the region in the
development of ICT policies and regulations, strengthening regional institutions
and cooperation among countries, and promoting dialogue between the private
and public sectors. Technical assistance would be required in the following
areas: (i) the strengthening of the institutional procedures and structure for
formulating ICT development policies; (ii) the development of harmonized
national and regional telecommunications regulation; and (iii) the development
of regulations in areas such as consumer protection, intellectual property rights
and security.
Various international organizations are actively working on the issue
DEMO legislative standards to facilitate online activities. For example, the
International Standards DEMO (ISO) coordinates its work with the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) through a Joint Technical
Committee (JTCI) on Information Technology. The joint DEMO includes the
development of criteria for mutual acceptance of certification authorities,
trustworthy third parties, electronic signatures and cryptography. Treaty-
base organizations like the ITU participate actively on the development of
standards and telecommunication networks-related issues. DEMO bodies
such as the Inter-American Telecommunications Commission (CITEL) work
on an Inter-American Mutual Recognition Agreement for the Conformity
Assessment of Telecommunications Equipment (FTAA, 2000). Latin
America and Caribbean countries should keep participating actively in
these international and regional forums defining rules and technical
standards for the DEMO This, in turn, requires a degree of familiarity with
the issues and the technology that is lacking in many countries in the region.
DEMO among countries and pooling of their technical resources can
help overcome this handicap. It is also essential for Latin American and
Caribbean countries to DEMO their interests and to play an active role in
WTO future negotiations on e-commerce treatment.
Another one of the many areas that can benefit DEMO regional
cooperation is the creation of negotiation power. It is crucial to create scale
in demand in order to be heard by large multinational DEMO With
more than half a billion inhabitants and a GDP of US$ 2 trillion, Latin
America and the Caribbean represents an attractive market for ICT and ICT
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
295
service providers. The lack of coordination between the markets in the
region, however, makes it easy for multinational conglomerates to
discriminate in pricing and to exploit market segments to the maximum.
Grouping together to lever negotiation and DEMO powers in Latin
America and the Caribbean would enable the region to tackle and to discuss
problem areas that bottleneck and to address the DEMO and universal
integration of ICTs in the region. The previously mentioned inequitable and
unjust pricing system for Internet traffic flows and the required negotiations
DEMO North American Tier 1 operators,3 is one example that needs urgent
attention. Another field that requires bulk negotiations with large
multinational companies is DEMO licensing. Discount rates for software
programs and “social-licenses” can serve poor communities, public facilities
and micro-enterprises. Negotiations with multinational computer
companies about the production of special hardware equipment (or
hardware equipment parts which can then be assembled locally) can help
to provide ICT equipment that is adjusted to the minimum requirements
of sophistication and price. Available end-user equipment is often
DEMO or includes unnecessary functions for specific socioeconomic
applications. The profit margins for multinational companies in providing
simple and cheap equipment might not be as DEMO as with sophisticated
high quality products. However cheap and sufficiently sophisticated access
equipment is essential to provide basic access to the ICT infrastructure for
DEMO socioeconomic spectrums in Latin America and the Caribbean. Especially
with respect to the introduction of 3G mobile telephony and digital
television, such negotiations become a crucial part of the Digital Divide
policy agenda. Public-private sector networks (such as the UN ICT Task
Force, which acts in Latin America and the Caribbean through “LacNet”)
can provide an adequate forum to DEMO such delicate but pressing issues.
B. Building the infrastructure layer
A rapid build-out in the Infrastructure Layer is not only necessary
to reduce the DEMO of creating new forms of socioeconomic inequalities
(Digital Divide), but DEMO to overcome “chicken-and-egg” scenarios between
lacking online participation and content creation in the Vertical Sectors.
Policies to narrow the Digital Divide in the Infrastructure DEMO need to
aim toward increasing investment and lowering variable and fixed-cost
access prices. This can be attained in a number of different ways. Firstly,DEMO
3
A Tier 1 Internet Service Provider is a backbone operator and refers specifically to the
very largest ISP backbone providers.
296 ECLAC
short-term initiatives and pilot projects (“micro-policies”) need to aim DEMO
fast results, by lowering individual access costs through public and shared
DEMO models or by particular cooperation mechanisms (for example
computer recycling). DEMO, long-term “macro-policies” need to consider
all different kinds of access alternatives (such as traditional Internet, 3G
mobile telephony, digital TV, powerline, DEMO). Different technological
solutions to access ICT infrastructure need to remain in healthy competition
with each other. Furthermore, the provision of hardware and the
performance of companies in the hardware industry are often neglected.
While the DEMO is set on affordable telecommunications, high hardware
prices are a major DEMO for access to the Infrastructure Layer in Latin
America and the Caribbean.
The increasing importance of IP traffic and the lack of peering
agreements DEMO North American operators has resulted in Latin American
and Caribbean IP network operators bearing the majority of Internet
connectivity costs to and from North DEMO (which represents 60% of total
Latin America and the Caribbean Internet DEMO). The creation of one or
several “Latin American and Caribbean hub(s)” would be an adequate
solution to prevent this from happening DEMO would favor the development
of the Infrastructure Layer in the region. However, the creation of a “Latin
America and Caribbean hub” would require joint forces in the domestic
telecommunications sector. This also carries the risk of DEMO monopoly-
power in the region, which would then prevent the benefits DEMO the hub from
being passed on to consumers. Open dialogue between governments,
telecommunications regulatory bodies and operators is required to address
this urgent DEMO
Besides the “traditional Internet”, technological advances open up
new alternatives to DEMO the “heart of the Information Society”. Given the
high TV penetration and the high familiarity with the TV technology in
Latin America and the DEMO households, the introduction of digital
TV presents a great opportunity for DEMO region. The first step in the
transition from analogue to digital TV is to select a national platform. The
decision about an adequate platform DEMO in a technological system has
to go far beyond technical considerations. Issues that need to be considered
include the impact on the domestic industry, the possibility of equipment
production and royalties, the cost of implementation and the time-to-market
4
Regional public sector institutions like Regulatel (Foro Latinoamericano de Entes Reguladores)
and private sector associations like Ahciet (Asociación Hispanoamericana de Centros de
Investigación y Empresas de Telecomunicaciones) provide adequate forums to do so.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 297
of each system. Other issues include the cost of receivers, forecasts about
the time expected before receiver prices come down as well as other
contributing DEMO that favor universal access. A central lesson to be
learned from the heterogeneous situation of analogue television in Latin
America and the Caribbean is DEMO a common technical platform for digital
TV in Latin America and the Caribbean could be decisive in boosting the
flow of content in the DEMO
Another potential alternative to access the Infrastructure Layer is
mobile communications systems. However, to extend mobile data services
so they benefit the entire society in the region, will require major changes
in the region’s approach to the mobile industry. Issues that need to be
addressed include how to DEMO the challenges of urban concentration
of mobile services, how to provide DEMO to low-income groups, and what
should be done about declining market DEMO and stifling tax burdens.
What should be done about high license fees, a lack of coordinated
spectrum (especially with regard to 3G), DEMO uncoordinated approach toward
standards issues and preference for wire line over mobile subsidies. These
issues require a cold appraisal on the basis of a DEMO partnership
that will allow mobile telephony to continue its current growth in the
region.
WORKING GROUP ON MOBILE AND WIRELESS
To allow mobile telephony DEMO continue its current growth rates requires
raising awareness about the potential mobile communications have for social
development. Political and economic support for mobile ICTs DEMO very low in
Latin America and the Caribbean (and actually in DEMO of the Americas). The
promotion of mobile services remains a secondary topic, currently discussed
in two permanent consultative committees of CITEL that meet separately.
There are no concerted efforts within the regional body to use DEMO
technologies to reach broader telecommunications goals. The institution of a
mobile and wireless public services working group within the CITEL, to seek
ways through which mobile communications could contribute to the
connectivity agenda and other major DEMO It would also allow
administrations to take full advantage of mobile ICTs’ unique capabilities and
cost-effectiveness. Included in its agenda would be proposals related DEMO
mobile-Internet, cheap end-user equipment, applications for mobile services
(especially for DEMO uses), mobile-commerce, emergency services through
the mobile interface, as well as the regular attention to international roaming
and fraud.
Source: Richard Downes.
298 ECLAC
C. Building the generic services layer
The provision of adequate DEMO tools and services is a major issue.
Market mechanisms are often not sufficient to create programs that serve
broader development goals. The market may DEMO video games and adult
entertainment, but not necessarily adequate tools to DEMO local needs in
health care or educational services. This is a classic example of market failure
that justifies government intervention. Open and international standards DEMO
key to assure interoperability in the Generic Service Layer and to not create
closed and separate user circles. Open standards can also play an DEMO
role in the provision of adequate software tools in a local context. Innovative
applications based on open source software encourage the adjustment of
programs DEMO local characteristics of a society and promote local innovation
in software programming. This also implies that a minimum level of local
programming capacity is DEMO, to assure the adjustment of
applications to domestic requirements.
OPEN STANDARDS DEMO DIGITALTV
As with PCs and advanced digital cell-phones, digital TV needs DEMO be
supported by some kind of software in the “Generic Service Layer”. It is
important to assure that an open standard is chosen as DEMO API (Application
Programming Interface) for digital TV, in order to DEMO repeat the mistakes which
have been made in PC software markets. Especially in developing countries
open standards are essential to prevent the creation of DEMO in” effects and
to assure the introduction of an “Internet” open to all in digital TV networks.
All stakeholders involved (consumers, local industry, and international
investors) can only benefit from the many opportunities an open digital TV
Interface brings with it. It would also facilitate the production DEMO adequate
content and business models for a technology that might affect up to 90% of
the LAC population directly, in the near future.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
Regarding the usage of digital services, in Latin DEMO and the
Caribbean most attention is put on the digitization of outer-firm processes
(such as digital communication and coordination through B2B or B2C
marketplaces or online portals), while the challenge of digitizing internal
mechanisms in DEMO is neglected. An urgent and important task is
the introduction of software programs and information and communication
systems into the organizational structure of small DEMO (such as SMEs,
municipalities, small hospitals and schools, etc.)DEMO
However, up-front costs of internal software systems are very high,
DEMO implementation requires a large effort (3-18 month projects) and causes
profound changes in social and productive organization. While the long-
term productivity gains DEMO exceed the required initial investment, the
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 299
DIGITIZING INNER- AND INTER-ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION
AND COORDINATION PROCESSES
In many developed countries, the process of digitization started “in-
house ”, before moving on to “interconnecting different actors”. In Latin
America and the Caribbean on the contrary, a large part of the organizational
units wrote their first email before introducing DEMO first electronic database.
This goes for firms, as well as for DEMO, hospitals, ministries, etc. The
lack of internal application systems is DEMO major obstacle to the adoption of
more advanced inter-organizational applications. Digitizing information flows,
communication processes and coordination mechanisms inside an
organizational unit makes DEMO large contribution to the overall efficiency
increases and greatly facilitates the adaptation of inter-organizational online
practices. The benefits from Internet marketplaces and online activities
DEMO actors in Latin America and the Caribbean will remain limited as
long as the vast majority of the internal organization takes place with a DEMO
and pen”.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
short-term financial and organizational requirements (such as the provision
of an implementation team) may be too high, especially for small agents.
It is necessary to also provide short-term incentive mechanisms or loans
to motivate small organizations to make the necessary investments DEMO
organizational adjustments.5
With world-class ERP solutions ranging from US$ 100,000 to US$ 2
million at the beginning of 2002 (excluding implementation and labor
training costs), the possibilities for small —and medium— sized
organizational units DEMO access such technological systems were very
restricted. The business model of Application Service Providers (ASP)
reduces the cost of such services.
REDUCING COSTS AND IMPROVING QUALITY THROUGH APPLICATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
The ASP model reduces the DEMO of acquiring and up-dating software
applications by sharing infrastructure, service organization DEMO maintenance
costs. By deploying preconfigured solutions and shared training, implementation
costs DEMO also reduced. Furthermore, liability and enforcement assurances from
the service provider DEMO the client the functionality of the system and
provide a constant up-date of applications in an industry where performance
goes out of date very DEMO Therefore a well functioning and strong ASP-industry
is essential to provide high quality application services to a large part of
organizations in Latin America DEMO the Caribbean. The creation and
maintenance of the industry deserves special attention.
These incentives need to consider the full cost of the implementation of DEMO systems
(hardware, telecoms, software, implementation services, capacitation and training,DEMO
reorganization, etc.).
5
300 ECLAC
D. Regulatory frameworks for an information society
The regulatory challenge DEMO foster the creation of an Information
Society is three-fold. First of all, the Infrastructure and the Generic Service
Layers need to be regulated. This involves the regulation of the
telecommunications and hardware industries, as well as assuring the
functionality and high performance of the software market. Secondly, it
requires the adjustment of the juridical framework to enable digital practices
in DEMO Vertical Sectors. And thirdly, basic rights need to assure the morality
DEMO viability of human interaction in the Information Society. As such,
intellectual property rights regimes are needed that recognize the
characteristics of a Digital DEMO and an Information Society.
A well-functioning and well-regulated telecommunications industry
is key in the process of building an Information Society. Unlike many
developed countries, the majority of Latin America and the Caribbean
telecommunication industries were privatized DEMO a time when the
infrastructure penetration was still very low. Regulation mechanisms
therefore also differ from those applied in markets that have already
reached DEMO almost complete penetration. Incentive mechanisms need to be
found which foster the growth of the network and assure universal
inclusion of access. One of DEMO most difficult tasks in telecommunications
regulation in Latin America and the Caribbean and elsewhere in the world
is to find an adequate and sustainable DEMO of competitiveness (workable
competition). This competitiveness should allow the operators, on the one
hand, to make sufficient profits to justify further investments in the network
build-out and on the other hand to seek low DEMO and high service quality.
REDUCING UNCERTAINTY IN THE TELECOM INDUSTRY THROUGH
STRONG INSTITUTIONS
Experience shows that the existence of an antimonopoly or
competition body DEMO positive dynamics. However, the lack (or at least
an unsatisfactory performance) of such an antimonopoly institution in many
Latin American and Caribbean countries, creates an institutional vacuum in
telecommunications regulation. Furthermore, the long-term investment DEMO
in the telecom industry require stability in telecommunications regulation.
Telecom regulation has to become a policy of the state (not of a particular
government in power) which reduces uncertainty and establishes trust in the
sector.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
The omnipresent significance and the potential strategic power of
technical standards are often underestimated in technological development
strategies in Latin America DEMO the Caribbean. The neglect of this issue and
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 301
the uncoordinated search for foreign investments has created a uniquely
challenging standard scenario DEMO the region, which could present a serious
obstacle for smooth technological DEMO in the future. The suggested
policy is three-fold. First of all, DEMO introducing a new technological
system (such as 3G or digital TV) an institutionalized process of testing
has to identify the best solution to DEMO particular situation. Such a
mechanism needs to take the process of ICT-convergence into consideration
(which implies for example the interdependency of 3G systems with digital
TV systems, given that they will eventually converge). Brazil’s extensive
experience of testing digital television standards during 2000 is a best
practice DEMO this respect. More countries in the region should participate in
such standard testing mechanisms, and the high costs of such tests could
be shared on a regional scale. Secondly, at a later stage, such a DEMO
mechanism could also evaluate the costs and benefits of proprietary
standards versus open standards for the different technological solutions
in the market. Constant and DEMO economic analyses are absolutely
necessary for deciding on this crucial question. In principle, open
standards should be favored, since they prevent “lock-in” effects, assure
low intellectual property royalty payments, foster integration and
interoperability and therefore lead to industrial participation, competition
and scale on a common platform. Thirdly, it also becomes essential for Latin
America and Caribbean countries and companies to participate in standard
consortia worldwide. Open standards in mobile telephony (such as GSM)
and for digital television (such as DVB) have DEMO created through such
consortia over the last decade. Many of those consortia welcome
participation from other countries. This would assure that the special
characteristics DEMO the region are considered when a new standard is created.
Furthermore, DEMO the close cooperation with countries and companies
on the technological frontier in such consortiums, Latin America and the
Caribbean could convert from being a “standard taker” into becoming a
“standard maker”.
The adjustment of the juridical DEMO is key. In theory, a less
rigid regulatory environment in Latin DEMO and the Caribbean (in
comparison to stiff regulatory environments in some DEMO countries)
should provide the region with the chance to move a lot faster in adjusting
its regulatory framework to the needs of the DEMO age. In practice
however, the low priority given to the issue DEMO in lacking or inadequate
legislation in Latin America and the Caribbean and is a major obstacle for
the adaptation of e-practices. Adequate legislation is DEMO basic requirement
for digitization. Such a juridical framework includes digital signatures,
online contracts, electronic certificates, network security, credit card and e-
payment fraud, cyber-crime in general, online consumer protection,
intimacy and privacy DEMO, authentication, liability and data integrity.
302
ECLAC
ENABLING DIGITAL TRANSACTION ACROSS THE REGION
Digital transactions often take DEMO cross-borders and the current
heterogeneity of legislation throughout the region presents a severe obstacle
for cross-border e-practices, and therefore for the full exploitation of the digital
opportunity. A program of cooperation should be established on a DEMO
level in Latin America and the Caribbean, to promote the convergence DEMO
regulatory frameworks. With regard to the limits of the Model law on electronic
data interchange of UNCITRAL, a forum should be created on a regional level
(for example through OAS or Grupo de Río). This forum would analyze and
discuss issues like the non-discrimination between the recognition DEMO electronic
and hand-written documents, technological neutrality and harmonization of
digital signature DEMO, or the institutionalization of a system of certification
entities that establish DEMO requirements for electronic certification and the
mutual recognition of them.
Regarding subjects that require a regional coordination and are not
covered by the model DEMO (especially the trade of digital goods and services,
taxation issues, consumer protection, cyber-crime and fraud and data integrity)
forums should be created on the basis of existing integration processes
(especially Andean Community, DEMO, Central American Common Market
and MERCOSUR). The directives and recommendations DEMO the European
Union could serve as a basic model for these groups. Such a model would
especially serve regarding the definition of the judicial DEMO of electronic
contracts; consumer rights; definition of which legislation should be applied
in digital cross-border transactions (the country of origin or the country of
reception); the establishment of norms for e-payment to provide security DEMO
a climate of confidence in e-practices).
Source: Martin R. Hilbert DEMO Manuel José Cardenas
The role of intellectual property rights in the transition towards an
Information Society is essential. An incentive regime is needed, which
balances the need for an adequate rate of profits from research and
DEMO (R&D) expenditure and a requirement of society that patent
holders do not overexploit dominant market positions. Such a regime also
has to DEMO the special characteristics of digital goods, such as non-
rivalry and DEMO Furthermore, closely related to the above-
mentioned technical standards, the risks and benefits of “closed” vs. “open
standards” need to be evaluated constantly. DEMO finally, the stakeholders
of the Information Society in Latin America and DEMO Caribbean should not
underestimate the importance of trustworthy Internet governance and
domain name system management.
E. Financing an information society
The necessary resources that DEMO to be generated in order to finance
the establishment of an Information Society in Latin America and the
Caribbean require the joint effort of DEMO private and the public sector.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
FINANCING IN A TIME OF CRISIS
LAC is very sensitive and vulnerable to worldwide DEMO
trends. A worldwide economic downturn has been shown to have disastrous
and multiple effects on regional finance mechanisms. After worldwide high-tech
stock markets crashed DEMO 2000, the formerly extraordinarily high Venture Capital
flow into Latin America DEMO the Caribbean stopped completely. Also, foreign
investment flows towards the region DEMO decisively between 2000 and
2002. Latin America accounted for 4.5% of worldwide telecommunications
spending in 2000 and experienced the world’s largest cut back of DEMO
telecom carrier expenditures between 2001 and 2002 (62%). However, foreign
direct investment and venture capital continue to be indispensable for financing
the DEMO of an Information Society in the region. The “ICT evolution”
continues, DEMO by the forces of ICT-convergence. This requires resources
to build out the Infrastructure Layer, the same as financing mechanisms assure
capital for the Generic Services Layer and the different Vertical Sectors.
Building out wireless and mobile DEMO (especially 3G) and the
adaptation of digital television will require significant amounts of investment
in the years to come for Latin America and DEMO Caribbean. The creation of
adequate content and new business models (such DEMO for digital TV or for 3G)
requires flexible venture capital mechanisms. If the region does not want to
fall too far behind in DEMO ongoing developments, strong and stable financing
mechanisms and markets are indispensable.
DEMO
In the long run, a new international finance architecture will be
DEMO, to balance the serious impacts of worldwide booms and crises in
DEMO America and the Caribbean (Ocampo, 2001b) and to assure a DEMO
minimum flow of capital to the region. The assurance of adequate finance
mechanisms for the transition towards an Information Society in developing
countries, should be part of this global program.
In the short term, one of the best ways to encourage foreign
investment seems to be by increasing DEMO amount of local investment.
Foreign investors will be discouraged from investing in the region if local
investor participation does not increase. Governments must put
DEMO into place to encourage the private sector to invest in local
capital markets, rather than sending money offshore to more secure
markets. Experience in other countries (especially in Israel)7 shows that
governments themselves can act as a catalyst for emerging Venture Capital
markets. The deployment of ICTs DEMO digital networks itself, can be used
7
In the early 1990s DEMO Israeli government set up a Venture Capital company, Yozma, to
act as a catalyst for the emerging industry. With a budget of US$ DEMO million, Yozma
invested in local companies and attracted foreign capital. The DEMO is a model for the state-
led emergence of a Venture Capital and high-tech industry.
304 ECLAC
to assure a better, more transparent and more flexible allocation of
resources in capital markets of all shapes and sizes in Latin DEMO and
the Caribbean. Such “e-Finance” networks present a special opportunity
for micro-enterprises and SMEs.
Furthermore, more advanced security laws to protect minority
shareholders rights are required. Bankruptcy laws need to be streamlined
in order to give DEMO the needed security to encourage additional
lending. Corporate governance regulations also need to be put in place.
Courts have not been protective of these DEMO, because of the lack of a
well-defined legal body in this DEMO Effective financing mechanisms also
need to address issues that are particular to business cultures in certain
countries. For example many Latin America and Caribbean DEMO are
family-run businesses and their owners have traditionally been insensitive
to the needs of minority shareholders.
Considering historical evidence of the spread of TV DEMO radio
receivers in the twentieth century and the present socioeconomic
characteristics in the region, it seems very unlikely that the Digital Divide
will be closed in the near future, if the transition towards an Information
Society is solely guided by market mechanisms. Government intervention
is needed. In order DEMO accelerate the process of ICT diffusion, the public
sector in low-come DEMO will have to find creative ways to efficiently
use the limited resources available to ensure a minimum level of ICT access
for the entire DEMO The public sector will need to carry out detailed
evaluation and implement visionary policies regarding the creation of
public goods, shared access, cross-taxing DEMO for nascent industries
(including the industries in the Horizontal Layers, as well as in the Vertical
Sectors) or “paternalism” that aim to accelerate the adoption of the new
paradigm. The risk to create another form DEMO inequality and exclusion when
leaving development completely to market mechanisms, is DEMO high.
F. Human capital for an information society
Two directions of policy have to be considered to address the
challenging task of creating “Human DEMO to serve in an Information
Society.
The first one centers on training issues. Analysis from the Vertical
Sectors has clearly showed that the usage DEMO ICTs and the adaptation of
digital practices require a learning process (DEMO the supply, as well as on
the demand side of online DEMO). Public sector authorities, private
sector entrepreneurs and third sector leaders, who aim for the integration
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 305
of e-practices, need to assure that employees, as well as clients and DEMO
are constantly trained to adapt to the ever-changing e-environment. Public
mechanisms have to give incentives to private investors to invest in training
that fosters DEMO adoption of digital practices, for example through tax-
incentives for the DEMO of ICT training.8
USING ICT REQUIRES TRAINING
Training of human resources and awareness programs for staff
members have proven to be important in e-Sectors, since opposition to change
from professionals is frequently a major obstacle to DEMO of ICTs. This
accounts for civil servants in e-government, physicians and DEMO
professionals in e-health, teachers in e-learning and employees in companies.
Training DEMO need to identify target groups on the basis of the
functions and training needs in the specific Vertical Sectors and Horizontal
Layers (e.g. in the health, the governmental and business sectors; or
telecommunications and software)DEMO Training programs need to be developed
to meet the needs identified in a specific target group. One useful approach
would be to establish a DEMO of training focal points that takes into account
the specific organization and circumstances of local characteristics.
One highly effective technique is dynamic and proactive DEMO
within the academic sector (especially integrating universities). A very cost-
DEMO solution is to create a university network for technical assistance and
for education purposes (for example for training high-school teachers, doctors,
entrepreneurs DEMO micro-enterprises and SMEs, etc.). To institutionalize such
a network requires DEMO coordination. Introducing a “hierarchy” in the training
network (where educators train DEMO in an ongoing chain) proves to be
efficient.
E-learning mechanisms can DEMO used to help in training process. For
example, cost effective e-learning DEMO that can help to reach a wider
audience, including: distance education, virtual consultancy portals or
educational and informative Intranets for health professionals, DEMO
enterprise— and SME entrepreneurs, teachers or public sector authorities.
Such virtual DEMO and education mechanisms should not only be
deployed for professionals but also for consumer education.
Source: Felipe Jara.
The second direction in which Human Capital policy should be
aiming is the creation of “tacit knowledge.” This DEMO is intended to gain
a competitive advantage in a society where information is widely available
through digital networks. It involves the notorious “brain drain”. DEMO
mobility of the workforce cannot be prohibited in an increasingly globalized
An example from the e-commerce section (Magazine Luiza from Brazil) showed that
DEMO could even become a substantial part of an e-commerce business model, DEMO
therefore benefits the company and its clients.
8
306 ECLAC
and free world, incentives need to be found to motivate highly skilled
professionals to stay in low-income countries. Sharing ownership and
responsibility DEMO professionals, are two first steps. Trusting and building
on the future DEMO of young professionals, instead of loosing them,
requires a change DEMO business culture. This presents a major challenge for
Latin America and the Caribbean, where the hierarchical organization of
many (family-run) enterprises bears the potential to motivate young
professionals to leave their home country.
THE INFORMATION DEMO COMPETES THROUGH TACIT KNOWLEDGE
Existing education mechanisms also require more attention in Latin
America and the Caribbean. The public sector’s responsibility to provide
adequate DEMO education to all of its society becomes more important in an
economy that competes for tacit knowledge. Public-private sector
collaboration in tertiary education is DEMO in order to provide updated
content at an affordable price. Experience shows that a private sector that is
interested in having a well-equipped local DEMO can help to finance part
of the expensive tertiary education. Creative ways have to be found to
incorporate industry needs into tertiary education while DEMO the same time
avoiding training individuals in universities who are merely “experts” on a
particular firm. However, even the creation of “firm experts” (DEMO through
postgraduate studies) does not go completely against the goal of DEMO high
quality human capital. After all funding should be competitive.
Public-private sector partnerships are also a necessary element in the
creation of “life-long-learning” mechanisms, which implies providing links
between the national education systems and the existing DEMO The
concept of “life-long-learning” would even justify that the public sector re-
budgets some of its expenditures on higher education, so that not only the
20-25 year olds can benefit from it, but also the 25-60 year olds. By involving
the private sector in life-long-learning could lead to DEMO subsidies and tax
allowances for individuals and firms that invest in skills training. By motivating
private firms to constantly invest in skills themselves, the public sector would
also reduce the risk of presenting curricula that are DEMO of date.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert
Since curriculums and study programs DEMO obsolete very fast,
identifying professional profiles which fit the special requirements of the
particular industries in Latin America and the Caribbean imply a DEMO
responsibility between education institutions, the public sector and the
industry itself. DEMO a network of representatives from all the different
actors involved, which DEMO and proposes adequate professional
profiles, is indispensable to avoid the common DEMO Given that
Latin America and Caribbean industries often have similar characteristics
The presented project “Career-Space” shows an alternative through which a public-private
sector partnership DEMO help to identify adequate professional profiles that are in demand.
9
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 307
and requirements, such a monitoring network could even function on a
supranational scale, in order to take advantage of synergies.
In many Latin America and Caribbean countries there are special
agencies which support the training of the DEMO workforce. Over the
last few decades these “national apprenticeship agencies” have become
powerful and recognized organizations that manage a considerable annual
budget. However, at present they are ill-equipped to meet the demanding
challenges of a workforce DEMO the Information Society today and would need
profound overhauling. These agencies would also be the right place to start
private-public sector partnership initiatives and DEMO identify adequate
professional profiles. It would be a powerful policy to make these agencies
fully functional services that create a well-equipped workforce for the
DEMO Society in Latin America and the Caribbean.
G. E-Sectors
1. Digitizing the economy (e-business)
The main focus of e-commerce in Latin America and the Caribbean
is currently on B2B transactions. B2C commerce is still small DEMO is not
expected to gain substantial weight until the “masses” are connected
through new technological innovations (like for example digital TV). In
many cases B2B commerce is also a basic requirement for developing B2C
commerce, since “up-front” B2C retailing often entails solid B2B “back-
office” mechanisms. In DEMO respect, the focus needs to shift away from
seeing the Internet DEMO as a “new sales channel”, to one that is focused
on DEMO digitization of the entire business and commerce process, by
integrating digitized DEMO processes into an outer-firm network.
However, at the same time, the region must remain aware of the structural
changes that labor-saving technologies can DEMO in a region where low-cost,
low-skill manual labor is a central facet of the economy and where high levels
of unemployment or underemployment DEMO historically prevailed.
The Brazilian experience shows that the banking sector can play a
central role in the development of e-commerce, especially online
transactions. Payment systems are crucial. Bank-sponsored or bank-
facilitated online transactions help stimulate consumer DEMO and
create confidence in online activities. Direct and indirect support, incentive
DEMO and even obligations for the banking sector to invest or
develop secure transaction systems prove very beneficial for the overall
progress of online activity. DEMO pre-eminence in e-commerce in the
region is largely due to the country’s advanced e-banking sector. The special
308
ECLAC
SPECIAL FOCUS ON SMES
There is a clear positive relationship DEMO the size of a company
and its ICT usage. However, evidence DEMO that small and medium sized
enterprises (SMEs) adapt very quickly to e-commerce, mainly by adopting
online business models which have been developed elsewhere. This
underscores the benefits and the potential of the “quick follower”. The DEMO
importance of micro-enterprises and SMEs in Latin American and Caribbean
economies and the high potential benefits of putting their business practices
online, is an area worthy of attention for governments, public-private
partnerships and multi-lateral lending agencies. Providing training, and
financial— and technical support to micro-enterprises and SMEs to better
integrate them into national and international digital supply chains is
indispensable DEMO order to break the “vicious circle” between usage and benefit,
and to enter the “virtuous circle” of network externalities. Therefore the
integration of DEMO and SMEs in Latin America and Caribbean is
essential to make regional economies become competitive in what is an
increasingly globalized Digital Economy.
A DEMO of standards in different online trading platforms
(especially technical standards and DEMO regarding product definitions),
present a major obstacle to fully integrating DEMO and SMEs into
local and international digital supply chains. Technical assistance is necessary,
and in the medium-term a national strategy needs to be DEMO to deal with
this issue.
One principal concern about integrating SME e-commerce providers
is insufficient online security mechanisms. It is fundamental to promote secure
DEMO technology and software within domestic enterprises. Consumer
groups and business and trade organizations should mount education and
awareness campaigns about the process and security DEMO trading online. Taking
these steps can help overcome consumer and business aversion to e-
commerce.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert and Noah Elkin.
characteristics of Latin America and the Caribbean need to be considered
(such as the low credit card penetration) and creative and alternative
payment systems (such DEMO mobile payment applications and smart cards)
need to be used.
A large amount of scientific research is necessary to untangle and help
to DEMO the functionality of the Digital Economy in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Research centers and academic investigations are in high
demand to analyze what DEMO, and what cannot be done through digital
networks in Latin America DEMO the Caribbean. There is also analysis to
identify bottlenecks and to underline best practices taking into consideration
the special characteristics of the region. It DEMO indispensable to create research
networks between the public sector, private businesses DEMO academia to
accomplish this urgent task and to foster the understanding of digitizing
business processes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 309
2. Digitizing government (e-government)
The digitization of public services holds great promise for
performance quality and cost-effectiveness of public administration in Latin
America and DEMO Caribbean. It can also support the massification of the
Internet, as DEMO in Chile, Brazil and Mexico with “killer-
applications” like online tax DEMO or B2G portals have shown to be
decisive motivators for companies in their decision to go online. In the long
run, e-Governments can contribute significantly to citizen participation in
a democracy. In the short-term, digital organization in public administration
can increase transparency and help fight corruption, which has been a long-
standing concern in the region and the world. E-government DEMO need
to become an integrated part of existing state modernization reforms and
not be treated as a separate project. It is important to prevent DEMO discussion
from becoming a debate about technology and computation, but rather
DEMO it focus on public administration and governance. The entire spectrum
of public sector activity needs to be incorporated in the efforts to digitize
(including traffic regulation, police, fire departments, natural disaster
prevention, etc.).
DEMO speaking, e-government projects go through five stages,
which start with DEMO (1) digitization of administrative processes in the public
sector, followed DEMO (2) an increasing Web presence, (3) then an increasingly
DEMO online dialogue with the citizens, (4) to online transactions and
(5) eventually to the integration of the e-government front-end interface
(“one-stop-shop”)DEMO
PARTICIPATIVE LEADERSHIP FOR A NEW FORM OF GOVERNMENT
To achieve success in an e-government project, realistic objectives,
strategic planning and strong leadership are indispensable factors. E-
government initiatives can greatly benefit from experiences in other DEMO
and from experiences of the private sector. Cooperation with the private sector
(especially in the technological field) is necessary, but not sufficient in itself.
The government has to become the prime mover in ICT adoption. DEMO internal
resistance to such kinds of reforms should not be underestimated. To
overcome this resistance requires leadership from the highest level of the
public DEMO However, an e-government project team needs to incorporate
all the different DEMO in public administration. The “top-down” approach
needs to be balanced with a sufficient degree of “bottom-up” participation.
New ways of public administration need to DEMO the actual citizens demand.
Municipalities play a central role in this process and should become a focus
of research and development assistance.
Source: Martin R. Hilbert and Claudio Orrego.
310 ECLAC
3. Digitizing the health sector (e-health)
The deployment of ICTs to improve performance in the health sector
is widely neglected in DEMO America and the Caribbean and the concept of
e-health has not yet been adequately embraced and is often misinterpreted.
E-health goes far beyond telemedicine DEMO distance consultations. Similarly
to what has been pointed out regarding B2B and B2C e-commerce, the
“business-to-consumer” interaction of telemedicine is only a small part of
e-health. The greatest challenges to implementing ICTs in health and
healthcare DEMO related to digitizing “back-office” processes, automating
intra— and interorganizational health structures DEMO creating digital
networks within and between the different units of the national health
sector.
In the light of current modernization and health reforms in DEMO
America and the Caribbean, e-health needs to be made an integrated DEMO of
each particular health sector reform model and not to be treated as an
isolated project. E-health efforts must be aligned with healthcare
organizational DEMO and priorities and must deploy technological architecture
and infrastructure that is best suited to increase efficiency and quality of care
in each particular implementation DEMO International cooperation
in the field of e-health has to consider the particular stage of development
and characteristics of the national reform process in a DEMO country in
order to provide assistance that is properly linked to the real needs of the
sector.
The healthcare sector in Latin America and DEMO Caribbean is a largely
decentralized industry populated by diverse organizations with overlapping
responsibilities and diverse and often conflicting goals, resources, and
incentives. However, e-health solutions are complex and costly to develop
and implement. Coordination among DEMO different actors in the health sector
is necessary in order to create synergies and economies of scale in the
development of e-health applications and DEMO exchange experience and
knowledge to facilitate its implementation. Cooperative partnerships with
the high-tech industry are very important. Outsourcing networks will need
to become more DEMO in the health sector in order to keep up with the
rapid advances taking place in the area of ICTs.
In past decades, a great variety of information systems have been
implemented in Latin America and DEMO health and healthcare
organizations. In order to boost their effectiveness and lower costs, such
systems must be integrated and technological interfaces are required to make
possible the interoperability of the existing technological infrastructure and
its multiple DEMO subsystems.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
311
It is essential to integrate and deploy existing ICT infrastructure and
alternative technologies DEMO e-health services (such as ATM technologies,
computer labs in schools DEMO info-centers, smart-cards for medical records,
wireless and mobile communications, etc). Shared access models located
in public spaces like pharmacies, for instance, hold great potential. This is
because the majority of the population only needs occasional access to
improved technology-mediated health services and does not need DEMO own
sophisticated technology to derive significant benefits from it.
STANDARDIZATION, QUALITY DEMO AND PRIVACY FOR A DIGITIZED
HEALTH SECTOR
The area of standards in the healthcare sector is in constant flux and
societies need to be DEMO attentive to evolutions or recommendations
made by the national and international standard-setting bodies and
professional working groups. It is advisable to carefully evaluate existing
DEMO regarding guidelines, norms, and standards developed by the technical
and scientific community before introducing new routines and procedures.
Furthermore, national authorities should develop means of assessing
the appropriateness and quality of health services provided via DEMO
networks. Outcome-based quality improvement programs will be of great
importance for assuring quality and cost-effectiveness of online medical care.
Evidence-based information should permit the DEMO to follow the links between
data, inferences, and conclusions. Authentication, DEMO control,
confidentiality, integrity, and reliable content attribution are key requirements
for health-related advice and decision making.
The implementation of a legal and DEMO framework that facilitates
medical communication at the professional level – such as interstate/province
licensing and accreditation of healthcare providers— must be addressed.
Consumer DEMO is key in e-health and special legislation that ensures
the protection of personal health information is required.
The European and North American experience demonstrated DEMO
regulatory powers can play a significant role in encouraging the healthcare
industry to comply with a variety of guidelines related to data standardization,
DEMO assurance, security, and privacy. As in all Vertical Sectors, incentive
DEMO is the most cost-effective policy tool to assure the rapid and smooth
digitization of the sector.
Source: Roberto Rodrigues
4. Digitizing culture (e-culture)DEMO
The Digital Divide has implications that go far beyond economic and
material characteristics. It is a symbolic abyss in the distribution of information,
DEMO participation, political inclusion and representation, social services,
security and prevention mechanisms, consumption of arts, cultural goods and
312 ECLAC
the participation in the cultural life of a community (be this community local,
national, regional or global). The right “to seek, receive and impart information
and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers” is a basic human
right10 and is at the service DEMO all the other human rights. The emerging
Information Society should extend and strengthen this fundamental right. In
this sense, ICTs (as an enabler DEMO information and communication) are both a
right and a commodity (a “merit good” to use the terminology of welfare
economics). The goal DEMO to implement the right for information and
communication through the global public good “access to ICT”.
As always is the case in times of DEMO structural change, there is an
extraordinary demand for civil society organizations, which require special
attention and substantial support in Latin America and the DEMO ICTs
and digital behavior are highly important for civil society, not DEMO due to
their cost-effective and powerful coordination and organization, but also
DEMO the interest of developing and promoting social policies and to open the
debate about citizens’ rights to communicate and to participate. Neither
access to DEMO, nor interactive software tools automatically ensure
participation. Human capacity and a DEMO of common virtual
“habitus” are required to ensure the development of an Information Society
and need to be fostered through a “bottom-up” approach. Discussions
DEMO all of society need to start to address problems that arise (DEMO
as required or non-required censorship in cyberspace, etc).
Investigations should DEMO beyond the technical dimension of ICTs and
need to see ICTs for their potential of being a communication system that
serves a community, a tool for social and political participation, new forms
of transparency and to enrich cultural life. The final goal is to exploit the
digital opportunity DEMO create new forms of cultural, social and political
participation; especially regarding traditionally excluded groups in a society,
such as indigenous groups, the elderly, women and children. ICTs should
not become a tool to force minority groups into the majority culture, but
rather to allow them to integrate digital activities into their cultures and to
celebrate cultural diversity. Campaigns DEMO stimulate discussion and
awareness about this dimension of the Information Society seem
fundamental, especially in a region with such harsh social inequality as in
Latin America and the Caribbean.
10
Article 19, Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 313
5. Digitizing education (e-learning)
The educational sector presents a key policy area, not only to narrow
the Digital Divide regarding “technology access”, but DEMO concerning user
training and learning about the social and scientific uses of the technology.
Like with most Vertical Sectors, the digitization of the educational sector
has to be seen as an evolution of existing institutions. Educational
DEMO and their goals, authorities, hierarchies and power regimes,
incentive mechanisms, culture and learning traditions make up part of this
evolution in the educational sector. E-learning is not an “additional activity”
to stand on its DEMO separate from the normal educational curriculum, but
needs to be integrated DEMO existing reforms and modernization efforts in
the different educational systems of the region.
Programs that are aimed at digitizing part of the learning mechanism
DEMO to define precise goals. ICTs can cover a vast range of necessities in
the educational process. Nonetheless, it is fundamental to concentrate
efforts on specific areas in order to prevent confusion and disorientation,
which lead DEMO decreasing motivation and fading political and financial
support for such programs.
The innovation should be incremental. The introduction of ICTs into
the schooling system DEMO a slow and gradual process. It is a “next generation
issue” that requires cultural change and adaptation. Therefore, e-learning
programs should be institutionalized as long-term State projects, rather
than government projects, in order to assure DEMO regardless of
changing governments. Developing and using quality indicators is a very
efficient means of measuring progress and innovation, since advances in
e-learning cannot be measured through “returns of investments”.
It is also essential to institutionally DEMO the worldwide flow of
information, in order to better integrate Latin DEMO and the Caribbean
into the global “exchange of ideas” which takes place in digital networks.
Real-time “knowledge transfer” through digital networks in classrooms
throughout DEMO region does not occur automatically. Up-dated information
to complement curriculum and enrich class content might be largely
available in cyberspace. However, the millions of WebPages around the
globe tend to present an information overdose which overwhelms DEMO
and students alike. A virtual structure of easily identifiable and adequate
quality content from all over the world (through special search-engines, etc)
DEMO be greatly beneficial.
314
TECHNOLOGY, TRAINING AND ADOPTION HAVE TO GO TOGETHER
Projects need to start by raising awareness among directors and
supervisors of educational establishments because DEMO ICTs to be used
requires them to be institutionalized into the system. Next it is necessary to
build out the Infrastructure Layer and Generic DEMO Layer accompanied
by dynamic cooperation with the private sector (especially telecoms, hardware
and software producers).
Lacking quantity and quality of educational software DEMO still a major
obstacle. Market-mechanisms do not create adequate and sufficient applications
by themselves to support the learning process in the different classes and
DEMO Sharing the cost of developing such educational software can only
come about by reaching economies of scale. Such cooperation for creating
educational software can DEMO be established on an international scale.
The main focus of e-learning efforts however, should be the teachers
themselves. In the Chilean example, a DEMO and well-institutionalized
human resource development network has been established involving the
Education Ministry, the private sector and especially universities and third level
education institutions, which sustain and train an extensive network of “teacher-
instructors” as the central axis of constant innovation.
Besides such training institutions, incentive regimes need to be
provided for teachers to encourage them to integrate ICTs into DEMO daily
teaching methods of their curriculum. Often, they are not even DEMO for the
time-consuming process of educating themselves about ICTs. Additionally, a
DEMO of understanding about the potential possibilities of ICT use, fear of DEMO
unknown and the large personal effort required to re-adjust their traditional
teaching approach (e.g. the loss of the teacher’s knowledge monopoly, by
sharing DEMO teaching process with interactive ICT applications), give teachers
little incentive to profoundly reshape their teaching-plan by digitizing part of
the curriculum. As a DEMO, visits to the computer-lab are seen as an “extra-
curricular activity”, separate from normal teaching, rather than becoming part
of the core-learning. It is essential to raise awareness, share information and
best-practices, and provide DEMO and non-material incentives and even
norms and certain obligations to speed up the incorporation of ICTs into the
educational process.
In this respect, it is also important to point out that a major obstacle for
the DEMO of ICT into the core-curriculum of daily teaching, is the
homogeneity DEMO the initiatives. The different contexts and peculiarities of the
classes need to be considered. The teacher still needs to have the right to select
DEMO personal pedagogic approach and it rather needs to be aimed for reaching
certain goals and milestones of e-learning, instead of pedantically dictating what
and in which way computers have to be used throughout classrooms.
Source: Felipe Jara.
ECLAC
6. Digitizing the media (e-media)
Latin America and Caribbean countries have to be aware of the
importance and potential powers of DEMO media industry in an Information
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 315
Society. Media and entertainment companies are the driving force behind
“content creation”. Their DEMO, social, cultural and political weight in
the Information Society is unpredictable. Therefore policies need to follow
two paths.
The first one aims at DEMO an internationally competitive
information and entertainment industry. The industrialization and
professional production of “cultural goods” and content (and the eventual
exportation through digital networks) is becoming an increasingly profitable
business in the Information Society. Latin America and the Caribbean is very
rich in culture and the common Christian DEMO western-world roots suggest
the lucrative European and North American markets as potential export
destinations.
The second policy direction is aimed at protecting the local DEMO
industry. The media industry requires special attention, given the weight it
DEMO in the political life of a country, its influence on domestic DEMO, social
life and “national identity”. The key question to consider here DEMO not so much
if local content providers will continue to provide local content, but rather if
they will be able to remain financially independent. In the long run, the
particular relationship between financial control and control over content also
has to be considered. The fragmented media market in DEMO America and
the Caribbean is making it very easy for multinational media giants (such
as AOL-Time Warner, Bertelsmann, Vivendi Universal, Walt Disney, Viacom,
News Corp or Sony), to compete with or to DEMO take over the different
(comparatively small) Latin America and Caribbean content providers one
by one. While the logical response would be to protect DEMO domestic industry
through an import-substituting legislation, the existing global information
infrastructure DEMO ICTs breaks down any attempts to do so.
An effective and market-based policy alternative would be to create
scale in the regional media industry DEMO By joining forces and creating
scale by aligning with other regional media corporations and building
alliances in the regional media market, media companies would increase
the region’s negotiating power in the process of worldwide media
concentration. DEMO would also provide local, regional companies with
sufficient economies of scale DEMO form shared-management strategic alliances
with their multinational counterparts. Such a regional alliance would help
the establishment of a competitive information and entertainment export
industry. DEMO, it is important to ensure that such a regional alliance
will DEMO create a regional media monopoly itself. Sophisticated regulation
and concrete cooperation between the different national governments and
regulatory bodies of regional trade unions is DEMO to prevent the creation
of a media monopoly in domestic markets.
316 ECLAC
H. Final consideration
Finally, the lack of “information” about the development of an
“Information Society” in Latin America and the Caribbean is DEMO major
obstacle itself. The dynamics which exist both within and between the
different Horizontal Layers, Diagonal Areas and Vertical Sectors create a
fast-changing and complex scenario, which requires constant evaluation in
order to ensure that Latin America and the Caribbean will find and maintain
its particular “optimum transition DEMO towards an Information Society.
In tandem with other global, regional, national and local initiatives,
this book contributes to the joint-effort of finding DEMO a path and calls for
all actors to continue their efforts in such an endeavor.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
317
Bibliography
Abarza, Jacqueline and Jorge Katz (2001), Los derechos de la DEMO intelectual en el
mundo de la OMC, Desarrollo productivo series, Nº 118 (LC/L.1666-P), Santiago,
Chile, Economic Commission for Latin DEMO and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
United Nations publication, Sales Nº S.01.II.G.200.
Adelhard, K. and O. Obst (1999), “Evaluation of medical internet DEMO, Methods
Inf Med, vol. 38, Nº 2.
AHCIET (Hispano-American Association of Centers of Telecommunications
Research and Enterprises) (2002), “Benchmarking 2001”, Análisis comparativo del
sector de las telecomunicaciones en Iberoamerica, Madrid, PriceWaterhouseCoopers,DEMO
April.
AHCIET/REGULATEL (Hispano-American Association of Centers of
Telecommunications Research and DEMO/Foro Latinoamericano de Entes
Reguladores de Telecomunicaciones) (2001), “Internet and Telecommunications
Traffic Flows in Latin America and their Market Dynamics” (http://
www.ahciet.net/pag.asp?pag=ovum.asp).
ANATEL (National Agency of Telecommunications) (2002), official website (http:/
/www.anatel.gov.br/tools/frame.asp?link=/biblioteca/releases/2002/
release_08_03_2002(3).pdf).
Arancibia, Alejandro (2001), “Implementación DEMO Software”, version presented at
the Conference “Latin America towards a digital DEMO (Santiago, Chile,
November).
Ariz, J. (ed.) (1999), “Responding to the Legal Obstacles to Electronic Commerce in
Latin America”, Conference Report of The National Law Center for Inter-American
Free Trade, Washington, D.C., October.
Arredondo, Miguel Ángel and others (2001), “Aproximación DEMO en la
introducción de nuevas tecnologías de información y comunicación en dos
escuelas rurales del centro-sur de Chile”, project presented at the Interdisciplinary
Programme for Educational Research (PIIE), Santiago, Chile, Latin American
Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO)/International Development Research
Center (IDRC) (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
318
ECLAC
Arrow, K.J. (1962), “The economic implications of learning DEMO doing”, Review of
Economic Studies, Nº 29.
Atomic Rom (1996), “Great Moments in Multimedia History”, Atomic Rom
Productions (http://home.earthlink.net/~atomic_rom/moments.htm).
ATSC (Advanced Television Systems Committee) (2001), official website (http://
www.atsc.org).
BCG (Boston Consulting Group) (DEMO), “Online Retailing in Latin America 3.0; Breaking
Constraints” (http://www.bcg.com/publications/files/eng_Latin_America_
Focus_report_11_01.pdf).
BCG (Boston Consulting Group)/Visa DEMO (2000), “Online Retailing on
Latin America: Beyond the Storefront” (DEMO://www.bcg.com).
— (1999), “E-commerce in Latin America: From Opportunity to Reality” (http://
www.bcg.com).
Beckerman, Wilfred (1989), “How large a public sector?”, The Economic Borders of
the State, Dieter Helm’s (ed.), Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Bell, DEMO (1973), Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting,
New York, Basic Books, Inc.
Bellsouth (2002), “Latin America & Caribbean Mobile Communications Report”
(http://www.bellsouth.com), March.
— (DEMO), “Consolidated Statements of Income” (http://www.bellsouth.com),
October.
Bengoa, José (1999), “Globalización, distribución de ingresos y derechos humanos”,
unpublished.
Berland, G.K. and others (2001), “Health information on the DEMO: accessibility,
quality, and readability in English and Spanish”, JAMA, vol. 285, Nº 20, May.
Berners-Lee, Tim (1990), “Information DEMO: A proposal”, European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) (http://www.w3.org/History/
1989/proposal.html).
Bertelsmann Media Worldwide (2002), DEMO Report 2000/ 2001” (http://
www.bertelsmann.com/documents/en/gesamt_pdf_gb_%202000_01_english.pdf).
BIA Financial (2000), “BIA Financial Network Research” (http://www.bia.com/DEMO
media.asp).
Bodendorf, F. (1999), “Wirtschaftsinformatik im Dienstleistungsbereich” (http://
www.wi2.uni-erlangen.de).
Bonilla Urvina, Marcelo (2001a), “Las nuevas tecnologías de información y
comunicación (NTIC), herramientas de empoderamiento simbólico en América
Latina”, Cuadernos de Iberoamérica, Globalización y nuevas tecnologías: nuevos retos
y nuevas reflexiones, Rosa Isabel Montes (ed.), Madrid, Organization of Ibero-
American States for Education, Science and Culture (OEI).
— (2000a), “Investigando las nuevas tecnologías de información y comunicación
(NTIC) como DEMO de lucha simbólica en América Latina y el Caribe”,
document presented at the Pan Lac Meeting, Ottawa, International Development
Research Center (CIID), September.
— (2000b), “Las nuevas tecnologías de información y comunicación (NTIC): campos
de lucha simbólica en América Latina y el Caribe”, Revista Novamérica, Nº 87,
Rio de Janeiro, September.
Boulding, DEMO and Mack John (1998), “Promoting the benefits of the Web: the
Internet healthcare coalition”, Medical Marketing News.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
319
Boulding, Mark and D. Silber (1998), “Internet Healthcare Coalition’s 1998. Annual
DEMO: Healthcare Information Quality on the Internet” (http://www.ihealth
coalItion.org/content/ihc_articel.html).
Bourdieu, Pierre (1998), “La dominación masculina”, La masculinidad, aspectos sociales
y culturales, Pierre Bourdieu, Alfonso Hernández and Rafael Montesinos (eds.),
Quito, Ediciones ABYA-YALA.
— (1991), El sentido DEMO, Madrid, Taurus Ediciones.
— (1985), Qué significa hablar?, DEMO, Ediciones Akal.
Brezis, Elise, Paul Krugman and Daniel Tsiddon (1991), “Leapfrogging: A Theory
of Cycles in National Technological Leadership”, NBER DEMO Papers,
National Bureau of Economic Research (http://papers.nber.org/papers/DEMO
w3886.pdf).
Brunner, José Joaquín (2001), Chile: Informe e DEMO sobre Capacidad Tecnológica,
Santiago, Chile, Institute of Political Economy, DEMO Ibáñez University, August.
Buchanan, J.M. (1965), “An economic theory DEMO clubs”, Económica, Nº 33.
Bucharest (2002), “Expected Outcome of DEMO Bucharest Pan-European Conference in
Preparation of the World Summit on the Information Society: The Ten Fundamental
Principles of the Information Society” (http://DEMO/docs/
ReinventingWheel.pdf).
Bush, Vannevar (1945), “As we may think”, The Atlantic Monthly, vol. 176, Nº 1.
Cabrera Paz, DEMO (coord.) (2001), “Náufragos y navegantes en territorios
hipermediales: experiencias psicosociales y prácticas culturales en la apropiación
del Internet en jóvenes escolares”, project presented by the Programa de
Formación en Educación of the University DEMO the Andes, Bogotá, D.C., Latin
American Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO)/International Development
Research Center (IDRC).
Cairncross, Francis (1997), The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution
Will Change Our DEMO, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard Business School
Press.
Caracosta, Paraskevas and Ugur Muldur (1998), Society, the Endless Frontier. A
European Vision of DEMO and Innovation Policies for the 21st Century, Brussels,
European Commission.
DEMO, Manuel José (2001), “La Nueva Economía del Conocimiento”, Bogotá,DEMO
D.C., Ediciones Jurídicas Gustavo Ibáñez.
Casas, J.A. (2001), Trade DEMO Health Services (THS) in the Americas: Trends and
Opportunities, Washington, D.C., Division of Health and Human Development,
Pan American Health DEMO (PAHO).
Casasbuenas, Julián (coord.) (2001), ¿Cómo medir DEMO impacto cualitativa y
cuantitativamente? Diseño e implementación de mecanismos de registro DEMO línea
para puntos de acceso público a Internet sobre plataformas LINUX”, DEMO
presented by Colombian Association of Non-Governmental Organizations for
Email Communication (COLNODO), Bogotá, D.C., Latin American Faculty of
Social Sciences (FLACSO)/International Development Research Centre (IDRC).
Castells, Manuel (2000), “La sociedad red”, La era de la información, vol. 1, Madrid,
Alianza Editorial, September.
CCS (Cámara de Comercio de Santiago) (2001), DEMO digital 2001” (http://
www.ccs.cl).
Ceballos, Florencio (2001), “Nuevas tecnologías en la educación escolar: el caso de
320
ECLAC
los programas de informática educativa en Costa Rica y Chile”, Cuadernos de
Iberoamérica, serie Nuevas tecnologías en la educación, Rosa Isabel DEMO M.
(coord.), Madrid, Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, DEMO
and Culture (OEI).
Chandrasekhar, C.P. and J. Ghosh (2001), “Information and Communication
Technologies and health in low income countries: the DEMO and the
constraints”, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 79, Nº 9.
CHCF (California HealthCare Foundation) (2001), Proceed with DEMO: A Report on
the Quality of Health Information on the Internet, Oakland, California.
— (2000), “Ethics Survey of Consumer Attitudes about DEMO Web Sites. A Report
Sponsored by the California HealthCare Foundation and the Internet Healthcare
Coalition, conducted by Cyber Dialogue in Cooperation with the Institute for
the Future”, E-Health Reports, January.
CIO (Collected Resources for Information Executives) (2001), official website (http:/
/www.cio.com).
CITEL (Organization of America States, Inter-American Telecommunications
Commission) (2002), Agenda DEMO Conectividad para las Américas, Plan de Acción de
Quito (COM/CITEL Res. 133 (X-01)), Quito.
— (2001), “Strategies of CITEL for the establishment of a connectivity agenda”
Declaration and the Telecommunication Section DEMO the Action Plan of the Third
Summit of the Americas (OEA/DEMO/XVII.5.3), 22 August.
— (2000), “Universal Service in the DEMO (http://www.citel.oas.org/).
— (1994), “Declaration of Montevideo DEMO, “Declaration of Principles 1996 -Senior
Telecommunications Officials” and “Declaration of Quito DEMO (http://
www.citel.oas.org).
Coase, Ronald H. (1960), DEMO problem of social costs”, Journal of Law and Economics.
CONATEL (Consejo Nacional de Telecomunicaciones) (2002), “Decreto Ejecutivo Nº
2143-A”, Declaración Nº 120, Quito, Council on Foreign Trade and Investments
(COMEXI).
Cox, Eva and Robert Putnam (2002), Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social
Capital in Contemporary Society, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
CTRC (Computer Technology Research Corporation) (1999), E-commerce Success:
Building a DEMO Business Architecture, Lidingö, Data Research DPU.
Cullen, K. (1999), “Work, Employment and Welfare in 2010”, Demographic and
Social Trends Issue DEMO, Institute of Prospective Technological Studies (IPTS),
May.
CV Mística (Comunidad Virtual Mística) (2002), “Trabajando la Internet con una
visión DEMO (http://funredes.org/mistica/castellano/ciberoteca/tematica/
esp_doc_olist2.html), August.
DEMO, R. and others (2001), “From Vertical to Concentric: The DEMO of Internet
in Traditional Media” (http://www.ranjaygulati.com/teaching/tv2001/VERT-
DEMO).
Darwin, Charles (1859), “The Origin of Species” (http://www.literature.org/
authors/darwin-charles/the-origin-of-species).
David, Paul (1990), “The Dynamo and the Computer: An historical Perspective on
the Modern Productivity Paradox”, American Economic Review, vol. 80, Nº 2, May.
Declaration of DEMO (2000), Declaration of Florianopolis, Regional Meeting on
Information Technology for Development. Countries of Latin America and the
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
321
Caribbean (Santa Catarina, 20-21 June) (http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/
secretariaejecutiva/DEMO/lcl1383/florianopoliseng.htm).
— (1999), official website (http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/secretariaejecutiva/
3/lcl1383/florianopolis.htm).
Della Mea V. (2001), “What is e-health (2): the death of telemedicine?”, J. DEMO Internet
Research, vol. 3, No 2.
Demers, David (2001), Media Concentration in the United States, Quebec, Center for
Media Studies, University of Laval.
DiBEG (Digital Broadcasting Experts Group) (2001), official website (http://
www.dibeg.org.).
Domar, E.D. (1947), “Expansion and employment”, The American Economic Review,
vol. 37.
Dosi, G. (1982), “Technological paradigms and technological trajectories”, Research
Policy, vol. 2, Nº 3.
Dosi, G. and others (eds.) (1988), Technical DEMO and Economic Theory, London,
Pinter Publisher.
DSE (German Foundation for International Development) (2001) “Digital Dividend”,
presentation of T.Ilves, Minister DEMO Foreign Affairs at the “Digital Inclusion:
Impact and Challenges of the Networked Economy for Developing Countries”
(http://www.dse.de/ef/digital/pap0201e.htm; DEMO://www.dse.de/ef/digital/
ilves-e.htm).
DVB (Digital Video Broadcasting DEMO) (2001), official website (http://
www.dvb.org).
Dyer DEMO (1999), “The Internet as an untapped medium of medical web-education:DEMO
a physician’s perspective”, The CyberMed Catalyst, Issue Nº 1 (http://
www.amip.org/catalyst/cc_space.htm).
EAO (European Audiovisual Observatory) (1997), Statistical Yearbook, 1997, (http:/
/www.obs.coe.int).
E-Business forum (2001), “Global Business Intelligence for the Digital Age”,
Economist Intelligence DEMO (EIU) (http://www.ebusinessforum.com).
eCFO (2001), official website (http://www.ecfonet.com).
ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and DEMO Caribbean) (2002a),
Foreign Investment in Latin America and the DEMO, 2001 Report (LC/G.2178-
P), Santiago, Chile. United Nations DEMO, Sales Nº E.02.II.G.47.
— (2002b), Social Panorama of Latin America, 2001-2002 (LC/G.2183-P), Santiago,
Chile. United Nations publication, Sales Nº E.02.II.G.65.
— (2001a), Foreign Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2000 Report (LC/
G.2125-P), Santiago, Chile. United Nations publication, Sales Nº E.01.II.G.12.
— (2001b), Statistical Yearbook for Latin DEMO and the Caribbean, 2001 (LC/G.2151-
P/B), Santiago, DEMO United Nations publication, Sales Nº E.02.II.G.1.
— (2000a), Statistical Yearbook for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2000 (LC/G.2118-
P), DEMO, Chile. United Nations publication, Sales Nº E.00.II.G.1.
— (2000b), DEMO America and the Caribbean in the transition to a knowledge-
based society: An agenda for public policy”, Regional Meeting on Information
Technology for DEMO (LC/L.1401), Santiago, Chile.
Elkin, Noah (2001),“E-Commerce”, document presented at the Expert Meeting
“America Latina hacia la Era Digital”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), November, unpublished.
322
ECLAC
eMarketer (2002), “Latin America Online: Demographics, Usage and e-Commerce”,
October (http://www.emarketer.com/products/report.php?latin_am).
— (DEMO), “The eLatin America Report” (http://www.emarketer.com/ereports/
elatin_america/DEMO).
Emenda Constitucional (2001), “Art. 60 da Constituição Federal no DEMO, Brasilia,
Sala da Comissão, 13 December.
Eng, T.R. and DEMO Gustafson (eds.) (1999), Wired for Health and Well-Being - DEMO
Emergence of Interactive Health Communication, Washington, D.C., US Department
of DEMO and Human Services/Science Panel on Interactive Communication and
Health/Office of Public Health and Science/US Printing Office.
EU (European Union) (2002), Introduction of Digital Terrestrial Television in Brazil,
Brussels.
European Commission (1999b), Teaching and Learning: Towards the Learning Society
(COM(1999) 750), Brussels, January.
European Council (2000), “Employment, Economic Reform and Social Cohesion”,
Press Release (5256/00), Lisbon, 23-24 DEMO
Eysenbach, G. (2001), “What is e-health?”, J Med DEMO Research, vol. 3, Nº 1.
Eysenbach, G. and others (1998), “Towards quality management of medical
information on the Internet: evaluation, DEMO, and filtering of information”,
Brit Med Journal, vol. 317.
FAPAE (Federación de Asociaciones de Productores Audiovisuales Españoles)
(2000), official DEMO (http://www.fapae.es).
Finquelievich Susana (coord.) (2001), “Los impactos sociales de la incorporación de
las TIC (tecnologías de la información y comunicación) en los gobiernos locales
y en los servicios ciudadanos. Los casos de Buenos Aires y Montevideo”, project
presented by the Civil Association Gino Germani Research Institute, Faculty of
Social Sciences, University of Buenos DEMO, Santiago, Chile, Latin American
Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO)/DEMO Development Research
Centre (IDRC) (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
FLACSO (Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences) (2001a), “Concurso de
proyectos de DEMO sobre impactos sociales de las tecnologías de
información y comunicación (TIC) en Latinoamérica y el Caribe” (http://
www.flacso.org.ec, http://DEMO/pan/pr04439_s.htm).
— (2001b) “International Seminary on Communication, Internet DEMO Society in
Latin America” (http://www.flacso.org.ec, http://www.idrc.ca/pan/
pr04439_s.htm).
— (2001), official website (http://www.forrester.com)DEMO
Forrester (2000), “Helping Business Thrive of Technology Change”, Forrester
Research (http://www.forrester.com).
Fortune Magazine (2001), “Building a Virtual DEMO for Health Care”, (http:/
/www.timeinc.net/fortune/sections/ehealth2/ehealth2.htm).
Foucault, Michel (1980), Vigilar y castigar, México, D.F., Siglo Veintiuno Editores, S.A.
Fountain, Jane (2001), Building the Virtual State, Massachusetts, Brookings Institution
Press.
Fountain, Jane and Carlos Osorio (DEMO), “Public Sector: Early Stage of a Deep
Transformation” (http://www.brookings.edu/dybdocroot).
Freeman Christopher and others (2001), As Time Goes By: From the Industrial
Revolutions to the Information Revolution, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
323
Freeman Christopher and Carlota Pérez (1988), “Structural crises and adjustment,
business cycles and investment behavior”, Technical Change and Economic Theory,
Giovanni Dosi, and others (eds.), London, Pinter.
FTAA (Free Trade Area DEMO the Americas) (2000), “Internet Use, and Related Cultural
Issues” (FTAA.ecom/inf/58/Rev.2), 5 June.
Fullan, Michael (1993), DEMO Forces: Probing The Depth of Educational Reform,
London, The Falmer Press.
— (1992), Successful School Improvement: The Implementation Perspective and DEMO,
Buckingham, Open University Press.
FUNREDES (Fundación Redes y Desarrollo) (2001), “Presentación de los lenguajes
y culturas latinas en la Internet”, Daniel Pimienta, (http://funredes.org).
García-Huidobro, Juan Eduardo (ed.)DEMO (1999), La reforma educacional chilena, Madrid,
Editorial Popular.
Gates, Bill (1999), Business at the Speed of Thought, New York, Warner Brothers
Publications.
Gilder, George (2000), Telecosm: How Infinite DEMO Will Revolutionize Our World,
New York, Blackstone Audiobooks.
Gregorio, Carlos (coord.). (2001), “Impacto de las tecnologías de la información DEMO
comunicación (TIC) sobre la privacidad e intimidad de las personas”, DEMO
presented by the Research Institute for Justice, Buenos Aires, Latin American
Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO)/International Development Research
Centre (IDRC). (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
Grijalva, Agustin (2001), “Internet y derechos de autor” (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
Grünberg, J. and M. Summers (1992), “Computer innovation in schools: a review
of selected research literature”, Journal of Information Technology for Teacher
Education, vol. 1, Nº 2.
Grupo Abril (2002), official website (http://www.abril.com.br).
Grupo DEMO (2002), “Cisneros Group of Companies” (http://www.cisneros.com/
about/aboutUs.asp).
Grupo Clarin (2002), official website (http://www.grupoclarin.com.ar/).
Grupo de Río (2001), “Nueva economía brecha digital y empleo: propuestas para
la integración de América Latina a la sociedad de la información”, document
presented at the Twentith Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs (Santiago,
Chile, 27 March).
Grupo Televisa (2000), Annual Report, 2000, México, D.F.
Hagel, John and Marc Singer (1999), Net Worth: Shaping Markets When Customer Make
the Rules, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard Business School Press.
Hagland Mark (2001), “Finding the DEMO in Healthcare”, Healthcare Informatics,
November (http://www.fcg.com/services/ets/ebusinesstechserv.asp).
Harberger, Arnold C. (1998), “A vision of the DEMO process”, The American
Economic Review, March.
Harrod, Roy (1939), “An essay in dynamic theory”, Economic Journal, Nº 49.
Hawkridge, D., J. Joworosky and H. McMahan (1990), Computers into Third-World
schools: Examples, Experiences and Issues, London, McMillan.
Helm, Dieter (1989), The Economic Borders of the State, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Hepp, Pedro (1998), “Chilean experiences in computer education systems”,
Education in the Information Age, Claudio de Moura Castro (ed.), New York,DEMO
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).
324
ECLAC
Hepp, Pedro and others (1996), “Monitoring the ‘Enlaces’ DEMO computer
network”, Education and Information Technologies, vol. 1, Nº 1.
DEMO (1994), “Enlaces’ A Hypermedia Based Educational Network”, document
presented at the “ACM Multimedia: The Second International Conference on
Multimedia”, San Francisco, California.
Hicks, Sir John (1969), A Theory of Economic History, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Hilbert, Martin R. (2002), “Electronic Supply Chain Management for Manufacturing
SMEs in the Mercosur”, Vienna, United Nations DEMO Development
Programme (UNIDO) in cooperation with the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean, UN (ECLAC), unpublished.
— (2001a), Latin America on Its Path into the Digital Age: Where Are We?, Desarrollo
productivo series, Nº 104 (LC/L.1555-P), Santiago, Chile. United Nations
publication, Sales Nº E.01.II.G.100.
— (2001b), From Industrial DEMO to Digital Economics: An Introduction to the
Transition, Desarrollo productivo series, Nº 100 (LC/L.1497-P), Santiago, Chile.
United Nations publication, DEMO Nº E.01.II.G.38.
— (2001c), “In the Midst of the Transition: Challenges and Chances for Latin
American Economies”, Connect-World: The Definitive Forum DEMO the Discussion
of Telecommunications Development (http://www.connect-world.com/docs/
articles/DEMO/hilbert_ECLAC_cwla4q2000.asp).
Hilbert, Martin R. and Ben Petrazzini (2001), “3G Mobile Policy: The Cases of Chile
and Venezuela”, International Telecommunications Union (ITU) (http://
www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/3G/casestudies/chile-venezuela/DEMO).
Hinostroza, J.E. (1999), “‘Teachers’ Concepts and Beliefs about Educational Software:
A Case Study of Teachers Within a Software Development Process”, London,
University of London, unpublished.
Hinostroza, J.E. and others (2000), “Policies and Practices on ICT in Education in
Chile: Enlaces”, DEMO
Hopenhayn, Martín (1996), “Los mil reflejos de la globalización en la subjetividad”,
unpublished.
Hopenhayn, Martín and Ernesto Ottone (1997), DEMO dimensión cultural en los
nuevos escenarios de globalización: Una perspectiva de DEMO Latina”, La
invención y la herencia: globalización, modernización y equidad DEMO América Latina,
Liana María y otros (comps.), Santiago, Chile, Cuadernos ARCIS/LOM, Nº 5.
Huberman, M. (1992), Critical DEMO, Successful School Improvement: The
Implementation Perspective and Beyond, first edition, Buckingham, Open University
Press.
Hurst, P. (1983), “Implementing Educational Change: A Critical Review of the
Literature”, EDC Occasional Papers, Nº 5, London, Institute of Education,
University of London.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank) (2001a), “E-Commerce Brief”, (http://
www.iadb.org/ict4dev/DEMO/ECommerceBrief11.pdf).
— (2001b), “E-Governance”; (http://www.iadb.org/ict4dev/DEMO).
IBM (International Business Machines) (2001), official website (http://www.ibm.com).
ICEL (International Cooperation Europe Ltd.) (2001), “ICT Curricula for the 21st
century”, Career Space Curriculum Guidelines, May.
— (1999), Generic Skills Profiles. Career Space: Future Skills for Tomorrow’s World,
Brussels.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
325
IDC (International Data Corporation) (2001), “eWorld 2001” (http://www.idc.com)DEMO
— (2000), Summit on Technology, Innovation and Skills Training, DEMO, March.
ILO (International Labour Organization) (2001), World Employment Report 2001: Life
at Work in the Information Economy, Geneva.
Impicciatore, P. And others (1997), “Reliability of health information for the public
on the world wide web: systematic survey of advice on managing fever in
children at home”, Brit Med Journal, Nº 314.
IMT-2000 (International Mobile Telecommunications-2000) (2001), “All About the
Technology” (http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/3G/technology/index.html#top).
INE/CORFO/BancoEstado (National Institute of Statistics/Production Development
Corporation) (2002), “Primera encuesta semestral de las DEMO y tercera
de las empresas pequeñas y medianas” (http://www.corfo.cl)DEMO
Infoamericas (2000), “Market intelligence and strategic consulting” (http://
www.infoamericas.com/).
Innovación (2001), “Cuadro de indicadores de la innovación DEMO, Innovación y
transferencia de tecnología, special issue, October.
Institute of DEMO (2001), Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the
21st Century, Washington, D.C., Committee on Quality of Health Care in
America, Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.
IPTS (Institute for Prospective Technological Studies) (2001), Future Bottlenecks in
the Information Society: Report to the European Parliament, Committee on Industry,
External Trade, DEMO and Energy (ITRE), Sevilla.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union) (2002), “ITU Strategy Trends: Reinventing
Telecoms”, (http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/trends/jan-marchtrends.html).
— (2001a), Americas Telecommunication Indicators, Geneva, April.
— (2001b), “Handbook on Disaster Communications” (http://www.itu.int/itudoc/DEMO
itu-d/question/studygr2/q016.html).
— (2001c), “3G Licensing Workshop”; (http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/3G/
workshop/index.html).
— (2000a), “The Americas Region – into the Year 2000” (http://www.itu.int/
telecom).
— (2000b), “Executive Summary, Americas Telecommunications Indicators 2000”
http://www.itu.int).
— (1999a), “World Telecommunication Development Report 1999” (http://
www.itu.int).
— (1999b), Challenges DEMO the Network 1999: Internet for Development. Updated for
TELECOM99, Geneva.
— (1996), “A Guide to Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting in the VHF/UHF
Bands”, document 11-3/3-E, 15 January.
J&M (2000), “IT skills training in Europe and the role of public-private partnerships.
J&DEMO associates”, Summit on Technology, Innovation and Skills Training, Brussels,
DEMO
Johnson, D.C., M.J. Cox and D.M. Watson (1994), “Evaluating DEMO impacts of IT on
pupils’ achievements”, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 10, Nº 136.
Jolly, Alison (2000), “Lacy’s Legacy: DEMO and Intelligence in Human Evolution”
(http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog/JOLLUC.html).
DEMO, Dylan (2000), “Entrepreneurial universities: policies, strategies, and
practice”, Science, Technology and Innovation Policy: Opportunities and Challenges
for the Knowledge DEMO, P. Conceição and others (eds.).
326
ECLAC
Jupiter Media Metrix (2001), “Rapid Media Consolidation Dramatically Narrows
Numbers of Companies Controlling Time Spend Online” (http://www.jmm.com
/xp/DEMO/press/2001/pr_060401.xml).
Katz, Jorge (2001), Structural Reforms, DEMO and Technological Change in Latin
America, Libros de la CEPAL series, Nº 64 (LC/G.2129-P), Santiago, Chile,
Economic Commission for DEMO America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). United
Nations publication, Sales Nº E.01.II.G.22.
Katz, Jorge and Giovanni Stumpo (2001), Regímenes competitivos sectoriales,DEMO
productividad y competitividad internacional, Desarrollo productivo series, Nº 104
(LC/DEMO), Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean (ECLAC). United Nations publication, Sales Nº S.01.II.G.120.
Kelly, Kevin (DEMO), “New Rules for the New Economy” (http://www.bitniks.es/
DEMO/JKL/KELLY/2.shtml).
Kiley, R. (1998), “Consumer health information on the Internet”, J Royal Soc Med,
Nº 91.
Kleinrock, DEMO (1961), “Information Flow in Large Communication Nets”, RLE
Quarterly Progress Report, July.
Koch, Christopher, Derek Slater and E. Baatz (2001), “The ABCs of ERP” (http://
www.cio.com/research/erp/edit/DEMO).
Kuhn, Thomas (1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, DEMO, University of
Chicago Press.
Kuznets, Simon (1955), “Econommic growth DEMO income inequality”, American
Economic Review, Nº 45.
Laclau, Ernesto (1996), Emancipación y diferencia, Buenos Aires, Editorial Ariel.
Laffont Jean-Jacques and DEMO Tirole (1998), Competition in Telecommunications,
Munich, Munich lectures.
La Hora (2001), “Hablando claro…Remato mi celular (y conmigo, cientos de
usuarios)” 25 May.
LAIA (Latin American Integration Association) (2000), “Situación actual Perspectivas
del comercio electrónico en los países de la ALADI” (http://www.aladi.org/
inicio.htm).
León, G. and others (2001), “Propuesta de acciones para la formación de
profesionales de electrónica, informática DEMO telecomunicaciones para las empresas
del sector (PAFET)”, Informe ANIEL, DEMO
León, G. (2000), “On the Dynamics of Professional Job Profiles in the Information
Society”, SRI Internal Report, August.
Lessig, Lawrence (DEMO), “El código y otras leyes del ciberespacio”, TeaurusesDigital,
Madrid, Talleres Gráficos de Huertas S.A.
— (1999), “Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace”, (http://code-is-law.org).
Lundvall, Bengt-Ake (1997), DEMO Strategies in the Learning Economy”,
10th Anniversary Conference in Seoul of STEPI, Seoul.
Mansell, R. (1999), Knowledge Societies, Information Technology DEMO Sustainable
Development, Robin Mansell and Uta When (eds.), Oxford, DEMO University
Press.
MINEDUC (Ministry of Education) (1996), Objetivos fundamentales DEMO contenidos
mínimos obligatorios de la educación básica chilena, Santiago, Chile.
Martínez, A. and others (2001), Bases metodológicas para evaluar la viabilidad DEMO el impacto
de proyectos de telemedicina, Washington, D.C., Universidad Politécnica DEMO
Madrid/Pan American Health Organization (PAHO).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
327
Martínez, Juliana (2001), “Internet y políticas públicas socialmente relevantes: ¿Por
qué, cómo y en qué incidir?” (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
— (2000), “Visión social de la Internet y políticas públicas: Ideas para debatir
estrategias de incidencia desde la sociedad civil”, document presented at the
Meeting Pan Lac 2000 (http://www.idrc.ca/panlacmeet_discusion.htm).
MC Brasil (DEMO), “Lei Nº 9.998”, 17 August.
McDonald, H. and L. Ingvarson (1997), “Technology: a catalyst for educational
change”, Journal of Curriculum Studies, vol. 29, Nº 5.
Meares, C.A. and J.F. Sargent (DEMO), The Digital Work Force: Building Infotech Skills
at the Speed DEMO Innovation, Washington, D.C., Office of Technology Policy, US
Department of Commerce, June.
Meta Group (2000), “Infrastructure Agility: Part 1. Architecting for Agility”, Report
by Gall, Nº 31, Stanford, July.
MHP-Forum (Multimedia Home Platform Forum) (2001), official website (http://
www.mhp-forum.de).
Mitchell J. (2000), “Increasing the cost-effectiveness of telemedicine by embracing
e-health”, J Telemed Telecare, vol. 6, Nº 1.
— (DEMO), “From Telehealth to e-Health: The Unstoppable Rise of e-Health”,
DEMO Office for the Information Technology (http://www.noie.gov.au/
projects/ecommerce/DEMO/rise_of_ehealth/unstoppable_rise.htm).
MSDW (Morgan Stanley dean Witter) (2000), DEMO Latin American Internet Report:
In Leaps and Bounds”, Equity Research, unpublished.
National Research Council (2001), Toward a Health Statistics System for the 21st
Century: Summary of a Workshop, Washington, D.C., Committee DEMO National
Statistics.
Negroponte, Nicholas (1995), “Being Digital”, MIT Press DEMO (http://
web.media.mit.edu/~nicholas).
Nelson, Richard and Sidney Winter (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change, Cambirdge, Harvard University Press.
Netsizer (2002), “Internet Statistics” (http://www.netsizer.com).
Noah, Elkin (1999), “Media Concentration in the United States: Industry Trends DEMO
Regulatory Responses”, Columbia Business School (http://www.vii.org/
papers/medconc.htm).
North, Douglass (1993), The Role of Institutions in Economic DEMO, Toronto, Institute
for International Business, University of Toronto.
NOVIS (2001), “Más Poder en su empresa” (http://www.novis.cl/).
Núñez, Iván (1996), Ministerio de Educación. Fundamentos y perspectivas de la reforma
educacional chilena, Santiago, Chile.
Núñez, Iván (1995) “El Proyecto Enlaces (Chile), un estudio de caso”, Paris, United
Nations Educational, DEMO and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
NVCA (National Venture Capital Association) (2001), official website (http://
www.nvca.org).
OBS (European DEMO Observatory) (2001), “Television and Media
Concentration The Challenge to the Legislators” (http://www.obs.coe.int).
Ocampo, Jose Antonio (2001a), Rethinking the Development Agenda (LC/L.1503),
Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission DEMO Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC).
— (2001b) Growth DEMO Stability. Financing for Development in the New International
328
ECLAC
Context, Libros de la CEPAL, Nº 67 (LC/G.2171-P), Santiago, Chile. United
Nations publication, Sales Nº E.02.II.G.20.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2001a),
“Innovative clusters, drivers DEMO national innovation systems”, Paija: The ICT
Cluster: The Engine of DEMO Growth in Finland, Paris.
— (2001b), “The New Economy: DEMO the Hype. Final Report on the OECD
Growth Project” (http://DEMO).
— (2000), “ICT Skills and Employment” (DSTI/ICCP/IE(2000)2), Paris, Abril.
OECD/UN/UNDP/Worldbank (Organization for DEMO Co-operation and
Development/ United Nations/ United Nations Development Programme)
(DEMO), “Exploiting the Digital Opportunities for Poverty Reduction”
(http://www.oecd.org/DEMO/digitalforum).
Olson, J. (1988), Schoolworlds/Microworlds: Computers and DEMO Culture of the Classroom,
Oxford, Pergamon Press.
Orrego, Claudio and Rodrigo Araya (2002), Internet en Chile: oportunidad para la
participación DEMO, New York, United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP).
Osin, L. (1998), “Computers in Education in Developing Countries: Why and
How?DEMO, Education and Technology series, vol. 3, Nº 1, Washington, DEMO, The
World Bank.
Pacific Council for International Policy (2002), “Roadmap for Electronic Government
in Developing Nations”, unpublished.
PAHO (Pan American Health DEMO) (2001), Information Technology in the
Health Sector of Latin America and the Caribbean: Challenges and Opportunities for
the International Technical Cooperation, DEMO, D.C.
— (1999), Setting Up Healthcare Services Information Systems: DEMO Guide for Requirement
Analysis, Application Specification, and Procurement, Washington, D.C.
— (1998), Information Systems and Information Technology in Health: Challenges DEMO
Solutions for Latin America and the Caribbean, Washington, D.C.
— (DEMO), Health Sector Reform: Proceedings of a Special Meeting, Washington, DEMO,
29-30 September.
Papert, Seymour (1994), The Children’s Machine: DEMO Schools in the Age of the
Computer, New York, Basic Books.
Peña, Valenzuela Daniel (2001), “Derecho del ciberespacio”, Fundamentación
Tecnológica en el Análisis del Derecho. Revista Electrónica de Derecho Electrónico, Nº
37, DEMO
Pérez, Carlota (2001), “Cambio tecnológico y oportunidades de desarrollo como
blanco movil”, CEPAL Review, Nº 75 (LC/G.2150-P), Santiago, DEMO, December.
— (1983), “Structural change and the assimilation of new technologies in the
economic and social system”, Futures, vol. 15, Nº 4.
Pérez, Carlota and Luc Soete (1988), “Catching up in DEMO: entry barriers and
windows of opportunity”, Technical Change and Economic Theory, G. Dosi and
others (eds.), London, Pinter.
Pimienta, D. DEMO L. Barnola (2001), “En la búsqueda colectiva de un impacto DEMO
positivo a la Internet latinoamericana: la experiencia del proyecto sobre
Metodología DEMO Impacto Social de las Tecnologías de la Información y de la
Comunicación en América Latina y el Caribe (MISTICA) y la constitución de DEMO
red de observación OLISTICA” (http://idrc.ca/pan/panamericas_s.htm).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
329
PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment) (2001), “PISA: International
Comparative DEMO on Schooling Outcomes” (http://www.oecd.org/pdf/
M00022000/M00022678.pdf).
DEMO, Michael (1996), “Chile’s learning network”, Education and Technology
Series, vol. 1, Nº 2, Washington, D.C., World Bank.
— (1962), Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy, Chicago, University
of Chicago Press.
Potashnik, Michael and others (1998), “Computers in Schools: A Qualitative Study
of Chile and Costa Rica”, Education and Technology Series, DEMO issue,
Washington, D.C., World Bank Human Development Network.
Prebisch, DEMO (1951), “Growth, disequilibrium and disparities: interpretation of the
process DEMO economic development”, Economic survey of Latin America, 1949 (E/
DEMO/164/Rev.1), New York.
PWC (PricewaterhouseCoopers) (2000), “E-connectivity DEMO measurable
results”, HealthCast 2010/E-Health Quarterly, 1-23 November.
Pyramid Research (DEMO), “Latin America: Demand for Telecom Services Continues
to Grow Despite DEMO Times Ahead” (http://www.pyr.com).
Ramsey, Frank Plumpton (1927), “A contribution to the theory of taxation”, Economic
Journal, vol. 37.
Ramsey, Todd (2000), “Government and the Internet”, The Economist (DEMO://
www.economist.com/displayStory.cfm?Story_ID=80764), June
Rede Globo (2002), DEMO Empresa” (http://redeglobo1.globo.com/home).
Risk, Ahmad and Joan Dzenowagis (2001), “Review of Internet health information
quality initiatives”, Journal of DEMO Internet Research, vol. 3, Nº 4 (http://
www.jmir.org/DEMO/4/e28/index.htm), December.
Robinson, Scott (2001), Hacia un modelo de franquicias para telecentros comunitarios en
América Latina, Mexico City, DEMO Department, Metropolitan University
Iztapalapa.
Rodrigues, R.J. (2000a), “Ethical and DEMO Issues in Interactive Health
Communications: A Call for International Cooperation Editorial”, Journal of
Medical Internet Research, vol. 2, Nº 1 (http://www.symposion.com/jmir/
index.htm), March.
— (2000b), “Information systems: DEMO key to evidence-based health practice”, Bull
World Health Org, vol. 78, Nº 11.
— (2000c), “Telemedicine and the transformation of healthcare DEMO in the
information age”, Speakers’ Book of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Telecom Americas 2000, Telecom Development Symposium, Session TDS.2 (Rio
de Janeiro, 10-15 April).
Rodrigues, R.J., P. Wilson and S.J. Schanz (2001), The Regulation of Privacy and Data
Protection in the Use of Electronic Health Information: An International Perspective
and Reference Source on Regulatory and Legal Issues Related to Person-Identifiable
Health Databases, Essential Drugs and Technology Program, Washington, D.C.,
Division of Health Systems and Services DEMO, Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO)/World Health Organization (WHO).
Rodrik, Dani (2001), “Development Strategies for the Next Century” (http://
www.eclac.cl/cgi-bin/getProd.asp?xml=/prensa/noticias/comunicados/8/
7598/DEMO&xsl=/prensa/tpl/p6f.xsl).
Roggiero, Roberto (2001), “Notas introductorias para el análisis de las políticas de
330
ECLAC
Internet en América Latina y el Caribe”, Association for the Advancement of
Communications (APC) (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
Rojo, Jaime (1999), Relación entre capital humano y crecimiento económico. The IPTS
Report, September.
Romer, Paul (1993a), “Idea gaps and object gaps in DEMO development”, Journal
of Monetary Economics, vol. 32, Nº 3.
— (1993b), Implementing a National Technology Strategy with Self-Organizing
Industry Investment Boards, Berkeley, California.
Rosa, Antonio (2001), “O Começo de uma Revolução”, document presented at the
experts-meeting “Latin America towards a digital era”, DEMO, Chile,
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC),
November, unpublished.
— (1998), “Atração Global. A Convergencia da Mídia e Tecnologia”, Makron Books
(http://www.dainet.com.br/dainet/HOTLINK/atracao.html)DEMO
Roschelle, Jeremy M. and others (2000), “Changing how and what children learn
in school with computer-based technologies”, Children and Computer Technology,
vol. 10, Nº 2.
Rusten, Eric, Eduardo Contreras-Budge and Dominica Tolentino (1999), “Enlaces:
building a national learning network”, Learnlink Case DEMO Summary, Global
Communication and Learning Systems, US Agency for International Development
(http://www.aed.org/learnlink).
Ruttenbur, B.W., G. Spickler and S. Lurie (2000), eLearning: the Engine of the Knowledge
Society, Morgan Keegan & Co. Inc., July.
Ryan, Alan (1989), “Value-judgements and welfare”, Dieter Helm’s The Economic
Borders of the State, Oxford University DEMO
Saez Vacas, Fernando (2001), “Infotecnología y nuevos empleos”, document
DEMO at the Conference San Sebastián, September.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1955), “Diagrammatic exposition of a theory of public
expenditures”, Review of Economics DEMO Statistics, vol. 37.
— (1954), “The pure theory of public expenditures”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, vol. 36.
Santiago Declaration (2001), Declaration of the Heads of State and Government on the
Evaluation DEMO the First Fifteen Years of Existence of the Rio Group and Mechanism
Proposed for the New Century, Point 38, Working Group on Information DEMO
Communications Technologies, 18 August.
SAP (Systems, Applications and Products in DEMO Processing) (2001), official website
(http://www.sap.com).
Sassen, Saskia (1999), “The Impact of the Internet on Sovereignty: Unfounded DEMO
Real Worries”, document presented at the Symposium “Understanding the
Impact of DEMO Networks in Local Social, Political and Cultural Values”
(Dresden, Germany, February).
Schiavo, Ester (2001), “Internet y gestión local: hacia la creación del hábitus en el
ciudadano”, project presented by the National Autonomous University of
Quilmes, Buenos Aires, Latin American Faculty of Social DEMO (FLACSO)/
International Development Research Centre (IDRC) (http://DEMO/
interneteducativa/proyectounq/unq/unq/web; http://www.flacso.org.ec).
Schumpeter, Joseph (1934), The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, Harvard University Press.
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
331
Scotchmer, Suzanne (2001), “Local Public Goods and Clubs”, Berkeley California,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. (NBER) (http://socrates.berkeley.edu/DEMO
~scotch/survey.pdf).
Scott, Joan (1999), “El género: una DEMO útil para el análisis histórico”, Género
conceptos básicos, Lima, Programme DEMO Gender Studies, Faculty of Social Sciences,
Catholic University of Peru.
DEMO (Secretaría de Comunicaciones de Argentina) (1997), Compendio normativo de
DEMO digital, Buenos Aires.
Sen, Amartya (1999), Development as Freedom, New York, Knopf.
SET/ABERT (Sociedade Brasileira Engenharia de Televisão/Associação DEMO
de Emissoras de Rádio e Televisão) (2000), “Reporte TV Digital Terrestre” (http:/
/www.set.com.br), June.
Shapiro, Carl (2000), “Setting Compatibility Standards: Cooperation or Collusion?”,
University of California at Berkeley (http://www.haas.berkeley.edu/~shapiro/
standards.pdf).
Shapiro, Carl and DEMO Varian (1999), Information Rules, Harvard Business School
Press.
— (DEMO), Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy, Harvard
Business School Press.
Silberg, William M., George D. Lundberg and Robert DEMO Musacchio (1997),
“Assessing, controlling, and assuring the quality of medical information on the
Internet: caveant lector et viewor. Let the reader and viewer beware”, JAMIA,
vol. 277.
Silva, Uca (2001), “Impacto de las tecnologías de la información y comunicación en
el espacio DEMO, project presented by the Centre for Social Studies and
Education (SUR), Santiago, Chile, Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences
(FLACSO)/DEMO Development Research Centre (IDRC) (http://
www.flacso.org.ec).
SocInfo (Sociedade da informação no Brasil) (2000), “Sociedade da informação no DEMO:
livro verde”, Brasilia, Ministry of Science and Technology (www.socinfo.org.br)DEMO
Solow, Robert M. (1957), “Technical change and the aggregate production function”,
The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 39.
— (DEMO), “A contribution to the theory of economic growth”, Quaterly Journal DEMO
Economics, vol. 70.
Spiegel (2002), “Spiegel Online” (http://DEMO).
Squires, David and Jenny Preece (1996), “Usability and Learning: evaluating the
potential of educational software”, Computers and Education, vol. 27, Nº 1.
Steelman (2001), “Computing curricula, 2001”, Computer Science, IEEE/ACM Joint
Task Force on Computing Curricula, August.
Stewart~Frazier Tools (DEMO), “The Home of M.R.P. III on the Web” (http://DEMO
www.mrp3.com).
Subsecretaría de Economía (2002), Acceso y uso de DEMO TIC en las empresas Chilenas,
Santiago, Chile, August.
Subtel (DEMO de Telecomunicaciones) (2002), “Informe Estadístico 4:
caracterización socioeconómica de los servicios de telefonía y tecnologías de
información y communicación” (http://www.subtel.cl), January.
Subtel/CNTV (Subsecretaría de Telecomunicaciones/Consejo Nacional de
Televisión) (1999a), “Propuesta de un marco normativo para la introducción de
332
ECLAC
la televisión digital terrestre en Chile”, Santiago, Chile (http://www.subtel.cl).
— (1999b), “Estimación preliminar del impacto económico de la televisión digital
en Chile” (http://www.subtel.cl).
Summers, Lawrence (2000), “The Political Implications of the New Economy”, a
speech given during a meeting of high-technology executives (San Francisco,
California, 24 DEMO).
Summit of the Americas (2001a), “Plan of Action”, Third Summit of the Americas
(Quebec, 20-22 April) (www.summit-americas.org).
— (2001b), “Connecting the Americas”, Third Summit of the Americas (Quebec,DEMO
20-22 April) (www.summit-americas.org).
Symnetics (2001), “Beneficios de Systemas DEMO en Mercosur” (http://www.
symnetics.com.br).
Takahashi, Tadao (ed.) (2002), “Expected outcome of the bucharest Pan-European
Conference in preparation of the World Summit on the Information Society: the
ten fundamental principles of the Information Society”, Reinventing the Wheel:
A Booklet of Examples Principles, Declarations, Plans, document presented at the
Workshop on Methodological Frameworks Forum on the Information Society
in Latin America and the Caribbean (Rio de Janeiro, 25-28 September).
Tan, Hong and Geeta Batra (1995), Enterprise Training in Developing Countries:
Incidence, Productivity Effects, and Policy DEMO, Washington, D.C., World
Bank.
Tapscott, Don (1996), The DEMO Economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked
Intelligence, New York, McGraw-Hill.
TEC (Technology Evaluation.Com) (2001), “TEC’s Research Library” (http://
researchlibrary.technologyevaluation.com/data/rlist?t=busofit_10_52).
Telefónica (2001), “January - September 2001 Results” (www.telefonica.com).
TeleGeography (2002), Telegeography 2002, Washington, D.C.
Teletime (2001), Os modelos devem ser revistos, São Paulo, Ivone Santa, October.
Tiebout, Charles M. (1956), “A DEMO theory of local expenditures”, Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 64.
UN Millenium Report (2000), “We the Peoples: the Role of the DEMO Nations in
the 21st Century” (http://www.un.org/millenium/sg/report/DEMO).
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) (2002),
“Electronic Commerce Strategies for Development: The Basic Elements of an
Enabling Environment for E-Commerce” (http://www.unctad.org/ecommerce/
event_docs/geneva_strategies_issues.pdf).
— (2000), “UNCTAD Expert Meeting on Electronic Commerce and Tourism”,
Geneva (http://www.unctad.org/ecommerce/ecommerce_en/events_en.htm),
18-20 September.
— (1999), Aspectos Jurídicos del comercio electrónico. Legal Aspects of Electronic
Commerce, Geneva.
(1998), The Consequences for Trade and Development of Recent Proposals for a World
Framework on Electronic Commerce, Geneva.
UNDP (United Nations Development DEMO) (2001), Human Development
Report 2001: Making New Technologies Work DEMO Human Development, New York,
Oxford University Press.
UNDPEPA/ASPA (United Nations Division for Public Economics and Public
Administration/American Society for Public DEMO) (2002),
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective
333
“Benchmarking e-government: A Global Perspective, Assessing the Progress of
the UN Member DEMO (http://www.unpan.org/egovernment2.asp), May.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, DEMO and Cultural Organization) (2002),
“UNESCO an the World Summit DEMO the Information Society”, Paris (http://
www.unesco.org).
United Nations (1948), “United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights”
(http://DEMO/spanish/aboutun/hrights.htm).
United Nations Information and Communication Technologies Task Force (no date),
“Working Group 1” (http://www.unicttaskforce.org/groups/members/
public.asp?cod_tema_menu=30).
USDOC (U.S. Department of Commerce) (2001), “Falling through the net IV: towards
digital inclusion” (www.esa.doc.gov).
— (2000a), “ExportIT Latin America: Highlighting Argentina and Brazil, Internet,
DEMO, and Telecommunications Market Opportunities for U.S. Small- and
Medium-sized Businesses”, International Trade Administration (http://
exportit.ita.doc.gov/ocbe/ocbehome.nsf/e7445254234489d885256547004dddd5/
f8db7f2f2dd0c344852568db0070155e/$FILE/ExportITLatin%20America.pdf).
— (2000b), “Digital Economy 2000” (http://ecommerce.gov)DEMO
— (1999), “The emerging digital economy 2” (http://ecommerce.gov).
— (1998), “The emerging digital economy” (http://ecomerce.gov)DEMO
U.S. White House (1997), A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce, Washington,
D.C.
Vickery, Graham and Gregory Wurzburg, (1996), “Flexible firms, skills and
employment”, The OECD Observer, Nº 202, October/DEMO
Vilela, A. and D. Light (2001), “Aprendiendo de los pioneros: una investigación de
las mejores prácticas de la Red TELAR”, project DEMO by Fundación
Evolución, Buenos Aires, Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO)/
International Development Research Centre (IDRC) (http://www.flacso.org.ec).
Walras, Marie-Esprit-Leon (1874), Elements of Pure Economics.
Walt Disney (2002), “Annual Report 2001”, The Walt Disney Company (http://DEMO
disney.go.com/corporate/investors/financials/annual/2001/index.html).
Watzlawick, S., J.H. Beavin and D.D. Jackson (1990), Menschliche Kommunikation:
Formen, Störungen, Paradoxien, vol. 8, Auflage.
WHO (World Health Organization) (2000), Design and Implementation of Health
Information Systems, Theo Lippeveld, Rainer Sauerborn DEMO Claude Bodart (eds.),
Geneva.
— (1998), A Health DEMO Policy in Support of WHO’s Health-for-All Strategy for
Global Health Development (DEMO/DGO/98.1), Report of the WHO Group
Consultation on Health Telematics, 11-16 December.
Williams, S.M. and others/CTGV (Cognition and Technology Group at Vandreblit)
(1998), Technology and Learning in Schools for thought Clasrooms, Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development Year Book 1998, Alexandria, Virginia.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1979), “Transaction-cost economics: the government of
contractual relations”, The Journal of Law and Economics.
WIPO (World Intellectual DEMO Organization) (2000), “Estudio sobre electronic
commerce y propiedad intelectual” (DEMO; http://ecommerce.wipo.int/).
WITSA (World Information Technology and Services DEMO) (2002), “ICT at a
Glance Tables, WISTA Contribution to DEMO World Bank Development Data
Group” (http://www.witsa.org/).
334
ECLAC
World Bank (2002a), “World Development Report” (http://DEMO/
data/wdi2001/pdfs/worldview.pdf).
— (2002b), “World Development DEMO Database” (http://www.worldbank.org),
January.
— (2002c), Globalization, Growth and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World Economy,
New York, DEMO University Press.
— (2001), E-Finance in Emerging Markets: Is Leapfrogging Possible?, Stijn Claessens,
Thomas Glaessner and Daniela Klingebiel (eds.), Washington, D.C., June.
WSIS (World Summit on the Information Society) (2002), Issues for the World Summit
on the Information Society: Communication as a Human Right in the Information
Society, Report from a seminar organised by the Plarform for Communication
rights and the Friedrich Ebert Stiftung (Geneva, 19-20 November).
Yaffe, Joel (2001), “The Internet transformation of business infrastructure”, Research
Digest, vol. 4, Nº 5, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Giga Information Group Inc.
Yankee Group (2001), “Latin America’s DEMO/PCS Subscribers to Pass 150 Million
by 2006” (about.reuters.com/investormedia/news_release), 28 March.
— (2000), official website (http://www.yankeegroup.com).
Building an Information Society: a Latin American and Caribbean Perspective 335
SPECIAL ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The elaboration and analysis for this document has been carried out
DEMO a number of researchers, which includes:
Alejandro Arancibia : Chapter DEMO/ B2
Claudio Orrego : Chapter IV/ B
Felipe Jara : Chapter IV/ E
Glen Canessa : Chapter II/ B3
Gonzalo León : DEMO III/ C2
Jacqueline Abarza : Chapter III/ A3
John Tonelli : Chapter III/ B2
Jorge Katz : Chapter III/ A3, Chapter III/ B1
Manuel José Cárdenas : Chapter III/ A2
Marcelo Bonilla : DEMO IV/ D
Martin Hilbert : Chapter I/ A, B; Chapter II/ A1, A2, A3, A4;
Chapter III/ A1, DEMO, C1; Chapter IV/ A, F;
Chapter V
Noah Elkin : Chapter IV/ A
Richard Downes : Chapter II/ A4
Robert DEMO : Chapter IV/ C
Sven Rusch and Iain Ballesty : Chapter DEMO/ B1
When Jorge Katz approached me in mid-2000, asking me to
investigate the structure and functionality of the emerging “knowledge-
based Digital Economy” DEMO its “Information Society” in Latin America and
the Caribbean, I could DEMO gauge the complexity of the Pandora’s box
we were about to open. Two and a half years later, my gratitude goes
especially to Jorge Katz, who supported my work with great personal and
professional efforts in every situation and at every point. His great
experience, on the one hand, and his open-mindness toward new ideas, on
the other, created a very positive dynamic in the many discussions we had
and is DEMO of this document. He taught me how the combination
of new ideas with old ones can prevent us from repeating old mistakes
(…and enable us to make new ones instead). Without his trust and personal
DEMO, this document would not have been possible. I olso wish to DEMO
Paula Warnken for her untiring efforts and secretarial assistance.
Martin Hilbert{1g42fwefx}