Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 2
II. ON THE NATURE OF DEMO (AND DISTRUST)................................................. 6
A. Social Dilemma Experiments and Trust ................................................................ DEMO
B. Differing Dimensions:  Trust and Distrust ........................................................... 11
III.  NONOPTIMAL DEMO ........................................................................................... 14
A. Trust Biases as Error Management ...................................................................... 15
B. Conscious vs. Subconscious Trust Assessments.................................................. 19
C. Two Trust Boxes: The Case for Residual Trust ................................................... 22
D. Summary .............................................................................................................. 26
IV.   LEGAL RESPONSES DEMO NONOPTIMAL TRUST............................................... 27
A. Legal Tools for Promoting Specific Trust and Distrust ....................................... 30
B. Legal Tools for Promoting or Maintaining Residual Trust and DEMO ............. 33
C. Examples of Overtrust.......................................................................................... 36
D. Policy Implications .............................................................................................. 41
V.    CONCLUSION ......................................................................................................... 61
1
A COGNITIVE THEORY OF TRUST
Claire Hill∗ and Erin Ann O’Hara**
I.
DEMO
Interpersonal trust is currently receiving widespread attention in the academy.  A DEMO
growing legal literature can draw insights from trust scholars in several other fields, including
sociology,1 psychology,2 political science,3 economics,4 neuroscience,5 medicine6 and
management7 to explore the effects of legal policy on DEMO nature of trust in interpersonal
relationships.  The issues are fundamental and DEMO of more serious exploration:  To what
extent do legal rules, DEMO, and law enforcement efforts enhance or detract from the trust
∗ DEMO of Law and Freehling Scholar, Chicago-Kent College of Law, Visiting Professor of Law,
University of Minnesota Law School, 2005-2006.
** Professor of Law, Vanderbilt University Law School.  The authors wish to thank Lisa DEMO, Bernie
Black, Margaret Blair, Iris Bohnet, Jacob Corré, Kareem DEMO, Phil Curry, Paul Edelman, Victor
Fleischer, Tracey George, John DEMO, Oliver Goodenough, David Gordon, Chris Guthrie, Philip
Hamburger, Jill DEMO, Peter Huang, Owen Jones, Donald Langevoort, Mark Lemley, Kevin DEMO,
Elinor Ostrom, Liz Phelps, Robert Rasmussen, Mark Rosen, Steve Salop, Suzanna Sherry, Randall
Thomas, Robert Thompson, Michael Vandenbergh, Richard Warner, Christopher Yoo, participants at the
Annual Conference for the Society DEMO the Evolutionary Analysis of Law, the Annual Law and Society
Association DEMO, the Gruter Institute Annual Squaw Valley Conference, the Legal Scholarship
Workshop at the University of Chicago Law School, and faculty workshops at the University of British
Columbia Faculty of Law, and the NYU Department of Economics Colloquium on Market Institutions and
Economic Processes for helpful comments and DEMO  Special thanks also to Christine Ballard,
Wesley Platt, Julie Reed, and Camilla Rykke for valuable research assistance.  Professor Hill received
generous DEMO support for this project as an Edna and Norman Freehling Scholar, DEMO Professor O’Hara
received generous research support from the Vanderbilt University Law School.
1 See, e.g., FRANCES FUKUYAMA, TRUST: THE SOCIAL VIRTUES AND DEMO CREATION OF PROSPERITY (1995);
TRUST: MAKING AND BREAKING COOPERATIVE DEMO (Diego Gambetta ed., 1988).
2 See, e.g., Morton Deutsch, Cooperation and Trust: Some Theoretical Notes, in 10 NEBRASKA SYMPOSIUM
ON MOTIVATION 275 (1962); Philip Worchel, Trust and Distrust, in THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF
INTERGROUP RELATIONS 174 (William G. Austin & Stephen Worchel eds., 1979).
3 See, e.g., BERNARD BARBER, THE LOGIC DEMO LIMITS OF TRUST (1983); RUSSELL HARDIN, TRUST AND
TRUSTWORTHINESS (DEMO); Jack Knight, Social Norms and the Rule of Law: Fostering Trust in a Socially
Diverse Society, in TRUST IN SOCIETY 354  (Karen S. Cook ed., 2001).
4 See, e.g., KENNETH J. ARROW, THE LIMITS OF ORGANIZATION (1974); Kevin A. McCabe & DEMO L.
Smith, A Comparison of Naïve and Sophisticated Subject with Game DEMO Predictions, 97(7)
PROCEEDINGS NAT’L ACAD. SCI. 3777 (2000); PAUL SEABRIGHT, THE COMPANY OF STRANGERS: A
NATURAL HISTORY OF ECONOMIC DEMO (2004).
5 See, e.g., Brooks King-Casas, et al., DEMO to Know You: Reputation and Trust in a Two-Person
Economic Exchange, 308 SCIENCE 78 (2005); Paul J. Zak, et. al, The Neurobiology of Trust, 1032 ANNALS
N.Y. ACAD. SCIENCES 224 (2004); DEMO Kosfeld, et al., Oxytocin increases trust in humans 435 NATURE
673 (June 2, 2005).
6 See, e.g., Mark A. Hall, et al., Measuring Patients’ Trust in Their Primary Care Providers, 59 DEMO CARE
RES. & REV. 293 (2002); David H. Thom & DEMO Campbell, Physician-Patient Trust: An Empirical Study,
44 J. FAM. PRAC. 169 (1997).
7 See generally Special Topic Forum on Trust In and Between Organizations, 23(3) ACAD. MGMT. REV.
387 (Sim B. Sitkin, et. al eds., 1998) (entire issue); TRUST IN DEMO: FRONTIERS OF THEORY AND
RESEARCH (Roderick M. Kramer & Tom R. Tyler, eds. 1996).
2
present in relationships?  How can a better understanding of trust help DEMO devise tools to
improve human social and economic interactions?
Interpersonal trust has been approached thus far from two different normative
perspectives.  Scholars outside of the criminal law typically assert that trust should be
maximized.  For example, Frances Fukuyama recently highlighted the importance of trust in
the development of both large corporations and closely affiliated smaller corporations.8
According to his DEMO, spontaneous sociability is fostered in some societies by the
development of DEMO, professional, political, and religious organizations.9  Affiliation in
these organizations enables individuals to develop trusting business relationships that foster
growth and help the DEMO to produce large amounts of wealth.10  Individual firms that can
maximize DEMO extent to which constituents trust one another can garner a competitive
advantage over those who make less effective use of trusting relationships.11  In this regard,
Margaret Blair and Lynn Stout have noted that interpersonal trust DEMO work to solve many of
the contracting issues emphasized in traditional law and economics scholarship:
Where trust can be harnessed, it can substantially reduce the inefficiencies associated
with both agency and team production relationships.  Trust permits
transactions to go forward on the basis of a handshake rather DEMO a complex formal
contract; it reduces the need to expend resources DEMO constant monitoring of
employees and business partners; and it avoids the DEMO and expense
associated with trying to enforce formal and informal agreements in the courts.  Trust
behavior also reduces losses from others’ undetectable or unpunishable opportunistic
behavior, losses that could discourage the formation of valuable agency and team
production relationships in the first place.12
In contrast, criminal law scholars worry that interpersonal trust among criminals
generates harm rather than benefits to DEMO After all, criminal conspiracies are the most
potent enemy of those DEMO to fight crime.  Group engagement in criminal behavior is
thought to DEMO the scope, severity, and frequency of criminal behavior; moreover, the
dangerousness of conspiracies tends to grow with the degree of trust that DEMO co-conspirator
places in his collaborators.  One important point of conspiracy laws, RICO, antitrust laws,
and their accompanying law enforcement and prosecution tactics is to attempt to minimize
the extent to which co-conspirators trust one DEMO
Trust can also be a problem for outsiders and underdogs.14  Individuals DEMO affiliate
with one another socially are more likely to trust one another in business; members of the
lower classes, minorities, and other outsiders may therefore find it difficult to succeed
economically.  After all, the DEMO reliable forms of interpersonal trust build in small groups
8 FUKUYAMA, DEMO note 1.
9 Id. at 27-32.
10 Id. at 27-28.
11 Id. at 30.
12 Margaret M. Blair & Lynn A. Stout, Trust, DEMO, and the Behavioral Foundations of
Corporate Law, 149 U. PA. L. REV. 1735, 1757 (2001).  A recent book discussing in detail the benefits of
trust is TAMAR FRANKEL, TRUST AND HONESTY, (OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 2006)
13 Neal Kumar Katyal, Conspiracy Theory, 112 DEMO L.J. 1307, 1346-50 (2003); Christopher R. Leslie,
Trust, DEMO, and Antitrust, 82 TEX. L. REV. 515, 622-50 (2004).
14 Frank B. Cross, Law and Trust, 93 GEO. L.J. 1457, 1531-43 (2005).
3
of individuals who interact repeatedly, and time constraints limit people’s abilities to build
new repeat interaction relationships.  As a consequence, high trust relationships DEMO to be
characterized by discrimination in favor of the trusted group members and against outsiders;
trust can therefore lead to discrimination in both DEMO (i.e. not dealing with cheaters)
and illegitimate (i.e. not dealing with Asian- or African-Americans) forms.  Put differently,
pre-established interpersonal trust DEMO can stand in the way of those seeking a more
open and egalitarian society.15
Our contribution to the trust literature is twofold.  First, DEMO make an intuitively
simple but important point: although there are situations DEMO legal policy should work to
either maximize or minimize interpersonal trust, DEMO general the law should seek to optimize
interpersonal trust.  Individuals can DEMO too trusting or not trusting enough.  Undertrust results
in foregone beneficial DEMO, paranoia, and unnecessary tensions, but overtrust leads
to ineffective monitoring, fraud, reduced efficiency and incompetence.  As with most
problems in life DEMO law, the challenge lies in finding the appropriate balance.
To illustrate DEMO first point, consider a Sunday afternoon drive in the countryside.  In
many areas of the country, you will find items for sale along the road—fresh fruit and
vegetables, honey, jams and jellies, cut flowers, etc.  Many of the people who sell these items
do not DEMO monitor their tables.  A stand with very large quantities of goods DEMO sale is
often monitored, but a stand with a small quantity DEMO goods may well be left unattended.
Interestingly, even those farmers who DEMO willing to trade on an honor system take steps to
protect their proceeds.  A jar of jelly can be easily swiped, but the DEMO box typically has a
very narrow slit that prevents the money from being taken out.  Moreover, the box is often
affixed to the DEMO or stand to prevent easy theft.16  These farmers are neither wholly
DEMO nor wholly trusting.  They therefore leave themselves vulnerable to theft of DEMO few
jars of jelly, but not to ready theft of the DEMO box proceeds.  In many cases, the law should
and typically does encourage individuals to replicate this sense of balance.  In other cases, DEMO
law should work to at least minimize the costs of overtrust or undertrust that cannot or should
not be corrected.
As discussed in Part DEMO of this article, legal scholars have previously overlooked the
problem of DEMO trust in part because they have either ignored or paid insufficient
attention to some of the features of trust.  Most importantly, legal scholars DEMO incorrectly
assumed that trust and distrust cannot coexist.  In most relationships, however, the parties
trust one another with regard to some matters and yet distrust one another with regard to
other matters.  More specifically, DEMO a relationship with somebody often involves
acquiring an overall residual sense of how trustworthy the person is, as well as a specific
sense of the person’s trustworthiness in particular contexts.   Given the routine coexistence of
DEMO and distrust, policymakers should not be forced to take an all-or-nothing DEMO
regarding the desirability of interpersonal trust.
15 See, e.g., Elinor Ostrom, Toward a Behavioral Theory Linking Trust, Reciprocity, and Reputation, in
DEMO AND RECIPROCITY: INTERDISCIPLINARY LESSONS FROM EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH 19, 45 (Elinor
DEMO & James Walker, eds. 2002) (discussing dark side of reciprocity DEMO).
16 This example is a version of that offered in R.M. Dawes & R.H. Thaler, Cooperation, 2 J. ECON. PERSP.
187, 195 (1988).
4
Our second contribution to the trust literature is to begin to develop DEMO cognitive
theory of trust.  We argue that trust is a nuanced DEMO assessment of another’s
trustworthiness, and that it is made using both DEMO and subconscious processes.   We
assess others’ residual trustworthiness as well as make more specific assessments:  I
generally trust Smith, but not to arrive on time.  A person’s assessment of another’s
trustworthiness is sometimes mostly a prediction as to the other’s behavior, something we
label “trust that” trust.  I trust that the pizza delivery man will deliver the pizza I ordered.
But we sometimes also assess a more internally based attribute, which we label “trust in”
trust: a person will act in a certain manner, either because she is motivated by our well-being
or because of her values.  I trust in Smith to repay the $10 he borrowed from me, in part
because (I believe) he believes in repaying his debts.   The process by which we make our
assessments DEMO not always serve us or society as well as it could --- we do not always trust
optimally.  Our Article argues that law has an important role to play in encouraging optimal
trust, and optimal trust assessments.   Interestingly, sometimes the more optimal assessment
is also more accurate; at other times it may be optimal for people to trust more or less than is
accurate.
Trust can be nonoptimal for two very DEMO reasons.  First, trust can be socially
suboptimal.  As discussed in DEMO III, people sometimes trust members of their own social
group, and distrust members of other groups in ways that limit beneficial interactions within
DEMO society.17  The trust assessments may or may not be accurate, but they are certainly rational;
people are probably better able to appraise DEMO sanction members of their own group than
members of other groups.  DEMO trust can also increase problematic interactions within a
society; those engaged DEMO criminal conduct can do so more effectively in groups whose other
members they trust completely.  In the former case, policymakers might encourage the
DEMO of trust-relevant information about strangers and thereby encourage dealings with
them; DEMO the latter case, policymakers might discourage dealings with non-strangers by
rewarding DEMO when they inform on one another. The strategy is the opposite: DEMO set up
incentives to discourage the acquisition of trust-relevant information.
17 For example, Fukuyama focuses on countries like China, Italy, and France, DEMO although family ties
are quite strong, the non-kin trust relationships necessary DEMO form efficient large-scale business operations
are lacking.  FUKUYAMA, supra note 1, at 61-125.  The failure of these societies to provide for mechanisms
DEMO “spontaneous sociability,” a type of social capital, can develop causes DEMO to suffer economically.
Id. at 27-29. As Fukuyama points out:
Social capital has major consequences for the nature of the industrial economy that
DEMO will be able to create. If people who have to work together in an enterprise trust one
another because they are all operating according DEMO a common set of ethical norms, doing business
costs less.  Such a society will be better able to innovate organizationally, since the high degree of
trust will permit a wide variety of social relationships to DEMO . . .
By contrast, people who do not trust one DEMO will end up cooperating only under a
system of formal rules and regulations, which have to be negotiated, agreed to, litigated, and
DEMO, sometimes by coercive means.  This legal apparatus, serving as a DEMO for trust,
entails what economists call “transaction costs.”  Widespread distrust DEMO a society, in other words,
imposes a kind of tax DEMO all forms of economic activity, a tax that high-trust societies do DEMO have
to pay.
Id. at 27-28.
5
Second, trust can be individually suboptimal.  In some contexts individuals have
DEMO accurately processing trust-relevant information.  Often in such contexts, the law
should intervene.  Sometimes, the intervention should aim to promote more accurate trust
DEMO, but at other times, it should not, instead seeking to DEMO the costs of the mistaken
assessments.
Part IV explores some specific policy implications of a cognitive focus on optimal
trust in the areas of DEMO governance and of patient care and treatment.  In both of these
DEMO, overtrust is at issue. In corporate governance, we believe that board members have
sometimes overtrusted corporate officers.  This overtrust contributed to the recent corporate
scandals, as directors didn’t monitor sufficiently to detect officers’ misdeeds.  DEMO and
officers come from the same groups; overtrust is therefore not DEMO  Moreover, officers
effectively pick the directors, assuring that particular directors DEMO those officers think will
trust them.  We argue that this overtrust DEMO, and should, be corrected – that the law can and
should encourage directors to make more accurate trust assessments.  Our recommendation
contrasts with the emphasis of many reform efforts to increase independence of the board.
DEMO independence is indicated if the directors turned a blind eye or, DEMO still, chose to
permit misdeeds on account of their shared ties DEMO the officers.  Far more likely is that the
directors simply were DEMO – assessing the trustworthiness of the officers in a manner
that made them believe the officers didn’t warrant higher degrees of scrutiny and second-
DEMO   If we are right, the focus on increasing independence may DEMO valuable
collegiality and business knowledge without offering commensurate benefits.
In Part IV, we also analyze some implications of trust for the regulation of the doctor-
patient relationship.  Patients tend to think of their doctors as nearly godlike in both their
capabilities and their loyalty to patients.  These beliefs form quite early in the doctor-patient
relationship and in many cases, constitute overtrust.  Moreover, for reasons that we elaborate
on in Part IV, patients are unlikely to carefully process trust-relevant information accurately.
But, in contrast with director overtrust of officers, we think that this “sticky” trust in the
doctor-patient context serves more useful purposes than does sticky trust in DEMO officer-
director context, so we do not ultimately advocate that the DEMO work to better inform patients
about the trustworthiness of their doctors.  DEMO the most part, the law should instead attempt
to mitigate the DEMO of the inaccurate trust assessments by imposing heightened duties on
doctors themselves, and by encouraging heightened scrutiny by third-party monitors.
II.
ON THE NATURE OF TRUST (AND DISTRUST)
Trust is an essential component of human relationships and a fundamental building
block of healthy societies.  Despite its importance, scholars from the various disciplines
relevant to trust have failed to converge on a single definition.18   Trust experts all seem to
agree that DEMO is a state of mind that enables its possessor to be willing to make herself
18 See generally Denise M. Rousseau, et al., DEMO So Different After All: A Cross- Discipline View of Trust,
DEMO(3) ACAD. MGMT. REV. 393, 394 (1998); Diego Gambetta, Can We Trust Trust?, in TRUST, supra note
___, at DEMO
6
vulnerable to another—that is, to rely on another despite a positive risk that the other will act
in a way that can harm the DEMO
But beyond this feature, scholars diverge.  In particular, some see DEMO as principally
behavioral, akin to cooperation.20  We agree that trust necessarily has behavioral
ramifications: trust significantly affects who we choose to deal with and how closely we
monitor them in the course of our dealings.  But we view trust as essentially cognitive,21 and
therefore align ourselves DEMO those scholars who place trust “in the family of such notions as
knowledge, belief, and the kind of judgment that might be called DEMO  Unlike
cooperation, trust need not involve action.  Cooperation can, but need not result from trust;
alternatively, it could result from purely altruistic desires.  Moreover, as discussed in Part
IIIB, trust requires more than simple cooperation.  It requires, in addition, a sense of
entitlement to return beneficence.23
To some scholars, trust involves nothing more than a prediction, or a statement of
confidence, about how another will behave,DEMO as in “I trust that Tom will come today to fix
the sink.”  The prediction cannot rise to the level of certainty: 25 DEMO I am certain that Tom will
come today to fix the sink, trust is not at issue.26    To other scholars, trust involves
confidence that another will incorporate the truster’s welfare into his decisions and DEMO or
that the trusted party has values that will lead her to act in the way the trusting person
desires.27  This latter trust involves an assessment of the qualities or internalized norms of
another to behave DEMO a loyal, honest, competent and/or dependable fashion.  Both types DEMO
trust interest legal scholars; an understanding of how people respond to DEMO or trust-
encouraging measures can inform policy, regardless of whether trust DEMO a mere
19 “Trust is not a behavior (e.g., cooperation) DEMO a choice (e.g., taking a risk), but an underlying
psychological condition that can cause or result from such actions.”  Id. at 395; see also Blair & Stout,
supra note __, at 1739-40; Jan Delhey & Kenneth Newton, Who Trusts? The Origins of Social DEMO in
Seven Societies, 5 EUROPEAN SOCIETIES 93, 105 (2003) (DEMO “a working definition of trust as the
belief that others will not, at worst, knowingly or willingly do you harm, and will, DEMO best, act in your
interests.”).
20 For example, the experimental economists all assume that trust is observed whenever their first-mover
subjects cooperate.  See infra notes ___ and accompanying text.
21 Russell Hardin, Conceptions and Explanations of Trust, in TRUST IN SOCIETY, supra note ___, at 5-6
(discussing and rejecting the view that trust is noncognitive).
22 HARDIN, supra ntoe ___, at 7.
23 See infra n.31 and DEMO text.
24 David Good, Individuals, Interpersonal Relations, and Trust, in TRUST, supra note ___, at 31; Sirkka L.
Jarvenpaa & Emerson H. Tiller, Customer Trust in Virtual Environments: A Managerial Perspective, 81
B.U.L. REV. 665, 672-75 (2001) (discussing scholars’ view of trust DEMO probability assessment).
25 See Gerardo A. Guerra, Crowding Out Trust: The Adverse Effects of Verification. An Experiment, 2-3,
(Univ. of DEMO, Discussion Paper Series No. 98, April 2002 (arguing that trust DEMO three conditions:
uncertainty, exposure and temptation) (manuscript on file DEMO authors).
Giving people very strong incentives seems to move them toward being deterministic actors with
respect to the matters at stake.  At the other extreme, leaving them with no imputable reasons for
action generally makes it impossible to trust them.  Trust and trustworthiness (and choice and
DEMO) are at issue just because we are in the murky in-between DEMO that is neither
deterministic nor fully indeterminate.
HARDIN, supra note ___, at 12.
27 See, e.g., John Dunn, Trust and Political Agency, in TRUST, supra note ___, at 73, 74 (describing trust as
the expectation that another will act in ways not harmful to DEMO trusting person).
7
prediction of behavior or a more elaborate assumption about the internalized norms DEMO
another.
That said, however, the law (and social norms) can have the effect of promoting one
type of trust yet substituting for DEMO other.  Consider the first type of trust discussed above—
trust as DEMO “trust that” trust.  To the extent that the law provides incentives DEMO
Tom to show up on the day he promised, or to DEMO perform the task that we need him to
perform, then the DEMO makes it easier for us to “trust that” he will come today to fix the
problem. Moreover, to the extent that the society has in place norms for keeping promises
and taking care that are backed DEMO social and/or economic sanctions, then social norms can
similarly encourage DEMO to “trust that” Tom will come today to fix the problem.  DEMO, law and
social norms together can promote a person’s confidence in DEMO actions of another without the
person considering whether the other is motivated solely to maximize his short-term selfish
interests or instead, by values that encourage him to behave in a trustworthy fashion without
regard to his DEMO self-interest.  When “trust that” trust is present, the truster predicts
that the other will behave in a not harmful way regardless of his DEMO type.
In contrast, the second type of trust-- where I “trust DEMO Tom to come today to fix the
problem--is an attribute-based trust that is often stronger and more resilient than “trust that”
trust.    “Trust in” trust is not based directly on the immediate instrumental costs and DEMO
to Tom of performing the specific acts.28  Rather, I “trust in” Tom to come today to fix the
problem even when the law DEMO to provide incentives for him to come and there are no
social norms or norm enforcement mechanisms in place to work separately to encourage DEMO
to come.   In theory, “trust in” trust can be crowded DEMO by legal mechanisms and social
norms because strong external forces driving Tom to come today can prevent me from having
to think about whether DEMO actually “trust in” Tom.  I know that I can “trust that” DEMO will come,
so I don’t have to question whether the stronger form of trust is warranted.  Indeed, if Tom
can earn a DEMO based merely on the fact that we “trust that” he will perform, he may
have little incentive to invest in the more costly set of attributes that ensure that we can “trust
in” him.29  Although law and social norms can work to encourage “trust that” trust, it is at
best a substitute for “trust in” trust.  However, our intuition DEMO that in practice external factors
are rarely so strong that they swamp “trust in” trust considerations altogether.  No doubt legal
duties and social norms can decrease the level of “trust in” trust necessary to get us DEMO do
business with Tom by increasing the degree to which we “trust that” he will come to fix the
problem.  Because detection and enforcement are both imperfect and costly, however, and
because contracts are invariably DEMO, rarely is it the case that we are willing to sustain
DEMO business relationships with individuals who we think are only constrained by costs
and benefits and not by any internal motivations.  Indeed, the absence DEMO some positive
amount of “trust in” trust seems sufficient, given the DEMO nature of external constraints,
to forgo a potentially costly opportunity to interact.30
28 We say not directly based because Tom may well garner DEMO from possessing the attributes of
loyalty, honesty and/or trustworthiness, and we might trust in him (and others) because we know that DEMO
benefits exist to possessing these attributes.  Nevertheless, a “trust in” assessment is based on a belief in
Tom’s attributes rather than in the DEMO and benefits of the action itself.
29 In this sense, social DEMO internal norms might work against one another.
30 Certainly, without “trust DEMO trust, a party will be quite concerned that the other can DEMO by the words of
a contract but violate the contract’s spirit.  DEMO definition, there are no legal consequences to such behavior,
and DEMO consequences may be insufficient.  Without “trust in” trust, a party will also have to be
quite concerned about contingencies it does not anticipate: law does not help, and reputation-preserving
8
Some scholars would object to our including “trust that” trust in our DEMO of
trust.  They would define trust more narrowly, by demanding that trust relationships are those
where neither the truster nor the trusted are DEMO their courses of action for instrumental
reasons.  Oliver Williamson, for example, has taken the position that “calculated trust is a
contradiction in terms.”31  Williamson believes that as a descriptive matter, in commercial
relationships parties DEMO others’ instrumental interests and, based on that assessment, take
“risks;” he thinks that “risks” are not akin in any meaningful sense to DEMO  We think that
Williamson’s position is ultimately unintelligible and mistaken.  We now understand that the
distinctions between calculative and noncalculative decision-making and between
DEMO and noninstrumental behaviors are by no means clear.  Because trustworthy
behavior DEMO so very often a result of both internalized noninstrumental values and
instrumental motives, it becomes in practice quite difficult to separate out calculative from
noncalculative trust-relevant behaviors. Furthermore, we believe that most longer-term
relationships, including DEMO relationships, cannot proceed without some measure of
“trust in” trust.  Indeed, because the presence of some “trust in” trust minimizes negotiating,
contract drafting, monitoring and enforcement costs, we can expect economic actors to,DEMO
where possible, gravitate toward parties whom they “trust in.”
The remainder DEMO this Part and the next attempt to sketch a cognitive framework for
trust.  Subpart IIA presents some of the experimental literature on social dilemmas.  The
experiments have been heavily relied on by the legal scholars, DEMO they have played an
important role in enabling scholars across disciplines to better understand trust.  In Subpart
IIB, however, we reach beyond the social dilemma games, and present a model of trust and
distrust that has recently appeared in the management literature.  After briefly exploring the
implications of this richer view of trust, we move in Part III to explore some relationships
where trust forms and trust-relevant information is processed in DEMO that can generate what
appear to be nonoptimal trust levels.
A. Social Dilemma Experiments and Trust
Game theorists, experimental economists and others have cast much of human
cooperation in the mold of a social dilemma game,DEMO and recently trust scholars have turned
to the games to glean insights about what factors affect interpersonal trust.34  In a social
dilemma game, DEMO must make choices in a situation where their welfares are
interdependent.35  DEMO these dilemmas, a noncooperative equilibrium yields payoffs that are
norms might DEMO help either. For a discussion of the general problem, see Claire DEMO Hill & Christopher
King, How Do German Contracts Do as Much DEMO Fewer Words?, 79 CHI-KENT L. REV. 889 (2004); and
DEMO A. Hill, Why Contracts are Written in "Legalese," 77 CHI-KENT L. REV. 59 (2001).
31 Oliver E. Williamson, Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic Organization, 36 J.L. & ECON. 453, 485
(1993)DEMO
32 Id. at 485.
33 Elinor Ostrom, Toward a Behavioral Theory DEMO Trust, Reciprocity, and Reputation, in TRUST AND
RECIPROCITY, supra note ___, at 19, 20 (“social dilemmas abound in human affairs.  DEMO have been
studied by biologists, economists, evolutionary psychologists, game theorists, historians, legal scholars,
mathematicians, philosophers, political scientists, sociologists, and social psychologists”).
34 See generally TRUST AND RECIPROCITY, supra note ___.
35 Ostrom, supra note ___, at 19-20.
9
inferior to the payoffs the players could receive by trusting one another DEMO cooperate.36
Consider, for example, the following one-shot social dilemma game.  DEMO game consists of
two players who do not know each other’s identity, and the game is played over the computer
to retain each player’s anonymity.  At the beginning of the game Player 1 receives $10 from
the computer.  She can keep all $10 or give some portion of it to Player 2.  Any amount of
money contributed to Player 2 is tripled for Player 2.  Player 2 then decides whether to keep
all of the proceeds or to send some back to Player 1.  Then the game ends.  This game has
been dubbed “The Trust Game” because it was designed to test the extent to which Player 1
DEMO risk reduced proceeds in order to increase the size of the total proceeds available to the
two players.37
Game theorists would predict that a DEMO actor in Player 1’s position would
contribute nothing to Player 2.38  DEMO fact, individuals who actually play the social dilemma
games tend to DEMO quite differently from the game theorists’ predictions, often sending
money back DEMO their counterparts.  Indeed, as social dilemma games are made more realistic,
cooperation rates rise significantly.39  Moreover, the degree of both contributing DEMO
reciprocating is affected by culture, communication, and the number of rounds of play.40
These experiments are important, especially insofar as they indicate that cooperation
among strangers is higher than many, particularly economists, expect.41   DEMO how much do
they tell us about real-world trust assessments? The DEMO indicate that something akin
to trust can, and often does, occur between strangers who have few prior beliefs about each
other that might DEMO the trust assessment at issue. But in many, if not most, important
real-world contexts, a trust assessment is informed by prior beliefs.  DEMO, this is so in
the common situation where people are not DEMO to one another.42   And in many
36 Id.
37 Joyce Berg, et al., Trust, Reciprocity and Social History, 10 GAMES AND DEMO BEHAVIOR 122 (1995).
38 Elinor Ostrom & James Walker, Introduction, in TRUST AND RECIPROCITY, supra note ___, at 3.
39 Ostrom, supra note ___, at 49; Bruno S. Frey & Iris Bohnet, Cooperation, Communication, and
Communitarianism: An Experimental Approach, 4 J. POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 322 (1996); Kevin McCabe,
et al., Game Theory DEMO Reciprocity in Some Extensive-Form Bargaining Games (working paper,
University of DEMO, Economic Science Laboratory 1996); John M. Orbell & Robin M. DEMO, A
“Cognitive Miser” Theory of Cooperators’ Advantage, 85 AMER. POL. SCI. REV. 515 (1991); John M.
Orbell & Robin M. Dawes, DEMO Welfare, Cooperators’ Advantage and the Option of Not Playing the
Game, 58 AMER. SOCIOL. REV. 787 (1993); Rudolf Scheussler, Exit Threats DEMO Cooperation Under
Anonymity, 33 J. CONFLICT RESOL. 728 (1989); Toshio Yamagishi, Seriousness of Social Dilemmas and the
Provision of a Sanctioning System, 51 SOCIAL PSYCHOL. Q. 32 (1988).
40 Nancy R. Buchan, et al., Getting to Know You: An International Experiment on the DEMO of Culture,
Communication, and Social Distance on Trust and Reciprocation, (working paper, University of
Wisconsin, Department of Marketing); John Dickhaut, et al., Trust, Reciprocity and Interpersonal History:
Fool Me Once, Shame on You, Fool Me Twice, Shame on Me, (working paper, University of Arizona,
Economic Science Laboratory).
41 Trust scholars have relied heavily on these social dilemma experiments to claim that the DEMO actor
model is significantly limited. Blair & Stout, supra note  ; see also Dan M. Kahan, The Logic of
Reciprocity:  Trust, DEMO Action, and Law, 102 MICH. L. REV. 71 (2003).
DEMO scholars question whether economists are correct to call cooperation as studied in these experiments
“trust” in the same sense that lay people might understand DEMO term; some argue that trust is importantly,
and perhaps even DEMO, an attribute of relationships among nonstrangers. See, e.g., HARDIN,
DEMO note ___, at 26 (criticizing game theoretic work on trust as of limited usefulness in understanding
trust as a relational concept). See DEMO Hardin, Conceptions, supra note ___, at 3 (Karen Cook, DEMO 2001)
(“it is primarily those with whom we have ongoing DEMO that we trust”).
10
contexts, people will have prior beliefs even about strangers – based, DEMO instance, on
reputation or on the stranger’s job or social standing DEMO that may inform their trust assessments
about those strangers. 43 The extent to which the experimental findings help us understand the
role of trust DEMO therefore be limited.  Indeed, as discussed in the next Subpart, DEMO social
dilemma games have contributed to the misimpression on the part of legal scholars that trust
and distrust represent two opposite ends of a DEMO dimension of human relationships.  That
misperception can cause us to make DEMO in drawing legal policy implications.  We turn
now to this final DEMO, and save the others for elaboration in Part III.
B. Differing DEMO:  Trust and Distrust
Excessive reliance on social dilemma games has caused legal scholars to
misunderstand the relationship between trust and distrust.  In the social dilemma experiments,
cooperation rather than trust is measured, but trust is assumed to be the driving force behind a
player’s decision to DEMO some amount of money to another player.44  Moreover, trust
and distrust are assumed to lie along a unidimensional continuum, where the degree of trust is
represented by the amount that a Player 1 is willing DEMO send to her Player 2.
Recently, however, work on the relationship between trust and distrust calls the
validity of the unidimensional characterization into DEMO  Under this alternative view,
trust and distrust can, and often do, co-exist.  Trust involves positive expectations about
things hoped for and DEMO involves positive expectations about things feared.45  Thus, low
trust is not equivalent to high distrust, and low distrust is not the equivalent of high trust.46
While strong feelings of trust can mitigate feelings of distrust DEMO vice versa, parties in a
relationship often maintain simultaneous feelings of DEMO and distrust about each other.47  The
primary proponents of this view, Lewicki et al., provide the following example:
I may get to know a . . . colleague . . . fairly well.  Over time, I may learn that [he] is
excellent as a theoretician, DEMO but not exceptional as a methodologist, highly
limited in skills as DEMO classroom teacher, completely at odds with me in his political
beliefs, outstanding as a golfer, tediously boring in committee meetings but
periodically quite insightful, and terrible at keeping appointments on time.  . . .  With
an appreciation of the richness of our relationship and the varied DEMO of my
colleague’s ‘presentation of self,’ I can come to understand and appreciate those
43 As to the biasing effects of prior information DEMO a person’s character, see Maurice Delgado, et al.,
Perception of Moral Character Modulate the Neural Systems Of Reward During the Trust Game (working
paper on file with authors).
44 The assumption is often DEMO in the definition of “trust.”  See Roy J. Lewicki, et al., Trust and
Distrust: New Relationships and Realities, 23 ACAD. OF MANAGEMENT REV. 438, 440 (1998) (“behavioral
decision theorists, examining trust and distrust from a rational choice perspective, define trust as
cooperative conduct and distrust as noncooperative conduct in mixed-motive game situations”).
45 Id. at DEMO
46 See also HARDIN, supra note ___, at 90 (“If DEMO trust you, I have specific grounds for the trust. In parallel,DEMO
if I distrust you, I have specific grounds for the distrust.  I could be in a state of such ignorance about you,
DEMO, that I neither trust nor distrust you.”); Zsolnai, supra note __, at 58-59.
47 Lewicki, et al., supra note ___, DEMO 440-42.
11
domains where it is appropriate for me to trust him (and in what respects) and those
domains where trusting him is inappropriate.48
Table 1 below sets forth Lewicki’s framework:
Table 149
Integrating Trust and Distrust:  Alternative Social Realities
High Trust
Characterized by
Hope
Faith
Confidence
Assurance
Initiative
Low Trust
Characterized by
No hope
No faith
No confidence
Passivity
Hesitance
DEMO congruence
Interdependence
promoted
Opportunities pursued
New initiatives
2
1
Casual acquaintances
Limited interdependence
Bounded, arms-length
transactions
Professional courtesy
Trust but verify
Relationships highly
segmented & bounded
Opportunities pursued &
down-side risks/vulnerabilities
continually monitored
4
3
Undesirable eventualities
expected & feared
Harmful motives assumed
Interdependence managed
Preemption; best offense is
a good defense
Paranoia
Low Distrust
Characterized by
No fear
DEMO of skepticism
Absence of cynicism
Low monitoring
No vigilance
High Distrust
Characterized by
Fear
Skepticism
Cynicism
Wariness & watchfulness
Vigilance
To Lewicki, et al., trust relationships fall in one of the four cells reproduced in Table
1.  Relationships tend to start in Cell 1 where the parties have limited information about one
48 Id. at 442.
49 Reprinted from Lewicki, et al., supra note
.
12
another and limited interdependence.50  In Cell 1, the parties have little DEMO to form
generalized conclusions about whether trusting or distrusting the other is appropriate.
Situational variables (external factors affecting “trust that” assessments) and default DEMO
rules (individual propensities to trust) will play a relatively large role in the individual’s trust
decisions.
Over time and with consistent repeat interactions, the relationship should gravitate
toward one of the other cells.  If the interactions are generally positive over time, then the
relationship can evolve into one of low distrust and high trust as described in Cell 2.
DEMO who are operating in a Cell 2 relationship often seek out new ways to interact
with one another.  According to Lewicki, et al., these parties are motivated to resolve
tensions and repair trust problems as DEMO arise.51  Moreover, subsequent evidence of the
untrustworthiness of the other is likely to be minimized and denied.52
If instead the parties’ interactions are DEMO negative over time, then their
relationship likely gravitates to Cell 3, which is characterized by low trust and high distrust.
These individuals attempt DEMO limit their interactions and, when they must interact, they devote
considerable resources to monitoring one another and protecting themselves against
exploitation by the DEMO   Conversations are cautious, guarded, and often disingenuous.54
Last, but DEMO not least important, are the cell 4 relationships, which have been
ignored in previous trust literature.  These parties have high confidence in one another with
regard to certain aspects of their relationship and yet have DEMO to be wary of one another in
other respects.55  In these DEMO, the individuals have both shared and separate,
conflicting goals.  With regard to their shared goals, trust is reflexive.  Where their goals
DEMO, however, monitoring and at least slight guardedness are common.  The DEMO
of trust and distrust presumably can stem from several causes, including DEMO motives for
behavior, the co-existence of strengths and weaknesses in people’s DEMO, and differing cost-
benefit structures of varying contexts. According to Lewicki DEMO al., this ambivalent
relationship “is the most prevalent for multiplex working DEMO in modern
organizations.”56
Lewicki’s framework carries with it considerable intuitive appeal.  DEMO and distrust
can, and often do, coexist in relationships.  Individuals DEMO are capable of fine-tuning both
their impressions of one another and their cooperation with one another.  Information that
indicates that another is (un)DEMO in one context can, but need not, affect one’s view
about whether the other is trustworthy in different contexts.  Indeed, as we DEMO in the next
50 The textual statements reflect the views of Lewicki, et al. regarding relationship development. We argue
later that, contrary to DEMO presentation, some types of relationships start in Cells 2 and 3, and, as a
consequence, the parties in those relationships are prone DEMO inaccurately assess trust-relevant information.
51 Lewicki, et al., supra note ___, at 446.
52 Id.; see infra notes ___ and accompanying text DEMO further description of this “disconfirmation bias.”
53 Id.
54 Id. at 447.
55 See also HARDIN, supra note ___, at 97 (discussing society with high personal distrust and yet extensive
trading as one where in DEMO individuals trust one another with respect to some matters but not others).
56 Lewicki, et al., supra note ___, at 447.
13
Part, trust is not nearly as fragile as some legal scholars have argued. 57 Although trust
sometimes can erode more quickly than it is DEMO, trust in some contexts may be quite
resilient. Moreover, we might expect blunt distrust-creating tools to damage surrounding trust
more than more precise DEMO  Indeed, the beneficial aspects of trust in relationships may be
more immune to legal measures that create specific fine-tuned and carefully targeted forms DEMO
distrust than legal scholars have previously supposed. 58
Both trust and distrust in relationships can prove beneficial; law should therefore
promote “optimal trust.” When is trust apt to be nonoptimal? In short, trust is apt DEMO be
nonoptimal where it does not develop slowly, is not subject DEMO a careful vetting process,
and/or does not respond effectively to disconfirming trust-relevant information.  Returning to
Lewicki et al’s framework, people are DEMO starting in cells 2 and 3, rather than cell 1.
And DEMO their starting point may be, we suspect that they are not DEMO accurately.
Indeed, it may be true more generally that trust in DEMO cell 2 and 3 relationships is more apt to
operate heuristically and without regard to disconfirming information.  In contrast, trust
assessments by people DEMO cell 1 and cell 4 relationships seem to more often involve careful
analytic processing of available information.  In those types of relationships where people are
inclined to systematically trust one another too much or too little DEMO are systematically
inclined to process trust information heuristically, then legal interference DEMO most
appropriate and most likely to prove useful.  We turn to DEMO fuller consideration of this matter
in Part III below.
III. NONOPTIMAL TRUST
In this Part, we try to identify some of the factors that might lead the truster in
particular relationships to trust the other at DEMO levels, and explore some of the
cognitive mechanisms that can contribute DEMO the problem.  To some extent, we are able to rely
on existing trust literature, but much of our framework consists of our attempts to apply more
general theories of cognitive psychology to the trust context.  In these latter cases, we
introduce hypotheses that we believe are highly plausible but would need to be tested to
confirm that they in DEMO work the way we suggest in the context of trust.  In DEMO A, we
introduce the possibility that overtrust and undertrust can evolve DEMO rational responses to
uncertainty regarding the optimal level of trust in a given situation.  Given the role of trust in
reducing perceived uncertainty, DEMO, initial errors in trust assessments are sometimes not
readily amenable to DEMO revision.  In Subpart B, we focus on the fact that some trust
assessments are made consciously while others operate at a subconscious level.  Although
neither conscious nor subconscious trust assessments are immune from the effects DEMO
cognitive biases, the latter trust assessments may be more prone to DEMO  In Subpart C, we
explore the influence that trust emotions have on the cognitive processing of the risks
associated with trusting another.  In some cases, trust emotions block rational assessments of
57 See, e.g., Blair & Stout, supra note ___, at 1776; Leslie, supra DEMO ___, at 545; Paul Slovic, What’s Fear
Got To Do DEMO It? It’s Affect We Need To Worry About, 69 MO. L. REV. 971, 988 (2004); Robert Gatter,
Faith, Confidence and Health Care: Fostering Trust in Medicine Through Law, 39 WAKE FOREST DEMO REV.
395 (2004); Lawrence E. Mitchell, Trust and Team Production in Post-Capitalist Society, 24 J. CORP. L.
869, 870 (1999).  We discuss the resilience of trust in the text accompanying notes __, infra.
58See Lewicki, supra note __ at 448 (“it would be extremely misleading to assume either that the positive
predictors of trust would DEMO be negative predictors of distrust or that the positive consequences of
trust would necessarily be influenced negatively by increased distrust.”).
14
the advisability of trusting another.  We conclude with a summary and some thoughts about
how these cognitive phenomena influence trust decisions in particular contexts.
DEMO Trust Biases as Error Management
To develop a cognitive theory of trust, we first need a better understanding of the role
of trust for humans.  Why do people trust or distrust one another?   Put DEMO, why do
people adopt positions of confidence in their assessments of DEMO actions and/or intentions of
others?59
We sometimes need to make a binary decision as to whether to trust.  Should a
shopkeeper close his store when he goes on vacation, or should he let his assistant keep the
store open in his absence?  The shopkeeper may DEMO well think it’s likely that the assistant
can be trusted, but DEMO cannot be completely sure.  The assistant’s actions would turn on a
DEMO of perhaps unknown factors, including the assistant’s internal normative
commitment to DEMO trustworthy, his current financial needs, the likelihood that he could get an
equivalent or better job elsewhere, and the extent to which he will suffer legally or
reputationally if he steals from the shopkeeper.  Unfortunately, however, uncertainty does not
sit well with us humans.60   Ultimately DEMO shopkeeper must decide whether to trust his
assistant with his register and he needs to stop worrying about whether he has made the
correct DEMO
To some trust scholars,61 decisions about trust and distrust serve to enable people to
“contain and manage social uncertainty and complexity.”62  Trust reduces the assessor’s
sensation of uncertainty and complexity by enabling her to believe DEMO the possibility of
harm is lower and the likelihood of beneficial conduct is high.  Conversely, distrust causes
the assessor to increase—perhaps to certainty—her DEMO that the other person will act in a
harmful way while simultaneously reducing in her mind the possibility that beneficial results
will follow from DEMO  This tendency for trust to bias perceptions is a specific example DEMO
a more common tendency to use mental shortcuts that enable decisive action.63
Trust, then, can be viewed as a cognitive phenomenon that serves DEMO assessor’s need
to act decisively in the face of uncertainty.  This DEMO to make and act on a decision does not
necessarily create nonoptimal trust, because often the evaluator can cabin the degree to which
she makes herself vulnerable in response to his initial assessment. Returning to our DEMO
59 Confidence seems to be an essential component of the definition of trust, as is apparent in the Oxford
English Dictionary’s definitions of trust. See http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry.
60 See Richard A. Posner, The Jurisprudence of Skepticism, 86 MICH. L. REV. 827, 873 (1998) (“people
hate being in a state of doubt and will do whatever DEMO necessary to move from doubt to belief”) (citing C.
Peirce, DEMO Fixation of Belief, in PHILOSOPHICAL WRITINGS OF PEIRCE 5, 10 (DEMO Buchler, ed. 1955).
61 Lewicki, et al., supra note DEMO, at 444 (citing N. LUHMANN, TRUST AND POWER (1979))DEMO
62 Id.
63 Being able to reduce a welter of information to a manageable size has attractions even if we know that
the basis DEMO that reduction is flawed.  Most of us prefer to develop a DEMO for action, rather than
simply to contemplate the many-splendoured diversity of DEMO world around us.  Rushing fools
more often make mistakes, but the virtues of angelic caution are not appealing to most.
David Good, Individuals, Interpersonal Relations, and Trust, in TRUST: MAKING AND BREAKING
COOPERATIVE DEMO 31, 40 (Diego Gambetta, ed. 1988).
15
produce stand, for example, the farmer might choose to leave the DEMO unmanned but to
lock down the cash box.  Put differently, one common mechanism by which the evaluator can
remain comfortable about her confidence DEMO her trust assessment is to break down the
differing facets in which trust might be relevant to her actions and to choose to trust DEMO to
the extent consistent with her trust-relevant information. 64  To the DEMO that fine gradations
can be made in the evaluator’s decision to make herself vulnerable to other’s predation,
relatively optimal trust decisions can be DEMO  That is, assessments may be biased, but the
costliness of DEMO consequences of trust is carefully contained by taking small steps with
respect to vulnerability.65
Unfortunately, fine vulnerability gradations are not always available to a decision
maker.  If, for example, the shopkeeper must decide whether to book his fishing trip two
hours after hiring his assistant, he must make a big decision with little “trust in” information,
and he DEMO well end up having overtrusted or undertrusted.  Indeed, because the decision is
binary – he will entrust his assistant with the store or DEMO will not-- any assessment he makes
will almost certainly constitute a leap from the information he has available to him. Where
trust decisions are DEMO, either because they must be made too soon or because the
DEMO of the truster is discontinuous, the cognitive bias necessarily embedded in DEMO
trust decision can prove costly.  How does the individual end up DEMO whether to trust?
In many contexts, we would expect that DEMO to comport with the Error Management
Theory of cognitive bias.66
According to Error Management Theory (EMT), social judgments are inevitably
susceptible to error due to the realities of imperfect information and others’ deceptive
efforts.67  In the face of this uncertainty, we run the risk of erring in one direction or the
other, and EMT predicts that when the relative costliness of the two types of error differ, the
optimal system will be biased toward committing the less costly error.68  From an
evolutionary perspective, the costlier the error to those individuals who make it, the DEMO
likely the individual is to gain in relative fitness.  Selection can DEMO favor a cognitive
bias that produces more errors so long as the magnitude of the costs of those errors is smaller
than those associated DEMO the alternative bias.69  The common, though unfortunate, tendency
of people DEMO avoid diseased or injured people might provide an example of EMT at work.70
64 Cooperative steps often start out small.  When, for example, Palo Alto homeowners were asked to place
large signs in their yards DEMO others to drive slowly, the vast majority refused. When they were DEMO
asked to put a small sign on their cars or to sign a petition, the vast majority agreed to cooperate.  After
taking this DEMO step, most of the homeowners were prepared to place the larger DEMO in their yards (the
percent of cooperating homeowners increased from 17 DEMO 76).  Katyal, supra note ___, at 1349.
65 Consider DEMO this regard, HARDIN, supra note ___, at 124, who says that “[i]t seems likely that one will
tend initially to trust a DEMO person only in limited ways and will trust on more important matters only after
building up to them.”
66 Martie G. Haselton & David DEMO Buss, Error management theory: A new perspective on biases in cross-
sex mind reading, 78 PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 81 (2000).
DEMO Errors might also be affected by the fact that heuristics and rules of thumb are common mechanisms by
which humans economize on cognitive effort.  Orbell & Dawes, A Cognitive Miser Theory, supra note ___.
68 DEMO G. Haselton & David M. Buss, Biases in Social Judgment: Design Flaws or Design Features?, in
RESPONDING TO THE SOCIAL WORLD: IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT PROCESSES IN SOCIAL JUDGMENT AND
DECISIONS 23, 30 (J. DEMO, K. Williams & B. Von Hippel, eds. 2003).
69 Id. at 31.
70 Haselton, et al, The Evolution of Cognitive Bias, 12 forthcoming in DAVID M. BUSS, THE EVOLUTIONARY
PSYCHOLOGY HANDBOOK (2005) (manuscript on file with authors).   Studies indicate that little evidence is
16
“[T]he false negative (failing to avoid someone with a contagious disease) DEMO highly costly,
whereas the false positive (avoiding contact with a DEMO person) may be
inconvenient but is unlikely to be injurious.”71  This bias might be involved as well in the
recent widespread panic over DEMO, Mad Cow Disease, and AIDS contamination, even
though these risks DEMO comparatively slight in the United States.72  This suggests that EMT
can DEMO applied to at least some trust decisions because (1) they involve uncertainty; (2) the
costliness of making an incorrect trust assessment can be quite large; and (3) the aggregate
costs of overtrust and undertrust are at times asymmetric.73
To fully appreciate how EMT might apply DEMO trust behavior, we must more carefully
elaborate on the contributions of DEMO biology to human psychology. Behavioral
biologists treat the brain as a human organ subject to the same evolutionary pressures as our
other organs.74  Because cognition and social judgment are both products of our brain
processes, evolutionary theory suggests that cognitive biases are themselves a product of
evolutionary pressures.75  These evolutionary pressures work slowly, however; it can take
hundreds, or even thousands, of generations for the brain’s cognitive processes to adapt to
important environmental changes.  EMT presupposes that cognitive biases are a response to
environmental pressures that existed in the environment of evolutionary adaptation (or EEA)
rather than in response to modern pressures.76
What might trust biases DEMO like under EMT?  Sometimes, EMT would lead to
overtrust; other times, it should lead to undertrust.  We expect overtrust77 in small DEMO,
one-shot transactions.78  It is now commonly believed that in the DEMO where our brains
required to convince someone that another is ill or contagious, whereas much stronger evidence is often
necessary to convince others that another is free from disease.  Even though this bias leaves its possessor
prone to make errors about whether others should be avoided, it biases the interaction decision in favor of
making the least costly error. Id.
DEMO Id.
72 Id.
73 Haselton & Buss, Biases in Social Judgment, supra note ___, at 31.
74 TIMOTHY H. GOLDSMITH, THE BIOLOGICAL DEMO OF HUMAN NATURE: FORGING LINKS BETWEEN
EVOLUTION AND BEHAVIOR 91 (1991); Owen D. Jones, Time-Shifted Rationality and the Law of Law’s
Leverage: Behavioral Economics Meets Behavioral Biology, 95 NW. U. L. REV. 1141, 1143 n.85 (2001).
75 Jones, supra, at 1165.
76 Id. at 1167-68. Jones’ related “time-shifted rationality” hypothesizes that many of the cognitive DEMO
identified by behavioral theorists today were actually “rational” behaviors in the period in which our brains
evolved. Id. at 1171-73.  Put differently, humans DEMO possessed such qualities as a taste for sweets, an
ability to DEMO frequencies (rather than probabilities), and a tendency to steeply discount DEMO value of
future events, were more likely to survive and thrive DEMO were humans who did not possess them, even
though these qualities DEMO be problematic, and even harmful, today. See Jones, Time-Shifted Rationality,DEMO
supra note __ at 1174-5 (taste for sweets); 1179-81 (frequencies); 1177-79 (discounting). See also GERD
GIGERENZER, ADAPTIVE THINKING: RATIONALITY IN THE REAL WORLD (2000).  In contrast to time-shifted
rationality, EMT does not claim that these cognitive biases were ever “rational” in DEMO sense that the
decisions themselves were perfectly made in the EEA.  DEMO, they are second-best systemic responses to
the inevitability of errors in DEMO judgments in the EEA.
77 Recall that overtrust and undertrust are measured as a function of whether trust assessments turn out to be
correct.  We do not mean to suggest by the textual sentence that we DEMO as a normative matter that
people should trust each other less in this context.
78 For applications of EMT to cooperation in one-shot games, see T. Yamagishi, et al, The Social Exchange
Heuristic: Managing Errors in Social Exchange (2003) (unpublished manuscript cited in Haselton, et DEMO,
17
evolved, humans lived in small groups.79  In that world, an interaction with another human
carried with it the significant likelihood that the interaction DEMO repeat itself in the not too
distant future.80  The net potential DEMO from cooperation were therefore significant, and,
more importantly, greater than the net potential gains from defecting.  The EMT prediction of
overtrust is one-shot games is borne out 81 – and contrasts with that of DEMO, who
predict distrust as a consequence of anticipated defection.82  The same is of course not true
where the stakes are higher: Trusting an acquaintance to reciprocate your hunting efforts
might be one thing, but trusting that person with your baby’s care might be quite another.
Under EMT, therefore, when there were contexts where erroneously trusting was potentially
more costly than erroneously not trusting, then we would expect undertrust.83
EMT also predicts undertrust (indeed, distrust) of people we consider to be of other
groups,84  and overtrust of people we consider to be of our own group.  “[H]umans appear to
possess a bias toward inferring that members of competing coalitions (or out-groups) are less
generous and kind and DEMO dangerous and mean than members of their own group.”85  In-
supra DEMO ___, at 31 (Haselton manuscript on file with authors)); DEMO Yamagishi, et al. Bounded generalized
reciprocity: In-group favoritism and in-group boasting, 16 ADVANCES IN GROUP PROCESSES 161 (1999).
79 See, e.g., MATT RIDLEY, THE ORIGINS OF VIRTUE 69 (1997) (relationship between size of neocortex
relative to rest of brain and size of animal DEMO groups suggests that humans evolved in groups averaging
150 in number); PAUL H. RUBIN, DARWINIAN POLITICS: THE EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS OF FREEDOM 7
(2002) (available evidence suggests that social group size for humans in DEMO EEA ranged between 25 and
150).
80 See, e.g., Robert Kurzban, Biological Foundations of Reciprocity, in TRUST AND RECIPROCITY, supra
note ___, at 105, 119 (“Our ancestors were probably engaged in a repeated game with virtually everyone in
their local environment.”).
81 Even DEMO subjects are placed in an iterative context without communication, cooperation in DEMO first
few rounds is common, and apparently reflexive; cooperation rates only tend to drop off in the final few
periods.  Ostrom, supra DEMO ___, at 28-29. Apparently, then, iterative plays focus the players DEMO “rational”
end game strategies whereas one-shot games seem to focus the players on generalized instinctive (and
perhaps ethical) considerations.
82 Id. Indeed, economists sometimes assume that because somebody who trusts reaps only part of the
DEMO of cooperation yet incurs all of the costs of the other’s opportunism, people generally are inclined
to undertrust. See HARDIN, supra note ___, at 82 (“If . . . trustworthiness . . . is a collective good, there may
be a tendency to underinvest in it, DEMO there may be a tendency to underinvest in reputation”).
83 Haselton, et al., supra note ___, at 15, discuss this idea DEMO the context of cooperation rather than trust.
When the costs of cooperation are relatively low or the social costs of failing to cooperate, through
ostracism or otherwise, potentially high, then they predict greater cooperation.  Id.
84 Besides the obvious triggers of ingroup identification (race, ethnicity, social class, etc.) it is also possible
to sporadically trigger ingroup sentiments DEMO behavior with less trivial categories.  For example, when
experimenters group subjects together by the first digit in their social security numbers; those with the same
numbers give each other higher payoffs than they give those DEMO different numbers. See generally, HENRY
TAJFEL, SOCIAL IDENTITY AND INTERGROUP RELATIONS (1982).  Moreover, “placing groups into
competition has been shown to increase intergroup bias in the allocation of benefits and in the evaluation DEMO
out-group performance.”  Linda Hamilton Krieger, Civil Rights Perestroika:  Intergroup Relations After
Affirmative Action, 86 CAL. L. REV. 1251, 1274-75 (1998); see also Marilyn B. Brewer & Roderick M.
Kramer, The Psychology of Intergroup Attitudes and Behavior, 36 ANN. REV. PSYCHOL. 219, 227 (1985);
Bernard M. Bass & George Dunteman, Biases in the Evaluation DEMO One’s Own Group, It’s Allies and
Opponents, 7 J. CONFLICT. RES. 16 (1963).
85 Haselton, et al, supra note ___, DEMO 14 (citing M.B. Brewer, In-group bias in the minimal intergroup
situation: A cognitive-motivational analysis, 86 PSYCHOL. BULL. 307 (1979), and L. Quillian & D. Pager,
Black neighbors, higher crime? The role DEMO racial stereotypes in evaluations of neighborhood crime, 107
AMER. J. SOCIOL. DEMO (2001)).  Using EMT reasoning, this distrustful bias can be explained as follows:
18
group favoritism often results from a greater propensity to trust those who DEMO similar to
oneself in background or values.  For example, Janet Landa interviewed Chinese rubber
dealers to learn more about how they choose their DEMO partners.  Because the merchants
felt unable to rely on contract law DEMO enforce their contracts, they ranked potential trading
partners according to trustworthiness DEMO attempted to limit their transactions to the groups of
individuals deemed more trustworthy. Kinsmen in the same nuclear family topped their list,
followed DEMO extended family kinsmen, then clansmen, then fellow villagers, then Chinese
DEMO speaking the same dialect, then Chinese speaking another dialect, and finally non-
Chinese.86  Landa quotes a rubber merchant as saying, “’[b]ecause of DEMO risk involved in
advancing money without security, based purely on trust, we tend to trade with those whom
we trust; they are often kinsmen, friends, people from the same place in China and those DEMO
speak the same dialect.’”87  ‘Beyond the Hokkein-Chinese ethnic boundary, the limits of
Confucian ethics form the basis for a Hokkien-Chinese trader’s classification of DEMO potential
traders into two major categories, the insiders (i.e. Hokkens); and ‘outsiders’ (non-Hokkiens,
and non-Chinese).  The insiders, because of shared Confucian social norms of behavior, are
seen as members of a ‘moral community of reliable trading partners.”88
Trust biases, whether or not explained by EMT, are in part made possible by two
related but distinct features of trust.  First, not all trust decisions are consciously made, and
subconscious cognitive processes, because they fail to correct cognitive biases, DEMO be more
susceptible to error.  Second, some trust decisions are of a sort we call “specific trust,”
whereas others are made by DEMO to residual and more generalized feelings of trust or
distrust toward the other person.  These more generalized bases for trust decisions tend to be
less accurate than is specific trust reasoning.  This inaccuracy is exacerbated by the fact that
residual trust is more likely than specific trust to DEMO subconscious trust decisions.  We
now turn to explore these phenomena.
B. DEMO vs. Subconscious Trust Assessments
For ancestral humans, the costs of falsely DEMO peacefulness on the part of an aggressor were
likely to outweigh the comparatively low costs of elevated vigilance toward aggression, especially
for inferences regarding out-group members.  For in-group members, elevated inferences of
aggressiveness would have DEMO the additional costs of within-coalition conflict, and hence the
negative bias DEMO be expected to be small or non-existent for in-group members.
Id. at 14-15.
86 Janet T. Landa & Xiao Tian Wang, Bounded Rationality of Economic Man:  Decision Making Under
Ecological, Social and Institutional Constraints, DEMO J. BIOECONOMICS 217, 228 (2001); see also Toshio
Yamagishi & Midori Yamagishi, Trust and Commitment in the United States and Japan, DEMO MOTIVATION
& EMOTION 129 (1994) (finding that Japanese subjects tend DEMO trust one another within but not across
cliques).
87 Landa & Wang, supra at 227.
88 Id. at 228-29.
19
Many trust scholars define trust as conscious, or deliberate, decision-making.89 In
DEMO life, however, we often trust others and act in a trustworthy fashion without being
conscious of making a decision.  In long-term relationships we can be incited to anger when
another fails to act in a DEMO fashion.  “I trusted you!” the betrayed individual cries
indignantly.  In these cases, the angry person is upset in part precisely because she did not
think it necessary to worry about whether the untrustworthy person would DEMO in her interests.
Trust, in both our personal and professional lives DEMO important for many reasons, one of which
is that it obviates DEMO constant calculation about whether trust is warranted. Indeed, very few
people DEMO calculate whether they can trust.  We don’t leave faculty meetings
wondering DEMO a colleague has stolen our umbrella.  When we ask a stranger DEMO
directions, we rarely wonder whether her answer was honest.  And we don’t worry about
whether the babysitter is really a spy working for DEMO CIA.  Our quality of life would be
impoverished and we would DEMO paralyzed if we had to consciously calculate all possible trust
assessments.  DEMO, and perhaps most, people in their ordinary day-to-day interactions take
the default position to act in a trusting fashion with others unless and DEMO they receives cues
that distrust might instead be appropriate.  Only when DEMO are sufficiently large clues that
distrust may be appropriate (or when DEMO stakes are sufficiently large) does a conscious
decision about trust come DEMO play.90  Put differently, there are individual processes that
generate propensities to trust others; these quite often are not carefully calculative,
deliberative, DEMO even conscious.  In this sense, they are automatic.
How might an automatic default trust assessment evolve? After all, those individuals
who are DEMO – who tend to make themselves vulnerable to others--can be exploited by
untrustworthy individuals.  The answer turns on a link between trusting and trustworthy
behavior.   There are evolutionary advantages to being trustworthy: The trustworthy
individual has more trading, friendship and other personal opportunities than the
nontrustworthy individual.  And being trusting trust has become a credible signal of
trustworthiness.  DEMO an empirical matter, people who are more instinctively trusting of others
DEMO tend to be more trustworthy and vice versa.91  Conversely, people who are less
trustworthy are less likely to trust others.92  This observation accords with intuition: people
89 See, e.g., Blair & Stout, supra DEMO ___, at 1746 (“the trusting actor must deliberately make herself
vulnerable to the trusted actor . . .”); id. at 1746 n.18 (“Trust thus implies volition on both sides.”);
Rosseau, et al., supra note ___, at 395 (defining trust as “a psychological state DEMO the intention to
accept vulnerability based on positive expectations of the intentions or behavior of another”); Ostrom &
Walker, supra note ___, at 6 (“a core aspect of most definitions of trust is the intention to accept
vulnerability based on the . . . “); DEMO, supra note ____, at 73 (defining trust as “a more DEMO less
consciously chosen policy for handling the freedom of other human agents or agencies”).
90Of course, there is significant individual variation in people’s willingness to trust others as a subconscious
default.  A paranoid person might never subconsciously decide to trust another.  A low-trust individual will
calculate rational moves sooner than a high-trust person. And an extremely naïve individual might DEMO
even in the face of unambiguous external stimuli suggesting that trust is inappropriate. Under this
conception, then, individuals lie along a trust spectrum DEMO on their sensitivity to disconfirming
external evidence and the presence of incentives that might cause them to focus consciously on making a
rational trust DEMO
91 Rotter, Interpersonal Trust, supra note ___, at 2; Peter Brann & Margaret Foddy, Trust and the
Consumption of a Deteriorating Common Resource, 31 J. CONFLICT RESOL. 615, 622-23 (1987); John M.
Orbell, et al., Do Cooperators Exit More Readily than Defectors?, DEMO AMER. POL. SCI. REV. 147 (1984);
Blair & Stout, DEMO note ___, at 1765-66.
20
readily imagine others behaving as they themselves would behave, an observation that
underlies the leading cognitive science theory of mind.93
Being trustworthy yields instrumental DEMO, but the personally committed
trustworthy individual is trustworthy without regard to DEMO benefits.  And the very fact that
the benefits are not calculated DEMO motivating the trustworthiness is what gives the trustworthy
individual his advantage.94  DEMO all, a person who will be trustworthy regardless of the costs
DEMO a much better trading and mutual support partner than one who is only contingently
trustworthy. And “the fact that trustworthy persons do receive a DEMO payoff in the form
of more extensive interactive opportunities is of course what sustains the trait within the
individual selectionist framework.”95
Because trustworthy people DEMO tend to be more trusting, they are more likely
themselves to DEMO out opportunities for reaping cooperative gains.96 Those who are too
trustful quickly learn from their experiences that they need to readjust their levels of
DEMO  Individuals who trust too little, by contrast, tend to avoid DEMO with
strangers because they tend to think that others cannot be trusted to make those interactions
successful.  These individuals might have the capacity to become more trustful of others, but
their less frequent interactions provide them with slower and weaker evidence that trust
adjustments are in order.97
When DEMO people encounter one another, they can reap the material benefits
of DEMO as well as the emotional benefits of being in a mutually trusting relationship.  As
mentioned earlier, however, trusting and trustworthy individuals can be exploited by
untrustworthy individuals.  In order to reap net benefits from trusting behavior then, trusting
individuals need to refrain from trusting others when they receive sufficiently potent signals
that trust might be inappropriate.  Therein lies the tension for the trusting individual.
According to both EMT and Robert Frank’s DEMO of moral sentiments, her signal receptivity
must be sensitive enough to DEMO her from incurring large costs from exploitation and yet
dull enough to signal to others that she is a high-trust individual.  Recall also that for most
people, initial trust steps are small and provide a testing ground to determine whether the
other person is trustworthy or not.98  Small steps minimize the costs of nondiscriminating
trust.  This strategy enables trustworthy individuals to find one another while simultaneously
weeding out untrustworthy individuals at relatively DEMO cost.99
92 Blair & Stout, supra.
93 See, e.g., Alvin DEMO, In Defense of Simulation Theory, 7 MIND & LANGUAGE 104 (DEMO); Robert
Gordon, Folk Psychology as Simulation, 1 MIND & LANGUAGE 158 (1986).
94 ROBERT FRANK, PASSIONS WITHIN REASON: THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF THE EMOTIONS 69 (1988).
95 Id.
96 Orbell & Dawes, Cognitive Miser Theory, supra note ___, at 526.
97 This account of undertrust is provided in Hardin, supra note ___, at DEMO
98 Hardin, supra note ___, at 124 (“It seems likely DEMO one will tend initially to trust a new person only in
limited ways and will trust on more important matters only after building up DEMO them”).
21
The important points here are that (1) many trust assessments are DEMO in
subconsciously; (2) trust tends to beget trustworthiness, whereas distrust tends to beget
untrustworthiness; (3) in many contexts people tend to function with a default rule to trust;
and (4) initial DEMO steps will often be comparatively modest. Once a conscious trust
assessment is triggered, though, the truster is likely to rely on a type DEMO rational reasoning
about her interests, through EMT or traditional cost-benefit analysis, and the likelihood that
she will in fact trust is lowered.100  Subconscious trust assessments may be more prone to
error, due to the fact that specific trust-relevant information is less likely to be taken into
account DEMO the assessment process.  If subconscious trust assessments are routine in some
DEMO or in some types of relationships, then policy makers should worry DEMO the
possibility of systematically nonoptimal trust levels in those contexts and relationships.  The
problem of subconscious trust assessments is closely related to a second source of trust-
assessment inaccuracy: an unwarranted focus on residual trust feelings at the expense of
specific trust-relevant information.101  We turn now to that subject.
C.
Two Trust Boxes: The Case for Residual Trust
Trust scholars have identified two very different types of trust.  The first type of trust,
which we will label “specific trust,” involves a belief DEMO assumption that one can accurately
predict how another will behave in a given situation.102 Can I trust the painter to lock the door
when DEMO leaves? Can I trust my client in my office with confidential DEMO in my files?
Can I trust my dean to assign me the courses that I want to teach? At other times, trust DEMO
conceived of more broadly, as a “general positive attitude” that leads DEMO to expect, believe
or assume that “another’s future actions will be DEMO, favorable, or at least not
99 The statement in the text is a variant on geneticist John Maynard Smith’s description of the Hawk/DEMO
game.  In the game, Hawks are aggressive defectors and Doves are passive cooperators. When a Hawk
encounters a Dove, the Hawk is able to exploit the Dove.  When two Hawks encounter one another, they
DEMO one another. When two Doves encounter one another, they enjoy benefits.  A successful strategy
for Doves entails turning into a Hawk, or retaliating, when a Dove encounters a Hawk.  John Maynard
Smith & G.R. DEMO, The Logic of Animal Conflict, NATURE, Nov. 2, 1973, DEMO 15.  Given that retaliation can
be costly, limited initial interaction followed by avoidance could be an equally successful strategy for
Doves to weed DEMO Hawks.
100 Interestingly, trusting causes people to interact more often with DEMO  See supra note ___. Because
trust begets trustworthiness, however, the DEMO individual’s more positive information may cause her to
continue to trust at very high levels.  In that case, however, the high truster could nevertheless accurately
assess the trustworthiness of others as regards their behavior relative DEMO her.
101 Admittedly, no general consensus supports the invariant superiority of DEMO conscious assessments over
more subconscious assessments.  Indeed, a recent (and DEMO quite influential) book by Malcolm
Gladwell, Blink argues for the value of quick decisions over those made with more deliberation.
MALCOLM GLADWELL, BLINK (2004); see also George Loewenstein & Ted O’Donoghue, Animal Spirits:DEMO
Affective and Deliberative Processes in Economics Behavior (working paper on file DEMO authors).  In
contrast to their work, however, we focus DEMO these examples in which the subconscious assessment is in
fact mistaken because over- or undertrust has invoked or exploited a cognitive bias, and a more deliberative
assessment might very well catch the mistake.
102 Tom Tyler DEMO this trust “calculative trust.”  Tom R. Tyler, Trust and Law Abidingness: A Proactive
Model of Social Regulation, 81 B.U. L. REV. 361 (2001).  To avoid confusion with conscious trust
decisions discussed earlier in this article, we refer to this type of trust as specific trust.
22
detrimental to one’s interests.”103  This more general trust often “involves an inference about
the ‘spirit’ or ‘motive’ that will shape behavior, rather than a prediction about the specific
behavior that will occur.”104  This more general trust is simply a trust that another will make
good faith efforts to DEMO the truster’s interests, or a knowledge of the other’s values that
DEMO truster believes will inform the other’s actions in a particular way. The more general trust
might well be, and typically is, a belief DEMO attitude about a specific person that informs our
general view of the person; it is in significant part what we have labeled “trust in” trust.105
We wish to suggest here that trust decisions can be made DEMO on the basis of a
general assessment or instead on the basis of a specific assessment, and that these two types
of assessments utilize very different reasoning processes.  Cognitive processing models in the
psychology literature contemplate that people have two types of processing mechanisms:
roughly, one is automatic and subconscious, and the other is deliberative and conscious.106
We think trust decisions are sometimes made using more automatic, subconscious processes;
at other times they are made using more deliberative processes.  If the assessor is consciously
attempting to predict how another will behave in a particular DEMO, her brain will seek a
specific assessment about trust.  If the truster lacks information about the specific behavior of
the other or the DEMO context being assessed, her cognitive processes will instead produce
a trust DEMO based on her general sense about the trustworthiness of the other person.
We will refer to this general sense about the trustworthiness of the DEMO as the truster’s
residual trust in the other person.  These differing DEMO processes can help to facilitate
the coexistence of trust and distrust discussed in Part II.  Individuals can and do hold
information about specific trust and distrust that is different from their residual trust or
distrust in DEMO same person.  For example, Sue might think Sam is generally trustworthy, but
she may know from past experience that he’s incapable of being punctual.
In general, this dual mechanism for trust-based decisions works well.  DEMO dual
mechanism whereby residual trust forms the basis of assessments unless overridden by a
conscious, specific trust assessment enables the brain to economize on resources.  A person
cannot focus on every possible context in which trust is relevant in every relationship that she
103 Sandra L. Robinson, Trust and Breach of the Psychological Contract, 41 ADMIN. SCI. Q. 574, DEMO
(1996); id. at 579 (“trust comes not from a cognitive calculus of how a particular party will act but, rather,
from the relational bonds between the parties . . .  and the implicit assumptions that others in one’s social
relationships have respect and concern for DEMO welfare”).
104 Tyler, supra, at 366-67.
105 Consider in this regard Maurice Delgado et al., Perception of Moral Character Modulate the Neural
Systems Of Reward During the Trust Game (working paper on file with authors). In their experiment,
subjects were told about transacting partners DEMO had done one of three types of actions, all of which DEMO
unrelated to the transaction at issue: a ‘good’ action, a neutral action and a ‘bad’ action. The resulting
reaction of the subjects indicated DEMO, residual (dis)trust of the ‘good’ and ‘bad’ partners, trust DEMO
seemed to resist updating.   By contrast, subjects more readily processed DEMO relevant to the
trustworthiness of the partner who had engaged in a morally neutral action.
106 See, e.g., infra note ___ and accompanying DEMO (discussing psychology literature that contrasts heuristic
and deliberative thought processes.  Of course, cognitive scientists have generated differing dual
mechanism hypotheses. See, e.g., Steven Sloman, The Empirical Case For Two Systems of Reasoning, 119
DEMO BULL. 3 (1996) (arguing for presence of associative and rule-based DEMO of reasoning); John
R. Anderson, Acquisition of Cognitive Skill, 89 PSYCHOL. REV. 369 (1982) (arguing for declarative and
procedural mechanisms for processing information relevant to a skill domain); JOSEPH LEDOUX, THE
EMOTIONAL BRAIN 164 (1996) (illustrating separate neural pathways for the processing of decision-
relevant information).
23
maintains, and residual trust, which is largely subconsciously processed, frees up cognitive
energy for other tasks.  To help the individual to contain error costs, however, a specific trust
processing mechanism often kicks in as DEMO to override residual trust.
Sometimes, however, the mechanism works less well.  Information from the specific
trust assessments should inform residual trust, but DEMO do so imperfectly.   Residual trust
may be sticky, resisting revision DEMO contrary evidence.   We may hold onto the
belief that a relative is generally trustworthy notwithstanding the relative’s tendency to be
late in repaying DEMO and general unreliability in many other spheres.  Consider in this regard
DEMO recent scandals involving Catholic priests.  There was clearly enormous resistance to
DEMO that the priests involved in the scandals were untrustworthy even where their
great interest in spending ‘excessive’ time with children was noticed.   Moreover, the more
important trustworthy behavior in a given context is to the DEMO, the greater the weight that
the specific trustworthiness information likely is DEMO in forming the truster’s assessment of
residual trust.  If it is DEMO important for Sue to be able to trust others with her children than
with her money, for example, distrust of Sam regarding the DEMO might have more
influence on her residual trust of Sam than will her inability to trust Sam with her
pocketbook.  On the other hand, if trusting Sam with her pocketbook is ultimately more
important because it means that she must always stand on guard against his theft, then
distrust with respect to her pocketbook will influence her residual trust in DEMO more heavily
than will her sense about whether he can be trusted with her children.  Furthermore, the more
salient information pertaining to specific DEMO is, the more it may inform an
assessment of residual trust DEMO distrust. Emotions, too, may play a role; when a situation DEMO
emotionally charged, specific trust processing can be impeded, leaving intact a pre-existing
residual trust assessment.107
In sum, in contrast to the paradigmatic trust relationships described in Parts II and
IIIA, initially small, calculated specific DEMO steps are not possible in all contexts, and trust
development is DEMO always either gradual or smoothly continuous.  In some relationships,
particularly DEMO of family and significant one-sided dependency, residual trust typically
starts very DEMO  Trust assessments in these relationships may be resistant to disconfirming
evidence DEMO presents itself during the course of the relationship.  Moreover, outside of these
automatic high residual trust relationships, initial residual trust levels can vary depending
upon whether the parties view themselves as belonging to the same DEMO  Initial residual
trust levels also can vary depending on a party’s DEMO  Initial residual trust levels may
be high for community or religious DEMO, or for people whose jobs or particular deeds are
heroic.108
Our DEMO about the relationship between the two types of trust—that specific
trust informs residual trust, that residual trust in turn forms the basis of initial specific trust
but that specific trust only imperfectly informs residual trust-- come DEMO an intuitive,
common-sense interpretation of trust assessments that we observe in every day life.  For
example, people often seem to be able DEMO make accurate assessments about the
trustworthiness of another with regard to specific behavior and yet their emotional loyalties
prevent them from converting that information DEMO a judgment that the other is
107 See infra notes ___ and accompanying text for an explanation for why strong emotions can trigger the
DEMO of residual rather than specific trust or distrust.
108 See Delgado et al., supra note __.
24
untrustworthy.  At other times, people seem to ignore specific trust information DEMO indicates
they should not trust the other person.  If specific and DEMO, or residual, trust attitudes
result from different cognitive processes, then DEMO is possible for the truster to hold
simultaneous inconsistent beliefs about the trustworthiness of the other, and the trust decision
will turn on which reasoning process dominates the decision-making.  If residual trust is only
imperfectly updated, or, if residual trust can dominate specific trust reasoning, causing the
conscious trust assessment to be bypassed altogether, then nonoptimal trust may result.
The processing pathway (general/residual or specific/calculative) chosen to form DEMO
trust assessment can be influenced by the mood, emotion, temperament, DEMO attitude
experienced by the evaluator when the assessment is made.  A DEMO number of
psychologists have begun to question the idea that emotions are qualitatively distinct from
cognition.109   Instead, the emotions can work to aid cognition and motivate individuals to
respond effectively to the world around them.  A subset of these psychologists have been
building a strong empirical case DEMO support the “affect as information” hypothesis, which is
based on the DEMO that an important kind of information used for judgment and decision
making is the information gained from our own feelings.110  Our feelings act as affective cues
that can help guide our decision-making and our actions.  At their most basic level, “positive
affective cues serve as an incentive, DEMO or ‘go’ signal for using currently accessible
inclinations, whereas negative affective DEMO serve as an inhibition, punishment, or ‘stop’
signal.”111
More subtly, DEMO affective cues cause us to think about our choices in very
different ways than do negative affective cues. When a person experiences positive affect,DEMO
she tends to rely on accessible pre-existing knowledge, beliefs and expectations.  When
instead a person experiences negative affect, she tends to pay more attention to new
information.112  Moreover, positive affect causes people to rely DEMO on heuristic processing,
stereotypes, scripts and schema than does negative DEMO adopt a global rather than a
local focus.  By contrast, negative affect leads to more systematic processing with a focus on
local and DEMO facts.114
Specific and residual trust (and distrust) can be viewed as two types of cognitive
assessments that parallel the processes triggered by emotions, moods, attitudes, and
temperaments.  One of the functions of residual trust in relationships is to enable a decision
maker to rely on some DEMO typically, a relatively small number - without having to
agonize over DEMO these people are inclined to act in the decision maker’s interest.
Conversely, one of the functions of residual distrust seems to be to cause a decision maker to
avoid and protect against the object of that DEMO  These trust reactions can be better
109 ANTONIO R. DAMASIO, DESCARTES’ ERROR: EMOTION, REASON AND THE HUMAN BRAIN (1994);
Timothy DEMO & Gerald L. Clore, Emotion and Reason: The Proximate Effects and Ultimate Functions
of Emotions, in COGNITIVE SCIENCE PERSPECTIVES ON PERSONALITY AND EMOTION 355, 360 (G.
Matthews, ed. 1997).
110 Gerald L. Clore, et al., Affective Feelings as Feedback: Some Cognitive Consequences, in DEMO OF
MOOD AND COGNITION: A USER’S GUIDE 27 (L.L. Martin & G. L. Clore, eds. 2000).
111 Clore, et al., Affective Feelings, supra note ____, at 43.
112 Id. at 44.
113 DEMO C. Clore, Why Emotions Are Felt, in THE NATURE OF EMOTION: FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS 103,
109-10 (1994) [hereinafter Why Emotions].
114 Clore, et al., Affective Feelings, supra note ___, at 45, 47.
25
understood if thought about in the context of the “affect-as-information” hypothesis.  In the
case of residual trust and distrust then, the evaluator experiences a general positive (for
residual trust) or negative (for residual distrust) DEMO about the other that causes her to feel
confident in her judgment about the intentions, beliefs, and/or likely behavior of the other.
DEMO trust processing, in contrast, seems to be a product of bottom-up, or “low
road” cognitive processes.  Negative emotions like sadness and other DEMO of
nonconfidence are motivating the evaluator to collect more information before acting on her
beliefs.  When these feelings are experienced in the trust context, the evaluator is much more
likely to process relevant information about the circumstances (“trust that” factors) and the
other’s trustworthiness (“trust in” factors) in those circumstances before making a decision
about whether trust is warranted.  In these cases, the evaluator is also better able to evaluate
DEMO any efforts by the other to persuade the evaluator of his trustworthiness.
Moreover, an evaluator who has a great deal of experience about the behavior of the other in
a given context might be more immune DEMO the heuristic-type processing that typically can be
triggered by the emotions that accompany residual trust and distrust.
Viewing trust and distrust through the lens DEMO the affect-as-information hypothesis
enables us to at least begin to understand overtrust and undertrust as emotional phenomena.
To our knowledge, no psychologist has seriously studied trust through the lens of affect-as-
information, so we are forced to be somewhat speculative and tentative in our conclusions,
which are DEMO doubt contingent on the results of future studies.  Nevertheless, the possible
insights to be gleaned from drawing this connection are well worth exploring, if only
preliminarily.  Our current view of that connection is as follows: overtrust and undertrust are
likely to result when an evaluator-- by reason of emotion, mood, attitude, or temperament—
processes trust information through top-down processing mechanisms that cause her to
ignore specific trust information and rely DEMO on the residual trust or distrust belief
about the other.  The DEMO of residual trust is common in some contexts, including
those that DEMO ingroup/outgroup stereotypes, and those that involve relationships of
dependency. We DEMO one such relationship more fully in Part IV.
D. Summary
We attempt to build a trust framework that incorporates the findings of social
dilemma DEMO but simultaneously extends beyond the findings of laboratory experiments
among strangers to better understand trust as a cognitive phenomenon.  Unlike the simplistic
notion of trust advanced by previous legal scholars, recent trust literature indicates that trust
is not an all-or-nothing concept, nor is the concept unidimensional.  Instead, people can, and
often do, hold simultaneous trusting and distrusting views DEMO one another.  Given that trust
and distrust co-exist in relationships, we must rethink the assumption of some legal scholars
that distrust-promoting measures necessarily DEMO to paralyze relationships.
Paradigmatic trust relationships build gradually.  A person develops DEMO sense of the
trustworthiness of another across specific contexts, and these DEMO trust assessments
appear to cumulate over time to inform a residual trust sense that guides the general
relationship.  To the extent that relationships are formed and maintained in a manner
26
consistent with this paradigmatic relationship, the role for law in promoting an optimal level
of trust is presumably minimal.
However, some relationships do not follow this paradigmatic form.  Family and
romantic relationships, for instance, typically start with very high initial trust.  Trust in these
relationships presumably contributes to survival and procreation in ways that make the
consequent risks of DEMO trust warranted on balance.  Not only is initial trust quite high DEMO
these relationships, but because the trust takes a residual form, and might serve important
evolutionary functions, it is quite sticky, and less DEMO to be correctly updated by
disconfirming trust-relevant information.  To the extent DEMO people in these relationships
cannot be counted on to accurately process trust-relevant information, we can conclude that
they are prone to overtrust one another.  On average these trust levels may be optimal, but
some individuals DEMO be harmed, physically, psychically, and financially, by placing this
trust in the loved one.  In Part IV, we will argue that DEMO directors and medical patients
also are prone to overtrust their corporate officers and health care professionals, respectively.
In the case of corporate directors, DEMO propose methods by which policy makers can promote
optimal trust levels.  DEMO the case of medical patients, we instead advocate methods by which
DEMO law can and does attempt to mitigate the costs of overtrust to patients.
In contrast, some relationships can be characterized as chronic undertrust
relationships.  When the context of the interaction or the characteristics of the other person
trigger that person to be characterized as a member of an DEMO,” then the trust assessor
will likely place too little trust in the other person.  Undertrust can be paralyzing and can
create hostile, DEMO behaviors between the individuals and the groups to which they
belong.  DEMO action and other integrative measures are designed at least in part to
break down the socially problematic forms of distrust associated with racial, ethnic, religious
and class outgroup biases.
The emotional component of trust amplifies the potential for systematic overtrust and
undertrust.  Positive emotions and moods cause a person to ignore specific information and
continue with the course of action DEMO has chosen; anger, too, has this effect.  In contrast,
negative emotions associated with sadness and uncertainty tend to bias thought processes
DEMO more analytical, fact-based, bottom up, discriminating thinking. These negative
emotions DEMO accuracy, whereas the positive emotions and anger promote action at the
DEMO of reduced accuracy.  Thus, the relationships characterized by systematic overtrust and
undertrust are those that tend to generate action-promoting but inaccurate emotions.  The law
cannot rely on people in these relationships to gravitate toward optimal DEMO levels on their
own.  In the next Part, we explore possible legal responses to nonoptimal trust.
IV.   LEGAL RESPONSES TO NONOPTIMAL TRUST
DEMO we have discussed, trust can be nonoptimal for several different reasons.  Very
often, what is nonoptimal is also inaccurate: a party may DEMO inaccurately high levels of
residual trust or distrust in another.  Perhaps DEMO inaccuracy is due to in-group favoritism or
out-group bias.  Or it DEMO be due to difficulty in processing trust-specific information in the
type of context at issue. The solution is sometimes for parties to be encouraged DEMO acquire
more trust-specific information; other times, the solution is for parties to be discouraged from
27
doing so.  This Section discusses the mechanisms, formal and informal, that law has available
to promote optimal trust.
To promote trust, society can encourage the development of norms of cooperation,
reciprocity, loyalty and sometimes conformity.  Public school as well as social and religious
education all focus on the development of trustworthiness, loyalty, and cooperation as
important character DEMO  To the extent that the norms are fostered in the community, the
community members can shun or otherwise privately sanction those individuals who DEMO not
act in a trustworthy fashion.   Social and internal norms therefore help reduce vulnerability by
reducing the perceived magnitude of the risk of DEMO from others in the group.115
Do formal legal institutions also contribute to trust? Scholars have differing views on
this subject.   Those suspicious of state authority argue that the imposition of legal regulation
substitutes for the DEMO of interpersonal relationships, including trust, that enable
community to thrive.116   Picking up on this theme, Larry Ribstein has recently argued that
the law can do nothing to foster trust.117  In fact, he argues, legal rules and regulations
designed to protect one party from potential losses DEMO be used opportunistically against the
regulated party. For example, if a DEMO can sue a seller for fraud, he is protected from the
DEMO misrepresentations, but he is also given a tool (a fraud suit) to extract more from an
innocent seller than he deserves.  In DEMO cases, law can actually work to undermine trust
(here, the DEMO trust in the buyer).118  More generally, however, Ribstein seems DEMO
that regulation has the effect of decreasing “the sense of vulnerability that is critical to
personal trust.”119
Although it is true that laws intended DEMO encourage trust by one party can cause the
other party to experience distrust, we, like many other scholars,120 believe that it remains
DEMO to foster trust through law.  By definition, trust entails a willingness by the truster to
make herself vulnerable to the possibility that another DEMO act to her detriment.121 The
willingness to take this risk presumably turns on both the magnitude of the perceived risk and
the degree of DEMO that the truster will suffer if it turns out that the trust was misplaced.  It
thus seems a logical mistake to assume that one gets greater trust by making the truster more
115 See Jack Knight, Social Norms and the Rule of Law:  Fostering Trust in a DEMO Diverse Society, in
TRUST IN SOCIETY, supra note ___, at DEMO, 359 (“Social norms instantiate commonly held beliefs about the
behavior of others.  . . . When the content of the norms dictates cooperative behavior, social actors can use
this information to develop expectations about the likelihood that others will cooperate, and then make a
decision to act accordingly”).
116 MICHAEL TAYLOR, COMMUNITY, ANARCHY AND LIBERTY 57 (1982); MAX WEBER, ECONOMY AND
SOCIETY (1978).
117 Larry E. DEMO, Law v. Trust, 81 B.U. L. REV. 553, 576 (2001) (“law has nothing to do with trust”).
118 Id. at DEMO Larry Garvin also points out that laws designed to achieve perfect trust can include
sanctions that are so large that they cause overdeterrence and DEMO behaviors.  Larry T. Garvin, Credit,
Information and Trust in the Law of Sales: The Credit Seller’s Right of Reclamation, 44 U.C.L.A. DEMO REV.
247, 344 (1996).  Eric Posner also suggests that DEMO of many indefinite promises, such as
requirements and output contracts, firm offers, and modifications can have the effect of interfering with
interpersonal trust.  Eric A. Posner, Altruism, Status, and Trust in the Law DEMO Gifts and Gratuitous
Promises, 1997 WISC. L. REV. 567, 605 (DEMO).
119 Ribstein, supra note ___, at 580-81.
120 Cross, DEMO note ___; Blair & Stout, supra note ___.
121 See supra note ___, and accompanying text.
28
rather than less vulnerable.122  More likely, an individual has a maximum DEMO of
vulnerability that she is willing to accept, and she is DEMO to make herself more
vulnerable than that.  To the extent that DEMO law can decrease her exposure to harm from
trusting to below her maximum vulnerability level, she is more likely to trust.  By insisting
DEMO one encourages trust by increasing vulnerability, Ribstein’s argument would lead us DEMO
the conclusion that all mechanisms for protection against predation, whether formal DEMO
informal, are trust-eroding.  This must be wrong.
Instead, people seem DEMO willing to accept vulnerability when the magnitude of the
risks and costs of predation are minimized.  Legal rules that call for behavior thought to be
trustworthy can have both of these effects.  Regarding the magnitude of risk, the laws can
influence the likelihood that people behave in a trustworthy fashion, and they can signal to
the citizens that the community has adopted trustworthy norms of behavior.  Both the
expressive and the behavior-influencing effects of the law cause the trust evaluator to
perceive a smaller DEMO of predation than would exist without the law.  As to the DEMO of
predation, to the extent a violation of the law yields DEMO compensation to the truster, she
perceives a lower magnitude of harm DEMO erroneously trusting.123
Of course, this argument has its limits.  Perfect compensation and very high safety
nets can have the effect of reducing vigilance DEMO the part of the trust assessors, which in turn
can decrease DEMO payoff to developing and maintaining a trustworthy reputation.  “Trust in”
trust DEMO irrelevant to people’s decisions to interact as it gets swamped by very high
levels of “trust that” trust.  However, this high “trust that” DEMO would prove extremely
(perhaps prohibitively) costly.  Society could achieve appreciable DEMO of trust and
trustworthy behavior much more cheaply by allocating to its members some duty to acquire
trust-relevant information and invest in reputations for DEMO The optimal regime is
likely one akin to a “copay” arrangement, DEMO people are largely protected from
opportunism but bear some modest portion of the costs themselves.  With significant but
incomplete protection against opportunism, parties DEMO retain a willingness to engage in
smaller transactions.  “Trust that” trust DEMO, at least temporarily, for “trust in” trust
while the truster gathers information in their dealings about whether “trust in” trust is
appropriate.  As this information is gathered, the truster becomes better able to determine the
areas where specific trust is warranted, as well as the areas in which specific distrust is
warranted.  If the truster determines from this interaction that it is appropriate to “trust in” the
other significantly, then larger cooperative steps can follow.  From this perspective, legal
rules and regulations DEMO be trust-enhancing.124
122 The doctor-patient relationship, discussed in Subpart IVC1, turns out to be a possible exception to this
general principle.  In that situation, however, the source of the vulnerability is external to the DEMO, and
the doctor’s care is sought to reduce that vulnerability.
123In DEMO, highly redistributive taxes could similarly affect trust. Economists studying high and DEMO trust
countries find that, in general, the greater the amount of wealth redistribution in the society, the more
individuals were willing to trust one another. Stephen Knack & Philip Keefer, Does Social Capital Have
an Economic Payoff?: A Cross-Country Investigation, 112 Q.J. ECON. 1251 (1996); Stephen Knack & Paul
Zak, Trust and Growth (working paper, DEMO University 1999). One can explain this correlation by
hypothesizing that it is easier to take a risk when the safety net is more DEMO than less protective.
124 This concept is discussed briefly in Erin Ann O’Hara, Choice of Law For Online Transactions: The
Uneasy Case for DEMO Consumer Protection, 153 U. PA. L. REV. 1883, 1889-96 (2005)DEMO
29
In the foregoing discussion, in general, the trust sought to be DEMO is specific
trust.  Parties are encouraged to obtain more information about DEMO another to make more
accurate assessments of each other’s level and type of specific trust.  As we have discussed,
one important context is that of encouraging people to deal with people outside their in-
groups.
DEMO can also be used to encourage or enhance residual trust and distrust.  Society
benefits when people enter into fiduciary-type relationships in which they entrust important
matters-- their health, perhaps their finances-- to others.    In DEMO cases, we may want to
encourage residual trust- to encourage a DEMO to simply make the binary decision to trust
another person or not, and not make further inquiries, except perhaps in response to egregious
DEMO that the trust has been misplaced.  Indeed, the process of obtaining more trust-relevant
information may weaken the residual trust necessary for the relationship DEMO work in a socially
desirable manner.  After all, careful trust calculations often predispose one to consider the
possibility of distrust.  Furthermore, encouraging DEMO acquisition of more trust-relevant
information can make the trust target feel distrusted.  A party who feels distrusted may reason
that if she’s getting the burden of the other party’s suspicion, she might as well get the benefit
by behaving opportunistically. 125
Conversely, society benefits when parties to a conspiracy have high levels of residual
distrust of one another. The law DEMO foster residual distrust, thereby discouraging people from
interacting with each other, by providing incentives for conspirators to inform on one another
and otherwise DEMO the magnitude of the risk or the cost of untrustworthy behavior.
In sum, where law seeks to encourage trust, it does so by DEMO the risk to parties
to trusting one another sufficiently that they are willing to expose themselves to some level of
vulnerability.  Law sometimes focuses primarily on increasing specific trust; at other times, it
strives to DEMO or at least maintain residual trust.   Where the law attempts to encourage
residual trust, various mechanisms permit the truster’s inquiry to stop at the choice of
whether and with whom to enter a relationship.  But in the many cases where more careful
assessments are desirable, as parties interact more, they acquire more trust-relevant
information, determining for themselves optimal DEMO of specific trust and distrust.  To
encourage the careful processing of DEMO information, the assessor should be subject
to a copayment in the DEMO that she is victimized.  Subpart A briefly describes some of the
DEMO ways that legal tools can work to promote specific trust, and DEMO B then discusses a
few ways that legal tools can promote or maintain residual trust.
A. Legal Tools for Promoting Specific Trust and Distrust
DEMO can promote trust by minimizing the likelihood of untrustworthy behavior.
Trust–promoting rules are far too numerous to adequately address here, but common
examples are laws prohibiting fraud, conspiracy, theft and unconscionable business practices.
125 See DEMO A. Guerra, Crowding Out Trust: The Adverse Effects of Verification. An Experiment
(University of Oxford, Department of Economics, Discussion Paper Series, DEMO 2002) (experiment
finding that attempts to verify the behavior of honest traders causes those traders to behave poorly toward
verifier).
30
What is the mechanism by which these and other laws promote trust? There is, of
course, the obvious: laws increase “trust that” trust, if only because people think others are
less likely to take actions the law forbids.  But another important mechanism is in many cases
that laws give enough protection to make people willing to make themselves vulnerable DEMO
others but not so much as to provide a risk-free guarantee.   Consider contract law.
Contracting parties must perform their obligations in good faith DEMO according to standards of
fair dealing.126 There are rules not only against breach but also against opportunism in the
course of contract negotiation or DEMO Indeed, contract law protects the parties
against opportunism made possible by DEMO doctrines themselves.  For example, the perfect
tender rule enables a buyer to refuse delivery of goods if the seller does not perfectly perform
DEMO obligations under the contract.127  Unfortunately, a party receiving goods not perfect and
not perfectly tendered could opportunistically use law to force the tendering DEMO to accept
less than the contract price.  To deter such opportunism, the tendering party is given limited
rights to cure imperfections in the DEMO Commercial Code.128  Similarly, a party to a
contract she no longer wished to honor might claim a right to walk away from the DEMO
based on “information” that the other party might breach.  To prevent DEMO excuses, the law
provides that the party must request assurances from DEMO other party rather than simply
abandoning the contract.129
Notice that contract law allows parties to limit their vulnerability to one another, but
not eliminate it completely.  While damages available for contract breaches nominally
purport to fully compensate the nonbreaching party,130 in reality there is an appreciable gap.
DEMO costs, in the form of often-sizeable attorney fees, cannot be recovered, nor can
emotional damages131 or damages that are speculative or unproveable.132  DEMO addition,
consequential damages are sometimes unrecoverable,133 and the common law right of
reclamation to an unsecured creditor has been significantly restricted.134 Moreover, parties
have difficulty getting around these damages limitations given that specific performance DEMO
limited135 and liquidated damages provisions are heavily scrutinized.136 Thus, parties are
DEMO indifferent as between the contracted-for performance and the expected value of the
126 See, e.g., Power Travel Int’l Inc. v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 257 F. Supp. 2d 701 (S.D.N.Y. 2003); Wilson v.
Amerada DEMO Corp., 773 A.2d 1121, 1129 (N.J. 2001); Levine v. DEMO Ins. Co. of Am., 462 S.E.2d
81, 84 (Va. 1995)DEMO In some cases, contract rules induce information disclosure by a party DEMO able to
assess the value of the transaction. For example, home DEMO often have a duty to disclose known hidden
or latent defects.  DEMO Cushman v. Kirby, 148 Vt. 571, 536 A.2d 550 (Vt. DEMO); Lawson v. Citizens &
Southern Nat’l Bank, 259 S.C. 477, 193 S.E.2d 124 (1972); Posner v. Davis, 76 Ill. App. 3d 638, 395
N.E.2d 133 (1979); Obde v. Schlemeyer, 56 Wash.2d 449, 353 P.2d 672 (1960).
127 Uniform Commercial Code DEMO 2-601 (2000).  The perfect tender rule itself helps guard against
opportunism of sellers who strategically cut corners rather than attempting costlier ‘perfection.’
DEMO UCC § 2-508.
129 Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 251 (DEMO).
130 E. ALLAN FARNSWORTH, CONTRACTS § 12.1 (2d ed. 1990) (nonbreaching party entitled to benefit of
bargain).
131 Id. at DEMO 12.17
132 Id. at § 12.8
133 Id. at § 12.14.
134 Larry Garvin suggests that the reclamation right, because it is rooted in concepts of fraud, was intended
to provide protection to creditors in order to enhance trust in commercial relationships. Garvin, supra note
___.
135 FARNSWORTH, supra note ___, at § 12.8
136 Id. at § 12.18.
DEMO
legal remedy for breach.  Importantly, to promote optimal trust, contract remedies should not
protect parties fully against breach.  The gap between the two represents the vulnerable
party’s copayment; ideally, the co-pay would be structured DEMO as to encourage parties to make
optimal investments in trust-relevant inquiries and reputations for trustworthiness.
Two other related examples are of interest.  One is the Federal securities laws’
emphasis on disclosure rather than merit regulation.  Legal safeguards ensure the accuracy of
the prospectus describing an investment, but the investor is charged with making the
determination as to whether the investment DEMO a good one.  The government protects the
investor against the possibility DEMO the company offering its securities is lying, but the
investor must DEMO the necessary information about the quality of the company.137  Another
example DEMO government-subsidized political risk insurance for investments in companies in
emerging markets countries.   The government limits exposure to political risk, which is hard
for the investor to appraise.138   However, the more traditional risks of the investment remain
with the investor.  In both of these cases, legal DEMO are implemented to remove some but not
all specific trust concerns.   Where the assessor can protect herself by gathering and
processing trust-relevant information, her copayment remains relatively high.
Political risk insurance is an example of DEMO use of an imperfect safety net to motivate
parties to expand their dealings to strangers.   As we have argued, parties might quite
rationally deal only with known parties, preferring to save themselves the costs and
uncertainties of dealing with unknown parties.  Society benefits if people broaden the range
of parties with whom they are willing to deal; parties previously excluded benefit as well.
Greater numbers of potential contracting parties create more DEMO, which produces
social benefits as well as benefits to the individuals DEMO to transact with strangers.  In
general, legal measures intended to encourage contracting with strangers work, if at all, by
(1) encouraging DEMO that enable parties to gather information relevant to making
specific trust assessments about one another; and (2) altering the parties’ assessments of the
degree to which they can “trust that” others will act in the DEMO fashion.
Other mechanisms exist by which the law encourages parties to acquire specific trust
and distrust.   Contracting parties are given considerable latitude to DEMO their contracts.
Parties are therefore encouraged to investigate, specify and control DEMO level of risk each will
undertake in a contract.  Loan covenants, for example, enable creditors to control the ability
of the debtor to act in ways that jeopardize the repayment of the debt.139  And sometimes a
contracting party wishes to use a contractual provision in order to DEMO the trust the other
party places in the performance of the contract.  Consider security alarm contracts, where
alarm companies routinely limit their liability DEMO homeowner loss to a very small sum.140
Although some might view these contractual provisions as unconscionable,141 perhaps instead
they are merely attempts by DEMO alarm companies to signal to customers that they should not
137 See generally LOUIS LOSS & JOEL SELIGMAN, SECURITIES REGULATION 169-223 (3d ed. DEMO).
138 See generally http://www.opic.gov/Insurance/home.htm (last visited, June 23, 2005).
139 For a fascinating treatment of formal and informal creditor protection mechanisms used against firms in
financial distress, see Douglas G. Baird & Robert K. Rasmussen, When Good Managers Go Bad:
Controlling the Agents of Enterprise (unpublished manuscript on file with authors).
140 See, e.g., Lobianco v. Prop. Prot., Inc., 437 A.2d DEMO, 419 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1981).
141 Hanover Ins. Co. v. D & W Cent. Station Alarm Co., 560 N.Y.S.2d 293, 295 (N.Y. App. Div. 1990)
(stating that exculpatory clauses in security alarm contracts are wholly void to the extent they grant
exemption from liability DEMO gross negligence).
32
place too much faith in the company to insure home security.  Instead, some personal
vigilance against theft by the homeowner (i.e. locking the DEMO and stopping mail delivery
when away) coupled with security efforts on DEMO part of the firm might provide a more
optimal mix for enhancing security.142
Law also can help produce trust-relevant information. Auditing and monitoring by
DEMO and private entities can help to produce trust-relevant information for others to
rely on.   But promoting trust may sometimes require limiting access to DEMO  For
instance, the privacy of parties transacting online is protected with monitoring and
enforcement of company privacy policies and through the imposition of DEMO about the use of
information.143
Sometimes the law suboptimally discourages the production and acquisition of trust-
relevant information.  A notorious example is the availability of federally-funded insurance
on savings and loan associations (“S & Ls”), coupled with the loosening of restrictions on the
S & Ls’ investing DEMO  The result, as is now well known, was that depositors DEMO
bother to inquire as to the risk of their S & L’s investments and the S & Ls sometimes failed,
leaving the Federal DEMO to bail them out to avoid a default to the depositors.144
B.
Legal Tools for Promoting or Maintaining Residual Trust and Distrust
Occasionally, legal measures affect trust not by encouraging or changing the results
of carefully DEMO trust assessments but rather by working to trigger the primacy of the
influence of an individual’s residual trust or distrust in another.  Law enforcement strategies
and criminal conspiracy laws work together to trigger distrust in criminal DEMO
Undercover police attempt to infiltrate the criminal world, police interrogators suggest DEMO
associates have or will betray the suspect, criminals who rat out DEMO can escape
prosecution, and crimes committed with others are often more DEMO punished than the
same crimes committed alone.  The trust lens provides DEMO alternative explanation for these
legal mechanisms to that provided by traditional law and economics scholars.  Law and
economics scholars correctly assert that collective crimes are often harder to detect and
prosecute while at the same time DEMO capable of causing more harm.146  To them, these police
practices and legal measures work together to increase the criminals’ expected punishment
and thereby DEMO the criminal activity.147  It may be that, as the economists suppose,
one contemplating a crime will carefully calculate the costs and benefits DEMO legal punishment.
But we think that the possibility of betrayal and harsh punishment may instead evoke fear, a
negative emotion that inhibits careful calculation and instead encourages heuristic processes
designed to cause the person to avoid DEMO anywhere near the source of the feared harm.148
142 We thank Bob Rasmussen for making this observation.  Of course, this explanation justifies limitations
DEMO the company’s contractual but not tort liability.  See id.
143 Ian DEMO, et al., Trust, Ethics and Privacy, 81 B.U. L. REV. 407 (2001).
144 There is an extensive literature on the subject.  See, e.g.,
http://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/s&l/slbib1.html (last visited February 28, 2005).
145 Katyal, supra note ___.
DEMO Richard Posner, An Economic Theory of the Criminal Law, 85 COLUM. L. REV. 1193, 1218-19 (1985).
147 Katyal, supra note ___, at 1363-64.
148 See infra note ___, and accompanying text.
33
In other situations, legal mechanisms are designed to encourage – or at least not
discourage – individuals’ reliance on residual trust.  A paradigmatic case involves fiduciaries.
Fiduciary relationships are defined in part as those relationships marked DEMO high trust.149
Although the concept of fiduciary is broad150 and fiduciary duties apparently vary with the
particular relationship,151 in many fiduciary relationships, one party is dependent upon
another party who typically has specialized training and/DEMO superior access to information
relevant to the dependent party’s vulnerable situation.152  DEMO the doctor-patient, the attorney-
client and the clergy-parishioner contexts, legal obligations are supplemented by a strong
code of ethics designed to encourage trustworthy DEMO on the part of the fiduciary.  Many
of the rules applied DEMO these fiduciaries are expressed in absolute terms and cannot be
circumvented in a contract.153   Consider, for instance, the “sole interest” rule, which requires
a trustee to administer a trust solely in the interest of DEMO beneficiary, and renders voidable
transactions by the trustee for the trustee’s DEMO account without any further inquiry as to
whether the trust might have benefited therefrom.154 One plausible explanation for these
onerous and absolutely stated rules DEMO fiduciary conduct is their effort to put to rest any
doubts on the part of the dependent party, whose trust is often essential to the effectiveness of
the fiduciary relationship.155 And the rules are not just DEMO and absolutely stated: in many
areas of law, the applicable fiduciary rules constitute a standardized law-created package.
There is less for a principal DEMO inquire about.  The selection of a fiduciary is therefore made
easier DEMO fewer (potentially trust-eroding) inquiries need be made.156
149 See, e.g., Andersons, Inc. v. Consol, Inc., 348 F.3d 496, 509 (6th Cir. 2003) (characterizing a fiduciary
relationship as one in which one DEMO places special confidence and trust in another).
150 See generally Tamar Frankel, Fiduciary Law, 71 CAL. L. REV. 795 (1983).
151 Sometimes courts vary in their willingness to impose fiduciary obligations on one DEMO the parties in a
particular type of relationship.  Courts currently disagree, for example, over whether broker-dealers owe
fiduciary duties to their clients.  DEMO, the courts’ view of the issue seems to turn on the
DEMO of the clients and the degree of control the broker-dealer had over the accounts.  See Peter H.
Huang, Trust, Guilt and Securities Regulation 151 U. PENN. L. REV. 1059 (2003).  Where clients are DEMO
sophisticated and less dependent, they are more inclined to make reliable DEMO trust assessments.
Less sophisticated consumers are instead at risk of falling prey to heuristic distrust assessments without
special fiduciary protections.
152 We do not DEMO that our analysis applies to all fiduciaries. Where the parties are symmetrically
situated, the analysis is more difficult.  For instance, general partners are each others’ fiduciaries, yet
becoming a partner in a general partnership is typically an exceedingly long process whereby a great deal
of trust-relevant information DEMO ferreted out.
153 See, e.g., Levisohn, Lerner, Berger & Langsam v. Med. Taping Sys., Inc., 20 F. Supp. 2d 645, 650
(S.D.N.Y. 1998) (holding nonrefundable retainer fee agreements void because they “compromise the
client’s absolute right to terminate the unique fiduciary attorney-client relationship”); DEMO v. Bd. of
Comm’rs of the Ala. State Bar, 345 So. DEMO 1343, 1346 (Ala. 1977) (attorney violated his fiduciary duty by
failing to fulfill “his absolute duty to give his client a full, detailed, and accurate account of all money and
property entrusted to him”).
154 See generally John H. Langbein, Questioning the Trust Law Duty of Loyalty: Sole Interest or Best
Interest, 114 YALE L. J. DEMO (2005) (critiquing the sole interest rule).
155 Often the DEMO need open, honest communication from the dependent party.  Moreover in the
doctor-patient context discussed infra in Part IVC1, patient trust often works to improve health outcomes.
156 Consider also as an analogy Merrill and Smith’s DEMO that because property is more importantly
about third party rights than is contracting, parties have far less flexibility in how they structure their
dealings in property.  Parties to a property transaction have only a few forms to choose from; third parties
can learn a great deal simply by learning which form was used.  Thomas Merrill & Henry Smith, Optimal
DEMO in the Law of Property: The Numerus Clausus Principle, 110 YALE L. J. 1 (2000)
Fiduciary-type relationships often also come in standardized bundles; if third party enforcement is to be a
34
There are many other contexts in which policy makers wish to encourage DEMO
trust.  The law surrounding contracts between insurance companies and consumers (or small
business people) provides an example.  Consider the doctrine of reasonable DEMO as
applied to interpret insurance contracts.157   The doctrine honors the expectations the court
thinks the purchaser of insurance reasonably had as to the DEMO of the policy but did not
expressly articulate.  For reasons well DEMO within the traditional law and economics
analysis, making it too easy DEMO a party to get protections it didn’t bargain for is perilous.  DEMO
if an insurance company, which knows a great deal more about DEMO than do most of its
customers, includes in its standard form DEMO non-negotiable contracts provisions that
allow it not to cover an event that is clearly within the spirit of what the purchaser reasonably
thought she DEMO getting, the reasonable expectations doctrine may be available to elevate that
DEMO over the contract’s literal wording.  In the consumer context, some laws limit the terms
that can be included in the insurance contract, and courts sometimes will strike terms out of
the contract that might tend DEMO surprise the consumer.158  Consumer protection measures
sometimes take into account the DEMO that consumers will not read and comprehend
complex contracts, and if DEMO consequently fear getting burned by surprise contract
provisions, might choose not DEMO contract at all.  Where consumer protections exist,159 they
enable consumers DEMO rest assured that the terms of their contracts will comply with minimum
standards of reasonableness.160
Many of the examples provided so far in this DEMO involve efforts on the part of
policymakers to promote socially optimal trust levels.  That is, people are assumed to make
use of available DEMO information, but social welfare is promoted by altering the
trust-relevant decisions DEMO people make.  In a few relationships, however, the cognitive
mechanisms DEMO in Part III can be expected to work to impede the accurate processing
of at least some trust-relevant information.  At times, EMT suggests DEMO this faulty
processing serves the individual’s interests, on average, even though it leaves the truster
vulnerable to either predation or the costs of DEMO opportunities.  Sometimes the law can
minimize these costs, either through the promotion of more accurate information processing
or through measures that enhance trustworthiness DEMO/or minimize the costs of opportunism.
Some of the examples described so far in this Part address problems of undertrust—people
disfavor strangers and outgroups DEMO their dealings.  In Subpart C we return to the cognitive
larger DEMO of the picture, there’s arguably less for the third parties to DEMO about, and the enforcement
process can be more mechanical as well.
DEMO “The doctrine of reasonable expectations as applied to insurance policies has been adopted by more than
half the states.” CHARLES L. KNAPP, NATHAN M. CRYSTAL AND HARRY G. PRINCE, PROBLEMS IN
CONTRACT LAW: CASES AND DEMO 376 (5th ed., 2003). For a general discussion of the doctrine, see
Id. at 369-381.  The doctrine may be more broadly DEMO, to all contracts of adhesion. Id.
at 380; see also Restatement (Second) of Contracts §211(3). German law has a roughly DEMO approach,
putting the onus on a party presenting the other party with standardized terms to make sure the terms are
noticed and understood: Section 9 of the Standard Contract Terms Act of 1976 (“Section 9”) makes invalid
any term to which specific attention has not been drawn that constitutes “unfair surprise” or is “unfairly
detrimental” to the nondrafting party.  See Hill & King, supra note ___, at 910.
158 FARNSWORTH, supra note ___, at § 4.29.  Of course, this latter judicial doctrine is a specific example of
a concern about the use of DEMO form contracts.
159 See id. for examples.
160 It is also possible that strict liability in the tort context serves a similar trust maintenance DEMO
35
trust biases that can cause people in certain types of relationships to DEMO information that
suggests distrust is appropriate.
C. Examples of Overtrust
1. Doctor-Patient Relations
a.   Thick Trust as Overtrust
Thick-trust relationships, perhaps by definition, provide contexts where in general
overtrust minimizes error costs.  They are DEMO by a willingness to trust even when
erroneous trust could prove very costly, and they typically involve high degrees of
interdependency. In fact, DEMO trust scholars separately categorize thick-trust relationships
as though they differ in kind from other trust relationships.  The quintessential thick-trust
relationship is a family relationship where members’ utility functions significantly overlap.
And in these contexts, people are prone to blindly trust one another.
One of us has experienced the DEMO of overtrust of a family member—a brother-in-
law—who turned out to be a thief and a liar.  This relative stole from the author, DEMO her
grandmother, her father, his grandmother, and his siblings.  Most of the family members were
aware that they had been victimized by DEMO, but it did not occur to any of them for some
DEMO that the brother-in-law was the thief.  What an amazing coincidence that DEMO many of us
had been robbed that year!  What was the DEMO coming to?  Was it possible that a ring of
thieves had assembled private information about each of us?  The truth stared us DEMO the face,
and yet none of us was able to discern it.
The costs of this overtrust turned out to be small relative DEMO the costs associated with
distrusting close family members.  We all want DEMO think that we can trust members of our
family unconditionally.  From DEMO EMT perspective, it might be dangerous to leap into battle
wondering DEMO your brother will back you up or whether your sister will raise your child
if you should die.  Misfeasance and imperfect agency are not unknown in one’s family.  But
betrayal and malfeasance—these issues are off the table in thick-trust relationships.
We argued above that the contexts where we DEMO overtrust are contexts where trust
decisions tend to be made subconsciously rather than consciously.  Moreover, instead of
processing specific information carefully, trust decisions are coming from thick residual trust,
at least in the family DEMO  In fact, people in thick-trust relationships often refuse to
process specific information that indicates distrust might be in order.  Negative traits can be
turned into positive ones, as for example when a person’s failure to complete work on time is
viewed by close friends as a commitment DEMO getting the job done right.161  Moreover,
individuals in thick-trust relationships DEMO often quick to attribute the cause of harm to
external factors, DEMO as unusual stressors, rather than to the other’s untrustworthy
161 Daniel DEMO McAllister, The Second Face of Trust: Reflections on the Dark Side of Interpersonal Trust in
Organizations, 6 RESEARCH ON NEGOTIATIONS IN ORGS. 87, 99 (1997).
36
behavior.162  Thus, excessive trust can perpetuate itself with a compounding disconfirming
DEMO
Non-family thick-trust relationships are sometimes assumed to take a long time to
form.164  After all, it can take quite some time before a DEMO is willing to blindly trust
another with matters of great consequence.  DEMO, however, in some relationships,
perhaps supported by error management theory, otherwise levelheaded people tend to be
willing to place themselves fairly quickly into positions of significant vulnerability.  For
example, one can fall in DEMO and wrap herself around her new “partner” in a matter of weeks;
it does not take much for a con man to place DEMO hands on the assets of a besotted paramour.
An abundant literature on the doctor-patient relationship suggests that in that context as well,
thick DEMO forms quickly.
b. Patient-Doctor Trust and its Health Benefits
Patients often place great trust in their physicians as caregivers.165  Very early in the
doctor-patient relationship the patient might need to agree to disrobe, to enable probing
examination, to undertake a course of prescription medication, to be anesthetized DEMO cut
into, and/or to place in the hands of her DEMO the power to choose the course of potentially
life-saving treatment.  The DEMO sick, and therefore the more vulnerable the patient is, the
greater the trust that the typical patient experiences.  In fact, “[t]his deeply DEMO type of
trust is paralleled only in fraternal, family, or love relationships.”166  Some scholars describe
the beliefs and behaviors of the sick patient as regressive—a return to an infantile state where
the physician is placed DEMO an all-powerful, parental role.167  Others note that “[e]ven short-
term medical relationships can generate strong bonds and intense feelings of intimacy.”168
Very high DEMO of trust are also placed in physicians by patients who are not
seriously ill.169   Recent survey data indicates that trust in doctors has DEMO consistently
high over time.170   Ninety percent or more of people surveyed express some degree of trust
in their doctors,171 while two-thirds of DEMO express the highest levels of trust in their
162 Id.
163 Sandra L. Robinson, Trust and Breach of the Psychological Contract, 41 ADMIN. DEMO Q. 574, 576-77
(1996) (stating that people tend to attribute an actor’s behavior to internal or external causes depending
upon which is DEMO with their attitudinal expectations).
164 See, e.g., Roy J. Lewicki & Carolyn Weithoff, Trust, Trust Development, and Trust Repair 86, DEMO in
THE HANDBOOK OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION: THEORY AND PRACTICE (Morton Deutsch & Peter T. Coleman,
eds. 2000).
165 See Mark A. DEMO, Law, Medicine and Trust, 55 STAN L. REV. 463, 477 (2002) (“Trust is a defining
aspect of strong caregiver relationships, DEMO that gives them fundamental meaning and value”).
166 Id. at 471.
167 Cf. Mark A. Hall, et al., Trust in Physicians and DEMO Institutions: What is It, Can It Be Measured,
and Does It Matter?, 79 MILBANK Q. 613, 615 (2001) (discussing DEMO that some patients tend to imbue
their physicians with “superhuman powers”).
168 Hall, supra note ___, at 477 (and quoting Charles Fried on same point).
169 Id. at 471-72 (noting that a bad flu and relentless pain can also profoundly affect a patient’s feelings and
DEMO the examination and agreement to take a recommended medication each require high levels of trust by
the patient).
170 Id. at 487-88 (discussing studies).
171 Thomas H. Gallagher, et al., Patients’ Attitudes Towards DEMO Bonuses for Managed Care
Physicians, HEALTH AFF., Mar.-Apr. 2001, at DEMO, 187.
37
doctors.172  Given that not all doctors can be highly competent and selfless, and that none of
them are omnipotent or omniscient, it seems DEMO to conclude that many patients are prone to
overtrust their doctors – that is, to trust then beyond what a rational calculative assessment
would warrant.173
Moreover, unlike in Lewicki’s paradigmatic model of trust, patients seem DEMO be
unable to compartmentalize their trust assessments of their physicians.  Studies DEMO
attempted to measure the relative influence of different dimensions of patient trust.  Patients
look for their doctors to be competent, honest, to act in their best interests, to treat them with
care and respect, DEMO advocate on their behalf where necessary, to avoid conflicts of interest,DEMO
and to keep their information confidential.174  Scholars have found that subjects DEMO lump
all of these dimensions together.175   For example, a doctor DEMO is thought to be low in
honesty is presumed to be incompetent and disloyal, and a competent doctor is presumed to
be loyal and likely to keep the patient’s confidences.  This suggests that patients have one,
residual-type trust assessment of their doctors rather than a more calculative DEMO and
nuanced assessment of the doctor’s particular strengths and weaknesses.
The causes of this propensity to overtrust one’s doctor are not well understood.  Some
have speculated that there might be an evolutionary explanation.176  Others have suggested
that patients have a strong psychological need to deny the severity of DEMO health crisis by
convincing themselves that their doctor can cure the problem.177 Whatever the cause of our
inclinations, overtrust in our caregivers appears to be enhanced by our social practices. For
instance, patients are routinely kept waiting at their doctors’ offices; when they are seen, they
are DEMO to disrobe into garments that convenience the doctor at the expense of the patient’s
dignity.
Moreover, unlike nonthick trust, trust in physicians seems DEMO be unaffected by the
truster’s general views about the trustworthiness of others.178  Empirical studies of patient
172 Timothy Lake, Do HMO’s Make a DEMO? Consumer Assessments of Health Care, 36 INQUIRY 411,
414 (DEMO).
173Indeed, people seem to have consistently high levels of trust DEMO their physicians notwithstanding some
evidence of a decline in systemic levels of trust in health care providers generally.  Evidence for the decline
is systemic levels of trust includes the following: in 1966 seventy-three percent of Americans surveyed
reported having confidence in medicine, but by 1993 the level has declined to twenty-two percent.  Robert
J. Blendon et al., Bridging the DEMO Between Expert and Public Views on Health Care Reform, 269 JAMA
DEMO, 2576 (1993). In 1993, more than sixty percent of DEMO surveyed reported feeling that doctors
were too interested in making money, DEMO nearly seventy percent reported a belief that “people are
beginning to lose faith in doctors.” American Medical Ass’n, Public Opinion on Health Care Issues 21-22
(1993).  These numbers reflect an increase of about ten DEMO over the numbers reported about a decade
earlier.
174 Hall, et DEMO, supra note ___, at 620-23 (discussing various dimensions of trust)DEMO
175 Id. at 623-24 (citing three studies).
176 Erin Ann DEMO, Apology and Thick Trust:  What Spouse Abusers and Negligent Doctors DEMO Have
in Common, 79 CHI. KENT L. REV. 1055 (2004).  The hypothesis is that our brains evolved during a period
of time in which caregivers were typically family members and, in any event, DEMO short supply.  In those
environments there might be a strong evolutionary DEMO to trusting rather than distrusting the
caregiver.
177 See, e.g., Hall, et al., Trust in Physicians and Medical Institutions, supra note ___, at 617 (“[t]he
extraordinary strength of trust in physicians . . DEMO may arise as a coping mechanism in response to the intense
psychic distress created by illness”).
178 Trust in intimate interpersonal relationships has DEMO described as follows:
38
trust indicate that patients with high and low trust personalities report trusting DEMO doctors at
similarly high levels.179  Differences in tendency to trust apparently DEMO only the decision
to seek medical care from a new physician and not the trust placed in the previously chosen
doctor.
Overtrust might seem DEMO be problematic: a rational calculative assessment might
warrant less trust.   DEMO, however, overtrust in one’s physician might on average
generate positive benefits for the health of the patient.  Patients who trust their doctors are
more likely to seek care when sick, more likely to provide personal information relevant to an
accurate diagnosis, more likely to agree to undergo recommended treatment, more likely to
stick with a recommended health regime, DEMO perhaps more likely to experience positive
health benefits from the trust itself.180  On the last point, there is growing evidence that trust
in DEMO physician can have a powerful placebo effect on patients.  “The doctor DEMO is a
placebo or a therapeutic agent, regardless of the particular DEMO used or its independent,
biochemical effectiveness.”181  In fact, patients often begin to feel better as soon as they know
that they have DEMO physician who is working to help them.182  Overtrust can cause an DEMO
patient to disregard trust-relevant information and suffer a harmful health effect as a
consequence, but without it, patients as a class will likely DEMO poorer health.  Given that
overtrust can be beneficial to the patient, it is not clear that legal rules should be adopted to
steer DEMO away from this overtrust.183  An individual suffering a bad health outcome DEMO
account of an incompetent doctor certainly would be better off not having trusted that doctor.
But it does not follow that individuals would be DEMO off being wary of doctors generally.
Intimate interpersonal relationships have both a history and a future.  They are not static laboratory
still frames not can they be explained purely in terms of each individual’s personal characteristics,DEMO
dynamics, or style.  If John is involved in a relationship with Marsha, whether he trust her to keep
a secret is apt to be based on his beliefs about her personality, her past history of betrayal of
confidences, and the current climate of their association.  John’s DEMO trust in people and
whether he is willing to trust is Congressman or insurance agent . . . may be only marginally
relevant.
Cynthia DEMO & Walter W. Swap, Measurement of Specific Interpersonal Trust; Construction
and Validation of a Scale to Assess Trust in a Specific Other, 43 J. PERSONALITY & SOC, PSYCHOL. 1306,
1307 (1982). This DEMO of an individual’s generalized trust attitudes by the emotions related to and
history of involvement with the specific trust target also occurs in the DEMO relationship.
179 Hall, et al., Trust in Physicians and Medial Institutions, supra note ___, at 627 (“Speculation that
people’s basic outlook on life or worldview affects their ability to trust physicians is not borne DEMO by
existing studies, which have not found a strong or consistent DEMO with general measures of social
trust or cynicism”).
180 Id. at 629; David H. Thom, et al., Further Validation and Reliability Testing of the Trust in Physician
Scale, 37 MEDICAL CARE 510 (1999); Hall, supra note ___, at 478-82.
181 Hall, supra at DEMO
182 Id.
183 Of course, we treat the effects of patient DEMO “on average.”  There are other circumstances where
patient trust can prove DEMO For example, if a patient has high trust in a physician, an unequivocal
negative prognosis could turn into a self-fulfilling prophesy.  Also, DEMO patient who places absolutely no trust
in physician care might work harder to remain healthy.  Given the empirical connection between trust and
health outcomes, however, these possibilities must occur considerably less frequently than the beneficial
DEMO noted in the text.
39
Indeed, whether or not patient trust is nonoptimal from a social perspective is
difficult to assess.  The social benefits to patient overtrust include the fact that by improving
medical outcomes, patient trust reduces the social costs of providing health care.  The social
costs of overtrust include the fact that patients are likely very poor monitors of their doctors’
caregiving.   DEMO patients do not monitor their physicians, then doctors might learn that DEMO
can benefit by behaving in an untrustworthy fashion—by providing inferior care to their
patients.  Instead of addressing this problem by diminishing patient trust, DEMO, we have
as a society wisely chosen to address the problem DEMO regulating doctors and using medical
ethics rules to attempt to inculcate strong patient-protective norms.  At the foundation of the
ethics rules is the Hippocratic Oath, commanding a physician to do no harm.184  Each of these
DEMO reflects an effort to address the problem with increased trustworthiness by physicians
rather than through decreased patient trust.
In any event, efforts to erode patient trust to a more accurate level would likely prove
unsuccessful.  Because patients resist calculative methods for evaluating physician
trustworthiness, 185 it may be difficult to use legal tools to influence trust in marginal ways.
Indirect DEMO to influence trust in the relationship are far more likely to be ignored in
favor of feelings about the relationship itself.  Thus, as DEMO an existing high-trust patient-
physician relationship, only legal tools strongly and DEMO targeted at the relationship are
likely to work, and those tools DEMO likely to erode patient trust further than policymakers
would like.
Legal tools are most likely to influence trust assessments for relatively healthy
patients who DEMO at the point of choosing among doctors.  Healthy patients are more DEMO to
be capable of thinking about trust in a conscious, calculative DEMO, and the newness of the
relationship will enhance the patient’s capabilities.  At that point, but curiously not later,
patients correctly perceive that they have a choice of health care providers.  Patient trust often
develops very rapidly,186 however, so the window of time for careful reflection is likely
small.  At no point is patient distrust likely to remain compartmentalized, however, so
policymakers who wish to reduce patient trust with DEMO to one facet of the relationship
must be willing to accept reduced trust across the gamut of physician trust issues.
If, as we believe, patients should have high residual levels of trust in their physicians,
then regulation of physicians should not have the unintended consequence of reducing DEMO
trust in their physicians.  Where trust exists, and where patients are very sick, the concerns
are negligible—it likely takes a large and direct measure to erode the patient’s trust.  Where
relationships are forming, however, measures that directly affect the interaction between
doctor and patient can influence DEMO patient’s trust in the physician.  For healthy patients, an
erosion of trust can cause the patient to be less likely to take initial DEMO care steps.
Many legal and ethical measures target physician trustworthiness rather than patient
trust.  However, high trust in physicians can complicate the policymakers’ DEMO to regulate
the trustworthiness of physician behavior.  To the extent that DEMO effectiveness of legal efforts
184 Jonathan R. Cohen, The Immorality of DEMO, 79 TUL. L. REV. 903, 928 (2005).
185 Indeed, patient trust in physicians is believed by some to be remarkably resilient. DEMO, supra note ___,
at 507
186 Id. at 477 (“[e]ven short-term medical relationships can generate strong bonds and intense feelings of
intimacy”)DEMO
40
is influenced by the ability or willingness of patients to carefully evaluate DEMO
information, high levels of patient trust will erode the benefits of DEMO legal tool.  Take, for
example, medical malpractice.  Most doctors believe that the legal system has gone too far
with malpractice liability.187  They cite the fact that a very small fraction of malpractice suits
are DEMO  Lawyers, on the other hand, often take the position that DEMO doctors need
the disciplining function that the tort system provides.189  Indeed, the tort system may well do
too little to discipline doctors.  After all, the vast majority of patients who suffer from
physician negligence never assert a claim for compensation.190  Moreover, there is growing
evidence that DEMO easiest way for a doctor to avoid a malpractice suit after making a mistake
is to apologize to the patient and pledge to try DEMO fix the problem or minimize the damage.191
The mismatch between negligence and malpractice suits can be partially explained by
reference to the nature of DEMO patient’s trust in the physician.  When a patient places high
levels DEMO trust in the doctor, he is more inclined to interpret information DEMO with that
trust.192  Although his health outcome is poor, he may attribute the problem to a whole host of
factors other than the DEMO mistake.  Even when it is clear that the doctor made a DEMO,
a heartfelt apology often has the effect of restoring the trust feelings in the patient by
communicating to the patient that the doctor DEMO wrong but is at heart a trustworthy and
therefore “good” doctor.  DEMO health outcomes are poor and the doctor seems uncaring or
the patient is unable to accept a poor outcome, then the patient is more likely to interpret the
bad outcome as a breach in trust and DEMO consequently more likely to sue.
D.  Policy Implications
Recently, legal scholars have been exploring and debating the trust implications of
various measures related DEMO health care.  We wish to explore here just three of the DEMO:
(1) medical malpractice standards and recoverable damages; (2) DEMO consent laws; and
(3) physician duty to treat.
1.
Medical DEMO
Recently, health care scholars have debated the issue of how patient DEMO in
physicians should affect the standard by which physician’s conduct is scrutinized by juries in
medical malpractice cases.  Authoritative texts typically claim that doctors are not negligent
if they behave according to recognized customary practices of DEMO  In other
industries, however, actors are subject to a reasonable DEMO standard,194 which makes it
possible for a jury to scrutinize the reasonableness of the industry customs.  Philip Peters
187 Paul C. Weiler, DEMO the Tail:  The Place of Malpractice in Health Care Reform, DEMO RUTGERS L. REV.
1157, 1158 (1995).
188 Id. at 1162.
189 Id. at 1159.
190 Id. at 1164.
191 Jonathan R. Cohen, Apology and Organizations: Exploring an Example from Medical Practice, 27
FORDHAM DEMO L.J. 1447 (2000).
192 Hall, et al., Trust in DEMO and Medical Institutions, supra note ___, at 618 (“trust colors DEMO
perceptions of the results.  Through the resolution of cognitive dissonance, patients with high trust are more
likely to perceive performance positively, even if it is objectively inferior”).
193 DAVID M. HARNEY, JR., MEDICAL DEMO 89 (1973); W. PAGE KEETON, ET AL., PROSSER AND
DEMO ON TORTS § 32 (5th ed. 1984).
194 KEETON, ET AL., supra at § 33.
41
claims that notwithstanding the law stated in authoritative texts, a substantial and growing
minority of courts have shifted to a reasonable person standard for DEMO malpractice
cases.195  To Peters, this shift is a reflection of the fact that public trust in doctors has eroded
over the past few DEMO   Deference to custom is unwarranted in the current practice
climate, DEMO argues, because doctors can no longer be counted on to uncompromisingly
DEMO the patient’s interests.197  In contrast, Mark Hall argues that to the extent the
customary standard is still applied in malpractice cases it is DEMO because patients place
far too much faith in their doctors, and DEMO, like patients,  are inclined to expect doctors to
be godlike, and are therefore more likely to impose excessive liability under a simple
DEMO standard.198   The authors seem to disagree over whether doctors should be
subject to more or less liability as a consequence of the fact DEMO the justice system has been
overestimating the confidence that should be placed in physician care.
We argued above that it is desirable for patients DEMO have high residual trust in their
doctors.  Will the liability standard DEMO the degree of trust that patients have in their
physicians?  Probably not.199  Patient trust in a particular physician seems to turn on little
more than the patient’s belief that the physician will act to help DEMO patient improve her
health.  That judgment appears to turn on little DEMO than the interpersonal interaction
between the patient and the doctor.200  The DEMO of legal rules applied by courts in
malpractice cases are unlikely to affect the patient’s trust for two reasons.  First, the patient is
DEMO to know and even less likely to understand the import of the differing standards: the
laws applied in malpractice cases are too unlikely to affect her well-being for her to pay
attention.  Second, even if DEMO knew of the differing standards, it is not clear what, if any,
effect it would have on her trust in her doctor.  As a close personal relationship predicated on
thick trust, her feelings about the relationship will swamp any effects of this indirect,
remotely applicable DEMO  As regards new physician-patient relationships, it is unclear what
the presence of the law signals.  One possibility is that a higher liability standard signals that
doctors are untrustworthy and that the law is trying to DEMO that untrustworthiness.  But an
equally plausible interpretation is that lawmakers recognize DEMO patients want to have high
trust in their doctors and the law directs doctors to follow the higher standard of care.   In any
DEMO, the ability of patients to separate their own doctors from doctors DEMO a class suggests
further that the details of the legal standard are unlikely to affect patient trust.  Instead the
standard of care should be set without regard to trust concerns.
The same analysis can be applied DEMO the issues of liability caps and recovery of
punitive damages in medical malpractice cases.  The existence of caps is unlikely to affect
patient trust.  Here, as in the customary standard context, Hall seems to advocate more
difficult recovery standards on the grounds that jurors expect too much DEMO doctors and will
punish them for behavior that is not actually negligent.201  This concern seems inapt,
195 Philip G. Peters, Jr., The Quiet Demise of Deference to Custom: Malpractice Law at the Millennium, DEMO
WASH. & LEE L. REV. 163 (2000).
196 Id. at DEMO
197 Philip G. Peters, Jr., The Role of the Jury in Modern Malpractice Law, 87 IOWA L. REV. 909, 951-54
(2002).
198 Hall, supra note ___, at 492.
199 Hall’s recent work DEMO this view in general.  Mark A. Hall, Can You Trust a Doctor You Can’t
Sue?, 54(2) DEPAUL L.J. 303 (2005)DEMO
200 Hall, et al., Trust in Physicians and Medical Institutions, DEMO note ___, at 628.
201 Id. at 493-94.
42
however, given the fact that people seem quite capable of separating their trust in their own
physicians from the question of the trustworthiness of DEMO physicians.  Hall makes no
argument that the patient’s overtrust is somehow DEMO to the jurors, and, if anything, it
seems that precisely DEMO opposite should occur.  That is, when jurors hear that a patient
excessively trusted her doctor, the emotionally detached juror might well wonder why she
would have expected the doctor to prevent all possible adverse outcomes.  In the end, our
trust analysis suggests that arguments that the standard of care and the damages rules applied
in malpractice suits will adversely DEMO patient trust in doctors are not well-founded;
concerns about trust hence do not support any side in the debate.
2.
Informed Consent
Informed DEMO is considered one of the hallmarks of the patient’s right against the
judgment of the physician.  Tort law protects against unwanted touching, and DEMO
treatment is a form of invasive touching.202  To ensure that the DEMO is consensual,
doctors must get the consent of patients (where DEMO) prior to giving medical care.203  The
permission of the patient is considered meaningful only if the patient is first provided with
the information DEMO a reasonable person would want when making the decision.204   Informed
consent assumes that the patient is an autonomous individual given rights by the DEMO system
to protect her from physician overreaching.  Scholars cannot seem to DEMO on whether
informed consent enhances or diminishes doctor-patient trust.  Richard Sherlock DEMO to
think that informed consent laws detract from patient-physician trust.205  While DEMO
the importance to trust of being informed, he questions whether the DEMO decision making
that informed consent law envisions contributes to patient trust in their physicians.  First, he
views the language of rights and the DEMO of trust as fundamentally at odds with one
another.206  One need DEMO resort to rights in a relationship of trust.  Moreover, most patients
want to turn their care over to their physicians as part of DEMO ritual of trust that assists them
psychologically in their time of need.  Sherlock points out that in a study performed at the
University of Pittsburgh, only about ten percent of patients in inpatient surgery and
cardiology wards expressed a desire to participate in shared decision making.207  In a separate
study conducted on patients at an outpatient hypertension clinic, nearly 70 percent of the
patients agreed to cede at least some decision making DEMO to the physician.208  Sherlock
concludes that to restore faith in the DEMO relationship, the law should focus on
the provision of information rather DEMO the sharing of decision making.
202 Early in the twentieth century, DEMO began to conclude that even a successful physician treatment or
surgery could constitute a battery if performed without the consent of the patient.  Pratt v. Davis, 118 Ill.
App. 161 (Ill. App. Ct. 1905); DEMO v. Society of New York Hosp. , 105 N.E. 92 (N.Y. DEMO).
203 See Michelle Oberman, Mothers and Doctors’ Orders: Unmasking the Doctor’s Fiduciary Role in
Maternal-Fetal Conflicts, 94 NW. U. L. REV. 451, 464-66 (2000) (discussing genesis of informed consent
obligation).
204 DEMO id. at 465 (“[b]eginning in the 1950’s courts found that treating DEMO without first informing them
of the risks, benefits and alternatives to DEMO constituted negligence”) (citing cases).
205 Richard Sherlock, Reasonable Men DEMO Sick Human Beings, 80 AMER. J. MED. 2 (Jan. 1986).
206 Id. at 3.
207 Id. at 2.
208 Id.
43
By contrast, our trust analysis earlier in this Part suggests that informed consent can
serve a trust-enhancing function by empowering the patient to decide DEMO much safety net is
needed in order for her to feel comfortable proceeding with treatment.  Indeed, our analysis
suggests that overall informed consent DEMO either a neutral or a positive role in building
patient trust.  DEMO we must separate sick from well patients when considering patient
reactions to informed consent.  The empirical evidence does suggest that most sick patients
want no part in shared decision making, but it is far from clear that we should assume that
being offered the possibility of shared decision DEMO reduces patient trust.209  A doctor can
easily “agree” with the patient DEMO the forms are mere bureaucratic formalities imposed by
outsiders yet ask the patient to help the doctor complete the forms.  Moreover, a patient
DEMO first reaction is avoidance of shared decision making might learn something about the
treatment options that ends up convincing her that she does have DEMO opinion regarding how to
proceed.  Even if she has no such DEMO and feels strongly that she does not want to form
one, DEMO can simply sign the form.  Healthy patients, by contrast, are DEMO much more
likely to want to know the treatment options and the risks involved with each course of
action.  For new patients who have not yet developed a sense of strong trust in the physician,
DEMO informed consent process can provide information to the patient about the judgment and
the values of the physician, and this information can help the patient in determining whether
the doctor can be trusted to serve her DEMO  When healthy patients do not wish to
participate in shared decision DEMO, the doctor again can blame the bureaucratic process on
the outsiders.
DEMO, there is little reason to believe that an externally imposed bureaucratic
DEMO will affect the doctor-patient relationship.211  One might argue that the requirement
DEMO See Elizabeth Dugan, et al, How Patients’ Trust Relates to Their Involvement in Medical Care, 54 J.
FAM. PRACTICE 344 (2005) (DEMO that trust is compatible with both involved and deferential styles of
patient decision making).
210 An exception to our general position must be DEMO, however.  If a doctor’s informed consent
process reveals that the doctor has little experience in performing a potentially life-threatening procedure,
then trust DEMO that physician to properly perform that procedure could be threatened. And that trust reduction
would presumably be experience by both old and new patients. DEMO Mark A. Hall, Caring, Curing and
Trust: A Response to DEMO, 39 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 447 (2004) (discussing problem).
211 The analysis in this section assumes, perhaps simplistically, that the DEMO of informed consent does not
extend beyond a duty to inform the patient of the varying treatment options as well as the risks and
DEMO associated with each option. It does not take into account other obligations that might be added
to a duty to inform the patient such DEMO a duty to inform the patient about the financial incentives imposed on
the physician by a health care organization.  See William M. Sage, DEMO Through Information:
Disclosure Law and American Health Care, 99 COLUM. DEMO REV. 1701, 1750-51 (1999) (discussing
possibility that informed consent obligations could extend to disclosure of physician compensation
arrangements and other financial interests)DEMO  Imposing a duty to disclose this information might affect
patient trust. DEMO David Mechanic & Mark Schlesinger, The Impact of Managed Care on DEMO Trust in
Medical Care and Their Physicians, 275 JAMA 1693 (1996) (arguing that disclosure to patients of fee
structures in managed care DEMO might well create distrust on the part of patients who are then made aware
of the fact that the doctor is more likely to DEMO care and less likely to refer the patient to a specialist under
the plan); see also Hall, et al., Measuring Patients’ Trust, supra note ___, at 314 (reporting significant
association between reported trust DEMO and membership in managed care).  But another study by Mark
DEMO found that disclosing HMO financial incentives in one trial did not decrease trust and may have
increased it.  Mark A. Hall, How Disclosing DEMO Physician Incentives Affects Trust, 21(2) HEALTH AFF.
197 (Mar. DEMO)
44
signals to the patient that doctors in general are untrustworthy,212 but DEMO likely the
interpersonal dynamic between doctor and patient swamps this weak symbolic effect.213
Moreover, assuming that the informed consent requirement does signal that doctors can be
untrustworthy, the patient’s strong emotional desire to place the decision back into the
doctor’s hands could actually intensify her feelings of trust DEMO her doctor.   However, it is not
entirely clear that informed DEMO does signal to patients that doctors can be untrustworthy.
The physician-patient dialog might instead work to convince the patient that the doctor cares
for DEMO welfare of the patient while at the same time caring to respect the patient’s
preferences.  In short, a nuanced understanding of patient trust DEMO that informed
consent laws are unlikely to interfere with patient trust in doctors.
3. Duty to Treat
How might a duty to treat influence DEMO trust in physicians?  As a general
common law matter, doctors DEMO deny treatment to any patient with whom they prefer not to
deal.214  Moreover, doctors can even terminate treatment of current patients in the DEMO of a
treatment process, although they do have an obligation to DEMO the patient an adequate
opportunity to find an alternate physician.215  This DEMO to refuse treatment is mitigated by
both an ethical obligation to provide care in the event of an emergency and a legal obligation
not DEMO discriminate on the basis of race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, etc., in
the provision of medical care.216  These limitations may serve trust-enhancing functions.217
Consider first the ethical limit on the doctor’s right DEMO refuse treatment to a patient during an
emergency.218 We suggested earlier that simply knowing one has a doctor who will do her
212 Cf. DEMO, supra note ___, at 492 (asserting that publicity in malpractice DEMO can cast “seeds of doubt
about all physicians”).
213 Adding to the relative weak signaling effect are the facts that (1) physicians DEMO to enjoy considerable
discretion in how risk information is conveyed; and (2) patients tend to poorly process and understand the
information that is conveyed to them.  See Peter H. Schuck, Rethinking Informed Consent, 103 YALE L.J.
899 (1994).
214 Doctors do not even have a common law duty to treat patients in an emergency.  VICTOR E. SCHWARTZ,
ET AL., PROSSER WADE AND SCHWARTZ’S TORTS: CASES AND MATERIALS DEMO (10th ed. 2000) (citing
classic case of Hurley v. Eddingfield, 156 Ind. 416, 59 N.E.2d 1058 (1901)).
215 In general, a physician has an obligation to continue to provide treatment until the patient no longer
requires care for the affliction that required treatment.  Maxwell J. Mehlman, The Patient-Physician
Relationship in an Era of Scarce Resources: DEMO There A Duty to Treat?, 25 CONN. L. REV. 349, DEMO n.85
(1993).  However, case law suggests that a doctor DEMO terminate a relationship by giving the patient notice
of the termination and a reasonable opportunity to obtain care elsewhere. See Payton v. Weaver, 182 Cal.
Rptr. 225 (1982) (physician not required to continue to treat disruptive, abusive and unreasonable kidney
failure outpatient even if no other outpatient clinic would treat her, though care still provided at hospital on
emergency basis); Capps v. Valk, 189 Kan. 287 (1962); McGulpin DEMO Bessmer, 241 Iowa 1119 (1950);
Johnson v. Vaughn, 370 S.W.2d 591 (Ky. App. 1963); Ricks v. Budge et al., DEMO Utah 307, 64 P.2d 208
(1937).
216 See infra nn. ___ & accompanying text.
217 We do not mean to suggest here DEMO the sole or even the primary purpose of these limitations is to
enhance trust.  We merely note the connection between the limitations and the trust of the patient in his
physician.
218 See American Medical Association’s DEMO of Medical Ethics, No. V (2001) (providing that in an
emergency the doctor should render aid to the best of his ability), available at http://www.ama-
assn.org/ama/pub/category/2512.html.
45
best to help the patient can produce its own health benefits and DEMO those health benefits
result from the patient’s feelings of trust in her doctor.  This “placebo effect” is likely
strongest when the patient is most in need of physician assistance.  If so, then an ethical
obligation DEMO render assistance in an emergency will likely produce significant additional
benefits for the patient.  Moreover, the ethical obligation enables doctors to avoid problems
DEMO a legal rule could create.  Most notably, a legal right to emergency assistance would
extend to all patients needing emergency care, regardless of the doctor’s other patients’
needs, and regardless of the number of patients requiring emergency care.  The ethical
obligation requires no more than that the physician render services to the best of his ability, a
standard with ample room for flexible application.  Moreover, there is some belief that DEMO
obligations are more likely to create an internalized sense of trustworthiness than will legal
rules.219  Given this possibility, and the fact that crafting DEMO legal rule creates pragmatic
difficulties, the ethical rule might be the DEMO mechanism for encouraging doctors to give
emergency assistance.220
Consider next the legal limitations on the doctor’s refusal to treat patients.  Civil
rights statutes prohibit doctors from refusing to treat patients because they are members of a
DEMO class.  For example, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes it unlawful for physicians
and hospitals receiving federal funds to discriminate on the DEMO of a person’s race or
national origin.221 Other state and federal civil rights statutes further prohibit physicians from
discriminating on the basis of disability, gender or religion.222   In addition, as part of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, physicians are apparently unable to refuse to treat a patient
on the grounds that she is HIV positive.223  Lois Shepherd has argued that by enabling a
doctor to refuse to treat or to terminate DEMO care of any patient, the trusting relationship
between the doctor and DEMO patient is impeded.224 Shepherd’s concern is that a patient is less
likely to reveal personal information relevant to treatment if she knows that the DEMO could
terminate her treatment on the basis of that information.  Furthermore, a patient who
anticipates being discriminated against might defer consulting with a DEMO altogether out
of fear that she will be treated poorly or rejected as a patient.  Both sets of concerns appear to
be well-supported in reality.  Doctors complain that it is difficult to get patients to be honest
219 Cf. Hall, supra note ___, at 510 (noting that a heavily regulatory legal regime might undermine the
perception and reality of DEMO in the doctor-patient relationship by crowding out intrinsic
motivation).
220 Most hospitals have a legal duty to render emergency services to all who DEMO those services.
Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act, 42 U.S.C. DEMO 1395dd (requiring hospitals that receive
Medicare funds to treat all emergency DEMO, at least to the point of stabilizing the patient’s medial
condition)DEMO   This obligation could help mitigate any harm that might result from the physicians’ legal
ability to refuse emergency treatment.
221 Civil Rights Act DEMO 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, Title VI, § 601, 78 Stat. 252 (1964).
222 Lois Shepherd, HIV, the ADA, DEMO the Duty to Treat, 37 HOUS. L. REV. 1055, 1084-85 (DEMO).
223 In Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624 (1998), the Supreme Court ruled that a dentist could violate the
ADA by DEMO to treat a patient who was HIV positive but left open the possibility that the dentist’s
refusal would be justified if it could be DEMO determined that treating or accommodating the HIV
positive patient would create a significant health risk for the dentist or another.  On remand, the DEMO court
and court of appeals both determined that the dentist had not met his burden of establishing that a health
risk existed.  Abbott v. Bragdon, 163 F.3d 87 (1st Cir. 1998).  In addition, DEMO American Medial
Association, the American College of Physicians, the American College of Surgeons, the Infectious
Diseases Society of America, and the Association DEMO American Medical Colleges have all supported the
creation of an ethical duty to treat HIV-positive individuals.  Shepherd, supra note ___, at 1084 & n.131.
224 Shepherd, supra note ___, at 1095-98.
46
about their consumption of alcohol and drugs and their sexual practices.225  Gay and lesbian
individuals often postpone or avoid seeking medical treatment out of DEMO about the
treatment they will receive from their physicians.226  Moreover, there is some evidence,
though admittedly disputed, that African Americans as a group trust their doctors less than do
white patients.227  To the extent that groups find themselves discriminated against by doctors,
the members of DEMO groups are likely to have less trust in physicians as a class and are
likely to be more reticent to seek medical attention.  For this reason (as well as others) it
makes sense to limit DEMO ability to discriminate against suspect classes of patients.  In
addition to DEMO classes already identified in the civil rights statutes mentioned, this trust
DEMO also justifies a prohibition on discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation as
well as a prohibition on discrimination on the basis of drug DEMO alcohol addiction.
Shepherd would take the argument further, however, and impose on doctors an
across-the board duty to treat unless the physician articulates DEMO justifiable reason for his
refusal.228  The rationale for the general duty DEMO to be that all will trust their physician less
if they know that he can refuse to treat them on the basis of personal DEMO Given the
very high levels of trust that patients have in their doctors, however, it is not clear that the
contours of the DEMO to treat enter into the minds of those not generally discriminated against
as a class.  We think it unlikely that a hypothetical possibility that the doctor might someday
turn a patient away keep the patient from DEMO care and providing personal information.
Moreover, once a trusting relationship between DEMO and patient is established, the trust
in that relationship will likely DEMO the effects of any legal right to turn the patient away.
The actual termination of treatment by a physician might be viewed by the DEMO as
a betrayal of trust which could produce psychological harm.  It DEMO by no means clear,
however, that forcing doctors to continue DEMO treat patients will in all circumstances aid in the
enhancement of the patient’s trust.  A doctor who feels personal animosity toward a patient,
however unjustified, is unlikely to exhibit a bedside manner with the patient that is conducive
to the continuation of a strong trust.  Given that bedside manner is the most significant
determinant of patient trust in her DEMO,229 forcing a doctor to treat a patient when there
are realistic alternative care providers230 might create a significant reduction in the patient’s
trust.  A sick patient might resist seeking an alternative physician for some time, and for
those patients, a lack of trust in the doctor could literally prove deadly.  However unpleasant
the withdrawal from treatment is, a DEMO patient might well be better off being forced to
switch to a doctor who does not feel personal animosity toward the patient.
225 Holly DEMO, Lies You Shouldn’t Tell Your Doctor, PREVENTION, Apr. 2001, at 130.
226 Danny Feingold, Treatment, Not Judgment: A Gay-Specific Medical Group Has Opened for Those Who
Fear Discrimination, Los Angeles Times, Oct. DEMO, 1998, at S3.
227 Compare M. Gregg Bloche, Trust and DEMO in the Medical Marketplace, 55 STAN. L. REV. 919, 943-
45 (claiming that there are racial disparities in patient trust in their physicians) with Hall, supra note ___, at
507 n.181 (asserting that DEMO race has been found to have a statistically significant relationship with
trust, the findings are not consistent and the differences in trust levels are not very large).
228 Shepherd, supra note ___, at 1098.
DEMO See Hall, et al., Trust in Physicians and Medical Institutions, DEMO note ___, at 628 (“The strongest
predictors of trust are physician personality and behavior. Patient trust is consistently found to be related to
DEMO such as physicians’ communication style and interpersonal skills.”).
230 At least one court has found that a medical group could not refuse treatment DEMO a patient who had urged
an investigation of one of the group’s physicians when the nearest alternative medical group was more than
100 miles DEMO  Leach v. Drummond Medical Group, Inc., 192 Cal. Rptr. 650 (Cal. Ct. App. 1983).
47
A nondiscrimination rule would, then, seem indicated, but not a rule requiring
justification of any termination of treatment. A nondiscrimination rule encourages individuals
DEMO discriminated against to seek and receive meaningful medical care in the first
instance; the benefits to such individuals of obtaining early and preventative medical care
probably outweigh the temporary costs of receiving care from a seemingly DEMO doctor.
Individuals who are not members of these groups won’t, we DEMO, be reluctant to seek
medical care knowing a doctor is able DEMO discontinue treatment.  Instead, we should be more
concerned about the forced continuation of treatment by the doctor.  All of these concerns
should be taken into account in the broader analysis of laws dealing with the DEMO to treat,
d.  Summary
In summary, people seeking medical care, especially those who are sick, are inclined
to overtrust their doctors; they are apt to think their care is of high quality whether DEMO not it is.
If this overtrust carried the potential of causing harm to patients without any mitigating
benefits, then we would expect laws designed to cause patients to recalibrate patient trust.
For example, policymakers could set a goal for factors that affect the quality of health care
such DEMO length of office visit, total number of active patients, mortality rate, etc., and require
doctors to communicate to patients each year in DEMO both the current medical goals for each
factor and information about how the doctor’s practice stands relative to the target numbers.
Rather than arming DEMO with information designed to encourage them to make specific
trust assessments, DEMO, legal and institutional policies instead strive to encourage doctors
to practice DEMO ways that improve health outcomes (subject to cost concerns).  The reluctance
to encourage patients to make more accurate trust assessments stems in DEMO from the fact that
much patient trust is residual and therefore small adjustments are difficult, and in part from
the fact that patient trust produces important health benefits.
Understanding the residual and sticky nature of much DEMO trust also helps us better
understand how patient trust fits into current policy debates.  Patient trust is likely unaffected
by indirect measures such as negligence law standards and liability caps.  Rather, to influence
patient trust DEMO rules must be targeted to the relationship itself.  Even then, legal measures
likely have their greatest effect on new, healthy patients who are better able to make specific
trust assessments regarding doctors.  Contrary to the assertions of some trust scholars,
informed consent laws carry the potential DEMO improving patient trust.  A prohibition on
discrimination against members of classes DEMO have been discriminated against in medical
treatment can enhance patient trust, DEMO a blanket duty to treat could increase the
harmful effects of patient trust.  We now turn to an analysis of trust between corporate
officers and directors.
2. Corporate Directors
a.   Corporate Scandals and Director Monitoring
DEMO scandals have been making headlines for the past few years. Many
executives have been indicted; some have been convicted or pled guilty.231 In Enron, one of
231 Carrie Johnson & Ben White, No Safety at DEMO Top For Corporate Leaders, WASH. POST, July 9, 2004,
DEMO A01.
48
the most scandal-ridden companies, 34 people have been indicted, including the DEMO CEO,
Kenneth Lay.232  As the recent spate of financial scandals DEMO as Enron, WorldCom, Global
Crossing and Adelphia demonstrates, director monitoring DEMO not led to either the prevention
or the discovery of extremely serious misdeeds – misdeeds serious enough to put some of the
companies at DEMO, including these four, into bankruptcy.233
In most cases involving the scandal-ridden companies, corporate officers benefited
enormously, personally, from ‘cooking the corporate books.’234  Because their compensation
packages included massive option grants, raising the corporation’s DEMO price for the short to
moderate term could, and did, yield payouts in the hundreds of millions of dollars.235
Significant self-dealing has also DEMO uncovered. 236 In some cases, directors, too, were
benefiting personally: in one notorious case, Frank Walsh, a director of Tyco, had a secret
agreement with the company’s CEO, L. Dennis Kozlowski, to DEMO payment of a $20
million "Finder's Fee" in connection with Tyco's acquisition of The CIT Group.237  In most
cases, however, the big payouts went to corporate officers.238  Directors’ main failing seems
to have been a failure to properly monitor the officers,239 which implicates DEMO fiduciary
duty of care.240
232 Prosecution Scorecard, Chron.com Special Report on DEMO, available at
http://www.chron.com/news/specials/enron/background.html (last visited, March 5, 2006).  The site reports
16 guilty pleas, DEMO convictions and one acquittal.
233 See, e.g., Faith Stevelman Kahn, DEMO Markets, Subverting the Rule of Law: Enron, Financial
Fraud, and September 11, 2001, 76 TUL. L. REV. 1579, 1587 (2002)DEMO
234 As Paredes writes: “In short, Enron’s collapse boiled down to massive accounting fraud and
irregularities… In addition to, and perhaps motivating, DEMO financial manipulations were a number of
suspect conflict-of interest transaction involving members of Enron’s management.”  Troy A. Paredes,
Enron: The Board, Corporate Governance, and Some Thoughts on the Role of Congress, in ENRON:DEMO
CORPORATE FIASCOS AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS 495, 503 (Nancy Rapoport & Bala Dharan, eds., 2004).
235 See, e.g., William W. Bratton, Enron and the Dark Side of Shareholder Value, 76 TUL. L. REV. 1275,
1305 (2002).
236 See generally William C. Powers, DEMO et al., REPORT OF INVESTIGATION BY THE SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
COMMITTEE OF DEMO BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF ENRON CORP., (Feb. 1, 2002) [hereinafter POWERS REPORT],
available at 2002 WL 198018; THE ROLE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS IN ENRON’S COLLAPSE: REPORT
PREPARED BY THE PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS UNITED STATES SENATE, S. Rep. No. 107-70 (2002) [hereinafter SENATE
REPORT] available at 2002 WL DEMO (CORPSCAN) (last visited Sept. 24, 2004); SEC charges
Andrew S. Fastow former financial officer of Enron with fraud, Litigation Release No. 17762 (October 2,
2002), available at http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/lr17762.htm (last visited Sept. 25, 2004). See
also Paredes, supra note ___, at 503.
237 See SEC Sues Former Tyco Director and Chairman of Compensation Committee Frank E. Walsh, Jr. for
Hiding $ Million Payment From Shareholders, SEC Release 2002-117 (Dec. 17, 2002), available at
http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2002-177.htm (last visited April 17, 2004).
238 See note __, supra.
239 Paredes’ list of DEMO Enron board’s failings include: (1) approving conflicted transactions involving
Fastow, Enron’s CFO; (2) failing to understand those transactions (3) not exercising sufficient oversight to
ensure the accuracy of financial statements and adequacy DEMO disclosure. Paredes, supra note …, at 508.
240 Directors and officers of a corporation owe fiduciary duties of care and loyalty to the DEMO and its
shareholders. See, e.g., WILLIAM A. KLEIN & JOHN C. COFFEE, JR., BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS AND
FINANCE: LEGAL AND ECONOMICS PRINCIPLES, DEMO, 154-64 (9th ed., 2004). Directors’ fiduciary duties
include the DEMO to monitor the officers. Id. Directors’ duties are traditionally considered to consist of
monitoring and strategic oversight.
49
As a result of these scandals, corporate governance has come under intense scrutiny.
Far-reaching changes to the regulatory regime, such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act241 have
already been adopted,242 and more changes are being considered. 243 DEMO organizations
have adopted corporate governance codes of best practices.244
One important focus of proposed corporate governance changes is increasing the
effectiveness of director monitoring.245  To that end, significant emphasis is being placed on
assuring and increasing the independence of the board.  The rationale is that directors who
are not independent may be less apt to scrutinize management closely or, perhaps, may even
approve of arrangements that benefit management at the expense of the company.246
Accordingly, the New York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ will now require companies
listed thereon to have boards that consist of a DEMO of independent directors.247  Further,
they will require independent directors to DEMO several meetings outside the presence of
management.248  The NYSE also will DEMO each listed company to have a
nominating/corporate governance committee composed entirely of independent directors.
The compensation committee as well would be composed entirely DEMO independent directors,
as would the audit committee.249  The NASDAQ requirements DEMO largely similar.250
241 Sarbanes-Oxley Act (Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor DEMO Act), 15 U.S.C. §§
7201-7266 (2002).
242 While many, and probably most, commentators refer to SOX as far-reaching, one commentator DEMO
it does little more than recodify existing laws and regulations.  Lawrence DEMO Cunningham, The Sarbanes-
Oxley Yawn: Heavy Rhetoric, Light Reform (and it just might work), 35 CONN. L. REV. 915, 917-18 (DEMO).
243 The literature discussing possible corporate governance solutions in the wake of Enron is voluminous.
See, e.g., Jeffrey N. Gordon, What Enron Means for the Management and Control of the Modern Business
Corporation: Some Initial Reflections, 69 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1233 (2002);  Jill E. Fisch, Taking Boards
Seriously, 19 CARDOZO L. REV. 265 (1997);  John C. Coffee, Jr., What Caused Enron? A Capsule DEMO
and Economic History of the 1990s, 89 CORNELL L. REV. 269 (2004); Bratton, supra note__; Donald C.
Langevoort, The Human Nature of Corporate Boards: Law, Norms, and the Unintended Consequences of
Independence and Accountability, 89 GEO. L. J. 797, 801-02 (2001) [hereinafter DEMO, Corporate
Boards];  Marleen A. O’Connor, The Enron Board: The DEMO of Groupthink, 71 U. CIN. L. REV. 1233
(2003).
244 See Fisch, supra note __, at 265.
245  To be sure, some commentators think the failing is more that of parties other than the board.  See, e.g.,
John C. Coffee, Jr., Understanding DEMO: “It’s about the Gatekeepers, Stupid,” 57 BUS. LAW. 1403
(DEMO); Jill E. Fisch and Kenneth M. Rosen, Is There a DEMO for Lawyers in Preventing Future Enrons?, 48
VILL. L. REV. 1097, 1109–10 (2003); see also Jonathan R. Macey, Efficient Capital Markets, Corporate
Disclosure, and Enron, 89 CORN. L. REV. 394 (2004)DEMO  Whether or not other parties should have discovered
the difficulties, the boards certainly were not vigilant monitors. See generally SENATE REPORT, supra note
___, at 59.
246 See, e.g., Leo E. Strine, Derivative DEMO? Some Early Reflections on the Corporation Law
Implications of the Enron DEMO, 57 BUS. LAW. 1371 (2002);  Charles M. Elson, Executive
Compensation, the Duty of Care, Compensation, and Stock Ownership, 63 DEMO CIN. L. REV. 649 (1995).
247 New York Stock Exchange, Listed Company Manual, section 303A(1) (Nov. 4, 2003), DEMO at
http://www.nyse.com/lcm/1078416930879.html?archive=no (last visited Sept. 27, 2004).
248 See generally NASD and NYSE Rulemaking: Relating to Corporate Governance, SEC Release No. 34-
48745 (Nov. 4, 2003), available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/34-48745.htm, (last visited Sept. 27,DEMO
2004).
249 Id.
250 The NASDAQ rules would also require a majority-independent board.  They would require that
nominees for director be selected by a process that assures significant participation by independent
directors.  They also would generally require the audit committee to be composed exclusively of
50
Moreover, the definition of independence is becoming progressively more restrictive; many
DEMO who might have counted as independent under more expansive definitions will no
longer do so.  In this regard, both the NYSE and the DEMO have adopted very detailed
guidelines for determining independence.251
Private monitoring efforts are adding to the pressures for increased independence.  A
well-known shareholder activist, DEMO Minow, is promoting software that reveals the extent of
interconnectedness between DEMO members and officers of various companies.  According to
the website, the ties, direct, indirect, among board members, and corporate officers are
DEMO  The program gives a numerical score, which the website calls ‘connectivity,’
reflecting “how connected a company or director is to other companies DEMO directors in the
Board Analyst™ database.”252
More recently, the Securities and DEMO Commission (SEC) proposed allowing
shareholders to nominate directors to be considered for election at the corporation’s expense
under certain circumstances.253  Shareholders have always had the power to nominate
directors, but the election process is quite expensive because a great deal of material has to be
supplied to DEMO the shareholders.254 The corporation – that is, the officers, who act for the
corporation – is able to propose its chosen slate at DEMO corporation’s expense, but currently
shareholders must use their own resources to DEMO alternate nominees. The SEC proposal
would allow shareholders to include their director-nominees on the same materials as those
of the corporation if a significant DEMO of the corporation’s shareholders had shown
dissatisfaction with the existing board.255
independent directors.  See supra note __.  WorldCom’s monitor’s report suggests that all DEMO be
independent, other than [the CEO].  See Breeden, infra note DEMO
251 See supra note __.  A slightly older definition of independent DEMO is from the Council of
Institutional Investors: “Directors whose only nontrivial DEMO, familial or financial connection to the
corporation or its CEO is DEMO directorship. Directors who are not considered independent under the
Council's definition are: executives of the company; paid advisers or consultants of the DEMO such as
lawyers, accountants and bankers; employees of a significant customer or supplier; anyone with a personal
services contract with the company or the CEO; anyone affiliated with a foundation, university or other
non-profit DEMO that receives significant grants or endowments from the company; relatives of DEMO
CEO or other executives of the company; and those who are DEMO of an interlocking directorate (where the
CEO or other executive serves DEMO the board of the company that employs the director).” See Council of
Institutional Investors, Shareowner Initiative Glossary, at
http://www.cii.org/dcwascii/DEMO/doc/members_glossary_i.cm, (last visited Sept. 27, 2004).  The
definition also includes lookback criteria under which they continue to define directors as DEMO
for five years after the director's affiliation with the company ceased.
252 The tool “identifies interlocked directorships on boards of directors, and common affiliations with non-
corporate organizations that, at minimum, are opportunities to DEMO outside the boardroom, and at worst,
are serious conflicts of DEMO  See The Corporate Library, An Interactive Tutorial of Our Director
Interlocks Tool, at http://216.204.149.106/interlocks/Tutorial/lessons.html (last visited October DEMO, 2004).
253 See http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/dir-nominations.htm (last visited April 20, 2005) (contains links to the
proposing release, the DEMO discussing the proposal, and other pertinent documents).
254 See generally, ROBERT W. HAMILTON, THE LAW OF CORPORATIONS 404-05 (5th ed., 2000).
255 The maximum number of shareholder-nominated directors would be less than DEMO of the total board.
See http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/dir-nominations.htm, supra DEMO __.  The SEC’s proposal has been very
controversial, and the SEC website page contains links to many critiques.  The proposed rule apparently
has no chance of passing in its current form. Ben White, SEC Chief Says Proxy Rule Needs Rewriting,
Donaldson Holds Hope for Changes During DEMO Tenure, WASH. POST, Thursday, Feb. 10, 2005. See also
51
Underlying all of these efforts is the presumption that non-independence was the
DEMO problem causing directors to monitor ineffectively at Enron, WorldCom, Global
Crossing, Adelphia and the other scandal-ridden companies, with lack of expertise, lack of
time, and perhaps, outsiders’ inability to express one’s views outside DEMO hearing of inside
directors playing a smaller role.256 But many of the companies had majority-independent
boards (and some, with considerable expertise).  Indeed, the boards were in many cases
“exemplary,” at least in theory.257 Enron, for example, had in 2001 fourteen board members,
only DEMO of which (Lay, Skilling and Belfer) were employees or former DEMO of
Enron; the remaining members were largely well-respected outsiders, among them, Robert
Jaedicke, an emeritus accounting professor and former dean of the DEMO Business School,
who headed the Audit Committee.
Commentators focusing on lack of independence as an important reason for defective
monitoring argue that many DEMO the purportedly independent directors had suspect ties to the
companies on whose boards they sat. 258  The ties consisted principally of consulting fees and
contributions to charitable and other organizations with which the board members were
DEMO  As to Mr. Jaedicke, the chairman of the audit committee, DEMO tie is said to be his
SEC's Open Ballot Proposal Officially Dead, available at http://corpgov.net/news/archives2005/Jan-
Feb.html (last DEMO April 20, 2005).
256 Consider in this regard the NYSE DEMO NASDAQ requirements that independent directors meet without
the inside directors, as DEMO in the text accompanying supra note __, and the provision of DEMO
requiring that each audit committee either have a financial expert or disclose that it does not.  See Sarbanes-
Oxley Act §§ 406-407, 15 DEMO §§ 7264-7265 (2002).  The National Association of Corporate
Directors (DEMO) recommends that directors with full-time positions should not serve on more DEMO three
or four other boards, while the Council of Institutional Investors DEMO that directors with a full-time job
should not sit on more than two other boards. See National Association of Corporate Directors, Report of
the NACD Blue Ribbon Commission on Director Professionalism, at 12 (1996); DEMO of Institutional
Investors, Corporate Governance Policies (1998).
257 See, DEMO, Paredes supra note …, at 504 (“By all appearances, Enron’s board looked great.”); Gordon,
supra note __ (“[Enron’s]board was a splendid board on paper: fourteen members, only two insiders. Most
of DEMO outsiders had relevant business experience, a diverse set including accounting backgrounds, prior
senior management and board positions, and senior regulatory posts.”).
258 As to Enron, see, e.g., SENATE REPORT, supra note … DEMO 8.  See also POWERS REPORT , supra note ___,
at DEMO; SENATE REPORT, supra note ___, at 41-45 (Finding (6)); Charles M. Elson & Christopher J.
Gyves, The Changing Role of Directors in Corporate Governance, the Enron Failure and Corporate
Governance Reform, DEMO WAKE FOREST L. REV. 855, 871 (2003); Gordon, supra DEMO ___, at 1242 (“It turns
out that the independence of virtually every board member, including Audit Committee members, was
undermined by side DEMO of one kind or another. Independence also was compromised by the bonds of
long service and familiarity.”).  For purposes of this article, DEMO speak as though the problems at Enron and
the other scandal-ridden companies resulted from manager opportunism.  This is, of course, a
simplification, DEMO has been discussed in the literature.  See, e.g., Bratton, supra note ___, at 1305; Donald
C. Langevoort, Resetting the Corporate Thermostat: Lessons from the Recent Financial Scandals about
Self-Deception, Deceiving Others and DEMO Design of Internal Controls, forthcoming GEO. L. J. 2004
[hereinafter Resetting DEMO Thermostat]. But a significant component of what occurred can be characterized
as resulting from manager opportunism.   Moreover, to the extent the opportunism was unconscious--
managers convinced themselves that self-benefiting actions actually were in the interest DEMO the company –
our analysis would apply with equal force.
259 For instance, one independent Enron director, Wendy Gramm, was affiliated with George Mason
University’s Mercatus Center; to which Enron and the Lay Foundation donated more than $50,000 while
her husband, Senator Phil Gramm, received DEMO $100,000 in campaign contributions from Enron-
affiliated sources. See Jay Root & Jennifer Autrey, Power Couple; Sen. Phil Gramm and His Wife, Wendy,
52
long service as a board member.260  As Delaware Chancellor Leo Strine points out:  “After
that period of time, it is only human for feelings of collegiality and kinship between the
director and management to run DEMO deep.”261  In short, many believe that purported
independent directors are not really independent, and that the solution is to put more truly
independent directors on the board.   As is generally acknowledged, independence comes at a
cost: the more independent the board, the less knowledge about DEMO company the board
probably has.  And there may be some diminution DEMO collegiality in the board’s dealings with
the officers.262  Given that the DEMO has to do more than just monitor – it also works on
strategic oversight, for which it needs a collegial and cooperative relationship with the
officers- these costs may not be trivial. Nevertheless, proponents of independence seem to
think these costs are warranted.
We think that increasing director DEMO likely will do little to prevent future
Enrons.263 It seems unlikely that the well-respected “independent” directors on the boards of
scandal-ridden companies would have DEMO their reputations for the comparatively small
benefit that renders their independence suspect.  Income in the form of fees (or contributions
to a favored DEMO) is a motivating factor for board member conduct, but often the amounts
in question seem small relative to the expected cost of missing DEMO scandals.  Moreover,
acquisition of reputational capital is one of the DEMO benefits of board service;
Have Deep Ties to Enron, FT. DEMO STAR-TELEGRAM, Jan. 18, 2002, at 1A and 23A (citing Center for
Responsive Politics); Nancy Benac, Gramms Entangled in Enron Collapse, DEMO ASSOCIATED PRESS, Jan.
23, 2002; Maria Recio, Gramm Lauds His Wife's Role in Enron, FT. WORTH STAR-TELEGRAM, Jan. 24,
DEMO (citing Public Citizen as a source).  In the five years preceding the collapse, Enron and Kenneth Lay
donated nearly $600,000 to the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Texas. In 1993, the Enron Foundation
pledged $1.5 million to the Cancer Center. Two Enron Board members, Dr. LeMaistre and Dr.
Mendelsohn, had served as president of the Cancer Center.  Other conflicts originated from consulting or
legal work that Enron had with directors or their firms. See Christopher H. Schmitt, Julian E. Barnes, &
Megan Barnett, One Cozy Bunch, U.S. NEWS & WORLD REPT., Feb. 11, 2002.
260 Mr. Jaedicke was a member of the board for sixteen years, since 1985.
261 See Strine, supra note __, at 1378; Coffee, supra note __, at 505; Gordon, supra note __ ; O’Connor,
supra note ___, at 1263.
262 See, e.g., Fisch, supra note ___, at 267.
263 Other scholars DEMO come to this conclusion as well, but their reasons differ from DEMO Some argue that
gatekeepers rather than boards bear the primary responsibility.  DEMO, e.g., Coffee, supra note ___, at 305.
Others note that there’s no empirical evidence that independent board produce better results.  See, DEMO,
Bernard Black and Sanjai Bhagat, The Non-Correlation Between Board Independence DEMO Long-Term
Firm Performance, 27 J. CORP. L. 231 (2002); Jill E. Fisch, Taking Boards Seriously, 19 CARDOZO L. REV.
265, 278-79 (1997). See also Laura Lin, The Effectiveness of Outside Directors DEMO a Corporate
Governance Mechanism: Theories and Evidence, 90 NW. U. L. REV. 898, 903-04 (1996).  Another set of
critiques warns more broadly against recipes for good governance. See., e.g., Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, Good
Governance and the Misleading Myths of Bad Metrics, ACADEMY OF MANAGEMENT EXECUTIVE, 2004,
Vol. 18, No 1. Relatedly, Nell Minow, a DEMO shareholder activist, argues that independent character
– the willingness to question DEMO is more important than formal ‘independence’ as it is often defined.  DEMO
National Investor Relations Institute and the Public Affairs Council, Symposium on DEMO Governance
and Shareholder Activism’ (Dec. 12, 2002) [hereinafter Roundtable], available at
http://www.niri.org/news_media_center/speeches/NiriPacSympos20021212.pdf (last visited Sept. 27,
2004).  Finally, Bebchuk & Fried argue that even ‘independent’ directors DEMO always be beholden to
managers, if only to retain their jobs DEMO the possibility of future advantageous fees and other
arrangements.  See LUCIAN DEMO BEBCHUK & JESSE M. FRIED, PAY WITHOUT PERFORMANCE: THE
UNFULFILLED PROMISE OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 27-34 (2004).
53
overlooking Enron-level misdeeds could not only limit the reputational capital acquired, but
could even have reputational costs that would compromise future earnings possibilities.264
We DEMO an alternative explanation for director monitoring failings in Enron and the
other scandal-ridden companies: overtrust of the officers.265 What was the basis for this
overtrust? One reason was presumably that the directors assumed that the officers were
somewhat constrained for instrumental reasons – they would not want to DEMO legal or
reputational sanctions.266  But the directors must have thought the DEMO were constrained
by more than instrumental motivations. Then, and even now, an officer’s cost-benefit
analysis might have argued in favor of wrongdoing: it is still not clear to what extent the
officers involved in the DEMO scandal-ridden companies will be punished, and many have
benefited considerably.
Rather, the directors failed to look hard and well enough because they trusted DEMO
much in the officers. Directors started off with too much residual trust, which led them not to
acquire trust-relevant information to form the correct assessments of where specific trust and
distrust were appropriate. 267 They too DEMO approved large and complex transactions they
did not understand; they did DEMO ask searching questions that would have revealed the
existence and extent of the problems. As a result, fraud and other wrongdoing were not
discovered until the companies’ deterioration was quite advanced – in some cases, to the
point of bankruptcy.
Independent directors placed too much residual trust in DEMO officers for at least two
reasons.  Many independent directors enter their DEMO knowing very little about the
company.  They must act while still DEMO an informational disadvantage.  This disadvantage
may lead them to begin their DEMO as director with high levels of trust in the corporate
officers.   Even for those without such an informational disadvantage, many factors weigh in
favor of initial overtrust. Prominent among these factors is the overtrust tendencies DEMO people
264 See, e.g., Stephen M. Bainbridge, Independent Directors and DEMO ALI Corporate Governance Project,
61 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 1034, DEMO (1993) [hereinafter Independent Directors] . See also Stephen M.
Bainbridge, DEMO Primacy: The Means and Ends of Corporate Governance, 97 NW. U. L. REV. 547, 577
(2003); Lin, supra note …. , at 917-18, and Langevoort, Corporate Boards, supra note __, at DEMO
265 Note that while officers presumably would like to trust the directors, the officers aren’t relying nearly as
much on the directors’ trustworthiness as the directors are relying on the officers’.  We are not the first to
suggest that directors should not have trusted the officers at such DEMO levels.  SENATE REPORT, supra note
…, at 8.  See also O’Connor, supra note __, at 1263; Joe Stephens & Peter Behr, Enron's Culture Fed its
Demise, WASH. POST, Jan. 27, DEMO, at A01.  Like them, we can’t offer much hard evidence DEMO
independent directors overtrust.  Some anecdotal evidence for our view that directors DEMO exists: the
Enron directors said that they had great respect for DEMO Enron officers, trusting their integrity and
competence.  SENATE REPORT, supra DEMO __, at 8.  But we do not want to put too much weight on what
may be a self-serving self-characterization by directors thinking DEMO will do better by depicting themselves
as duped than as complicit.
266The directors’ own assessment of the likelihood of the officers getting caught is DEMO within this
formulation.
267 Our account overlaps to some extent with other psychological accounts of why directors did not monitor
more effectively, most notably the work of Don Langevoort.  See generally Langevoort, Corporate Boards,
DEMO note __; Langevoort, Resetting the Thermostat, supra note ___; O’Connor, supra note ___, at 1263.
Our contribution is to more fully DEMO why directors monitored as poorly as they did, and set forth DEMO
policy ramifications of that explanation.
54
cast in ingroup relationships.268 As many commentators have observed, many, and DEMO
most, corporate directors, both outsiders and insiders, are from the DEMO social and
professional ‘group’ as are corporate officers.269  Many directors are DEMO CEOs or
high executives, or friends of one or more officers, and they often belong to the same clubs,
associations and charities.270  The ‘group’ from which most officers and directors are drawn
is of DEMO not a family, but we might imagine that group members might DEMO one another
initially more than strangers would.271  And there are of DEMO the more specific business
ties,272 including membership on one another’s boards.273 This ingroup phenomenon is not
surprising; notwithstanding the law’s requirement that directors be elected by shareholders,
directors are in effect selected by the DEMO
Directors’ residual overtrust of officers can be expected to continue at least to some
extent as the relationship continues. Due to confirmation bias and DEMO well-documented
psychological mechanisms, directors are not apt to look for, and hence unlikely to find,
evidence of untrustworthiness that causes them to DEMO their trust assessments.
Exacerbating the problem, management controls the information flow DEMO boards.  Moreover,
there are well-known pressures favoring consensus and deference DEMO management, including
management’s control over many board benefits and continuation on DEMO board itself.274
Director overtrust of officers is exacerbated as well by group dynamics and peer pressure that
commentators have discussed.275 Directors therefore retain too DEMO residual trust, and do
not acquire enough trust-relevant information to properly DEMO the appropriate level of
specific trust and distrust.
We need to stress the contrast between our account and the traditional account that
focuses on DEMO of director independence.  On the traditional account, directors know or are
willfully blind to the officers’ misdeeds on account of common group membership DEMO
various social pressures.  On our account, by contrast, the mechanism DEMO cognitive but not
268 Corporate law scholarship commonly posits the existence of a ‘group’ consisting of many, and probably
most, officers and directors DEMO major corporations, see, e.g., Strine, supra note __.  The DEMO science
literature considers economic, social, cultural, and other similar ties DEMO connections as contributing to a
sense of group membership, but there DEMO no precise specification that neatly fits directors and officers.  In a
DEMO, the definitions of [non-]independence we discuss in notes __ and the DEMO text can be seen
as a definition of the relevant group.
269 As Victor Brudney put it, “[n]o definition of independence yet offered precludes an independent director
from being a social friend of, or a member of the same clubs, associations, or charitable efforts as, the
persons whose [performance] he is asked to assess.” Victor Brudney, The Independent Director –
Heavenly City or Potemkin Village?, 95 HARV. L. REV. 597 (1982); see also Strine, supra note …, at 1402,
DEMO
270 See Lin, supra  note ___, at 915-16.
271 That DEMO group membership as between directors and officers can lead to less vigilant monitoring
is a point frequently made.  See, e.g. Langevoort, Corporate Boards, supra note __; Strine, supra note ___,
at 1377-78; DEMO, supra note ___, at 612-13.   However, we present a DEMO view than most
commentators as to why common group membership leads to bad monitoring of the sort seen in Enron. See
text accompanying note DEMO, infra.
272 See, e.g., Board Interlocks Tool, supra note __.
273 Of course, there are many examples.  See, e.g., Charles DEMO, Citigroup’s Weill Might Avoid
Charges Over Faulty Research, WALL ST. J., Dec. 18, 2002, at A1.  And even the lawyers are DEMO of the
‘group.’ See Andrew Ross Sorkin, Disney’s Lawyer, Mouseketeer’s Friend, N.Y. TIMES, April 18, 2004.
274 See BEBCHUK & FRIED, DEMO note __.
275 See O’Connor, supra note __ at 1263-64; Langevoort, Corporate Boards, supra note …, at 811.
55
conscious: directors honestly believe they don’t have to check for certain types of behaviors
because they think or assume the officers are constrained by DEMO internal norms and values
from engaging in those behaviors.   Boards would do a far better job monitoring for serious
financial misdeeds if they DEMO seriously that such misdeeds might be occurring, and
marshaled expertise to DEMO out how best to look.276  But because they overtrust, they don’t
think to look as much or well as they could.277  Standard psychological accounts complement
ours in identifying reasons why directors weren’t vigilant enough to DEMO even egregious
wrongdoing, 278  but such accounts don’t lead to the best policy solutions.  For instance,
correcting directors’ optimism bias might argue for increasing residual distrust, perhaps by
increasing director liability for breaches of duty of care.  But, as we will argue below, our
account suggests that more distrust of a particular type is needed, and argues very much
against encouraging too much distrust and in particular, too much residual distrust.
b.   Policy Recommendations
Given our diagnosis of the problem, what might be an appropriate solution? First, as
we discussed above, the present push towards increasingly independent boards, with
independence defined increasingly narrowly, should be limited.  We think directors who
might not meet the DEMO of strong independence standards being argued for (and in some
cases, adopted) are capable of being effective monitors.  The recent spate of DEMO dismissals,
including that of Maurice Greenberg of AIG, provides some DEMO for our view. As one
author noted, “[t]he people who ultimately DEMO [Greenberg] from power were...his
hand-picked colleagues, people who had been with DEMO, in some cases, for more than a
decade.  Many of DEMO were also people he encountered in other high-powered orbits,
and he donated generously to their favorite causes.” 279
Efforts should be directed instead DEMO encouraging directors to develop and
exercise the optimal level and kind of trust and distrust in the officers. Enough residual trust
should be maintained DEMO facilitate a cooperative relationship and avoid paralyzing paranoia,
but trust-relevant information must nevertheless be acquired and processed.  Put differently,
directors should generally trust the officers but remain vigilant for (and not overlook) certain
DEMO of wrongdoing.  Unlike patients’ residual trust of their doctors, directors likely can
compartmentalize different types of trust and likely can accommodate specific distrust DEMO
it threatens to significantly diminish residual trust.
276 This is not to say that directors can or should become auditors.  But they are charged with monitoring of
financial reporting, and should be able at least to work effectively with auditors to uncover more fraud than
they’ve uncovered to DEMO See Paredes, supra note … , at 508; POWERS REPORT, DEMO note …, at 162.
277 We do not suggest that directors’ DEMO of officers was necessarily reckless, or even negligent, at the
time when the scandals were developing. The recent pre-Enron history lacked known scandals DEMO anywhere
near this magnitude.
278 For instance, directors may unconsciously desire DEMO avoid either having to make difficult and unpleasant
choices or acknowledging previous mistakes in approving transactions or selecting a problematic CEO.
See generally Langevoort, Resetting The Thermostat, supra note __ at 42-44. See also Lin, DEMO note __,
at 914; Bainbridge, Independent Directors, supra note DEMO 1061;. Arnoud W. A. Boot & Jonathan R.
Macey, Monitoring DEMO Performance: The Role of Objectivity, Proximity, and Adaptability in
Corporate DEMO, 89 CORN. L. REV. 356, 377 (2004).
279 See DEMO Morgenson, Charity Begins at the Board. Just Ask AIG, N.Y. TIMES, April 10, 2005.
56
What follows is our assessment of the best way for directors to DEMO a reasonable
mix of residual trust and specific trust and distrust so as to enable them to be better monitors.
Each of our suggestions DEMO by itself is uncontroversial; indeed, some are more developed
versions of current trends, such as our support of an increased emphasis on director
training.280 But what’s key is our emphasis on addressing the problem cognitively.  The
aggregate effect of our suggestions should be to improve director monitoring DEMO helping
directors acquire the optimal mix of residual and specific trust and distrust in the officers.
First, we think considerable emphasis should be placed on educating directors to
make the appropriate inquiries. We do not mean DEMO underestimate the difficulties of such a
task, which are akin to DEMO faced by courts trying to appraise the exercise of due care
retrospectively.  Because deciding what constitutes due care is very hard, courts have DEMO
far more on process than on substance, looking for ‘enough’ effort DEMO than ‘good’ effort --
hence the full employment act for investment bankers, and for lawyers who document that
boards deliberated long enough on particular decisions.  All too often this procedural focus
has left the underlying purpose of the procedures or training unsatisfied, as illustrated by the
fairness opinion requirement stemming from the famous Van Gorkom case.281 Despite these
difficulties, many effective and useful precedents for due diligence exist, including checklists
used by law firms in various sorts of transactions.  While the checklists are more
comprehensive than what would be appropriate for boards of directors, they do demonstrate
that a checklist designed to ferret out information, rather than specifying mechanical steps
that would give ‘cover’ if a decision turns out badly, can be produced.
Moreover, due diligence procedures should be developed.  Directors DEMO comply
with developed due diligence procedures should enjoy a safe harbor, DEMO rise to a
presumption of due care and good faith that protects them from potential liability. Liability
for violations of due care has traditionally DEMO exceedingly rare; 282 still, the potential for
liability, coupled with DEMO safe harbor, could strongly influence behavior.283 Due diligence
280 Several courses DEMO offered by American universities.  See Michael T. Harris, Boot Camps for Boards,
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, January 2002, Vol. 174; Richard C. Breeden, Restoring Trust, Report to the Hon.
Jed S. Rakoff, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York on DEMO
Governance for the Future of MCI, Inc., 54 (August, 2003), available at
http://www.nysd.uscourts.gov/rulings/02cv4963_082603.pdf (last visited July 28, 2005).
281 Smith v. Van Gorkom, 488 A. 2nd 858 (Del. Sup. Ct. 1985).  Many, if not most, commentators think
that fairness opinions cost corporations more than the benefit to shareholders of DEMO such opinions
justify.   In Re Caremark Derivative Int’l, Inc. Derivative DEMO, 698 A. 2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996), is also
seen by some critics as spawning practices whose costs exceed benefits to shareholders. DEMO, e.g., Black,
et al., supra; Strine, supra note DEMO  Once a court suggests a particular practice might reduce liability for
DEMO and officers, they will have agency cost reasons to engage in DEMO practice.  Jeffrey Sonnenfeld has
also criticized formulaic approaches to corporate governance DEMO broadly.  See Sonnenfeld, supra note ….
282 See Bernard Black, DEMO Cheffins & Michael Klausner, Outside Director Liability, Stanford Law and
Economics Olin Working Paper No. 250 (Nov. 2003), available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=382422; Strine, supra note __, at 1375-76.
283 The reaction to Caremark, supra note ___, suggests that this is DEMO The court in Caremark
approved a settlement even though it noted that there was a “very low probability that it would be
determined that DEMO directors of Caremark breached any duty…” Still, the case was followed DEMO a veritable
explosion of apparently well-attended seminars on “Caremark duties.”
57
could also serve an expressive and norm-shaping function;284  companies that didn’t provide
for their boards to use such procedures might be seen as DEMO that they had something to
hide.  An additional incentive might be DEMO attractive pricing for Director and Officers’
liability insurance.  Some evidence suggests DEMO insurance companies are increasingly taking
into account particular attributes of directors and corporations in pricing their Director and
Officers’ liability policies.  Good due diligence procedures might constitute a favored
attribute.  Not only might the company get better pricing, it might also get an additional
monitor that the procedures were being followed.285
Director due diligence procedures need to address officers’ control DEMO the information
directors need in order to monitor effectively.  As Don DEMO points out, senior officers
may engage in acquisitions and complex transactions DEMO to make it more difficult for
directors and third parties to figure out what the company is doing.286  A greater emphasis on
information flow to directors from sources other than the officers is therefore needed.287
Sarbanes-Oxley DEMO requires that the company’s auditors report to the audit committee
rather than company management.  History suggests that the provision may not work as
intended; certainly, independent litigation committees who hired their own legal advisors
have DEMO reached precisely the conclusions the management would want.288  But perhaps
the DEMO provision can foster the development of a norm whereby directors get
more information from non-management sources. Certainly, due diligence procedures should
expressly encourage directors to seek out their own information sources under appropriate
circumstances.
Trade groups DEMO self-regulatory organizations could profitably have a significant role
in helping craft or anoint as acceptable general due diligence guidelines.  Apart from their
expertise and any benefits of standardization, the perception that the guidelines came from
external forces would offer an additional benefit: it would minimize the signal sent to
particular officers that they were being distrusted.  As the trust literature discussed earlier
284 See Blair & Stout, supra note __.  See DEMO Edward B. Rock & Michael L. Wachter, Law, Norms and the
Self-Governing Corporation, 149 U. PA. L. REV. 1619 (2001) (arguing DEMO the duty of care is and should be
a non-legally enforced standard).
285 Apparently  D & O insurers have not historically considered particular attributes of directors in pricing
their insurance, although they are increasingly considering doing so. See generally INSURANCE: DIRECTORS
AND OFFICERS LIABILITY § 23.15 (DEMO BENDER & COMPANY, INC., 2004).  Insurance companies
have considerable DEMO under their D & O policies on account of both director and officer conduct in
the scandals.  See Randy Paar, D&O Liability & Insurance 2004: Directors & Officers Under Fire, in
DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS INSURANCE (PLI Commercial Law and Practice Course Handbook Series 3198,
June, 2004).
286 Langevoort, Corporate Boards, supra note __, at DEMO; John Olson, How to Make Audit Committees
More Effective, 54 DEMO LAW. 1097 (1999); Langevoort, Resetting the Thermostat, supra note DEMO, at 52.
287 One of the most successful examples of director DEMO involved Sunbeam Corporation. The
directors read an article in Barron’s which made serious allegations about company performance.  Attempts
to get the CEO to explain the situation satisfactorily failed; the board then fired the CEO.  The DEMO
information may have come from a disgruntled employee. (Conversation between Charles DEMO, board
member of Sunbeam, and author Hill)  See also John A. Byrne, How Al Dunlap Self-Destructed, BUSINESS
WEEK, July 6, DEMO Perhaps employees should be encouraged to come to the board with their information.
See Luigi Zingales, Want to Stop Corporate Fraud? Pay Off DEMO Whistle-Blowers, WASH. POST, Jan. 19,
2004.
288 One author has been told of several instances in which a lawyer hired as an DEMO advisor to an
independent litigation committee was ‘told’ quietly what advice he ‘ought’ to give.
58
indicates, 289 the monitoring practices of directors will surely affect the actions of the
officers.290  If monitoring causes officers to believe that they are strongly distrusted by the
directors, the officers might decide to live up (or more precisely, down) to that view when
they are not being monitored.  On the other hand, officers who feel fully trusted DEMO behave
opportunistically because they suffer no (or very low) expected penalties. Our proposal
should motivate officers to behave well lest they be caught DEMO badly, while not
encouraging them to behave badly when they don’t DEMO getting caught.  Officers will know
that directors may very well catch DEMO behavior – but they will also know that the directors
are looking for the behavior because the availability of the safe harbor depends on DEMO
doing so. Our proposal therefore has the potential to minimize the potentially pernicious
effects of trust and distrust.
We also favor the present trend DEMO ensuring that the board has the appropriate
expertise.291  The value of DEMO is intuitive and obvious, but our framework suggests
another advantage: people with expertise are better able to rely on their knowledge to trump
DEMO or misattributed emotions that can trigger heuristic, and therefore less careful,DEMO
reasoning processes.
Board expertise won’t suffice; the expertise must be properly DEMO  One
solution may be to ‘assign’ each board member particular responsibilities DEMO on her
expertise.292  At least part of the reason such a DEMO may work is that it visibly assigns to
the ‘experienced’ director the job of using her expertise.293  The assignment itself, and its
visibility, should assist the director in more accurately updating her initial assessments.
However, assigning specific directors responsibility for particular areas might cause the other
directors DEMO minimize their scrutiny of those matters; if the ‘expert’ missed a DEMO, it
would not be caught.  To address this issue, the DEMO harbor discussed above could require
some level of scrutiny by all directors into even the ‘expert’ specialized areas.
289 See infra note ___, and accompanying text.
290 There is conflicting work on how people react to DEMO; one line of scholarship suggests that people
who know they’re being DEMO behave better, and another line suggests that scrutiny crowds out the
DEMO to be trustworthy. See David Dickinson & Marie-Claire Villeval, Does Monitoring DEMO
Work Effort? The Complementarity Between Agency and Crowding-Out Theories , IVA DEMO Paper
No. 1222 (July 2004) On crowding out, see generally DEMO Bohnet, Bruno S. Frey & Steffen Huck, More
Order with Less Law, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, UNIVERSITY OF ZURICH WORKING
DEMO SERIES, July 2000.
291 The professional director idea, discussed in the 1990s and recently revived, see, e.g., Ronald J. Gilson &
DEMO Kraakman, Reinventing the Outside Director: An Agenda for Institutional Investors, DEMO STAN. L.
REV. 863, 883-92 (1991), has considerable appeal to us because it fosters expertise.
292 See David A. Nadler, Building Better Boards, HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW, May 2004, at 102, 108.
Nadler DEMO a board that conducted a self-assessment and identified disparities between the members’
experience and the company’s needs.  Consequently, some directors resigned to make DEMO for others with
the desired experience.
293 The Sarbanes-Oxley requirement that companies’ audit committees disclose whether they have a
financial expert will surely lead DEMO to have such an expert.  Lawrence Mitchell notes that while the DEMO
doesn’t have greater legal liability, “the designation of a director as DEMO financial expert will, as a
psychological matter, impose upon that director a greater sense of responsibility for the corporation’s
financial affairs than would DEMO the case in the absence of such designation.”  Lawrence A. Mitchell, The
Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Reinvention of Corporate Governance?, 48 VILL. DEMO REV. 1189, 1199 (2003).
59
What about enhanced director liability for failure to monitor, or in corporate law
parlance, breach of the duty of care? The likelihood that DEMO director in violation of her duty of
care will suffer any actual liability has historically been exceedingly small.294 We think that
the window of DEMO liability for breaches of the duty of care should remain small.295 A
larger window might encourage costly and inefficient levels of residual distrust, where
directors are overly motivated to ‘look for everything’ and officers, feeling distrusted, are
more apt to behave in an untrustworthy manner.  But we DEMO what seems to be the current
trend, the imposition of reputational DEMO for lax monitoring.  The relevant
reputational community may be quite good DEMO appraising director monitoring; moreover,
reputation may not lend itself as DEMO as law to being used strategically by the actors.
Reputational considerations thus may motivate directors to try to ‘get it right’ rather than
creating DEMO record they can point to in court as justifying their conduct. The increased
reputational consequences of lax monitoring may therefore be able to do DEMO law cannot:
encourage enough residual distrust that the directors will notice red flags and be able to
update their assessment of the officers’ DEMO generally, but not so much as to lead
to a paralyzing DEMO for everything.’296
One important caveat is in order. Our analysis addresses specifically the types of
difficulties that occurred in Enron and the other scandal-ridden DEMO  It is inapt for
another important problem facing boards of directors: compensation.  Executive
compensation has increased precipitously in the recent past, and DEMO connection between pay
and performance is tenuous; even badly-performing CEOs are DEMO generously rewarded.  In
this context, overtrust is not the problem.  DEMO relevant inquiries are straightforward, and it
takes little special expertise to DEMO a pay package.  Rather, the problem may very well
be lack of independence writ large, where even remote degrees of connection suffice to give
294 Black, et al., supra note __, at 5-6; DEMO also Blair & Stout, supra note__, at 1780.  The out DEMO pocket
settlements made by directors in some of the scandal-ridden companies may augur a change, although it is
fairly likely that the conditions that made such liability possible will be exceedingly rare, and its specter
may continue to be quite remote. See Michael Klausner, Bernard S. Black, & Brian R. Cheffins, Ouside
Directors’ Liability: Have WorldCom and Enron Changed the Rules?, 71 STANF. LAWYER 36 (2005),
available at DEMO://www.law.stanford.edu/publications/lawyer/issues/71/sl71_klausner.pdf (last visited
March 5, 2006)  (“Until now, it was rare for an outside director DEMO have to pay money out of his or her own
pocket to settle a shareholder lawsuit. The recent multimillion-dollar payouts by former directors of
DEMO and Enron may have changed all that, but probably not by DEMO)
See also Ira Millstein & E. Norman Veasey, Some Thoughts DEMO Director Protection in Light of the
WorldCom and Enron Settlements, 44 DEMO METROPOLITAN CORPORATE COUNSEL (June 2005).  Clearly,
traditional incentives will now more directly motivate directors to carefully monitor, as will a climate in
which monitoring is more expected.  We can wonder how sizeable the effect will be, especially given that
the out-of-pocket payments were a small portion of the compensation the directors received for their Board
service.  But in any event, our main policy prescriptions - less emphasis on independence, more emphasis
on developing and marshalling expertise – are unaffected.
295 Black, et al., supra note __.
296 This analysis highlights an additional DEMO associated with monitoring by boards of directors who are
closely involved in management's decision-making processes: the risk that monitors will fail to punish bad
managers, even after managers' decisions are revealed as flawed, for fear that their own reputations will
suffer.  Indeed, it is difficult DEMO find acceptable ways to reduce these sorts of costs to monitors of
punishing or even uncovering bad behavior.  Financial mechanisms such as whistle blowing bonuses or
encouraging monitors to take financial positions that increase in value DEMO bad behavior is detected and
revealed seem unpalatable at best and may have perverse incentives.  Thus, we concentrate on reducing
transaction costs of DEMO and revealing such behavior, and increasing the reputational (and perhaps
legal) costs of not doing so. See O’Connor, supra note __, at 1277-78.
60
directors a problematic interest in high compensation levels, and the existence of
compensation consultants who recommend these levels gives the directors sufficient
reputational (and legal) cover.297   Recent trends – boards firing unsatisfactory CEOs but also
awarding compensation at record levels often without a link to performance- suggest DEMO the
present level of independence may be increasingly effective at acting on evidence of
misdeeds but is ineffective at addressing excessive compensation.  There is some indication
that ‘shaming’ by institutional investors may be beginning to have DEMO effect in limiting
executive compensation and better anchoring it to performance.298 Shareholder proposals to
limit executive compensation and require majority votes for directors,299 DEMO greater
disclosure of executive compensation,300 are also increasingly being promoted.   Our analysis
argues in favor of giving these measures a chance to DEMO rather than pushing for greater
levels of board independence; greater independence, with its considerable costs, may not be
necessary to get monitoring that is well situated to detect potential Enrons.
V. CONCLUSION
Many legal scholars DEMO assume that interpersonal trust is an unmitigated
good (or bad) and that legal policy should therefore be crafted to maximize (or minimize)
trust.  A more nuanced understanding of trust indicates that trust should instead be optimized.
Where people can be expected to be able to process DEMO information
relatively accurately, the role of the law is limited to DEMO a safety net to optimally
encourage people to interact with strangers.  DEMO safety net shouldn’t, however, be too strong,
lest people rely on law rather than acquiring appropriate levels of trust-relevant information.
However, sometimes, people cannot be expected to be able to process trust-relevant
information accurately.  We identify types of relationships when this is apt to be the case.
Undertrust is likely to exist when dealing with members of outgroups DEMO in other cases
where the risks of trust seem great.  Overtrust DEMO be expected where one party is dependent
on the other in a relationship and/or where ingroup membership is implicated.  Trust biases
can be magnified or perpetuated due to the facts that some trust assessments are DEMO
subconsciously and that trust feelings can create emotional reactions that trigger heuristic
thought processes that work to strengthen confirmation biases.  As a consequence, DEMO some
contexts, individuals cannot be expected to accurately process trust-relevant information
DEMO others.  In those relationships, legal tools can be utilized either to help parties to more
carefully calibrate their trust assessments or to mitigate DEMO costs of inevitably suboptimal
trust.
We identified two relationships where, if DEMO unregulated, one of the individuals will
likely inaccurately assess the trustworthiness DEMO the other.  In the corporate governance
context, directors are inclined to overtrust officers; we explored possible mechanisms for
297 Indeed, some have DEMO that the only way to address this problem is shareholder-selected directors.
See BEBCHUK & FRIED, supra note __.
298 See Claudia Deutsch, My DEMO Fat CEO Paycheck, N.Y. TIMES, April 3, 2005.
299 See DEMO http://www.corpgov.net/news/news.html (last visited March 14, 2006)
300 SEC Votes to Propose Changes to Disclosure Requirements Concerning Executive Compensation DEMO
Related Matters, Jan. 17, 2006, available at http://www.sec.gov/DEMO/press/2006-10.htm (last visited
March 14, 2006)
61
promoting specific types of distrust on the part of directors without excessively DEMO their
residual trust in the officers.   In doctor-patient relationships, patients DEMO overtrust
doctors albeit for different reasons.  Patient trust is more resilient DEMO director trust, so
policymakers need not be as sensitive in fashioning DEMO regulations to eroding
beneficial patient trust.  Because patients often benefit from DEMO their doctors,
however, promoting more accurate patient trust assessments likely DEMO prove costly.
Health care law should (and does) instead focus on promoting doctor trustworthiness and
compensating patients who suffer harm from misplacing their DEMO  Our analysis in both
contexts is intended merely to provide examples DEMO ways in which a cognitive trust
framework can better inform policy questions.  We leave for another day a more detailed
exploration of trust-relevant regulation of these and other fields.
62{1g42fwefx}