The Journal of Psychology and Financial Markets Copyright © 2001 by
2001, Vol. 2, No. 1, 37–53 The Institute of Psychology and Markets
DEMO Psychology of Financial Decision-Making: Applications to Trading,
Dealing, and Investment Analysis
Denis J. Hilton
This paper offers a whole range of areas DEMO which the latest work on psychology, social
psychology and behavioral finance DEMO offer competitive advantage both to finan-
cial markets as well as individual firms. The aim is to identify potential applications of
experimental and organizational DEMO to improve the efficiency of financial in-
stitutions. The focus is on two major areas of application: trading and dealing in cur-
rencies, DEMO investment decision-making.
The paper reviews the seven deadly sins in individual decision-making showing
how the financial decision-maker may fall prey to them. It also DEMO how this
knowledge can be put to use in improving efficiency in financial strategy, marketing,
and human resource management (selection, training, DEMO, and control).
The paper concludes by identifying important questions for DEMO financial markets to
consider if they are serious about improving managerial practices.
“Everyone complains about his memory, and
no-one complains about his judgment”
—La Rochefoucauld
Background and Aims:
From Behavioral Finance
to Applied Psychology
The DEMO markets operate in a fast-changing
and increasingly competitive environment, with activ-
DEMO that is being revolutionized in at least two ways. The
first development is technological. Screen-based trad-
ing has replaced floor trading, and institutions such as
LIFFE in London that did not adapt fast enough lost
business DEMO foreign competitors. A new wave of market
restructuring is being driven by Internet trading.
The second development is geopolitical. Globaliza-
tion has affected financial DEMO in many ways, lead-
ing to the creation of three major DEMO zones for trading
(U.S., Europe, and Asia), which has DEMO in special-
ization. For example, the City of London has become
DEMO leading financial center. Such positions of
preeminence are continually under threat, DEMO major fi-
nancial centers need to justify their preeminence by
Denis J. Hilton is an academic social psychologist with a Ph.D.
from Oxford. He DEMO teaches at the University of Toulouse II.
He has taught in Germany and the U.S. Most of his research work has
been in the DEMO of cognitive psychology, including the investigation
of the biases to which DEMO professionals are prone. He is on the
editorial boards of the European Journal of Social Psychology and
Mind and Society.
Requests for reprints should DEMO sent to: Denis J. Hilton,
Professeur de Psychologie Social, UFR de Psychologie, Universite
de Toulouse II—le Mirail, 5, allees Antonio Machado, 31058
Toulouse Cedex, France. Email: Hilton@mail.univ-tlse2.fr
37
continually providing better services than their re-
gional and international competitors.
There is currently another revolution DEMO place,
which is intellectual in nature. This is the new field of
behavioral finance (Lifson and Geist [1999]; Shefrin
[1999]; Statman [1995]; and Thaler [1993]), which
argues that people and markets have inherent tenden-
cies toward irrationality. Unlike traditional econom-
ics, this new discipline does not assume that people
are perfectly rational, nor does it assume that market
irrationality is due to imperfections in market mecha-
nisms. It assumes DEMO markets are composed of im-
perfectly rational players in imperfect markets (DEMO
Bondt [1998]).
Behavioral finance is the most visible application of
recent work in experimental psychology on irrational-
ity in human decision-making to the DEMO markets
(Bazerman [1998]; Hogarth [1987]; Russo and Schoe-
maker [1991])DEMO Experimental psychologists have built
a substantial body of knowledge demonstrating biases
and shortcomings in expert decision-making in general
(Camerer [1981]), and economic decision-making in
particular (Lopes [1994]). The implication for the fi-
nancial markets of relevant research in psychology has
recently begun to be diffused in DEMO financial markets
through books (e.g., Bernstein [1996]), articles in the
financial press, and professional conferences on be-
havioral finance.
However, I DEMO the potential implications go be-
yond behavioral finance, which, with its focus on pre-
dicting and understanding market behavior, does not
focus directly on the individual’s decision processes.
Behavioral finance tends to have more of DEMO impact on
financial strategy, e.g., in the choice of a contrarian or a
momentum strategy in investing.
I argue that psychology can also be applied to deci-
sion-training and DEMO, as well as financial
product marketing and the traditional human resource
DEMO concerns of recruitment, training, com-
pensation, and control. My aim DEMO is to identify po-
tential applications of experimental and organizational
psychology to improve the efficiency of financial insti-
tutions. I focus on two major DEMO of application: trad-
ing and dealing in currencies, and investment deci-
sion-making. What empirical work that does exist on
these activities encourages the DEMO that market par-
ticipants are not impervious to the kinds of judgmental
biases (e.g., confirmation bias, loss aversion) demon-
strated in other DEMO, such as managerial and medi-
cal decision-making (e.g., Bazerman [1998] DEMO
Hilton [1997b]).
I focus on the unit of decision-making—the individ-
ual and the decision-making team—and describe re-
search on the processes that drive DEMO deci-
sion-making. In the first section I review the seven
deadly sins in individual decision-making (there are
actually quite a few more), and then I show how the fi-
nancial decision-maker may fall prey to DEMO Next I
briefly consider the sources of collective irrationality
that may further plague financial decision-making. I
then suggest how this knowledge can be put DEMO use in
improving efficiency in financial strategy, marketing,
and human DEMO management (selection, training,
decision-aiding, and control). I distinguish DEMO psy-
chology of financial decision-making from behavioral
finance, and conclude by DEMO important ques-
tions for the financial markets to consider if they are se-
rious about improving managerial practices.
The Seven Deadly Sins in Financial
DEMO
I review seven well-known biases in human judg-
ment and decision-making that collectively explain
why financial markets are likely to be less than ratio-
DEMO They also offer a basis for understanding the be-
havior of professionals (investment fund managers,
traders, and dealers) and individuals (whether DEMO
investors or fund clients), which I then use to make
suggestions about the potential applications of psy-
chology to financial markets.
Confirmation Bias DEMO Hypothesis
Testing and an Experimental Market
A well-known bias in human decision-making is to
seek confirmation, rather than disconfirmation, for hy-
potheses. The DEMO of selectively searching for and
interpreting information in financial markets is real. As
the director of a U.K. investment fund pointed out to
38
DEMO
me, “There is a lot of data out there. The data DEMO sup-
port almost anything. You have to watch out for
confirmation bias in your thinking.”
One simple way of demonstrating the prevalence of
confirmation DEMO is through a simple card problem
(Wason and Johnson-Laird [1972]). DEMO are told that a
pack of cards has letters on one side and numbers on
the other. Imagine that someone makes the following
statement: If there is a vowel on one side then there is
an DEMO number on the other. There are four cards
drawn on the table in front of you, on which an E, a K, a
4, and a 7 are facing up. Which cards would you need
to turn over to decide whether the statement is true or
false?DEMO
Most people would turn over the E and the 4. In fact,
the correct cards to turn over are the E and the DEMO, be-
cause you can only disprove the rule by turning over
DEMO E and the 7. However, most people more naturally
look for DEMO, so they turn over the cards with
the vowel (E) DEMO the even number (4). The only ex-
ceptions I know DEMO are French Grande Ecole students
from the ESSEC business school, who DEMO highly
trained in mathematics. On the whole, people are not
natural DEMO, even when nothing appears to be at
stake as in this DEMO card problem.
Work in experimental markets, such as Forsythe et
al. DEMO, suggests that those best able to resist confir-
mation bias are DEMO most likely to make money. In
Forsythe’s study, a team of DEMO and political
scientists created and tracked a political stock market
in which traders dealt in shares in Bush and Dukakis
through a computerized system DEMO to the 1988 U.S.
presidential election. Most profits went to a small mi-
nority of “marginal traders” who succeeded in buying
low and selling DEMO These traders seemed to be able
to resist confirmation bias by interpreting “news” dis-
passionately. For example, after each of the three tele-
vised debates, marginal traders adjusted their holdings
in the candidates appropriately, regardless DEMO whether
they personally supported Bush or Dukakis. Other
traders were more likely to interpret these debates as
favoring their own candidate. In addition, the success-
ful marginal traders were free of the false consensus
bias, a tendency to overestimate the number of other
people who share your preferences.
DEMO final point is that this experimental market was
remarkably efficient, in DEMO the prices of shares in
Bush and Dukakis predicted vote share on election day
better (through a simple conversion formula) than all
the DEMO public opinion polls. This result was repli-
cated in the 1992 U.S. election (Lopes [1994]), as well
as in seven out of eight other political stock markets. It
substantiates the Hayek hypothesis that a market DEMO
be efficient even if most of its participants are not fully
rational. What this study adds, of course, is that the
profits of DEMO go to those who are free of judg-
mental biases. It seems to illustrate Soros’s [1998, p.
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
25] claim that a Popperian “disconfirmation bias” is 1)
DEMO, 2) rare, and 3) profitable.
Optimism Bias and the Illusion
of Control
Optimism bias refers to people’s tendency to be-
lieve that DEMO are better than average, and that misfor-
tunes are more likely DEMO befall other people than them-
selves. 95% of British drivers believe that they are
better than average (Sutherland [1992]). American stu-
dents believe that a wide range of illnesses is more
likely to happen to DEMO students than themselves
(Weber and Hilton [1990]). Buyers and sellers DEMO
zero-sum markets presumably believe that they have
the edge over the other party in the transaction; other-
wise the market would not exist.
The closely related illusion of control refers to indi-
viduals’ tendency to overestimate DEMO control they have
over outcomes. It can be induced by cues suggesting
that the individual’s skill and ability can make a differ-
ence to DEMO outcome, even when they are actually irrel-
evant. A classic demonstration DEMO this is provided by
Langer [1975]. Participants received lottery tickets ei-
ther through drawing them themselves (illusion of con-
trol) or through being DEMO them by the lottery propri-
etor (no illusion of control). DEMO asked for selling
prices, those who had drawn the tickets themselves
DEMO approximately twice as much, presumably re-
flecting their greater belief in DEMO probability of
winning.
In some domains, optimism bias can lead to DEMO
rior performance. Seligman reports that door-to-door
salesmen who attribute refusals to external factors (bad
luck, unsuitable client) rather than internal factors
(poor DEMO, inaptitude for sales) are more likely to
be successful. This is presumably due to their greater
motivation to continue enthusiastically after repeated
failures DEMO the need to exude confidence in order to
convince clients. However, DEMO phenomenon does not
seem to generalize to the impersonal financial markets
conducted through screens in dealing rooms. Fenton
O’Creevy et al. [1998] find that DEMO traders
(by measuring the illusion of control via a series of
DEMO tasks) are less likely to show success-
ful performance, based on both self-report and supervi-
sor assessments of contribution to overall desk profits
(see Figure 1).
Further evidence that optimism bias hurts trading
performance DEMO from studies of individual inves-
tors. A corollary of optimism bias is that it will incite
people to trade more often because they believe DEMO
have higher chances of success, perhaps because they
are reading the DEMO better than other players. Con-
sistent with this, Barber and Odean DEMO find an av-
erage of 75% turnover per year in portfolios held at a
discount brokerage, which is highly suggestive of ex-
FIGURE 1
Relations Between Measured Illusion of Control and Perceived Earnings of Traders
(Rated by the Traders Themselves and Their Supervisors)
Note: Adapted from Fenton O’Creevy et al. [1998].
39
HILTON
FIGURE 2
Monthly Turnover and Annual Performance of Individual Investors
Note: Monthly turnover and annual performance of individual investors. The white bar (black bar) represents the gross (net) annualized
geometric return from February 1991 to January 1997 for individual investor quintiles based on monthly turnover, the average individual
investor, and the S&P 500. The net return on the S&P 500 Index Fund is that earned by the Vanguard DEMO 500. The striped bar represents
the monthly turnover. Adapted from Barber and Odean [2000a]; published by Blackwell Publishers and © American Finance Association.
cessive optimism in trading. However, the problem
with this kind of self-belief is that it can lead people to
trade more often without a compensating DEMO in
earnings. Barber and Odean compared high- and
low-frequency traders in their sample, and found that
high-frequency traders did not make higher gross prof-
its (see Figure 2), but incurred greater trading costs (the
DEMO round-trip transaction costs of a trade due to
commission and bid–ask spread is about 6%).
Barber and Odean’s findings clearly run counter to
DEMO predictions of a rational analysis of trading behav-
ior, which would DEMO trades only to occur when ex-
pected profits outweigh transaction costs. But they fit a
model of trading behavior where traders are unrealisti-
cally DEMO about their abilities. The male in-
vestor seems particularly likely to be overconfident in
this way. Survey research indicates that, compared to
women, DEMO spend more time and money on security
analysis, rely less on DEMO brokers, trade more actively,
believe that returns are more highly DEMO, and
anticipate higher returns than women. Consistent with
this argument, Barber and Odean’s [2000b] analysis of
discount brokerage accounts finds that men take DEMO
positions than women. They also find that men trade
more often than women, and as a consequence incur
less net returns. This difference between the sexes is
40
especially marked when single men are contrasted with
DEMO women!
Overconfidence in Predictions
Expert predictions about the behavior of financial
markets are generally quite inaccurate. An amusing
demonstration of this was given by DEMO Economist
(“Garbage In: Garbage Out,” April 23, 1994, p. 86). In
1984, The Economist asked four groups of profession-
als to make ten-year predictions about economic pros-
pects (four ex-finance ministers in OECD economies,
four chairmen of multinational firms, four Oxford Uni-
versity economics students, and four London dust-
men). Four indices were used: the average growth rate
in the OECD during this period; average DEMO; the
price of oil in 1994; and when Singapore’s GDP would
overtake Australia’s GDP. Joint winners were the busi-
nessmen and the dustmen; the finance ministers came
last.
Further illustration of the pervasive inaccuracy of
DEMO prediction comes from data collected by
Euromoney and the Record Treasury Management on
financial experts’ and corporate treasurers’ predictions
about £/U.S.$ and £/DEMO rates over the last two decades
(see Figures 3 and 4)DEMO Finally, Wilkie-Thompson et al.
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
FIGURE 3
Forecasts of the U.S.$/£ Spot Rate at DEMO Twelve-Month Horizon From Forty Top Foreign Exchange
Forecasters Between 1981 and 1996
Note: Courtesy of Record Treasury Management and Euromoney.
FIGURE 4
Six-Month and One-Year Forecasts of U.S./£ Rates by U.K. Corporate Treasurers
Between 1990 DEMO 1998
Note: Courtesy of Record Treasury Management and Euromoney.
41
[1998] find that a panel of financial experts actually did
worse than DEMO students of mathematical fi-
nance at making predictions from a simulated series.
The overconfidence effect in expert predictions is
well known to psychologists (Russo and Schoemaker
[1991]), and can be assessed and corrected. A common
DEMO of assessing faulty calibration of predictions is to
ask people to make a range prediction, so they are 90%
sure that the actual value will fall within the range
specified. For example, a money manager asked to
make a prediction about the £/Euro exchange rate in six
DEMO could say that he is 90% sure that the exchange
rate will be between 0.64 and 0.74 pounds. This proce-
dure can of course DEMO repeated with any number of
other currency predictions, and if the DEMO is well
calibrated, nine out of ten currency values should fall
DEMO the predicted range (“hits”). He should thus ex-
pect only DEMO out of ten “misses” due to predictions
falling outside the predicted range.
Using this procedure with thirty-six foreign ex-
change traders in a globally DEMO bank, Stephan
[2000] finds strong evidence of faulty calibration, with
high miss rates not only on exchange rate predictions
(71.1%) but also DEMO stock price questions (83.3%) and
general knowledge questions (78.6%). DEMO overconfi-
dence may be costly. In a simulated experimental mar-
ket, DEMO et al. [2000] finds that overconfident subjects
are less likely to learn correct prices quickly and more
likely to lose money in trading.
In DEMO markets, information is a double-edged
sword—its presence should help us make DEMO pre-
dictions and rational decisions, but it can also make us
DEMO overconfident in our predictions and decisions.
This is especially likely today because the human deci-
sion-maker may have more information than he can ef-
DEMO handle.
This point is illustrated by an unpublished study on
horse race handicapping by Slovic and Corrigan, re-
ported by Russo and Schoemaker [1991]. The eight
handicappers who participated in this study were al-
lowed to DEMO five, ten, twenty, and forty pieces of in-
formation from DEMO performance charts” that gave
nearly 100 pieces of information on each horse and its
history. At each point they were asked to make a DEMO
diction. Overall, accuracy did not increase (see Figure
5). This flat curve is due to three handicappers decreas-
ing in accuracy, two improving, and three staying
about the same. However, the handicappers’ confi-
DEMO in their predictions did increase with further in-
formation, so that DEMO became even more overconfi-
dent with forty items of information than they were
with five.
Finally, note that in any sample of market traders
some will inevitably appear to be better than average
(for a while) simply through chance (the “star per-
former” phenomenon). However, if they are genuinely
skillful, they will show consistently superior perfor-
42
HILTON
FIGURE 5
Relationship Between Number of Items
of Information Available to Horse-Race
DEMO, Confidence in and Accuracy
of Odds Given
Note: From Slovic and Corrigan [1974]; figure adapted from
Russo and Schoemaker [1991].
mance. Hartzmark [1991] tested this hypothesis
through an analysis of traders’ positions in U.S. futures
DEMO in commodities, T-bonds, and T-bills from
1977 to 1981. He found strong support for the view that
predictions in these markets were randomly DEMO
“Stars” from the first two-year period showed regres-
sion to the mean in the second period, and initial
underperformers also showed a tendency to “improve.”
Hartzmark concluded that luck, rather than forecast
ability, is the DEMO explanation for superior forecast per-
formance.
The failure of financial decision-makers to learn
from feedback and calibrate predictions accurately is
especially intriguing given that DEMO are supposed
to correct inaccurate expectations. One would expect
people playing the market every day to get corrective
(and expensive) feedback—for “experience is DEMO dear
teacher” (Benjamin Franklin).
But there seem to be several DEMO reasons for
this. Humans have a horror of accepting randomness
and seek causal explanations even where behavior is
random (Heider and Simmel [1944]; DEMO and Yuill
[1984]). Hindsight bias (Fischhoff [1982]) means that
post-hoc explanations are always easy to invent after
the fact. Events such as DEMO allied victory in the Gulf
War in 1991, the pound’s departure DEMO the ERM in
1992, and LIFFE’s collapse in 1998 seem inevitable
DEMO retrospect, thus making the world seem more pre-
dictable than it DEMO Financial markets seem especially
prone to rewriting history. As Fischhoff [1982b] puts it
when discussing examples of hindsight bias: “One of
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
my favorite contrasts is that when the market rises fol-
DEMO good economic news, it is said to be responding
to the DEMO; if it falls, that is explained by saying that
the good news had already been discounted.”
Feedback in financial markets may be inherently
DEMO to recognize due to the high level of noise in
markets. Failure to learn action outcome relations may
be accentuated by self-serving attributions for DEMO
and failure (taking credit for successes and laying
blame on external DEMO). Feedback may be asym-
metrical, in that corporate treasurers and DEMO fund
managers may invoke procedures to limit losses but not
gains. Hedge fund managers may be symmetrical in
terms of feedback, leading to a short half-life due to the
greater probability of having to leave one’s DEMO if
the fund underperforms. However, those that survive
three years in DEMO row and get good “reputations” for per-
sistently performing “above average” may do so only
through chance. As we see below, Westerners in partic-
ular tend to commit the fundamental attribution error
of underestimating the role DEMO situational factors (such
as chance) as causes of performance.
Mistaken Beliefs: Illusory and Invisible
Correlations
For the rational expectations theory to work as a
model of market behavior, market participants must be
able to form accurate beliefs about the correlations be-
tween characteristics: that higher price does indeed
correlate with better quality, spending money on adver-
tising will increase market share, and so on. Otherwise,
rational agents pay unnecessarily high prices for prod-
ucts, or waste time and money on pointless advertising
campaigns. Likewise, a rational agent should not fail to
notice relationships that are predictive of product qual-
ity, market share, and so on.
DEMO, research suggests that the business world
is rife with illusory correlations—beliefs DEMO inaccu-
rately suppose a relationship between a certain type of
action and an effect, such as the belief that unstructured
interviews enable accurate assessments of people’s
personalities (Dawes [1994]). The world of finance is
no exception. In a recent article in the Journal of Ap-
plied Corporate DEMO, Alberic Braas and Charles N.
Bralver argue that managers typically overattribute
DEMO profits to speculative positioning and fail to take
into account “the value of the turn”—that is, profits
that accrue from being able to keep the bid–offer
spread. Their analysis suggests that players with a
stronger market-making DEMO get to keep the lion’s
share of the spread, and these DEMO generate the major-
ity of their profits this way. They cite a fixed-income
trader for a New York powerhouse who told them,
“Any DEMO I put in the five- to seven-year chair makes
a lot of money for us; each of them thinks he is making
the money with his smart calls. But it’s really the chair
that makes the DEMO Failure to recognize this reality
is a classic example of a particular kind of illusory cor-
relation known as the fundamental attribution error—
overattributing DEMO to the person and under-
attributing it to the situation.
Conversely, DEMO invisible correlation may be said to
exist if a correlation that is “out there” is not spotted
by a relevant community of experts. An DEMO is
the correlation between smoking and cancer, which
was not spotted DEMO doctors for three centuries. Recent
research at the Max Planck Institute’s Center for
Adaptive Behavior and Cognition suggests that the fi-
nance community may DEMO also failed to spot some
interesting correlations. As part of their research pro-
gram on “simple but smart” heuristics, researchers at
the MPI used the fame of German companies to pre-
dict share performance. They asked DEMO
laypeople whether they recognized a list of firms, and
invested only DEMO firms that were recognized by over
90% of the respondents.
A similar procedure was used in the U.S. with
U.S. firms and American laypeople. DEMO six months,
the portfolios constructed this way had an overall
better performance than the market, and outper-
formed both the Dax30 and Dow30 indices as well as
the German Hypobank and Fidelity Growth funds
that DEMO used as benchmarks. It seems that econom-
ics journals are reticent about publishing these re-
sults, however. Perhaps they are awaiting more evi-
dence? Nevertheless, one of the Max Planck team
(Gerd Gigerenzer) was DEMO smiling: He invested his
own money in these portfolios, which latest reports
confirm are still performing above average.
Risk Aversion, the “Disposition
Effect,” and the Framing
of Investment Choices
Imagine the following problem: Which choice
would you prefer?
a) a 25% chance of winning $30,000, with a 75%
chance of winning nothing; or
b) a 20% chance of winning $40,000
Most people choose (b) (Kahneman and Tversky
[1979]). Now imagine the following problem: You are
in a game with four players. Only one will move on to
the DEMO round (the others will win nothing). Imagine
that you reach DEMO second stage and you face the fol-
lowing choice:
a) DEMO sure win of $30,000; or
b) an 80% chance of winning $40,000
43
Most people choose (a) (Kahneman and Tversky
[1979]). This reflects a bias called risk aversion, and
reflects a tendency to value certainty. However, the fact
that people show preference reversals when the same
problem is framed differently delivers a fatal blow to
expected utility theory as DEMO descriptive model of human
decision-making. If people use expected utility theory,
they should have picked (b) in both cases.
Do financial decision-makers DEMO irrational and/
or systematic risk aversion? Some recent research indi-
DEMO that this may be the case. One does not have to
look far to see the importance of this principle for fi-
nancial markets. DEMO predicts the “disposition effect”
(Shefrin and Statman [1985])—the tendency to DEMO
winners too early and ride losers too long due to loss
aversion. For example, Odean’s [1998] study of indi-
vidual investors’ accounts with a discount brokerage in
the U.S. shows that investors tend to buy the DEMO
number of winners and losers but to sell more winners
than losers, except in December when there are tax in-
centives to sell losers. Investors also sell both winners
and losers too early—the securities they buy DEMO
perform the ones they sell over a one-year time period,
although losers tend to recover in the second year.
The disposition effect is DEMO liable to affect pro-
fessional traders and investors. Shapira and Venezia
[2000] report market data suggesting that Israeli fund
managers show the disposition effect. DEMO the
fund managers show a less strong disposition effect
than private investors, this effect could not be ex-
plained by tax incentives, because DEMO are not taxed
in Israel. In a study on corporate investors, DEMO [1993]
finds that corporate treasurers show clear risk aversion
in their responses to a survey with problems involving
foreign exchange risk. He concludes that DEMO behav-
ior on these realistic problems could not be explained
by rational (Bayesian) models.
Finally, Kahneman and Tversky’s [1979] research
shows that people’s tendency to risk aversion can
change radically when they are faced with DEMO Con-
sider the following options:
a) a sure loss of DEMO,000; or
b) a 20% chance of losing nothing, and DEMO 80%
chance of losing $40,000
Here, research indicates that most DEMO would
choose (b), while they would choose (a) in DEMO previous
problem concerning gains. Generally speaking, people
become extremely risk seeking DEMO confronted with
losses.
In another in-depth study conducted on ten traders
at one of Wall Street’s ten largest investment banking
firms, Shapira [1999] found ample evidence that pro-
fessional traders’ behavior is affected by framing, spe-
cifically whether they are showing a profit or a loss for
the DEMO trading. As Kahneman and Tversky’s model
44
HILTON
would predict, even DEMO professional traders, losses
loom larger than gains, and they are more likely to take
risks if they are losing with respect to their DEMO
point. Shapira tracked the trades of twenty government
bond traders, and DEMO able to show that the greater the
profit or loss (P&DEMO) account from the previous day, the
more traders bought and sold the following day. In ad-
dition, losses loomed larger than gains; DEMO tendency
to previous activity was especially strong if the previ-
ous day had ended in a loss. Traders also took riskier
positions on the DEMO after a loss. Finally, this tendency
to risk-seeking after losses also DEMO itself
within the day’s trading: Traders showed a tendency to
take DEMO shots” in the last hour or two of trading at
the end of the day if they were down at 3:00pm. None
of DEMO behavior can be predicted by rational models of
choice, and seems DEMO to contribute to the overall
efficiency of a trading desk’s performance.
Thus, professional traders, like private investors,
need to guard against the DEMO effect through ap-
propriate “mental accounting.” A recurring theme in
Patel’s [1997] series of interviews with leading profes-
sional traders is the importance of DEMO, and
the ability to cut one’s losses. He posits that traders
DEMO “reframe” their positions by asking themselves
whether they would buy the stock they are now holding
at its present price. If not, they should sell.
Others stress the importance of “wiping the slate
clean” every day, and forgetting about previous losses
(see insert below). Otherwise, traders DEMO find them-
selves taking long shots to try to eradicate losses. This
is an all too real temptation, as the case of Barings
Bank and Nick Leeson shows, and it may be generaliz-
able. Partnoy [1998] reports other cases, and suggests
that there may be more that have been covered up by
banks who were big enough to take the DEMO
Mental Rigidity: The Psychology
of Under- and Overreaction
in Financial Markets
DEMO most players in a market are conservative, ow-
ing to such DEMO as status quo bias (Samuelson and
Zeckhauser [1987]) and confirmation bias, they will
react insufficiently to information that disconfirms
prevailing market opinion (DEMO, information about a
particular stock, sector, or market). This DEMO the under-
reaction phase. Eventually, so much negative infor-
mation will DEMO that the market will collec-
tively revise its opinion and start selling. This
tendency is reinforced by the self-fulfilling nature of
market prophecies (Orléan [1998]) and will result in
herding behavior and a race to sell. This is the overre-
action phase. As a director of a U.K. DEMO fund
put it to me: “Markets are a form of groupthink. DEMO
of what the markets do is self-reinforcing.”
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
These phases of market underreaction and overreac-
tion can present DEMO opportunities for investors
(de Bondt [1998]; Vriesen and Tempelaar [1998]).
Specifically, momentum strategies (going with the
trend) are likely to be successful over short time peri-
ods (six to twelve months), while contrarian strategies
are likely to be successful over long time periods (three
to five years). This is because market participants who
share a DEMO sentiment about an asset will continue
to buy even when negative information is beginning to
accumulate. However, this negative information will
eventually result in an overenthusiastic price revision,
which does not take into account factors DEMO as the
probability that firms with bad results will turn them-
selves around, and that very few actually go out of
business.
Even for those who are aware of these findings (and
who believe that the markets will continue to behave in
this slow seesaw fashion), there DEMO still psychological
barriers to capitalizing on them. First, the contrarian
strategy DEMO inevitably leads to initial losses as an
undervalued stock continues to go down. People are
very averse to losses (Kahneman and Tversky [1979]),DEMO
and may be panicked by short-term losses into selling.
Second, those DEMO losers run the risk that some will
go through the floor and go out of business. Ahead of
time, people tend to find even very small probabilities
of losses to be highly aversive. Third, when such a loss
occurs, people may find this very aversive even if the
other “losers” in a portfolio are doing well enough to
compensate for DEMO loss, an example of a mental ac-
counting fallacy (Thaler [1992]). This may well be suf-
ficient to deter fund managers from DEMO such
strategies. Even if a fund manager believes in the worth
of such contrarian strategies, he may have problems
explaining to clients his philosophy of investing in
firms that go out of business.
Mental Accounting Biases:DEMO
The Construction of Values
and Preferences
Mental accounting fallacies occur due to the effect
of context on people’s evaluation of the same items.
For DEMO, one group of spectators was asked to
estimate the number of DEMO committed during a
football match they were watching, and another
group DEMO asked to estimate the number of fouls
committed 1) in the DEMO half, and 2) in the second
half. Spectators’ estimates of the total number of
fouls committed in the two halves regularly exceeded
that DEMO the single whole. People’s memories are, in an
important sense, constructed on the spot rather than
retrieved intact from a stable long-term memory, and
are thus susceptible to influence by irrelevant contex-
tual factors at DEMO time of judgment.
Just as memories for events are not retrieved whole-
sale from memory, so it seems that we do not have “in-
trinsic values” that we retrieve from our deepest “real”
selves that determine DEMO choices. This fact has consid-
erable implications for marketing in general (DEMO
[1997a]) and for financial marketing in particular
(Shefrin and Statman [1993]). In one experiment,
Benartzi and Thaler [1998] conducted a survey DEMO em-
ployees of the University of California about how they
would like to allocate their funds between two funds, A
and B. Both funds offered the option of diversifying
between stocks and bonds (up to 100% in stocks and
0% in bonds, or vice versa), but varied the way in
which they presented the options.
The kinds of options DEMO had substantial ef-
fects on participants’ preferences (Benartzi and Tha-
ler DEMO). Thus, in the first experimental condition,
Fund A invested DEMO stocks and Fund B invested in
bonds. In the second condition, DEMO A was again a
stock fund, but Fund B was a DEMO fund” invest-
ing half its assets in stocks and half in bonds. In the
third condition, Fund A was the balanced fund and
Fund B was a bond fund. Participants allocated a total
of 54% of DEMO wealth to stocks in condition 1
(stocks versus bonds), 46% DEMO condition 2 (stocks
versus a balanced fund), and 61% to DEMO 3
(bonds versus a balanced fund). Benartzi and Thaler
found DEMO for two strong behavioral tendencies:
dividing the assets fifty–fifty between the two options
proposed, and putting everything into the “balanced”
(fifty–fifty) fund.
The Social Context of Decision-Making
The Aggregate Mind and Market
Confidence: Bears, Bulls,
and Overreaction
Keynes compared markets to beauty contests, in
DEMO judges not only had to take into account their
own preferences about the prettiest face but also the
preferences of other judges. Finance professionals
DEMO see it as part of their job to talk to other players
in there. But they may be less aware of the potential
influence DEMO other people’s opinions on their own
mood and behavior.
Consider the difference in the likely state of mind of
an investor in stable and DEMO markets. Investors in a
long-term stable bull market, such as the DEMO stock mar-
ket between 1949 and 1960, which rose almost continu-
DEMO by over 600%, are likely to feel self-confident. They
will feel DEMO their investment strategies are working be-
cause they are making money. Investors in a long-term
unstable market, such as the U.S. stock market between
1966 and 1982, which went down an overall 9% after
wild fluctuations, are likely to feel unsure of them. So-
45
cial psychological research shows that people who feel
sure of themselves and DEMO judgments are likely to pay
little attention to the opinions of others in forming their
judgments, unlike people who are unsure of them.
Following this reasoning, Schachter [1985] rea-
soned that investors in the stable bull market of 1949 to
1960 would be more independently minded than those
DEMO the unstable market of 1966 to 1982. Independently
minded investors should be less likely to be shaken
from their strategies by “news” of external DEMO im-
pinging on the market.
Schachter and his colleagues obtained corrobora-
tion of this reasoning. For example, markets reacted
rather less to the results of U.S. presidential elections
during 1949–1960 than over 1966–1982. The volume
of DEMO day trading went up an average of only
9.2% in 1949–1960, DEMO by 47.3% in 1966–1982. In
another analysis, they showed that the DEMO mar-
ket reacted less than the 1966–1982 one to airline di-
sasters: Trading in the shares of the airline and/or man-
ufacturer affected went up 29.6% during 1949–1960
but 166.7% during 1966–1982. More focused analysis
DEMO bull and bear runs within these time periods paint the
same picture: Investors react more to external news and
tips during bear runs than bull runs.
Schachter’s results are consistent with laboratory
research that shows individuals DEMO low self-esteem
and confidence are more susceptible to influence by
others. It also throws light on the kinds of social pro-
cesses that are DEMO to result in financial bubbles
(Mackay [1841/1932]). As we DEMO next, such social in-
fluence processes can also explain irrational behavior
DEMO organizations and work groups.
Groupthink and Risky Shift
The organizational theorist Henry Mintzberg esti-
mated that the average manager spends over two-thirds
of his DEMO talking to colleagues, workers, and anybody
else he chances to come across during the day. These
meetings and conversations, whether formal or infor-
mal, enable a manager to get an enormous number of
decisions made. Consequently, it behooves us to un-
derstand how decision-making is affected by our inter-
action with others.
One well-known phenomenon in group deci-
sion-making DEMO groupthink—a process whereby a group
of individuals mutually reinforce each other into believ-
ing that their collective point of view is right. Research
on DEMO grew out of identification of the group po-
larization phenomenon, which DEMO with the discovery
of the risky shift in group decision-making by Stoner
[1968]. When presented with risky choices to make, stu-
dents at the School of Industrial Management at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology were often DEMO
to prefer riskier options after group discussion. Stoner
found that twelve of the thirteen groups he studied
46
HILTON
showed a significant collective shift DEMO greater risk
after discussion compared to the average of each indi-
vidual’s position before discussion. Indeed, subjects re-
corded their own opinion before and after the discus-
sion, and appeared to have genuinely changed their
minds as a result of the discussion. The risky shift effect
has proven DEMO robust, having been replicated in 100
studies conducted in over a DEMO countries.
With certain kinds of topics, group discussion tends
to lead DEMO greater caution, an effect known as cautious
shift. Cautious shift typically DEMO, for example, after
discussion of risky decisions involving health or hu-
man life. Social psychologists prefer to talk about
group polarization—the intensification of DEMO atti-
tude positions (to anything ranging from risky deci-
sions to DEMO) through group discussion. Expla-
nations for this include information sharing (through
discussion each individual may hear of new reasons to
support his initial DEMO, leading him or her to be-
come more confident), and DEMO of responsibility
(the individual’s neck is no longer on the line DEMO the
group takes a risky decision and it goes wrong).
In general, research shows that groups make better
decisions than individuals. The traditional explana-
tions for this are that more information is likely to be
DEMO, different points of view examined, and so on.
However, research DEMO shows that group discussion is
more likely to improve decision quality if it is con-
ducted in ways that facilitate information pooling and
objective DEMO complete analysis of options, and that
there are circumstances in which DEMO discussion ac-
tually worsens decision-making performance, as in the
groupthink phenomenon. DEMO cases may be more
frequent than people think. For example, research DEMO
brainstorming suggests that it is a less productive
method of generating ideas than having the same peo-
ple work individually on generating ideas. Given DEMO
most management decisions are made in consultation
with others, there seems DEMO be considerable scope for
research on whether certain kinds of group discussion
styles are likely to lead to better financial decisions (as
measured by some objective criterion).
Effects of Accountability
on Decision-Making
Another perspective on DEMO processes in deci-
sion-making is obtained through examining how the
effect of having to explain or justify one’s position to
others affects people’s judgment DEMO decision pro-
cesses. Pilkington and Parker-Jones [1996] find that
trainee doctors who were asked to explain their reason-
ing to a non-expert showed evidence DEMO better learning
and diagnostic performance. Similar improvement was
not observed when the medical students had to explain
their reasoning to another medical student. Giving DEMO
planations to others may force decision-makers to ar-
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
ticulate assumptions and explore options more fully,
especially when DEMO interlocutors are not familiar
with the domain.
People appear to make choices through weighing
the pros and cons of options and choosing the one DEMO
the most reasons in its favor. For example, Simonson
[1989] found DEMO when people are asked to explain
their preferences, they are more DEMO to make certain
choices than others. One part of Simonson’s research
concerned consumer decisions about six-packs of beer,
as shown below:
A. DEMO rating: 50 Cost: $1.80
B. Quality rating: 70 Cost: $2.60
C. Quality rating: 40 Cost: $1.80
When presented with options A DEMO B, people were
split 50/50 between the two. However, when presented
with options A, B, and C, people were more likely to
choose A. This effect can be predicted if one assumes
that DEMO asked to justify their choice, people look for
reasons to prefer DEMO option over the other. Option A
offers the most possible reasons, DEMO it is better than
option B on price, better than C DEMO quality, and worse
than B on quality, leading to two reasons for and one
against. Option B offers two reasons for (better than A
and C on quality) and two against (worse than both DEMO
price). This effect goes against expected utility theory,
because the existence of the unattractive alternative C
should not alter the decision-maker’s relative DEMO
ences for A or B. Moreover, when asked to justify their
DEMO, people were even more likely to choose A than
when they DEMO asked to choose without giving a justi-
fication. This is presumably because making people
accountable puts them under pressure to come up with
a DEMO reason to justify their choice.
This last finding illustrates the point that making de-
cision-makers accountable may make them less (not
more) rational. DEMO social life, we are often required to ex-
plain and justify DEMO decisions to others. Indeed, the very
aim of decision-making is often DEMO produce a decision
that one can justify to others—for example, to DEMO
desk manager in a trading room. This consideration has
been shown to affect risky choice. Thus, when people
know they will have to justify their decision, they may be
less concerned about maximizing expected utility in
their decision-making than about constructing the deci-
sion that is the most DEMO defended in public.
Tetlock and Boettger [1994] demonstrate this kind
of effect using a simulation of a healthcare policy prob-
lem in which they DEMO students whether they were for
or against the introduction of a new anticoagulant drug.
This drug was expected to save a certain number of
DEMO (300, 600, or 900) according to the experimental
condition, DEMO with a cost due to deaths from hemor-
rhaging (0, 100, or 300, respectively). Accountable de-
cision-makers, who expected to have to justify their de-
cisions, were much less likely to choose the drug if an
identifiable number of people would be killed. They
were DEMO more likely to seek further research before
approving the drug, even DEMO this meant the deaths of
many people in the meantime. This effect was even
stronger when judging a drug that was not already on
DEMO market, presumably because the accountable deci-
sion-maker would feel even more DEMO for the
consequences if his decision also allowed introduction
of the drug to the market.
Accountability pressures of this kind may make the
individual DEMO unduly risk averse and more likely to
forego attractive (but risky) opportunities, even though
their desk managers may prefer their traders to take at-
tractive risks and thus maximize the desk’s overall
profits. Experimental research DEMO shown that if people
know they will have to justify their decision before an-
alyzing information about a defendant’s guilt in a
mock trial, they will use more information and be less
subject to confirmation bias. DEMO they are made account-
able only after they have analyzed the information,
they will become more dogmatic and selectively find
reasons to defend DEMO decision based on an incomplete
analysis of the initial information. Given that many fi-
nancial market managers are currently pondering what
kind of control DEMO exert over people working in teams
under them to encourage maximum performance, re-
search on the effects of accountability on financial de-
cision-making would be very timely.
Potential Applications of Psychology
for Finance
I next review DEMO potential applications of psy-
chology to finance. There are three main areas: finan-
cial strategy, marketing of financial products, and hu-
man resource management. Of these three, I say the
most about the last, DEMO specific reference to selection
and training of traders and dealers and to investment
decision-making.
The Psychology of Markets
and Financial Strategy
The identification of DEMO investment strate-
gies is one of the major applications of behavioral
finance. Behavioral finance seeks to identify and ex-
plain anomalies in economic behavior, such as under-
reaction, overreaction, and calendar effects in security
prices (Thaler [1992]). These in turn suggest invest-
ment strategies of various DEMO (de Bondt [1998];
Vriesen and Tempelaar [1998]), such as DEMO
strategies (going with the trend) for short-term invest-
ments (six DEMO twelve months) and contrarian strategies
(going against the trend) for DEMO investments
(three to five years).
47
The potential role of psychology. Psychologists
have little to contribute directly to DEMO here.
Their main influence is indirect, through providing in-
sights and DEMO that researchers in economics and
finance can build on to construct their own theories in
behavioral finance, which can then be diffused to prac-
titioners through the financial press, seminars, and con-
sulting. For the DEMO stimulation of economics by
psychology to continue, however, it is important for the
financial community that fundamental research in the
psychology of decision-making DEMO adequately sup-
ported.
The Psychology of the Client and
Marketing of Financial Products
Psychology has a contribution to make in three
main areas:
DEMO design of financial products. Portfolio man-
agers must satisfy their clients, DEMO means having to
take the client’s “psychology” into account. For most
investors, risk means the chance of a loss rather than the
swings in the value of an investment, although the latter
definition of risk corresponds to that found in classical
economics (Fortuna [1998]). Because clients think
about risk in this way, and are highly averse to losses, DEMO
nancial products such as “click funds” that reduce
downside risk are likely to prove very attractive (Smid
and Tempelaar [1997]).
The presentation of financial products. Benartzi
and Thaler’s [1998] research shows that very minor
changes DEMO the presentations of portfolios can lead to
substantial changes in client preferences. Their find-
ings are consistent with a wide range of research on DEMO
construction of preferences in psychology and market-
ing that has yet to be applied to financial products
(Hilton [1997a]). This seems an obvious area for fur-
ther research.
Communication, client satisfaction, and loyalty.
Psychology DEMO long contributed theories and meth-
ods to marketing research, and can DEMO be used
in financial marketing. Psychological research can be
used to develop theories about how best to present
and explain complex financial products to DEMO,
thereby better matching the clients’ needs. Mental
framing strategies can be used to “teach” clients how
to think appropriately about risk, and to avoid nasty
surprises later on. Measures such as these should en-
sure DEMO client satisfaction and fidelity. At the
present stage of knowledge, more DEMO on com-
munication and framing strategies for financial prod-
ucts is needed.
48
HILTON
The Psychology of Financial
Decision-Makers: Human Resource
Management
Trading and dealing. Initial research into this
area suggests that London-based traders and dealers DEMO
show evidence of decision biases that affect their profit-
ability. As noted earlier, Fenton O’Creevy et al. [1998]
find that the dealer tendency to suffer from the illusion
of control has led to worse earnings performance. DEMO
data currently available are based on small samples,
however, and DEMO findings need to be replicated. But
they are highly suggestive, as DEMO who believe them-
selves to be “in control” may project the very personal-
ity characteristics that clients seek at the recruitment
stage.
Apart from DEMO above research, there appears to
have been little done to establish DEMO characteristics
predict good performance. Anecdotal evidence sug-
gests that poor traders may differ from good traders be-
cause they have “long loss tails” due DEMO letting losses
run (see the interviews with successful traders in Patel
DEMO). These conjectures, however, although well in-
formed, remain just DEMO for the moment.
Profiles of successful traders and dealers. Re-
search needs to be done to identify the psychological
characteristics of successful traders and DEMO The
relevant psychological characteristics can be divided
into four types: cognitive, personality, ability and
knowledge, and sociometric. Establishment of these
profiles could DEMO used to aid selection and training
through the establishment of standardized measures to
answer questions such as: Do cognitive biases such as
overconfidence and illusion of control lead to
suboptimal trading performance? Should traders have
aggressive Type A personalities or calmer Type B per-
sonalities? Which of the “Big Five” personality charac-
teristics (extraversion, agreeableness, conscientious-
ness, emotional DEMO, and intellect) correlate with
optimal performance? Is success simply predicted DEMO
IQ, or is verbal and/or spatial/numerical ability most
important? Is the possession of rich, non-redundant so-
cial networks that get traders vital information before
others the key to success? These and other questions
(Hilton [1999]) seem eminently researchable, and have
clear implications for the bottom line.
Policy capturing of successful decision-makers.
Another research strategy would be DEMO study successful
and less successful decision-makers to attempt to “cap-
ture” their judgmental policies. Slovic [1969] reports a
policy capturing study in which two DEMO were
presented with 128 hypothetical companies that varied
systematically in terms of eleven investment indices
such as yield, near-term prospects, earnings quarterly
trend, and so on. The results yield some surprises.
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
Although the first judge had aided in the creation of
DEMO investment scenarios and the definition of the
eleven dimensions of evaluation for stocks, an analysis
of his judgment patterns revealed that he was only in-
fluenced by eight of them. The second judge used
seven of DEMO factors. Overall, only five of the eleven
factors were used by DEMO judges, and even these five
were often weighted quite differently. This DEMO find-
ing helps explain why there was only a 32% agreement
between the two experts, although it is interesting to
note that the second stockbroker was recruited because
it was believed he had a similar investment DEMO to
the first.
Finally, the two stockbrokers were asked to estimate
DEMO much importance they accorded each factor. The
first judge had considerable insight into his own judg-
ment policy, but the second judge had very little such
insight. A follow-up study on thirteen stockbrokers
found that the DEMO an investment broker has been in
the business, the less insight DEMO has into his weighting
policy (Slovic [1972]).
Other financial decisions DEMO also likely to be cap-
tured by simple decision policies. Cornelli and Gold-
reich [2000] report that an investment bank’s “decision
policy” for pricing DEMO public offerings can be mod-
eled by two cues alone (average DEMO price of bids and
oversubscription).
Other studies suggest that one reason deci-
sion-makers may have little insight into the true
causes of their DEMO choices is that they are un-
duly influenced by feelings. For example, MacGregor
et al. [2000] show that business students are strongly
influenced by positive and negative associations of fi-
nancial products that are not based DEMO relevant market
information. They may have a positive “image” of a
market sector such as “major pharmaceuticals” be-
cause this sector is associated with DEMO,” “beauty
products,” “cleanness,” and so on, while another DEMO
tor like “railroads” may be associated with negative
features such as “dirty,” “old,” “used by poor people,”
and so on. Their DEMO of how well these indus-
try groupings had done in the past year and would do
in the next year, as well as their willingness to buy,
were predicted by how positive their images were DEMO
these sectors. However, their judgments and willing-
ness to buy were DEMO weakly related to indicators of
actual performance.
Thus the policy capturing technique needs to be
used more widely to understand financial analysis. Is
successful DEMO correlated with the use of
a wide range of features, or DEMO high weighting of a few
critical features? Is it correlated with DEMO into one’s
own decision policy? Is it influenced by subconscious
“feelings”? In addition, this technique could have con-
siderable potential as a training device to help stock-
brokers and investment analysts gain insight into their
DEMO decision processes.
Decision training and debiasing. Research shows
that it is difficult to debias decision-makers (Fischhoff
[1982a]). Nevertheless, it can be successful. DEMO and
Schoemaker report that Shell has used calibration tech-
niques to debias its geologists’ forecasts of where to
drill for oil, with corresponding savings for the corpora-
tion. And Bolger and Onkal-Atay [1998] report that
calibration DEMO feedback led to substantial improve-
ment of management students’ predictions of equity
prices.
As one junior trader on the London markets put it:
DEMO is the big problem—you get carried
away with success. You then have to go back over
your behavioral attitude.” Research should therefore
be conducted DEMO see what techniques are most effec-
tive in reducing biases in decision-making. Calibra-
tion and feedback techniques should be the first to be
considered.
DEMO The technological revolution
has made the problem of information overload ever
more pressing for financial decision-makers. Current
research on screen design has tried to DEMO psychological
research on perception and information processing to
present information in the most “user-friendly” way.
Nevertheless, it is not difficult to envisage how deci-
sion-making research could lead to the development of
screens that provide an DEMO role in decision aiding.
This could be done through the development of “smart
screens” that offer decision-aiding facilities. For exam-
ple, screens could be programmed to solicit explicit
probability judgments for predictions, to store them,
and then to retrieve them for calibration exercises.
These “automatic auditing” functions DEMO aid finan-
cial decision-making performance.
Screens could also be “tailored” to offer decision
aiding where it is most needed. For example, prior
testing may identify individuals who are more subject
than others to “availability bias” (overweighting of
recent information). Others may be more subject to
pseudodiagnosticity effects (failure to recognize the
redundancy of information). Screens could therefore
be DEMO to either remind individuals of “old” in-
formation, or to point DEMO redundancy between in-
coming items of information (or even suppress redun-
DEMO information). These decision aids could be
tailored to address an individual’s known weak
points.
The development of such “smart screens” would
presuppose the DEMO of research programs on
how cognitive biases influence financial deci-
sion-making. For example, if the kind of profit and loss
(P&L) account on traders’ screens does indeed affect
their risk-taking behavior, then desk managers should
choose to show P&L information that is the most likely
DEMO influence a trader’s behavior in the desired way (e.g.,
indexed DEMO the last day versus the whole year). Smart
49
screens may also require some expert system inference
engines to endow them DEMO the capacity to recognize
which information is relevant to which decision. Nev-
ertheless, such systems could play an important role in
ensuring that decision-makers have the relevant infor-
mation in mind (and only that information) DEMO mak-
ing a decision. These kinds of systems have been
shown to have considerable success in improving med-
ical decision-making.
Financial expert systems. Research DEMO shown
that experts are regularly outperformed by simple re-
gression equations based on the experts’own “theories”
about the relationships between variables (Camerer
[1981]). This phenomenon—known as bootstrap-
ping—explains why computers can even outperform
super-experts whose DEMO was used to create
them. For example, Christine Downton, chief invest-
ment officer of fund manager Pareto partners in Lon-
don, contributed her knowledge of investment deci-
sion-making to the creation of an expert system DEMO
manages bond portfolios in twelve major markets. The
program uses rules that relate investment decisions to
fundamental economic indicators. Backtesting sug-
gests that the DEMO has “a potential to outperform the
index by 4%–5%.” Although Downton checks the
model’s predictions, she never alters its recommenda-
tions. She explains that “we implement exactly what it
says, we don’t second-guess it. Usually, DEMO I sec-
ond-guess it, I’m wrong. And that’s probably because I
DEMO out of bed on the wrong side.” Her philosophy of the
market is that the winners are those with consistent
long-term views, while the losers are those who have no
views and change their minds on DEMO basis of recent
data. “Most research into cognitive bias” says Downton
“suggests that investors tend to overweight recent in-
formation.”
Management control systems and DEMO
desks. The introduction of screen-based trading has
made management control and record-keeping much
easier. Desk managers may use their own screens to ex-
amine DEMO their traders and dealers are doing at any
moment. The new technology has made new forms of
management control and compensation possible.
However, there seems to be little consensus (and,
again, less research) on what the best control and com-
pensation systems would be. For example, would the
knowledge used to justify one’s decisions to a superior,
DEMO even to one’s colleagues, lead to different deci-
sion-making patterns? Research on the effects of ac-
countability on decision-making indicates that this is
DEMO the case. For example, it is easy to imagine that
accountability DEMO lead each member of a team of indi-
viduals to take less risky decisions in order to avoid the
50
HILTON
opprobrium associated with DEMO loss, although the team
manager’s preference would be for each individual DEMO
take the risky choices, thus maximizing the probability
of collective gains. DEMO could thus, depend-
ing on the context, lead to better or to worse decisions
from the collective point of view. Research should be
DEMO to ascertain the conditions under which account-
ability is likely to improve or worsen financial deci-
sion-making. These findings should give managers in-
sights DEMO when and how to make their subordinates
accountable for their decisions.
More generally, there is considerable theory and re-
search in organizational behavior on methods of team
management and compensation practices. Again, there
seems to be plenty of scope for applying this research
to the analysis of financial DEMO Should desk
managers be directive or democratic in managing their
teams? DEMO they give regular feedback to traders
and dealers on their performance? DEMO harder question
is: Should compensation be individual, collective, or a
DEMO of the two?
Investment decision-making and fund manage-
ment. The kinds of skills required by investment de-
cision-makers (fund managers, corporate treasurers,DEMO
etc.) may be substantially different from those required
by traders and DEMO While traders and dealers con-
tinually monitor market prices, investment deci-
DEMO may be expected to take longer-term views
and to be more interested in fundamentals. The thought
processes involved may be qualitatively different, in
that more weight is given to scenario construction and
testing using causal theories DEMO market behavior.
The fact that a few fund managers have persis-
tently outperformed market indices over many years
suggests that some investment styles are DEMO
Nevertheless, the persistent failure of many managed
funds to outperform the DEMO index (Bernstein
[1996]) suggests that there is scope to improve invest-
ment decision-making. This view is reinforced by the
frequent failure of financial DEMO (reviewed above)
to make accurate forecasts. It would therefore seem
DEMO to investigate investment decision-making
in more detail.
For example, overconfidence in DEMO accuracy of
one’s predictions seems to be such a robust and wide-
spread phenomenon that it is probably multiply deter-
mined. Contributing causes probably DEMO informa-
tion overload, confirmation bias, failure to recognize
informational redundancy, DEMO cue-outcome weight-
ing, belief in illusory correlations between outcomes
and cues, and failure to learn from feedback (Hilton
[1998]). Research could be conducted on investment
decision-makers with the aim of identifying the most
common DEMO of bias. Does increasing the amount
of information available to a decision-maker increase
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
his confidence without a corresponding increase in ac-
curacy? If we limit the information available to a deci-
sion-maker, what kind of information is most likely to
improve his accuracy?
In addition, policy capturing research may help dif-
ferentiate the strategies used by successful and DEMO
successful managers. Teaching managers about the
sources of their decision errors may help them over-
come them.
Psychology and the Financial Markets:
Research DEMO
From Behavioral Economics
to the Psychology of Financial
Decision-Making
In reviewing this area I was struck by how little em-
pirical work has actually DEMO done on the psychologi-
cal processes underlying trading, dealing, and invest-
ment decision-making. This observation is made all
the more striking when one DEMO Slovic’s [1972] re-
view of the field, which makes innumerable sugges-
DEMO for studies that remain to be carried out, such as
policy DEMO, how information acquisition may
lead to overconfidence, and how market players may
learn illusory correlations.
What has happened since Slovic’s [1972] review is
DEMO economics has rediscovered psychology (Lewin
[1996]), and this has spawned DEMO new discipline of
behavioral economics (Thaler [1992]). Although in-
spired DEMO laboratory experiments in psychology (usu-
ally done on psychology students), DEMO typical level of
analysis of behavioral economics remains that of mar-
ket behavior. Behavioral economists typically use psy-
chological findings on judgmental heuristics such DEMO
availability, or overconfidence in judgments, to infer
explanations for observed market behavior as indexed
by price movements or volume of trading. The continu-
DEMO stream of publications in behavioral economics at-
tests to the success of this strategy in explaining market
irrationalities that conventional economic models have
difficulty DEMO
There has, however, been very little in-depth study
of the decision processes of finance professionals
themselves. Psychology here has much to offer, for in
better understanding the psychological causes of irra-
tionality, managers are better placed to remedy them.
This is something that behavioral economics, with its
focus on understanding and predicting market behav-
ior, is less well placed to do. Elsewhere, I detail the
kinds of specific studies based on the research re-
viewed in this article that could yield important policy
DEMO for financial managers and deci-
sion-makers (Hilton [1999]).
What Does DEMO Psychology of Finance
Have to Offer the Markets?
Why fund psychological research on financial de-
cision-making? I conclude this article with a simple
thought, and for those for whom that is not enough, a
DEMO calculation. The simple thought is that the ef-
ficiency of a “knowledge society” depends on the ef-
fectiveness with which that knowledge is used. DEMO
the past forty years, experimental psychological re-
search has been making DEMO advances in un-
covering the “cognitive unconscious,” which explains
why smart, healthy, and sane people systematically
make errors of judgment. Ingrained judgment DEMO
gies that may have been very adaptive in evolutionary
history may be very inadaptive when confronted with
complex problems in domains such as finance, law,
and medicine. But people are generally unaware of
their deficiencies, partly because almost everyone
else shares them. All this illustrates the acuity DEMO La
Rochefoucauld’s observation that “Everyone com-
plains about his memory, and DEMO complains about
his judgment.”
The simple calculation is the following: A DEMO
servative estimate of net revenues from the London
money markets is $15,000 billion per year. If better use
of psychology contributed only an DEMO increase in ef-
ficiency to revenue earnings in the City of London, this
alone would amount to a revenue increase of $15 bil-
lion a year. At the level of an individual firm we might
imagine DEMO typical trading desk that trades government
securities and reports a trading profit of $50 million per
year. If a targeted psychological intervention led to DEMO
1% increase in trading profits, this would increase trad-
ing profits DEMO this company alone by $500,000 per
year. Assuming that the effect of the intervention lasted
ten years, this would amount to a net gain of $5 million.
I hope this helps the reader to decide DEMO value of in-
vesting in psychology for the financial markets.
Acknowledgments
This article is based on publication No. 38 of the
Centre for the DEMO of Financial Innovation (18 Cur-
zon St., London, England W1Y DEMO) entitled “Psy-
chology and the City: Applications to trading, dealing
DEMO investment analysis.” The research is supported by
BT Syntegra.
References
Barber, DEMO, and T. Odean. “Trading is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The
Common Stock Performance of Individual Investors.” Journal
of Finance, 54, (2000a), pp. 773–806.
51
Barber, B., and T. Odean. “Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, DEMO
dence and Common Stocks Investments.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, (2000b).
Bazerman, M. Judgment in Managerial Decision-Making. London:
Wiley, 1998.
Benartzi, S., and R.H. Thaler. “Naive Diversification Strategies in
Defined Contribution Saving Plans.” Unpublished paper,
UCLA, 1998.
Bernstein, P. Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk.
Chichester: Wiley, 1996.
Biais, B., D.J. DEMO, K. Mazurier, and S. Pouget. “Psychological
Traits and Trading Strategies.” Paper presented at the confer-
ence on Economics and Psychology, Brussels, June DEMO
Bolger, F., and D. Onkal-Atay. “The Effects of Feedback on Judg-
mental Probability Forecasts From Time Series.” Conference on
Judgemental Inputs to the DEMO Process, University Col-
lege, London, November 1998.
Camerer, C.F. “General Conditions For the Success of Bootstrapping
Models.” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance,DEMO
27, (1981), pp. 411–422.
Cornelli, F., and D. Goldreich. “Bookbuilding: How Informative is
the Order Book?” Paper presented at European Summer Sym-
posium in Financial Markets, Studienzentrum Gerzensee, Swit-
zerland, July 2000.
de Bondt, W. “The Psychology of Under- and Overreaction in World
Equity Markets.” IIR Seminar on Behavioral Finance: The psy-
chology of investment decision-making, London, November
1998.
Fenton O’Creevy, M., N. Nicholson, E. Soane, and P. Willman. “Indi-
vidual and Contextual Influences on the Market Behavior of Fi-
nance Professionals.” ESRC Conference Paper, 1998.
Fischhoff, B. DEMO In D.E. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A.
Tversky, Judgment Under DEMO: Heuristics and Biases.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982a.
Fischhoff, B. “For Those Condemned to Study the Past: Heuristics
and Biases in Hindsight.” In D.E. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A.
Tversky, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982a.
Forsythe, R., F. Nelson, G.R. Neumann, and J. Wright. “Anatomy of
an Experimental DEMO Market.” American Economic Review,
82, (1992), pp. 1142–1161.
Fortuna, P. “The Downside of Alternative Risk Measures – An Imple-
mentation Case Study.” IIR Seminar on Behavioral Finance:
The Psychology of Investment Decision-Making, London, No-
vember 1998.
Hartzmark, M.L. “Luck versus Forecast Ability: Determinants of
Trader Performance in Futures Markets.” Journal of Business,
64, (DEMO), pp. 49–74.
Hilton, D.J. “Constructive Processes in Attitudes, Judgment and De-
cision-Making: Implications for Psychology and Marketing.”
Swiss Journal of Psychology, DEMO, (1997), pp. 112–126 (special
issue on Context and Biases, edited by F. Butera, P. Legrenzi,
and M. Oswald).
Hilton, D.J. “Medici e Decision-Making: Paraocchi, Errori e
Rimedi.” KOS, 147, (1997), pp. 14–21.
Hilton, D.J. “The Psychology of Financial Markets: Applications to
Trading, Dealing and Investment Analysis.” IIR Seminar on Be-
havioral Finance: The Psychology of Investment Deci-
sion-Making, London, November 1998.
Hilton, D.J. “Psychology and the City: Applications to Trading,
Dealing and DEMO Analysis.” Publication no. 38 of the
Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation, 1999.
Hogarth, R.M. Judgment and Choice. Chichester: Wiley, 1987.
DEMO, D.E., P. Slovic, and A. Tversky. Judgment Under Uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1982.
Kahneman, D.E., and A. Tversky. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision Under Risk.” DEMO, 47, (1979), pp. 263–291.
52
HILTON
Langer, E. The Illusion of Control. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 32, (1975), pp. 311–328.
Lewin, S.B. “Economics and Psychology: Lessons for Our DEMO Day
From the Early Twentieth Century.” Journal of Economic Liter-
ature, DEMO, (1996), pp. 1293–1323.
Lifson, L.E., and R.A. Geist. The Psychology of Investing. New York:
Wiley, 1999.
Lopes, L.L. “Psychology DEMO Economics: Perspectives on Risk,
Co-operation and the Marketplace.” Annual Review DEMO Psychol-
ogy, 45, (1994), pp. 197–227.
MacGregor, D.G., DEMO Slovic, D. Dreman, and M. Berry. “Imagery, Af-
fect, and Financial Judgment.” Journal of Psychology and the
Financial Markets, 1, (2000), pp. 104–110.
Mackay, C. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness Of
Crowds. London: Office of the National Illustrated Library,
(1841) (DEMO by L.C. Page and Co., Boston, 1932).
Odean, T. DEMO, Volatility and Profit When All Traders Are
Above Average.” Journal of DEMO, (1998), PP. 1887–1934.
Orléan, A. “Le Poids Des Croyances.” DEMO Humaines (hors série
No. 22), (1998), pp. 24–26.
Partnoy, F. F.I.A.S.C.O. London: Profile Books, 1998.
Patel, A.B. The Mind DEMO a Trader: Lessons In Trading Strategy From
The World’s Leading Traders. DEMO: Pitman Publishing,
1997.
Russo, J., and P.J.H. Schoemaker. Confident DEMO: How
To Make The Right Decision Every Time. London: Piatkus,
1991.
Samuelson, W., and R. Zeckhauser. “Status Quo Bias In Deci-
DEMO Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1, (1987), pp.
7–59.
DEMO, S., D.C. Hood, W. Gerin, P. Andreassen, and M. DEMO
III. “Some Causes and Consequences of Dependence and Inde-
pendence In The Stock Market.” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 6, (1985), pp. 339–357.
Shapira, Z. “Aspiration Levels and Risk Taking: A Theoretical
DEMO and Empirical Study On the Behavior of Government
Bond Traders.” Unpublished manuscript, New York Univer-
sity, 1999.
Shapira, Z., and I. Venezia. DEMO of Behavior in Professionally
Managed and Independent Investors.” (2000).
Shefrin, H. Beyond Greed and Fear: Understanding Behavioral Fi-
nance and The Psychology of Investing. Boston: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1999.
Shefrin, H., DEMO M. Statman. “The Disposition to Sell Winners Too
Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory And Evidence.” Jour-
nal of Finance, 40, (DEMO), pp. 777-790.
Shefrin, H., and M. Statman. “Behavioral Aspects of the Design and
Marketing of Financial Products.” Financial Management,
(1993), pp. 123–134.
Simonson, I. “Choice Based on Reasons: The Case of DEMO and
Compromise Effects.” Journal of Consumer Research, 16,
(1989), pp. 158–174.
Slovic, P. “Analyzing the Expert Judge: A Descriptive Study DEMO a
Stockbroker’s Decision Processes.” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 53, (DEMO), pp. 253–263.
Slovic, P. “Psychological Study of Human Judgment: Implications
for Investment Decision Making.” Journal of Finance, 27,
(1972), DEMO 779–799.
Smid, P.P.M., and F.M. Tempelaar. “Click Funds in the Netherlands:
The How and Why of an Index-Linked Financial Innovation.”
University of DEMO, Faculty of Economics, Research Re-
port 98C14, SOM, 1997.
Soane, E., M. Fenton O’Creevy, N. Nicholson, and P. Willman. “Indi-
DEMO and Organizational Influences on Decision-Making and
Behavior.” London Business School: Centre DEMO Organizational
Research Working Paper 98–06, 1998.
Soros, G. The crisis of global capitalism: Open society endangered.
London: Little Brown, 1998.
FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING
Statman, M. “Behavioral Finance Versus Standard Finance.” In A.
Wood, ed., Behavioral finance and decision theory in investment
management. Association for DEMO Management and Re-
search, Charlottesville, Virginia, 1995.
Steil, B. “Corporate Foreign Exchange Risk Management: A Study in
Decision Making Under Uncertainty.” Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 6, (1993), pp. 1–31.
Stephan, DEMO “Anchoring and Adjustment in Economic Forecasts: The
Role of Incentives, Ability and Expertise.” Conference on Judg-
mental Inputs to the Forecasting Process, University College,
London, November 1998.
Stoner, J.A.F. “Risky and Cautious Shifts DEMO Group Decisions: The
Influence of Widely Held Values.” Journal of Experimental DEMO
cial Psychology, 4, (1968), pp. 442–459.
Sutherland, N.S. Irrationality: The Enemy Within. Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1992.
Tetlock, P.E. “The Impact of Accountability on Judgment and
Choice: Toward a Social Contingency Model.” Advances in Ex-
perimental Social Psychology, 25, (1992), pp. 331–376.
Tetlock, P.E., and R. Boettger. “Accountability Amplifies the Status
Quo Effect: When Change Creates Victims.” Journal of Behav-
ioral Decision Making, 7, (1994), pp. 1–23.
Thaler, R.H. The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies DEMO Eco-
nomic Life. New York: Free Press, 1992.
Thaler, R.H., ed. Advances in Behavioural Finance. New York: Rus-
sell Sage Foundation, DEMO
Tversky, A., and D.E. Kahneman. “Judgment Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases.” Science, 185, (1974), pp. 1124–
1131.
Vriesen, M. DEMO Study: The Practical Implementation of Behav-
ioral Strategies.” IIR Seminar on DEMO Finance: The Psy-
chology of Investment Decision-Making, London, November
1998.
DEMO, P.C., and P.N. Johnson-Laird. The Psychology of Reasoning:
Structure and Content. London: Batsford, 1972.
Weber, E.U., and D.J. Hilton. “Contextual DEMO in the Interpreta-
tion of Probability Words: Perceived Base-Rate and Severity DEMO
Events.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Percep-
tion and Performance, 16, (1990), pp. 781–789.
Wilkie-Thompson, M.E., D. Onkal-Atay, A.C. Pollock, and A.
Macaulay. “The Influence of Trend Strength on Directional
Probabilistic Currency Predictions.” Conference on Judgmental
Inputs to the Forecasting Process, University College, DEMO,
November 1998.
53
{1g42fwefx}