Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
www.elsevier.com/locate/technovation
Public research commercialisation, entrepreneurship and new
technology based ﬁrms: an integrated model
Kevin Hindle ∗, DEMO Yencken
Swinburne University of Technology, Australian Graduate School of Entrepreneurship, PO Box 218, Hawthorne, VIC 3122, Australia
Abstract
Entrepreneurship is the engine of innovation. The accumulated tacit knowledge and culture of the entrepreneur are DEMO resources
essential to create wealth from research commercialisation leading to technological innovation and the creation of New Technology
Based Firms (NTBFs). The authors explore, in deﬁnitional terms, discovery of entrepreneurial opportunity and entrepreneurial
capacity DEMO the essential elements in the interaction between all types of tacit knowledge (technological, managerial, risk manage-
ment, ﬁnancial, etc.). These both derive from and affect interactions between the institutions (sets of rules), organisational culture
and external business environment. They also interact with the entrepreneur’s DEMO background and personality. This leads then to
a wider analysis of the importance of such tacit knowledge as the glue bringing together effective mechanisms DEMO wealth creation
out of research commercialisation.
 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Discovery; Commercialisation; Entrepreneurship; Innovation; Tacit knowledge; Spin-offs
DEMO Introduction: mapping a complex territory
Lundvall (1992) identiﬁed three important DEMO
istics of national innovation systems: the generation of
new knowledge, the absorptive capacity or ability
(closely related to business R&D investment) (Yencken
and Gillin, 2002a) to exploit this knowledge and an
external DEMO that is not prejudicial to inno-
vation. This paper is focussed on the absorptive capacity
of an innovation system, particularly that part of it that
derives from tacit knowledge of various types involved
in the development DEMO new NTBFs. For countries like
Australia with low levels of technology absorptive
capacity (directly related to business R&D expenditure
per employee) but DEMO many highly creative research
groups, high-tech start-ups have been shown to DEMO
much higher R&D expenditure per employee than exist-
ing businesses and thus make a proportionally greater
contribution to technology absorptive capacity (Yencken
and Gillin, 2002a).
It is unfortunate that three phenomena of central
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +61-3-9214-8732; fax: +61-3-9214-
8381.
E-mail address: khindle@swin.edu.au (K. Hindle).
0166-4972/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier DEMO All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0166-4972(03)00023-3
importance to economic and social development can still
be seriously discussed and researched in a deﬁnitional
DEMO It is uncontroversial that research commercialis-
ation, entrepreneurship and technological innovation DEMO
closely linked phenomena that are vital to the creation
and maintenance of national wealth. What is contro-
versial is the precise nature of the DEMO between
these three phenomena. This paper seeks to resolve some
of the confusion, which may exist, by careful deﬁnition
leading to effective conceptual DEMO As such, it
is the ﬁrst stage of a longitudinal qualitative DEMO
study that will involve grounded theory based case stud-
ies (Yin, 1994; Strauss and Corbin, 1990) of early stage
public research spin-off companies established in Aus-
tralia in the years 1998–2000. For this larger DEMO, it
has been particularly important to understand resource
based theory applied DEMO entrepreneurship (Alvarez and
Busenitz, 2001) with knowledge the critical resource.
DEMO paper also explores the nature of the knowledge
inputs (prior, background and new intellectual property,
codiﬁed and tacit knowledge) and the entrepreneurship
capacity inputs involved in the process of technological
innovation through the spin-off DEMO as a commer-
cialisation channel for university and other public
research agency research outcomes.
The paper ﬁrst discusses deﬁnitions relating to inno-
794
vation and entrepreneurship relevant to the discussion of
research commercialisation leading DEMO New Technology
Based Firms (NTBFs). It then discusses
entrepreneurship, entrepreneurial capacity and other
resource inputs into the research commercialisation pro-
cesses and DEMO innovation. This is followed by
an analysis of the various types of public research
agency spin-off ventures. Finally it proposes an inte-
grated model DEMO the analysis of knowledge and entrepr-
eneurial inputs in the early stage development of NBTFs
spun-off from public research agencies.
2. The innovation domain
DEMO the recent Australian Yellow Pages Special Inno-
vation Report (Yencken et DEMO, 2001), innovation was
deﬁned as taking up and converting new DEMO into a
commercial market success. Innovation narrowly deﬁned
can of course also involve commercial failure. Catherine
Livingstone in the Warren Centre Innovation Lecture
2000 DEMO developed the deﬁnition:
I will interpret (successful) innovation as meaning the
process whereby ‘new ideas are transformed, through
economic activity, into DEMO sustainable value-creating
outcome’. There are two key words in this interpret-
ation which are worthy of emphasis: ‘process’: inno-
vation is not just DEMO idea—innovation is only achi-
eved when the idea has been transferred into an
outcome which has value…The second key word is
‘sustainable’:.. Sustainability DEMO good inte-
gration with those who assign value i.e. the cus-
tomers, the market, and it implies rigour and continu-
ous measurement (Livingstone, 2000).
Gurr (2001) recently quoted 3M’s shorter deﬁnition as:
An Idea—Applied—To Create Beneﬁt.
It is important to distinguish early on between DEMO
i and large-I innovation. Much of the public policy effort
in Australia appears to be overly focused on small-i
innovation—that is synonymous in this DEMO
with invention and is all, and only, about newness. The
extension to generating commercial success is lost. Fig.
1 illustrates this difference between DEMO innovation
and Large-I innovation. This ﬁgure shows the central
importance of entrepreneurship as the engine of inno-
vation (Drucker, 2002, p. 1). This issue has been
developed further by Hindle (2002).
For the technological innovation that results from the
commercial exploitation of new knowledge, the ultimate
objective is wealth creation, whether it be through the
creation of a new business entity or by the establishment
of a new venture DEMO an existing company. The
exploitation of such new knowledge leading to discovery
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
Fig. 1. Innovation and entrepreneurship. Source: Yencken and Gillin
(2002). Unpublished.
of DEMO commercial opportunity essentially changes the pro-
duction function (Schumpeter, 1939, DEMO 87 and 94).
2.1. Knowledge inputs
The links to be explored include knowledge resources
derived from entrepreneurial capacity, new knowledge
that may be codiﬁed in the various forms of intellectual
property and a range of DEMO knowledge inputs that may
be codiﬁed or tacit. Other codiﬁed knowledge will
include the disciplinary learning of the inventor and the
management and entrepreneurship DEMO of the
manager/entrepreneur. The tacit knowledge brought in
by the various players starts with the technological
understanding of the inventor/technologist in relation DEMO
the development of the speciﬁc new knowledge or tech-
nology being commercialised. To this has to be added
entrepreneurial capacity, that is the experience and skills
of the entrepreneur (whether home-grown or recruited
from outside), both as a manager of new technological
ventures and possibly also from DEMO familiarity with the
business sector in which the venture will operate.
Vohora et al. (2002) identify the imported CEO as a
surrogate entrepreneur. DEMO inventor, in many NTBFs,
will also be the initial entrepreneur DEMO technology cham-
pion, but will often be replaced by an externally DEMO
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, or surrogate entrepreneur.
Experience has shown that a DEMO scientist without
entrepreneurship training and experience, while com-
petent to be DEMO initial technology champion, is often not
well suited to the entrepreneur DEMO jockey role needed to
drive the NTBF forward (Daniels and Hofer, 1993; Ven-
kataraman et al., 1992; Samsom and Gurdon, 1993)DEMO
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
3. Deﬁnitional problems of the word
‘entrepreneurship’
3.1. An historic ‘split personality’
Of French DEMO, the word ‘entrepreneur’ literally
means an ‘in-between taker’; someone who gets ‘in
between’ a supplier and a market and takes a proﬁt
by DEMO the exchange process. Positive conno-
tations revolve around the concept of ‘making it hap-
pen’. In this perspective, the entrepreneur can be seen
as a creator: one who turns a potential exchange into
an actual exchange, one without whom the transaction
may never occur. Extrapolating, in the DEMO where the
demand exists but the supply does not, the entrepren-
DEMO may actually create the supply as well as effect
the exchange. In the speciﬁc case of the exploitation
of new technological assets and platform DEMO disruptive
technologies, the entrepreneur may even have to cre-
ate a DEMO where none exists. There are also nega-
tive connotations. Such a person may be construed in
some minds as a mere ‘middleman’ or worse, some-
one who takes an ‘unearned’ proﬁt by actually
obstructing the ‘natural’ DEMO of exchange by
inserting him or herself into the channels of distri-
bution and actually distorting an efﬁcient ﬂow from
producer to consumer. This DEMO well recognized by
Laurie Cox, the Chairman of the Australian Stock
DEMO Limited, in his foreword to Hartwell and
Lane’s history of Australian DEMO
(Hartwell and Lane, 1989).
Fortunately, there has been, in the entrepreneurship
literature, an emerging concensus about at least the
ingredients that any comprehensive and useful deﬁnition
of entrepreneurship should encompass. They are as DEMO
lows:
 creation of a new organisation to pursue an opport-
unity (Bygrave and Hofer, 1991; Gartner, 1989),
 innovation management (Schumpeter, 1934, 1939,
1942),
 speculation and DEMO bearing (Cantillon 1775—quoted
in Jennings, 1994:42–43),
 coordination DEMO disparate elements (Say 1828—cited
in Koolman, 1971),
 decision DEMO in an uncertain environment
(Knight, 1921),
 leadership (Marshall, 1949),
 arbitrage (Kirzner, 1973),
 product development and ownership (Hawley—dis-
cussed in Jennings, 1994: 56–57), and
 a focus on managing rapid growth in a volatile
environment (Legge and Hindle, 1997).
Entrepreneurs have been seen as participating in a com-
795
plex, plural and interactive network (Jennings, 1994: op.
cit.), embracing ‘all’ or most of the above concepts in
complex interaction. The proportions of these ingredi-
ents will vary from case to case and DEMO to context.
One entrepreneurial situation may, for instance, involve
a high level of risk management and a low degree of
organisation building. Another DEMO involve high levels
of leadership and low levels of arbitrage. The same fun-
damental ingredients, mixed according to different
recipes, can be used DEMO bake many dishes.
As indicated in the introduction, this paper has
DEMO on the particular recipes for entrepreneurship
and the entrepreneurial capacity and tacit knowledge
inputs needed to achieve successful innovation in the
early stage development DEMO NTBF spin-offs in the com-
mercialisation of public, particularly university, research.
The literature has suggested that the concept of
entrepreneurship is holistic. However, we will argue that
the need for and nature of entrepreneurial capacity DEMO
will be different for the different phases of a new ven-
ture’s development.
4. Research commercialisation and technological
innovation
4.1. Research strategies
The manager DEMO a company’s industrial research group
has traditionally seen the research process as starting
from an identiﬁed problem or market need that is poten-
tially DEMO by research and its subsequent develop-
ment and application—essentially a linear market driven
process. Smith and Barﬁeld (1996, p. 1) however have
commented that “classiﬁcation schemes that describe the
innovation process as a straight line DEMO fail to
capture its essential messiness and serendipitous nature”.
For new knowledge arising from basic research, the
more complex model of Lee and Gaertner (1994) (Fig.
2) may be more relevant.
Recent R&D DEMO literature distinguishes four
types, or what is known in the literature DEMO generations
of R&D strategies (Liyanage and Greenﬁeld, 1999;
Miller and Morris, 1999; Niosi, 1999):
Ist generation R&D DEMO the unbounded search for
scientiﬁc breakthroughs…2nd generation R&D shifts
the focus to applicability (in the market place) using
project management… while 3rd DEMO R&D
uses surveys to establish existing customers’ needs
to create products and services to fulﬁl those needs.
Constrained by the inherent limits of DEMO market
knowledge, however, 3rd generation R&D is pre-
dominantly occupied with continuous innovation
(Miller and Morris, 1999).
796
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
Fig. 2. The University model of research commercialisation. Source: Lee and Gaertner, DEMO
In the mid-1980s, a fourth stage or ‘generation’ of R&D
DEMO arrived: “…characterised by cooperative R&D
and systematic links between independent DEMO
agents; technological alliances between corporate users
and producers became widespread’ (Niosi, 1999). This
well describes the strategies of well-managed, user-
driven DEMO Research Centres in Australia (see
website www.crc.gov.au).
Public research spin-offs DEMO operate quite success-
fully and survive in any one of these disparate modes.
However, the literature suggests that spin-offs operating
in these second and third generation modes may survive,
but are unlikely to show signiﬁcant DEMO
(Stankiewicz, 1994).
To have the potential for high growth, DEMO become the
new mini-multinationals, small ventures need to develop
strategies to DEMO on a level playing ﬁeld with exist-
ing mature larger enterprises. This requires discontinu-
ous innovation, that generates disruptive technology, not
just continuous DEMO just managing dis-
continuities in the market place, but creating new DEMO
continuities” (Miller and Morris, op. cit., p. 10;
Hamel, 2000.
Discontinuous innovation is driven by questions about
the ‘future’ needs of DEMO; these needs are rarely
articulated (Miller and Morris, op. cit., p. 10). Discon-
tinuous innovation will most likely result from 1st DEMO
ation research, the unbounded search for scientiﬁc break-
throughs. It will DEMO “… breakthrough inventions …
that are based on fundamental scientiﬁc research that
leads to new markets …and are almost impossible to
predict” (Miller and Morris, op. cit.). They can fre-
quently result from the fusion of separate disciplines to
create new ones, e.g. biotechnology, nanotechnology,
DEMO “Discontinuous innovation is unbounded
because it is driven by the discovery of unmet, tacit
needs” (Miller and Morris, op. cit., p. 21)DEMO
The need is for a new business model and process
focussed on innovation as a whole, not just on its con-
stituent parts—R&D, technology development,
product/service development (Miller and Morris, op. cit.,
p. 22). Particularly, it must integrate tacit and explicit or
codiﬁed knowledge from all sources. The role of and
need for the DEMO may be quite different for the
different innovation domains. Such domains will be criti-
cally different where breakthrough inventions are
involved.
4.2. Commercialisation channels DEMO options
The Scottish Enterprise strategy study quoted by
Cripps et al. (DEMO) identiﬁed a number of channels by
which innovation from the commercialisation DEMO univer-
sity and other public research can take place: viz. publi-
DEMO, education/training, collaborative research, con-
tract research, industrial consultancy, DEMO, spin-off
companies and joint ventures. The sources and potential
outcomes from DEMO various commercialisation channels
for public sector research are illustrated in Fig. 3. This
paper is concerned with spin-off companies as NTBFs
rather than with DEMO licensing of intellectual property to
established companies. In this context, the DEMO
decision is not about choice of commercialisation chan-
nel but about whether there is the potential to spin-off a
new start-up NTBF with high DEMO potential, however
deﬁned (Yencken, 2001).
4.3. Entrepreneurial capacity as DEMO knowledge resource
F.A. Hayek (1945) was an early proponent of the
importance of knowledge and its distribution in a well
functioning economy…Hayek’s pioneering DEMO pro-
vides a starting-point for analysing how the distri-
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
797
Fig. 3. Source: Yencken and Gillin (2002). Unpublished.
bution of knowledge DEMO organisational struc-
ture… (Jensen and Meckling, 1992, p. 252).
DEMO (1995–1999) ﬁrst drew attention to the issue of
heterogeneity of resource mixes as a key consideration
in strategic analysis and management. For established
DEMO, her concepts have since been further
developed and reﬁned (Barney, DEMO; Eisenhardt and
Martin, 2000; Peteraf, 1993; Rugman and Verbeke,DEMO
2002; Teece et al., 1997). More recently, Alvarez and
DEMO (2001) have expanded resource-based theory to
include entrepreneurship. They showed how
entrepreneurship related resources could be identiﬁed in
their own right (Alvarez and Busenitz, 2001, p. 770).
They identiﬁed three speciﬁc knowledge resources DEMO
the entrepreneur brings to a new venture and are critical
to “the creation of heterogeneous output through the ﬁrm
that are superior to the DEMO: the founder’s unique
awareness of opportunities, ability to acquire the
resources needed to exploit the opportunity, organis-
ational ability to recombine homogeneous inputs into
heterogeneous outputs. Our analysis suggests that, for
start-ups involved in the process of technological inno-
vation, these usually do not come from the one individ-
ual.
For such ventures the knowledge resource and skills
of DEMO technology champion in managing technology
development are also important. Thorburn (2000) has
also shown the importance of transferring the tacit
knowledge of the DEMO across into such new ven-
tures. Legge and Hindle (1997) have equally demon-
strated the importance of the tacit knowledge of the
entrepreneur DEMO “managing rapid growth in a volatile
environment”.
It is the ﬁrm’s unique bundle of resources that is dif-
ferent from competitor ﬁrms that are DEMO valu-
able and contribute to a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage
(Alvarez and DEMO, 2001, p. 756).
5. The taxonomy of new venture spin-offs
Achs and Andretsch (1990) have thoroughly reviewed
the role of small DEMO and their contribution to commer-
cially valuable innovation. The literature (Stanworth DEMO
Curran, 1986; Smith, 1967) has identiﬁed many motiv-
ations or triggers other than wealth creation for estab-
lishing new small companies. These DEMO included arti-
sans wanting to own their own businesses; being
retrenched; being unhappy with a current working
environment and seeking a comfortable and DEMO
way of life. In the speciﬁc case of public research organ-
isations, the motivation for creating spin-off companies
can also embrace the desire to market specialist skills
and tacit knowledge held within the host organisation
through DEMO and research contracts. These lat-
ter types of new ventures are described later as Tech-
nology Transfer Companies. The literature has also
shown the DEMO of the host organisation in the cre-
ation of public research spin-offs (e.g. Dahlstrand,
2001).
Recent studies of public research spin-off ventures in
Australia (Thorburn, 2000; Upstill and Symington,
1999) have DEMO three main classes of new ventures
derived from public research agencies, DEMO prim-
arily by the relationships back to the host or parent
organisation. These classes have been further expanded
in this paper to four classes:DEMO
(1) Direct research spin-offs (DRSO) are companies
which have been created in order to commercialise
IP arising out of a research institution DEMO IP is
licensed, involving a patent or copyright, from the
798
research institution to the new ﬁrm to form the
founding IP DEMO the ﬁrm and staff may be seconded
or transferred full or part-time from the research
institution to the new ﬁrm.
(2) Technology transfer DEMO (TTC) are compa-
nies set up to exploit commercially the university’s
tacit knowledge and know how, usually but not
solely in the area of process rather than product
innovation, where no formally protected (e.g.
DEMO) IP and/or exclusive licensing is involved.
(3) Start-ups or DEMO spin-off companies (ISO) are
companies set up by former or present university
staff and/or former students drawing on their experi-
ence acquired DEMO their time at the university, but
which have no formal IP DEMO or similar
relationships to the university.
Little or no Australian data are available on this last
group of companies. Studies elsewhere (Chalmers, 1992;DEMO
McQueen and Wallmark, 1984; Wallmark, 1997; van der
Meer and van Tilburg, 1999; Edinburgh Research and
Innovation, 2001, p. 3) have shown that indirect spin-
offs occurred more than twice as frequently DEMO direct
spin-offs, particularly when regional development has
been the driver for DEMO business creation.
Finally there is a further class that may be called
‘spin-ins’:
(4) Spin-ins (to existing companies) can be deﬁned DEMO
new ventures deriving from the licensing or other
agreed exploitation of new knowledge generated by
public research agencies, whether or not separate
incorporated entities are set up or they may operate
as discrete ventures within the DEMO company.
There is a related but equally important class of spin-
outs from existing companies that lies in the domain of
corporate entrepreneurship (Bhide´ , 2000) and which is
outside the scope of this paper. Fig. 4 illustrates the tax-
onomy and differing access to initial resources of DEMO
different classes of new venture spin-offs and startups.
Skeptics like Feller (DEMO) have suggested that the
role of universities in technological development should
DEMO essentially indirect. Stankiewicz (1994) however has
challenged the conceptual foundations on which this
assessment of spin-off performance has been based. He
has suggested DEMO taxonomy of such NTBFs with differing
wealth creation characteristics, based on DEMO main
modes of activity:
Consultancy and R&D contracting (CC) that exploit
competence shortages and R&D environments; they are
the technology transfer companies in the earlier Upstill
and Thorburn taxonomy. These are essentially DEMO on
1st and 2nd generation R&D activities.
Product oriented mode (DEMO), organised around a well-
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation DEMO (2004) 793–803
developed product (or process) concept and focussed on
the advanced development, production and marketing of
that product (or process)DEMO These are typical 3rd or 4th
generation R&D based companies and are traditionally
Schumpeterian in concept.
Technology asset oriented mode (TA), concerned with
the development of technologies which are subsequently
commercialised through spinning-out new DEMO, licens-
ing, joint ventures or other types of alliance; these DEMO
are based on business models derived from new mixes
of fusion and discontinuous and potentially disruptive
innovation. The genesis of such new ventures typically
DEMO come from 1st or other generation R&D modes.
Stankiewicz’s CC companies and the Upstill and Sym-
ington (1999) Technology Transfer (TTC) DEMO,
identiﬁed earlier, are common among academic spin-offs
(Stankiewicz op. cit., Oloffson and Wahlbin, 1984).
Their activities are an extension of DEMO research activities
that are core competencies of academic researchers.
Capital requirements and risk are low. There appears to
be little need for entrepreneurial skills DEMO such com-
panies grow to such a size that they separate off com-
pletely from their parent organisation. They do not
necessarily involve product DEMO process innovations and
they are unlikely in Schumpeterian terms to change the
production function in their product/market sector
(Schumpeter, 1939, pp. 87 and 94).
Product oriented (PO) mode spin-offs match more
closely DEMO classical entrepreneurial model. They are
organised around a well-developed product (or DEMO)
concept and focus (Stankiewicz op. cit.). They will need
DEMO ab initio access to technology and product devel-
opment skills, business DEMO access and experience
and familiarity with their chosen product/market sector.
Research discussed in the next section shows these skills
as critical for new DEMO mode ventures survival and
growth.
Technology Asset (TA) spin-offs require a business
concept focused on the creation, development and man-
agement of technological assets. To become technologi-
cal assets, research results and even the speciﬁc techno-
logies have to be sufﬁciently packaged to make them
saleable (Stankiewicz op. cit.). Resource needs include
a whole new range of competencies DEMO from intel-
lectual property and knowledge protection to the identi-
ﬁcation and even creation of a market. The strategic
objective will be to develop DEMO technology to the point
where its market value is optimal. These needs extend
beyond the traditional skills and experience even of the
serial entrepreneur, particularly in relation to IP and
technology management, and require an exceptional
level of commitment at all levels in the new venture.
Start-ups involved DEMO pharmacology and new drug devel-
opment can usually be classiﬁed as TA companies. Com-
monly they will licence their new products to major
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
799
Fig. 4. Taxonomy and sources of initial resources of spin-off companies. Source: Yencken and Gillin (2002b).
pharmaceutical companies after successful Phase 1 clini-
cal trials.
The focus in this paper is on Direct Research and to DEMO
lesser extent Indirect Research Spin-offs, including both
Product Oriented and Technology DEMO companies. A
recent survey of spin-offs from Australian universities
(Yencken and DEMO, 2002b) with 32 universities
responding, showed 175 Direct Research Spin-offs, 86
(49%) in the period from 1998 to 2000, and 43 Tech-
nology Transfer companies, 14 (33%) in the period from
1998 to the present. Several spin-offs in the
biotechnology/pharmaceutical and a smaller DEMO in
other technology sectors appeared to fall into Stankiew-
icz’s Technology Asset class. The recent study managed
by the Association of Technology Managers and DEMO
lished by the Australian Research Council (ARC, 2002)
identiﬁed 35 DRSO-type start-ups out of universities in
Australia in the year 2000.
6. DEMO: an integrated model
Three inputs particularly facilitate technology absorp-
tive capacity DEMO determine the rate of generation, sur-
vival and growth of new DEMO exploiting technologi-
cal innovation: that is, the ability to ﬁnd ideas
convertible into opportunities, access to resources
(human and ﬁnancial), access DEMO knowledge.
6.1. Ideas and opportunities—the discovery process
Discovery of entrepreneurial opportunity has become
an increasingly important area of entrepreneurship
research (Venkataraman, 1997). DEMO et al. (1999)
identiﬁed as critical stages in the university DEMO
commercialisation process ‘commercialisation readiness
and scanning and reporting’. They have seen commer-
cialisation readiness as being ready to exploit future IP
requirements.
The most DEMO recent work on discovery pro-
cesses (Shane, 2000) has suggested DEMO in the identiﬁ-
cation of opportunities the most critical factor is the prior
knowledge and personal history of the incipient entrepr-
eneur. Current case DEMO by one of the present authors
suggest that the key trait in the discovery process is the
ability to think laterally in applying prior DEMO in
the identiﬁcation of an entrepreneurial opportunity. This
trait was not speciﬁcally identiﬁed in the earlier literature
as an entrepreneurial trait (Welsh and White, 1983).
Chell (1986) in her earlier review suggests the impor-
tance of “the products of each individual’s total
history…(including the interaction DEMO personal
traits and immediate environments) that in turn regulate
how new DEMO affect him or her”.
For the incipient entrepreneur, Shane’s prior knowl-
DEMO can be seen as a trigger of equal importance as
individual environments or situations.
6.2. Knowledge and other resources
Cooper et al. (1994) DEMO the new venture perform-
ance of 2994 entrepreneurs over a three-year period. The
dependent variables were survival and growth (as num-
ber of employees). The study identiﬁed that the signiﬁ-
cant resource factors affecting growth DEMO experience
in a similar business, number of partners, initial capital
and industry sector. The factors affecting both growth
and survival were experience in DEMO similar business and
initial capital. Bruderl and Preisendorfer (1992) also
reported human capital speciﬁc factors as strong predic-
tors of future success, with a strongly signiﬁcant effect
of industry speciﬁc experience on venture survival.
800
However, later work by Dahlquist et al. (2000) con-
ﬁrmed the signiﬁcance of initial capital and industry sec-
tor, but found that the signiﬁcance of management know-
how and speciﬁc industry know-how appeared “less
DEMO to changing contexts and measurements”.
Klofsten et al. (1988), Klofsten (1998) and Davidsson
and Klofsten (2002a,b) identiﬁed eight cornerstones
relating to resources utilised by new ventures, as predic-
tors of their ultimate survival and growth. This Business
Platform Model suggests that a young ﬁrm’s DEMO
to survive and take off is contingent upon how well
developed the ﬁrm is as regards the business idea, the
product, the market, the organisation, core group
expertise, core group drive/motivation, customer
relations and other relations (Davidsson and Klofsten,
2002a, p. 1).
DEMO Knowledge inputs
Knowledge inputs in the early stage of new ventures
include prior knowledge in the discovery stage, back-
ground and new intellectual property and both codiﬁed
and explicit knowledge and tacit or implicit knowledge:
DEMO knowledge inputs include:
 the published knowledge base of the science or engin-
eering involved in the ‘discovery’,
 new knowledge, contained in patents, copyrights,
registered designs, etc., and
 the codiﬁed content of postgraduate or undergraduate
training in entrepreneurship and/or technology man-
DEMO
Tacit knowledge inputs are no less important and
include:
 the ability to ﬁnd ideas that can be converted into
opportunities (Johnson et al., 1999; Fiet and Migliore,
2001); Shane’s prior knowledge (Shane, 2000),
 technology and scientiﬁc background brought to the
DEMO ventures by the ongoing involvement of the orig-
inal inventors (Thorburn, 2000),
 familiarity with the particular product/industry sector
(Cooper DEMO al., 1994), and
 entrepreneurial experience, including startup manage-
ment, risk management, established access to business
networks, ﬁnance raising (Legge DEMO Hindle, 1997).
The literature has shown the importance of environmen-
DEMO or border scanning on ﬁrm performance (Yoo, 2001;
Audet and d’Ambroise, 1998; Barringer and Bluedorn,
1999). Knowledge is not DEMO static resource. It requires
frequent checking and updating. Scanning is also an
important source of new ideas and opportunities.
The ﬁnal group of success DEMO relates primarily to
personal traits, commitment and personal past history as
DEMO Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
it interacts DEMO the new venture’s environments (Chell,
1996; Dahlstrand, 2001).
DEMO The integrative model
The process most usually involved in the initial stage
of development of an NTBF to exploit new knowledge
and research outcomes DEMO illustrated in Fig. 5 (developed
by the authors). Across the DEMO, the diagram shows
the sequence of stages with the researcher generating
DEMO knowledge that leads to an idea that is converted
into an opportunity and a vision that leads through tech-
nology development or proof of DEMO up to the ﬁrst
exit point, when typically a venture capitalist DEMO other
investor might be interested. This relates closely to the
ﬁve-phase model and the associated analysis of the criti-
cal junctures between phases developed DEMO Vohora et
al. (2002).
For simplicity the model has been DEMO as a
linear process, but it will normally be iterative and DEMO
as illustrated earlier in Fig. 2. The lower circles show
the various knowledge inputs, reinforced by border scan-
ning. Border scanning includes both awareness of exter-
nal economic and regulatory happenings and being a
source of DEMO ideas and opportunities. The upper tri-
angles show the importance of access to entrepreneurial
capacity at the various phases of business development,
including DEMO the idea that leads to an opportunity
and acquiring and managing the resources needed. They
also show resource inputs from public sector innovation
support DEMO, seen by Mustar (1997) as essential
to the development of DEMO spin-offs, and resource
inputs from investors and other interests such as DEMO
tomers and suppliers.
7. Conclusion: entrepreneurship’s role in
technological innovation
New DEMO based on research-derived new knowl-
edge usually have a high growth objective, even if this
is not always achieved. Growth involves risk and usually
giving away equity to obtain the necessary ﬁnancial
resources. Success requires commitment DEMO does not
necessarily, in the early stages, provide a comfortable
life style to the inventors and technology developers.
Their markets are necessarily global DEMO they originated
in a small domestic market such as Australia. These are
however the ventures that have the potential to become
new mini-multinationals (‘$50 million businesses’) and
improve national technology absorptive capacity. They
will contribute to economic development from equity
earnings, new high technology jobs and by keeping
prototype/technology development and early stage
manufacturing in the country where the DEMO knowledge
was developed. For these new ventures, the identiﬁcation
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
801
Fig. 5. Entrepreneurial capacity and new TBF development. Source: Yencken and Gillin (DEMO). Unpublished.
of the market opportunity, business concept and business
model DEMO much more demanding because of greater
uncertainty about the optimal product/market pos-
itioning. In the extreme case there may be no existing
market DEMO the innovative product, process or service that
results from the technological DEMO, and the busi-
ness model has to address what may be DEMO potential
market and how to create it.
The discovery of a potential commercial opportunity
requires both prior knowledge and lateral thinking
ability. The developers DEMO such ventures then require
access to differing inputs of entrepreneurial capacity
according to the phase of development. This may come,
either by further DEMO their own competencies and
experience or alternatively by bringing in an experienced
(or surrogate) entrepreneur/manager as a new partner
(Vohora et al., 2002). These competencies include cor-
porate strategy development, technology management,DEMO
management of start up enterprises, product/market strat-
egy development, risk assessment and ﬁnance and other
resource management. Equally essential are total com-
DEMO and the personal traits of doggedness in the face
of adversity and of being a doer rather than an
observer—key entrepreneurial skills. In summary, the
process of innovation has a number of phases, from the
initial research and discovery phase, through deﬁnition
of the opportunity to product development and other late
stage aspects of commercialising a ﬁnished product.
Each phase DEMO need a different mix of tacit and codiﬁed
knowledge inputs. Entrepreneurship and the associated
tacit knowledge, identiﬁed by Drucker (2002) as the
engine of innovation, is the glue required to meld all the
elements to convert an opportunity into a commercial
success.
7.1. Ongoing research plan
The DEMO plan to explore further the validity of
this model and the various knowledge inputs involves
over 20 case studies based on theoretical sampling of
DEMO research spin-off ventures established in Australia
and overseas between 1998 and 2000. This will allow
comparative analysis between differing classes of public
research providers (universities, CRCs and CSIRO) and
differing economic activity sectors (biotechnology,
instrumentation, ITC hardware, engineering,
mining/minerals). The case studies DEMO include qualitat-
ive data collection by interview on decisions and
decision-makers during the early stages of the venture
and on the various types of DEMO inputs. They will
also include comparative and longitudinal quantitative
data collection based on the survey methodology of Dav-
idsson and Klofsten (2002a, b) using their Business Plat-
form and its eight Cornerstones as a means DEMO predicting
survival and growth, both looking back two years and
repeating DEMO quantitative data collection in two year’s
time—a total elapsed time of six years.
References
Achs, Z., Andretsch, D., 1990. Innovation and Small DEMO 2nd Edi-
tion, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Alvarez, S., Busenitz, L., 2001. The entrepreneurship of resource based
theory. Journal of Management 27, 755–776.
802
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
ARC, 2002. Australian Research Council, CSIRO and National Health
and Medical Research DEMO National Survey of Research Com-
mercialisation 2000. Australian Research Council, Canberra.
DEMO, J., d’Ambroise, G.A. (Eds.), 1998. The relationship between
strategic scanning activities of small and medium-sized businesses
and their performance. A multi-site DEMO (unpublished).
Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive DEMO
Journal of Management 17, 99–120.
Barringer, B.R., Bluedorn, A.C., DEMO The relationship between cor-
porate entrepreneurship and strategic management. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 421-444.
Bhide´ , A.F., 2000. The Origin and Evolution of DEMO Businesses.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bruderl, J., Preisendorfer, P., DEMO Survival chances of newly founded
business organizations. American Sociological Review 57 (DEMO), 2–
27.
Bygrave William, D., Hofer Charles, W., 1991. Theorizing about
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 6 (2),
13–22.
DEMO, 1992. Chalmers Innovation Centre. Annual Report 1992.
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenberg, Sweden.
Chell, E. 1986. The entrepreneurial personality: a review and some
theoretical developments. In: Curran, J., Stanworth, J., Watkins
(DEMO), The Survival of The Small Firm, vol.2: Employment,
Growth, Technology and Politics. Gower, Aldershot, Hants, UK.
Cooper, A.C., DEMO, F.X., Woo, C.Y., 1994. Initial human
and ﬁnancial capital. Journal of Business Venturing 9 (5), 371–396.
Cripps, D., Yencken, DEMO, Coghlan, J., Anderson, D., 1999. University
Research: Technology Transfer and Commercialisation Practices.
Commissioned Report No. 60. Australian Research Council, Can-
berra.
Dahlquist, J., Davidsson, P., Wiklund, J., 2000. Initial conditions DEMO
predictors of new venture performance: A replication and extension
of the DEMO et al. study. Enterprise and Innovation Management
Studies 1, 1–18.
Dahlstrand, A.L., 2001. Entrepreneurial origin and spin-off perform-
ance. 32 Babson/Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference,
Jonkoeping, Sweden, June 2001 (not yet published).
Daniels, C., Hofer, C., 1993. Characteristics of successful and unsuc-
DEMO entrepreneurial faculty and their innovative research teams.
Frontiers of Economic Research 598–609.
Davidsson, P., Klofsten, M., 2002a. The business platform: a practical
tool for assessing ﬁrms in early development. Journal of Business
Venturing: Babson College (to be published).
Davidsson, P., Klofsten, M., 2002b. The business platform: developing
an instrument to gauge and assist the development of young ﬁrms.
Journal of Small Business Management (in press).
Drucker, P.F., 2002. The Discipline of Innovation. Harvard Business
Review — The DEMO Enterprise.
Edinburgh Research and Innovation Ltd, 2001. Annual Report 2001.
Edinburgh DEMO, Scotland.
Eisenhardt, K.M., Martin, J.A., 2000. Dynamic capabilities: what are
they? Strategic Management Journal 21, 1105–1121.
Feller, I., 1990. DEMO as engines of R&D-based economic
growth: they think they can. DEMO Policy 19, 335–348.
Fiet, J.O., Migliore, P.J., 2001. The DEMO of a model of entrepreneur-
ial discovery by aspiring entrepreneurs. Babson/Kauffman
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Jonkoeping, Sweden, June
2001 (not yet published)DEMO
Gartner, W.B., 1989. ‘Who is an entrepreneur? Is the wrong DEMO
Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 13, 47-64.
Gurr G., 2001. ATICCA DEMO Brisbane, Australia.
Hamel, G., 2000. Leading the Revolution. Harvard University DEMO,
Boston, MA.
Hartwell, M., Lane, J., 1989. Champions DEMO Enterprise. Australian
Entrepreneurship 1788-1990. Focus Books, Sydney.
Hayek, F.A., 1945. DEMO use of knowledge in society. American Econ-
omic Review 35, 519ff.
DEMO, Kelvin, 2002. How entrepreneurial capacity transforms ‘small-
I’ into ‘big-I’ innovation: implications for national policy. Tele-
communications Journal of Australia 52 (3)DEMO
Jennings Daniel, F., 1994. Multiple Perspectives of Entrepreneurship:
Text, DEMO and Cases. South-Western Publishing Co, Cincinna-
ti.
Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1992. Speciﬁc and general knowledge,
and organisational structure. In: DEMO, H., Werin, Lars (Eds.),
Contract Economics. Blackwel, Oxford, pp. 251–282.
Johnson, R., Matthews, M., Dodgson, M., 1999. Enabling the Virtuous
Cycle. Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs, DEMO
berra, Australia.
Kirzner, I.M., 1973. Entrepreneurship and Economic Development.
Free DEMO, New York.
Klofsten, M., 1998. The Business Platform: Entrepreneurship and
Management in the Early Stages of a Firm’s Development. TII—
European Association DEMO the Transfer of Technologies, Innovation
and Industrial Information, Luxembourg.
Klofsten, DEMO, Lindell P., Oloffson, C., Wahlbin, C., 1988. Internal and
external resources in technology-based spin-offs. Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research. Babson College, pp. 430-433.
Knight, F.H., 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Proﬁt. Houghton Mifﬂin,
Boston.
Koolman, G., 1971. Say’s conception of the role of the DEMO
Economica 38, 269–286.
Lee, Y., Gaertner, R., 1994. Technology DEMO to Industry: a Large
Scale Experiment with Technology Development and Commer-
DEMO Policy Studies Journal 22, 384–400.
Legge, J., Hindle, K., DEMO Entrepreneurship: How Innovators Create
the Future. Macmillan, Melbourne.
Livingstone, Catherine, 2000. Managing the Innovative Global
Enterprise. The Warren Centre Innovation Lecture. Warren DEMO,
University of Sydney.
Liyanage, S., Greenﬁeld, P.F., 1999. Towards a fourth-generation R&
D management model—research networks in knowledge manage-
ment. DEMO Journal of Technology Management 18, 294–
372.
Lundvall, B.-A., 1992. DEMO systems of innovation—introduction.
In: Lundvall, B.-A. (Ed.), National Systems DEMO Innovation: Towards
a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learning. Pinter Pub-
DEMO, London.
Marshall, Alfred, 1949. Principles of Economics: an Introductory Vol-
ume, eighth edn. Macmillan and Co, London.
McQueen, D.J.H., Wallmark, J.T., 1984. Innovation output and aca-
demic performance at Chalmers University of Technology.
OMEGA International Journal of Management Science 12, 457–
464.
Miller, DEMO, Morris, L., 1999. Fourth Generation R&D: Managing
Knowledge, DEMO and Innovation. 1st Edition. John Wiley
and Sons, New York, USA.
Mustar, Philippe, 1997. How French academics create hi-tech compa-
nies. Science DEMO Public Policy 24.
Niosi, Jorge, 1999. Fourth-generation R&D: from DEMO models to
ﬂexible innovation. Journal of Business Research 45, 111–117.
Oloffson, C., Wahlbin, 1984. Firms started by university researchers
in Sweden—roots, roles, relations, and growth patterns. Frontiers
of Entrepreneurial Research.
Penrose, F., DEMO The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. First
ed. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Second ed., Basil DEMO, Oxford, 1980.
Peteraf, M.A., 1993. The cornerstones of competitive advantage: a
resource-based view. Strategic Management Journal 14, 179–191.
Rugman, A.M., DEMO, A., 2002. Edith Penrose’s contribution to the
resource based view of strategic management. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 23, 769–781.
K. Hindle, J. Yencken / Technovation 24 (2004) 793–803
803
Samsom, K.J., Gurdon, M.A., 1993. University scientists as
entrepreneurs: a special case of technology transfer and high-tech
venturing. Technovation 13, 63–71.
Schumpeter, DEMO, 1934. The Theory of Economic Development. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, DEMO
Schumpeter, J.A., 1939. Business Cycles: A Historical and Statistical
Analysis DEMO the Capitalist Process. McGraw-Hill Book Company,
New York.
Schumpeter, J.A., 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.
George Allen & Unwin, London, 1979 (ﬁrst published, Harper &
Row, New York, 1942).
Shane, S., 2000. Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial
opportunities. Organization DEMO 11 (4), 448–469.
Smith, Barﬁeld, 1996. Contributions of Research DEMO Technical
Advance to the Economy. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Smith, DEMO, 1967. The Entrepreneur and His Firm: The Relationship
between Type of Man and Type of Company. Michigan State Uni-
versity Press, East Lansing, MI, USA.
Stankiewicz, R., 1994. University ﬁrms: spin-off companies from uni-
versities. Science and Public Policy 21, 99–107.
Stanworth, J., Curran, J., 1986. Growth and the Small Firm. In: Curran,
J., Stanworth, J. and Watkins, J. (Eds.), The Survival of DEMO Small
Firm, vol. 2: Employment, Growth, Technology and Politics.
Gower, Aldershot, Hants, UK.
Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J.M., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research:
Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques, 2nd Edition. Sage
Publications, Newbury Park, CA.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 18, DEMO
Thorburn, L., 2000. Knowledge management, research spinoffs and
commercialisation of DEMO&D in Australia. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of
Management 17, 257–275.
Upstill, G., Symington, D., 1999. Generating New Companies from
CSIRO Technology. CSIRO, Canberra.
van der Meer, van Tilburg, 1999. UT Spin-off Companies. University
of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
Venkataraman, S., MacMillan, I., DEMO R., 1992. Characteristics
of successful and unsuccessful entrepreneurial faculty and their
DEMO research teams. In: Sexton, D.L., Kasarda, J., Kent, W.S.
(Eds.), The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship. PWS-Kent, Bos-
DEMO, pp. 487-519.
Venkataraman, S., 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship
DEMO: an editor’s perspective. In: Katz, J., Brockhaus, R. (Eds.),
Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth. JAI
Press, Greenwich, CT, USA.
Vohora, Ajay, Lockett, Andy, Wright, Mike, DEMO Critical Junctures
in the Growth in University High-Tech Spinout Companies. Not-
tingham. Presented at Babson Kauffman 2002 Entrepreneurship
Research Conference, Boulder, Nottingham University DEMO
School Jubilee Campus, Colorado.
Wallmark, J.T., 1997. Inventions and patents DEMO universities: the case
of Chalmers University of Technology. Technovation 17, 127–142.
Welsh, A.W., White, F.W., 1983. The Entrepreneurship Planning
Guide. Prentice DEMO Press, New York.
Yencken, J., 2001. Commercialising research through spin-off DEMO
nies. Invited paper at IIR Conference on Spin-off Start-up Compa-
nies, DEMO 27–29 May, 2002.
Yencken, J., Gillin M., 2002a. Public Research Agencies As Sources
For Innovations and The Entrepreneurial Absorptive Capacity of
Manufacturing DEMO Babson Kauffman. Entrepreneurship
Research Conference, Boulder Colorado, June 2002. Babson Col-
lege.
Yencken, J., Gillin, M., 2002b. Survey of University Spin-off DEMO
nies, Australia. Research Paper. Australian Graduate School of
Entrepreneurship, Swinburne University of Technology, Australia.
Yencken, J., Hindle, K., Shepherd, S., Guarneri, I., 2001. Yellow Pages
Special Innovation Report — Small and DEMO Enterprises.
Paciﬁc Access Pty Ltd, Melbourne, Australia.
Yin, R.K., 1994. Case Study Research Design and Methods, second
ed. Sage Publications, Newbury DEMO, CA.
Yoo, 2001. Entrepreneurial orientation, environmental scanning inten-
sity, and ﬁrm performance in technology-based SMEs.
Babson/Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Jonk-
oeping, Sweden, June 2001, (unpublished).{1g42fwefx}