Entrepreneurship Research and Practice
A Call to Action for Psychology
Robert Hisrich
DEMO Langan-Fox and Sharon Grant
Entrepreneurship is a major source of employment, DEMO
nomic growth, and innovation, promoting product and
service quality, competition, and economic ﬂexibility. It is
also a mechanism by which many people DEMO the society’s
economic and social mainstream, aiding culture formation,
population DEMO, and social mobility. This article
aims to illuminate research opportunities for DEMO
by exposing gaps in the entrepreneurship literature and
describing how these gaps can be ﬁlled. A “call to action”
is issued to psychologists to DEMO theory and undertake
empirical research focusing on ﬁve key topic areas: DEMO
personality characteristics of entrepreneurs, the psycho-
pathology of entrepreneurs, entrepreneurial cognition,
entrepreneurship education, and international entrepre-
neurship. Methodological issues are discussed and recom-
mendations provided. It is shown that psychologists can
help identify the DEMO that inﬂuence new venture creation
and success and inform the construction of public policy to
facilitate entrepreneurship.
Keywords: entrepreneurship, intrapreneurship, psychopa-
thology, DEMO, international differences
E
ntrepreneurship, starting and managing a business
for the purpose of growth and proﬁt (Carland, Hoy,
Boulton, & Carland, 1984), can be traced back to
ancient Greece, where entrepreneurial DEMO brought in-
dependence and economic and social reform. Entrepreneur-
ship is credited with the development of the assembly line,
the airplane, the computer, the contact lens, and DNA
ﬁngerprinting (Baumol, 2004). It DEMO a major source of
employment, economic growth, and innovation and is an
integral part of the economic renewal process (Kuratko,
2003). Entrepreneurship is also a mechanism by which
many people enter the economic DEMO social mainstream of
society, facilitating culture formation, population integra-
tion, DEMO social mobility (Bednarzik, 2000).
The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM; Reyn-
olds, Bygrave, & Autio, 2004) described entrepreneurship
as a DEMO phenomenon” that is on the increase. The
1990s saw major start-up activity in transition economies,
where private sector activity is relatively new (Peng, 2001).
There was a rise in entrepreneurial activity in the United
States in the late 1990s, peaking at the new millennium
(Neck, Zacharakis, Bygrave, & Reynolds, 2003). In 2002,
11% of the American adult workforce was involved in the
initial start-up phase or DEMO development of a young busi-
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
Copyright 2007 by the American Psychological Association 0003-066X/07/$12.00
Vol. 62, No. 6, 575–589 DOI: 10.1037/0003-066X.62.6.575
Thunderbird School of Global Management
Swinburne University DEMO Technology
ness (Neck et al., 2003). Around the world, DEMO in every 100
people of working age are involved in entrepreneurship,
with approximately 300 million in the venture creation
phase (Reynolds et al., 2004). The generation of the 21st
century has been branded Generation E, the most entrepre-
neurial since the Industrial Revolution (Kuratko, 2003).
Eighty percent of would-be entrepreneurs in the United
States are between DEMO ages of 18 and 34, with approxi-
mately 6 million people DEMO this age bracket actively trying
to start their own businesses (see DEMO, 2003). Entre-
preneurship is also an important source of employment DEMO
women, and there has been signiﬁcant worldwide growth in
women’s self-employment (Hisrich & O¨ ztu¨rk, 1999; Lan-
gan-Fox, 2005). In 2004, three times more women than
men started ﬁrms in the United States. This could reﬂect
the service-oriented economy and the fact that the service
DEMO represents a strong area for women (Coughlin &
Thomas, 2002)DEMO A dominant trend in the 21st century is
likely to be ethnic entrepreneurship, with entrepreneurial
activity in the developing world increasing because of free
trade, the availability of venture capital, and the develop-
ment of DEMO (Morris, Schindehutte, & Lesser,
2002).
An Expanded Role DEMO Psychology in
Entrepreneurship
With the rapid expansion of entrepreneurship, academic
interest DEMO the topic has also grown, as evidenced by over
50 conferences DEMO 1,000 publications each year (Filion,
1997). The entrepreneurship DEMO is vast, complex, and
multifaceted, spanning economics, sociology, business,DEMO
and psychology. A hallmark of the literature is an over-
abundance of theoretical work and a relative absence of
empirical work (Gregoire, Noel, Dery, & Bechard, 2004).
Furthermore, a recent review (Chandler & Lyon, 2001) of
the methodologies used in entrepreneurship research sig-
naled a need to reduce common method variance, improve
construct validity and scale reliability, specify the level of
Robert Hisrich, Center for Global Entrepreneurship, Thunderbird School
of Global Management; Janice Langan-Fox and Sharon Grant, Australian
DEMO School of Entrepreneurship, Faculty of Business and Enterprise,
Swinburne University DEMO Technology, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Correspondence concerning this article should be DEMO to Rob-
ert Hisrich, Center for Global Entrepreneurship, Thunderbird School of
Global Management, 15249 North 59th Avenue, Glendale, AZ 85306-
6000. E-mail: hisrichr@t-bird.edu
575
construction of public policy to facilitate entrepreneurship.
Methodological issues are also presented DEMO recommen-
dations provided. In what follows, we deﬁne entrepreneur-
ship as DEMO as different types of entrepreneurs and the
entrepreneurship process. We then discuss the role of psy-
chologists in extending scientiﬁc inquiry into entrepreneur-
ship, illustrating how entrepreneurship is fertile ground for
psychological research and practice.
Defining DEMO
Robert
Hisrich
analysis, and conduct longitudinal research to capture the
entrepreneurship DEMO over time. Psychology’s theoret-
ical sophistication and methodological rigor should make
an important contribution to the development of a more
comprehensive view of entrepreneurship. DEMO psycho-
logical variables are crucial to entrepreneurship. Entrepre-
neurial intent and success have been linked to social com-
petence (Baron, 2000), motivation (Collins, Hanges, &
Locke, 2004; Kontos, 2003; McClelland & Winter, 1969;
Miron & McClelland, 1979; Segal, Borgia, & Schoenfeld,
2005), self-efﬁcacy (C. C. Chen, Greene, & Crick, 1998;
Zhao, Seibert, & Hills, 2005), and willingness DEMO bear
uncertainty (McMullen & Shepherd, 2006). Other research
has investigated the common attributes of entrepreneurs
(Baum & Locke, 2004; Hisrich, DEMO) and the effect of
variables such as gender (Lewis, 2006) and minority status
(Ede, Panigrahi, & Calcich, 1998) on the propensity to
consider entrepreneurship as a viable career option.
However, Baum, DEMO, Baron, and Katz (2007, p. 1)
noted that “despite the belief that the entrepreneur’s
personal characteristics are important for new venture
DEMO, the psychology of the entrepreneur has not been
thoroughly studied.”
In DEMO article we aim to illuminate research opportu-
nities for psychologists by exposing gaps in the entrepre-
neurship literature and describing how these gaps can DEMO
ﬁlled. We present a call to action for psychologists to
develop theory and undertake empirical research focusing
on ﬁve key topic areas that are DEMO to psychology: the
personality characteristics of entrepreneurs, the psychopa-
thology of entrepreneurs, entrepreneurial cognition, entre-
preneurship education, and international entrepreneurship.
These topic areas can be used to identify the factors that
affect new venture DEMO and success and to inform the
In the early 20th century, DEMO were not frequently
distinguished from managers and were viewed mostly from
an economic perspective (see, e.g., Ely & Hess, 1937).
With DEMO integration of business, managerial, and personal
terminology, the concept has DEMO to include newness,
creating, organizing, risk taking, and wealth (Ronstadt,
1984). Entrepreneurs are found in all professions: architec-
ture, business, education, engineering, law, medicine, and
psychology. To include DEMO types of entrepreneurial behav-
ior, we use the following deﬁnition as DEMO foundation of this
article: “Entrepreneurship is the process of creating some-
DEMO new with value by devoting the necessary time and
effort, assuming DEMO accompanying ﬁnancial, psychic, and
social risks, and receiving the resulting DEMO (Hisrich,
Peters, & Shepherd, 2005, p. 8).
Types of Entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurship can be conceptualized along a continuum
ranging from entrepreneur DEMO one end to administrator at the
other (Hisrich et al., 2005). It can also be viewed in
absolute terms, “new ﬁrm versus no new ﬁrm,” or in
relative terms, “more entrepreneurial versus less entrepre-
neurial.” An important distinction is that between invention
(opportunity discovery) DEMO innovation (opportunity ex-
Janice
Langan-Fox
576 September 2007● American Psychologist
Sharon Grant
ploitation). Innovation, creating a new organization, prod-
uct, or process, may be further distinguished from imita-
tion, entering an DEMO market (Ruef, Aldrich, &
Carter, 2003), reﬂecting Schumpeter’s (1952) notion of the
entrepreneur as an innovator.
Typologies of entrepreneurs. Several ty-
pologies have grouped entrepreneurs on the basis of their
psychological characteristics, with most typologies focus-
ing on the personality characteristics of entrepreneurs (e.g.,
Miner, 1997, 2000; Muller & Gappisch, 2005). Some DEMO
pologies have examined the psychological characteristics
of subpopulations of entrepreneurs and have formed ty-
pologies of potential entrepreneurs (Erikson, 2001), na-
scent DEMO (Korunka, Frank, Lueger, & Mugler,
2003), female entrepreneurs (Langan-Fox & Roth, 1995),
retiree entrepreneurs (Singh & DeNoble, 2003), and father-
less entrepreneurs (Strenger & Burak, 2005). DEMO of
entrepreneurs are presented in Table 1.
There are so many permutations of entrepreneurs that
some sort of grouping is necessary if only for DEMO beneﬁt of
parsimony. Typologies of entrepreneurs are beneﬁcial for
theory development because theories require the summari-
zation of variable content in order to arrive DEMO a set of
variables that make a meaningful whole. Clustering recog-
nizable types will enable researchers to identify types and
replicate research ﬁndings, as well as aid analysis (e.g.,
discriminant analyses of variables associated with different
types). Types also have practical value inasmuch as one
can DEMO which types might prove to be more or less
successful entrepreneurs, DEMO this has implications for se-
lection and training.
Team entrepreneurs. A new business is more
likely to grow and survive if more than one DEMO is
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
involved in the start-up phase (DEMO Shane, 2003). Although
research has traditionally focused on solo entrepreneurs,DEMO
team entrepreneurs have become widespread and play a
signiﬁcant role in new product innovation, particularly in
high-tech industries, where a diversity of expertise DEMO often
required (Chowdhury, 2005). The term team entrepreneurs
refers to a group of owners and managers of the same ﬁrm
(Ensley, DEMO, & Carland, 2000). Family ﬁrms are a
common form of team entrepreneurs (Ucbasaran, Lockett,
Wright, & Westhead, 2003). DEMO entrepreneurs may be
able to avoid some of the functional and social-psycholog-
ical pitfalls associated with solo entrepreneurship. For in-
stance, multimember teams have immediate access to emo-
tional and instrumental social support, a larger and a more
diverse set of skills, and a stronger capacity for innovation.
On the downside, coordinating and integrating team mem-
bers may prove costly (Ucbasaran et al., 2003). Past re-
search has examined topics DEMO as friendship within en-
trepreneurial teams (Francis & Sandberg, 2000), lead
entrepreneurs (Ensley et al., 2000), team member entry and
DEMO (Ucbasaran et al., 2003), and team skill heterogeneity
and functional diversity (Ensley, Carland, & Carland,
1998) in the context DEMO team process variables and team
effectiveness. Ensley et al. (2000, p. 60) noted that “little
investigative effort has been expended on the general be-
havioral and cognitive dynamics of an entrepreneurial
team,” suggesting an DEMO for future research in this
Corporate entrepreneurs (“intrapreneurs”).
The entrepreneur DEMO can be broadened to include
those who exhibit innovative and enterprising behavior
within an existing organization, that is, corporate entrepre-
neurs or intrapreneurs; the distinction between entrepre-
neurship and intrapreneurship is that the former is DEMO
self-gain and the latter for organizational gain (Hisrich,
1990). DEMO may encompass business ventur-
ing; competitive aggressiveness; proactiveness; process,
DEMO, or service innovation; risk taking; and self-re-
newal (Christensen, DEMO). There are relatively few “ofﬁ-
cial” intrapreneurs because of the belief that ﬁrms must
wait for them to emerge or self select (Davis, 1999).
Intrapreneurship is crucial for the survival of the mature
organization (Jelinek, 1997). It can be used to harness
creative energy DEMO enhance morale, and may have a snow-
ball effect throughout the DEMO (Carrier, 1996;
Pryor & Shays, 1993). Any organization DEMO involved in
intrapreneurial activity has probably made an unintentional
decision not to stay in business for long (Merriﬁeld, 1993).
Past research on DEMO has largely centered on
determining the characteristics of intrapreneurs who lead
their ﬁrms to new venture success (Antoncic & Hisrich,
2003; Christensen, 2004; Davis, 1999; Russell, 1999).
Other research has addressed DEMO role intrapreneurs play in
recognizing and developing new ventures both domesti-
cally and abroad (Altinay, 2004). In addition, Abraham
(1997) studied the relationship between intrapreneurship,
individualism, and collectivism.
577
area.
Table 1
Typologies of Entrepreneurs
Author(s) Name of entrepreneur type Description of type
Cooper, Ramachandran,
& Schoorman (1997)
Erikson (2001)
Typology of potential
entrepreneurs
Korunka, Frank, Lueger,
& Mugler (2003)
Typology of nascent
entrepreneurs
Lafuente & Salas (1989)
Typology of
entrepreneurs based
on work expectations
Langan-Fox & Roth
(1995)
Typology of female
entrepreneurs
Craftsman Emphasizes noneconomic goals (e.g., doing the work DEMO or she
wants to do and avoiding working for other people); is less likely
to have had previous, high-level management experience; devotes
DEMO time to administrative activity and more time to “doing” activity
(e.g., sales, production).
Administrative (more Emphasizes economic goals (e.g., is DEMO likely to see the business as
successful) a vehicle for a DEMO lifestyle); is more likely to have had
previous, high-level management DEMO; delegates “doing”
activity and allocates time to administrative activity.
Ready Proactive; sees entrepreneurship as desirable and feasible; self-
governed; continuously recognizes new DEMO; allocates
resource base to meet situational demand.
Ready reluctant Not proactive, sees entrepreneurship as desirable and feasible; might
not act on opportunities unless encouraged.
Ready unfeasible Proactive; sees entrepreneurship as desirable but unfeasible.
Ready unconvinced Proactive; sees entrepreneurship as undesirable but feasible.
Daydreamer Not proactive, sees DEMO as desirable but unfeasible.
Undesirable Not proactive; sees entrepreneurship as undesirable DEMO feasible.
Uncredible Sees entrepreneurship as neither desirable or credible.
Bureaucrat Will probably never become an entrepreneur.
Low need for achievement; low internal locus of control; low personal
initiative; strong push factor; little social support; DEMO of
organizational effort; low use of information.
Strong self-realization motive; strong perception of positive role
models; enhanced internal locus of control; enhanced DEMO
motive; unfavorable financial situation.
Low risk-taking propensity; perceived supportive environment; DEMO
use of information; low organizational effort; careful appraisal of
risk.
Craftsmanship Primarily guided by expectations of work itself; secondary
expectations focus on performance and organizational context;
uncertainty and challenge are not potential sources of DEMO
Security Expectations are centered on impact of work on family welfare;
expectations related to challenge and uncertainty also play a role.
Risk/challenge DEMO risk and challenge; expectations for improving family welfare
are unimportant.
Managerial DEMO expectations; secondary expectations related to
improving family welfare.
Need achiever Highest DEMO need for Achievement (nAch); lowest on activism
(planning for a career), job satisfaction, self-attributed need for
Achievement (sanAch), ability DEMO influence/have power, need for
influence, and self-attributed need for Power (sanPow)
Pragmatic Moderate nAch, sanAch, ability to influence/have power, activism,
job satisfaction, and trust; lowest on independence from family,
internal locus of control, and resistance to subordination; motivated
by DEMO to pass on business to children and earning more
money in self-employment.
Managerial Lowest on nAch; high ability to influence/have power; sanPow DEMO
Influence, and resistance to subordination; highest on activism,
internal locus of control, job satisfaction, sanAch; low trust.
Nascent entrepreneurs
against-their-will
Would-be nascent
entrepreneurs
Networking nascent
entrepreneurs with
risk-avoidance
patterns
578 September 2007● American DEMO
Table 1 (continued)
Author(s) Name of entrepreneur type Description DEMO type
Miner (1997, 2000) Personal achiever Need to achieve; desire to plan and set goals; desire for feedback;
strong personal initiative; strong personal commitment to firm; belief
that one person can make DEMO difference; internal locus of control;
belief that work should be DEMO by personal goals, not by others.
Empathic super Capacity to understand DEMO empathize; desire to help others; belief
salesperson that social processes are important; belief that a sales force is
crucial to company strategy; DEMO to have strong positive
relationships with others.
Real manager Desire for corporate leader role; decisiveness; positive attitude to
others; desire to compete; DEMO to stand out from crowd; desire
for power.
Expert idea generator DEMO to innovate; love of ideas; belief that new product
development is crucial to company strategy; intelligence; desire to
avoid risk taking.
Miner, Smith, & Bracker
(1992)
Muller & Gappisch
(2005)
Singh & DeNoble (2003)
Typology of retiree
entrepreneurs
Smith (1967); DEMO &
Miner (1983)
Strenger & Burak (2005)
Typology DEMO fatherless
(male) entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurs who
become their own
fathers (successful)DEMO
Self-destroyers
(unsuccessful)
Grandiose dreamers
(unsuccessful)
Craftsman (See Smith, 1967, below)
Opportunistic (See Smith, 1967, below)
Inventor DEMO orientation; high priority placed on new product
development strategies and patent DEMO; uses his or her firm
as a vehicle for invention and DEMO the product invented
rather than for growth.
Creative acquisitor Idea generator or intuitive type; tolerance of ambiguity, intuitive
problem-solving orientation and salesperson type; interpersonal
reactivity.
Controlled Stress resistance, emotional stability; level of arousal; analytical
perseverator problem-solving orientation.
Distant achiever Need for achievement and autonomy.
Rational manager DEMO, analytical problem-solving orientation, risk-taking
propensity.
Egocentric agitator Maladapted type, level DEMO arousal; low interpersonal reactivity,
internal locus of control.
Constrained High DEMO attitude, self-efficacy, and entrepreneurial and
innovative orientation.
Rational Medium on entrepreneurial attitude, self-efficacy, and innovation.
Reluctant Low on entrepreneurial attitude, self-efficacy, DEMO innovation.
Craftsman Narrowness in education and training (technical only); low DEMO
awareness and involvement; a feeling of incompetence in dealing
with the DEMO environment; limited time orientation.
Opportunistic Breadth in education and training; high social awareness and
involvement; confidence in dealing with the social environment;
awareness of and orientation to the future.
Emotionally come to terms with DEMO fathers’ failure; use
entrepreneurship as a way to repair the emotional DEMO of
having been let down.
Deep-seated rage and unconscious guilt; overtly DEMO and rebellious
but do not feel they truly deserve success; destroy DEMO own
achievement.
Desperate need for their fathers’ affection and love; feel DEMO inner
void; fantasize about becoming successful; driven by an image of
being praised and recognized; strive for ever-grander achievement;
lose ability to differentiate between actual personal capacity and
fantasized grandeur; ignore warning signs leading to downfall.
Note.
All typologies are empirically based with the exception of DEMO and Denoble’s (2003), which is theoretically grounded.
September 2007 ● DEMO Psychologist
579
The Entrepreneurship Process
It is generally agreed that entrepreneurship is a multiphase
DEMO consisting of entrepreneurial intent and opportunity
search, discovery/recognition, evaluation, DEMO exploitation
(Eckhardt & Shane, 2003; Shook, Priem, & McGee, 2003).
In modeling the entrepreneurship process, it is useful to
distinguish between supply side factors, emphasized by
psychologists, and demand side factors, emphasized by
economists (Eckhardt & Shane, 2003; Shaver, 1995). DEMO
fuente and Salas (1989) noted that although demand side
factors such as the demand for goods and services and the
relative cost of DEMO provide the stimuli for entrepreneur-
ial activity by inﬂuencing the number of potential oppor-
tunities, they do not guarantee that such opportunities will
be recognized and exploited. They argued that supply side
factors such as psychological DEMO (e.g., attitudes,
preferences) are important for the study of DEMO
because they inﬂuence the number of potential entrepre-
neurs. As such, DEMO characteristics have to be
identiﬁed in policy oriented toward promoting entrepre-
neurial activity, which renders a purely economic view of
entrepreneurship insufﬁcient (Lafuente & Salas, 1989). Of
course, demand side factors (e.g., economy, technology)
also have an impact on new venture success, and DEMO
should be noted by psychologists. The results of the entre-
preneurship process are typically measured in terms of
ﬁnancial performance, yet both economic and noneco-
nomic outcome variables are important given that venture
creation is often DEMO rewarding outcome in itself (Hisrich et
al., 2005).
Entrepreneurship Research and
Practice: A Call to Action for
Psychology
In the following sections, we review and critique the liter-
ature on psychology and entrepreneurship. The discussion
is organized around ﬁve key topic areas that provide abun-
dant DEMO for psychological research. We propose
a number of research questions that provide a call to action
for psychologists interested in entrepreneurship. The re-
search DEMO aligned with each topic area are shown in
Table 2.
The Personality Characteristics
of Entrepreneurs
Research on personality and entrepreneurship has focused
on two DEMO research questions: Why do some people but
not others become entrepreneurs? Why do some people
make more successful entrepreneurs than others? (Shaver,DEMO
2007). The personality approach provided the impetus for
substantial research in the 1960s and 1970s, with research
on need for achievement (nAch; McClelland, 1961), the
most frequently studied personality characteristic, peaking
in DEMO 1980s (Rauch & Frese, 2007).
Rauch and Frese (2007) described the personality
approach as a classic but controversial approach to the
DEMO of entrepreneurship. Currently there is dis-
agreement in the literature as to whether personality is a
useful construct in entrepreneurship research. For instance,
DEMO research has shown that personality characteristics
fail to reliably distinguish between entrepreneurs and non-
entrepreneurs (e.g., managers) and generally account for
only a small proportion of the variance in entrepreneurial
success (Cromie, 2000; Hisrich, 2000). Meta-analytic re-
search has revealed a small, positive relationship DEMO
autonomy, internal locus of control, and risk-taking pro-
pensity and new venture creation and success, and a mod-
erate, positive relationship between DEMO, nAch,
and self-efﬁcacy and new venture creation and success.
Risk-taking DEMO has a weaker association with both
outcome variables, and self-efﬁcacy has DEMO stronger associ-
ation with success (see Rauch & Frese, 2007, DEMO a review).
However, it is possible that the role of DEMO in
entrepreneurship has been underestimated in past research
because of design and methodological limitations.
Improving Design and Measurement in
Personality-Based Research
Entrepreneurship as a DEMO: The need
for longitudinal research. Entrepreneurship is a
complex, dynamic, DEMO process, yet the important
personality characteristics at each phase have not DEMO
identiﬁed. Past research has tended to focus on the start-up
phase, DEMO characteristics of entrepreneurs and nonentre-
preneurs compared on the basis of the assumption that
innate or stable characteristics cause the dependent variable
of entrepreneurship DEMO (Davidsson, 2007). This ap-
proach is problematic for a number of reasons. First, such
an approach does not test for reversed causation. That is, it
is difﬁcult to evaluate whether the personality characteris-
tics of entrepreneurs are a predisposing factor or are
learned from the role DEMO Empirical work has generally
assumed the former perspective: that those displaying DEMO
characteristics in question self-select into entrepreneurship
(see Shane, 2003). Second, the personality characteristics
that predict start-up behavior may not predict behavior later
on in the entrepreneurship process (Eckhardt & Shane,
2003). For example, the trait of openness may be suited to
creating a new venture (creative mindset) rather than sus-
taining one (managerial mindset) (Ciavarella, Buchholtz,
Riordan, Gatewood, & Stokes, 2004). Finally, distal person
characteristics are unlikely to be a strong predictor of a
DEMO event (i.e., start-up; Davidsson, 2007). Longitu-
dinal research is needed to identify antecedent personality
characteristics as well as the characteristics involved DEMO
persistence and long-term success. Davidsson (2007) rec-
ommended using a behavioral aggregate of entrepreneurial
activity such as entrepreneurial career performance as an
alternative DEMO the dichotomous outcome variable of entre-
preneurship status (i.e., founder vs. nonfounder).
Matching of predictor and criterion vari-
ables. Studies of how DEMO entrepreneurs differ
from less successful entrepreneurs have also been problem-
atic. Such studies have utilized a cross-level design in
which individual-level personality characteristics are DEMO
to explain ﬁrm-level performance (Davidsson, 2007). Yet
personality characteristics should relate more strongly to
580 September 2007● American Psychologist
Table 2
Topic Areas and Research Questions
Topic area
The personality
characteristics DEMO
entrepreneurs
Psychopathology:
exploring the
dark side of
entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurial
cognition
Entrepreneurship
education
Expanding
entrepreneurship
as a global
phenomenon
●
●
●
●
●
DEMO
●
●
Research questions
● Are the personality characteristics of entrepreneurs a predisposing factor, or are they learned from
the role itself? That DEMO, what are the antecedent personality characteristics for entrepreneurship?
● What DEMO the relative importance of different personality characteristics at each phase of the
entrepreneurship process? Do the personality characteristics that predict start-up differ from those
that predict growth and survival?
● Which personality characteristics need to DEMO stable, and which personality characteristics need
to change or develop over DEMO?
● Are personality characteristics a longitudinal predictor of success?
● Which personality characteristics are associated with failure?
● What are the DEMO and mediating variables in the personality–entrepreneurship relationship?
● Do the important personality characteristics differ for individual versus corporate or team-based
entrepreneurs?
Is DEMO a link between psychopathology and entrepreneurship?
Is the prevalence of psychopathology higher among entrepreneurs?
How are entrepreneurs perceived by their employees? Are they dysfunctional managers?
Do entrepreneurs share a particular familial and/or DEMO history?
Are psychological variables associated with ethical/unethical entrepreneurship? Is DEMO a link to
psychopathology?
Can ethical entrepreneurship be regulated, for DEMO, through screening or selection?
Do entrepreneurs have higher resilience and DEMO output capacity than nonentrepreneurs?
Do entrepreneurs benefit from counseling or psychotherapy on a professional level (e.g., survival
and growth of the firm)? What types of intervention are most effective?
What is the nature of the cognitive process underlying opportunity recognition and exploitation?
What is DEMO relationship between cognitive shortcuts and entrepreneurial success?
What is the relationship between general ability and entrepreneurial success? What other types of
intelligence are important (e.g., successful intelligence)?
Are different aspects of intelligence required for different phases of the entrepreneurship process?
How do entrepreneurs organize DEMO about the entrepreneurship process? What do their
mental models of the DEMO process look like?
What are the critical competencies (e.g., knowledge, skills, and abilities [KSAs]) underlying
entrepreneurship? How do these change DEMO the course of the entrepreneurship process?
Which KSAs are predisposing factors and which KSAs need to be learned?
How do the educational DEMO of different types of entrepreneurs (e.g., individual, corporate, team-
based) differ?
Can opportunity recognition be taught or learned?
What tasks are involved in starting a business and leading it to success? Which KSAs are aligned
with these tasks?
Which tasks are common and DEMO to particular phases or types of entrepreneurship?
How should national culture be operationalized in the context of entrepreneurship research? What
are the cultural dimensions relevant to entrepreneurship?
Does the relationship between national culture and DEMO differ depending on the
outcome measured (e.g., venture creation vs. self-employment or corporate entrepreneurship)?
How do national culture and contextual factors combine or interact to predict entrepreneurship?
How do national culture and organizational DEMO combine or interact to predict corporate
entrepreneurship?
How does religion influence entrepreneurial activity and success? Does the relationship between
religiosity and entrepreneurship vary depending on the religious grouping?
Given a particular religious grouping, are entrepreneurs more or less religious than
nonentrepreneurs?
●
●
●
●
DEMO
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
581
individual-level performance (e.g., personal ﬁnancial suc-
cess) than to ﬁrm-level performance (e.g., growth, proﬁt-
ability), particularly in larger ﬁrms (Rauch & Frese, 2007).
Predictor and criterion variables should be measured at DEMO
same level of analysis.
Construct operationalization. Entrepreneur-
ship has been operationalized inconsistently, and this fact
has hampered interstudy comparison (Hisrich et al., 2005).
For instance, Stewart and Roth (2001) argued that different
operational deﬁnitions of entrepreneurship may have ob-
scured risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs
DEMO managers. In their meta-analytic review, Stewart and
Roth found that entrepreneurs DEMO a higher risk propensity
than managers and that this difference was greater for
growth-oriented entrepreneurs than for income-oriented en-
trepreneurs.
Valid and reliable measures. DEMO de-
signed speciﬁcally to assess entrepreneurial personality
characteristics have been of questionable validity and reli-
ability (Cromie, 2000; Rauch & Frese, 2000)DEMO Rather than
trying to develop a suite of personality measures exclu-
sively for entrepreneurs, which would be of limited value,
future research should use established measures from main-
stream personality psychology. Coming from a long DEMO
sound tradition, projective measures of motives (e.g.,
nAch) have DEMO utility in the entrepreneurship literature
(McClelland, 1961, 1987) and should be used alongside
psychometrically established measures of traits such as the
theoretically DEMO and empirically validated NEO-Per-
sonality Inventory (a measure of 30 subtraits DEMO
according to the Big Five). The inclusion of such measures
should ensure that key motives and traits are not over-
looked.
Moderating and DEMO variables.
Rauch and Frese (2007) noted that broad taxonomies of
personality traits such as the Big Five have been less
frequently studied in DEMO entrepreneurship literature and
that general traits have lower predictive validity than spe-
ciﬁc traits in this context owing to the speciﬁcity of per-
formance DEMO (e.g., sales growth). They suggested
that (a) predictor and criterion variables should be matched
on the basis of broadness versus speciﬁcity DEMO (b) the
effect of broad traits on new venture creation and success
may be mediated by speciﬁc traits. Nonperson mediator
and moderator variables DEMO also be included in future
research (Davidsson, 2007). For instance, previous ﬁndings
for internal locus of control and risk propensity are heter-
ogeneous, suggesting the presence of moderator variables
(Rauch & Frese, 2007).
Psychopathology: Exploring the “Dark Side”
of Entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurs “break the mold” by rejecting society’s pre-
vailing norm of seeking employment with another organi-
DEMO or person (Teal & Carroll, 1999). Many entrepre-
neurs are misﬁts, difﬁcult employees who start their own
ﬁrms because they are unwilling to submit to authority and
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to work in a DEMO environment
(Kets de Vries, 1985). Kets de Vries (1985, p. 161) noted
that “entrepreneurs seem to be driven by a magniﬁcent
obsession,” and Winslow and Solomon (1988) described
entrepreneurs as mildly DEMO Yet the dysfunctional
psychological characteristics of entrepreneurs have re-
ceived little attention. Past work has been based on clinical
case studies or small patient DEMO rather than large-scale
survey research with established measures (e.g., Kets de
Vries, 1985, 1996; Strenger & Burak, 2005), thus limiting
DEMO objectivity and generalizability. Nonetheless, case study
research may be valuable as DEMO lead-up to survey research.
The in-depth, case-by-case analysis of real-world behavior
DEMO be superior for hypothesis development, and the lon-
gitudinal nature of DEMO study research could provide in-
sight into the interplay between individual, DEMO, and envi-
ronmental characteristics in the entrepreneurship process
(Davidsson, 2007)DEMO
McClelland (1961) attributed the dark side of entre-
preneurs to high nAch coupled with inner-directedness.
Other work has suggested that entrepreneurs are character-
DEMO by a need for control, a sense of distrust, a desire for
applause, and defense mechanisms such as splitting (Kets
de Vries, 1996), that is, seeing the world as all good or all
bad (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). This may
have a catastrophic DEMO not only on entrepreneurs them-
selves but on communication, decision making, morale,
and productivity within their ﬁrms (Kets de Vries, 1985,DEMO
1996). In addition, psychopathology may be linked to care-
less, extravagant, or unethical entrepreneurial behavior. As
McClelland (1961, p. 331) DEMO more than 40 years ago,
“We do not know at the present time what makes an
entrepreneur more or less ethical in his (her) dealings but
obviously there are few problems of greater importance for
future research.” Understanding the psychopathology of
entrepreneurs has practical implications for entrepreneurs
DEMO are heading for trouble and for investors who need to
assess whether entrepreneurs are likely to succeed
(Strenger & Burak, 2005).
Historically, entrepreneurship has been synonymous
with economic well being, far removed from psychological
well being. A possible starting point for clinical research is
the family DEMO of entrepreneurs. Kets de Vries
(1996) identiﬁed the classic familial proﬁle as consisting of
an emotionally or physically absent father and a control-
DEMO, overbearing mother, with death, illness, and separa-
tion as prominent themes. He argued that any self-destruc-
tive behavior of entrepreneurs is likely DEMO stem from
insecurity, low self-esteem, and a fragile sense of self.
Through starting their own ﬁrms, entrepreneurs establish a
secure foundation, take DEMO, and obtain afﬁrmation and
recognition (Kets de Vries, 1985, 1996). Strenger and
Burak (2005) observed that many male entrepreneurs are
DEMO by fatherlessness, the experience of growing
up with an absent, abusive, insufﬁcient, or weak father.
They reasoned that fatherlessness may provide the DEMO
entrepreneur with the incentive to create his own environ-
ment in much the same way that lack of paternal authority
does in Freud’s Leonardo DEMO However, although
entrepreneurs cope with fatherlessness by transforming it
into an DEMO, only those who psychologically come to
582 September 2007● American Psychologist
terms with their father’s failure (entrepreneurs who become
their own fathers) DEMO succeed. In contrast, those who
cannot let go of their rage (self-destroyers) or inner void
(grandiose dreamers) will fail (see Table DEMO for details).
Entrepreneurs who “become their own fathers” typically
grow up with a neglectful father, whereas self-destroyers
typically grow up with an abusive one (Strenger & Burak,
2005).
The start-up experience is ﬁlled with anxiety, enthu-
siasm, frustration, and hard work. The failure rate is high
because of competition, poor sales, restricted capital, and
lack of managerial ability (Hisrich et al., 2005). Financial
and emotional DEMO can also be high. It takes a complex
personality to survive the troubled waters of new venture
creation. Entrepreneurs’ personality quirks and mix of DEMO
ative and irrational impulses may be responsible for their
drive, energy, and success, making them interesting sub-
jects for research (Kets de DEMO, 1985).
Entrepreneurial Cognition
Cognition is the nouveau area in the DEMO lit-
erature (Baron, 2004). Entrepreneurial cognition can be
deﬁned as “knowledge structures that people use to make
assessments, judgments or decisions involving opportunity
evaluation, venture creation and growth” (R. K. Mitchell et
al., 2002, p. 97). Entrepreneurial cognition is a valuable
topic given that cognitive strategies can be learned or
mastered through training (Palich & Bagby, 1995). Al-
though research is in a formative stage, work DEMO date has
suggested that the cognitive variables that distinguish en-
trepreneurs from nonentrepreneurs are opportunity recog-
nition, risk perception, and cognitive shortcuts.
Entrepreneurs DEMO to make cognitive leaps about
potential opportunities long before they can be rationally
and systematically evaluated (Busenitz et al., 2003). Entre-
preneurs DEMO have a special ability for identifying oppor-
tunities that other people fail to recognize (Shane, 2003).
Recent attention to opportunity recognition (the cognitive
process through which opportunities are identiﬁed) has
been a major theoretical development in the entrepreneur-
ship literature (Baron, 2006). Opportunity recognition DEMO
been attributed to active search (Gilad, Kaish, & Ronen,
DEMO); alertness or “notice without search” (Gaglio & Katz,
2001; Kirzner, 1979); prior knowledge and cognitive
mechanisms (this may overlap DEMO perception; see below;
Shane & Venkataraman, 2000); ability, DEMO, motiva-
tion, and desirability (Hostager, Neil, Decker, & Lorentz,
1998); and, more recently, pattern recognition or “connect-
ing DEMO dots” (Baron, 2006). However, despite a plethora of
theoretical DEMO, exploration of opportunity recognition is
undeveloped in empirical work (Gaglio & Katz, 2001).
Given the methodological challenge of capturing opportu-
nity recognition at its point of execution, experimental and
laboratory research (e.g., computer simulation) could be a
useful research paradigm.
The classic image of the entrepreneur is one of an
adventurous, bold, and visionary risk taker. DEMO
strike a balance between aversive and opportunistic risk.
The failure to pursue a potentially proﬁtable venture may
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
be just DEMO costly in the long term (i.e., “sinking the boat”
risk vs. “missing the boat” risk; Dickson & Giglierano,
1986). As described earlier, the risk-taking behavior of
entrepreneurs has been explained in terms of a stable dis-
position, that is, a higher risk-taking propensity (McClel-
land, 1961; Stewart & Roth, 2001). However, recent work
DEMO entrepreneurial cognition has suggested that entrepre-
neurs and nonentrepreneurs differ not in regard to their risk
propensity per se (i.e., conscious acceptance of DEMO) but
rather in how they perceive risk (Busenitz, 1999; Busenitz
& Barney, 1997). The central thesis of this work is that
entrepreneurs are characterized by lower risk perception,
thus giving the illusion DEMO greater risk tolerance. Research
has shown that entrepreneurs categorize ambiguous busi-
ness scenarios signiﬁcantly more positively than do non-
entrepreneurs (Palich & Bagby, DEMO) and rate the proba-
bility of securing desired career attributes (e.g., leadership)
signiﬁcantly higher than do nonentrepreneurs (Amit, Mac-
Crimmon, DEMO, & Oesch, 2000). Entrepreneurs also
appear to use cognitive shortcuts (e.g., heuristics) in deci-
sion making that lower their risk perception (Busenitz &
Barney, 1997; Keh, Foo, & Lim, 2002; Simon, Houghton,
& Aquino, 1999). However, an experimental DEMO (Forlani
& Mullins, 2000) found that entrepreneurs’ decision mak-
ing (new venture choice) was inﬂuenced by inherent risk,
perceived risk, DEMO risk propensity, which suggests a more
complex decision-making process.
Applying cognitive DEMO may be the only way
forward for entrepreneurs given the emotion, DEMO, in-
formation overload, novelty, uncertainty, and time pressure
associated with new venture creation (Alvarez & Busenitz,
2001; Baron, 1998). Busenitz and Barney (1997, p. 10)
argued that without cognitive DEMO, “many entrepre-
neurial decisions would never be made.” On the other DEMO,
cognitive shortcuts may also give rise to cognitive error
(Busenitz DEMO al., 2003). Baron (1998) proposed that entre-
preneurs may DEMO more susceptible to cognitive error be-
cause of affect infusion, counterfactual DEMO, planning
fallacy, self-serving bias, and self-justiﬁcation. However,
only one DEMO these cognitive mechanisms, counterfactual
thinking, has been empirically investigated. Baron (DEMO)
reported that entrepreneurs were in fact less susceptible to
counterfactual thinking than were potential entrepreneurs
and nonentrepreneurs. An important question is whether
successful DEMO are less prone to cognitive short-
cuts and errors than are less successful entrepreneurs
(Baron, Frese, & Baum, 2007). Notably, no research to date
has explored the use of cognitive shortcuts in a DEMO
setting, for instance, over the course of the entrepreneur-
ship process.
A cognitive variable that has been overlooked in the
entrepreneurship literature is DEMO ability, that is, intel-
ligence (Markman, 2007; Rauch & DEMO, 2007; Sternberg,
2004). This is surprising given the well-established rela-
tionship between general ability and job performance in the
occupational literature (Schmidt & Hunter, 1998). Only a
handful of studies have investigated the general ability of
entrepreneurs. Ray and Singh (1980) found that DEMO general
ability of farmer entrepreneurs predicted growth rate, that
583
is, the difference between their outputs from 1970 to 1974.
A longitudinal study (van Praag & Cramer, 2001) found
that academic intelligence at age 12, measured by knowl-
edge comprehension tests on school subjects, DEMO a posi-
tive predictor of entrepreneurial talent in adulthood. Cre-
ativity, DEMO, and divergent thinking should also be
important, but these aspects of cognitive ability have like-
wise been neglected in entrepreneurship research (J. R.
Mitchell, Friga, & Mitchell, 2005; Shane, 2003). Sternberg
(DEMO) argued that successful entrepreneurship is likely to
require a blend of DEMO, creative, and practical intel-
ligence (“successful intelligence”). Busenitz and DEMO
(2007, p. 134) theorized that entrepreneurs need entrepre-
neurial capabilities, “the ability to identify new opportu-
nities and develop the resource base DEMO to start a ﬁrm,”
and dynamic capabilities, “the ability to DEMO the
ﬁrm’s resource base to meet changing demands.”
It is evident that the array of characteristics needed for
entrepreneurship is extensive. At the same DEMO, it is unre-
alistic to expect all budding entrepreneurs to possess DEMO
characteristics. Entrepreneurship education, discussed be-
low, can be used to “make a person a more competent and
a more professionalized business owner” (Katz, 2007, p.
211).
Entrepreneurship Education
The notion that it is DEMO to boost new venture creation
and success through education is gaining popularity, and
there is increasing support for the idea of entrepreneurship
as a discipline that can be taught and learned (Kuratko,
2003). Katz (2007, p. 209) summarized the evidence that
entrepreneurship education is associated with entrepreneur-
ial activity and success and noted, “Although evidence is
widely dispersed and unintegrated, the effort does seem to
work”: Entrepreneurship MBA DEMO are more likely to
be involved in new venture creation or ownership than are
nonentrepreneurship MBA graduates; small ﬁrms that re-
ceive assistance from a Small Business Development Cen-
ter (e.g., one-on-one counseling, training) DEMO a higher
rate of survival and growth than do other small ﬁrms; and
the ﬁrms of entrepreneurship MBA graduates show a
higher rate of sales and employment growth than do the
ﬁrms of nonentrepreneurship MBA graduates. DEMO,
research incorporating a Gene  Environment approach is
needed before the traditional hypothesis that entrepreneurs
are born, not made (the proposed “entrepreneurship DEMO)
can be ruled out.
There is also evidence to suggest that characteristics
associated with entrepreneurial success, such as achieve-
ment motivation, can DEMO learned. McClelland and Winter
(1969) developed an achievement motivation training pro-
gram for entrepreneurs based on the rationale that increas-
ing the strength DEMO this motive may increase a country’s
economic development. Small businessmen in India were
trained how to think, talk, and act like people who DEMO
high on nAch. Results indicated that there was an increase
in business activity two years after training. Similarly,
achievement motivation training for minority DEMO peo-
ple in the United States was associated with an increase in
monthly sales, personal income, and proﬁt six months after
training (Miron & McClelland, 1979).
Entrepreneurship education may take the form of an
academic program, entrepreneurship training, and individ-
ual or peer coaching (see Katz, 2007). Entrepreneurship
education is currently a hot topic, and DEMO has been a
substantial increase in the number of courses offered in the
past 20 years— over 2,000 courses, 1,500 schools, DEMO 100
funded centers in the United States alone (Kuratko, 2003).
A similar trend has emerged in Europe and China. For
example, the German government recently funded 25
chairs in entrepreneurship, and in China courses are taught
in many higher education institutions (Hisrich, 2005).
Entrepreneurs DEMO to be multiskilled (Markman,
2007). Even experienced, motivated, DEMO visionary entre-
preneurs are not immune to failure (Shane, 2003) DEMO may
beneﬁt from education to hone their skills as their ﬁrms
expand or change direction. Given what we have learned
about entrepreneurs’ cognitive shortcuts (see above), it is
possible that entrepreneurs fall prey to erroneous DEMO
making that could be avoided through appropriate educa-
tion. In addition, DEMO possible dysfunctional per-
sonality characteristics may mean that they lack the social
skills necessary to succeed. Baron and Markman (2000)
highlighted the importance of social competencies, includ-
ing social adaptability, social perception, impression man-
agement, and persuasion and inﬂuence. Busenitz and
Arthurs (2007) stated that many entrepreneurs lack the
managerial and technical skills needed for developing an
DEMO Baum, Locke, and Smith (2001) found that
owner–manager CEOs’ speciﬁc competencies (e.g., tech-
nical skills) but not general competencies (e.g., diagnostic
use of concepts) directly predicted new venture growth.
Baum and Locke (2004) introduced the construct of new
resource skill, that is, DEMO in ﬁnding capital and human
resources and setting up new systems, DEMO found that it was
a signiﬁcant predictor of venture growth.
Behaviorally speciﬁc skills or competencies are invis-
ible assets that can be exploited and DEMO McClelland
(1987) identiﬁed several competencies that distinguished
successful from less successful entrepreneurs: assertive-
ness, commitment to work, efﬁciency orientation, initia-
tive, and systematic planning. It may be difﬁcult to estab-
lish and measure DEMO competencies given that
we do not have a complete understanding of how compe-
tencies change over the life cycle of the business. Markman
(2007) argued that what is needed is a knowledge, skills,
and DEMO (KSAs) analysis of entrepreneurship. Al-
though there has been extensive research on the personality
characteristics of entrepreneurs, there is a relative absence
of research on the KSAs needed to get a venture off the
ground DEMO make it ﬂourish. A constructive way forward
would be to document the tasks that entrepreneurs need to
perform to start up a business and DEMO it to success. By
beginning with job analysis and deciphering the tasks that
are common and unique to particular phases (e.g., start-up)
DEMO types (e.g., team-based) of entrepreneurship, psychol-
ogists will be able to identify important KSAs throughout
the entrepreneurial process. A comprehensive taxonomy of
DEMO September 2007● American Psychologist
entrepreneurial tasks will allow researchers to better test
and apply entrepreneurship theory DEMO enabling interstudy
comparison. Furthermore, knowledge of the KSAs associ-
ated with DEMO entrepreneurial tasks would be valuable
for selection and training. For instance, DEMO KSAs associ-
ated with start-up could be used as a tool for assessing
people’s natural potential for entrepreneurship.
A recent special issue on entrepreneurship DEMO
in the Academy of Management Learning & Education
journal identiﬁed several areas for development, including
teaching opportunity recognition as a core competency
(DeTienne & Chandler, 2004) and educating entrepreneurs
about emotion management in the context of learning from
failure (Shepherd, 2004). Given the importance of DEMO
ing investor capital, ethics education is also a priority
(Bechard & Gregoire, 2005).
Entrepreneurship as a Global Phenomenon
The entrepreneurship literature is characterized by a lack of
reliable, internationally comparable data (Hisrich, Honig-
Haftel, McDougall, & Oviatt, 1996; Thomas & Mueller,
2000)DEMO Yet there are two major reasons why international
research should be given more attention. First, given the
global economy, a critical new challenge DEMO entrepreneurs
is working on an international scale. Entrepreneurs are no
longer restricted to the domestic market, and international
entrepreneurship is emerging as the new breed of business
activity (Dess et al., 2003). Furthermore, even locally ori-
ented entrepreneurs must be aware of international com-
petitors, customers, employees, and suppliers (Hisrich,
Vahcic, & Glas, 1999). Morris et al. (2002) argued that
recognizing cultural similarities and differences DEMO crucial
to building trust when negotiating, purchasing, selling, and
working DEMO an international scale. Second, cultivating na-
tive industry through indigenous entrepreneurship DEMO
provide a solution to unemployment and economic depen-
dence in the developing world (W. Chen, 2000). Under-
standing the relationship between culture DEMO entrepreneur-
ship is vital to the internationalization of entrepreneurship
theory including policy to promote new venture creation on
a global scale (Thomas & Mueller, 2000). The role of
cultural values in entrepreneurship and economic develop-
ment outside the Western context has received less atten-
tion, with past research focusing on environmental factors
such as capital, labor, and so DEMO (Morris et al., 2002).
A major source of information on international differ-
ences in entrepreneurship is the Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor (GEM), an ongoing initiative based on large-scale
household sampling across 40 countries, including the
United States. Entrepreneurial activity is measured using
two indices, the Total Entrepreneurial Activity index (those
active in starting a new business) and DEMO Firm Entrepre-
neurial Activity index (innovation and growth in estab-
lished DEMO) (Reynolds et al., 2004). GEM data are avail-
able DEMO participating institutions for secondary data
analysis. Although secondary data analysis is attractive in
terms of cost and time efﬁciency, a major limitation of this
data set and other archival entrepreneurship data sets (e.g.,
the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics) is that they
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
typically focus on sociological variables (e.g., personal
background). Psychological variables DEMO often lacking or
have to be approximated using distant, single-item proxy
DEMO (Davidsson, 2007).
Culture and entrepreneurship. Cultural vari-
ation may stem from ethnic, language, national, regional,
religious, or social class DEMO (Basu & Altinay, 2002).
Culture may affect the supply of entrepreneurs by inﬂu-
encing preferences for entrepreneurship (Davidsson, 1995)
or DEMO personal characteristics of the population (Davidsson
& Wiklund, 1997). Alternatively, culture may affect entre-
preneurship indirectly via contextual factors. For instance,
a culture’s prevailing attitude toward entrepreneurship
could affect the amount of ﬁnancial DEMO available to
entrepreneurs or inﬁltrate the education system to deter-
mine the amount and quality of entrepreneurship education
and training (Hisrich, 1996). DEMO example, America’s indi-
vidualistic culture is amenable to entrepreneurship (Lee &DEMO
Peterson, 2000). Walt Disney, Sam Walton, Ray Kroc, and
Bill Gates embody the essence of entrepreneurship and the
American entrepreneurial dream (Burn, 2001), and it is
through entrepreneurship that the majority of the Fortune
200 companies were realized (Purrington & Bettcher,
2001). The United States is currently a world leader in
ﬁnancial support for DEMO (Reynolds et al.,
2004). In contrast, Russia has been forestalled by the per-
sisting culture of the communist regime, although a tran-
sition to a more entrepreneurial culture is now evident (Lee
& Peterson, 2000). Russian entrepreneurs typically rely on
personal funding and thus have restricted capital (Puffer &
McCarthy, 2001).
Empirical studies of culture and entrepreneurship have
tended to focus on Hofstede’s (1980) conceptualization DEMO
national culture (i.e., individualism– collectivism, uncer-
tainty avoidance, power distance, and masculinity–femi-
ninity) (Hayton, George, & Zahra, 2002). DEMO review of
empirical studies on national culture and entrepreneurship
(Hayton et DEMO, 2002) indicated that (a) high individualism,
low uncertainty avoidance, and high power distance are
associated with national entrepreneurship; (b) DEMO
ism, power distance, and uncertainty avoidance are related
to entrepreneurial characteristics such as cognitive scripts
and traits; (c) entrepreneurs are higher in power distance,
individualism, and masculinity and lower on uncertainty
avoidance than are nonentrepreneurs; and (d) Hofstede’s
cultural dimensions are meaningfully related to aspects of
corporate entrepreneurship such as entry mode, innovation,
spin-offs, DEMO strategic renewal.
Tung, Walls, and Frese (2007) noted that despite
evidence linking culture with venture creation, success, and
failure, the culture– entrepreneurship relationship is incon-
sistent, small, and temporally unstable, with the nonequiva-
lence of measures (e.g., cross-cultural differences in re-
sponse styles DEMO reference groups) contributing to this
problem. The blurred empirical distinction between DEMO
tural values and individual values is also problematic. For
instance, culture DEMO conceptualized at the national level but
measured at the individual level (DEMO, 2007). Hayton
et al. (2002) identiﬁed the relationship between DEMO and
585
heuristics or scripts as a fruitful area for future research
given that DEMO characteristics (unlike individual values)
are conceptually removed from cultural values. DEMO devel-
opment of a new measure of national culture focusing on
cultural dimensions that are directly relevant to entrepre-
neurship is pertinent. For instance, Hofstede’s (1980)
broadly deﬁned taxonomy (developed in the organizational
context) might not adequately capture cultural dimensions
that relate to entrepreneurship and/or DEMO heterogeneity
within a country or region (Basu & Altinay, 2002; DEMO
et al., 2002). Basu and Altinay (2002) found that DEMO
dimensions such as attitudes toward education, business
experience, family ties, DEMO tradition in business, migra-
tion motives, and religion predicted business entry motives,
pattern of start-up ﬁnance, and family involvement in busi-
Culture, religion, and entrepreneurship.
“Culture is greatly inﬂuenced by religion since religion
DEMO a person’s basic values and beliefs” (Basu &
Altinay, 2002, p. 373). Yet, despite its status as a key
component of culture and ethnic identity, religion has been
underresearched in the international entrepreneurship liter-
ature. Bellu and Flume (2004) found that religion moder-
ated DEMO effect of pursuing material wealth on life satisfac-
tion. Personal religiosity was associated with higher life
satisfaction. Dodd and Seaman (1998) argued that DEMO
may act as a muniﬁcence factor for entrepreneurship as
well as strengthening (or weakening) other environmental
muniﬁcence factors. For instance, religion may inﬂuence
one’s decision to become an entrepreneur by supporting (a)
independent economic activity; (b) entrepreneurs’ subse-
quent business strategies via personal religiosity (DEMO, faith,
morals); or (c) entrepreneurs’ social networks (e.g., access
to professional advice and support; Dodd & Seaman,
1998)DEMO Dodd and Seaman (1998) found that there were no
signiﬁcant differences between entrepreneurs and nonen-
trepreneurs with respect to religious afﬁliation (belonging
to a particular religion), adherence (attending religious
meetings), and impact (DEMO religion made in one’s
life). Furthermore, religious adherence was unrelated DEMO
entrepreneurial status or success. Note, however, that this
study was based on a British sample in which religious
behavior was generally low and DEMO toward Christian-
ity. Thus, it is possible that further research combining
DEMO religious diversity with a between-groups design
may reveal a stronger relationship between religiosity and
entrepreneurship. In addition, the effect of religion on
entrepreneurship may be mediated or moderated by other
variables. Entrepreneurs interact with bankers, investors,
customers, and employees, who form a major resource
network that DEMO vital to the longevity of the business (Baron,
2000; Hisrich, 1990). Entrepreneurs might be able to use
their religious afﬁliations to help develop such networks
(Dodd & Seaman, 1998).
Policy and DEMO Countries need
a strategy for entrepreneurship. The challenge is forging a
culture to encourage entrepreneurial activity. Governments
have the potential to inﬂuence the rate DEMO new venture
creation through policy that is either directly or indirectly
related to entrepreneurship (Hisrich et al., 2005). An inter-
esting case DEMO Northern Ireland, where government funding
was used to kick-start the war-torn DEMO, making en-
trepreneurship an important cornerstone in the country’s
economic revival (Hisrich, 1988). Deng Xiaoping’s dis-
mantling of the communist system in China in the late
1970s is another example of how policy can DEMO a dra-
matic impact on the development of entrepreneurship (see
Tung DEMO al., 2007). The British government has been pro-
active in DEMO a strategy for entrepreneurship that
focuses on encouraging the start-up market; DEMO
regulatory policy; increasing access to capital; improving
services for small ﬁrms; building skills to grow ﬁrms;
promoting entrepreneurship among the disadvantaged; DEMO
derpinning entrepreneurship with resources; and evaluating
results (Gome, 2005). DEMO further entrepreneurship world-
wide, Reynolds et al. (2004) suggested that DEMO
policy should focus on decreasing the cost of registering
ﬁrms, giving DEMO recognition to property ownership,
reducing government control over national economic ac-
tivity, and providing training.
Conclusion: The Way Forward
As a catalyst DEMO innovation and job creation, entrepreneur-
ship has signiﬁcance for prosperity and DEMO at the
individual, family, community, and national levels. There
is DEMO wealth of research on entrepreneurship in business,
economics, management, and sociology, but psychology’s
contribution is yet to be fully exploited, demanding DEMO
“call to action” for psychologists. There are a number of
gaps in the literature that need to be ﬁlled, and in this article
we have identiﬁed research opportunities for psychologists
in ﬁve key topic areas: the personality characteristics of
entrepreneurs, the psychopathology of entrepreneurs, en-
trepreneurial cognition, entrepreneurship education, and
international entrepreneurship. These topic areas can be
divided into two clusters: the characteristics of the entre-
preneurs themselves, namely, individual differences such
as personality, psychopathology, and cognition, and psy-
chological variables that relate to the infrastructure of the
entrepreneur’s environment, speciﬁcally, system DEMO
such as education and national factors, including culture
and policy.
With DEMO to the characteristics of entrepreneurs,
research opportunities reside in clarifying the role of person-
ality in the entrepreneurship process through longitudinal re-
search DEMO appropriate matching of predictor and criterion
variables; improving construct operationalization and DEMO
surement (e.g., validity, reliability); exploring mediating and
moderating variables DEMO the personality– entrepreneurship re-
lationship; and examining the psychopathology of entrepre-
DEMO, including dysfunctional entrepreneurial behavior and
its link to familial and/or DEMO history. The study of entrepre-
neurial cognition, a nouveau area of DEMO re-
search, can provide a fresh outlook on the characteristics of
DEMO Research opportunities abound in investigating
the nature of opportunity recognition; examining DEMO
shortcuts and their impact on success and failure; and estab-
lishing DEMO importance of general and speciﬁc cognitive abil-
586 September 2007● American Psychologist
ness.
ities for the entrepreneurship process. The possibility that an
entrepreneurship gene may DEMO the personality and cog-
nitive characteristics of entrepreneurs must also be given
research attention.
Research on the infrastructure of the entrepreneur’s
immediate and broader DEMO environment is
needed to improve entrepreneurship education and promote
local, ethnic, and international entrepreneurship. Research
opportunities include identifying the KSAs that underpin
entrepreneurship DEMO incorporating these in education and
training; establishing a reliable, internationally comparable
database that includes psychological variables; improving
studies of the culture– entrepreneurship relationship by ad-
dressing the level-of-analysis problem and developing new
measures of national DEMO; and, ﬁnally, exploring the role
of religion in entrepreneurship.
This DEMO should serve as a stimulus for a new era of
research on the psychology of entrepreneurship. Psychol-
ogy’s contribution to entrepreneurship research and prac-
DEMO has the potential to revolutionalize our understanding
of the dynamics of new venture creation and success. Most
entrepreneurs start out with a dream: a magniﬁcent obses-
sion. As we have shown, there are several psychological
variables that may inﬂuence the realization of this dream.
These variables will need DEMO be translated into practical
solutions if the dream is to come true. The dream can be
accomplished; psychology can help.
REFERENCES
Abraham, R. (1997). The relationship of vertical and horizontal individ-
ualism and collectivism DEMO intrapreneurship and organizational commit-
ment. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 18, 179 –186.
Altinay, L. (2004). Implementing international franchising: The role of
intrapreneurship. International Journal of Service Industry Manage-
ment, 15, 426 DEMO 443.
Alvarez, S. A., & Busenitz, L. W. (2001). The entrepreneurship of
resource-based theory. Journal of Management, 27, 755–775.
American DEMO Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical man-
ual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association.
Amit, R., MacCrimmon, K. R., Zietsma, C., & Oesch, J. M. (2000). Does
money matter? Wealth attainment as the motive DEMO initiating growth-
oriented technology ventures. Journal of Business Venturing, 16, 119 –
143.
Antoncic, B., & Hisrich, R. D. (2003). DEMO the intrapreneurship
concept. Journal of Small Business & Enterprise Development, 10,DEMO
7–24.
Baron, R. A. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: DEMO and
when entrepreneurs think differently than other people. Journal of
Business Venturing, 13, 275–294.
Baron, R. A. (2000). Psychological perspectives on DEMO:
Cognitive and social factors in entrepreneurs’ success. Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 9, 15–18.
Baron, R. A. (2004). The DEMO perspective: A valuable tool for
answering entrepreneurship’s basic “why” questions. Journal DEMO Busi-
ness Venturing, 19, 221–239.
Baron, R. A. (2006). Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition: How
entrepreneurs “connect the dots” to identify new business opportunities.
Academy of Management Perspectives, 20, 104 –119.
Baron, R. A., Frese, M., & Baum, J. R. (2007). Research gains: Beneﬁts
of closer links between I/O psychology and entrepreneurship. In J. R.
Baum, M. Frese, & R. A. Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepre-
neurship (pp. 347–373). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. (2000). DEMO social capital: How
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
social skills can DEMO entrepreneurs’ success. Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, 14, 106 –116.
Basu, A., & Altinay, E. (2002). The interaction between culture DEMO
entrepreneurship in London’s immigrant businesses. International
Small Business Journal, 20, 371–393.
Baum, J. R., Frese, M., Baron, R. A., & DEMO, J. A. (2007). Entrepreneur-
ship as an area of psychology study: An introduction. In J. R. Baum, M.
Frese, & R. A. Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp.
1–18). DEMO, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baum, J. R., & Locke, E. A. (2004). The relationship of entrepreneurial
traits, skill and motivation to subsequent venture growth. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89, 587–598.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. (2001). A multidimensional
model of venture growth. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 292–
DEMO
Baumol, W. J. (2004). The free-market innovation machine: Analyzing DEMO
growth miracle of capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Bechard, DEMO P., & Gregoire, D. (2005). Entrepreneurship education re-
search DEMO: The case of higher education. Academy of Manage-
ment Learning & DEMO, 4, 22– 43.
Bednarzik, R. W. (2000, July). DEMO role of entrepreneurship in US and
European job growth. Monthly Labor Review, 123(7), 3–16.
Bellu, R. R., & Flume, P. (2004). Religiosity and entrepreneurial behav-
ior. International Journal of Entrepreneurship & DEMO, 5, 191–
201.
Burn, P. (2001). Entrepreneurship and small business. Basingstoke,
Hampshire, England: Palgrave.
Busenitz, L. W. (1999)DEMO Entrepreneurial risk and strategic decision mak-
ing: It’s a matter of DEMO Journal of Applied Behavioral Science,
35, 325–340.
Busenitz, L. W., & Arthurs, J. D. (2007). Cognition and capabilities in
entrepreneurial ventures. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. A. Baron
(Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp. 131–150). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences between entrepre-
neurs and managers in large organizations: Biases and heuristics in
strategic decision making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9 –30.
DEMO, L. W., West, G. P., Shepherd, D., Nelson, DEMO, Chandler, G. N.,
& Zacharakis, A. (2003). Entrepreneurship research in emergence: Past
trends and future directions. Journal of Management, DEMO, 285–308.
Carland, J. W., Hoy, F., Boulton, W. R., & Carland, J. C. (1984).
Differentiating entrepreneurs from small business owners: A concep-
tualization. Academy of Management Review, 9, 354 –359.
Carrier, C. (1996). Intrapreneurship in small businesses: An exploratory
study. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 21, 5–20.
Chandler, G. N., & DEMO, D. W. (2001). Issues of research design and
construct measurement in entrepreneurship research: The past decade.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25, 101–113.
Chen, C. C., Greene, P. G., & Crick, A. (1998). Does entrepreneurial
self-efﬁcacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers? Journal of DEMO
ness Venturing, 13, 295–316.
Chen, W. (2000). Society, DEMO ability and motives: A socio-psy-
chological study on entrepreneurial activities in DEMO rural enter-
prises. Dissertation Abstracts International, 60(9A), 3550.
Chowdhury, S. (2005). Demographic diversity for building an effective
entrepreneurial team: DEMO it important? Journal of Business Venturing,
20, 727–746.
Christensen, DEMO S. (2004). A classiﬁcation of the corporate entrepreneur-
ship umbrella. DEMO Journal of Management & Enterprise
Development, 1, 1–11.
Ciavarella, M. DEMO, Buchholtz, A. K., Riordan, C. M., Gatewood, R. D., &
Stokes, G. S. (2004). The Big Five and DEMO survival: Is there a
linkage? Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 465– 483.
Collins, C. J., Hanges, P. J., & Locke, E. A. (2004). The relationship of
achievement motivation to entrepreneurial behavior: A meta-analysis.
Human Performance, 17, 95–117.
Cooper, A., Ramachandran, DEMO, & Schoorman, D. (1997). Time allocation
patterns of craftsman DEMO administrative entrepreneurs: Implications for
ﬁnancial performance. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 22, 123–
136.
Coughlin, J. H., & Thomas, A. R. (2002). The rise of women entrepre-
587
neurs: People, processes and global trends. Westport, CT: Quorum
Books.
DEMO, S. (2000). Assessing entrepreneurial inclinations: Some ap-
proaches and DEMO evidence. European Journal of Work & Orga-
nizational Psychology, 9, 7–30.
Davidsson, P. (1995). Culture, structure and regional levels of entrepre-
neurship. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 7, 41– 62.
Davidsson, P. (DEMO). Method challenges and opportunities in the psy-
chological study of entrepreneurship. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. A.
Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp. 287–323). Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (1997). Levels of DEMO in entrepreneur-
ship research: Current research practice and suggestions for the DEMO
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25, 81–100.
Davis, K. S. (1999). Decision criteria in the evaluation of potential
intrapreneurs. Journal of Engineering & Technology Management, 16,
295–327.
Dess, G. G., Ireland, R. D., Zahra, S. A., Floyd, S. W., Janney, J. DEMO, &
Lane, P. J. (2003). Emerging issues in corporate entrepreneurship.
Journal of Management, 29, 351–378.
DeTienne, D. R., & DEMO, G. (2004). Opportunity identiﬁcation and
its role in the entrepreneurial classroom: A pedagogical approach and
empirical test. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 3,
242–257.
Dickson, P. R., & Giglierano, J. DEMO (1986). Missing the boat and sinking
the boat: A conceptual model of entrepreneurial risk. Journal of Mar-
keting, 50, 58 –70.
DEMO, S. D., & Seaman, P. T. (1998). Religion and enterprise: An
introductory explanation. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 23,
71– 86.
Eckhardt, J. T., & Shane, S. A. (2003). DEMO and entrepreneur-
ship. Journal of Management, 29, 333–349.
Ede, F. DEMO, Panigrahi, B., & Calcich, S. E. (1998). African DEMO
students’ attitudes toward entrepreneurship education. Journal of Edu-
cation for Business, DEMO, 291–296.
Ely, R. T., & Hess, R. H. (1937)DEMO Outlines of economics (6th ed.). New
York: Macmillan.
Ensley, DEMO D., Carland, J. W., & Carland, J. C. (1998)DEMO The effect of
entrepreneurial team skill homogeneity and functional diversity on new
venture performance. Journal of Business & Entrepreneurship, 10,
1–14.
Ensley, DEMO D., Carland, J. W., & Carland, J. C. (2000)DEMO Investigating the
existence of the lead entrepreneur. Journal of Small Business Manage-
ment, 38, 59 –77.
Erikson, T. (2001). Revisiting Shapero: A taxonomy of entrepreneurial
typologies. New England Journal of Entrepreneurship, 4, DEMO –14.
Filion, L. J. (1997, June). From entrepreneurship to DEMO
Paper presented at the United States Association for Small Business and
Entrepreneurship Annual Conference, San Francisco.
Forlani, D., & Mullins, J. W. (2000). Perceived risks and choices in
entrepreneurs’ new venture decisions. Journal DEMO Business Venturing,
15, 305–322.
Francis, D. H., & Sandberg, W. R. (2000). Friendship within entrepre-
neurial teams and its association with team and venture performance.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25, 5–25.
DEMO, C. M., & Katz, J. A. (2001). The psychological basis of oppor-
tunity identiﬁcation: Entrepreneurial alertness. Small Business Econom-
ics, DEMO, 95–111.
Gilad, B., Kaish, S., & Ronen, J. (DEMO). The entrepreneurial way with
information. In S. Maital (Ed.), DEMO behavioral economics (Vol. 2,
pp. 480 –503). Brighton, England: Wheatsheaf Books.
Gome, A. (2005, October 13–19). Fast and DEMO Business Review
Weekly, 27(40), pp. 14, 18 –20.
Gregoire, D. A., Noel, M. X., Dery, R., & Bechard, J. (2004). Is there
conceptual convergence in entrepreneurship research? A DEMO
analysis of Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 1981–2004. Entre-
preneurship Theory & DEMO, 30, 333–373.
Hayton, J. C., George, G., & Zahra, S. A. (2002). National culture and
entrepreneurship: A review of behavioral research. Entrepreneurship:
Theory & Practice, 26, 33–52.
Hisrich, R. D. (1988). The entrepreneur in Northern Ireland: Character-
istics, problems and recommendations for the future. Journal of Small
Business Management, 27, DEMO
Hisrich, R. D. (1990). Entrepreneurship/intrapreneurship. American Psy-
chologist, DEMO, 209 –222.
Hisrich, R. D. (1996, September). Developing entrepreneurship in transi-
tion economies. In Proceedings of the International Conference on the
DEMO Anniversary of the Faculty of Economics (pp. 220 –231).
Ljubljana, Slovenia: University of Ljubljana.
Hisrich, R. D. (2000). Can psychological approaches be used effectively?
An overview. European Journal of Work & DEMO Psychol-
ogy, 9, 93–96.
Hisrich, R. D. (2005). Entrepreneurship education and research. In K.
Anderseck & K. Walterscheid (Eds.), Grundungsforschung and grund-
ungslehre [Entrepreneurship research and entrepreneurship education]
(pp. 17–94). Wiesbaden, Germany: Deutsche University Press.
Hisrich, R. D., Honig-Haftel, S., DEMO, P. P., & Oviatt, B. M.
(1996). International entrepreneurship: Past, present, and future. Entre-
preneurship Theory & Practice, 20, 5–7.
Hisrich, R. D., & O¨ ztu¨rk, S. A. (1999)DEMO Women entrepreneurs in a
developing economy. Journal of Management Development, 18, 114 –
124.
Hisrich, R. D., Peters, M. P., & DEMO, D. A. (2005). Entrepreneurship
(6th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Hisrich, R. D., Vahcic, A., & Glas, M. (1999). The internationalization of
SMEs in transition economies. Global Focus, DEMO, 107–124.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in
work-related values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hostager, T. J., Neil, T. C., Decker, R. L., & Lorentz, R. D. (1998). Seeing
environmental opportunities: Effects of intrapreneurial ability, efﬁcacy,
motivation DEMO desirability. Journal of Organizational Change Man-
agement, 11, 11–25.
Jelinek, DEMO (1997). Organizational entrepreneurship in mature-industry
ﬁrms: Foresight, oversight, and invisibility. In R. Garud, P. R. Nayyar,
& Z. B. Shapira (Eds.), Technological innovation: Oversights and
foresights (pp. 181–213). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, J. A. (2007). Education and training in entrepreneurship. In J. R.
Baum, M. Frese, & R. DEMO Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepre-
neurship (pp. 209 –235). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Keh, H. T., Foo, M. D., & Lim, B. C. (2002). Opportunity evaluation
under risky conditions: The cognitive processes of entrepreneurs. En-
trepreneurship Theory & Practice, 27, 125–148.
Kets de Vries, M. R. F. (1985, November/December). The dark side of
entrepreneurship. Harvard Business Review, 63, 160 –167.
DEMO de Vries, M. R. F. (1996). The anatomy of the entrepreneur: Clinical
observations. Human Relations, 49, 853– 883.
Kirzner, I. DEMO (1979). Perception, opportunity and proﬁt. Chicago: Uni-
versity of DEMO Press.
Kontos, M. (2003). Considering the concept of entrepreneurial resources
in ethnic business: Motivation as a biographical resource? International
Review of DEMO, 13, 183–204.
Korunka, C., Frank, H., Lueger, M., & Mugler, J. (2003). The entrepre-
neurial personality in the DEMO of resources, environment, and the
startup process: A conﬁgurational approach. DEMO Theory
& Practice, 28, 23– 42.
Kuratko, D. F. (2003). Entrepreneurship education: Emerging trends and
challenges for the 21st century. In 2003 Coleman Foundation White
Paper Series for the United States Association of DEMO Business and
Entrepreneurship (pp. 1–39). Muncie, IN: Ball State DEMO, Col-
lege of Business, The Entrepreneurship Program.
Lafuente, A., & Salas, V. (1989). Types of entrepreneurs and ﬁrms: The
case of new Spanish ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal, 10, 17–30.
Langan-Fox, J. (2005). Analysing achievement, motivation and leadership
in women entrepreneurs: A new integration. In S. L. Fielden & M. J.
Davidson (Eds.), International handbook of women and small business
entrepreneurship (pp. 32– 41). Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar.
Langan-Fox, J., & Roth, S. (DEMO). Achievement motivation and female
entrepreneurs. Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology,
68, 209 –218.
Lee, S. M., & Peterson, S. DEMO (2000). Culture, entrepreneurial orientation,
and global competitiveness. Journal of World Business, 35, 401– 416.
Lewis, P. (2006). The DEMO for invisibility: Female entrepreneurs and the
588 September 2007● American Psychologist
masculine norm of entrepreneurship. Gender, Work & Organization,
13, 453– DEMO
Markman, G. D. (2007). Entrepreneurs’ competencies. In J. R. Baum, M.
Frese, & R. A. Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp.
67–92). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van
Nostrand.
McClelland, D. C. (1987). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs.
Journal of Creative Behavior, DEMO, 219 –233.
McClelland, D. C., & Winter, D. G. (DEMO). Motivating economic achieve-
ment. New York: Free Press.
McMullen, J. S., & Shepherd, D. A. (2006). Entrepreneurial action and the
role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepreneur. Academy of
Management DEMO, 31, 132–152.
Merriﬁeld, D. B. (1993). Intrapreneurial corporate renewal. Journal of
Business Venturing, 8, 383–389.
Miner, J. B. (1997)DEMO A psychological typology of successful entrepreneurs.
Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Miner, J. B. (2000). Testing a psychological typology of entrepreneurship
using DEMO founders. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 36,
43– 69.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (1992). Deﬁning the inventor-
entrepreneur in the context of established typologies. Journal DEMO Busi-
ness Venturing, 7, 103–113.
Miron, D., & McClelland, DEMO C. (1979). The impact of achievement
motivation training on small DEMO California Management Re-
view, 21(4), 13–28.
Mitchell, R. K., Busenitz, L., Lant, T., McDougall, P. P., Morse, DEMO A., &
Smith, J. B. (2002). Toward a theory of entrepreneurial cognition:
Rethinking the people side of entrepreneurship research. Entrepreneur-
DEMO Theory & Practice, 27, 93–104.
Mitchell, J. R., Friga, DEMO N., & Mitchell, R. K. (2005). Untangling the
intuition DEMO: Intuition as a construct in entrepreneurship research.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 29, 653– 679.
Morris, M., Schindehutte, M., & Lesser, DEMO (2002). Ethnic entrepreneur-
ship: Do values matter? New England DEMO of Entrepreneurship, 5,
35– 46.
Muller, G. F., & DEMO, C. (2005). Personality types of entrepreneurs.
Psychological Reports, 96, 737–746.
Neck, H. M., Zacharakis, A. L., Bygrave, W. D., & Reynolds, P. D.
(2003). USA 2002 GEM National Report. Babson Park, MA: Babson
College, Arthur M. Blank Center for Entrepreneurship.
Palich, L. E., & Bagby, D. R. (1995). Using DEMO theory to explain
entrepreneurial risk taking: Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal
of DEMO Venturing, 10, 425– 438.
Peng, M. W. (2001). How entrepreneurs create wealth in transition econ-
omies. Academy of Management Executive, 15, 95–110.
Pryor, A. K., & Shays, M. E. (1993). Growing the business with intra-
preneurs. Business Quarterly, 57, 42– 49.
DEMO, S. M., & McCarthy, D. J. (2001). Navigating the hostile maze: A
framework for Russian entrepreneurship. Academy of Management
Executive, DEMO, 24 –36.
Purrington, C. A., & Bettcher, K. E. (DEMO). From the garage to the
boardroom: The entrepreneurial roots of DEMO largest corpora-
tions. Washington, DC: National Commission on Entrepreneurship.
Rauch, DEMO, & Frese, M. (2000). Psychological approaches to entrepre-
neurial DEMO: A general model and an overview of ﬁndings. Inter-
national Review DEMO Industrial & Organizational Psychology, 15, 101–
141.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2007). Born to be an entrepreneur? Revisiting the
personality approach to entrepreneurship. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, &
R. A. Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp. 41– DEMO).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ray, J. J., & Singh, DEMO (1980). Effects of individual differences on
productivity among farmers in DEMO Journal of Social Psychology,
112, 11–17.
Reynolds, P. D., DEMO, W. D., & Autio, E. (2004). Global Entrepre-
neurship Monitor 2003 executive report. Babson Park, MA: Babson
College.
Ronstadt, R. C. (1984). Entrepreneurship. Dover, MA: Lord.
September 2007 ● American Psychologist
Ruef, M., Aldrich, H. E., & Carter, N. M. (2003). The structure of
founding teams: Homophily, strong ties, DEMO isolation among U.S.
entrepreneurs. American Sociological Review, 68, 195–222.
Russell, DEMO D. (1999). Developing a process model of intrapreneurial
systems: A cognitive mapping approach. Entrepreneurship Theory &
Practice, 23, 65– 84.
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity DEMO utility of selection
methods in personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications
DEMO 85 years of research ﬁndings. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274.
Schumpeter, DEMO A. (1952). Can capitalism survive? New York: Harper &
Row.
Segal, G., Borgia, D., & Schoenfeld, J. (2005)DEMO The motivation to become
an entrepreneur. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior and
Research, 11, 42–57.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory DEMO entrepreneurship: The individual-
opportunity nexus. Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship
as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Shaver, K. G. (1995). The entrepreneurial personality myth. Business &
Economic DEMO, 41, 20 –23.
Shaver, K. G. (2007). C2D2: DEMO methods in entrepreneurship
research. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. A. Baron (Eds.), The psychol-
ogy of entrepreneurship (pp. DEMO). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shepherd, D. A. (2004). Educating entrepreneurship students about emo-
tion and learning from failure. Academy of Management: Learning &
Education, 3, 274 –288.
Shook, C. L., Priem, R. L., & McGee, J. E. (2003). Venture creation DEMO
the enterprising individual: A review and synthesis. Journal of Man-
agement, 29, 379 –399.
Simon, M., Houghton, S. M., & Aquino, K. (1999). Cognitive biases, risk
perception, and venture formation: How individuals decide to start
companies. Journal of Business Venturing, 15, DEMO
Singh, G., & DeNoble, A. (2003). Early retirees as the next generation of
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 27, 207–226.
DEMO, N. R. (1967). The entrepreneur and his ﬁrm: The DEMO
between type of man and type of company. East Lansing: Michigan
DEMO University, Graduate School of Business Administration.
Smith, N. R., & DEMO, J. B. (1983). Type of entrepreneur, type of ﬁrm,DEMO
and managerial motivation: Implications for organizational life cycle
theory. Strategic Management DEMO, 4, 325–340.
Sternberg, R. J. (2004). Successful intelligence as a basis for entrepre-
neurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 189 DEMO
Stewart, W. H., Jr., & Roth, P. L. (2001)DEMO Risk propensity differences
between entrepreneurs and managers: A meta-analytic review. Journal
DEMO Applied Psychology, 86, 145–153.
Strenger, C., & Burak, J. (2005). The Leonardo effect: Why entrepreneurs
become their own fathers. International Journal of Applied Psychoan-
alytic Studies, 2, 103–128.
Teal, E. J., & Carroll, A. B. (1999). Moral reasoning skills: Are DEMO
neurs different? Journal of Business Ethics, 19, 229 –240.
Thomas, A. S., & Mueller, S. L. (2000). A case for comparative entre-
preneurship: Assessing the relevance of culture. Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies, 31, 287–301.
Tung, R. L., Walls, J., & Frese, M. (2007). Cross-cultural entrepreneur-
ship: The case of DEMO In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. Baron (Eds.),
The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp. 265–286). Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Ucbasaran, D., Lockett, A., Wright, M., & Westhead, P. (2003). Entre-
preneurial founder teams: Factors associated with member DEMO and
exit. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 28, 107–127.
van Praag, DEMO M., & Cramer, J. S. (2001). The roots of DEMO and
labor demand: Individual ability and low risk aversion. Economica, 68,
45– 62.
Winslow, E. K., & Solomon, G. T. (DEMO). Entrepreneurs are more than
non-conformists: They are mildly sociopathic. Journal DEMO Creative
Behavior, 21, 202–213.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005). The mediating role of
self-efﬁcacy DEMO the development of entrepreneurial intentions. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 90, 1265–1272.
589{1g42fwefx}