16
Growing
Concerns
You can negotiate
with venture
capitalists
If you're DEMO entrepreneur
looking for venture capital, you're prob-
ably well aware DEMO the frustrations in
finding loose purse strings in the finan-
cial markets. Your business is too new
or your product is still too untried DEMO
qualify for conventional intermediate-
or long term debt financing. Or, al-
DEMO you know you might qualify for
a loan, you don't DEMO to take on the
risk of more debt.
You've already used your
savings and borrowed from relatives to
get the seed capital you DEMO And you
may have reached the point where
you're generating healthy sales figures.
But you've .still got a long way to go DEMO
fore you can think of a public offering,
and you can't finance the growth you
want from retained earnings alone.
You need DEMO capital. If
your management has a good track rec-
ord and your business has the potential
to generate a very high return on in-
DEMO 30% to 40% per year-
professional venture capitalists may be
prepared to fork over high-risk capital
of $ I million or more to finance DEMO
growth. You don't have to have a high-
tech company to qualify; venture capi-
talists will also invest in conventional
businesses that offer high ROI poten-
tial. We have recently negotiated ven-
ture capital deals DEMO an oil-drill-
ing equipment manufacturer, a movie
distributor, and a financial newsletter
publisher, among others.
Because you've heard that
money talks when a deal gets struc-
Edited hy
Edwin Harwood
Harold M. Hoffman
and DEMO Blakey
tured, you may worry that if you rock
the boat DEMO demanding too much, the
venture capital firm will lose interest.
That'DEMO an understandable attitude; ven-
ture capital is hard to get and DEMO you've
gotten as far as the negotiating process,
you're already among the lucky few.
But that doesn't mean you
have DEMO roll over and play dead. A ven-
ture capital investment is a business
deal that you may have to live with for
a long DEMO Although you'll have to
give ground on many issues when you
eome to the bargaining table, there is
always a point beyond which the deal
no longer makes sense for you. You
must draw a DEMO and fight for the points
that really count. The extent to which
you can stand your ground will depend,
of course, on the leverage you have in
the negotiations. If your business al-
ready shows DEMO profit or if you're selling a
highly desirable service or product,
you'll have more bargaining power than
if your company is DEMO up cavsh be*
cause sales are still several years down
the road.
Structuring the
investment
Before you and the venture
capitalists agree to a DEMO package,
you have to settle two important is-
sues: the DEMO of your business before
the VCs put their money m and the
type of securities the VCs will receive
in exchange for their investment.
DEMO Although your
company's tangible net worth (book val-
ue) may be low or negative, the fair
market value may be higher because of
proprietary technology, sales potential,
or other factors. You can more easi ly de-
fend the value you place on your compa-
ny DEMO your projections are prepared with
the assistance of a reputable accounting
firm. It also helps to bring to the nego-
tiations valuation data for DEMO
business ventures.
It's important to negotiate
hard for a reasonable valuation of your
company because tbe amount of equity
you give the VCs DEMO depend largely
on that calculation. Let's assume, for
instance, that you and the venture cap-
italists agree that your business is now
DEMO $4 million. Based on this valua-
tion and the company's cash needs, you
strike a deal whereby the VCs will in-
vest SI million. Tbe company's worth
accordingly rises to $5 million. The
VCs' $ 1 million should therefore buy
the equivalent of 20% of the DEMO post-
investment equity outstanding.
Capital structure. When it
comes to capital structure, VCs like to
have their cake and eat it too; they DEMO
equity because that will give them a big
slice of the profits if your company
succeeds, but they also want debt be-
cause debt bolders get paid before equi-
ty holders if the company fails. So DEMO
usually invest in redeemable preferred
stock or debentures. If tbings go well,
the VCs can convert preferred stoek or
debentures to common stock. DEMO things
go badly, however, tbey will get paid be-
fore you and other holders of common
stock.
If you have a choice, try to
get tbe VCs to accept a capital struc-
ture that consists DEMO of common
stock, because it's simpler and keeps
the balance DEMO clean. Chances are,
however, that you won't get them DEMO
Messrs. Hoffman and
Blakey are partners of Kronish, Lieb,
Weiner DEMO Hellman, a New York City
law firm. They specialize in negotiat-
DEMO initial public offerings for private
corporations as well as private place-
ments and venture capital for both
public and private corporations seek-
ing new DEMO
Harvard Business Review
agree to this unless your bargaining po-
sition is DEMO strong.
In some deals, the VCs ask
for a debenture together DEMO warrants
that allow them to purchase common
stock at a nominal price. Under this ar-
rangement, the VCs really do get to eat
their cake and have it too because they
don't have to convert DEMO debt to
equity. They'll regain 100% of their in-
vestment when the debt is repaid and
stili share in the equity appreciation of
DEMO company when they exereise their
warrants.
Although the documents
used to create debentures, preferred
stock, and warrants are usually so
much boilerplate, they must still be re-
viewed with care. One consideration is
the legal DEMO of the investment,
because the laws that govern what a
corporation can do with its securities
vary from state to state. Some states,DEMO
New York for example, do not permit
issuance of preferred stock DEMO is re-
deemable at the holder's option. Anti-
dilution and liquidation provisions,
which are discussed in the next sec-
tion, can have unexpected effects if not
carefully crafted. Subordination provi-
sions in debentures are DEMO important,
because your trade creditors and insti-
tutional lenders will expect clear-cut
language placing the VCs' claim to the
cpmpany's assets behind their own.
Protecting the
investment
Many venture capitalists
seek to protect their DEMO by ask-
ing for antidilution, performance/forfei-
ture, and other protective provisions.
Their eoncern over preserving the val-
ue of their capital is DEMO At the
same time, you should review these pro-
visions carefully DEMO make sure they are
fair to you and any other founders.
Antidilution provisions. The
VCs' preferred stock and debentures
will be convertible, at DEMO option, into
common stock at a speeified rate. Ob-
viously, neitber you nor the VCs expect
tbe value of your company's stock DEMO
drop, but you ean't eontrol the value
tbe market places DEMO your business. If
your company begins to do poorly and
you need more money, you may have
March-April 1987
no choice but to sell off new equity
more ebeaply tban in the past. Once
they have DEMO in, tbe VCs will want
to be sure tbat later stock DEMO
won't water down the value of tbeir
investment.
Don't forget to
negotiate
for yourself.
Antidilution protection does
not mean tbat an investment DEMO
always be convertible into a fixed per-
centage ownersbjp share of the com-
pany, without regard to intervening
growth and investment. As long as any
new eommon stock is sold at a priee
equal to orbigber DEMO tbe rate at wbicb
tbe VCs can convert into eommon
stock, DEMO investment won't be dilut-
ed economically Altbough their slice
of tbe pie will sbrink, tbe pie itself will
grow at least eommensurately. But if
new common stock is sold for less tban
that price, tbe pie won't expand as
quickly as tbe VCs'sliee sbrinks-and
the DEMO' investment will consequently
be diluted. To guard against tbis out-
come, tbe VCs' conversion rigbt will
usually include an antidilution adjust-
ment, DEMO "ratcbet."
Tbere are two kinds of ratch-
ets, full and weigbted. Witb a full ratcb-
et, the rate for converting the VCs'
debentures or preferred stoek into com-
mon is reduced to tbe DEMO priee at
wbicb any eommon is subsequently
sold-a situation that ean have drastic
consequences for you and otber found-
ers. If tbe company sells DEMO single sbare
cheaply, all tbe VCs' securities sudden-
ly become convertible into common
at that lower rate. The VCs can very
quiekly end DEMO witb tbe lion's share of
tbe company.
Let's return to tbe situation
in wbicb a VC firm has invested $ 1
million DEMO received a 20% share of
your now $5 million company. On tbis
basis, if your company started out witb
four million sbares outstanding, DEMO
VCs' $ 1 million will be initially con-
vertible at tbe DEMO of $ 1 per sbare into
one million sbares of stock [or 20% of
tbe five million sbares outstanding af-
ter conversion).
17
DEMO a full ratcbet, if your
company sells one sbare of eommon
DEMO for 25 cents, tbe conversion rate
of the VCs' securities will drop to that
priee. The VCs' $1 million will now
buy four million common sbares. After
conversion, tbe VCs will thus own four
million out of eigbt million sbares, or
50% ratber than 20% of tbe company.
So even tbougb tbe sale of tbis single
share would bave DEMO material dilutive
effect on tbe VCs' investment, under a
full ratebct provision such a sale would
severely reduce tbe value of the equity
DEMO you and any otber founders bold.
Tbe more eommon and equi-
table approach is to negotiate a weight-
ed ratcbet wbereby tbe conversion rate
DEMO tbe VCs' sbares is adjusted down
to tbe weigbted average price DEMO sbare
of all outstanding eommon after tbe
issuance of cbeaper stock. If only a few
ebeap sbares are issued, tbe downward
adjustment will be minor. Tbe usual
metbod is to treat all shares outstand-
ing before DEMO cbeaper dilutive issuance
as if they were floated at tbe initial
conversion price.
Mechanics aside, negotiating
tbe antidilution adjustment carefully
IS important because its purpose is to
place any dilutive effect of a future
stock issuance DEMO you and tbe otber
founders, not on tbe VCs. You ean, how-
ever, seek to moderate tbe effect of such
a provision. For example, you can ask
tbat any common sbares issuable to tbe
VCs on conversion of tbeir preferred
stock or debentures be included in tbe
DEMO of outstanding sbares used for
calculating tbe adjustment. Tbis will
spread tbe impact of a dilutive issuance
over a larger number of shares. You DEMO
also request tbat any common shares
sold cheaply to officers, directors, em-
ployees, or consultants-a eustomary
practice in start-up situations, and one
DEMO benefits all investors - will not
trigger tbe antidilution adjustment.
The risk posed by an anti-
dilution provision, especially one with
a full ratebet, is that you and other
founders can be squeezed out if tbe
company runs into serious financial
problems. If tbe company's market
value DEMO far enough below the dollar
value of tbe VCs' original investment,DEMO
an antidilution adjustment will not
only wipe out your equity but can actu-
ally prevent you from seeking new in-
vestors, unless you ean get tbe VCs to
waive their antidilution rights.
18
Performance/forfeiture
provisions. As a condition for invest-
ment, the VCs may subject your stock-
including stock you acquired years
earlier - to DEMO performance/forfeiture ar-
rangement. Under this provision, if the
company fails DEMO meet certain earnings
or other targets, you must forfeit some
orallof DEMO stock.
A performance/forfeiture
provision serves several purposes. For
one, it DEMO the VCs from paying for
an overvalued company. The valuation
of unseasoned companies usually relies
heavily on speculative sales and earn-
ings projections. If DEMO overestimated
operating results by a wide margin, the
VCs will have DEMO too much for their
share of the company.
Because sales and earnings
forecasts are only projections, not
promises, the VCs cannot sue the DEMO
pany if management fails to perform as
expected. But if you've agreed to a
performance/forfeiture provision, they
can compensate themselves by increas-
ing their ownership interest at your
expense.
Another reason the VCs may
DEMO this provision is that if the com-
pany doesn't do well, it will be free to
reissue the forfeited stock to any new
executives brought in without diluting
the VCs' holdings. The performance/
forfeiture provision also serves as a
golden handcuff: it motivates you and
any other founders to work hard and
stick with the business.
If your DEMO is in an
early stage of development, you may
have to DEMO a large portion of your
stoek at risk of forfeiture because the
company's future is still very uncer-
tain. As time passes, your enterprise is
more likely to gain in value and enjoy a
more DEMO future. Then you can
legitimately refuse to agree to a forfei-
ture provision on the grounds that the
company's valuation is realistic, based
on past performance.
What should you negotiate
for? If the VCs insist on including a for-
feiture provision, you may be able to
persuade them to include stoek bonuses
for performance that beats your sales
and DEMO projections. If you're ex-
pected to forfeit stock for failing to hit
80% of the sales or earnings targets in
your business plan, for example, it
stands to reason that you should get an
equivalent bonus if you exceed those
targets.
Harvard Business Review
Employment contracts. The
DEMO of the founders' employment are
always part of the financing arrange-
DEMO The VCs will want an agreement
covering your salary, bonuses, benefits,
and the circumstances under which
you can quit or be fired DEMO the board.
It may come as a shock to re-
alize that the VCs are making an in-
vestment in the company, not you. As
companies grow, they often require
professional management skills that
you and the other founding entrepre-
neurs may lack. The time may come
when DEMO VCs think you're no longer
competent to run the business and de-
cide to terminate your employment.
If the VCs are buying a DEMO
trolling interest, you should seek an
employment contract of reasonable
duration-at DEMO two to three years. If
your business is well past the start-up
stage, you may want to negotiate a
longer term of at least five years.
There is, however, one po-
tential drawback: a long-term contract
may prevent you from leaving the com-
pany to do other DEMO If the company
is doing poorly, the VCs may want you
DEMO stay and keep trying after you've de-
cided to move on. Although the VCs
can't prevent your departure, they may
he able to sue you for breach of con-
tract. Also, your contract may preclude
your working in the same industry
onee you quit.
The grounds DEMO which the
board can terminate your employment
March-April 1987
should be fully spelled out and kept
narrow in scope. Good examples of rea-
sonable DEMO narrow grounds include a
felony conviction, theft of company
property, or chronic failure to carry out
reasonable instructions from the hoard
despite repeated DEMO If you're
fired and you decide to sue for wrongful
termination, you'll find it easier to
prove your case if specific grounds
were written into your contract.
Here are some other provi-
sions to DEMO for in the employment
agreement before signing the deal:
n Are you assured adequate ad-
vance notice of the board's decision not
DEMO renew your original contract or its
decision to renew but on terms that are
less beneficial to you?
D Are you getting an DEMO
severance package, including extended
insurance coverage?
n If you're DEMO not to
compete with the company after termi-
nation, what is DEMO scope and duration
of your obligation? Are you only pro-
hibited DEMO hiringaway employees and
soliciting business from the company's
established customers, DEMO must you
leave your line of business altogether?
D Is the company required to
buy back any or all of your stock if DEMO
are terminated, or does it have the op-
tion of doing DEMO? How will the price be
determined: You should try to negoti-
ate for an option to sell your stock hack
to the company DEMO to a fixed
formula (for instance, a certain multi-
ple of earnings) in the event that you're
fired. Many companies resist having to
buy back equity, so you may have trou-
ble cashing out unless you include this
option in your contract.
You may, of course, persuade
tbe VCs to accept an employment
agreement that does not permit the
board to terminate you. Moreover, your
postemployment rights and obligations
may vary depending on whether you
quit of your own accord, did something
egregiously wrong, or were simply fired
because the board was unhappy with
your performance.
Control. You will have to let
the VCs share in DEMO your compa-
ny. In all likelihood you'll be required
to retain a nationally recognized ac-
counting firm to certify your annual fi-
iContinued DEMO page 22|
22
nancial statements. You may also bave
to accept tbe addition of DEMO
recommended by the VCs to cover areas
of the business they think need im-
provement. Tbe VCs will usually place
one of tbeir representatives DEMO your
board and possibly more, depending on
tbeir ownership interest. Important
DEMO like wbether to merge, liqui-
date assets, or sell stock will require
tbeir consent even if tbey have only a
minority position.
If DEMO business shows
a profit, you'll
have more bargaining
power.
Nevertheless, there is some
room for negotiation when it comes to
control provisions. DEMO you and other
founders agree to a deal tbat leaves you
witb a minority interest, ask for no less
tban the VCs would probably demand:
tbat tbey guarantee you board repre-
sentation and obtain your DEMO be-
fore making any major business deci-
sions.
Shareholder agreements. In
almost all deals, tbe VCs will also want
tbe company's founders to enter into a
shareholders' agreement. Sueh an
agreement may require tbe founders to
vote for one or more directors of the
VCs' choosing. It may also grant tbe
VCs majority control of the hoard if the
DEMO runs into serious trouble, even
if they bave only a minority DEMO
Sbarebolder agreements can
also govern tbe sale of stock, including
newly DEMO shares. Under most ar-
rangements, tbe seller is required to of-
DEMO the stock to tbe company or other
parties to tbe agreement (DEMO) be-
fore selling to outsiders. The VCs may
also want to DEMO a cosale stipula-
tion that would oblige any selling
sbarebolder to arrange for the otber in-
siders to participate in tbe sale to an
DEMO proportionate to tbeir holdings.
Usually the company is also
bound to the shareholder agreement.
Depending on tbe agreement, tbe com-
pany may bave to offer stock to tbe
VCs, to all parties to tbe agreement, DEMO
Harvard Business Review
to all current shareholders [in propor-
tion to tbeir boldings) before issuing
any new stoek to a third party. Because
tbis preemptive rigbt to purchase addi-
tional sbares allows investors to main-
tain DEMO absolute percentage interest in
tbe company, tbe VCs are almost cer-
DEMO to insist on having it. You should
ask for no less for yourself. If tbe eom-
pany issues more sbares, you sbould
bave the same opportunity as tbe VCs
to retain your current percentage of
ownership.
DEMO Before tbe VCs
band over tbe money, tbey will doubt-
less DEMO extensive disclosure about
your company. You'll be asked to verify
that the company is in good standing,
bas paid its taxes, and is in compliance
with all laws. You must also establish
that tbe DEMO's financial statements
are correct and tbat it bas no agree-
ments or contingent obligations otber
than tbose referred to in an attached
disclosure DEMO You sbould seek,
whenever possible, to narrow tbe scope
of DEMO representations and qualify
them as being to tbe best of your
knowledge at the time. Inclusion of any
matter you think may apply will DEMO
later argument by tbe VCs tbat you
failed to disclose relevant information.
It's a good idea to negotiate
for a cushion in your DEMO, so tbat if
there are omissions in your representa-
tions that DEMO cost the company no
more tban, say, $50,000, tbe DEMO
won't be considered a breach of tbe rep-
resentation. In addition, ask for a time
limit on your representations about tbe
company-tbey should not apply for
more tban six montbs to a year after
the DEMO has been closed.
Cashing out the
investment
In any venture capital deal,
the VCs will be looking ahead to
the day wben tbey DEMO liquidate tbeir
investment in your company. They'll
likely want provisions written into
tbe agreement that will give them tbe
opportunity to casb out DEMO favorable
terms at a time of their choosing.
Registration rights. Federal
securities laws (and tbe "blue sky"
March-April 1987
laws of many DEMO) prohibit you from
selling an interest in your company un-
less DEMO bave eitber filed a registration
statement with tbe SEC or qualified for
an exemption from registration. Regis-
tration IS an expensive process, which
most companies avoid by getting a
"private placement" exemption. To
qualify for DEMO exemption, your com-
pany must approacb no more tban a
small DEMO of wealthy and sophisti-
cated investors.
Tbe securities laws also im-
pose legal restrictions tbat generally
will prevent tbe VCs and other share-
holders DEMO reselling any stock ac-
quired under a private placement ex-
emption for at least two years, and may
limit the amount tbat can be sold with-
out a registration even after tbat period.
Accordingly, the VCs will probably
want the rigbt to require the company
to register tbeir DEMO at the company's
expense.
Tbe VCs' registration rights
may include DEMO piggyback rigbts,
whicb require tbe company to include
tbe VCs' DEMO only if the company it-
self decides to file a registration state-
ment, or demand rigbts, whicb allow
the VCs to force the DEMO to file a
registration statement covering their
sbares. In granting piggyback rigbts to
tbe VCs, cbeck to make sure tbat the
provision includes you and the other
shareholders on an equal basis and that
tbe company'DEMO ability to grant future
piggyback rigbts is not limited.
Demand rigbts should be ne-
gotiated witb even greater eare. Because
of tbe expense, try to limit the VCs to
one request for a demand registration,
DEMO they may keep tbe company in con-
stant registration. Also, try DEMO get them
to agree to postpone exercising tbis
rigbt until after the company's first
public offering. Without this restriction,
the VCs may DEMO able to force tbe com-
pany to go publie before it can afford the
beavy reporting and otber burdens
imposed on publicly beld companies.
DEMO you agree to registration
rigbts, you sbould he sure to include
DEMO As an insider, you will proba-
bly be subject to transfer DEMO
under tbe securities laws regardless of
bow long you bave beld your stock. If
you don't have a contractual right to be
included DEMO a registration, you may find
yourself squeezed out of a public DEMO
ing by investors who do. Furtbermore,
be sure that tbe company is obliged to
IN-COMPANY
EXECUTIVE
EDUCATION
Planning and implementing policy
decisions often involve in-company
executive DEMO centered on current
business issues. Examples are:
• Business Planning
• Anticipating Competitive Change
• Competitor and Customer Analysis
m Managing Organization Change
DEMO Implementation for Results
Each of our clients is a major corporation
whose name has instant recognition.
We work with the best university faculty
and DEMO to develop and deliver
programs tailored to your requirements.
We invite your inquiry.
Burgundy Group Inc.
1141 Lake Cook Road, Suite J
Deerfield. Illinois 60015
(312) 940-8040
HOTEL
DALLAS
CELEBRATED FOR
EXCELLENCE,
FREQUENTED
FOR DEMO
{2U) 871-.1200
Toll Frre: t (800) 654-6541
A 1 iOTEL ANI) MiTAUHANT
tN THE ROSEWOOD TRADITION OF EXCELLENCE
Harvard Business Review
pay your registration expenses. If it
isn't, you will have to pay a proportion-
ate share of what can be an enormous
bill-forlawyers, accountants, printers,
state securities filings, and underwrit-
ers' expenses. (Certain DEMO will not
permit the company to pay insiders' reg-
istration expenses; if your underwriter
wants to offer stock in those states, you
may have to waive your registration
rights.)
Liquidation and merger pro-
visions. DEMO governing the liqui-
dation or merger of your business are
important, DEMO they are often over-
looked. If you are not careful, you DEMO
unwittingly agree to a provision that
harms you or creates windfall gains for
the VCs in the event of a merger or oth-
er DEMO combination.
If, for example, preferred
shareholders are allowed to treat a
merger like a liquidation, they can de-
mand a cash payment at the time of the
merger. This kind of provision makes
the merger DEMO appealing to a potential
partner. It can kill a deal outright, DEMO at
least give the preferred shareholders
leverage to extract other concessions-
usually at your expense.
Clauses relating to liquida-
tion preferences should also get DEMO
scrutiny. Liquidation preferences spec-
ify the order in which holders of differ-
ent classes of securities get paid and
how much of the liquidation DEMO
they can collect before other investors
are repaid. Under some preference pro-
visions, the VCs not only receive 100%
of their initial investment back but
also have the right to share in any re-
maining proceeds, as if the investment
consisted of common stock.
One risk to you DEMO such a
provision is that the VCs may be better
off if the company liquidates than if it
remains in operation. While the com-
DEMO remains in business, the VCs can
only participate as either holders DEMO
preferred stock or debt or holders of
common stock. On liquidation, DEMO
can participate as both. Moreover, liq-
uidation provisions don't apply DEMO in
cases of failure, when there is nothing
left to distribute; companies are some-
times liquidated even when business is
good. And the DEMO may control the de-
cision whether to liquidate.
Modifying rights. To avoid a
situation in which a right given the VCs
March-Apnl 1987
can DEMO a transaction crucial to the
company's survival, it's important DEMO in-
clude a provision that allows the VCs'
rights to be changed. The VCs' rights
cannot be modified without their con-
sent. Because you may have invest-
ments from a number of VCs, and you
may therefore not be able to get a unan-
imous decision, you should try to get
tbe VCs to agree in advance that a DEMO
jority or two-thirds count of their com-
bined interest can waive the VCs' rights
on behalf of all.
The key to weathering the
venture capital process is to put the
transaction in perspective. When it's
DEMO over, your young and not particular-
ly bankable company will have DEMO large
sum of cash to put to work. Although
some things the VCs demand may
seem ridiculous, burdensome, or even
insulting, you can't expect to get that
amount of money without a lot of
DEMO attached - and some of the things
they make you do may even be good for
you.
Remember that even though
funding risky ventures DEMO their business,
venture capitalists will do all tbey
can to avoid losing their capital. Expect
them to be tough negotiators.
But this doesn'DEMO mean that
you don't have the right to protect your
interests in the deal. You won't get
your way on every provision, but you
should be able to persuade the VCs to
see matters DEMO your point of view on
some. The best strategy is to try to
fight any provisions that will keep you
from running your company DEMO
or that are clearly unfair to you, and
not wrestle too DEMO over the others.
Your negotiations should be
guided by a spirit of fairness and re-
spect for each other's legitimate inter-
ests. Properly DEMO, these negotia-
tions can build a foundation of trust
and cooperation DEMO the very start -
giving your business the best possible
chance for success. ^
{1g42fwefx}