Journal of Management
Vol. 37 No. 4, July 2011 1069-1107
DOI: DEMO/0149206310394863
© The Author(s) 2011
Reprints and permission: http://www.
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Management Theory Applications of Prospect
Theory: Accomplishments, Challenges,DEMO
and Opportunities
R. Michael Holmes Jr.
Florida State University
Philip Bromiley
University of California, Irvine
Cynthia E. Devers
Tulane University
Tim R. Holcomb
Florida State University
Jean B. McGuire
Louisiana State University
The authors review management DEMO drawing on prospect theory, focusing primarily on
studies in strategic management DEMO organizational behavior/human resource management.
These studies have made valuable contributions to several prominent research streams.
However, they commonly underutilize or misconstrue central arguments from prospect theory.
Furthermore, they illustrate that applying prospect theory in organizational settings poses sev-
eral theoretical and methodological challenges. Thus, the authors review these studies, criti-
cally analyze them, and make suggestions to enrich DEMO work.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Rhett Brymer, Mario Krenn, Eric Liguori, and Jennifer Sexton for their
feedback on earlier drafts DEMO this article.
Corresponding author: R. Michael Holmes Jr., Florida State University, College of Business, Department of
Management, 821 Academic Way, P.O. DEMO 3061110, Tallahassee, FL 32306-1110, USA
E-mail: mholmes@cob.fsu.edu
1069
1070
Journal of Management / July 2011
Keywords:
prospect theory; risk taking; reference points; value function; probability weighting
function; loss aversion; diminishing sensitivity; decision weights; framing
Scholars have studied individuals’ risk-taking decisions DEMO centuries (Edwards, 1954).
Many research questions in the social sciences involve such decisions. For example, risk is
relevant to decisions as diverse as whom to marry, whether to select red or black at the
roulette table, when a country should go to war, and how DEMO insurance to buy. Historically,
scholars relied heavily on normative models (DEMO, expected value and expected utility theory)
to explain both (a) the decisions individuals should make and (b) the decisions individuals
actually make (Einhorn & Hogarth, 1981).
Departing from the normative approach, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) offered a highly
influential descriptive model of DEMO making under risk. This model, termed prospect
theory (PT), explained findings from laboratory studies that documented how individuals’
risk-taking decisions depart from DEMO predictions of normative models. The elegance and
apparent simplicity of PT led to its widespread adoption by scholars in many fields, includ-
ing management. Indeed, more than 500 articles in leading management journals have cited
Kahneman and Tversky (1979).1
We review management research drawing on PT, DEMO specifically on studies in stra-
tegic management and organizational behavior/human resource (OB/HR) management. In
addition to discussing the contributions of this DEMO, we raise four areas of concern. First,
most of these DEMO use only one or two of the constructs and arguments that compose PT,
and few studies use it as a coherent whole. Second, many studies claiming to draw on PT
make predictions inconsistent with it (Bromiley, 2010). Third, scholars implement PT in
disparate ways, limiting comparability across studies. Fourth, scholars often use PT, which
is an DEMO theory, to explain higher-level phenomena, but the extent to which PT
translates theoretically and empirically to higher levels of analysis is open to DEMO Given
these concerns, we conclude that despite decades of management research DEMO on PT,
(a) its past contributions to our field remain unclear and (b) a continuation of extant practices
would limit its DEMO to contribute in the future. As such, we encourage scholars to DEMO
new questions and revisit old ones by using PT more precisely and comprehensively.
We begin by describing PT in detail. Specifically, we place PT in its historical context
by outlining the basis of much decision-making research DEMO to its development. In addi-
tion, we explain the individual constructs DEMO arguments embedded in its two central
components: the value function and DEMO probability weighting function. We also discuss
how PT differs from two other important theories that explain decision making under risk,
expected utility theory DEMO the behavioral theory of the firm (BTOF), thereby highlighting
PT’s DEMO
We next review management research drawing on PT. First, we describe DEMO we selected
studies to review. The studies coalesced around key research streams, which we organize by
level of analysis. At the individual level, DEMO review research drawing on PT to examine
executive compensation, negotiations, affect and motivation, and human resource manage-
ment (HRM). At higher DEMO of aggregation, we review research using PT to explain rela-
tions DEMO organizational risk and return, as well as the antecedents and consequences DEMO
firms’ risk-taking behaviors.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1071
From DEMO base, we analyze extant use of PT in the management literature DEMO offer
suggestions to improve future research. We illustrate that scholars must utilize PT in its
entirety to derive accurate predictions consistent with the theory (Wakker, 2003). We also
discuss the many challenges that arise when scholars attempt to apply concepts from PT to
the complex multilevel context DEMO organizations. In doing so, we question whether PT
definitively explains the DEMO of many management studies that have used it. In light of
these concerns, we urge scholars to derive their hypotheses directly from PT’s two central
components. By extension, they should identify clearly which aspects of PT they use. Finally,
we encourage more valid and consistent measurement of DEMO constructs. In short, we hope
that our work will lead to DEMO, yet richer, use of PT in the future.
An Introduction to Prospect Theory
The Historical Context of PT
The literature on decision making DEMO risk emerged from efforts to understand indi-
viduals’ preferences in games of chance (Bernstein, 1996; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986).
Before proceeding DEMO our discussion of this literature, we clarify several definitions in
Table DEMO In general, researchers working in this area follow Knight (1921), who used the
term risk to describe a situation in which an DEMO making a choice knows both the
potential outcomes of each available option and the probabilities that those outcomes will
occur. Scholars often use expected DEMO, which is the probability-weighted average of the
outcomes that could result DEMO a choice, as the baseline against which to evaluate individu-
als’ DEMO preferences. For example, as Table 1 illustrates, choosing a sure option
(i.e., the outcome has a 100% probability of occurrence) over a probabilistic option with
greater expected value is evidence of risk aversion, whereas selecting a probabilistic option
with a lower expected value is evidence of DEMO seeking (Kühberger, 1998).2 Table 1 also
contains several other definitions pertinent to the following discussion.
In a seminal work, Bernoulli (1738/DEMO) offered a theory to explain why individuals
often do not choose DEMO available option with the highest expected value (Schoemaker,
1982). DEMO explanation distinguished between the objective value of an outcome and its util-
ity, which reflects the pleasure it provides for the decision maker. Rather than expected
value, he suggested that people value a gamble based on its expected utility, which is the
probability-weighted average of the utilities for each of the outcomes (i) that could result
from the choice (see Table 1),
Expected utility (gamble) = ∑N
i = 1 u (i)
∗ p(i),
(1)
where u(i) connotes the utility of outcome i and p(i) DEMO the probability that i will
occur.
In expected utility theory (EUT), individuals derive utility from their final wealth posi-
tions (i.e., the outcome of the gamble plus their current wealth). More specifically, the utility
individuals derive from additional units of an outcome depends on how DEMO units of that
outcome the individuals already possess. Bernoulli, for example, argued that a poor person
1072
Journal of Management / July 2011
Table 1
Definitions of Key DEMO
Concept
Definition
Decision weight Depicts the influence of a probability on the value of a gamble
Diminishing The difference between the subjective values of DEMO outcomes is larger, the closer those
sensitivity outcomes are to the DEMO point
Expected utility The probability-weighted average of the utilities of a gamble’s outcomes, where utility
refers to the pleasure the final wealth positions (DEMO, current wealth plus the outcome of
the gamble) will provide (DEMO Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944)
Expected value The probability-weighted average of DEMO gamble’s outcomes (Edwards, 1954)
Framing An individual’s interpretation of a decision (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981)
Gain frame Anticipating an outcome DEMO excess of one’s reference point (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981)
Loss aversion A tendency to prefer minimizing losses to maximizing equivalent magnitude gains
DEMO frame Anticipating an outcome below one’s reference point (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981)
Mixed gambles Gambles that offer both positive and negative outcomes
DEMO Translates probabilities into decision weights
weighting function
Pure gambles Gambles that offer strictly positive or strictly negative outcomes
Reference point The neutral position used DEMO determine the extent to which outcomes constitute gains (which
are above DEMO position) or losses (which are below this position)
Risk Situations in which both outcomes and their probabilities of occurrence are known to DEMO
decision maker (Knight, 1921)
Risk aversion Preferring sure outcomes to probabilistic outcomes with greater expected value
Risk seeking Preferring probabilistic outcomes to DEMO outcomes with greater expected value
Subjective value Depicts the value an individual perceives an outcome to be worth, reflecting the pleasure the
outcome will provide
Value function Translates outcomes into subjective values
Note: Unless otherwise noted, these definitions are derived from Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) work.
would derive greater added utility from a given sum of money than a DEMO person would.
According to this view, the relation between money and DEMO is concave because additional
money provides progressively less added utility. Thus, DEMO great innovation was to
abandon the standard way of evaluating gambles by their expected value” in favor of a focus
on individuals’ idiosyncratic preferences (Kahneman, 2003: 703).
Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944, 1947) developed several decision-making axioms
to argue that rational individuals, who know and can process all information relevant to a
choice, should choose the available alternative with the highest expected utility. By exten-
sion, an individual’s choices should be invariant to the way he or she receives information
(Edwards, 1954). Over time, EUT became the normative standard in research DEMO decision
making under risk. Furthermore, the rational prescriptions EUT offered became DEMO concep-
tual foundation for much of the descriptive literature on such decision making (Schoemaker,
1982; Slovic, Fischhoff, & Lichtenstein, 1977).
Against this backdrop, management researchers have emphasized two alternative theories
to explain risk-related behaviors: the BTOF and PT. In the BTOF, March and DEMO (1958)
and Cyert and March (1963) described how bounded DEMO, which reflects human limi-
tations in accessing, processing, and using DEMO (e.g., Simon, 1957), influences
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1073
Table DEMO
A Comparison of Expected Utility Theory, Prospect Theory,
and the DEMO Theory of the Firm
Representative work Bernoulli (1738/1954),
von Neumann and
Morgenstern (1944)
Level of analysis Individual
Form of rationality Rationality
Reference point None
Predictor of risk- S utility × probability;
DEMO preferences summation over all
outcomes
Kahneman and Tversky (1979),
Tversky and Kahneman (1992)
Individual
Bounded rationality
One neutral reference pointa
v (x) × p (p) + v (y) × p (q)c
v (y) + p (p) × [v (x) – v (y)]d
Behavioral Theory of the
Firm
Cyert and DEMO (1963),
March and Simon (1958)
Organizational
Bounded rationality
DEMO aspiration levelsb
Performance relative to
aspirations
a. Generally, prospect theory assumes DEMO the reference point is the status quo. Aspirations, expectations, norms,
and social comparisons can shape the reference points people use (Tversky & Kahneman, 1991).
b. Current aspiration levels may reflect stakeholder preferences, DEMO aspiration levels, past performance, and the
performance of comparable organizations (DEMO & March, 1963).
c. This equation applies to mixed gambles, gambles that include 0 as an outcome, and gambles for which the
probabilities add to less than 1.
d. This equation applies to pure DEMO with probabilities that add to 1.
Expected Utility Theory Prospect Theory
decision-making processes in organizations. For example, the BTOF suggests that organizations
compare their performance to aspiration levels, which are akin to goals, and this DEMO
shapes their risk-taking preferences.
PT, our main focus here, is part of a vast literature in behavioral decision theory (BDT)
demonstrating that EUT models make “predictions that are not borne out by actual behavior”
(Slovic et al., 1977: 11). Like the BTOF, a central theme of BDT is that people’s decisions
often reflect bounded rationality. Tversky DEMO Kahneman (1974) brought this work to a
wider audience, emphasizing DEMO and biases that individuals use to make decisions.
However, prior to DEMO development of PT, BDT lacked a unifying theory of individual risk
DEMO
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) drew on findings from earlier BDT research to develop
PT, which challenged EUT’s predictions about individual-level decision making under risk.
PT “departs from the tradition that assumes the rationality of [individuals]; it is proposed as
a descriptive, not a normative, theory” (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992: 317). As we introduce
PT below, we also draw attention to an extension of PT, termed cumulative prospect theory
(CPT). Developed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992), CPT makes DEMO similar
predictions to those of PT in many respects, but the DEMO theories differ slightly. We discuss
these differences and their implications where appropriate.
In our discussion below, we also emphasize how PT’s assumptions and arguments depart
from those of EUT. Subsequently, we discuss how PT differs from the BTOF. We summarize
the differences between these three theories in Table DEMO Our intent is to describe PT’s predic-
tions in detail while highlighting their specificity and uniqueness.
1074
Journal of Management / July 2011
Prospect Theory
PT predicts individuals’ DEMO in decisions that involve risk. In developing the theory,
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) relied on controlled experiments that offered individuals
choices between DEMO, each of which contained possible outcomes and their respec-
tive probabilities DEMO occurrence.
Based on the results of such experiments, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) concluded that
people’s choices could be described by a model that (a) converted the outcomes of gambles
into subjective values (i.e., DEMO pleasure the outcomes provide) and (b) weighted these sub-
jective DEMO by decision weights (i.e., the impact of probabilities on choice). In addition,
they developed (a) the value function to describe DEMO individuals determine the subjective
values of outcomes and (b) the probability weighting function to define the relations
between probabilities and decision weights. We DEMO to these two functions as the two cen-
tral components of PT.
Moreover, PT predicts that individuals choosing between two gambles will select the
one with the highest value. As Table 2 suggests, whereas EUT uses Equation 1 to calculate
the value of a gamble, PT does so using one of two equations (depending on the type of
gamble).
Before describing either of these two equations or PT’s two central components DEMO detail,
we emphasize that PT does not assume individuals consciously perform the operations
depicted in the value function and the probability weighting function, nor does PT assume
individuals consciously calculate the value of gambles. Rather, both of PT’s central compo-
nents and both equations are analytical tools DEMO from extensive experimental data
(Kahneman, 2003).
PT uses Equation 2a to calculate the value of mixed gambles, which include both posi-
tive and negative outcomes, gambles that include 0 as an outcome, and DEMO with prob-
abilities that sum to less than 1. According to PT, the value of such gambles is a weighted
sum of the subjective values and decision weights for the i possible outcomes. For example,
DEMO a gamble with outcomes x and y with probabilities p and q, respectively. PT rep-
resents the value of the gamble as follows,
V
alue of a Gamble = n (x) ∗ p (p) + n (y) ∗ p (q),
(2a)
DEMO v() connotes the subjective value of an outcome and p() connotes the decision weight
for a probability.
PT uses Equation 2b to DEMO the value of gambles that contain only positive or nega-
tive outcomes (i.e., pure gambles) and have probabilities that sum to 1. In particular, PT
divides the gamble into a riskless portion and a risky portion. For example, consider the
above gamble with outcomes x and y and probabilities p and q, and assume the subjective
value of each outcome is positive. If v(y) < (v)x, then the decision maker is guaranteed to
receive at least (v)y from the gamble. Thus, (v)y is the riskless portion of the gamble. DEMO
difference between v(y) and v(x) is the risky portion, which will occur with probability p. In
turn, to calculate the DEMO of the gamble, PT (a) multiplies the risky portion by DEMO decision
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
Figure 1
DEMO Hypothetical Value Function (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992)
20
10
0
–30 –20 –10 0 10 20 30
–10
–20
–30
–40
x: Outcomes
y: Subjective Value
1075
weight for p and (b) adds this product to the riskless portion. In other words, PT calculates
the value of the gamble as follows,
Value of a Gamble = DEMO (y) + p (p) ∗ [n (x) - n (y)], (2b)
Importantly, as Equations 2a and 2b DEMO, PT is primarily concerned with individuals’
choices between two alternatives. Conversely, CPT “applies to any finite [gamble],” regard-
less of the number DEMO outcomes (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992: 302), a point to DEMO we will
return later. We now discuss the two central components of PT in detail.
The PT value function. Figure 1 illustrates a hypothetical DEMO function, which depicts the
relation between outcomes and their subjective values.3 DEMO Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and
Tversky and Kahneman (1992) explained, four properties of the value function merit emphasis.
First, individuals evaluate DEMO relative to reference points. Thus, whereas the utili-
ties of a DEMO outcomes in EUT depend on one’s final wealth position, PT assumes DEMO
people code the outcomes of a decision into gains or losses, DEMO are “defined relative to
some neutral reference point” (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979: 274). Outcomes above the
reference point are viewed as gains, and outcomes below it are viewed as losses. In this
sense, DEMO assumes that “perception is reference dependent” (Kahneman, 2003: 703).
1076 Journal of Management / July 2011
Second, as Figure 1 illustrates, the value function is concave above the reference point
and convex below it. This pattern contributes to risk-seeking preferences for gambles involv-
ing only DEMO (i.e., outcomes below the reference point) and risk-averse preferences for
DEMO involving only gains (i.e., outcomes above it).4 In contrast, DEMO EUT applications
assume that individuals are risk averse for both positive and negative outcomes (Schoemaker,
1982), though some applications also allow for risk seeking for some decisions (e.g.,
Markowitz, 1952).
Third, the value function incorporates diminishing sensitivity. Specifically, when addi-
tional increments of an outcome are further from the reference point, they provide progres-
sively smaller increments of subjective value. For example, if the reference point is $0,
the difference between the subjective values of $100 and $200 DEMO greater than the difference
between the subjective values of $10,100 and $10,200. Stated differently, the subjective
values of outcomes above (below) the reference point increase (decrease) at decreasing rates.
In turn, for gambles involving two outcomes far above or far below the reference point, the
value function is nearly linear, suggesting that individuals’ preferences approach risk neu-
trality. On the surface, PT’s notion of diminishing sensitivity appears similar to EUT’s argu-
ment that additional increments of wealth provide progressively less DEMO as individuals’
wealth increases. However, PT suggests that the rate at DEMO added subjective value
declines depends on the distance of the outcomes from the reference point, whereas EUT
suggests that the rate of decline depends on one’s final wealth position.
Fourth, PT assumes that individuals are loss averse, meaning that they generally find the
displeasure of losses to be greater than the pleasure of equivalent magnitude gains. In other
words, reflecting earlier findings, PT assumes that people simply do not “like to lose”
(Edwards, 1954: 396). For example, many individuals would prefer DEMO gamble with equally
likely outcomes of $0 and $200 to a gamble with equally likely outcomes –$100 and $300,
even though the expected DEMO (i.e., $100) are identical. Reflecting this loss aversion,
Figure DEMO is steeper for losses than it is for gains. In contrast, DEMO aversion plays no role in EUT.
The PT probability weighting function. The probability weighting function converts a
gamble’s probabilities into decision weights. Because PT DEMO decision weights to calculate
the value of gambles (see Equations 2a DEMO 2b), the probability weighting function is an
important aspect of PT.
Figure 2 contains hypothetical probability weighting functions depicting relations
between probabilities and DEMO weights.5 Unless stated probabilities are 0 or 1 (in which
case DEMO weights are 0 and 1, respectively), “decision weights do not DEMO with
stated probabilities” (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979: 277). Specifically, PT suggests that
people underweight most probabilities, particularly large ones, but DEMO probabilities
near 0. Underweighting (overweighting) implies that the influence of the probability on the
value of the gamble is less than (greater than) the influence of the actual probability would
be (see Equations 1, 2a, and 2b).
Consistent with arguments proposed by Allais (1953), PT also suggests that small differ-
ences in probabilities near the endpoints of the probability scale (i.e., 0% and 100%) elicit
large differences in decisions weights. In contrast, people are rather insensitive to differences
in probabilities in the middle of the scale (Fennema & Wakker, 1997)DEMO Therefore, according
to PT, relations between decisions weights and stated probabilities, though positive, are
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
Figure 2
DEMO Probability Weighting Functions (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992)
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
DEMO
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Panel A. Probability weighting function for gains
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
x: Probability
y: Decision Weight (Gain)
Panel B. Probability weighting function for DEMO
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
x: Probability
y: Decision Weight (Loss)
1077
nonlinear. This pattern of underweighting and overweighting gives a reverse S shape to the
probability weighting DEMO Thus, in PT, the influence of a small change in probability
on the value of a gamble depends on where along the probability DEMO that changes occurs.
Conversely, in EUT, changes in probability have linear effects on the value of a gamble (i.e.,
the effect is the same regardless of where along the probability scale that change occurs)DEMO
Finally, we note that a key difference between CPT and PT DEMO in the probability weight-
ing function. Unlike PT, CPT “allows different DEMO weights for gains and losses”
1078
Journal of Management / July 2011
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1992: 302). Specifically, as Figure 2 illustrates, the probability
weighting function DEMO gains exhibits greater curvature than does the probability weighting
function for losses. In this sense, CPT suggests that people have “different attitudes toward
probability for gains than for losses” (Fennema & Wakker, 1997: 55). In contrast, PT implic-
itly assumes that probabilities influence decisions similarly for gains and losses.
Framing
The reference point plays a critical role in DEMO In particular, the reference point determines
how individuals frame (i.e., DEMO) the outcomes of a decision. For example, individuals
using one reference point may frame a given outcome as a gain, while individuals using a
different reference point may frame the same outcome as a loss (Bazerman, 1984).
Thus, scholars can test PT by manipulating framing. DEMO, framing manipulations
involve presenting identical information using different wording (Kühberger, DEMO). In par-
ticular, manipulations that alter the reference points people DEMO are often appropriate for
testing PT (Levin, Schneider, & Gaeth, 1998).
To illustrate, many experimenters have tested PT using the Asian disease problem. Study
participants are told that a given disease is expected DEMO kill 600 people. Some individuals are
given a decision option that would save 200 people, encouraging these individuals to use 600
deaths as the reference point. Thus, they frame this option as a gain. Conversely, DEMO indi-
viduals are given a decision option that would kill 400 people, encouraging these individuals
to use 0 deaths as the reference point. Thus, they frame this option as a loss. Although sav-
ing 200 people is equivalent to killing 400 in this example, study participants tend to be risk
averse when they view choices involving the former decision option (i.e., the gain frame)
but tend to be risk seeking when they view choices involving the latter (i.e., the loss frame)
(Kühberger, Schulte-Mecklenbeck, & Perner, 1999; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981).6
Distinguishing PT from the BTOF
We now turn to the other major DEMO used in management studies of risk, the BTOF. As
Table 2 DEMO, the BTOF uses organizational performance relative to aspirations to pre-
dict DEMO taking. For example, Cyert and March (1992: 228) argued that when organizations
are performing “close to a target [i.e., aspiration level], DEMO appear to be risk-seeking below
the target, [and] risk-averse above it.” DEMO, PT suggests that individuals are often risk
seeking and risk averse DEMO gambles involving outcomes below and above the reference
point, respectively, especially when those outcomes are near the reference point. Thus, in
some respects, the BTOF and PT are similar. However, they also differ in DEMO ways.
A basic difference is that PT is a theory of individual behavior, while the BTOF is a theory
that describes the behavior of organizations. In turn, the two theories emphasize different
subject matter. Specifically, DEMO BTOF offers a detailed account of decision-making processes
in organizations.7 In contrast, although PT predicts behavior, it is relatively silent on the
cognitive DEMO underlying such behavior. By extension, the BTOF specifies many con-
structs (e.g., organizational slack and routines) that do not have direct counterparts DEMO PT.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1079
Similarly, although the reference point in PT and the aspiration level in the DEMO each
divide outcomes into those that are desirable versus undesirable, the DEMO contains detailed
theory describing the sources of aspiration levels, whereas PT DEMO not have such a theory
of reference points. Specifically, as Table DEMO illustrates, the BTOF suggests that an organiza-
tion’s aspiration levels reflect DEMO stakeholders’ preferences, its past aspiration levels, its past
performance, and DEMO performance of comparable organizations (Cyert & March, 1963). This
level of specificity has enabled researchers to offer a number of proxies for DEMO levels
and, in some cases, to measure aspiration levels directly. Although PT research often uses
the status quo as the reference point (Kahneman, 2003), like other individual-level theories
of decision making under risk, DEMO generally lacks “a satisfactory theory of how reference
[points] are established and, for that matter, good empirical ways of estimating them
directly” (Luce, 1996: 192). Instead of measuring reference points, PT experimenters often
impose reference points using framing manipulations similar to the Asian disease problem
DEMO above (Kahneman, 1992).
In other respects, however, PT offers greater specificity than the BTOF does. For exam-
ple, PT’s predictions rest on its two central components, which together define the values of
gambles. By extension, PT explains decisions that involve specific outcomes and probabili-
ties. Conversely, the BTOF describes how managers search for and select solutions that will
produce organizational performance above aspirations. Thus, the BTOF does not require that
managers know either the outcomes of the decisions or the probabilities DEMO those outcomes.
In this sense, the BTOF can apply to more DEMO and ill-defined choices than those PT
describes.
Likewise, in part due DEMO the decisions the BTOF describes, its predictions about risk tak-
ing DEMO also more complex than are those researchers have derived from PT. To illustrate, the
BTOF suggests that when firm performance exceeds aspirations by a large amount, firms’
risk-taking preferences may switch from risk aversion to risk seeking (Cyert & March, 1963;
March & Shapira, 1992). Conversely, firms with exceptionally poor performance may
change aspiration levels and aspire simply to survive (March & Shapira, 1987). The BTOF’s
predictions DEMO whether low-performance firms become risk averse or risk seeking
depend on whether managers perceive the firm’s survival is threatened. In contrast, PT’s
value function clearly predicts that preferences approach risk neutrality when outcomes are
far from DEMO reference point.
As this discussion and Table 2 suggest, PT’s predictions DEMO distinct from those of both
EUT and the BTOF. As we demonstrate later, PT’s predictions are also more complex than
many researchers have assumed (see Bromiley, 2010). In the following sections, we identify
and review management research drawing on PT. This review shows that although PT DEMO
tains two central components, management research generally makes predictions exclu-
sively DEMO on the value function while ignoring the probability weighting function.
Identifying PT Research in Management
According to Web of Science, scholars have cited the Kahneman and Tversky (1979)
article that introduced PT more than 6,100 times. In addition, scholars have cited Tversky and
Kahneman’s (1992) article that introduced CPT more than 1,300 times. More than 550 DEMO
1080
Journal of Management / July 2011
citing either of these two DEMO (or both) have appeared in periodicals consistently recog-
nized as top academic journals for management research (see Note 1 for a list of the journals
we used). Given the considerable size of this literature DEMO space limitations, we employed four
steps to narrow our scope and DEMO to capture the most appropriate research for this review.
We first searched for articles using the search terms prospect theory and loss aversion. We
DEMO the latter term because loss aversion is the most frequently used aspect of PT in the
management literature. This search returned 189 articles. Second, we examined these articles
for appropriateness and fit. To focus more precisely DEMO PT-based research, we eliminated
15 articles that did not cite Kahneman DEMO Tversky (1979) or Tversky and Kahneman (1992).
Our review DEMO that several influential studies in management that drew on PT did not
appear in the sample (e.g., Amit & Schoemaker, 1993; Neale & Bazerman, 1985). Therefore,
in our third step, we added the top 5% of articles (based on citation counts per year) DEMO
lished in leading management journals that cited either of the two seminal PT articles. This
step helped ensure that we captured the most impactful DEMO in management that drew on
PT. This step added 17 articles to our sample,8 bringing the total to 191 articles.
Of this 191, we focused on 81 articles that used PT to describe decisions frequently DEMO
fronted by managers. We term these 81 articles management theory applications of PT. The
other 110 articles were decision analysis applications of PT. Due DEMO the advanced state of PT
research in the decision analysis literature, DEMO draw insights from these articles to enrich our
analysis and future research suggestions.
Management Theory Applications of PT at the Individual Level
In this DEMO, we review management theory applications of PT at the individual level.
DEMO the focus of prior work, we consider studies using PT to DEMO executive com-
pensation, negotiations, affect and motivation, and HRM.
Executive DEMO
We identified seven executive compensation studies at the individual level that drew on
PT. Traditionally, much of the literature on executive compensation has emphasized agency
theory (Devers, Cannella, Reilly, & Yoder, 2007). Agency theory generally assumes risk-
averse executives, risk-neutral shareholders, and a positive DEMO between organiza-
tional risk and return. With these assumptions, agency theorists DEMO that shareholders
should tie a portion of executives’ compensation to organizational returns, thereby discour-
aging executive risk aversion (Jensen & Meckling, 1976).
In contrast to agency theory, PT states that individuals sometimes evidence risk-seeking,
rather than risk-averse, behavior. Therefore, Eisenhardt (1989) suggested that DEMO insights
about risk taking could inform agency theory research on executive compensation. Thus far,
executive compensation research drawing on PT has emphasized two DEMO from the
value function: the reference point and loss aversion. These DEMO illustrate why such
compensation often fails to produce executive behavior consistent with shareholder interests
(e.g., Walsh & Seward, 1990).
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1081
For DEMO, Wiseman and Gomez-Mejia (1998) integrated concepts from agency theory
and DEMO to develop the behavioral agency model (BAM), which assumes that DEMO are
loss averse and that their compensation plans create reference points for them. In particular,
executives may perceive that the exercise price of DEMO stock options is an important refer-
ence point. When the price of the stock underlying their stock options exceeds the exercise
price, executives may adopt gain frames and, consistent with PT, become risk averse.
However, high incentive pay targets can lead executives to adopt loss frames and, therefore,
become risk seeking. Thus, building on arguments from PT, DEMO BAM suggests that execu-
tive compensation plans can either discourage or encourage risk aversion, depending on how
executives view the relation between firm outcomes (e.g., the stock price) and the reference
points (e.g., the exercise price) such plans make salient.
Extending this insight, Devers, Wiseman, and Holmes (2007) used a policy capturing
approach to examine the subjective values managers placed on stock options. In particular,
they used DEMO prices managers assign to stock options as a proxy for subjective values. They
argued that rising stock prices elicit gain frames and declining prices DEMO loss frames.
Furthermore, they assumed that stock price volatility reflects the DEMO of the underlying stock
(e.g., Sharpe, 1964). Consistent with DEMO expectations, they found evidence that managers
assigned a premium for stock DEMO volatility when stock prices were declining but dis-
counted for volatility when stock prices were increasing.9 They interpreted this result as
evidence that, consistent with the value function, managers are risk seeking in loss frames
and are risk averse in gain frames. This results contrasts with an assumption DEMO the Black–
Scholes (1973) model, which assumes that the value DEMO stock options relates positively to
volatility, regardless of stock price trends. DEMO, if compensation committees rely
exclusively on the Black–Scholes logic to design DEMO option packages, changes in the
volatility and trend of the underlying DEMO price could result in managers perceiving that
they are overcompensated or undercompensated.
Scholars have also used PT to examine when and how executives decouple DEMO wealth from
firm performance, thereby circumventing some of the intended effects DEMO incentive compensa-
tion (Bebchuk & Fried, 2006). For example, DEMO and McGuire (2008) argued that CEOs are
loss averse, and DEMO firm performance decreases their concerns about the potential losses
stemming from equity-based pay. Consistent with this argument, these scholars found that
CEOs were more likely to reduce equity holdings and tended to reduce them by a DEMO mag-
nitude when firm performance was poor. Likewise, also arguing that DEMO are loss averse,
Dunford, Oler, and Boudreau (2008) found that executives increasingly left their firms volun-
tarily when the price of DEMO firm’s stock was far below the exercise price. Thus, although many
DEMO use stock options as a retention mechanism (Fulmer, 2009), the value function provides
insight into conditions when this form of compensation might DEMO executive turnover.
In short, despite drawing only on PT concepts related DEMO the value function, these studies
have modified extant management theory by DEMO that executive compensation can
motivate either risk-averse or risk-seeking behaviors, depending DEMO whether recipients
frame the potential consequences of those behaviors as gains or losses. The studies also
identify conditions that encourage executives to alter their DEMO to the downside conse-
quences of equity-based pay. However, this area DEMO study also illustrates two shortcomings
of many management theory applications of PT.
1082
Journal of Management / July 2011
First, these findings rest heavily on whether scholars have correctly identified the reference
point. Because PT lacks DEMO theory of reference points, scholars have had to make somewhat
arbitrary DEMO in this regard. For example, the observation that some executives use
DEMO value of their stock options as loan collateral (Devers, Wiseman, DEMO al., 2007) suggests that
they may use reference points other than the exercise price. Indeed, consistent with the notion
that managers often focus on the best or worst possible scenario (March & Shapira, 1987),
some executives may use a stock’s highest or lowest recent prices DEMO a reference point. Second,
none of these studies considers other important PT concepts, such as diminishing sensitivity
and decision weights. We return to both of these issues in a broader discussion below.
Negotiations
We found DEMO studies that used PT to study negotiations. These studies often experimen-
tally manipulated the frames negotiators used to make decisions and examined the influence
DEMO such frames on bargaining behavior and outcomes. For example, researchers can DEMO
gain frames by instructing study participants that they are negotiating over profits they will
receive. Conversely, researchers can create loss frames by instructing the participants that
they are bargaining over expenses they must pay (De Dreu, Carnevale, Emans, & Van de
Vliert, 1994). In general, these studies relied on insights from the value function, especially
loss aversion and reference points. However, some of the studies also considered the effects
of diminishing sensitivity in the value function.
Researchers have identified three consequences DEMO loss aversion for negotiations. First,
negotiators in loss frames may become risk seeking and behave aggressively, while negotia-
tors in gain frames may become risk averse and behave cooperatively. For example, Neale
and Bazerman (DEMO) told study participants either to minimize their losses in the negotia-
DEMO or to maximize their gains, presumably placing them in loss frames DEMO gain frames,
respectively. These scholars found that the loss-frame negotiators made fewer concessions
and acted more competitively than gain-frame negotiators did.
The second DEMO of loss aversion can explain why agreements are sometimes
difficult to reach in negotiations. Negotiators tend to view their own concessions as losses
and DEMO of their counterparts as gains. Reflecting loss aversion, negotiators value their
DEMO (which they view as losses) roughly twice as much as they value equivalent
magnitude concessions by their counterparts (which they view as gains). In turn, they may
be unwilling to make concessions (Kahneman, 1992; Kahneman & Tversky, 1995).10 If each
negotiator approaches the DEMO this way, “the resulting four-to-one gap may be diffi-
cult to DEMO and the negotiators may have difficulty reaching an agreement (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1986: 262; also see Bazerman, 1984). For example, negotiations involving two
individuals attempting to minimize their losses (i.e., they DEMO in loss frames) often end in
impasses wherein no final settlement DEMO reached (Bottom & Studt, 1993).
Together, these two consequences DEMO loss aversion provide a foundation for several nego-
tiations studies. For example, Kristensen and Garling (1997) examined negotiations over the
price of a good. They created gain (loss) frames for buyers by setting the DEMO initial offer
price for the good below (above) the buyers’ reservation prices. They found that buyers in
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1083
gain DEMO made fewer counteroffers, were more likely to reach an agreement, and pur-
chased the good at a higher price than buyers in loss DEMO did. Thus, this study is consistent
with earlier work suggesting that DEMO frames promote cooperation. It also suggests that gain
frames may reduce the likelihood of impasse in negotiations.
However, Bottom (1998) examined a situation in which loss frames can have similar
effects. In particular, he created a scenario wherein individuals reaching a settlement in a
negotiation would have DEMO play a gamble to determine how much money they would receive
or pay. As such, reaching a settlement created risk for negotiators. If gain-frame individuals
are risk averse, they should be reluctant to reach a settlement in this scenario. Conversely, if
loss-frame individuals are risk seeking, they DEMO be eager to reach a settlement. Consistent
with his expectations, Bottom DEMO that loss-frame negotiators were more cooperative and
were more likely to reach a settlement than gain-frame negotiators were. This study under-
scores why scholars DEMO understand what constitutes risk in a given decision.
Examining another interesting phenomenon, De Dreu et al. (1994) considered how nego-
tiators behave when they know their counterparts are in gain or loss frames. These scholars
DEMO that negotiators perceived that their counterparts were more cooperative when they
knew the counterparts were in loss frames. Perhaps as a result, they conceded less to and
demanded more from opponents in loss frames. Thus, this study suggests that people’s nego-
tiating behavior may depend on what they DEMO about their counterpart’s frame.
A third way scholars have used loss aversion in negotiations research is to explain the
types of concessions a negotiator DEMO value most. Specifically, a counterpart’s concessions
may mean more to a DEMO when they reduce the negotiator’s losses, relative to when
they increase DEMO or her gains (Northcraft, Brodt, & Neale, 1995). Scholars have examined
this argument by drawing on another of the value function’s DEMO, diminishing sensitivity.
For example, Northcraft et al. (1995) proposed that, due to the curvature of the value
function, a negotiator will DEMO a counterpart’s concessions more when they involve out-
comes near the negotiator’s reference point. This diminishing sensitivity can produce several
interesting paradoxes in negotiations. DEMO illustrate, as Northcraft et al. explained, assume an
individual is bargaining for concessions in two different categories of outcomes, and one of
these categories is more important to him or her than the other one DEMO If that person receives
a concession near the reference point in the less important category, he or she may value that
concession more than a concession further from the reference point in the more important
category. DEMO study demonstrates the importance of understanding the reference points
people use to determine the subjective values of outcomes.
In another interesting demonstration of diminishing DEMO, Northcraft, Preston,
Neale, Kim, and Thomas-Hunt (1998) created schedules specifying the outcomes partici-
pants were allowed to concede in a DEMO These schedules resembled value functions
of different shapes. Specifically, some schedules DEMO diminishing sensitivity in that, as
individuals made more concessions, subsequent ones were less important. The schedules for
other individuals specified either that all DEMO were equal (i.e., linear sensitivity) or
that subsequent successions were DEMO important than were earlier concessions (i.e., increas-
ing sensitivity). Consistent with their expectations, these scholars found that diminishing
sensitivity in the value function enabled the negotiators to reach an agreement beneficial to
both of DEMO
1084
Journal of Management / July 2011
In sum, studies on negotiations provide several insights into the effects of framing on
decisions. Furthermore, the studies underscore the need to understand both how people view
risk in DEMO given decision and which reference point they use to evaluate the relevant out-
comes. For example, owing to diminishing sensitivity, individuals may be DEMO about
changes in gains and losses far from the reference point. Likewise, a person may frame an
outcome as a loss, even if DEMO outcome only reduces his or her gains.
Affect and Motivation
We identified eight studies drawing on PT to study affect (i.e., positive or DEMO states,
feelings, moods, or emotions that change over time; DEMO, J. M. George, 1991) and motivation
(i.e., internal forces DEMO encourage individuals to engage in and maintain certain behaviors;
e.g., DEMO & Porter, 1991) in diverse settings. These studies drew their predictions primar-
ily from the value function. In particular, they generally considered the concept of loss aver-
sion and, to lesser extents, reference points DEMO diminishing sensitivity.
Three studies drew on loss aversion to explain employee motivation. Steel and Konig
(2006), for example, argued that individuals separate DEMO of a task into gains (e.g., its
rewards) and losses (e.g., its costs). Consistent with loss aversion, they hypothesized that
DEMO view tasks more favorably and are more motivated to engage in them when they
offer immediate gains and delayed losses. Similarly, also drawing on loss aversion, Grant
(2007) theorized that employees are attuned to the impact their work has on other people,
and they perceive that DEMO work has greater impact when that work minimizes organiza-
tional losses (DEMO, prevents crises), relative to when the work creates gains for DEMO organiza-
tion (e.g., improves its image). Furthermore, Heath, Knez, and Camerer (1993) argued that
employees become accustomed to the financial and other benefits the organization provides.
In turn, reflecting loss aversion, DEMO may react negatively and their motivation may
decline when their organizations eliminate or reduce such benefits.
In addition, van Buiten and Keren (2009) examined the language people use to motivate
others. Specifically, they studied the tactics people use to convince others to select high-risk
or low-risk options. DEMO found that people who promote a low-risk option try to encourage
other people to view that option through a gain frame rather than a DEMO frame. Because gain
frames tend to evoke risk-averse preferences, using gain DEMO to promote low-risk policies
may be an effective way to motivate employees. In contrast, however, people promoting
high-risk options did not believe that DEMO frames were more convincing than gain frames
were. In turn, they DEMO have difficulty convincing people to select high-risk policies. As we
emphasize further below, this study illustrates the importance of understanding how indi-
viduals interpret decisions.
Regarding affect, Coughlan and Connolly (2001) examined how reference points and loss
aversion influenced individuals’ satisfaction with their performance on a task. DEMO,
individuals experienced dissatisfaction or satisfaction when their performance was below or
above, respectively, the performance level they expected to achieve. Thus, a person’s perfor-
mance expectations may constitute an important reference point for him DEMO her. Moreover,
consistent with loss aversion, individuals may experience greater DEMO when
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1085
performance DEMO below their expectations than the satisfaction they experience when
performance exceeds their expectations. Accordingly, this study further supports the argument
that individuals may evaluate the same outcome differently depending on the reference point
they use.
Other DEMO have drawn on diminishing sensitivity in the value function to examine
individuals’ affective responses to their level of voice in decisions (i.e., their DEMO
that they have been able to convey their preferences, concerns, etc.). For example, Hunton,
Hall, and Price (1998) found DEMO voice positively influences individuals’ views about pro-
cedural fairness and decision control, as well as the individuals’ levels of satisfaction with
the decision. Further, consistent with diminishing sensitivity, the positive influence of addi-
tional voice DEMO as it reached higher levels. Extending this work, Price et al. (2001)
studied relations between voice and perceptions of fairness in participants DEMO four coun-
tries (Great Britain, Mexico, the Netherlands, and the United States). Price et al. argued that
individuals may compare their DEMO of voice to reference points reflecting national norms
for voice in their home countries. For values of voice above and near the reference point,DEMO
the relation between voice and fairness had a concave shape. This result is consistent with the
shape of the value function. For values of DEMO far above the reference point, however,
the relation between voice DEMO fairness had a convex shape, which is inconsistent with the
value DEMO Price et al. also showed that these results generally held for participants from
all four countries.
Despite the insights these studies have provided, they generally use concepts from PT in
a manner somewhat detached from the DEMO arguments of the theory. For example, as a
theory of decision DEMO under risk, PT does not speak directly to affect and motivation.
DEMO, although relations among the variables in some of the studies coincided DEMO the shape
of the PT value function, the results of such DEMO do not support PT directly. Indeed, the
PT value function describes DEMO relations between outcomes and their subjective values to
decision makers. In addition, several studies did not specify a reference point. Absent a clear
reference point, the gains and losses of interest are somewhat ill defined.
HRM
Six studies drew on PT to examine HR-related questions. The majority of DEMO research
examined selection and performance evaluation, but one study examined employees’ DEMO
ingness to accept HR policies. Again relying primarily on the value function, the studies
considered loss aversion, reference points, and diminishing sensitivity.
For example, Kristof (1996) argued that selection resembles a gamble with positive and
negative outcomes. Consistent with this argument, Highhouse and Johnson (1996) argued
that selectors used job incumbents’ performance as a reference point and DEMO the
anticipated performance of prospective candidates as gains or losses relative to this point.
Drawing on loss aversion, they found that people prefer a candidate who represents no per-
formance change from the incumbent over candidates DEMO possible performance repre-
sents a loss.
1086
Journal of Management / July 2011
In addition, Wong and Kwong (2005a, 2005b) found diminishing sensitivity in selection
and performance evaluation. Specifically, decision makers perceived that differences between
job candidates were larger when low magnitude numbers quantified such differences (e.g., the
percentage of errors is DEMO vs. 6%) than when high magnitude numbers did (e.g., the DEMO
of nonerrors is 95% vs. 94%). In other words, consistent DEMO a concave value function, addi-
tional units of high (low) DEMO outcomes were less (more) important to decision makers.
Thus, individuals DEMO be able to manipulate similar decisions in organizations by varying the
presentation of information.
Finally, Bamberger and Fiegenbaum (1996) drew on concepts in PT to examine how
managers evaluate HR strategies. They argued that managers DEMO loss or gain frames
depending on how HR-related outcomes compare to reference points, and this framing
increases those managers’ openness toward risk-seeking and risk-averse HR policies, respec-
tively. They further argued that, because individuals in DEMO same organization may use dif-
ferent reference points, some managers will DEMO in gain frames, while others will be in loss
frames. The DEMO differences in risk-taking preferences may create conflict that disrupts
HR strategy implementation.
In short, some of these studies demonstrate that the value function may shape personnel
decisions in organizations. Again, however, this research largely ignores DEMO probability
weighting function.
More broadly, the body of management research applying DEMO at the individual level of
analysis identifies several reasons that people in the same organization may interpret identi-
cal decisions differently. With this thought DEMO mind, we now turn to reviewing research that
has used PT DEMO higher levels of aggregation.
Management Theory Applications of PT
at Higher Levels of Aggregation
Although it is an individual-level theory, scholars often apply PT to explain higher-level
phenomena. Indeed, in contrast to the 28 individual-level studies we identified, we found 53
at higher levels of aggregation. Research utilizing PT at higher levels primarily falls into one
of two broad categories. DEMO first uses firm performance distributions to explain relations
between firm risk and return. The second examines the antecedents and consequences of
firms’ specific risk-taking DEMO (e.g., acquisitions).
Organizational Risk and Return
Early applications of PT in the management literature examined relations between orga-
nizational risk and return. DEMO identified 13 management studies in this area.
Much of this work draws on Bowman (1980), who measured returns as mean return on
equity over time and risk as the variance in such returns. He found DEMO associations
between organizational risk and return and termed this relation a paradox, because it runs
counter to the positive risk-return relation assumed in many finance and economics models
(Armour & Teece, 1978; Sharpe, 1964)DEMO Drawing on PT to explain negative risk-return rela-
tions, Bowman (1982) argued that firms use median returns in the industry as a reference
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1087
point. DEMO that PT implies risk seeking when outcomes are below the reference point, he
argued that firms performing below the industry median take more risks.
Subsequent studies extended Bowman’s work by considering additional industries and
countries and DEMO examining more intricate relations between organizational risk and return.
Studying U.S. firms in nearly 50 industries, for example, Fiegenbaum and Thomas (1988)
found a negative risk-return association for firms performing below the industry median DEMO
found a positive association for firms performing above the industry median. Jegers (1991)
also found this general pattern of results in a sample of Belgian firms. The authors of both
of these studies concluded that DEMO results supported PT.
More recent work offers three important criticisms challenging this conclusion. First,
many scholars have raised concerns related to research methodology.11 DEMO example, manag-
ers may associate risk more with losses than with DEMO variability in outcomes, raising ques-
tions about the use of variance DEMO to capture risk (March & Shapira, 1987). Building
on this observation, Miller and Leiblein (1996) introduced a measure of downside risk,
which they based on the lower partial moments of firms’ return DEMO (also see Miller
& Reuer, 1996). In addition, Miller DEMO Leiblein (1996: 91) found that “downside risk results
in improved DEMO performance. Performance shows a negative relation with subse-
quent downside risk.” Thus, the findings of organizational risk-return studies may hinge on
the risk measure used. As we discuss below, this possibility underscores the need to select
risk-taking measures carefully when testing PT.
A second criticism concerns the reference DEMO The BTOF research on aspiration levels
we discussed earlier suggests that managers may compare firm performance to criteria other
than industry performance metrics. Specifically, challenging the widespread use of median
performance in the industry as a DEMO point, Bromiley (1991b) argued that high-
performing firms clearly do DEMO aspire to lower performance. Instead, such firms may use
their own DEMO history as a reference point. Likewise, as noted, firms in danger of
bankruptcy may focus on survival (March & Shapira, 1987). DEMO course, if firms are not using
the reference point researchers assume, results that appear to support PT may not do so
(Nickel & Rodriguez, 2002).
The third criticism concerns whether PT would actually predict a negative relation
between organizational risk and return. As we noted above, the PT value function implies
that risk aversion and risk seeking are DEMO near the reference point, but they decline
toward risk neutrality when DEMO are far above and below the reference point, respec-
tively. Thus, as Bromiley (2010) argued, the PT value function would imply either a positive
association between organizational risk and return or no association at DEMO
In sum, Bowman’s (1980) early insights led to a number DEMO studies investigating organi-
zational risk-return relations. However, this research stream is DEMO to criticisms related
to the measurement of risk and reference points. Furthermore, in our view, the PT value
function is inconsistent with a DEMO risk-return association, despite the claims of many
studies. To these criticisms, we add that this literature ignores the probability weighting
function.
In addition, we note that the risk evident in return distributions depends partly on DEMO
risk-taking decisions of managers (Palmer & Wiseman, 1999). Reflecting this argument,
more recently, scholars have moved away from measures of firm risk based on the return
distribution in favor of specific measures of DEMO risk-taking behaviors.
1088 Journal of Management / July 2011
Firm Risk-Taking Behaviors
Using similar DEMO to those found in the risk-return studies above, several studies
have DEMO on PT to examine firm risk-taking behaviors. Nearly half of all the articles
(40 out of 81) we reviewed fell within this area DEMO research. This work generally assumes
that firm-level actions are manifestations of the risk-taking preferences PT predicts for indi-
viduals. Although the dependent variables are DEMO at the firm level, some of the studies
consider predictors at DEMO individual level, while others consider predictors at higher levels.
As with DEMO other work we have reviewed, these studies draw their predictions only DEMO
the value function, and few of them consider diminishing sensitivity in DEMO value function.
Individual-level antecedents of firm risk-taking behaviors. Amit and Schoemaker (DEMO)
argued that the frames managers adopt influence their decisions about how to use organiza-
tional resources. Some studies examine this possibility by arguing DEMO managers perceive
that external threats increases the possibility of potential losses (DEMO & Dutton, 1988).
In turn, they use loss aversion to explain how managers respond to a variety of perceived
external threats to DEMO firm. For example, Chattopadhyay, Glick, and Huber (2001) found
DEMO CEOs who perceived threats to their organizations’ resources responded with externally
directed actions (e.g., adjustments to targeted markets), which the authors presumed DEMO
riskier than were internally directed actions (e.g., adjustments to administrative procedures).
Similarly, E. George, Chattopadhyay, Sitkin, and Barden (2006) DEMO that managers
become risk seeking when they perceive that threats to the legitimacy of the organization
will reduce its access to resources. In turn, they might respond through risky organizational
responses that are inconsistent with industry DEMO Conversely, Sharma (2000) found that
managers may initiate strategies that DEMO to institutional pressures when threats involve
issues stemming from the organization’s impact on the natural environment.
As earlier discussed, scholars have also argued that incentive compensation creates gain and
loss frames for executives.12 Like the research DEMO reviewed above, this work frequently assumes
that CEOs use the exercise DEMO of stock options as a reference point. For example, Zhang,
DEMO, Smith, Pfarrer, and Khanin (2008) argued that CEOs frame DEMO stock options as
possible losses, particularly when firm performance is poor. DEMO turn, they argued that this loss
frame facilitates risky, unethical behavior (Lehman & Ramanujam, 2009). In support, they
found evidence that firms were more likely to exhibit earnings manipulations when CEOs’ stock
options DEMO underwater, and this effect was stronger when the firms were performing DEMO
Other studies have drawn on PT to explain specific organizational actions involving large
resource commitments. For example, also assuming that CEOs use the exercise price of
stock options as a reference point, Larraza-Kintana, Wiseman, Gomez-Mejia, and Welbourne
(2007) found that as the values of the CEOs’ in-the-money stock options increased, firms
took less risk, which they measured DEMO several organizational actions (e.g., new market
entries and capital investments). This result supports the notion that CEOs with positively
valued stock options DEMO gain frames, which promote risk-averse behaviors at the firm
level. Likewise, Matta and Beamish (2008) argued that because CEOs are loss averse, they
adopt gain frames and become risk averse when they have lucrative DEMO holdings and
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory 1089
in-the-money DEMO options, especially when they near the end of their tenures. Using DEMO
national acquisitions to measure risk taking, they found that as the DEMO of aging CEOs’
equity holdings and in-the-money stock options increased, firms DEMO less risk.
Departing from most prior work drawing on PT at higher levels of aggregation, Devers,
McNamara, Wiseman, and Arrfelt (2008) provided evidence of a curved value function for
in-the-money stock options. Using DEMO variant of Miller and Bromiley’s (1990) strategic risk
measure (i.e., R&D intensity, capital investment intensity, and debt-to-equity ratio), Devers
DEMO her colleagues provided evidence that the value of restricted stock held by CEOs was
negatively associated with firm risk taking. However, Devers et al. also argued that, consis-
tent with PT, the subjective values CEOs DEMO to stock options rise at a decreasing rate. In
other words, DEMO the stock price is extremely high, further increases appear to be DEMO
important to CEOs. In support, Devers et al. found that increases DEMO the value of stock options
exhibited progressively weaker marginal impacts on the level of firm risk CEOs initiated.
Finally, a creative study by Pennings and Smidts (2003) estimated individuals’ value func-
tions and examined their DEMO in a field setting. Specifically, they constructed farmers’
value functions using DEMO individuals’ preferences in a series of hypothetical choices, and
they found DEMO the shape of those value functions differed across farmers. Farmers with
value functions exhibiting the S shape PT assumes (see Figure 1) tended DEMO use production
systems where pricing fluctuations frequently produce significant gains and losses (e.g.,
purchasing animals). However, farmers whose value functions were DEMO S shaped were more
likely to use production systems where gains and losses due to pricing fluctuations were less
of a concern (e.g., DEMO animals). They offered two alternative explanations for this result.
First, DEMO who frequently make decisions involving gains and losses may develop
S-shaped value functions. Second, people with S-shaped value functions may prefer produc-
tion systems in which decisions involving gains and losses are commonplace.
Higher-level antecedents of DEMO risk-taking behaviors. Scholars have also drawn on the
value function, primarily DEMO aversion, to study higher-level antecedents of firm risk-taking
behaviors. Like the DEMO risk and return studies, these studies argue that conditions
at the DEMO or industry level produce gain and loss frames for organizations as a whole,
thereby facilitating firm-level risk aversion and risk seeking, respectively. For example,
declining industry demand may create loss frames that facilitate risk DEMO Consistent with
this argument, Wood (2009) argued that declining industry DEMO encourages acquisitions.
Scholars have made similar arguments in several studies examining firms’ investments
in innovation, which are presumably risky. For example, Abrahamson and DEMO
(1993: 492) argued that many organizations copy other firms’ innovations DEMO, consis-
tent with loss aversion, the “perceived threat of a competitive disadvantage far outweighs the
perceived value of an equally large competitive advantage.” DEMO other words, the possibility
of incurring losses by not copying innovations DEMO weighs heavily in organizations.
Similarly, Mone, McKinley, and Barker (1998) theorized that firms experiencing perfor-
mance declines encounter possible losses, which DEMO risk-seeking investments in
innovation. Strong performance, however, can place organizations in gain frames, facilitat-
ing investments in low-risk, existing products and services (W. K. Smith & Tushman, 2005).
1090
Journal of Management / July 2011
In addition, two studies drew on loss aversion to explain interactions between organiza-
tions and external stakeholders. DEMO (1989) argued that creditors are loss averse, which
makes them DEMO to realize losses by forcing borrowers into bankruptcy. He argued that
this hesitancy is evidence of risk-seeking behavior because it reduces the funds available
DEMO the creditor (e.g., through liquidation) if the borrower ultimately fails. DEMO and
McLaughlin (2001) suggested that the risk-averse approach to managing stakeholders is to
address all of the needs of all stakeholders. Arguing that DEMO firms adopt loss frames
and become risk seeking, these scholars theorized DEMO such firms neglect the interests of
some stakeholders and attend only to the interests of stakeholders most critical to immediate
survival.
Like the organizational DEMO studies above, some scholars have measured firm
performance relative to a DEMO point. These studies argue that performance below the
reference point creates loss frames and risk-seeking behavior, whereas performance above
the reference point creates gain frames and risk-averse behavior (Palmer & Wiseman, 1999).
Citing this DEMO, Markovitch, Steckel, and Yeung (2005) assumed that firms with DEMO
returns above (below) the industry average are in gain (loss) frames. In turn, they found that
firms with above-average (below-average) stock returns subsequently invested less (more)
in high-risk actions than in low-risk actions. In addition, arguing that divesting a previously
acquired business reflects risk aversion, Shimizu (2007) found that firms are likely to divest
such businesses when their performance is negative, but this effect weakens as their perfor-
mance decreases further.
Finally, some research has drawn on PT to examine how firm risk taking influences firm
performance. For example, using average performance in the industry as the reference point,
Wiseman and Catanach (1997) found evidence that below-average firm performance creates
loss frames and facilitates risk-seeking behavior. Furthermore, they found that the relations
between such behavior and subsequent performance (i.e., return on assets) were generally
negative (also DEMO Latham & Braun, 2009). Conversely, Morrow, Sirmon, Hitt, DEMO Holcomb
(2007) found evidence that investors responded positively when firms with declining perfor-
mance engaged in certain risk-taking behaviors (i.e., valuable and DEMO new product
introductions and mergers and acquisitions). They interpreted their results as evidence that
the stock market values some forms of risk seeking DEMO firms have experienced perfor-
mance declines.
In short, drawing primarily on DEMO value function, research on the antecedents of firm
risk-taking behaviors generally DEMO that gain frames give rise to risk-averse behavior
and loss frames give rise to risk-seeking behavior at the firm level. Some studies have also
DEMO the firm performance consequences of the risk-taking behavior, but these results
DEMO depend on both the type of risk examined and the performance measure used.
These studies also illustrate several inconsistencies in research that draws on DEMO to
explain higher-level phenomena. In particular, scholars have used different proxies DEMO the
reference point. The BTOF and other work (Fiegenbaum, Hart, & Schendel, 1996; Short &
Palmer, 2003) argue that firms DEMO many reference points and that they may change over
time. However, DEMO lack of understanding of which reference points firms are using limits
our ability to compare results across studies and to conclude that the research DEMO firms’ risk-
taking behaviors definitively supports PT. For example, W. R. DEMO (2008) argued that firms
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1091
can DEMO either past performance or industry median performance as reference points.
Importantly, DEMO also found that performance above past performance levels increased R&D
intensity, but performance above the industry median decreased R&D intensity. Thus, DEMO
could conclude that this study either supports PT or contradicts PT, DEMO on the refer-
ence point we assume. Furthermore, several of the DEMO we reviewed did not specify a
reference point at all. This practice resembles modeling risk taking as a function of wealth,
which may DEMO fit PT’s assumptions.
In addition, the definition of risk can be DEMO problematic when scholars use PT at
higher levels. For example, whereas DEMO (2007) used divestitures to measure risk-
reducing actions, Markovitch et DEMO (2005) used divestitures to measure high-risk actions.
Furthermore, although Latham DEMO Braun (2009) used R&D as an indicator of risk seeking,
the results of factor analyses suggest that R&D intensity loads DEMO when other mea-
sures of risk seeking, such as capital investments (Miller & Bromiley, 1990) or diversifica-
tion (Palmer & Wiseman, DEMO), load positively. Likewise, whereas Mone et al. (1998)
argued that performance declines would facilitate risk-seeking investment in innovation,
Markovitch et DEMO (2005) argued that several forms of such investment (e.g., technology alli-
ances) are low-risk actions. In turn, these two studies reach DEMO that are somewhat
inconsistent with one another. Like inconsistencies in the reference point, the plethora of
risk-taking metrics makes it difficult to discern whether the firm risk-taking studies, as a
whole, definitively support PT.
In DEMO discussions that follow, we offer suggestions to help scholars operationalize
reference DEMO and risk-taking measures more consistently.
An Analysis of Management Theory Applications
of PT and Suggestions for Future Research
The previous two sections illustrated that DEMO drawing on PT has made contributions
in diverse areas of management scholarship. We now turn to analyzing the use of PT in the
management DEMO and making suggestions for future research.
Before proceeding, we would like DEMO emphasize that although few management theory
applications draw on CPT, it DEMO be more appropriate for studying many topics than PT is.
Strictly speaking, as noted above, PT applies only to two outcome gambles, whereas CPT
can accommodate more than two outcomes. Thus, to the extent that many management deci-
sions involve more than two possible outcomes, we encourage greater use of CPT.
With this thought in mind, we organize the remainder of this section by discussing con-
cerns related to (a) DEMO parts of PT while ignoring others, (b) interpreting the value DEMO
tion, (c) interpreting the probability weighting function, and (d) using PT in organizational
settings. Table 3 summarizes many of the issues DEMO raise in this section.
Partial Use of PT
As our review demonstrated, management research drawing on PT typically considers
only the value function. More specifically, nearly all of the 81 studies drew on loss aversion
1092
Journal of Management / July 2011
Table 3
Analysis and Future DEMO Directions
Partial Use of Prospect Theory (PT)
• Studies almost DEMO ignore the probability weighting function
• Research that does not consider the full model is not testing PT
• Studies not using the full DEMO must explain the effects of PT’s constructs
Interpretation of the Value Function
• Declining curvature predicts risk neutrality for large gains and losses
• DEMO isolation assumption questions the relevance of past performance
• Many decisions are mixed gambles and may promote risk aversion
• The value function may DEMO across firms and individuals
Interpretation of the Probability Weighting Function
• The effects of decision weights may counter the effects of the value function
DEMO Decision weights may promote general risk aversion
• The probability weighting function requires specified outcomes and probabilities
• Sensitivity to differences in probabilities varies DEMO the level of probabilities
Organizational Applications
Level of Analysis
• PT is an individual-level theory; whether it is homologous is debatable
• It may be unclear who makes which decision in organizations
• Perceptions likely vary DEMO individuals and organizations
Alternative Explanations
• Risk taking may reflect profit-maximizing behavior
• Researchers must differentiate PT from other theories (see Table 2)
• Preferences for immediate versus future outcomes shape risk taking
• Costs DEMO risk taking may influence behavior in ways not anticipated in PT
• Organizational and cognitive biases influence choices
Ambiguous Reference Points
• PT predictions DEMO heavily on the reference point
• We need more evidence about which reference points are used and when
• Research should specify the reference DEMO, preferably ex ante
Risk-Taking Measures
• Different measures of firm risk DEMO may capture different constructs
• Firms may take several risks simultaneously
• Risk-taking measures in management research may not align with PT
• People DEMO risk differently
and, to a lesser extent, reference points. Few studies drew on diminishing sensitivity.
However, studies incorporating the probability weighting function were virtually absent.
Table 3 includes some of the consequences of using PT DEMO
We stress that the implications of ignoring aspects of PT are nontrivial. For example,
Levy and Levy (2002) claimed that their study DEMO made choices inconsistent with
PT. However, when calculating the value of DEMO gambles the participants were evaluating,
Levy and Levy inserted probabilities in lieu of decision weights. Wakker (2003) recalculated
the value of the DEMO using decision weights, as specified in PT (see Equation 2a above),
and he concluded that Levy and Levy’s data agreed fully with PT. Moreover, Bromiley
(2010) demonstrated that PT makes different predictions depending on whether scholars use
the value function alone, the probability weighting function alone, and/or both functions
together.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1093
Therefore, if scholars do not use all of PT, they cannot readily argue that their results
either support or refute it. PT itself is a DEMO of concepts that were somewhat disjointed
before Kahneman and Tversky (1979) integrated them into a coherent theory (Wu, Zhang,
& Gonzalez, 2004). Thus, when scholars use some aspects of PT while not accounting for
others, they are not using PT. Rather, they are DEMO on individual constructs and argu-
ments (e.g., the influence of loss aversion on choice), which may be useful but do not reflect
DEMO itself.
In this respect, we do not suggest that PT’s individual DEMO cannot inform manage-
ment research. However, scholars must be clear whether DEMO are deriving hypotheses from
PT itself or from a subset of its individual constructs. Absent the unifying framework PT
provides, scholars must also carefully explain how those constructs will shape the phenom-
ena of interest. Accordingly, we now discuss implications of the concepts embedded in PT’s
two central DEMO: the value function and the probability weighting function.
Interpretations of the DEMO Value Function
In Table 3, we list four implications of the DEMO function our review suggested were
either underutilized or misrepresented in management research. First, the curvature of the
value function is essential to PT (DEMO & Kahneman, 1981). Because the function is
nearly linear far DEMO the reference point, risk seeking and risk aversion do not increase DEMO
outcomes move further from the reference point. Rather, as we have DEMO, the value
function posits risk neutrality at large distances from the DEMO point.
Second, because PT assumes individuals evaluate outcomes by comparing them DEMO a
reference point, past outcomes should not influence choice, beyond their possible effect on
the reference point. Some scholars have challenged PT’s assumption DEMO choices do not
depend directly on past outcomes (Sitkin & Pablo, 1992), but it is fundamental to PT.
Specifically, it reflects PT’s isolation assumption: Individuals consider choices in isolation
rather than considering their impact on total wealth. In turn, concepts such as loss aversion
and diminishing sensitivity pertain to the subjective values of possible (i.e., future) gains and
losses. Although studies often operationalize the value function using historical (i.e., expe-
rienced) gains and losses, we emphasize that potential outcomes should be the focus of
research drawing on PT.
Third, many decisions in organizations constitute mixed gambles because both gains and
losses are possible. For DEMO, most risky business choices (e.g., acquisitions or new
product introductions) can have positive or negative outcomes. Indeed, many managers
would not consider a choice risky unless it could have negative outcomes (March & Shapira,
1987). Although management theory applications of PT have largely ignored DEMO implica-
tions of mixed gambles, they have important consequences for risk DEMO
Importantly, the PT value function implies strong risk aversion for mixed DEMO
(Bromiley, 2010). Tversky and Kahneman (1992: 316) argued DEMO this risk aversion is due
to “[t]he pronounced asymmetry in the value function.” Specifically, in Figure 1, the kink
at the reference point DEMO a sharp difference between the subjective value of a gain and
the subjective value of an equivalent loss. This large kink exists because loss DEMO
1094
Journal of Management / July 2011
applies to negative outcomes, whereas it does not apply to positive ones (Bromiley, 2009).
In DEMO words, the potential losses mean more to the individuals than the DEMO gains do.
If managers’ decisions often constitute mixed gambles yet scholars do not consider the
resulting risk aversion, results appearing to support PT actually may not do so. At the same
time, incorporating this PT prediction into our scholarship can enrich our understanding of
managers’ decisions and their DEMO
Fourth, research should consider the possibility that the value function varies DEMO indi-
viduals and firms. Although experimental studies have elicited functional forms and param-
eters that define the shape of the value functions for individuals (e.g., Abdellaoui, 2000;
Abdellaoui, Bleichrodt, & Paraschiv, 2007), these studies nearly always use monetary
gambles with university students. However, as Pennings and Smidts (2003) demonstrated,
we cannot assume that the DEMO or shapes of the value function are the same for all
individuals. Thus, research needs to document value functions in organizations, determine
how DEMO aggregate individuals’ value functions up to the level of the firm, DEMO identify the
conditions under which such aggregation is warranted (e.g., G. Chen, Mathieu, & Bliese,
2004; Klein, Dansereau, & Hall, 1994).
The parameters or shape of the value function should also vary systematically across
firms. For example, losses that appear immense for small businesses may appear trivial for
many large firms. Likewise, it seems quite problematic to assume all firms view potential
risks the same way. This DEMO addresses boundary conditions for PT, as Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) DEMO that the PT value function may not accurately predict choices
involving either ruinous or insignificant losses.
Interpretations of the PT Probability Weighting Function
In DEMO of our earlier conclusion that management research frequently ignores decision
weights, DEMO 3 emphasizes four aspects of the probability weighting function future man-
agement research should consider.
First, although management scholars often attribute PT’s predictions about risk taking to
loss aversion, Kahneman and Tversky (1979: 280) DEMO that “decision weights could pro-
duce risk aversion and risk seeking” even without loss aversion. To illustrate, consider a
choice between either $5 with certainty or a gamble with a 50% probability of $0 and a DEMO
probability of $10. The underweighting of the probabilities (see Figure 2) reduces the value
of the gamble (e.g., see Equations 2a and DEMO) below its expected value, resulting in a prefer-
ence for the certain outcome (i.e., $5 for sure). Thus, the probability weighting function
produces risk aversion in this example. Alternatively, if the same gamble involved losses, the
underweighting of probabilities would make the value of the gamble greater than its (nega-
tive) expected value. According to PT, individuals would then prefer the gamble, evidencing
risk seeking. Thus, in DEMO examples, loss aversion (from the value function) is not neces-
DEMO to generate the “risk averse above; risk seeking below” prediction scholars DEMO attri-
bute to PT.
Importantly, the probability weighting function’s decision weights DEMO also generate the
opposite prediction. The probability weighting function suggests that individuals overweight
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1095
low DEMO (see Figure 2). When the decision weight is larger than DEMO probability, the
value of gambles involving gains can exceed the expected DEMO, and the value of gambles
involving losses can be below the (negative) expected value (e.g., see Equation 2a and 2b).
By extension, due to the overweighting of low probabilities, individuals may be DEMO to
accept low-probability gambles involving gains but avoid such gambles involving losses.
Thus, PT predicts that individuals can exhibit a fourfold pattern of risk taking: “risk aver-
sion for gains and risk seeking for losses of high probability; risk seeking for gains and risk
aversion for losses of low probability” (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992: 297). Perhaps owing
to the general tendency to ignore the probability weighting function, however, we DEMO no
management theory applications of PT incorporating this prediction. This omission limits
our ability to explain commonly observed phenomena using PT. For example, risk-seeking
behavior for low-probability gains explains the popularity of lotteries, and risk-averse
behavior for low-probability losses explains the prevalence of insurance against catastrophic
yet unlikely DEMO (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Likewise, managers face some
choices DEMO involve extremely high probabilities (e.g., production cost savings from new
equipment) and extremely low probabilities (e.g., developing a new drug). Thus, considering
PT’s fourfold pattern of risk taking provides a new lens through which to examine many
managerial decisions.
Second, the fourfold pattern notwithstanding, DEMO probability weighting function also
contributes to a general pattern of risk aversion for many choices. Figure 2 reveals that most
probabilities are underweighted. By DEMO, even though the probabilities of all possible
outcomes in a gamble DEMO sum to one, the decision weights for all of the possible
DEMO of a risky choice will often sum to less than one (DEMO & Tversky, 1979).
That the decision weights typically sum to DEMO than one contributes to a general tendency
toward risk aversion. Management research drawing on PT has ignored this general pattern
of risk aversion the DEMO weighting function frequently implies.13
Third, the importance of the probability weighting DEMO poses challenges to manage-
ment researchers. Although experimental studies can apply it by providing outcomes and
probabilities to participants, researchers conducting field studies must identify the outcomes
managers are considering and must develop reasonable estimates of DEMO probabilities manag-
ers assign to such outcomes. Moreover, if researchers wish DEMO utilize the probability weight-
ing function CPT implies, they must be DEMO to identify which outcomes managers perceive
as gains and which ones managers perceive as losses, because the relations between prob-
abilities and decision weights are different for gains and losses (see Figure 2). Thus, DEMO
difficulties of properly representing outcomes and probabilities may be insurmountable in
many areas of management research.
However, using the probability weighting function might be plausible in some situations.
For example, researchers examining well-defined CEO incentives might be able to make
plausible assumptions about the probabilities of potential outcomes. DEMO, if there
are rich data specifying the outcomes of past decisions DEMO it is plausible managers consider
such data, scholars may be able DEMO infer the influence of probabilities on managerial choices.
Likewise, the argument DEMO individuals infer probabilities is evident in Sine, Haveman, and
Tolbert’s (DEMO) study of the effects of external institutions on firm founding rates DEMO in
Steel and Konig’s (2006) illustration that CPT can enrich theories of motivation.
1096 Journal of Management / July 2011
Fourth, the shape of the probability weighting function implies that managers’ sensitivi-
ties to differences in probabilities DEMO For probabilities near 50%, for example, the nearly
horizontal slope of the probability weighting function (see Figure 2) implies that “people are
DEMO insensitive to probability difference[s]” (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992: 312).
DEMO, note the sharp increase in the slopes near 0% and 100%. DEMO this region, slight
differences in probabilities lead to dramatic differences in DEMO weights. Thus, there is a
need to understand how individuals infer DEMO (see J. E. Smith & von Winterfeldt,
2004, for a review of the vast literature on how individuals infer probabilities).
Using DEMO in Organizational Settings
We now turn to issues specifically associated with applying PT outside experimental set-
tings. Our purpose is not to discourage researchers DEMO using PT outside of the lab. Rather,
it is to note the challenges in such applications in the hopes of encouraging richer use DEMO PT.
Herein, we discuss issues related to (a) levels of DEMO, (b) accounting for alternative
explanations in empirical work, (c) identifying reference points, and (d) measuring risk
taking. Again, we DEMO this discussion in Table 3.
Level of analysis. As our review demonstrated, applying PT to complex, multilevel orga-
nizational settings can present several DEMO and methodological challenges. In our
view, many studies using PT at DEMO levels implicitly use it as a homologous theory. In
other words, DEMO assume its constructs have the same meanings and relations across levels
(DEMO Chen, Bliese, & Mathieu, 2005). As Table 3 suggests, PT may not be as homologous as
many scholars assume.
For example, in organizations, it may be unclear who makes the decisions researchers
examine. Many studies attempt to minimize this concern by focusing on the CEO, but other
top- (Hambrick, 1994) and middle-level managers (Kuratko, Ireland, Covin, & Hornsby,
2005) influence decisions as well. As our review of studies at the individual level showed,
there are several DEMO why these individuals might interpret decisions differently.
Depending on their location and job, for example, managers attend to different immediate
concerns (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967) and have different access to information (Thompson,
1967). Therefore, it is unlikely that all organizational members perceive potential outcomes
and probabilities similarly. The possibility that some individuals do not have value DEMO
and probability weighting functions resembling those in Figures 1 and 2 produces additional
complexity (Abdellaoui, 2000; Bleichrodt & Pinto, 2000; Pennings & Smidts, 2003).
Given these sources of variation, generalizing PT’s predictions DEMO individual-level
behavior to draw conclusions about the behavior of firms increases the potential for cross-
level fallacies (e.g., Rousseau, 1985). Consistent with arguments offered by others (Hitt,
Beamish, Jackson, & Mathieu, DEMO; Klein et al., 1994), to test PT definitively in organiza-
tional settings, scholars must identify the appropriate decision makers and account for the
possibility that they interpret decisions differently (Bromiley, Miller, & Rau, 2001; Svenson,
1996). Likewise, scholars need to consider alternative explanations for their findings. We
now turn to this issue.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1097
Alternative DEMO Scholars who use PT in organizational settings should recog-
nize, and DEMO account for, alternative explanations for evidence that appears to support
PT. DEMO 3 includes five such alternative explanations.
First, scholars should consider the DEMO that managers are simply acting sensibly to
achieve their personal or organizational goals. For example, if managers believe a risky
behavior will increase performance, an empirical study finding that low-performing firms
enacted the behavior more than did high-performing firms would not necessarily support PT.
Rather, it is plausible that managers in the low-performing firms felt more pressure to
improve performance, and so took an action expected to do so.
Thus, to claim a purely PT-based explanation for risk taking, scholars need evidence that
the behaviors observed are incompatible with either managers’ goals or those of the DEMO
zation. For example, in a product pricing experiment, Ho and Zhang (2008) found that the
risk-seeking behaviors of loss-frame individuals reduced their DEMO in a hypothetical
task. The finding that the behaviors were inconsistent with performance-maximizing behav-
ior bolstered the authors’ conclusion that the behaviors reflected risk-seeking DEMO
Often, experiments using PT account for profit-seeking behavior by equating the DEMO
values of the available gambles. For example, Miller and Shapira (2004) examined the prices
individuals set when buying and selling call and put options, which provide rights to buy and
sell assets (respectively) at a given exercise price. Arguing that call (put) options create gain
(loss) frames, they found that individuals’ pricing of call options evidenced DEMO aversion and
individuals’ pricing of put options evidenced risk seeking. These pricing decisions were
inconsistent with the expected values of the options, thereby bolstering Miller and Shapira’s
(2004) conclusion that the results reflected the individuals’ DEMO preferences.
Second, researchers need to differentiate between PT and the BTOF. DEMO 2 and our
earlier discussion suggest that the two theories make distinct predictions. However, to dif-
ferentiate the two theories, scholars will need DEMO derive their predictions more directly and
rigorously from the theories themselves.
Third, in organizational settings, managers likely expect that the outcomes of many DEMO
sions involving risk will not occur immediately after the choice. Thus, DEMO addition to PT
explanations, researchers must account for the possibility that DEMO preferences for
immediate outcomes and those that will occur in the distant future likely vary (Shelley, 1993;
Thaler, 1981).
Fourth, DEMO risk-taking decisions in experiments generally involve no added cost, risk
taking DEMO organizations requires resources. For example, Voss, Sirdeshmukh, and Voss (2008)
found evidence that risk-seeking managers invest more in exploration than exploitation, but
only when their organizations had sufficient financial slack to support exploration. DEMO,
Chattopadhyay et al.’s (2001) study that we reviewed earlier found that risk-seeking behavior
is more likely when organizations have the financial resources DEMO fund it. Thus, researchers
applying PT in organizational settings must account DEMO the cost to implement risk-averse or
risk-seeking decisions.
Fifth, scholars must DEMO PT predictions from the effects of known organizational
and cognitive biases. Whereas the experiments on which Kahneman and Tversky (1979)
based PT provided clear explanations of outcomes and their probabilities, in organizations,
the specification of outcomes and their probabilities depend on organizational processes.
Thus, individuals’ perceptions of the outcomes and probabilities may incorporate a variety
1098 Journal of Management / July 2011
of biases and other issues DEMO with both individual and organizational information
processing. For example, March and DEMO (1958) noted that retransmissions of information
may reduce uncertainty about that information, a phenomenon termed uncertainty absorp-
tion. Likewise, Bromiley (1987) DEMO numerous systematic biases in different kinds
of organizational forecasts. While marketers proposing a new product may tend to optimistic
forecasts, for example, sales DEMO whose incentives tie to forecasts may tend to conservative
forecasts.
Regarding cognitive biases, loss aversion can help explain the tendency to continue tasks
once investments are made (i.e., escalating commitment; Arkes & Blumer, 1985; Brockner,
1992), preferences for the current state of affairs (i.e., the status quo bias; Kahneman,
Knetsch, & Thaler, 1991; Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988), and the reluctance to relinquish
possessed goods (i.e., endowment; Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, 1990; Tversky &DEMO
Kahneman, 1991). Thus, scholars need to consider whether such cognitive biases are mani-
festations of loss aversion or are independent constructs that DEMO related to loss aversion.
More broadly, scholars should be aware that DEMO cognitive biases can confound empirical
tests of PT.
As this discussion implies, scholars must contend with several confounds when testing
PT. When applying PT in organizational settings, additional concerns related to the measure-
ment of important constructs also emerge, as we now illustrate.
Ambiguous reference points. Our review demonstrates that management scholars fre-
quently draw on PT to argue that DEMO or firms behave differently when outcomes are
above versus below a reference point. Moreover, gains and losses with identical probabilities
have different decision weights in CPT (see Figure 2). Thus, as Table 3 suggests, identifying
the reference point is critical.
Given PT’s experimental roots, wherein researchers manipulated reference points, little
guidance exists about how to identify and measure them in nonexperimental settings.
Scholars have noted the plethora of reference points DEMO in both individual-level (Kahneman,
1992) and organizational-level (Fiegenbaum et DEMO, 1996) research. Thus, there is a need for
more precise DEMO about the origins of reference points, especially when we seek to
DEMO experimental findings to settings outside the lab (e.g., Fischhoff, 1996; Short &
Palmer, 2003; Svenson, 1996).
For example, without knowing when individuals or firms are likely to use one reference
point DEMO another, PT can be difficult to falsify in organizational settings. Illustrating DEMO
concern, Fiegenbaum et al. (1996: 223) noted that in field research, “any variable(s) that
highlights a particular target or objective DEMO capable of establishing a reference point.”
Thus, results counter to PT DEMO mean that the researcher assumed a different reference
point than the decision maker used. Alternately, they could mean that the researcher used the
correct reference point but PT was not predictive.
Researchers may need to collect DEMO variety of objective and subjective data to understand
which reference points individuals and organizations use (Fiegenbaum et al., 1996). Indeed,
exclusive DEMO on archival data implicitly assumes that managers interpret a decision the
way researchers interpret it (e.g., Short & Palmer, 2003). Ironically, DEMO, the notion of
framing continues to demonstrate how and why individuals DEMO decisions differently.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory 1099
Thus, “[t]o get a sense of how subjects are reasoning, it is useful to let them speak for
themselves” (Lopes, 1996: 184). For example, Devers, Wiseman, et al. (2007) used a ques-
tionnaire to verify how study participants interpreted and used the information they were
DEMO Furthermore, scholars could use content analyses of company reports to identify DEMO
reference points firms are utilizing (Short & Palmer, 2003). Despite the dangers of desir-
ability and self-serving biases (Short & Palmer, DEMO), such qualitative data can help
specification and reduce the possibility that researchers attribute outcomes to incorrect
causes. Moreover, longitudinal, repeated measures research DEMO may provide insights
into how decision makers alter their selection of reference points over time, thereby helping
us move beyond the static choices that has often characterized PT-based research
(Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Phillips, & Hedlund, 1994; Slattery & Ganster, 2002). We also encour-
age the DEMO of other underused approaches to studying decision making, including case study
DEMO, quasi-experiments, field experiments, and surveys.
Furthermore, we encourage additional work along the lines of the aforementioned
Pennings and Smidts (2003) study, which estimated participants’ value functions and used
them to study attributes of DEMO individuals’ organizations. More broadly, we urge scholars to
identify reference points DEMO ante, especially when conducting research at higher levels of
aggregation. If DEMO, scholars should also test their models with alternate assumptions
about the DEMO point decision makers utilize.
Risk-taking measures. In many experiments testing PT, DEMO of the available gambles is
certain, often making the risky option (i.e., the probabilistic one) readily apparent. Although
risk has a well-defined DEMO in such a simple experiment, it has numerous, different
meanings in organizations. For example, the risks confronting managers (e.g., the possibility
of termination) sometimes depart from those confronting organizations (e.g., Palmer &
DEMO, 1999). Furthermore, different firm-level measures of risk often capture different
constructs (e.g., Miller & Bromiley, 1990).
Firms may also take several risks simultaneously (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1993).
Sometimes, one source of risk may exacerbate another. Wiseman and Catanach (1997), for
example, found that financial firms paying more to access funding (i.e., interest rate risk)
could also be at a higher risk of defaulting DEMO other liabilities (i.e., liquidity risk). At other
times, however, risk-seeking behavior in some activites may counterbalance risk-averse
behavior in others (McNamara, Moon, & Bromiley, 2002). To illustrate, Gomez-Mejia,
Haynes, Nunez-Nickel, Jacobson, and Moyano-Fuentes (2007) demonstrated that founding
families accept DEMO higher risk of firm failure in an effort to preserve family control, yet they also
minimize performance variability to avoid exacerbating this risk. However, if firms are behav-
ing in accordance with the isolation assumption of PT, they should address risky decisions
sequentially (i.e., one at a time) rather than trading off one form of risk for other forms of risk.
Moreover, we emphasize that people have different beliefs about what is risky (Bromiley
& Curley, 1992; Kühberger, 1998; Sitkin & Weingart, 1995; Weber & Milliman, 1997).
Perhaps because of such variation, as our review showed, some researchers use a given
behavior (e.g., a divestiture) to measure risk aversion, whereas other researchers use that
behavior to measure risk seeking. Therefore, scholars should take greater care in defining,
ex ante, what constitutes risk-averse and risk-seeking choices. Furthermore, when possible,
scholars should examine the construct validity of their risk measures.
1100
Journal of Management / July 2011
We also suggest that management DEMO shift some attention away from exclusive reli-
ance on secondary data and toward primary field data capable of capturing executives’ per-
ceptions of risk DEMO actual organizational environments and situations. For example, we are
encouraged by DEMO et al.’s (2007) approach to measuring risk taking. These
scholars had CEOs assess (a) how frequently their firms engaged in nine strategic DEMO
and (b) the risk associated with each of the nine actions. In turn, these scholars captured risk
taking at the organizational level as a weighted average of the frequency with which the
CEO’s firm used DEMO actions and their perceived riskiness to him or her. This approach
helps to ensure that the measures scholars use to capture risk accurately reflect DEMO
perceptions of that risk. Scholars could use a similar approach to distinguish different forms
of risk taking. Such measures have construct validity and, thus, could advance the state of
PT research in management (e.g., Boyd, Gove, & Hitt, 2005).
Conclusion
Management studies drawing on PT have made valuable contributions in diverse research
streams, including executive compensation, DEMO, affect and motivation, HRM, rela-
tions between organizational risk and DEMO, and firm risk-taking behaviors. Thus, we urge
scholars to continue drawing on PT in the future.
However, management scholars have yet to realize the full potential of PT. In particular,
management studies typically draw DEMO from only one of PT’s two central compo-
nents. In addition, DEMO research uses PT in ways inconsistent with the theory. Therefore, it
DEMO unclear whether this body of management research definitively supports PT. Given
this concern, we stress that scholars using PT should draw their predictions directly from
both components of the theory. In this respect, we have offered suggestions to aid scholars
seeking to use PT more precisely and comprehensively.
DEMO addition, we provided guidance to enrich the use of PT in DEMO settings.
Specifically, researchers should exercise caution when applying PT at higher DEMO of aggre-
gation. They should also consider several alternative explanations for findings that appear to
support PT. In addition, while emphasizing the importance of understanding the reference
points decision makers use, we also suggested how researchers can study reference points
more thoroughly in the future. Finally, we noted challenges in measuring risk taking in orga-
nizational settings and highlighted approaches DEMO believe can enhance the quality of future
work in this regard.
In short, we are excited about the contributions management theory applications of PT
have made, and we hope our work will be a catalyst for additional, yet more precise and
consistent, use of PT in the DEMO
Notes
We selected the following journals: 1. Academy of Management Journal, Academy of Management Review,
Administrative Science Quarterly, Human Resource Management, DEMO of Applied Psychology, Journal of
Management, Journal of Management Studies, DEMO of Organizational Behavior, Management Science,
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1101
Organization DEMO, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Personnel Psychology, and
Strategic DEMO Journal. We also used this list of journals to identify articles to review.
2. For simplicity, we use the term outcome(s) in DEMO of the term potential outcome(s) for the remainder of the
DEMO, unless we are drawing specific attention to the difference between potential DEMO historical (i.e., experienced)
outcomes.
3. Figure 1 is based on functional forms and parameters from Tversky and Kahneman (1992).
4. To understand why the curvature of the value function reflects risk-taking preferences, consider a gamble
with two equally probable outcomes of $0 and –$20. The DEMO value of the gamble is –$10. The total value of
this gamble will be a weighted sum of the subjective value of 0 and DEMO subjective value of –20, and so will fall on
a line DEMO these two subjective values (depending on the probabilities). If the DEMO function is convex, then the
subjective value of –$10 will be DEMO the line joining the subjective values of 0 and –20. Because the subjective
value of the gamble is greater than the subjective value of DEMO, the individual will prefer the gamble, thereby
illustrating risk seeking. A symmetric argument provides risk aversion above the reference point.
5. Figure 2 DEMO based on functional forms and parameters from Tversky and Kahneman (1992)DEMO
6. In this respect, many experimental tests of prospect theory (PT) implicitly demonstrate that people’s risk-
taking preferences are inconsistent with conventional notions of rationality, according to which such preferences
should not vary when individuals receive identical information in slightly different ways (Tversky, Slovic, &
DEMO, 1990).
7. We thank an anonymous reviewer for encouraging us DEMO highlight this distinction.
8. Of the 28 articles that we identified in this step, 6 of them were already in our sample, and DEMO of the articles
were entrepreneurship articles, which we eliminated. Therefore, we added 17 articles to our sample. We thank an
anonymous reviewer for DEMO us to identify some of the most influential articles drawing on PT.
9. Devers, Wiseman, and Holmes (2007) attempted to minimize the DEMO that differences in the objective
values of the stock options accounted for their results. For example, in the gain frame, the Black–Scholes value DEMO
higher for the high-volatility stock than for the low-volatility stock. However, DEMO that same frame, the subjective
values assigned by the study participants DEMO higher for the low-volatility stock than for the high-volatility stock.
We thank an anonymous reviewer for encouraging us to clarify this issue.
10. Tversky DEMO Kahneman (1991) estimated the displeasure of losses to be more than twice the pleasure of
equivalent gains. Subsequent studies have supported this assertion (Bleichrodt, Pinto, & Wakker, 2001; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992)DEMO
11. There are several methodological debates surrounding the statistical techniques and measures used to study
relations between organizational risk and return. Some of these DEMO, while important, do not pertain directly to
PT itself. Therefore, DEMO refer interested readers to Andersen, Denrell, and Bettis, (2007), Baucus, Golec, and
Cooper (1993), Bromiley (1991a), Bromiley DEMO Rau (2010), Henkel (2009), Ruefli (1990), and DEMO and
Bromiley (1991).
12. The studies we include in the DEMO reviewing research on executive compensation consider dependent
variables at the individual level. Here, we consider dependent variables at the firm level.
13. The amount of risk aversion varies depending on the parameters in the probability weighting DEMO as
well as those of the value function (Blavatskyy, 2005; DEMO, 2010).
References
Abdellaoui, M. 2000. Parameter-free elicitation of utility and probability weighting functions. Management
Science, 46: 1497-1512.
Abdellaoui, M., Bleichrodt, H., & Paraschiv, C. 2007. Loss aversion under prospect theory: A parameter-free mea-
surement. Management Science, 53: 1659-1674.
Abrahamson, E., & DEMO, L. 1993. Institutional and competitive bandwagons: Using mathematical modeling
as a tool to explore innovation diffusion. Academy of Management Review, 18: 487-517.
DEMO, M. 1953. Behavior of the rational man before risk: Criticism of the American school postulates and axioms.
Econometrica, 21: 503-546.
1102
Journal of Management / July 2011
Amit, R., & Schoemaker, P. J. H. 1993. Strategic assets and organizational rent. Strategic Management Journal, 14:
33-46.
Andersen, T. J., Denrell, J., & Bettis, R. A. 2007. Strategic responsiveness and Bowman’s risk-return paradox.
Strategic Management Journal, 28: 407-429.
Arkes, H. R., & Blumer, C. 1985. The DEMO of sunk cost. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 35: 124-140.
Armour, H. O., & Teece, D. J. 1978. Organizational structure and economic performance: Test of multi-divisional
hypothesis. Bell Journal of Economics, 9: 106-122.
Bamberger, P., & Fiegenbaum, A. 1996. The role of strategic reference points in explaining the nature and conse-
quences of human resource DEMO Academy of Management Review, 21: 926-958.
Baucus, D. A., Golec, J. H., & Cooper, J. R. 1993. Estimating risk-return relationships: DEMO analysis of measures.
Strategic Management Journal, 14: 387-396.
Bazerman, M. DEMO 1984. The relevance of Kahneman and Tversky’s concept of framing to organizational behavior.
Journal of Management, 10: 333-343.
Bebchuk, L. A., & DEMO, J. M. 2006. Pay without performance: Overview of the issues. Academy of Management
Perspectives, 20: 5-24.
Bernoulli, D. 1738/1954. Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk (L. Sommer, Trans.)DEMO Econometrica,
22: 23-36.
Bernstein, P. L. 1996. Against the gods: The remarkable story of risk. New York: John Wiley.
Black, F., & Scholes, M. 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. DEMO of Political Economy, 81:
637-654.
Blavatskyy, P. R. 2005. Back to the St. Petersburg paradox? Management Science, 51: 677-678.
Bleichrodt, DEMO, & Pinto, J. L. 2000. A parameter-free elicitation of the probability weighting function in medical
decision analysis. Management Science, 46: 1485-1496.
Bleichrodt, H., Pinto, J. L., & Wakker, P. P. 2001. Making DEMO use of prospect theory to improve the pre-
scriptive use of expected utility. Management Science, 47: 1498-1514.
Bottom, W. P. 1998. Negotiator risk: Sources of uncertainty and the impact of reference points on negotiated agree-
ments. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 76: 89-112.
Bottom, W. P., & Studt, A. 1993. Framing effects and the distributive aspect DEMO integrative bargaining.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 56: 459-474.
Bowman, E. H. 1980. A risk/return paradox for strategic management. Sloan Management Review, 21: 17-31.
Bowman, E. H. 1982. Risk seeking by troubled firms. Sloan Management Review, 23: 33-42.
Boyd, B. K., Gove, S., & Hitt, M. A. 2005. Construct measurement in strategic management DEMO: Illusion or
reality? Strategic Management Journal, 26: 239-257.
Brockner, DEMO 1992. The escalation of commitment to a failing course of action: DEMO theoretical progress.
Academy of Management Review, 17: 39-61.
Bromiley, P. DEMO Do forecasts produced by organizations reflect anchoring and adjustment? Journal of
DEMO, 6: 201-210.
Bromiley, P. 1991a. Paradox lost or at least DEMO found: A comment on “Mean-variance approaches to risk-
return relationships in DEMO: Paradox lost.” Management Science, 37: 1206-1210.
Bromiley, P. 1991b. Testing a causal model of corporate risk taking and performance. Academy of Management
DEMO, 34: 37-59.
Bromiley, P. 2009. A prospect theory model of DEMO allocation. Decision Analysis, 6: 124-138.
Bromiley, P. 2010. Looking at DEMO theory. Strategic Management Journal, 31: 1357-1370.
Bromiley, P., & Curley, S. P. 1992. Personality and individual differences in risk-taking. In J. F. Yates (Ed.), Risk-
taking behavior: 87-132. New York: John Wiley.
Bromiley, P., Miller, K. D., & Rau, D. 2001. Risk in strategic management research. In M. A. Hitt, R. E. Freeman,
& J. S. Harrison (Eds.), The Blackwell handbook of strategic management: 259-288. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Bromiley, P., & Rau, D. DEMO Strategic decision making. In S. Zedeck (Ed.), American Psychological Association’s
DEMO of industrial and organizational psychology (vol. 1): 161-182. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Chattopadhyay, P., Glick, W. H., & Huber, G. P. 2001. Organizational actions in response to threats and opportuni-
ties. Academy of Management Journal, 44: 937-955.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1103
Chen, G., Bliese, P. D., & Mathieu, J. E. 2005. Conceptual DEMO and statistical procedures for delineating and
testing multilevel theories of homology. Organizational Research Methods, 8: 375-409.
Chen, G., Mathieu, J. E., & Bliese, P. D. 2004. A framework for conducting multilevel construct validation. DEMO
F. J. Dansereau & F. Yanmmarino (Eds.), Research in multi-level DEMO: The many faces of multi-level issues
(vol. 3): 273-303. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Chen, W. R. 2008. Determinants of firms’ backward- and forward-looking R&D search behavior. Organization
Science, 19: 609-622.
Coughlan, R., & Connolly, T. 2001. Predicting affective responses to unexpected outcomes. Organizational
DEMO and Human Decision Processes, 85: 211-225.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. G. 1963. A behavioral theory of the firm. Oxford, DEMO: Blackwell.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. G. 1992. A behavioral theory of the firm (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
D’Aveni, R. A. 1989. Dependability and organizational bankruptcy: An application of DEMO and prospect theory.
Management Science, 35: 1120-1138.
De Dreu, C. DEMO W., Carnevale, P. J. D., Emans, B. J. M., & Van de Vliert, E. 1994. Effects of gain loss frames in
DEMO: Loss aversion, mismatching, and frame adoption. Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO
Processes, 60: 90-107.
Devers, C. E., Cannella, A. A., Reilly, G. P., & Yoder, M. E. 2007. Executive compensation: DEMO multidisciplinary
review of recent developments. Journal of Management, 33: 1016-1072.
Devers, C. E., McNamara, G., Wiseman, R. M., & Arrfelt, M. 2008. Moving closer to the action: Examining com-
pensation design effects on firm risk. Organization Science, 19: 548-566.
Devers, C. E., DEMO, R. M., & Holmes, R. M. 2007. The effects of DEMO and loss aversion in managerial
stock option valuation. Academy of Management Journal, 50: 191-208.
Dunford, B. B., Oler, D. K., & DEMO, J. W. 2008. Underwater stock options and voluntary executive turnover: A
multidisciplinary perspective integrating behavioral and economic theories. Personnel Psychology, 61: 687-726.
DEMO, W. 1954. The theory of decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 51: DEMO
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. 1981. Behavioral decision DEMO: Processes of judgment and choice. Annual
Review of Psychology, 32: DEMO
Eisenhardt, K. 1989. Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of Management Review, 14: 57-74.
Fennema, H., & Wakker, P. 1997. Original and cumulative prospect theory: A discussion of empirical differences.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10: 53-64.
Fiegenbaum, A., Hart, S., & Schendel, D. 1996. Strategic reference point theory. Strategic Management Journal,
DEMO: 219-235.
Fiegenbaum, A., & Thomas, H. 1988. Attitudes toward risk and the risk-return paradox: Prospect theory explana-
tions. Academy of Management Journal, 31: 85-106.
Fischhoff, B. 1996. The real world: What good DEMO it? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65:
232-248.
Fulmer, I. S. 2009. The elephant in the room: Labor market influences DEMO CEO compensation. Personnel
Psychology, 62: 659-695.
George, E., Chattopadhyay, DEMO, Sitkin, S. B., & Barden, J. Q. 2006. Cognitive underpinnings of institutional persis-
tence and change: A framing perspective. Academy of Management Review, 31: 347-365.
George, J. M. 1991. State or trait: DEMO of positive mood on prosocial behaviors at work. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 76: 299-307.
Gomez-Mejia, L. R., Haynes, K. T., Nunez-Nickel, M., Jacobson, K. J. L., & Moyano-Fuentes, J. 2007.
Socioemotional DEMO and business risks in family-controlled firms: Evidence from Spanish olive oil DEMO
Administrative Science Quarterly, 52: 106-137.
Grant, A. M. 2007. Relational DEMO design and the motivation to make a prosocial difference. Academy of
Management Review, 32: 393-417.
Hambrick, D. C. 1994. Top management groups: DEMO conceptual integration and reconsideration of the “team” label.
Research in Organizational Behavior, 16: 171-213.
Heath, C., Knez, M., & Camerer, C. 1993. The strategic management of the entitlement process. Strategic
Management Journal, 14(S2): 75-93.
Henkel, J. 2009. The risk-return paradox for strategic management: Disentangling true and spurious effects.
Strategic Management Journal, 30: 287-303.
1104
Journal of Management / July 2011
Highhouse, S., & Johnson, M. A. 1996. Gain/loss asymmetry and riskless choice: Loss aversion in choices among
job finalists. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 68: DEMO
Hitt, M. A., Beamish, P. W., Jackson, S. E., & Mathieu, J. E. 2007. Building theoretical and empirical bridges across
levels: Multilevel research in management. Academy of Management Journal, 50: 1385-1399.
Ho, T., & Zhang, J. 2008. Designing pricing contracts for boundedly rational customers: Does the framing the fixed
fee matter? Management Science, 54: 686-700.
Hollenbeck, J. R., Ilgen, D. R., Phillips, J. DEMO, & Hedlund, J. 1994. Decision risk in dynamic two-stage contexts:
Beyond the status quo. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79: 592-598.
Hunton, J. E., Hall, T. W., & Price, K. H. 1998. DEMO value of voice in participative decision making. Journal of
Applied Psychology, DEMO: 788-797.
Jackson, S. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1988. Discerning threats and opportunities. Administrative Science Quarterly, 33:
370-387.
Jawahar, I. DEMO, & McLaughlin, G. L. 2001. Toward a descriptive stakeholder theory: DEMO organizational life cycle
approach. Academy of Management Review, 26: 397-414.
Jegers, M. 1991. Prospect theory and the risk-return relation: Some Belgian evidence. DEMO of Management
Journal, 34: 215-225.
Jensen, M., & Meckling, DEMO 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behaviour, agency costs, and DEMO struc-
ture. Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305-360.
Kahneman, D. DEMO Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings. Organizational Behavior and DEMO
Decision Processes, 51: 296-312.
Kahneman, D. 2003. A perspective on DEMO and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist,
58: 697-720.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. 1990. Experimental tests of the endowment effect and the Coase
theorem. Journal of Political DEMO, 98: 1325-1348.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. 1991. The endowment effect, loss aversion, and status quo bias.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5: 193-206.
Kahneman, D., & DEMO, D. 1993. Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective on risk taking.
Management Science, 39: 17-31.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica, DEMO: 263-291.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1995. Conflict resolution. A cognitive perspective. In K. J. Arrow, R. H. Mnookin,
L. Ross, A. Tversky, & R. B. Wilson (Eds.), Barriers to conflict resolution: 44-60. New York: Norton.
Klein, K. J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, R. I. 1994. Levels issues in theory development, data collection, and analysis.
Academy of Management Review, 19: 195-229.
Knight, DEMO 1921. Risk, uncertainty, and profit. New York: Augustus Kelly.
Kristensen, H., & Garling, T. 1997. The effects of anchor points and DEMO points on negotiation process and
outcome. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 71: 85-94.
Kristof, A. L. 1996. Person-organization fit: An integrative DEMO of its conceptualizations, measurement, and
implications. Personnel Psychology, 49: 1-49.
Kühberger, A. 1998. The influence of framing on risky decisions: A DEMO Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 75: 23-55.
Kühberger, A., Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., & Perner, J. 1999. The effects of framing, DEMO, probability, and
payoff on risk preference in choice tasks. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 78: 204-231.
Kuratko, D. F., Ireland, R. D., Covin, J. G., & Hornsby, J. S. 2005. DEMO model of middle-level managers’ entrepre-
neurial behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, DEMO: 699-716.
Larraza-Kintana, M., Wiseman, R. M., Gomez-Mejia, L. R., & Welbourne, T. M. 2007. Disentangling compensation
and employment risks using DEMO behavioral agency model. Strategic Management Journal, 28: 1001-1019.
Latham, S. DEMO, & Braun, M. 2009. Managerial risk, innovation, and organizational decline. Journal of Management,
35: 258-281.
Lawrence, P. R., & Lorsch, J. W. 1967. Differentiation and integration in complex organizations. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 12: 1-47.
Lehman, D. W., & Ramanujam, R. 2009. Selectivity in organizational rule violations. Academy of Management
Review, 34: 643-657.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1105
Levin, I. P., Schneider, S. L., & Gaeth, G. J. 1998. DEMO frames are not created equal: A typology and critical analysis
of DEMO effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 76: 149-188.
Levy, DEMO, & Levy, M. 2002. Experimental test of the prospect theory value function: A stochastic dominance
approach. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO: 1058-1081.
Lopes, L. L. 1996. When time is of the essence: Averaging, aspiration, and the short run. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 65: 179-189.
Luce, R. D. 1996. When time is of the essence: Averaging, aspiration, and the short run Commentary on aspects of
Lola Lopes’ paper. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65: DEMO
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on DEMO and risk taking. Management Science, 33:
1404-1418.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1992. Variable risk-return tradeoffs and the focus of DEMO Psychological Review,
99: 172-183.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations. New York: John Wiley.
Markovitch, D. G., Steckel, J. H., & Yeung, B. 2005. Using capital markets as market intelligence: Evidence from
the pharmaceutical industry. Management Science, 51: 1467-1480.
Markowitz, H. 1952. The utility of wealth. Journal of Political Economy, DEMO: 151-158.
Matta, E., & Beamish, P. W. 2008. The accentuated CEO career horizon problem: Evidence from international
acquisitions. Strategic Management Journal, DEMO: 683-700.
Matta, E., & McGuire, J. 2008. Too risky to hold? The effect of downside risk, accumulated equity wealth, and firm
performance on CEO equity reduction. Organization Science, 19: 567-580.
McNamara, G., Moon, H., & Bromiley, P. 2002. Banking on commitment: Intended and unintended consequences
of an organization’s attempt to attenuate escalation of commitment. DEMO of Management Journal, 45:
443-452.
Miller, K. D., & DEMO, P. 1990. Strategic risk and corporate performance: An analysis of alternative risk mea-
sures. Academy of Management Journal, 33: 756-779.
Miller, K. D., & Leiblein, M. J. 1996. Corporate risk-return relations: Returns variability versus downside risk.
Academy of Management Journal, 39: 91-122.
Miller, K. D., & Reuer, J. J. 1996. Measuring organizational downside risk. Strategic DEMO Journal, 17:
671-691.
Miller, K. D., & Shapira, Z. 2004. An empirical test of heuristics and biases affecting real option valuation. DEMO
Management Journal, 25: 269-284.
Mone, M. A., McKinley, W., & Barker, V. L. 1998. Organizational decline and innovation: A contingency DEMO
work. Academy of Management Review, 23: 115-132.
Morrow, J. L., Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., & Holcomb, T. R. 2007. Creating value in the face of declining perfor-
mance: Firm strategies and organizational recovery. Strategic Management Journal, 28: 271-283.
Neale, M. A., & Bazerman, M. H. 1985. The effects of framing and negotiator DEMO on bargaining behav-
iors and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 28: 34-49.
Nickel, M. N., & Rodriguez, M. C. 2002. A review of research on the negative accounting relationship between risk
and return: Bowman’s paradox. Omega, 30: 1-18.
Northcraft, G. B., Brodt, S. E., & Neale, M. A. 1995. Negotiating with nonlinear subjective utilities—Why some
DEMO are more equal than others. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO: 298-310.
Northcraft, G. B., Preston, J. N., Neale, M. A., Kim, P. H., & Thomas-Hunt, M. C. 1998. Non-linear DEMO
functions and negotiated outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 73: 54-75.
Palmer, T. B., & Wiseman, R. M. 1999. Decoupling risk taking from income stream uncertainty: A holistic model
of risk. Strategic Management Journal, 20: 1037-1062.
Pennings, J. M. E., & Smidts, A. 2003. The shape of utility functions and organizational behavior. Management
Science, 49: 1251-1263.
Price, K. H., Hall, T. W., van den Bos, K., Hunton, J. E., Lovett, S., & Tippett, M. J. 2001. Features of the value
function for voice and their consistency DEMO participants from four countries: Great Britain, Mexico, the
Netherlands, and the United States. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 84: 95-121.
DEMO, D. M. 1985. Issues of level in organizational research: Multi-level and cross-level perspectives. Research
in Organizational Behavior, 7: 1-37.
1106
Journal of Management / July 2011
Ruefli, T. W. 1990. Mean-variance approaches to risk-return relationships in strategy: Paradox lost. Management
Science, 36: 368-380.
Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. 1988. Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1:
7-59.
Schoemaker, DEMO J. H. 1982. The expected utility model: Its variants, purposes, DEMO and limitations. Journal of
Economic Literature, 20: 529-563.
Sharma, S. DEMO Managerial interpretations and organizational context as predictors of corporate choice of envi-
ronmental strategy. Academy of Management Journal, 43: 681-697.
Sharpe, W. F. 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. Journal of
Finance, 19: 425-442.
Shelley, M. J. 1993. Outcome signs, question frames and discount rates. Management Science, 39: 806-815.
Shimizu, K. 2007. Prospect theory, behavioral theory, and the threat-rigidity thesis: DEMO effects on organi-
zational decisions to divest formerly acquired units. Academy of Management Journal, 50: 1495-1514.
Short, J. C., & Palmer, T. B. 2003. Organizational performance referents: An empirical examination of their content
and influences. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 90: 209-224.
Simon, H. A. 1957. Models of man. New York: John Wiley.
Sine, W. DEMO, Haveman, H. A., & Tolbert, P. S. 2005. Risky business? Entrepreneurship in the new independent-
power sector. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50: 200-232.
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. Academy of Management
Review, 17: 9-38.
Sitkin, S. B., & Weingart, L. R. 1995. Determinants of risky decision-making DEMO: A test of the mediating role
of risk perceptions and propensity. DEMO of Management Journal, 38: 1573-1592.
Slattery, J. P., & Ganster, D. C. 2002. Determinants of risk taking in a dynamic uncertain context. Journal of
Management, 28: 89-106.
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. 1977. Behavioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 28:
1-39.
Smith, J. E., & von Winterfeldt, D. 2004. Decision analysis in management science. Management Science, 50:
561-574.
Smith, W. DEMO, & Tushman, M. L. 2005. Managing strategic contradictions: A top DEMO model for managing
innovation streams. Organization Science, 16: 522-536.
Steel, DEMO, & Konig, C. J. 2006. Integrating theories of motivation. Academy of Management Review, 31: 889-913.
Steers, R. M., & Porter, L. W. 1991. Motivation and work behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Svenson, O. DEMO Decision making and the search for fundamental psychological regularities: What can DEMO learned
from a process perspective? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65: 252-267.
Thaler, R. 1981. Some empirical evidence on dynamic inconsistency. DEMO Letters, 8: 201-207.
Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in action. DEMO York: McGraw-Hill.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185: 1124-1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211: 453-458.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1986. Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of Business, 59: 251-278.
DEMO, A., & Kahneman, D. 1991. Loss aversion in riskless choices: A reference dependent model. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106: 1039-1061.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1992. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5: 297-323.
Tversky, A., Slovic, P., & Kahneman, D. 1990. The causes of preference DEMO American Economic Review, 80:
204-217.
van Buiten, M., & DEMO, G. 2009. Speaker-listener incompatibility: Joint and separate processing in risky choice
framing. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 108: 106-115.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. 1944. Theory of games and economic behavior. DEMO, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, DEMO 1947. Theory of games and economic behavior (2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Voss, G. B., Sirdeshmukh, D., & Voss, Z. G. 2008. The effects of slack resources and environmental DEMO on
product exploration and exploitation. Academy of Management Journal, 51: 147-164.
Holmes et al. / Management Theory Applications of Prospect Theory
1107
Wakker, P. P. 2003. The data of Levy and Levy (2002) “Prospect DEMO: Much ado, about nothing?” actually
support prospect theory. Management Science, 49: 979-981.
Walsh, J. P., & Seward, J. K. 1990. On the efficiency of internal and external corporate control mechanisms.
Academy of DEMO Review, 15: 421-458.
Weber, E. U., & Milliman, R. DEMO 1997. Perceived risk attitudes: Relating risk perception to risky choice. Management
DEMO, 43: 123-144.
Wiseman, R. M., & Bromiley, P. 1991. DEMO associations: Paradox or artifact? An empirically tested
explanation. Strategic Management Journal, 12: 231-241.
Wiseman, R. M., & Catanach, A. H. 1997. A longitudinal disaggregation of operational risk under changing regula-
tions: Evidence from the savings and loan industry. Academy of Management Journal, 40: 799-830.
DEMO, R. M., & Gomez-Mejia, L. R. 1998. A behavioral agency DEMO of managerial risk taking. Academy of
Management Review, 23: 133-153.
Wong, K. F. E., & Kwong, J. Y. Y. 2005a. Between-individual comparisons in performance evaluation: A perspective
from prospect theory. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90: 284-294.
Wong, K. F. E., & Kwong, J. Y. Y. 2005b. Comparing two tiny giants or two huge dwarfs? Preference reversals
owing to number size framing. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 98: 54-65.
Wood, A. 2009. Capacity rationalization and exit strategies. Strategic Management DEMO, 30: 25-44.
Wu, G., Zhang, J., & Gonzalez, DEMO 2004. Decision under risk. In D. J. Koehler & N. Harvey (DEMO), The Blackwell
handbook of judgment and decision making: 399-423. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Zhang, X. M., Bartol, K. M., Smith, DEMO G., Pfarrer, M. D., & Khanin, D. M. 2008. CEOs on the edge: Earnings
manipulation and stock-based incentive misalignment. Academy of Management Journal, 51: 241-258.{1g42fwefx}