Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1985, Vol. 49, No. 1, 95-112
Copyright 1985 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0022-35 WS5/J00.75
Trust in Close Relationships
John K. Rempel, John G. Holmes, and DEMO P. Zanna
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
A theoretical DEMO describing interpersonal trust in close relationships is presented.
Three dimensions of trust are identified, based on the type of attributions drawn
about a partner's motives. These dimensions are also characterized by a devel-
opmental progression DEMO the relationship. The validity of this theoretical perspective
was examined through evidence obtained from a survey of a heterogeneous
sample of established couples. An DEMO of the Trust Scale in this sample was
consistent with the notion that the predictability, dependability, and faith com-
ponents represent distinct and DEMO dimensions. A scale to measure interper-
sonal motives was also developed. The perception of intrinsic motives in a partner
emerged as a dimension, as did instrumental and extrinsic motives. As expected,
love and happiness were DEMO tied to feelings of faith and the attribution of
intrinsic motivation to both self and partner. Women appeared to have more
integrated, complex views of their relationships than men: All three forms of
trust were strongly related and attributions of instrumental motives in their
partners seemed to be DEMO Finally, there was a tendency for people to
view their own DEMO as less self-centered and more exclusively intrinsic in
flavor than their partner's motives.
Trust is certainly one of the most desired
qualities in DEMO close relationship. It is often
mentioned in conjunction with love and
commitment as a cornerstone of the ideal
relationship (C. Hendrick & S. Hendrick,
1983). Given that trust is accorded such an
esteemed position, is it surprising that there
is comparatively little focus on this concept
DEMO the research literature. In this article a
component theory of trust will be proposed,
which takes into account the fabric of expe-
riences DEMO close relationships. Depending on
the stage of the relationship, the experiences
DEMO which trust is based will change and the
interpretations those experiences receive will
also progress from a more straightforward
acceptance of behavioral evidence to DEMO at-
tribution of interpersonal motives. Particular
emphasis will be placed on describing the
structures and content of these motivational
attributions as they relate to DEMO theory of
The order of the first two authors was determined
randomly. The research reported in this article was
supported by a Social Sciences DEMO Humanities Research
Council Grant to the second author. We would like to
acknowledge the helpful comments of George Levinger.
Requests for reprints should be DEMO to John K..
Rempel, Department of Psychology, University of Water-
loo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1.
95
trust. In conjunction with this theoretical
DEMO, we will also present measuring
instruments for these concepts and report DEMO
study in which the proposed network of
associations is examined.
Interpersonal Trust
Deutsch (1973) has denned trust as "con-
fidence that one will find what is desired
from another, rather than what is feared." DEMO
more recent theoretical statement by Scanzoni
(1979) describes trust as "DEMO's willingness
to arrange and repose his or her activities on
Other because of confidence that Other will
provide expected gratifications." Scanzoni also
suggests that trust requires a willingness to
place oneself in a position of DEMO and that
trust is not likely to appear early in a rela-
tionship because there would be little basis
in past experience for its DEMO Out-
side the specific realm of close relationships,
Rotter (1980) has considered trust as an
individual personality variable. He defines
trust as "a generalized expectancy held by an
individual that the word, promise, DEMO state-
ment of another individual can be relied on."
Although they are not common, some em-
pirical studies have also explored the role of
trust in close relationships. Driscoll, Davis,
96
J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
and Lipetz (1972) examined the link between
love and trust. Their concern was with the
contrast between romantic and conjugal love.
The authors hypothesized that romantic love
DEMO to a more mature form of conjugal
love as trust develops. According to their
thinking, trust evolves through mutually sat-
isfying interactions and increasing confidence
in the relationship. Driscoll et al.'s 5-item
Trust Scale, which is similar to one used by
Dion and Dion (1976) in DEMO research,
consists of items dealing with areas of trust,
the ability to count on one's partner, and the
partner's considerateness. In a more recent
investigation, Larzelere and Huston (1980)
found DEMO trust between partners was asso-
ciated with love and with intimacy of self-
disclosure. Their emphasis was on dyadic
trust between intimates, which they denned
as the extent to which a person believes the
other to DEMO benevolent and honest. The au-
thors defined benevolence as the extent to
which an individual is genuinely interested
in a partner's welfare and DEMO to seek
maximum joint gain. Honesty is, likewise,
understood as DEMO extent to which an individ-
ual's statements of future intentions are be-
lievable.
Certain critical elements can be abstracted
from the previous theoretical DEMO operational
definitions of trust. First, trust is seen to
evolve out DEMO past experience and prior inter-
action; thus, it develops as the relationship
matures. Second, dispositional attributions
are made to the partner, such DEMO he or she
is regarded as reliable, dependable, and con-
cerned with providing expected rewards.
Third, as Deutsch's use of the term fear
implies, trust involves a willingness to put
oneself at risk, DEMO it through intimate disclo-
sure, reliance on another's promises, sacrific-
ing present rewards for future gains, and so
on. Finally, trust DEMO defined by feelings of
confidence and security in the caring respon-
ses of the partner and the strength of the
relationship. These considerations point DEMO a
model of trust with three components that
reflect increasing levels of attributional ab-
straction. We have labeled these components
predictability, dependability and faith.
As a basic foundation for each stage of our
model, we regard trust as a generalized ex-
pectation related to the subjective probability
an DEMO assigns to the occurrence of
some set of future events (Rotter, 1980; Scan-
zoni, 1979). We have termed the most specific
DEMO concrete stage predictability.
The predictability of a partner's behavior
is influenced by a host of factors including
such basic elements as the consistency DEMO
recurrent behavior and the stability of the
social environment. In addition, DEMO ability
to forecast an individual's behavior is in-
creased if the functional reinforcements and
restraints on behavior are known. In this
regard predictability DEMO very much akin to a
reinforcement or social exchange analysis
wherein the forecast of a partner's future
actions relies heavily on knowledge relating
DEMO the consistency of responses in the past
and an understanding of the reward contin-
gencies underlying potential actions (Rotter,
1980).
Thus judgments of a partner's predictability
originate from social learning experiences
based on DEMO behavioral sequences in
which relatively little effort is made to inter-
pret the behavior or draw implications from
its enactment. We would expect that DEMO
about the partner's predictability would relate
to the amount of past experience in the
relationship and the degree to which this
experience suggested DEMO, stability, and
control over the pattern of behavior exhibited.
The concept of predictability, however rel-
evant to the day to day business of conducting
a relationship, is likely not the first thing that
comes to mind when attempts are made to
define trust between intimates. A more DEMO
mon understanding of trust is probably cap-
tured by the second component of our model,
dependability. As relationships progress there
is an inevitable DEMO in focus away from
assessments involving specific behaviors, to
an evaluation DEMO the qualities and character-
istics attributed to the partner. Thus trust is
placed in a person, not their specific actions.
For example, is DEMO partner a reliable person,
someone who is honest and can be counted
on? The dispositional inferences that develop
in response to such questions are likely to
depend heavily on an accumulation of evi-
dence from DEMO more limited and diagnostic
set of experiences involving risk and personal
vulnerability. Self-disclosure theorists in par-
ticular have emphasized the notion that trust
TRUST
97
is built gradually through repeated encounters
involving the potential for DEMO or ridicule
(Altaian & Taylor, 1974; Rubin, 1973). Of
course, the social scripts derived from the
demands of impression management and the
rules of reciprocal exchange act to protect
partners and minimize risk DEMO the earlier
stages of a relationship (Holmes, 1981). By
necessity, then, trust that transcends a more
rudimentary sense of predictability will DEMO
ically emerge only in later stages of a dating
relationship.
Even in more established relationships, an
interpersonal environment possessing the po-
tential for risk and uncertainty is necessary
for the expression of the type of responsive
DEMO that fosters trust. For instance, part-
ners may hope to protect DEMO from
risks by avoiding contentious issues or by
following short-term rules of exchange to
govern their contributions. However, these
defensive orientations eliminate diagnostic
opportunities for learning about the disposi-
tional qualities of the partner that relate DEMO
trust. For someone to be able to make the
attribution that another person cares and can
be trusted, there must exist the possibility for
the other person to show that he or she does
not care (cf. Strickland, 1958). Thus, an
emphasis on experiences that involve DEMO
risk is essential in understanding the growth
of feelings of security and trust.
From this discussion, it can be seen that
the second component of our model, depend-
ability, is related in significant ways to DEMO
first component, predictability. In particular,
a partner's predictability is DEMO important
source of evidence from which dispositional
attributions can be drawn. By the same token,
dependability does not subsume predictability.
Rather, attributions of a partner's depend-
ability are weighted most heavily by the sub-
DEMO of behaviors that involves personal vul-
nerability and conflict of interests. Thus de-
pendability goes beyond a prediction based
on the stability of recurrent DEMO and
involves attributions about a particularly di-
agnostic set of those behaviors (Reeder &
Brewer, 1979), such that they are seen to
reflect the partner's dispositional qualities of
trustworthiness.
These first two elements DEMO trust, predict-
ability and dependability, require a consider-
ation of the impact of past experience and
the reliability of previous evidence. In rela-
DEMO, as in life, however, the future is
filled with novel DEMO and circumstances
where past or present experience is not nec-
essarily an accurate barometer. In times to
come, a relationship may be faced with new
stresses and forces, which could not have
been anticipated and for which no past en-
counters reasonably correspond: people ma-
ture, goals DEMO values can change, and feelings
do not always remain constant. In DEMO to
capture the essence of a trust that is not
securely rooted in past experience, we will
use the term faith. In religious contexts faith
describes the aspect of a belief that must go
beyond the DEMO evidence to accept a
given supposition as truth. Beliefs are held in
the presence of equally plausible alternatives,
and pertinent but inconclusive evidence DEMO
acknowledged as insufficient to either confirm
or refute them. Convictions are thus held and
acted on in the present, with the confident
expectation that future events will prove them
to be correct.
In the same way, there are no guarantees
that the hopes and desires invested in a DEMO
relationship will ever be realized. Given that
a successful relationship is not a guaranteed
proposition, it follows that continuing com-
mitment to, and DEMO in the relationship
requires, to one extent or another, a "DEMO of
faith". In effect individuals will be constantly
called upon to exert closure on their feelings
by setting their doubts aside, even though the
evidence warranting such emotional risks can
never be fully conclusive. Thus DEMO reflects
an emotional security on the part of individ-
uals, which DEMO them to go beyond the
available evidence and feel, with assurance,DEMO
that their partner will be responsive and
caring despite the vicissitudes of an uncertain
future.
As we will discuss shortly, we believe that
perceptions of such caring develop from an
interpersonal attribution process that centers
on DEMO interpretations of a partner's
motives and intentions (Kelley, 1979). Thus
with faith, the focus is not on specific behav-
iors and goes beyond even an emphasis on
dispositional attributions.
In suggesting that faith DEMO beyond the
available evidence, however, it would be er-
98
J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
roneous to imply DEMO past experience plays
no role. Clearly one would expect that a
partner's past predictability and dependability
would provide an important basis for gener-
DEMO to future situations. Thus predictability
and especially dependability should be related
to faith. These are not, however, the only
sources providing a foundation DEMO feelings of
faith. Personal dynamics of the sort suggested
by object-relations theory (Barry, 1970) no
doubt also play a role in determining the
degree to which someone is capable of trusting
another. Personal security and DEMO,
for example, contribute to the extent to which
a person DEMO willing to take emotional risks in
uncertain circumstances. It is also the case
that not all examples of predictability or
attributions of dependability will DEMO
to feelings of faith. Faith does not fully
subsume or contain these factors. Rather it
is largely those elements of predictability and
dependability that DEMO seen to reflect the
partner's underlying motives of caring and
responsiveness that will foster confidence and
emotional security in the face of an DEMO
uncertain future.
Each component in our model of trust
reflects a different perspective or basis from
which subjective probability judgments for a
partner's DEMO behavior can be made. Pre-
dictability, dependability, and faith are seen
as arising out of different levels of cognitive
and emotional abstraction. The DEMO is hi-
erarchical, but only in the sense that we
suspect DEMO there is a developmental pro-
gression in terms of the time and emotional
investment required to establish each com-
ponent and in terms of DEMO level of attribu-
tional abstraction each demands.
Although we do not consider these com-
ponents to be mutually exclusive, we do
believe that the dominance of one perspective
over another has very different implications
for the DEMO of the relationship. We expect
a strong correlation between mature forms
of love and faith, because both feelings directly
reflect the emotional history of a relationship
over a longer period of time. A weaker but
still DEMO association is predicted for
the dependability factor. The attributions re-
quired for this component of trust provide
an important basis for love, but are not
sufficient to account for the relationship-
specific qualities inherent in faith. DEMO rela-
tion between love and predictability is ex-
pected to be weak, given the developmental
progression we have described and the notion
that the origins of love reside in the attribu-
tional process, not simply in rewarding be-
havior (Kelley, 1979).
Attributing Motivation
Our analysis of DEMO is based on the notion
that people attempt to understand their part-
ners in terms of acts, dispositions, and motives
that would predict DEMO responses. This
process, we suggest, is captured in progres-
sively more symbolic terms as relationships
develop. As feelings of trust become more
established DEMO rooted, they depend more
heavily on beliefs about the partners' moti-
vations, and less on direct codings at the
behavioral level. Therefore we now turn to a
discussion of these motives and the implica-
tions DEMO have for trust and for the success
of the relationship in general.
Our analysis is immediately handicapped
in that it stresses the importance of DEMO
motives to partners for maintaining the re-
lationship when no clear conceptual system
for categorizing such motives exists. Unfor-
tunately, existing systems that might be rele-
vant to this issue focus more directly on the
qualities DEMO the resources exchanged during
transactions than on the motives inferred
from the behavior. For instance, U. G. Foa
and E. B. Foa (1974) proposed that rewards
can be classified into six content areas on a
DEMO: love, services, goods, money, in-
formation, and status. This system has proven
useful in studying the rules of the exchange
process (Holmes, 1981), but it is not at all
clear that these resource categories can be
translated into a corresponding set of more
latent DEMO states.
Attribution theorists have typically used
the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction to classify
task motivations. In the task motivation lit-
erature, intrinsic rewards are those inherent
in the activity (e.g., the satisfaction of creating
a painting). DEMO the activity generates its
own rewards. A direct translation to a close
relationship implies that the relationship itself
generates its own rewards. Extrinsic rewards
DEMO not inherent in the activity but result as
TRUST
99
a consequence of it. Thus, the activity is not
necessarily rewarding in and of itself but is a
means to another end (e.g., painting for mon-
etary gain). In reference to close relationships,
the relationship is seen as a vehicle for ob-
taining desired DEMO It should be pointed
out that most behaviors can be interpreted
as reflecting any motive orientation. The
critical element in the attribution of motives
DEMO the interpretation given the behavior or
event.
These categories were applied to the area
of close relationships in a study by Seligman,
Fazio, and Zanna (1980). In this research,
dating couples were induced to perceive their
motivations for involvement in their relation-
ships as being DEMO by either intrinsic
or extrinsic rewards. Extrinsic reasons were
related to rewards received from others, out-
side of the relationship, but mediated by
DEMO with the partner. Examples of
these rewards include social status and respect,
access to new opportunities and activities,
and the acquisition of DEMO friends or business
connections. Intrinsic explanations were de-
nned as the set of rewards directly mediated
by involvement with the partner. The subjects
then DEMO Rubin's Loving and Liking
Scale (Rubin, 1973). The results showed that
those subjects who had been influenced to
attribute their involvement DEMO extrinsic rea-
sons had lower scores on the Loving scale.
Those subjects who had been induced to
attribute intrinsic reasons showed scores on
the DEMO scale equal to the control group.
Thus, the self-attribution of extrinsic DEMO
vations apparently served to undermine the
value of the relationship, presumably DEMO
the use of a discounting logic.
The translation of the intrinsic-extrinsic
concepts from the task motivation literature
seems so direct and straightforward, that it
masks an important and complicating dis-
tinction. In the task motivation paradigm
DEMO is a single individual involved in the
activity, whereas relationships, by definition,
require two participants. Given that a person
considers the relationship DEMO be of value in
and of itself, the question still remains, of
value to whom? The individual may be mo-
tivated largely by the interpersonal rewards
received from the partner or, conversely, the
relationship DEMO be valued precisely because
it is rewarding to both. In the first case, we
regard the motives as instrumental in nature
and distinguish them from the second case,
which we consider to be a more DEMO
representation of intrinsic motives. Instru-
mental motives may be served by a host of
more or less explicit rewards partners provide
for each other, such as direct services, goods,
praise, sex, and support. In contrast, examples
of rewards most likely to be associated with
intrinsic attributions include shared enjoy-
ment of an activity, mutual demonstrations
of affection and a sense of closeness, social
involvement as a couple, and the DEMO
and joy associated with satisfying a partner's
needs.
The conceptual distinction between instru-
mental and intrinsic motivation is not new
to the literature DEMO close relationships. Clark
and Mills (1979), for example, distinguished
between exchange and communal relation-
ships. In the former case, individuals expect
to receive a fair return for any contributions
they might make to another, their behavior
within the relationship is essentially a means
to an end DEMO is governed by the rules of
social exchange. In communal relationships,
however, partners often respond directly to
each other's needs and react negatively if a
partner's positive behavior is phrased in terms
of DEMO social exchange.
In a similar vein, Kelley (1979) has sug-
DEMO that people in relationships code their
interactions in terms of whether partners
demonstrate the tendency to deviate from
instrumental, self-interested concerns. Part-
ners will be seen as motivated by caring and
love only to the extent DEMO they are viewed
as being responsive to the others' needs, at
some personal cost in terms of sacrificing
more purely egocentric, selfish motives. Al-
though Kelley is the first person to articulate
the process by DEMO such interpersonal at-
tributions of responsiveness are made, other
authors have DEMO stressed the notion that the
pleasure derived from gratifying the needs of
an intimate partner may be intrinsically re-
warding (Blau, 1964; Huesmann & Levinger,
1976; Larzelere & Huston, 1980; Lerner,
1977). Through the development of interde-
pendent goals and empathic identification,
DEMO partner's happiness becomes part of the
individual's own reward system. Intrinsic
100
J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
forms of motivation DEMO are often reflected
in evidence that the two people see themselves
as one couple. In Lerner's terms, they have
an "identity" relationship (Lerner, 1977).
In summary, we are proposing that three
general types of attributions can be made in
the motivational domain: extrinsic, DEMO
mental, and intrinsic. Each of these in turn
could be used DEMO describe both people's self-
perceptions and impressions of their partners'
motives. The judgments made on these di-
mensions are hypothesized to have DEMO
implications for the psychological climate in
a relationship, including feelings of DEMO and
love, as we discuss later.
A Symbolic Analysis of Perceived DEMO
The various motive states we have described
are not seen as independent of each other.
By following the logic of discounting rules, if
extrinsic reasons are particularly salient, the
perceived strength of instrumental and in-
trinsic motives will diminish. Similarly, attri-
butions to particularly dominant instrumental
motives would serve to weaken recourse to
intrinsic explanations. Intrinsic motives are
hypothesized to DEMO most strongly related to
love and happiness, because they best reflect
DEMO concern and caring for another
without explicit expectations of direct per-
sonal gain. In fact, the perception that both
self and partner are involved in the relation-
ship because it is of value in and of DEMO has
been seen as a necessary step for feelings of
love to occur (Kelley, 1979).
The perception of instrumental motives is
complex DEMO that it carries with it a number
of messages. Instrumental attributions result
when rewards are seen to constitute self-
serving ends obtained via the DEMO In
this sense a discounting logic would lead one
to question how valuable the relationship
would remain should the rewards no longer
be forthcoming. DEMO would also act to highlight
the social exchange aspects of the relationship
and thereby undermine attributions of love
(Clark & Mills, 1979; Holmes, 1981; Kelley,
1979). By the same token, the attribution of
instrumental motives may also impart positive
informaion about the relationship. In DEMO
gesting that one is personally motivated by
the rewards provided by one's partner, there
is the implicit recognition that this partner is
valuable and likeable. Thus if the partner is
positively regarded for his or DEMO appearance,
wit, or sensitivity, these attitudes validate the
person's worth as someone who is lovable. In
the same vein, it is self-affirming to believe
that a partner is motivated by the instrumen-
tal DEMO one is personally providing. This
implies that your partner is involved in the
relationship because you are the type of
individual who has valuable DEMO
The consequences of seeing a behavior as
instrumental in origin is, DEMO, largely a matter
of which message is most salient. The attri-
DEMO of instrumental motivation may rein-
force feelings of love and liking for the partner,
but the overall correlation with love will
likely be DEMO due to the opposing influ-
ence of the discounting logic (Kelley, 1979).
Finally, as the results from Seligman et al.
(1980) imply, the salience of extrinsic moti-
vations is presumed to undercut the attribu-
tion of intrinsic motives and, hence, lower
feelings of love DEMO the partner. Thus we
predict a negative correlation between love
and the attribution of extrinsic motives to
either the self or the partner.
A DEMO hierarchical pattern is also antic-
ipated for the association between trust and
motivation. In particular our analysis suggests
that feelings of faith are most DEMO when
events cannot be predicted with any certainty.
For this reason faith must rest on more
general attributions that one's partner is mo-
DEMO by a concern for the well-being of the
relationship itself rather than by the particular
rewards one is presently able to provide.
Consequently we DEMO a strong positive
correlation between feelings of faith and the
perception that a partner is intrinsically mo-
tivated. Instrumental motives are expected to
have DEMO weaker association with faith and the
attribution of extrinsic motives is expected
to undermine such feelings altogether. The
results for dependability and predictability
are DEMO to follow the same pattern but
show weaker correlations, especially with DEMO
trinsic motives.
Overview
Method
The present study was designed to provide information
relevant to the theoretical perspectives we have presented.
TRUST
101
To accomplish this we will relate the trust and motive
DEMO to each other and to feelings of love and
satisfaction within a close relationship. Scales measuring
these variables were administered to a heterogeneous
sample DEMO 47 dating and married couples.
Subjects
Forty-two couples volunteered as subjects at the Ontario
Science Centre in Toronto, Ontario. Five further couples
were contacted directly by the experimenter, creating a
total sample of 47 couples. Of the total sample, 30
couples were married, 5 were cohabiting, and 12 were
dating exclusively. The mean ages were 31 years for males
DEMO 29 years for females. The average duration of rela-
tionships was 9.1 years. The average number of children
was 2.4 among the 19 couples DEMO had children.
Procedure
A sign promoting the study was posted in the main
hall of the Ontario Science Centre. Couples who responded
and came DEMO the small amphitheatre where the study was
taking place were given preceded packets containing the
questionnaires and instruction sheets. Subjects were asked
to complete DEMO forms independently without comparing
answers with their partner. Completed questionnaires
were placed back in the envelope and returned to the
experimenter. Couples were then DEMO and given an
opportunity to receive feedback once results from the
study became available.
It was quickly discovered that subjects at the Science
Centre DEMO hesitant to commit themselves for the half
hour required to complete the questionnaire. Therefore,
the study was ostensibly divided and presented as two
DEMO but related studies. The sign was changed to
advertise a two-part study with the first part taking 20
min and the second part requiring DEMO min. Of the 42
couples taking part at the Science Centre, DEMO 2 did not
complete the entire questionnaire.
Materials
The present study is part of a larger project that used
a questionnaire composed of six DEMO Demographic
data consisted of sex, age, occupation, education level,
DEMO of relationship, and number and ages of any
children. The presentation DEMO the two groups of scales
comprising Parts I and 2 of the study was counterbal-
anced. Each person within a couple received the scales
DEMO in an identical manner. Four of these scales are
relevant to the present research report. The remaining
two scales were part of a separate DEMO dealing with
issues of power and means of influence in relationships.
Rubin's Loving and Liking Scale. The Rubin Loving
and Liking Scale is DEMO 18-item instrument, with 9 items
designed to measure love and the DEMO 9 items created
to measure liking (Rubin, 1973). Subjects were asked to
indicate agreement with statements about their partner
on a 9-point DEMO ranging from "not at all true" to
"completely true". DEMO the Loving and Liking Scale
were three global measures of the happiness, satisfaction
and success experienced at the present time within the
relationship. Subjects responded on an 8-point scale
ranging from "not at all (happy)" to "extremely (happy)".
Trust Scale. The 26-item Trust Scale DEMO designed
to measure levels of trust within close interpersonal
relationships. Items were tailored to represent the pre-
dictability, dependability, and faith components discussed
DEMO A descriptive prototype of each of the three
theoretical components was created, and individual items
were composed to sample representative content areas
within each domain. Thus, items designed to measure
predictability emphasize the consistency and stability of
a partner's specific behaviors, based on past experience.
Dependability items concentrate on the dispositional
qualities of the partner, which warrant confidence in the
face of risk and potential hurt (e.g., honesty, reliability,
etc.). Finally, items constructed to measure faith are
centered on feelings of confidence in the relationship and
the responsiveness and caring expected from DEMO partner
in the face of an uncertain future.
Several of these items were obtained from the Inter-
personal Relationship Scale (IRS) created by DEMO,
Guerney, and Stover (Guerney, 1977). Table 1 presents
DEMO items and the designated category for which they
were constructed (see DEMO 2 for item analysis). Partici-
pants were required to respond to statements about the
truthworthiness of their partner on a 7-point scale ranging
DEMO —3 ("strongly disagree"), through 0 ("neutral"), to
3 ("strongly agree").
Motivation Scale. This scale was created to assess
participants' perceptions of the reasons for their involve-
ment in their relationship from the perspective of the
intrinsic, instrumental, and extrinsic motivational DEMO
gories discussed earlier. Again, prototypes of the three
categories were used DEMO generate new items to add to
those obtained from the scale created by Seligman et al.
(1980). The various reasons that could be used to explain
involvement in the relationship were first classified as to
DEMO source. If the rewards are obtained exclusively
outside the relationship (e.g., parental approval) they
were classified as extrinsic. Items that sampled rewards
obtained within the relationship were broken down into
those that focus on the DEMO received by one partner
(promoting instrumental attributions) and those that
emphasized mutual satisfaction, empathic concern and
the value of the relationship to both partners (intrinsic
motivation). Scale items and category designations are
listed in Table 3.
Respondents were required to complete the 24-item
scale twice (see Table 3). In counterbalanced order,
subjects were asked to describe DEMO own motives for
maintaining their relationship and to infer these motives
for their partner. On the Partner's Motivation Scale (see
Table 4) DEMO instructions read, "Put yourself in
the place of your partner, DEMO indicate the extent to
which he/she believes the following reasons play a role
in your current relationship. In other words, answer the
following questions as you feel your partner would answer
them." Then the same set of items was additionally
prefaced with the phrase, "How I DEMO my partner would
answer. . . ." Subjects responded to all DEMO by circling
a number from 0 to 8 on a scale that extended from
plays no role at all to plays a major role. DEMO the Personal
Motivation Scale (see Table 5) the items were prefaced
with the phrase, "I have a relationship with my partner
because DEMO . ."
102 J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
Results to establish DEMO the particular pattern of
Overview relations we have hypothesized for our con-
cepts does in fact exist. To accomplish this,
We regard this DEMO as a first step in it is important to first ensure that our scales
verifying our theoretical notions, by seeking appropriately reflect the constructs we are
Table 1
Trust Scale
Designated*
Item category
1. When we DEMO difficult and unfamiliar new circumstances I would not feel worried or
threatened by letting my partner do what he/she wanted. F
2. I DEMO count on my partner to be concerned about my welfare. D
3. In general, my partner does things in a variety of different ways. He/she almost never sticks to
one way of doing things. P
DEMO My partner has proven to be trustworthy and I am willing to let him/her engage in activities
which other partners find too threatening. DEMO
5. I am familiar with the patterns of behavior my partner has established and I can rely on him/
her to behave in DEMO ways. P
6. Even when I don't know how my partner will react, I feel comfortable telling him/her anything
about myself; DEMO those things of which I am ashamed. F
7. Though times may change and the future is uncertain; I know my partner will always be ready
and willing to offer me strength and support. F
8. DEMO am never certain that my partner won't do something that I dislike or will embarrass me. P
9. My partner is very unpredictable. DEMO never know how he/she is going to act from one day to the
next. P
10. I feel very uncomfortable when my partner DEMO to make decisions which will affect me
personally. D
11. I have found that my partner is unusually dependable, especially when it conies to things which
are important to me. D
12. My partner behaves in DEMO very consistent manner. P
13. In my relationship with my partner, DEMO future is an unknown which I worry about. F
14. Whenever we have to make an important decision in a situation we have never DEMO
before, I know my partner will be concerned about my welfare. DEMO
15. Even if I have no reason to expect my partner to share things with me, I still feel certain that
he/she will. F
16. I can rely on my partner to react in a DEMO way when I expose my weaknesses to him/her. F
17. I usually know how my partner is going to act. He/she can DEMO counted on. P
18. When I share my problems with my partner, I know he/she will respond in a loving way even
before I say anything. F
19. In our relationship I have to keep DEMO or my partner might take advantage of me. D
20. I am certain that my partner would not cheat on me, even if the opportunity arose and there
was no chance that he/she would get DEMO D
21. I sometimes avoid my partner because he/she is unpredictable and I fear saying or doing
something which might create conflict. P
DEMO I can rely on my partner to keep the promises he/she makes to me. D
23. I would never guarantee that my partner DEMO 1 will still be together and not have decided to end
our relationship 10 yeare from now. F
24. When I am with my DEMO I feel secure in facing unknown new situations. F
25. Even when my partner makes excuses which sound rather unlikely, I am confident that he/she
is telling the truth. D
26. I am willing to DEMO my partner make decisions for me. D
• F = faith; DEMO = dependability; P = predictability.
TRUST
103
attempting to measure. The discussion of the
results will begin DEMO a presentation of two
item analyses used to refine our measuring
instruments. This will be followed by an
examination of the reliabilities and relations
DEMO the subscales. Finally, and most im-
portant, proposals developed from our model
of trust will be explored by considering the
associations among the DEMO of love,
trust, perceptions of the partner's motives,
DEMO personal motives.
motivation were constructed to conform to
specific theoretical guidelines. The theoretical
framework formed the basis for both the
generation of items and DEMO initial classifi-
cation into subscales. This deductive approach
to scale construction is more conservative
than an inductive one involving the selection
of a few DEMO from a large sample pool
(Burisch, 1984). However, in DEMO strictest
sense, our sample of 94 subjects was not large
enough DEMO guarantee stable results with certain
analytic procedures, including factor analysis.
For DEMO reason we will focus primarily on
the results of item analyses which we used as
guidelines to refine our scales, and will employ
very conservative criteria for deciding when
an item will be reclassified to another DEMO
or dropped altogether.1
Two types of analyses were used. In the
first analysis each scale item was correlated
with the total of the remaining DEMO on the
subscale for which it was created as well as
with the total for each of the other two
subscales. With such corrected DEMO cor-
relations it is possible to see how well each
item fits with its designated subscale com-
pared with the other subscales. The second
DEMO consisted of a factor analysis (com-
mon factors solution) with the number of
possible factors limited to three. An oblique
rotation was used DEMO the subscales reflect
variations on the common construct of trust
and are therefore expected to be moderately
correlated.
Our first goal in conducting these DEMO
analyses was to detect and eliminate any
items that clearly failed to measure trust
adequately. To accomplish this, those items
in the item analysis which did not correlate
at the .30 level or greater with any DEMO
were eliminated. (In each case, these items
were also those which had factor loadings
less than .40).
Second, in order to create relatively distinct
subscales, those items that failed to adequately
differentiate between the various categories
were also considered for removal. However,
rather than eliminating DEMO relevant
items outright, a more conservative strategy
was adopted whereby an DEMO would be omit-
Item Analysis Procedures
It should be noted at the outset that the
items used on our measures of trust and
Table DEMO
Trust Scale (Item Analysis)
Corrected
Designated* item-total
Item category Mb DEMO correlation
Faith
6
7
14
15
16
18
24
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
5.1
6.2
6.3
6.0
5.6
5.6
5.8
1.8
DEMO
0.9
1.3
1.5
1.5
1.4
.44
.59
.50
.48
.60
.58
.43
Factor
loading
4
11
20
22
25
8
9
10
12
21
DEMO
D
D
D
D
P
P
D
P
P
Dependability
5.7
5.7
5.6
6.2
5.9
1.2
1.5
2.0
1.2
1.5
Predictability
4.6
5.7
5.0
DEMO
5.2
2.1
1.7
1.9
1.4
2.0
.35
.45
.37
.59
.48
.33
.58
.39
.55
.38
Items omitted
1
2
3
5
13
17
DEMO
23
26
F
D
P
P
F
P
D
F
D
5.4
6.4
4.0
5.8
5.2
5.8
6.3
4.2
4.6
1.4
1.3
1.9
1.1
DEMO
1.1
1.3
2.4
1.8
.23
.50
.19
.21
.47
.41
.49
.35
.16
• F = faith; D = dependability; P = predictability.
" 7-point scale, 7 = strongly agree.
.43
.66
.67
.66
.69
DEMO
.46
.47
.51
.54
.55
.76
.49
.84
.52
.50
.58
.14
.34
.26
.11
.34
.43
.37
.32
.08
' Complete item analysis DEMO are available from the
authors on request.
104 J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
Table 3
Motivation DEMO
Designated*
Item category
1. We are close and intimate. We have special ways of demonstrating affection and letting each
other know how we feel. DEMO
2. He/she keeps me informed of things I should know about. He/she is a good source of
knowledge. R
3. He/she DEMO someone my parents would approve of. He/she is well liked by my friends. People are
impressed by my choice. E
4. He/she DEMO me as I am. He/she makes me feel important. I get praise and compliments
from him/her. R
5. We have a rewarding DEMO relationship. We have meaningful discussions which are
stimulating and enriching. We enjoy matching wits. R
6. He/she has the right connections. His/her DEMO and relatives could be of benefit to my career
and future aspirations. E
7. We have a sharing relationship. We can both freely share DEMO ideas, feelings and hopes. I
8. We love one another and DEMO more for each other than for ourselves. I
9. He/she does favours for me. He/she does what I want. He/she meets DEMO needs, (i.e., sexually,
etc.) R
10. He/she provides security for me. With him/her I feel safe and protected. R
DEMO We are each others best friends. When we need someone, we DEMO each other. I feel incomplete
without him/her. I
12. He/she has the qualities I've always wanted in a partner (i.e., DEMO, talents, looks, etc.). R
13. Eventually he/she will DEMO me to have the kind of luxurious lifestyle I have always dreamed of
(i.e., nice house, family, financial security, etc.). E
14. Through him/her I can meet new and interesting people. I DEMO make new friends and mingle
with an exciting new crowd. E
15. With him/her around, I have someone to help lend a hand, (with household duties, work, etc.).
Things go a lot DEMO when you've got someone to help you. R
16. He/she belongs to a number of prestigious organizations and knows a lot of DEMO people.
Someday, he/she will be very important in the community DEMO I would like to share that
importance with him/her. E
17. He/she gives me emotional support. He/she is concerned & ready DEMO listen; someone stable I
can hang on to. R
18. We DEMO have fun together. We do exciting, crazy things and keep socially DEMO with
others as a couple. 1
19. We share the same interests and concerns. We have the same attitudes and values (i.e., religion,DEMO
politics, sense of humour, etc.). 1
20. People think more highly of me since I began seeing him/her. My friends envy DEMO and I am
getting a lot more attention. E
21. He/she lets me be myself. He/she doesn't tie me down. In DEMO/her company I am free to grow
and fulfill myself as an individual. R
22. He/she gives me companionship. He/she keeps me DEMO being lonely. I have someone I can talk
to. R
23. He/she lets me get away from my past. With him/her I DEMO't have the financial or family
hassles I had when I was unattached. E
24. It gives me joy to offer him/her support. DEMO gives me pleasure to make my partner happy and
return the love he/she gives to me. I
" I = intrinsic; R = instrumental; E = extrinsic.
TRUST
105
ted only if it failed the criteria on both
methods DEMO analysis. The criterion for each
method required that an item appear on its
designated scale with a correlation or factor
loading that was at DEMO .10 units greater
than the next largest value on the other scales.
(Although a difference of. 10 may not appear
particularly large it must be remembered that
the various subscales are not expected to be
completely DEMO)
Finally, when items shifted from their pro-
posed subscale to DEMO subscale both the
item analysis and factor structure were re-
quired to be in agreement with the shift. If
only one scale suggested a DEMO, the item was
either retained as originally designated or
eliminated, as indicated by the results of the
other analysis.
Table 4
Partner's DEMO Scale (Item Analysis)
Corrected
Designated1 item-total Factor
Item category M" SD correlation loading
1
5
7
8
11
17
18
19
24
DEMO
I
I
I
I
R
I
I
Intrinsic
6.0 1.7
4.8 2.1
6.1 1.6
5.9 1.7
6.0 1.7
5.8 2.0
4.5 2.1
5.4 1.7
DEMO 1.5
.50
.39
.56
.49
.67
.62
.50
.41
.44
.59
.51
.61
.52
.75
.69
.56
.48
.51
I
4
9
10
15
DEMO
22
R
R
R
R
R
R
Instrumental
5.6 2.1
5.4 2.1
5.6 2.0
4.6 2.5
5.2 2.0
5.8 1.8
.58
.58
.50
.42
DEMO
.57
.64
.67
.55
.50
.57
.61
Extrinsic
6
13
14
16
20
E
E
E
E
E
1.3 1.8
3.3 2.7
2.5 2.1
DEMO 1.8
2.3 2.1
.60
.47
.52
.64
.49
.68
.56
.73
.72
.54
Items omitted
2
3
12
23
R
E
R
E
5.2 DEMO
4.9 2.5
5.7 1.6
3.2 2.8
.25
.39
.34
.46
.18
.41
.23
.39
" I = intrinsic; R = instrumental; E = DEMO
b 0 to 8-point scale, 8 = plays a major role.
DEMO 5
Personal Motivation Scale (Item Analysis)
Item
1
5
7
DEMO
19
24
4
9
17
21
22
3
6
13
14
15
16
20
23
Designated1
category
R
R
R
R
R
E
E
DEMO
E
R
E
E
E
Corrected
item-total
M* SD correlation
Intrinsic
6.1 1.5
5.2 1.9
6.5 1.4
4.6 2.0
5.6 1.8
6.9 1.4
Instrumental
DEMO 1.7
5.4 2.1
6.1 1.8
5.4 2.2
5.7 1.9
Extrinsic
4.5 2.5
1.4 2.1
2.6 2.7
2.6 2.2
4.2 2.6
1.2 1.8
1.8 2.0
DEMO 2.6
.44
.40
.58
.30
.34
.54
.43
.53
.49
.35
.52
.40
.69
.51
.58
.44
.58
.57
.51
Factor
loading
.50
.66
DEMO
.43
.38
.36
.44
.59
.53
.54
.50
.48
.74
.62
.63
.52
.63
.57
.53
Items omitted
2
8
10
11
12
R
DEMO
R
I
R
5.3 1.9
6.1 1.7
5.3 2.1
6.1 1.5
5.6 1.8
.37
.51
.41
.46
.39
' I = intrinsic; R = instrumental; E = extrinsic.
b 0 to 8-point scale, 8 = DEMO a major role.
.32
.36
.32
.42
.40
Refinement of the Trust Scale
The trust scale was refined using the pro-
cedures outlined above. DEMO Items 3, 5, and
26 were immediately eliminated because they
did not correlate with any subscale. Second,
Items 1, 2, 13, 17, 19, and 23 failed to
adequately discriminate between subscales
and DEMO, therefore, also removed. Finally,
item 10 appeared to correspond best with
measures of predictability. Except for this
one shift the remaining 16 DEMO stayed in
the categories for which they had been cre-
ated. As well, equal numbers of items were
eliminated from each subscale and the items
that were dropped in no way precipitated a
106
J. REMPEL, I. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
change of meaning DEMO either the faith or
dependability subscale. The items remaining
in the predictability measure, however, require
some comment. As a reading of the items
DEMO indicate, this subscale seems, indeed, to
reflect how predictable individuals DEMO their
partners to be. The emphasis however, tends
to be on DEMO partner's lack of predictability,
or what one might call volatility. The picture
that emerges prompts us to suggest that this
subscale leads DEMO to focus on the
potentially unpleasant consequences of their
inability to accurately anticipate their part-
ner's negative behavior.
Refinement of the Motivation Scale
DEMO Motivation Scale was completed twice
by respondents, once with reference to DEMO
own personal motivations, and once from the
perspective of their partner. DEMO psychological
implications of these different perspectives war-
rant separate analyses for each response set.
We will begin with the analysis of people's
beliefs DEMO their partner's motives. Follow-
ing the same procedure used for the Trust
Scale, Item 2, an instrumental item, was
omitted by virtue of its low correlations with
all three (intrinsic, instrumental, and extrin-
sic) subscales. Further, Item 12, also an in-
strumental item, DEMO Items 3 and 23, both
intrinsic measures, were eliminated due to
their inability to adequately differentiate
among the three components. Item 17 shifted
DEMO the instrumental subscale to the intrinsic
measure. This item deals with receiving emo-
tional support from one's partner. Because
the intrinsic construct was DEMO to reflect
feelings of togetherness or "we-ness" as well
as a theme of emotional intimacy, the inclu-
sion of Item 17 seems acceptable. These
modifications did not lead us to consider a
change of meaning DEMO any subscale. In gen-
eral, then, the results of the item analysis for
the scales measuring perceptions of a partner's
motivation were DEMO consistent with
our theoretical constructs.
The analysis for the scale on which respon-
dents indicated their own motives, however,
did not produce as precise a set of results.
The subscale measuring extrinsic motives was
the DEMO No items were omitted and
Item 15, originally an instrumental item, was
added. The distinction between the intrinsic
and instrumental scales, on the other hand,
is much less exact. Of the five items that
DEMO eliminated, four (Items 8 and 11 from
the intrinsic scale, DEMO Items 2 and 12 from
the instrumental scale) loaded closely on DEMO
these scales. The fifth item, Item 10, loaded
equally well on all three dimensions. Overall,
this outcome seems to indicate that, when
defining one's own motivations for maintain-
ing a close relationship, instrumental motives
are more closely aligned with purely intrinsic
motives than when one DEMO judging the motives
of one's partner. By the same token, DEMO
two classes of motivation are certainly not
undifferentiated. Thus, we chose DEMO present
the correlations that result using each subscale
separately, bearing in DEMO the similarity
between them.
The Structure of Feelings in
Close Relationships
The scaling results from the item analyses
were used to derive a new DEMO of measures
for each subject.2 The scores for males and
females on the following subscales were then
placed in a correlation matrix: (a) the faith,
dependability, and predictability subscales for
the trust measure, (b) the intrinsic, instru-
mental, and extrinsic subscales measuring
perceptions of a partner's motivations, (c) the
three components of personal motivation,
and (d) the Rubin Love Scale.
The correlations for men DEMO women sep-
arately showed remarkable similarity in the
pattern of results. Therefore, the findings
from the overall analysis will be reported,
except when the results warrant the presen-
tation of separate analyses for men and
DEMO Table 6 presents the results of the
combined analysis. The results will be dis-
cussed beginning with a consideration of the
intercorrelations of the DEMO subscales and
will be followed by an examination of how
the constructs of love, trust, perceptions of
1 An examination of the results DEMO from the a
priori subscales, in comparison with results achieved
using DEMO revised subscales, revealed that differences
between the two did not warrant DEMO changes in the
major conclusions.
TRUST
107
Table 6
Correlations Between Measures of Love, Trust, Perceptions DEMO Partner's Motives, and Personal Motives
Measure 1 2 345678
I. DEMO
(.86)
2. Faith .46" (.80)
3. Dependability .25* DEMO
4. Predictability .12 .27*
5. Intrinsic
6. Instrumental
7. Extrinsic
.49**
.52**
.07
.52**
.17
-.03
8. Intrinsic
9. Instrumental
10. Extrinsic
.55**
.44**
DEMO
.41**
.41**
-.08
Note. Cronbach's Alphas in parentheses.
*p<.05 . "p<.001.
Trust
(.72)
.28*
(.70)
Partner's motives
.23* .10 (.82)
.19 .06 .47** (.77)
-.15 -.16 DEMO .34*
Personal motives
.18
.23*
-.03
.04
.27*
-.24*
.77"
.32*
-.08
.44**
.53"
.31*
(.76)
.09
.20
.63"
(DEMO)
.48"
.11
9
(.76)
.30*
(.79)
one's partner's motivations and personal mo-
tivations are related.
Subscale associations DEMO reliabilities. To
begin with then, we will examine how the
subscales DEMO related to each other. The loving,
liking, and happiness measures DEMO all strongly
related for both sexes, as would be expected
(correlations ranged from r = .50 to r = .64,
p < DEMO). The Cronbach alphas for the loving,
liking, and happiness DEMO are .86, .85 and
.92, respectively. The strong correlations be-
tween these measures allow us to present a
rather precise picture of the DEMO by focusing
solely on the Love Scale in the remaining
discussion.
Turning next to the Trust Scale, the overall
Cronbach alpha was .81, DEMO subscale reli-
abilities of .80, .72, and .70 for the faith,
dependability, and predictability subscales,
respectively. In general the three subscales
were moderately correlated, as we expected
(r = .46, p < .001 for faith and dependability,
r = .27, p < .05 for faith and predictability,
and r = .28, p < .05 for dependability and
predictability). However, in this case the re-
sults for men and women showed distinct
patterns. The three subscales were associated
DEMO women, in a relatively ordered fashion.
Faith and dependability were strongly DEMO
lated, r = .61, p < .001, as were faith DEMO
predictability, r = .48, p < .001, and depend-
ability DEMO predictability, r = .44, p < .05.
For men, however, only a weak correlation
between faith and dependability was apparent
r = DEMO, p < .05. Essentially, it appears that
the three aspects of trust are relatively auton-
omous for men but not for women.
The DEMO reliability of the Motivation
Scale was .83 for attributions about partners'
motives, and .80 for inferences about personal
motives. The subscale reliabilities were rea-
sonably high for the former estimates (.82,
.77, .76), and somewhat lower for self-evalu-
ations (.69, .76, .79). DEMO, the general
reliability pattern is quite respectable given
the small number DEMO items in each subscale.
The subscale associations for the motive
scales followed the predicted hierarchical pat-
tern rather nicely. The intrinsic and instru-
mental DEMO about the partner's motives
were positively correlated, r = .47, p < .001,
as were attributions for personal motives, r =
.48, p < .001. As expected, the extrinsic and
instrumental measures DEMO also positively
correlated (r = .34, p < .05, for DEMO
attributed to the partner, and r = .30, p <
DEMO for personal motives), whereas the intrinsic
and extrinsic scores were not related.
Personal motivations and perceptions of
partner's motivations. It was expected DEMO
108
J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
personal motivations and DEMO of a
partner's motivations would be closely linked,
based on the premise that people need to
assume a shared understanding of common
DEMO and commitment. The results offered
very strong support for this prediction. A
belief in a partner's intrinsic motivation was
strongly related to personal DEMO of intrinsic
motivation, r = .77, p < .001. Strong corre-
lations between personal motives and attri-
butions about one's partner were DEMO ob-
tained for both the instrumental (r = .53,
p<DEMO) and extrinsic (r = .63, p<.001)
measures. Thus DEMO is apparent that individuals
tend to project onto their partner motives
very similar to their own.
Love, trust and the attribution of motives.
Love was expected to be strongly related to
the faith component of trust, less so to the
dependability measure and weakly, if at all,
to predictability. To a large extent these pre-
dictions were supported. There DEMO a strong
correlation between love and faith, r = .46,
DEMO < .001, a weaker correlation between love
and dependability, r = .25, p < .05, and no
correlation between love and predictability.
DEMO is again perhaps worth noting that there
were some differences between men and
women on the dependability and predictability
measures. The correlations between love DEMO
these two components were not significant
for men but reached significance for women
(r = .29, p < .05, and r = .29, p < .05 for
dependability and predictability, respectively).
Moving next DEMO the estimation of a partner's
motives, it was predicted that DEMO would
relate positively to the perception that a
partner was intrinsically motivated, less
strongly but positively to attributions of in-
strumental motivation and negatively, if at
all, to perceptions of extrinsic motivation. As
expected, feelings of love were strongly cor-
related with the intrinsic dimension (r = .49,
p < .001). Contrary to our predictions, how-
ever, the correlation of love with perceptions
of instrumental motives was equally substan-
tial (r = .52, p < .001). An examination of
DEMO scores for men and women separately
reveals that this strong correlation of instru-
mental attributions with love is due largely
to females, r - .62, p < .001, with males ex-
hibiting a noticeably weaker DEMO, r =
.37, p < .05. Finally, perceptions of extrinsic
DEMO were not related to love, for either
men or women. Thus, the pattern of results
we had anticipated, materialized for men but,
for women, intrinsic and instrumental per-
ceptions were both strongly tied to feelings
of love.
Looking at measures of personal motives,
the correlations DEMO love followed the ex-
pected pattern. A person's feelings of love
correlated highly with self-perceptions of in-
trinsic motivation, r = .59, DEMO < .001, less so
with self-perceptions of instrumental motives,
r DEMO .42, p < .05, and not at all with extrinsic
motives.
Trust and perceptions of motivation. In
the introduction we suggested that an DEMO
tant basis for feelings of faith was to be found
in the belief that a partner's involvement
in the relationship was intrinsically moti-
DEMO Indeed, faith and intrinsic motivation
were strongly correlated (r = .52, p < .001),
whereas faith and instrumental perceptions
were not. DEMO finding serves to further
strengthen the discriminant validity of the
faith construct. The correlations of intrinsic
motivation with dependability was consider-
ably weaker, r = .23, p < .05, and, with pre-
dictability, was DEMO significant. From a social
exchange perspective we also expected that
perceiving a partner to be instrumentally
motivated would be associated with feelings
that one'DEMO partner was dependable. This result
proved to be only marginal at best (r = .19,
p < .10). Finally, if a DEMO was perceived
to be extrinsically motivated, the various
components of trust DEMO be expected to
decrease. The correlations with all three mea-
sures of trust were indeed in the anticipated
negative direction, but none were statistically
significant.
The relation of self-perceived motives to
trust suggests an interesting pattern DEMO results.
One might speculate that individuals will
exhibit trust to the extent that they see their
own motives as positive and contributing to
the DEMO and enhancement of the
relationship. If they value the relationship
itself (DEMO) and the qualities of their
partner (instrumental), they are more likely
to have faith that the relationship will endure.
In support of DEMO pattern of reasoning, faith
was strongly correlated with self-perceptions
on both DEMO intrinsic and instrumental di-
TRUST
109
mensions (r = .41, p < .001, and r - .41,
p< .001, respectively). The latter finding
cannot DEMO explained as a spurious relation
brought about by the strong assumed simi-
larity effect for own and other's motives,
because faith was DEMO related to perceptions
that one's partner was instrumentally moti-
vated. In the same vein the rewarding qualities
provided by one's partner (i.e., personal in-
strumental perceptions) should, and in fact
do, relate DEMO the dispositional and behavioral
evidence that he or she can be trusted. Both
dependability and predictability correlated
significantly with personal instrumental mo-
tives (r = .23, p < .05, and (r = .27, p < .05,
respectively) but not with intrinsic motives.
Finally, a correlation between extrinsic mo-
tives and trust materialized for the predict-
ability measure (r = -.24, p < .05). This
suggests that the more an individual perceives
him or herself to be extrinsically motivated,
the DEMO volatile they expect their partner's
behavior to be.
Trust
Discussion
These results show that trust is related in
important ways to the success DEMO a close
relationship. It is equally apparent that trust
is a construct with a number of different
elements and these elements do not all DEMO
equivalent contributions. The most important
aspect of trust in close relationships appears
to be faith: the belief that one's partner will
act in loving and caring ways whatever the
future holds. In terms of both DEMO and
discriminant validity, faith had by far the
strongest correlations with DEMO of love
and happiness and was uniquely tied to per-
ceptions of a partner's intrinsic motivation.
These findings help to articulate our un-
DEMO of trust and lend credence to the
commonsense belief that it has a basis in
emotional security over and above the sup-
posedly less DEMO notions of depend-
ability and predictability. It would be erro-
neous however, to conclude that these latter
concepts should be ignored. Dependability
was also associated with love and happiness,
though the pattern of correlations was DEMO
Thus, it is still important for an individual
in a close DEMO to feel their partner is
someone who is dependable and can be relied
on in more immediate, objective ways. The
weaker set of correlations was in fact predicted
from the premise that dependability and pre-
dictability DEMO represent less salient and
central concerns for couples compared with
feelings of faith. The couples' more pragmatic
concerns were also echoed in the results for
the predictability component. The revision
of this subscale led us to DEMO that this
component needs to be viewed from the
point of view of inconsistency in behavior
rather than consistency. The inconsistency
has psychological meaning DEMO it raises
the spectre of a partner who is volatile and
acts in unexpected, negative ways.
The above result may be helpful in under-
standing an interesting and unexpected phe-
nomenon. For women there were strong DEMO
relations among all three components of trust,
whereas men showed a differentiation of the
three elements. Only faith and dependability
were correlated for DEMO and even this asso-
ciation was comparatively weak. In this re-
gard, Hill, Rubin, and Peplau (1976) have
suggested that women may be more concerned
with the pragmatics of interpersonal behavior
by virtue of DEMO is often a position of greater
dependency in the relationship. This notion
is consistent with our finding that women
appear to have a more DEMO view of
trust, which relies not just on feelings (faith),DEMO
but also on more particular attributions
drawn about their partners' character (de-
pendability), and concern for consistent be-
havioral evidence (predictability). Men, how-
ever, may have less need for such an integrated
DEMO Rubin (1973) among others has sug-
gested that they tend to be more romantic
than women, a luxury allowed by their higher
status. Focusing on faith to the relative exclu-
sion of more pragmatic concerns DEMO to
fit more readily with a romantic orientation
toward relationships. For this reason men
may isolate faith, dependability, and predict-
ability. This, of course, is not inconsistent
with the equally plausible possibility that
women are more sensitive to relationship
issues and maintain the reasonable view that
feelings DEMO the future (faith) are most
soundly based on evidence drawn from past
behaviors (dependability and predictability).
110
J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
Motivation
The results DEMO the item analysis for the
scale measuring the attribution of motives to
one's partner offered clear support for the
existence of a three-component DEMO for
interpersonal perceptions. Only 4 of 24 items
were eliminated, and DEMO three dimensions
could be clearly differentiated by our proce-
dures. As we had expected, a relatively or-
dered, hierarchical pattern of results emerged
DEMO that intrinsic perceptions were most
strongly linked to feelings of love, DEMO
by instrumental attributions, with extrinsic
inferences showing no relation whatsoever.
There DEMO one important exception to this
pattern, however: feelings of love for women
were tied as closely to instrumental percep-
tions as they were DEMO intrinsic ones. Why
might this be the case? In a more DEMO
form, this finding is reminiscent of the recip-
rocal attraction principle (Berscheid & Wals-
ter, 1977). If an individual perceives that their
partner values them, at least in part, for the
qualities and DEMO they provide, we
would venture that such an instrumental
metacognition is DEMO It follows then,
that being seen as a valuable person who
brings something uniquely important to the
relationship and feeling loved for what DEMO
has to offer, would encourage good feelings
and bolster self-esteem. This DEMO to be
the case for women in particular, and may
relate DEMO our earlier conjecture that, for var-
ious reasons, women have more rounded,
discerning views on relationships, and there-
fore would depend less exclusively than men
on the more romantic implications of intrinsic
attributions.
Overall DEMO, the results underline the
potential impact of intrinsic attributions on
feelings DEMO love for both men and women.
This finding is consistent with the view that
the perception of empathic identification and
unselfish concern by one'DEMO partner is central
to a meaningful interpersonal relationship
and the growth of love, as Kelley (1979) has
suggested. There was also evidence that in-
trinsic perceptions were strongly related to
faith, whereas instrumental attributions were
not. Taken as a whole, the set of results
supports the idea that intrinsic and instru-
mental motives are psychologically distinct
categories, with rather different implications.
Thus, the typical intrinsic-extrinsic dichot-
omy used in studies of task motivation does
not entirely reflect the added complexities in
the interpersonal DEMO
These results were modified in intriguing
ways when personal motives were reported.
There appears to be less of a distinction
between intrinsic and instrumental DEMO
when making attributions to the self. Thus,
what might appear to an observer or a partner
as an action motivated by instrumental re-
DEMO could very well be perceived by the
actor as an example of intrinsic motivation.
This tendency toward a global intrinsic ori-
entation could, of course, be seen as self-
serving. Self-esteem cannot help but be en-
hanced by the perception that one's actions
come from selfless, altercentric motives. We
are also inclined, however, to view them as
evidence DEMO the availability heuristic (Tversky
& Kahneman, 1973). A person interacting
with a partner he or she loves will often have
accompanying positive DEMO that are es-
sentially private, or at least more accessible
to DEMO self than to others. Thus, many actions
which, to an observer, may appear instru-
mental in nature, may in fact be understood
DEMO the actor in light of these private feelings
and interpreted as intrinsically motivated.
Some mention should be made of the
failure to replicate, in a survey context, the
Seligman et al. (1980) effect of extrinsic
motives on love. First, it is important to
realize that extrinsic motives attributed to
the self were not manipulated in the present
study. The DEMO of 2.63 for these personal
motives on a 9-point scale suggests they were
not very prominent. It is possible that the
relative dominance of DEMO motives may
overwhelm the impact of an extrinsic orien-
tation, particularly DEMO the presence of more
socially desirable alternative motives. Thus,
it would be fruitful in future investigations
to consider circumstances in naturalistic set-
tings DEMO would make extrinsic motives more
salient.
Trust and Interpersonal Motives
Finally, DEMO is important to elaborate on the
relation between trust, the attribution DEMO mo-
tives to one's partner, and love. The causal
TRUST
111
pathways relating these variables are of course
impossible to determine DEMO our cross-sectional
design. On theoretical grounds, however, we
would speculate that there is a developmental
order involving an initial stage where concern
with DEMO behavior is emphasized. Kelley
(1979) for example has suggested that partners
initially focus on instrumental rewards that
are exchanged as attraction develops. At DEMO
stage trust operates on the most elementary
level of predictability, as DEMO individuals
shield themselves from potential risks. Grad-
ually, however, attention shifts to evidence of
a partner's underlying motives and interper-
sonal dispositions. DEMO risks are taken and
intimacy increases, partners become increas-
ingly sensitive DEMO the issue of the other's
responsiveness to their needs. Behavior is
coded in terms of messages carried about the
other's willingness to DEMO self-interest
and show concern for what has now become
an important intimate relationship. According
to Kelley, this process of interpersonal attri-
bution is the basis for judging whether a
partner loves and cares for you.
These DEMO were addressed in the pres-
ent study by introducing a measure of per-
ceived intrinsic motivation. The association
between trust and beliefs about a DEMO's
motivations is central to the construct validity
of our model of trust. Our model was based
on the notion that the faith component DEMO
trust would depend on the degree to which a
person felt confident in attributing rather
abstract and symbolic interpersonal motives
to the partner. These DEMO should reflect
an intrinsic orientation that goes beyond the
potentially self-serving tone of instrumental
motives. The results were very consistent
with this perspective. Faith, which reflects an
inherent sense of emotional security, was
strongly correlated with attributions of in-
trinsic motivation but not at all with percep-
tions DEMO instrumental goals.
We are inclined to believe that the devel-
opmental sequence outlined above is roughly
descriptive of the process that relates these
various DEMO However, we also believe that
each variable facilitates and reinforces growth
(or decline) in the others. Trust, for instance,
permits a DEMO of security that would help
people cope with the feelings of risk and
personal vulnerability associated with the de-
velopment of deeply intimate feelings DEMO love.
Or, in contrast, continuing examples of con-
flict or inconsiderate behavior on the part of
a partner may lead a person, not only to
doubt the other's motives, but also to expe-
rience anxiety around the issue of trust. If
the examples are in fact DEMO and these
feelings tend to develop hand in hand in an
evolving causal loop, investigators may find
it difficult to isolate stages in a sequential
model that capture the process involved in
the growth of intimacy DEMO trust. The impli-
cation of the present research is that a closer
examination of these issues is essential.
In the physical sciences many phenomena
DEMO most salient when they are in the process
of change. In the same way, it is when rela-
tionships are vulnerable that trust is likely to
be in a process of transition. Therefore, the
most opportune time to examine trust may
occur when stress or conflict has created DEMO
situation where confidence in the other is an
issue. This perspective suggests a research
strategy in which couples experiencing in-
duced or more chronic DEMO are observed
as they interact in a controlled environment.
Such a procedure allows one to directly ob-
serve and measure the interplay between trust
DEMO interpersonal perceptions during a cou-
ple's social interaction, rather than DEMO to
rely exclusively on retrospective question-
naires.
Focusing on couples who are dealing with
conflict affords the opportunity to examine
another equally important research DEMO
the consequences for a relationship when
trust fails. It is a curious paradox that, whereas
trust is slow and difficult to build up, DEMO
appears notoriously easy to break down. Fur-
thermore, it seems that DEMO trust has been
betrayed it is doubly difficult to reestablish.
Subsequent research must address itself to
questions surrounding these issues. For in-
stance, which aspect of trust is most reactive
to life events? The belief that one's partner
is predictable (not volatile) may be the first
DEMO give way when stressed, whereas strong
feelings of faith may help DEMO relationship to
"weather the storm" of conflict. However,
certain critical events, such as unfaithfulness,
may undermine even the buffer zone created
by faith. Under these circumstances the
breakdown of faith may be irreparable, col-
112
J. REMPEL, J. HOLMES, AND M. ZANNA
oring all aspects DEMO trust as well as perceptions
of a partner's motives and subsequent behav-
ior. The empirical results and theoretical
proposals we have presented begin DEMO reveal
the intricate pattern trust weaves in the fabric
of a close relationship. Much research still
remains to be done, but the practical and
theoretical benefits of unravelling this puzzle
promise to be considerable.
References
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. A. (1973). Social penetration:
The development of interpersonal relationships. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Barry, W. A. (1970). Marriage research and conflict: An
integrative review. DEMO Bulletin, 73(\), 41-
54.
Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1977). Interpersonal attrac-
tion, (2nd ed.) Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life.
New York: Wiley.
Burisch, M. (1984). Approaches to personality inventory
construction: A comparison of merits. American Psy-
chologist, 39, 214-227.
Clark, M. S., & Mills, }. (1979). Interpersonal attraction
DEMO exchange and communal relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psvchohgy, 37(DEMO), 12-24.
Dion, K. L., & Dion, K. K. (1976). Love, liking and
trust in heterosexual relationships. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 2, 187-190.
Driscoll, R., Davis, K. E., & DEMO, M. E. (1972).
Parental interference and romantic love: The DEMO
and Juliet effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 24, 1-10.
Deutsch, M. (1973). The resolution of conflict: Constructive
and destructive processes. New Haven, CN: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Foa, U. G., & Foa, E. B. (1974). Societal structures of
the mind. Springfield, III: Thomas.
Guemey, B. G. Jr. (1977). Relationship DEMO
skill training programs for therapy, prevention and
enrichment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hill, C. T, Rubin, Z., & Peplau, L. A. (DEMO). Breakups
before marriage: The end of 103 affairs. Journal of
DEMO Issues. 32, 147-168.
Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. (1983)DEMO Liking, loving and
relating. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Holmes, J. G. (1981). The exchange process in close
relationships: Microbehavior and DEMO In
M. L. Lerner & S. C, Lerner (Eds.), The justice motive
in social behavior (pp. 261-284). New York: Plenum.
DEMO L. R., & Levinger, G. (1976). Incremental
exchange theory: A formal model for progression in
dyadic social interaction. In L. Berkowitz & E. Walster
(Eds.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 9, pp. 151-193). New York: Academic Press.
Kelley, H. H. (DEMO). Personal relationships: Their struc-
tures and processes. Hillsdale, NJ: DEMO
Larzelere, R. E., & Huston, T. L. (1980). The dyadic
Trust Scale: Toward understanding interpersonal trust
in close relationships. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 42. 595-604.
Lerner, M. J. (1977). The justice motive in social behavior
Some hypotheses as to its origins DEMO forms. Journal
of Personality, 45, 1-52.
Reeder, G. D., & Brewer, M. B. (1979). A schematic
model of dispositional attribution DEMO interpersonal
perception. Psychological Review, 56(1), 61-79.
Rotter, J. B. (1980). Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness,
and gullibility. American Psychologist, 35, 1-7.
Rubin, Z. (1973). Liking and loving: An imitation DEMO
social psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Scanzoni, J. (1979). Social exchange and behavioral
interdependence. In R. L. Burgess & DEMO L. Huston
(Eds.), Social exchange in developing relationships.
New York: Academic Press.
Seligman, C., Fazio, R. H., & Zanna, M. P. (1980).
Effects of salience of extrinsic rewards on liking and
loving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
38, 453-460.
Strickland, DEMO H. (1958). Surveillance and trust. Journal
of Personality, 26, DEMO
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
DEMO for judging frequency and probability. Cog-
nitive Psychology, 5, 207-232.
Received August 8, 1983
Revision received August 16, 1984 •{1g42fwefx}