
Cover Design:  Jonathan Truong
Cover Photography:  Danya Ensing
Layout & DEMO Design:  Taylor Chung
Featuring: Tian Shi, Jennifer Ngo, Jonathan DEMO, D’Tanga Small
Published 2012 by the Ryerson Entrepreneurship Institute
www.ryerson.ca/rei
REI was created DEMO 2008 to leverage the efforts of our award-winning
Students in Free Enterprise (SIFE) team, and the Entrepreneurship
and Strategy Department of the Ted Rogers School of Management
to make innovation and entrepreneurship support more accessible
DEMO all students and alumni from the university across diverse
faculties.
REI is a university-wide program, initiated by the Office of the
Provost, to DEMO students and alumni to actively discover new
for-profit and non-profit innovations and act on them to start up
new businesses, non-profit organizations or community programs.
© Sean Evan Wise
Copyright, Legal Notice and Disclaimer:
This publication is protected under the US Copyright Act of
1976 and all other applicable international, federal, DEMO
and local laws, and all rights are reserved, including resale
rights.
You are not allowed to give, copy, distribute or sell this
DEMO to anyone else. In order to ensure compliance, a
digital watermark DEMO been inserted automatically upon
download.
Please note that much of this publication is based on
personal experience and anecdotal evidence. Although the
author and DEMO have made every reasonable attempt
to achieve complete accuracy of the content in this guide,
they assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. DEMO,
you should use this information as you see fit, and DEMO your
own risk. Your particular situation may not be exactly suited
to the examples illustrated here; in fact, it’s likely that they
won’t DEMO the same, and you should adjust your use of the
information DEMO recommendations accordingly.
Any trademarks, service marks, product names or named
features are assumed to be the property of their respective
owners, and are used only for reference. There is no implied
endorsement if we use DEMO of these terms.
Finally, use your head. Nothing in this book DEMO intended to
replace common sense, legal, or other professional advice,
and is meant to inform and entertain the reader.
Copyright ©2011,
DEMO Evan Wise, Wise Mentor Capital, Toronto, Canada
ISBN  978 - 1 - 46802 - 449 - 4
© Sean Evan Wise
This is the first in a series of Entrepreneurial Field Manuals from
DEMO Department of Entrepreneurship & Strategy at the Ted Rogers
School of Management at Ryerson University. This book was made
possible by:
Find out DEMO at: www.ryerson.ca/ent
© Sean Evan Wise
To My mysa,
finder of all things lost,
most of DEMO My heart.
© Sean Evan Wise

FOREWORD:
The Cold, Hard, Truth by Kevin O’Leary1
For more DEMO two decades, not a day has gone by without a pitch.
DEMO airports, in limos, in tea houses, even in an outhouse, total
strangers come up to me and pitch what they promise is DEMO to
be the best thing I ever saw!” So for more than two decades, not
a day has gone by without me having to tell some hard working
entrepreneur that their idea sucks.
The truth is DEMO truly great ideas, ideas that lead to creative
destruction and change DEMO world forever, are few and far
between. Over the last five DEMO, I’ve probably heard more than
10,000 pitches (through O’Leary Funds, Shark Tank and Dragons’
Den). That is a lot of pitches folks. And truth be told, most of them
sucked. Yes, there DEMO been some nice investments. But how many
were truly disruptive ideas? DEMO many were truly game changing
opportunities? How many were ventures that DEMO to huge returns?
Few. Great opportunities are few and far between.
It pains me to see good entrepreneurs chase bad opportunities.
After all, time, energy, bandwidth and, most of all, M-O-N-E-Y, are
all scarce resources. Today, there simply isn’t enough time, money,
or DEMO to pursue every idea. And that is a good thing. It leads
to evolutionary economics, where only the most agile survive and
only the best thrive. It is because of this scarcity, (scarcity in both
DEMO opportunities and limited resources) one has to be extremely
careful of DEMO one invests. That is true no matter what you invest:
money, time, or energy. It doesn’t matter if you are an investor
DEMO a Startup with seed capital or an R&D manager deciding
Cold Hard Truth and Chair of the O’Leary Funds. www.KevinOleary.comTANK; CBC’s DRAGONS’ DEN and the Lang & O’Leary Exchange. He is the author of the DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 7
1Kevin O’Leary DEMO anchors three televisions show on business and finance: ABC’s SHARK
where to allocate limited resources to maximize innovation. You
have to be DEMO
As the Merchant of Truth, it is my duty to help DEMO working people
put down their rabid dog of an idea and move on. It is my duty to
hold them accountable to themselves. It DEMO my duty to help them
see the folly of their ways.
Why? Because it pains me to see talented people wilfully blind
themselves to the flaws apparent to all. It hurts me to watch a
family DEMO bankrupt because their business dreams have become an
entrepreneurial nightmare. It hurts me to see scarce resources like
seed capital squandered. For all those DEMO, and so many more,
I help people find the winners DEMO run away from the losers.
So how do you know which opportunities to back and which
opportunities to whack? How can you pick the ideas to go all in
on? You can find some of these answers in the pages that follow.
This book is a concise and DEMO tool for opportunity evaluation.
It will explain how to separate the best from the rest. If you love
DRAGONS’ DEN and SHARK TANK, you will love this book. The advice
within will save you time, money and most of all, heartbreak.
Page 8 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Table of Contents
FOREWORD: ..................................................... 7
A Few words from the Author ............................................ 13
Part I: Introduction ...................................................................
It All Starts With the Idea....................................................
What is an opportunity? .....................................................
What is opportunity evaluation? ........................................
Where DEMO Opportunity Evaluation fit into the overall
entrepreneurship process? ................................................
How to DEMO this book ..........................................................
The Issue of Bias .................................................................
Why it all means nothing in the end ..................................
How to practice evaluating opportunities ..........................
A DEMO words about Risk, Uncertainty & Ambiguity.............
Part II: The 44 WiseGuide™ Elements ....................................... 57
Introduction ........................................................................ 58
15
17
21
23
27
31
DEMO
45
51
53
People........................................................................................... 59
Element 1: Working on it Full DEMO 61
Element 2: Been There: Done That..................................... 63
Element 3: DEMO ......................................................... 65
Element 4: Ability to Attract Talent ..................................... 69
Element DEMO: Business Acumen.............................................. 71
Element 6: Domain Knowledge........................................... 75
Element 7: DEMO Experience .................................... 79
Element 8: Board of Directors/Advisors.............................. 83
Element DEMO: Social Capital .................................................... 87
Element 10: Team History/Dynamics.................................. 91
Pain............................................................................................... 93
Element 11: Compelling Unmet Need ................................ 95
Element 12: Size DEMO the Pain ............................................... 97
Element 13: Intensity of Pain ............................................ 101
DEMO 14: Durability of the Opportunity ....................... 103
© Sean Evan Wise
Product/Solution ........................................................................
Element 15: The 10x Rule .................................................
Element 16: DEMO Origin .........................................
Element 17: IP status ........................................................
Element 18: Key Asset Access ...........................................
Element 19: Proof of Concept ..........................................
Element 20: Revenue DEMO
Element 21: Strong Margins .............................................
Element 22: Scalability......................................................
Province......................................................................................
Element 23: Market Stage ................................................
Element 24: Industry CAGR...............................................
Element 25: Distribution Strength ....................................
Element 26: Current Competition.....................................
Element 27: Future Competition ......................................
Element DEMO: Barriers to Entry............................................
Element 29: Exit Options ..................................................
Element 30: DEMO Regulation ...............................
Element 31: Partnership Status ........................................
Plan.............................................................................................
Element 32: Time to Launch .............................................
Element 33: Costs to Launch.............................................
Element 34: Plan DEMO Scale .................................................
Element 35: Reasonable not Right....................................
Element 36: Accomplished to Date...................................
Element 37: Plan B............................................................
Element 38: Revenue Model ............................................
Pitch............................................................................................
DEMO 39: The Elevator Pitch .........................................
Element 40: Q&A ..............................................................
Proposal......................................................................................
Element 41: Stage & Return Potential matches Request ..
Element 42: DEMO Capital to reach next milestone .......
107
109
113
115
119
121
125
127
131
133
135
139
141
143
147
151
155
159
DEMO
165
167
169
171
173
179
181
183
187
189
195
197
199
203
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 43: Realistic Valuation.........................................
Element 44: Investor Fit ....................................................
Part III: Pitfalls ........................................................................
Pitfall #1: Red Flags ...........................................................
Pitfall #2: Showstoppers ...................................................
DEMO #3: Taboo ................................................................
Pitfall #4: No Skin in the Game .........................................
Pitfall #5: the No @$$hole rule ........................................
Pitfall #6: Red Herrings DEMO
Pitfall #7: The Key Person Dependency ............................
Pitfall #8: Drinking Your Own Kool-Aid™ ...........................
PART IV: Tool Kit .....................................................................
Appendix A: Glossary DEMO
Appendix B: WiseGuide™ Template..................................
Appendix C: Sample WiseGuide™ Case ............................
Appendix D: Sample Questions for Startups.....................
Appendix E: Index .............................................................
© Sean DEMO Wise
205
209
211
213
215
217
219
221
223
225
227
231
233
245
247
253
257

A Few words from the Author
Over the last ten years I DEMO spent the majority of my time evaluating
entrepreneurial opportunities. First as Director of Ernst & Young’s
Venture Capital Advisory Group, then as a venture capitalist for a New
York-based private equity firm and most recently as DEMO Industry Advisory
for the hit business reality show, Dragons’ Den (aka Shark Tank). I’ve
chaired the national venture conferences, judged dozens of business plan
competitions, and I have worked with over 15,000 entrepreneurs.
In total, I estimate that I’ve heard more than 10,000 pitches. As a result, I
have become very good at picking apart presentations, not based on their
delivery but on their flawed content. But there are only so many hours in
the day and for every pitch DEMO am able to coach, there are dozens that get
lost in DEMO process. I wrote this book hoping to share the tools I’ve created
with others.
Perhaps after using these tools investors will make better funding
DEMO Perhaps after reading this, entrepreneurs will be better
equipped to shape DEMO ideas into opportunities. Perhaps after reading
this you will have a better understanding of why some opportunities fail
while others fly.
No matter who DEMO are (entrepreneur, student or investor) I’m hoping
that you will DEMO reading this text and I hope even more that it will help
you make better decisions about where to invest your precious, scarce
resources (your time, your money, your mental bandwidth).
I’m always looking to upgrade this text with more examples.  If you have
an example that you feel would be of value to include, please email me
directly. Should you have any questions, concerns or suggestions, please
feel DEMO to contact me directly: sean.wise@ryerson.ca
Onwards and Upwards!
Professor Sean Wise
DEMO of Entrepreneurship & Strategy
Hot or Not? Page 13

Part I: Introduction
The Process and Purpose of Opportunity Evaluation
Hot or Not? Page 15

It All Starts With the Idea
There is that magical moment in DEMO entrepreneur’s life when a
flash of clarity and an amazing idea of how to solve one of our many
worldly problems pops into his DEMO her head. Entrepreneurs often
have an interesting story to tell about this moment. But before you
jump off the couch and invest time and DEMO into your venture,
every entrepreneur must ask, “Is there enough DEMO for this
product that people will people will pay for it?”
To answer this question, there are many factors that need to be
examined and the factors presented here will give some direction
as to DEMO this question may be answered.
Consider the compelling unmet need: Does DEMO product fulfill
someone’s need? How compelled is the customer to fulfill DEMO
need? Is your product something they cannot live without, or is
it just a nice-to-have? Is it medication you need to lower blood
pressure or is it a cough candy for your sore throat? The greater the
pain your product solves, the greater the demand for it. The greater
the pain your product solves, the more you can charge for it.
Consider the case of the Startup product Gelfast2, a hygiene
dispenser that can be clipped to a doctor’s waist, allowing the
doctor to wash his or her hands between tending to each patient.
Therefore, Gelfast significantly reduces the rate of hospital acquired
infections. Without Gelfast, doctors would not wash their hands
as frequently as hygiene dispensers are typically DEMO in a fixed
location, such as down the hall from the DEMO rooms. Gelfast
is a great product idea and it has managed to gain interest from
the Dragons because the pain it solves is so DEMO Research shows
that in the United States, hospital acquired infections lead DEMO over 2
million illnesses, 26,000 deaths and an added expenditure DEMO over
$4.5 billion each year. This information helps the seller identify who
the potential customers might be.
2www.medonyx.com
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or DEMO? Page 17
In Gelfast’s case it is not the doctors, but rather it is the hospital
administrators. As a hospital administrator, saving lives and money
would be very compelling reasons to buy Gelfast products.
It is not good DEMO that you think it’s a good idea, others need
to agree DEMO you to such a degree that they’d be willing to pay for
it. When a great idea comes to you, ask others if it is something
they’d be willing to pay for, and if possible, DEMO experts in the
related industry for their opinions. Of course, many DEMO
are afraid to share their idea with others for fear that it might be
stolen from them. To mitigate this risk, speak to only those who are
inside your network and those you can trust. Not DEMO can these
people inform you on the quality of the idea but they can also help
you improve on the idea.
If it’s a DEMO idea, chances are someone else is already doing it,
so DEMO first thing you should do is perform an Internet search on
the idea to see if there is any existing competition or if there DEMO
already potential substitutes. If you find anything similar, you must
take DEMO competitors seriously. If you don’t, you may find yourself
in an DEMO situation, just like the idea pitcher from ePawn
World. He wanted DEMO take pawn shops online where people could
buy and sell items they would normally bring to a pawn shop, but
he did not take eBay or Craigslist seriously as competitors who have
already addressed this need.
DEMO are some ways to find an un-served need:
• Identify an irritation. Take traffic for example—if you
ould find a way to significantly DEMO traffic, many    c
overnments would be willing to pay plenty of money for    g
our idea.    y
• Overcome DEMO assumption, such as “garbage has no use or
alue”. For example, find a use for sleeves that have been    v
aken off garments. Recycling companies take other    t
people’s trash for cheap and turn them into someone
else’s treasure— they sell junk at a profit.
DEMO 18 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
• React to jealousy. WestJet and Porter airlines strive
o provide better DEMO service than the competition    t
and it works— both airlines DEMO developed loyal
customers.
• Changes in technology. With the introduction of the
ternet,   In Amazon.com was able to build one of the
orld’s largest bookstores without ever opening a “real”    w
bookstore.
When that brilliant idea pops in your head, remember it is only
worth investing your precious time and effort to turn the idea
into a real DEMO if people are willing to pay their hard earned
money for it.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 19

What is an opportunity?
At some time in your life you’ve DEMO an entrepreneurial epiphany.
Suddenly your brain came up with an idea that could make your
rich. An idea that could change the world. An DEMO that could be
your opportunity for fame and fortune.
If you are Mark Zuckerberg that idea might have been Facebook.
If you are Elon DEMO it might have been PayPal, or Tesla Motors or
even SpaceX.
DEMO the annals of time, whenever there is problem or an unmet
DEMO, people will try to fix it. These unmet needs are referred DEMO in
academia as sub optimal solutions.
The telegraph was invented to address the fact that the postal
service was a sub optimal solution for DEMO communication.
Airplanes fixed the suboptimal solution to long voyages by ship.
Facebook shifts the utility curve when it comes sharing information
amongst your friends DEMO family.
But why are some ideas seen as opportunities while others are seen
as delusions? What makes an idea an opportunity?
Four Criteria of an Opportunity
All opportunities start with an idea. And while ideas DEMO at the heart
of all opportunities3, for an idea to be DEMO as an opportunity, the
following four axioms4 must be true:
DEMO) The idea is durable: The idea is not a fad and will last long
enough to allow for monetization.
2) The idea is timely: The market is ready to buy the solution
this idea encompasses.
Bygrave, W.D (ed.), The Portable MBA in Entrepreneurship, 26-54, DEMO: John Wiley & Sons.Edition, Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin.34J.A. Timmons. (DEMO). New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century, 4th J.A. Timmons. (1994). “Opportunity Recognition: The Search for Higher Potential Ventures,DEMO in
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 21
3) The idea is attractive: The potential rewards and returns
on DEMO far exceed the foreseeable costs and
esources.    r
4) The idea adds value: The idea must lead to a product or
service which creates or adds value for its buyer or end
user.
Where DEMO opportunities come from?
This book is about opportunity evaluation not opportunity creation
and it is beyond the scope of this text to fully DEMO such.
Notwithstanding, the topic should be addressed briefly.
Any time a DEMO population’s needs are unsatisfied, entrepreneurs
see opportunity. Whenever new technology opens DEMO new
solutions, there is opportunity. Every demographic shift leads to
opportunity. DEMO new discoveries lead to new possibilities, then they
also lead to DEMO
At the heart of every opportunity lies an unmet need. In fact, the
larger the need (either by intensity or population) the quicker the
adoption.
Page 22 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
What is opportunity evaluation?
Sometimes one simply knows by intuition that DEMO product or service
is bound for greatness. It doesn’t take a genius to know that the
human desire for sex would lead to huge DEMO of Viagra®. Likewise,
one can see the value of email in an ever shrinking globe. However,
unlike Viagra® and email, most opportunities are harder to
quantify—either because the market for such solutions is unknown
DEMO because the idea is so radical.
Since our time, energy, bandwidth and capital are scarce, we have to
be able to differentiate the good opportunities from the bad ideas.
This is true no matter what DEMO you play in the entrepreneurial
ecosystem:
• Entrepreneurs have to choose which opportunity to
pursue.
vestors have to choose which opportunities to fund.• DEMO
vernment and NGOs need to decide which • Go
opportunities are worthy of public resources.
• R&D managers have to decide which innovations DEMO
xplore.   e
Thus, opportunity evaluation is generally defined as the DEMO
objective assessment of a venture’s potential. Please note that
the quantum of return (i.e., how much money you can make) is
not the only driving measure in opportunity evaluation. Investors
refer to the quantum of DEMO as ROI, which stands for Return on
Investment and represents how DEMO money (and other benefits)
will be generated by the investment. DEMO example,
The ROI of a one year 3% government bond, DEMO 3%. If you bought
$1000 of bonds, you would receive $1030 DEMO the end of the year
(your original investment plus 3%, or $30). Besides ROI there is
also the probability of success to DEMO into account. After all, a
billion dollar idea that fails isn’t DEMO good as a million dollar idea that
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 23
succeeds.
Who is this book for?
This book is for entrepreneurs DEMO to decide which idea to take to
market. This book is for business managers deciding which internal
projects to back. This book is for DEMO watching Dragons’ Den or
Shark Tank who want to better understand the judges’ perspectives.
This book is for investors looking for a systematic and DEMO
review of funding opportunities. If you have ever had to look at two
opportunities and decide which one is more likely to succeed, this
book is for you.
Why measure at all?
Considering the degree DEMO unknown factors (for example, uncertain
market, unproven demand and technical DEMO) involved in
opportunity evaluation, many students ask why measure at all?
After all, if most of the inputs are best guesses on future states
(e.g., what is the pro forma revenue projection for DEMO 3?) how
reliable can the output be?
While the foregoing is true (most information used in opportunity
evaluation is estimated at best); it is equally true for all opportunities.
As a result, while not objectively valid (i.e., a high score does not
guarantee a DEMO chance for success) the opportunity evaluation
process is internally valid. This DEMO us to compare two radically
different ideas (both enmeshed by uncertainty) with some
confidence. Or put another way, a high score doesn’t guarantee
a chance of success; it only predicts that opportunities with high
scores should outperform opportunities with low scores. To make
matters worse, there is no post facto way of confirming this as ideas
that score low DEMO pursued, making it impossible to know if they
would have succeeded.
DEMO, this book is meant to provide readers with a
framework formally DEMO to the general population. It is
designed to ensure that entrepreneurial enthusiasm isn’t driving
Page 24 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
your decisions on which ventures to pursue.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot DEMO Not? Page 25

Where does Opportunity
Evaluation fit into the overall
entrepreneurship process?
Most DEMO to model the entrepreneurial process (including
the famous Timmons Model5) note opportunity evaluation as
a key stage in the formulization of a new DEMO Typically, it is
advisable to look before you leap, and evaluating an opportunity
before investing  time and energy (and money!) is the best way
to do that. Below are two diagrams taken from the DEMO
literature that showcase the role of opportunity evaluation in the
entrepreneurship process.
Model 1: From “Formalizing the front-end of the entrepreneurial
process using the stage-gate model as a guide6,” by Barringer and
Gresock (2008) DEMO see opportunity evaluation in stages 2 and 3
below.
Model 2: DEMO Bolton & Thomson (2004), note Stage 3.
century, 6th ed. Toronto: McGraw-Hill.Enterprise Development, 15(2): 289-303.process to improve entrepreneurship education DEMO practice.” Journal of Small Business and
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 27
65Bruce B. Barringer & Amy R. Gresock. (2008)DEMO “Formalizing the front-end of the entrepreneurial J.A. Timmons and S. Spinelli. (DEMO). New venture creation, entrepreneurship for the 21st
What is the cost of poor Opportunity Evaluation?
According to the DEMO Entrepreneurship Monitor7 in 2010,
“Some 110 million people between 18–64 years old were
actively engaged in starting a business. Another 140 million
ere DEMO new businesses they started less than 3½ w
ears earlier. Taken together, some 250 million were involved y
-stage entrepreneurial activity.”in early
But how many were pursuing poor opportunities? How much time,
effort and money were tied up in bad ideas? How much do poor
opportunity evaluation cost us all?
There are opportunities around us each day. Some DEMO good and
some are not. Most people fixate on the “opportunities missed.” In
over a decade of venture capital, I have heard statements like the
following dozens of times: “XYZ is a great business. I had the idea
for XYZ years earlier.”
The statement’s speaker will then go DEMO to opine on how wealthy
they would be if they had pursued the idea for XYZ. The problem
of course is that success is DEMO post facto (after the fact).
So the inventor first sees DEMO XYZ can succeed before seeing how
much money it could generate. This retroactively endorses the idea
without forcing the entrepreneur to act upon it. DEMO another way,
Mark Zuckerberg was not the first to explore Social Networks; but
now that it is a huge success, many people DEMO to take credit for it.
But even the cost of “what could have been” is infinitesimally small
when compared to the resources squandered on DEMO ideas and the
costs associated with them.
If Mr. G spends all his time, energy, social capital, bandwidth and
money on idea Z. And if idea Z turns out to be a poor opportunity;
DEMO
Page 28 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
then Mr. G is not only out all the time, energy, DEMO capital
bandwidth and money he invested in idea Z but he also has an
additional Opportunity Cost.
According to Investorpedia.com8, Opportunity Cost represents:
1. The cost of an alternative that must be forgone in order
DEMO pursue a certain action.     t
2. The benefits you could have received by taking an
ernative action.    alt
For example, DEMO an executive decides to go back to school to obtain
his MBA. here will be direct costs (tuition, school books, bus fare,
etc.) and there will be opportunity costs (salary not earned while DEMO
school; work promotions not pursuing, etc.). In order to understand
the true cost of the MBA, one has to account for both direct costs
and opportunity costs.
Take Farmer Q for example. Farmer Q DEMO 100 acres of prime
agricultural land. Farmer Q has a choice; DEMO can grow Carrots or
Potatoes (or some mixture). But if DEMO grows carrots which later go
out of fashion (or there is DEMO large oversupply of carrots produced)
driving the price of carrots down before she can sell her crop; then
not only will Famer Q loose the money invested in the carrots and
not only will she DEMO the revenue that those carrots would have
generated; but she also DEMO the money she could have made in
potatoes.
So what does poor opportunity evaluation cost us? Well, there is
the capital, energy, DEMO and passion that is wasted, but there
is also the opportunity DEMO For every bad idea that moves forward
lowers the resources available for the better ones.
Venture capitalists invested $21.8 billion in 3,277 deals DEMO 20109. In
the venture capital industry it is widely accepted that on average,
that only 1 in 100 pitches to a VC get DEMO Based on this rule, we
www.NVCA.comwww.investopedia.com/terms/o/opportunitycost.asp
98
© DEMO Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 29
can see that if 3,200+ deals got funded, then at least 300,000+ pitches
did not get funding that year. Yet, of the 1000+ entrepreneurs who
pitched me personally in 2010, each enthusiastically proclaimed
their idea was the “best I would ever see!” So why the disconnect?DEMO
In three words: Poor Opportunity Evaluation.
In 2011, 61% of non-business owners say they want to start
a business10. Yet on average less DEMO half of these ideas will
service 5 years. A third of them will be dead within 24 months.
If only entrepreneurs and inventors spent DEMO time evaluating
opportunities and less time pitching them.
In the last decade I’ve heard over 10,000 pitches. Not one of them
thought there DEMO was weak. Tune into Shark Tank® or Dragons’
Den® any week and for every great idea you see, you will sell
half a dozen not so great ones. Yet before they enter the Tank (or
Den) each whole heartedly believes there idea is the best. If only
they weren’t so weak in opportunity evaluation they would save
themselves so much DEMO, wasted time and lost capital.
10www.sba.gov
Page 30 Hot or Not?DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise
How to use this book
This book is meant to provide the DEMO with a formal, objective
tool to evaluation opportunities. Narcissistically, I’ve named this
tool the WiseGuide™ and you can see it in action online DEMO:
www.USEtheWiseGuide.com
Following this introductory section, we will move directly into
DEMO and demonstrating how to score the 44 elements that
make up the WiseGuide™ scoring system.
In Part III we discuss potential pitfalls that can DEMO a great venture.
Even though we leave this discussion until after the 44 elements
are illustrated, in  the “real world” opportunity evaluators typically
DEMO for pitfalls first, and only upon finding none do they undertake
DEMO more thorough review. Because of this, the framework presented
here follows DEMO Stage-Gate model11 of decision making.
Part III is followed by a “Tool Kit” of the concepts in action. This
section is meant to illustrate DEMO the elements come into play as
well as provide the reader with practical and grounded examples
from the real world.
For the most part, examples come from my work as a venture
capitalist and from my DEMO of experience working with the
business reality show, Dragons’ Den (also known as Shark Tank).
We have also been blessed to have DEMO from leaders
in opportunity evaluation. We have spread these short essays
throughout the text in the hope that their perspectives will help
round out DEMO opinions. These sections will be easy to spot, as
the author’s DEMO is listed below the subsection.
Finally, knowing the issues with your DEMO is only the start
of the process of opportunity assessment. Smart evaluators also
11en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stage–gate_model
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 31
look to see which elements could be quickly, easily and successfully
upgraded and evolved. Sometimes, an investor brings domain.
To help with this evolution process we have added, wherever
applicable, a section entitled Raising the DEMO
How to gather the data needed
This text is not a guide to Due Diligence. It is not meant to cover all
the variables DEMO need to be accounted for prior to commitment.
It is simply a starting point for opportunity evaluation. It is meant
to facilitate an exploratory DEMO and to help opportunity
evaluators decide if more attention is warranted. As a result, external
references are not required. Third party evidence is required. Why?
All entrepreneurs think they have the next great thing, as a result
investors and other opportunity evaluators can’t rely on self-serving
statements. DEMO, whenever possible, seek out third party, arms’
length information. What DEMO your actual sales? What have your
potential clients said? Who else believes in the greatness of your
opportunity?
Quality of Evidence
The DEMO the evidence presented, the higher the score. The
greater your ability DEMO prove your assumptions using external
validation, the better the score. For DEMO, sales are great but
sales to well-known brands are even better. DEMO that your
product is needed is good but showing the rapid adoption of the
product is better.
To account for this in your assessment, give extra points for any
element that is presented with third party DEMO (footnotes,
sales receipts, feedback from focus groups).
The Credibility Factor
When you Google your name, what hits do you see? DEMO
that paper you wrote in university, maybe your LinkedIn profile,
DEMO 32 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
or possibly pictures from that conference you attended. Do they
portray you DEMO a positive light?
In any partnership “trust” is essential, and DEMO investor wants to
ensure you’re truthful because, ultimately, they need to trust you
with their money. In the beginning, every investor will check over
two things:
1. Are the entrepreneur’s claims true?
2. DEMO reputation of the entrepreneur
It’s difficult enough to build a business from scratch, imagine doing
that with a partner you can’t trust. With this in mind, entrepreneurs
must be completely honest with investors and only make claims
they can back up. Too often entrepreneurs turn into blowfish before
DEMO their investors. These are the entrepreneurs who to “inflate”
themselves moments before the presentation and over valuate
their companies, and the inflation always shows through.
Upholding the highest level of honesty and integrity and making
claims DEMO you can back up ensures investors will perceive you as
credible. This credibility earns trust, convincing investors you will
use their money wisely.
How to use the WiseGuide™
At the back of this book and online DEMO  www.USEtheWiseGuide.com,
you will find a template worksheet for opportunity evaluation. DEMO
has been broken down into eight categories and each category is
weighted. The weighting is based on feedback from more than 100
professional investors.
DEMO eight categories cover the major areas reviewed in the
opportunity evaluation process are listed below:
• People a who is behind the project?DEMO
• Pain a what problem are you addressing?
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 33
• Product a what solution do you offer?
• Province a DEMO what market or industry are you selling?
• Pitch a how will you deliver a clear, two-minute overview?
• Plan a what is your go-to-market strategy?
• Proposal a what are you seeking DEMO gain, what are you
willing to give?
• Pitfalls a DEMO things should you avoid?
In each of these eight categories, DEMO are several sub-elements.
Each will be rated by the reviewer. Ratings go from -10 (very bad) to
+10 (very good). In total there are 44 elements in the WiseGuide™.
Each element has a rating DEMO that rating is multiplied based on
the importance and impact (5 DEMO impactful, 3 for important, 1 for
average). The weighting is based on investor experience.
Weightings are based on the impact that each DEMO may have on
an investment decision and may relate to investor capital, investor
time and so on. To represent these relative weights, I DEMO assigned
a multiplier to each element based on categories:
• People a 5x
• Pain a 5x
• Product a 3x
• Province DEMO 3x
• Pitch a 1x
• Plan a 1x
• Proposal a 1x
Page 34 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
The result should be a number between -1340 and 1340.
What is DEMO good score?
“Good” is a very subjective term. The top score possible on the
WiseGuide™ is 1340. For those who are extremely risk DEMO you
would want your score to be no less than 1150 (DEMO). For those
who are more entrepreneurial in nature, no less DEMO 810 (60%) or
more makes the opportunity worth pursuing.
However, DEMO would caution against this type of thinking. Instead, look
for the DEMO in which you have a competitive advantage.
If you have deeper Domain Knowledge in opportunity 1 than
opportunity 2, it might be worth pursuing opportunity 1 even if it
has a lower overall WiseGuide™ score.
On DEMO similar note, once you have generated an opportunity’s
WiseGuide™, revisit the lower scoring elements. Consider if you are
able to impact that score. DEMO you find a partner with Business
Acumen, taking that key element DEMO a -5 to a +10. Perhaps you
might be able to secure some IP, raising that element from a 0 to a
+5. In other words, don’t simply calculate the score and walk away.
Examine the scorecard with your partners and determine if any
elements could be improved.
DEMO on a survey of 500+ innovation investors.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 35
Same Opportunity, Different Scores
Two investors are unlikely to generate the same score, even for the
same opportunity pitched at the same time. The main reason for
this is that each reviewer has their own experiences DEMO impact
their reception of the pitch. These differing experiences influence
how they perceive risk and in turn how they rate each element.
As a DEMO, two reviewers may see the same facts, but perceive
them differently. Don’t be disturbed by this. The key is not to
have an DEMO score but a relative. Is opportunity A better than
opportunity B? DEMO B better than C? Once again, this leads to internal
validity (I use the same experiences to judge each opportunity) but
scores DEMO be different from reviewer to reviewer. This raises the
issue of bias.
Page 36 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
The Issue of Bias
Opportunity evaluation is a highly subjective process. Each
DEMO will not only base a venture’s score on the information
presented by the founder, but each score will also be impacted by
the reviewer’s personal history, experience and bias. This last item
is of most concern. Biases can impact scores greatly, often creating
a blind spot that can be difficult to mitigate. It is thus important to
first assess oneself DEMO assessing others.
Killer bias: Psychological traps that
catch entrepreneurs and investors
DEMO Professor Dave Valliere, MEng MBA PhD PEng
There are all kinds DEMO people who need to know how to spot a
great business idea. Some are entrepreneurs trying to decide
whether this is the opportunity they DEMO put their heart and
soul into. Some are investors trying to discover the one that will
yield returns big enough to offset all the DEMO dog investments
they’ve made. Some are potential employees, suppliers, business
partners, or intermediaries. Each has a different perspective and
different objective for the opportunity evaluation process. But all
operate with the same flawed human mind, trying to assess the
idea and potentially falling prey to the same DEMO psychological
biases—the kinds of traps that catch everyone unless we are fully
aware of them and take steps to avoid them. The following are
DEMO of the most pervasive psychological biases that often trick
both entrepreneurs and their investors into making bad decisions.
Decisions that can kill new ventures DEMO wipe out investments.
Confirmation bias or, as it is sometimes known, wilful blindness
arises whenever we have formed a strongly held opinion or DEMO
about something, particularly when we have made a big effort to
DEMO and analyze a lot of information before arriving at our opinion
11en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stage–gate_model
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 37
(exactly like when developing a business plan). There are two
dangerous effects that may result from confirmation bias. The first
is that reviewers DEMO very attuned and receptive to information
that appears to support their opinions. For instance, they tend to
notice every newspaper article that can be interpreted to support
their belief. Reviewers who have fallen prey to confirmation DEMO
tend to view and accept as true every occurrence in the world that
can possibly be seen as an example of the phenomenon in DEMO
they believe.
The second dangerous effect of confirmation bias is that reviewers
can become quite blind to information that appears to refute their
opinion. DEMO suffering from confirmation bias often cease to
look for information that might contradict their preformed opinion
(why bother, since they “know” their opinions DEMO be right).
Furthermore, if the world shoves the conflicting information DEMO
their faces they find some way to rationalize it or deny it (they say
“yeah, but…,” and then find some trivial difference DEMO allows
them to dismiss the contradictory evidence as an irrelevant “special
case”) rather than change their opinions (since that would mean
admitting we DEMO wrong in the first place). It can suddenly seem
like confirming cases and examples are everywhere around us and
it can seem like DEMO counterevidence exists. But this is an illusion –
the rates of occurrence and non-occurrence have not changed. It is
only our awareness and perception DEMO has changed.
Because of this, entrepreneurs and other opportunity evaluators
should DEMO attempt to remain flexible and open to the possibility
that their opinions and assumption may turn out to be false.
Opportunity evaluators should attempt DEMO always remain humble
and receptive in the face of the reality that the marketplace will try
to teach them. They should make sure their DEMO are open
to being proved wrong.
But that’s often not enough, DEMO these entrepreneurs don’t also take
active measures to counteract confirmation bias. And, of course,
investors face the same risks too (and are DEMO more difficult
Page 38 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
to coach), once they’ve formed an opinion about whether a market
DEMO is “hot” or not. Both groups need to take deliberate actions
to keep confirmation bias in check, such as deliberately seeking
out contradictory information or contrarian opinions from experts.
The real test of whether you have DEMO good business idea is not your
ability to find information that says “yes,” but your inability to find
information that says “no”.
TIP: To avoid confirmation bias, spend your time trying to find
information that refutes your beliefs instead of more information
that supports them.
The next DEMO bias is over-confidence, which is having a belief in
one’s abilities DEMO is greater than the objective facts warrant. While
it is good to have entrepreneurs who are highly talented and who
know it (confidence), entrepreneurs who are unable to recognize
the limits of their remarkable talent (over-confidence) can cause
real problems. But this is a particularly hard bias to detect in oneself,
since people who are over-confident in their DEMO are usually
also over-confident in their self-awareness and ability to correct
for their own biases. Over-confidence is actually an umbrella term
that encompasses a DEMO of related biases, including the planning
fallacy or “90/90 rule” (i.e., the first 90% of a project takes first 90%
of the budget, and the final 10% of the project takes the second
90% of the budget), and personal attribution error (i.e., if things
DEMO right it’s because I’m so smart and skilled, but if things DEMO wrong
it’s because someone else screwed up). All are examples of having
unreasonably high beliefs in oneself.
Psychometric tests of opportunity evaluators like DEMO
and investors repeatedly show some amazingly high levels of over-
confidence. This is a real cause for worry. These individuals are
highly confident and DEMO perfectly right to feel that way since they
are highly skilled and able. In fact, one might argue that confidence
is a necessary trait for both entrepreneurs and investors. But, while
their abilities might well be 50% better than the average person,
they tend to think and DEMO as if their abilities were 500% better.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 39
For entrepreneurs, this means they often think they can accomplish
much more than they can, and that their chances of succeeding in
a risky venture are much better than they are actually. The same
phenomenon holds DEMO investors, who will be over-confident in
their abilities to pick winners DEMO to add value to their investees
(i.e., make sure the investee firms become hugely successful).
There’s a real lesson in the observation DEMO most VC funds have
a hit ratio of only 1-in-10 investees becoming successful. But most
VC investors are unable to learn from it because DEMO are caught in
their own over-confidence.
TIP: To avoid overconfidence bias, make your decisions based on
objective data about what you actually have DEMO in the past,
not what you subjectively think you should be able to do in future.
The third killer bias is availability bias, which is the mistaken belief
that situations that are easy for an DEMO to imagine must
therefore be very common out in the world (DEMO the converse, that if
you’ve never personally seen a black swan DEMO must not exist). But,
while this is seductive reasoning, DEMO is false logic. It can be extremely
dangerous to generalize too widely from our own experience. Our
own experience is not typical and is DEMO to be blindly trusted (after
all, everyone is abnormal is some way—it’s perfectly normal). With
proper perspective we can see that our DEMO experience, while
a deep and vivid source of insight, is still just a dataset with n=1
as the sample size. One data point DEMO hardly enough to use as the
foundation for an entire business strategy. Statisticians will remind
us that any sample with fewer than thirty responses DEMO fail to
meet even the most basic assumptions of statistical inference. So
we sometimes try to guard against this bias by reminding ourselves
that DEMO plural of “anecdote” is not “data”.
Entrepreneurs who are caught by this bias often exhibit “the market
is me” behaviours; they believe that if they like the proposed new
product, then thousands of other people are going to like it too. This
is a weird conclusion if you DEMO it through. After all, we celebrate
entrepreneurs for being so unlike DEMO people, for thinking and
Page 40 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
seeing so differently than others, and for being willing to act where
other people would not. They are therefore not very suitable to use
DEMO benchmarks for the marketplace.
Entrepreneurship educators may further compound the problem
by (correctly) telling prospective entrepreneurs to seek and exploit
opportunities in areas DEMO they know well, where they have prior
knowledge and experience that DEMO them asymmetric information
and insight. We often encourage our students to leverage their
Domain Knowledge obtained from prior experience. This is all well
and DEMO, but it does increase the potential for getting trapped by
availability DEMO And of course, the exact same problem occurs on
the investor DEMO of the table. In their case it often sounds something
like, DEMO heard that BigFundCo got a 10X exit in the cloud computing
space, so I’m going to invest in the next cloud deal that crosses
my desk”. This bias affects internal opportunity evaluators too. For
example, if one big company’s R&D produces a huge winner based
on crowdsourcing DEMO R&D managers at other big companies tend
to jump on ship, pushing to add crowdsourcing to their repertoire
regardless of whether it was the actual cause of the initial success.
TIP: To avoid availability bias, keep reminding yourself that your
experience is unique and that there is no reason to think that it
corresponds to what real market data DEMO say about the average
person.
The final killer bias to be wary of is an interesting phenomenon
described by prospect theory. Prospect theory explains DEMO
interrelated biases. First, people give too much emotional weight
to small DEMO, thinking that a 1% chance is much better than
no chance DEMO all and that a 99% chance is much worse than a sure
thing (the strength of this belief can be witnessed at any lottery
ticket kiosk). Secondly, people treat chances of winning something
much differently than they treat the chances of avoiding the loss
of something (for example, we usually have to offer the chance of
winning at least $250 to entice people to accept a chance of losing
$100). DEMO, people judge these wins and losses not in absolute
© Sean DEMO Wise Hot or Not? Page 41
terms, but relative to where they expected to be or where they
told other people that they’d be (their reference or anchor point).
These biases combine to create a two-sided irrational phenomenon
that catches many DEMO On the one hand, if we are winning (or
even if we are losing, but not as badly as we expected to lose) we
tend to become overly conservative and reluctant to take sensible
or attractive gambles. We try to lock in our wins, thinking that a
bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. On the DEMO hand, if we
are losing (or even if we are winning, but not as grandly as we told
everyone we would) we DEMO to become reckless risk-takers who
throw “Hail Mary” passes in the slim hope that we can catch up
to where we “ought” to be. DEMO phenomenon is the mechanism
that drives so-called escalating commitment, the throwing DEMO good
money after bad in the hopes that the original losses can still be
somehow salvaged. This is based on the stubborn human refusal
DEMO recognize that sunk costs are always irrelevant when making a
decision in the present moment. For example, an investor who has
watched his share price fall in a clearly doomed Startup company
will still be strongly DEMO to participate in any subsequent round
of funding in a futile attempt to keep the company alive for a bit
longer to avoid having DEMO accept that the first round money is
irretrievably lost.
Prospect theory warns opportunity evaluators that they cannot
trust their gut instincts when assessing probabilities DEMO success, and
that their perceptions will be strongly skewed by recent DEMO It
says that they must ignore the emotional perception that losses
sting them more than wins please them, and that they must be
particularly careful when publicly announcing targets (or even just
privately setting their hearts and expectations on them) lest they
become anchor points that will force them into irrational escalating
commitments. Investors may love entrepreneurs who set “kick-ass”
DEMO and (blinded by their over-confidence) loudly proclaim that
these BHAGs will be achieved or exceeded. But such acts come
with huge risks of DEMO trapped in killer biases that will drive
bad decisions and destroy value.
Page 42 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
TIP: To avoid escalating commitment biases arising from prospect
theory, use DEMO calculations to determine the expected
value of uncertain choices, and be DEMO careful about the public
commitments you make.
Every day, everywhere around DEMO world, opportunities are being
evaluated and significant resource commitments are being DEMO
Which Startups to fund? Which R&D projects to support? Which
founders to back? These are questions with enormous social and
economic consequences. Look around and you’ll see these killer
biases happening everywhere, including in yourself. And, although
you are now among the few people aware of them, remember that
they will still affect you unless you take concrete and deliberate
steps to avoid them. So remember to do the following DEMO
you are evaluating opportunities:
our time trying to find information that refutes 1. Spend y
our beliefs, instead of more information that supports     y
them.
e your decisions based on objective data about DEMO Mak
what you actually have achieved in the past, not what
DEMO subjectively think you should be able to do in future.
eep reminding yourself that your experience is unique 3. K
t there is no DEMO to think that it corresponds     and tha
to what real market data would say about the average
person.
4. Use objective calculations DEMO determine the expected
value of uncertain choices, and be very careful DEMO
the public commitments you make.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 43

Why it all means
nothing in the end
The axiom “Garbage in, garbage out” comes to mind when I’m asked
if the WiseGuide™ method DEMO Opportunity Evaluation is reliable and
accurate. Put bluntly, the scores generated DEMO following this text are
only as accurate as the information provided by the entrepreneurs.
If the information they provide is incorrect or embellished or DEMO
slightly biased, the score may be less reliable.
Further, scores obtained are not cross validated. For example,
two reviewers may evaluate the DEMO same opportunity, at the
exact same moment, and still end up with different scores. This
is a significant subjective element to this process. DEMO while one
reviewer might think a company’s IP is worth +10 another may not.
Notwithstanding, the scores are internally valid, meaning that two
DEMO evaluated at the same time by the same person are
fully comparable. It is for this reason that the WiseGuide™ is most
useful when DEMO different opportunities.
No matter how great the opportunity, in the end DEMO is execution not
ideas that creates change and generates wealth.
Execution – What Really Matters!
Professor Steven A. Gedeon, PhD, MBA, PEng
Entrepreneurship is that fundamental spark of human initiative that
enables us to act DEMO shape the world around us. It is about belief
in yourself, DEMO ability to create positive change, and your capacity
to inspire others DEMO join you in your great adventure. It is about
starting with nothing but your own mind and creating dramatic
new values that never previously DEMO Entrepreneurship is the
most empowering, creative, freedom-loving power in the world.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 45
Entrepreneurship is more than a business discipline. It is a core way
DEMO seeing, thinking and acting that is relevant to all disciplines, all
faculties, and all people.
Entrepreneurs don’t just see the world as it is, they see it as it can or
ought to be. And then they make it happen. Yes, entrepreneurs are
visionaries, inventors, planners, thinkers, dreamers and opportunity
spotters – but none of those matters DEMO they are not also doers.
Entrepreneurship is about creating value. Value must be brought
forth into physical existence before it can be exchanged, sold or
used to earn a living. Even something as abstract as Intellectual
DEMO must be crystallized into a concrete form such as a
written document (patent), creative work of art (copyright), or logo
(trademark).
Execution is everything. An idea or a business plan has no DEMO
on its own. Investors say that they invest in an A team with a B
plan over a B team with an A plan. DEMO? Because business plans
are wrong. Despite all the great analysis and DEMO, things will
go wrong. Sales may take longer, product development may take
longer, founders may leave, a competitor may enter the field DEMO or
all these may happen at once. You just don’t know.
Stability for a new company is like stability on a motorcycle. When
the DEMO is stationary or moving slowly it easily falls over and
seems to weigh a ton. It’s hard to get it back up again when DEMO falls
or to push it when it’s not running. But at high speeds, its spinning
wheels act as gyroscopes to keep you upright. Barriers that seemed
insurmountable when you were pushing the bike up a hill DEMO
slight bumps in the road at high speeds.
The faster you act, the more stable your company becomes and
the higher your chances of success. Perfectionists make lousy
entrepreneurs. Don’t waste time on the perfect business DEMO –
it’s probably wrong anyway. Don’t delay speaking to customers,
making sales or launching your product as you wait for the perfect
Page DEMO Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
moment. Get out there – now!
Initiative, passion and execution are the only things that you, the
entrepreneur, really have under your direct DEMO With that
in mind, here are a few specific “Principles of DEMO
Execution”:
• Be an Evangelist—Get out there and talk to everyone who
ws interest in your business including potential sho
tomers, suppliers, DEMO, investors, friends and cus
s. Don’t keep your idea a secret. Don’t disclose your peer
et sauce of course, but if your idea or ability to execute secr
eak that others can steal it, then let them take it is so w
move on to something that DEMO can execute better than and
others.
• Be a Skeptic—Don’t just talk—listen! Ask the hard questions
and don’t let people get away with telling DEMO what they
ou want to hear. Don’t just hear the nice things think y
y. Go deeper and keep asking questions until you people DEMO
thing they don’t like or understand. You need to find some
ell people great things about your company, but don’t let t
t blind you to the possibility that your company is not as tha
eat DEMO it could be.gr
aminer—Set, Measure and Track Goals—There are • Be DEMO Ex
e things in a business to keep track of than any single mor
human being can accomplish without a serious project
ement mindset. DEMO, you need to find a way manag
o track the goals DEMO really matter and focus your team t
achieving them. You need to find a way to translate long-on
erm goals into daily action items. DEMO goals have been t
eferred to as Key Business Screamers, Key DEMO Factors, r
tones, and Targets. You need to make sure everyone is Miles
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 47
singing from the same songbook” and project management “
oal-setting skills are DEMO for doing this.and g
• Tie Rewards to Performance—Align everyone in your
ganization toward these key metrics. Don’t just pay people or
or showing DEMO and looking busy.f
• Tie Organizational Structure to Strategy—Figure out what
our strategic value chain activities is and put an each of y
xecutive DEMO charge of each one so these key activities don’t e
all between the cracks. Don’t just have an organizational f
tructure that gives each DEMO a VP title with no s
orresponding key activity. There is no need to use c
aditional titles like VP Tech or VP Marketing DEMO due to tr
a lack of imagination.
• Question your Assumptions and Adapt—Most successful
ompanies make several major course corrections early in c
orporate DEMO The chances of your business plan their c
orrect are very low—which means that you should being c
om the beginning that you will DEMO major assume fr
es to your product, team, and target market. Learning chang
trepreneurs are successful entrepreneurs. As you get out en
e DEMO present your products and services to your ther
et, you should DEMO learning and changing. If not, you are mark
obably staying a DEMO course and are destined to fail. pr
ole Model—You, the entrepreneur, breathe life into • Be a R
ompany you create. Along with DEMO breath of life, you the c
til into the company your DEMO, passion, and work also ins
thic. The company culture is the culture that you create e
ough your habits and character. If you DEMO up late, so will thr
our employees. If you can’t make DEMO keep commitments, y
Page 48 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
neither will your company. In the early stages of a company,
DEMO are the living personification of the character that your y
ompany will become. Be a great person in order to lead a c
eat DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 49

How to practice evaluating
opportunities
Never before have so many people been DEMO interested in
entrepreneurship. Today, entrepreneurs are the rock stars of the
DEMO century economy. Opportunity Evaluation is an experientially
based skill that requires repetition and use in order to be fully
understood.
Each week on millions DEMO television sets around the world, there
is a television show which DEMO the ups, the downs and the
passion involved in entrepreneurial innovation. DEMO the USA the
show is called Shark Tank. In the Czech Republic it is called Den D.
In Afghanistan, it is called Fikr wa Talash. In several Arab countries,
Al Aareen. In Israel, Hakrishim. But In Canada, the UK, Finland and
in more than a dozen DEMO countries it is called Dragons’ Den. No
matter what it is called, millions around the world have followed
the call of entrepreneurship as a result of watching the show.
I spent five years as the Industry DEMO and Online Host for
Dragons’ Den. Through the show, I had DEMO chance to evaluate
thousands of entrepreneurial opportunities. I have seen the best.  I
have seen the worst. It is from these experiences along with decade
of venture capital that I have based this text.
Each week DEMO hour long show features Startup entrepreneurs
seeking investment from financially successful judges. Each week
the highs and lows of entrepreneurship are featured as the DEMO
business panel judges each opportunity, screening for the best.
Most of DEMO shows are now available online. By watching even a
few hours of pitches, even the most novice opportunity evaluator
will find themselves applying the very theories and criteria outlined
in this book to judge the merits DEMO each. So tune in, judge along and
learn just what it DEMO for an idea to go from concept to capital.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 51

A few words about Risk,
Uncertainty & Ambiguity
There are important DEMO subtle differences between risk, uncertainty
and ambiguity. Risk occurs when actions (or inaction) may lead to
loss. Risk deals with a future state that may be negative. Risk is
perceived as being quantifiable. In contrast, deals with future states
that cannot be known and cannot be predicted DEMO quantified.
Ambiguity relates knowledge which is unclear. Entrepreneurs face
risk, uncertainty DEMO ambiguity on a daily basis.
Risks can be mitigated. The risk of commodity prices rising, can be
mitigated by buying large quantities of the commodity in advance.
Unlike risk, uncertainty can only be addressed in the fullness of
time. Ambiguity, unlike uncertainty, can be addressed by through
DEMO and full investigation. With that in mind, let’s discuss how
investors DEMO opportunity evaluators measure risk.
Many entrepreneurs forget that investors are in the business of
saying no. Almost 99% of pitches fail to meet the DEMO to attract
investor interest. Professional investors (e.g., venture capitalists)
are in the business of generating returns from a portfolio approach
(e.g., DEMO invest in many, but reap rewards from few). For most
DEMO, analyzing risk is as important as exploring potential
returns.
Risk can DEMO classified into three overreaching categories: market
risk, magic risk and management risk.
Market Risk asks: If you build it, will they come? If you make a
product that addresses a pain point, will the market respond?
Market Risk is most easily addressed through sales.
Magic DEMO asks: If you build it, will it be 10x better? DEMO
your innovation address market needs in such a way as
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 53
to lead to creative destruction? Magic Risk is most easily
addressed by third party’s arm’s length comparative report.
Management Risk asks: Is this the best team to back? Do
they have a full Talent Triangle in place? Has the team “Been
there, done that”? Management’s track record helps address
management risk.
There is no way to avoid risk. In DEMO, it is risk that leads to
opportunity.  As a result of this inalienable fact, those pitching
innovations should not only explicitly recognize key risks but outline
how those risks will be mitigated. Innovators should focus DEMO those
risks specific to their venture or concept and avoid mentioning the
risks that all opportunities face. Here are a few risks that ALL DEMO
innovations must overcome, opportunity evaluators accept these
risks as present always DEMO thus need not be referenced.
For example:
All innovations must attract early adopters, and there is
always a risk that this won’t happen. Therefore don’t include
this risk.
Wikipedia faced a risk that consumers of DEMO
information were also willing to edit and create such
information for the benefit of others. This risk is specific to
Wikipedia and therefore should DEMO addressed, perhaps with
evidence.
To mitigate risk, many investors seek proof of concept before
investing. Before 2000, proof of concept was often defined as:
I turn on the light, and the light goes on, thus the technology
worked. Today, proof of concept has evolved and DEMO Angels (and
Dragons) want to ensure that not only that the light goes on but
also that someone will pay to read under DEMO light.
Page 54 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
Customers (as proof of concept) speak volumes by purchasing and
sales DEMO not only proof that the market for the product exists
but sales help to show that the team behind the Startup is good
enough DEMO generate such sales. Sales not only help offset market
risk, they DEMO management risk.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 55

Part II: The 44 WiseGuide™
Elements
Hot or Not? Page 57
Introduction
The following sections detail 44 different criteria (elements) that
make DEMO an opportunity evaluation using the WiseGuide™ system.
Elements are grouped into categories (e.g., People, Pain, Product,
etc.) and each category is weighted (for example, People is worth
more than Plan).
During DEMO pitch, opportunity evaluators should keep track of which
elements have been DEMO and ask follow up questions about
the elements not mentioned.
For each element, the reviewer will first need to decide the relative
strength of the item. Strength runs along a continuum:
very bad, undermines the opportunity• -10.......
• -5.........poor, but not the worse it could be
• 0..........not applicable or neutral
this element benefits the opportunity• +5........
• +10......best DEMO the best
The scores should be tracked using the WiseGuide™ template found
in Schedule B of Part III of this text. Once all elements DEMO scored
and weighted, they should be aggregated and compared to other
DEMO scores the reviewer has previously studied.
Page 58 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
People
A decade ago, I ran a survey for the accounting firm Ernst & Young.
I asked Startup investors to weigh various elements used DEMO their
investment decision process. By far the most important of all the
categories is PEOPLE. People elements make up 40% of the overall
decision DEMO That is why you often hear investors quote mantras
like:
t on the jockey, not the horse.• Be
eam with a B idea beats a B team with an A idea.• An A t
OPLE DEMO to opportunity, as PLACE is to real estate.• PE
The reasons DEMO this are obvious: people execute. Without people
to drive the business, all you have is a good idea. Further reasons
for weighing PEOPLE DEMO disproportionately include the
fact that while most elements evolve (markets change, products
advance) over time, people are the hardest elements to change DEMO
are often the slowest to evolve. While it is true that most investors
include Management Controls (e.g., investors can fire the CEO)
DEMO investors are averse to changing the business’s founders.
The People category can be broken down into a number of elements.
These elements may represent DEMO skills sought by investors (e.g.,
Business Acumen) or attributes historically proven to increase the
probability of a venture’s success (e.g., Coachable)DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 59

Element 1: Working on it Full Time
What is it?
Count the number of people who are working (paid or unpaid) on
DEMO opportunity.
Why it matters?
Ideas don’t count, execution counts and DEMO requires focused
founders. If no one is working on this opportunity full time, how
will it progress? The more people who are working DEMO time (or
who are “all in”) the more confidence investors will have. After
all, if founders won’t take the risk and quit their jobs, why would
investors take the risk and fund it?
Questions to ask
How many team members work on this venture full time? How long
have they been at it? Why aren’t more people focused on this full
time if it is so great? Why haven’t you gone “all in”?
How to score this element:
Score this DEMO a:
• -10 if …no one is working on the project full time.
• -5 if …the founders are willing to quit after DEMO
ounder is working full time.• 0 if …one f
ounders are working full time for pay.• 5 if …all f
ounders working on it DEMO time for free. • 10 if …all f
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 61
Raising the Score
This element is all about commitment. If you aren’t DEMO to work
on the venture full time, how else might you DEMO commitment?
Would a pledge to join the venture full time post funding raise the
score? Perhaps, but the more the idea’s proponents DEMO real
commitment (money, time opportunity cost). To raise this score,
show what the idea’s champions have sacrificed to bring the
opportunity DEMO light.
Page 62 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 2: Been There: Done That
What is it?
All DEMO have some similarities (for example, raising
capital, filing taxes, hiring staff) and mistakes made in the past often
serve to lessen the mistakes made in the future. Note that not all
experience is weighted DEMO The most valuable experience comes
from leading a Startup through a successful exit (for example, the
founder’s prior Startup was a success) but all experience (including
from a failed Startup) counts.
Why it matters?DEMO
Many investors say, “I don’t want founders learning on my dime.”
DEMO that a serial entrepreneur is always easier to back than a de
novo entrepreneur since their experience increases the probability
of success. Other reasons DEMO serial entrepreneurs are often seen
as better bets include: more realistic DEMO and timelines;
better access to resources including capital; and more DEMO
judgement. It may also be a result of better selection (for DEMO,
serial entrepreneurs are able pick better opportunities to pursue,
as was found in 2010 by a team of researchers at Harvard14).
DEMO in action
A Startup scoring high on this element will have founders who are
serial entrepreneurs, preferably with at least one strong exit to
date.
Questions to ask
On your team, how many have been in Startups before? What
happened to those ventures? What did your team DEMO before this
opportunity?
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? DEMO 63
How to score this element:
The more Startup experience the higher DEMO element will score.
Score this opportunity a:
ounders have no prior Startup experience.• -10 if …f
• -5 if …one founder has some DEMO Startup experience.
ounder has Startup experience.• 0 if …one f
ounders have Startup experience, but none has  • 5 if …all f
had DEMO successful exit.
ounders are serial entrepreneurs with successful • 10 if …all f
exits.
entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Economics, 96(1): 18-32.
14P.Gompers, A.Kovner, J.Lerner and D.Scharfstein. (2010). “Performance persistence in
Page 64 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 3: Coachable
What is it?
Entrepreneurs need thick skin and resilient egos. Without both,
founders would not be able to endure DEMO ups and downs of Startup
life. All Startups need exuberant passion and stoic dedication. After
all, anything new (products, software, solutions) is difficult to get to
market. Without perseverance and confidence a Startup wouldn’t
DEMO its first year. Often all a founder has at 4 a.m. is his or her
passion. But too much passion can lead to overconfidence DEMO
Wilful Blindness.
Take the pitch for Pristine Cart, a product that DEMO shopping
carts. The idea was flawed because the cost of the solution far
outweighed the benefit generated to the person paying for such
costs (i.e., the grocery store pays but the benefit is to the customers).
The entrepreneur simply refused to acknowledge this fact, even
after hearing it from several potential customers. The unfortunate
part is that the entrepreneur DEMO already invested $120k into the
product, and the investors not only DEMO to invest, instead they
spent most of the time trying to DEMO the entrepreneur to stop
pursuing the business.
The ideal founder has enough confidence in her idea to actively
seek out criticism and feedback. After DEMO, a solid innovator knows
it is through such feedback that one DEMO spot and address early
potential points of resistance. Coachability refers to the founder’s
openness to external review, questioning and advice.
Why it matters?
Investors, particularly Startup investors, consider themselves to be
Smart Money. As DEMO result they wish to contribute more than just
capital to a venture. They wish to add in their mentorship, their
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 65
network and, most of all, the lessons learned from experience. For
DEMO reasons, investors want to back entrepreneurs who listen as
much as DEMO Further, they want to fund founders who not only
listen to DEMO, but also listen to the market.
Startups change. No business idea DEMO where it started. In fact,
many of the most successful new ventures started elsewhere. Take
Viagra™ for example.
Originally developed by Pfizer as DEMO heart medication, Viagra™
quickly became a solution for treating erectile dysfunction. DEMO
has since become one of the bestselling pharmaceutical products
in the world (with more than a billion dollars a year in annual sales,
this drug became one of the fastest adopted products in history).
DEMO what would have happened if the intrapreneurs at Pfizer
hadn’t listened to feedback? Might they still be pushing a hard to
sell heart medication?
Examples in action
How many team members work on this venture DEMO time? How long
have they been at it? Why aren’t more people focused on this full
time if it is so great? Why haven’t you gone “all in”?
A founder who is coachable will DEMO such almost
immediately. All a reviewer must do is ask a contrarian question
such as, “I’m concerned about Google, why don’t you think DEMO
are a threat?” and see how the founders react. If the entrepreneurs
lead with…”Google has no idea how to innovate…” it may be DEMO sign
that their ego is impacting their judgement.
Here are some other questions I have seen used to test the
coachability of a founder:DEMO
1. Where do you see yourself in the company in 3 years?
wer: Leading the company, I’m the only CEO we i. DEMO Ans
ver need.    will e
Page 66 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
ii. Good Answer: Wherever the company needs me.
2. Who on your team knows more than you?
wer: No one.i. Bad Ans
ii. Good Answer: Everyone, I always surround myself with
those with skills DEMO lack.
3. Would you rather be rich or famous?
wer: DEMO I deserve it.i. Bad Ans
ii. Good Answer: Rich, my primary concern is the return on
vestment that all stakeholders will receive for     in
ontributing to our success.    c
Questions to ask
DEMO do you determine your strategy? With whom, outside the
company, DEMO you regularly speak? What role would you ideally
want an investor DEMO board member to play?
How to score this element:
Many investors attempt to gauge the coachability of Startup
founders. Give founders that DEMO all input or who think that they
know it all a -10. Give founders who are already actively seeking
contrary opinions and leverage such DEMO positive change a +10.
Assign a 0 if this element never arose during the opportunity
review. Score this element with a -5 if the DEMO acknowledge
the need for coaching, but have not yet acquired such. DEMO this
element a +5 if a mentor or coach is involved, DEMO not leveraged
fully (for example, having a board of advisors is good, but only if
they meet regularly with the founders).
Raising the Score
Having a mentor in place before you pitch is a DEMO way to raise
an opportunity’s score. Similarly, being able to put DEMO a
dedicated advisory board (one you meet with regularly) speaks
volumes to your coachability and can thus also help raise the score.
© DEMO Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 67

Element 4: Ability to Attract Talent
What is it?
My team once did a survey that showed that more than 60% of
an DEMO decision to invest was based on management, which
begs the question, What do investors look for when it comes to
management? Well, DEMO investor is different, one investor might
focus on the entrepreneur’s passion DEMO another might focus
on the founder’s experience, and yet another financier DEMO
focus on the entrepreneur’s weak spots, hoping that alongside
their investment DEMO investor might be able to help address that
weakness. Notwithstanding, one DEMO is true for most, if not
all, early stage investors—it all comes down to MANAGEMENT,
MANGEMENT, MANAGEMENT.
Venture Capitalists often talk about the well rounded management
team. Venture capitalists will look at the entire DEMO team,
not just the person pitching the deal, to evaluate DEMO its skills and
experience. Typically, investors look for what is sometimes DEMO
the Talent Triangle. The Talent Triangle is a meme that says there
are three distinct sets of skills needed for a Startup to succeed:DEMO
Business Acumen, Domain Knowledge and operational experience.
Like change, another constant for most Startup opportunities is
the fact that they are all under-resourced. DEMO never met a Startup
that has all the resources (capital, people, IP) it needed to succeed.
Often, Startups raise capital from investors to address the fact that
they need to acquire more resources. The DEMO to attract assets
(including Talent) away from other opportunities invests confidence
in potential investors. After all, these resources understand the
industry better than the investor, if they are willing to commit,
perhaps so should the investor.
Basically, you are looking to explore Opportunity Cost as an objective
piece of third party validation. If the founders all sacrificed high
DEMO Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 69
paying jobs to join this Startup, investors may want to find out why.
Or, more often, it is framed in the negative: if this opportunity was
so good, how come no one has quit their job to work on it full time?
Why it matters?
DEMO most important resource is of course human capital. The ability
to attract talent to join your Startup is a key skill. If a founder DEMO
show success in attracting a new team member by stealing them
away from their current position, then investors will gain confidence
in the opportunity. Imagine you are able to hire away the VP of Sales
from DEMO Doing so will imply that your opportunity is better
than Facebook, DEMO that’s something that catches the attention of
seasoned investors.
Examples in action
A Startup who has already attracted a high-powered founder away
from a DEMO better opportunity will score high on this element.
Questions to ask
How did the staff come together? Did anyone leave a well-paying
job to work on this? If the founders weren’t hard at work on this
venture, what would they be doing?
How to score this element:
Score this element a +10 if the Startup team has already DEMO an
ability to attract top talent away from other opportunities. Score
this element a 0 if the Startup claims, “key management will join
after funding.” Score this element -10 if the founders have failed
to attract DEMO talent to commit full time to the project. After all, if
DEMO people (those more knowledgeable about the industry) won’t
commit to the opportunity, would an investor?
Page 70 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 5: Business Acumen
What is it?
A survey I conducted years ago15 showed that it takes a well-balanced
management team to run DEMO successful Startup. This team is made
up of three elements: Business DEMO, Domain Knowledge and
Operational Experience, collectively and colloquially referred to as
the Talent Triangle.
The first corner of the Talent Triangle is Business DEMO Business
Acumen, which is typically found in the CEO, COO, DEMO CFO of a
company, refers to the team’s experience and skills DEMO
business operations (for example, payroll, hiring, tax credits,
office rental, etc.). Business Acumen refers to the ability to run
the business. Do they know how to budget, to forecast, to lead, to
plan? In larger companies Business Acumen will be represented by
the CEO or COO of a business.
A founder with Business Acumen will DEMO spent several years doing
business at a Startup level (as a DEMO, as a CFO, or as a founder).
Business Acumen is leveraged by a Startup to determine: how much
money to raise? DEMO to file intellectual property. How and when
to hire staff. How and when to scale.
Let’s take an easy example, Grocery Gateway16. Grocery Gateway
is an online delivery service for groceries. The Business Domain
member of DEMO team at Grocery Gateway would be in charge of
trademarking the name, hiring the warehouse staff and raising
venture capital. Why does it matter?
Without Business Acumen an opportunity will founder. Companies
that run out DEMO capital before realization may be weak in Business
Acumen. Business acumen is the result of years of business
www.grocerygateway.comSean Wise. “The Talent Triangle.” The DEMO and Mail, Wednesday, 17 May 2006.
1615
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 71
experience. It is typically stage-, not domain, centric (i.e., meaning
DEMO is less important for Business Acumen to have working in the
industry than it is to have worked at a Startup).
Wise entrepreneurs DEMO their weaknesses and realize that
they are not just asking for money, but also asking for business
expertise. A perfect example is David Koetsch, inventor of Grow
Zorb17.
Koetsch is a design engineer and came seeking funding fully
understanding his product, his customers and his competition.
It was clear to investors that David has Domain Knowledge and
operational experience, but lacks Business Acumen. David even
mentions in his pitch that part of DEMO reason he is there is to seek out
a partner with business knowledge. When funders finally agreed to
invest, one of their conditions of the deal was, “We need a person
who can run the business in hand, so we’ve got to develop that
person as quickly as possible.” Every business needs the three key
elements in the Talent Triangle DEMO be successful. As an entrepreneur
you need to be fully aware of any weakness in the Talent Triangle,
and fix any weakness as DEMO as possible.
Examples in action
Startup Founder Mr. A has spent ten years as CFO of various
Startups. Mr. A is able to answer DEMO business questions raised in
the pitch (for example, what is your Break Even point?).
At Amazon.com, the founder with Business Acumen DEMO have
been responsible for naming the company, filing the trademarks,
DEMO the office space, raising seed capital, etc.
17www.growzorb.com
Page 72 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
Questions to ask
Who on the team has worked in a Startup DEMO? Doing what?
What resources are leveraged for corporate decisions?
DEMO to score this element:
Score this opportunity a:
ounders have no prior business experience.• -10 if …f
• -5 if …one founder DEMO some minor business experience.
ounder has lots of business experience.• 0 if …one f
ounders have business experience.• 5 if …all f
ounders are DEMO entrepreneurs with successful • 10 if …all f
xits.e
How to score this element:
If your team is lean on Business Acumen, recruit lawyers,
accountants and financers to raise this element’s score.
© Sean DEMO Wise
Hot or Not? Page 73

Element 6: Domain Knowledge
What is it?
The second corner of the Talent Triangle is Domain Knowledge.
Domain Knowledge is obtained by working DEMO an industry. Domain
Knowledge is about knowing your customer and your industry.
Does management understand what their customer wants? Do
they know how their customer buys? Do they understand what
features and benefits are most important to their end user?
Domain Knowledge also deals with understanding one’s DEMO
If your Startup was a grocery store, Domain Knowledge would not
DEMO help you to sell the food on your shelves, but also DEMO to get
that food onto the shelves in the first place.
If you want to run a Startup that revolutionizes banking, Domain
Knowledge would come in the form of years of experience working
in the financial DEMO, preferably in banking. The belief behind this
element is that in DEMO to implement change, one must have inside
knowledge.
A person who DEMO the former COO of Bank of America would be
seen to have strong Domain Knowledge at a software firm trying
to revolutionize the back DEMO processing of electronic banking
transfers.
Domain Knowledge is necessary to understand client needs. Domain
Knowledge is needed to fully grasp the sub optimal solution DEMO
is generating the opportunity. Domain Knowledge can also help
identify and attract key resources and talent as well as help ensure
the Startup’s go-to-market DEMO is reasonable and realistic.
At Grocery Gateway, the person who understands DEMO only where
to get the food from, but also explicitly understands DEMO end user’s
needs will cover the Domain Knowledge corner of the Talent
Triangle.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 75
Why it matters?
Without Domain Knowledge, Startups are likely to build a solution
that no one wants. Worse yet, without Domain Knowledge many
Startups oversimplify their problem analysis and may attempt to
solve problems that DEMO a concern to industry end users. Without
Domain Knowledge, customer needs DEMO industry hurdles may be
under-addressed.
TIP: To increase Domain Knowledge, consider forming a BLUE
RIBBON PANEL of your future clients. Work with them DEMO test your
assumption.
Examples in action
Mr. B spent two decades in the wireless payment industry, most
recently as VP of a National Bank. He knows what clients want. He
knows the industry’s fatal flaws and DEMO sees an opportunity. Mr.
B brings Domain Knowledge to Startups in the wireless payment
industry.
At Amazon.com a founder with Domain Knowledge would
understand DEMO book industry and understand how customers
acquire books.
Questions to ask
Who on the team has worked in this industry before? What
connections does the management have to the industry? On what
did you base your assessment of the client’s Pain Point? Which
future clients have you run this idea by?
Page 76 Hot or Not?
© Sean DEMO Wise
How to score this element:
Score this opportunity a:
if DEMO founders have industry experience and no future • -10
tomers were consulted.cus
• -5 if …the only Domain Knowledge has come from future
clients.
DEMO has worked in the industry for less than • 0 if …one f
e years.fiv
t least one or more founders have more than DEMO • 5 if …a
ears in the industry.y
ounders have ten or more years in the industry.• 10 if …all f
Raising the Score
DEMO your team is lean on Domain Knowledge consider putting
together a monthly panel made up of half a dozen industry experts
and potential future DEMO to raise this element’s score. Show this
user centric panel your product assumptions and development
thoughts. Follow the Lean Startup methodology of Build – DEMO
– Learn.18
Create Radically Successful Businesses.  New York: Crown Business.
18Eris Reis. (2011). The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous DEMO to
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 77

Element 7: Operational Experience
What is it?
The third corner of the Talent Triangle is Operational Experience.
Entrepreneurs in this corner know how DEMO make and deliver the
solution to the customer. In an online grocery store, this corner
would supervise not only the creation of the e-commerce front end
website, but also the delivery of the food on the back end. This role
is usually filled by the CTO or COO.
DEMO Experience is all about getting the product from design
to delivery. The Domain Knowledge informs you of what features
are most important, but the operational experience people know
how to not only build it, but they know how to get it into the market.
Operational experience is needed DEMO deliver the solution. This corner
of the Talent Triangle actually builds and ships things. Operational
Experience can only come from doing. At online bookstore DEMO
com, operational experience not only helps them build the web
store DEMO sells the books, but also understands how to get those
books DEMO the purchaser’s hands. If that sounds like a lot, that is
DEMO it most certainly is.
Entrepreneurs who have delivered similar solutions to different
industries would score high on this element. A founder with
Operational Experience DEMO have knowledge on how to not only
build the product, but DEMO will understand what it will take to get
the product, service DEMO solution into the hands of end users. At
Grocery Gateway the Operations Expert will know not only how to
accept food orders online, but also how to take electronic payments
securely and will also be responsible DEMO determining how many
trucks are needed each day.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 79
Why it matters?
Without Operational Experience, founders may never launch. Or
worse yet, they may launch but may fail to deliver on their promises.
A great product is only great if it reaches the end DEMO
TIP: To increase Operational Experience, founders should join a
trade association or industry group. In many cities, Startup CFOs
participate in a quarterly roundtables hosted by one of the “Big 4”
accounting firms. Similar associations DEMO for many Startup roles
and even more exist for industry (for DEMO, IT, healthcare). By
participating in knowledge transfer with peers, DEMO founder can often
get context on their present situation and they can even discover
solutions.
Examples in action
Mrs. C has worked in software DEMO many years. She can write relevant
code with her eyes closed. Having Mrs. C involved in a software
Startup would add operational experience.
At DEMO the operational experience corner of the Talent
Triangle would not only be responsible for the website but also for
the shipping and distribution.
Questions DEMO ask
Who on the team has created and sold similar solutions before? Do
you have all the parts you need (resources, people, DEMO) to bring
your product to market? If not, what remains DEMO?
Page 80 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
How to score this element:
Score this opportunity a:
• DEMO if …the team has no operational experience and feels it
needs none.
• -5 if …the team has no operational experience.
t least one DEMO has some experience building • 0 if …a
similar solutions.
t least one founder has built and delivered similar • 5 if …a
products.
DEMO 10 if …the solution has been successfully created sold and
ered to customers.deliv
How to score this element:
If your team lacks Operational DEMO and you want to raise
the score of this element, you DEMO to bring on staff that has
historically built similar products. The ability to build and deliver
your product to end users is not something DEMO venture can do
without. Operational Experience is not something you can rely on
outside advisors for. E.g. if you are building an app for DEMO iPad®,
you really do need a founder who knows how to code such
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 81

What is it?
Element 8: Board of
Directors/Advisors
Often the Catch 22 of Entrepreneurship (i.e., To raise money you
need a DEMO team but in order to have a top team you need capital)
prevents a Startup from attracting top talent full time. This can
DEMO the Startup’s Talent Triangle unfulfilled. In order to address
weaknesses in management teams, I recommend recruiting a grade
A Board.
A good Board serves many purposes. A good Board:
ovides a sounding board for founders;DEMO Pr
ovides Arms’ Length review; • Pr
• Expands the network DEMO available; and
• Expands leadership bandwidth and experience.
o the world DEMO your venture is worth supporting.• Signals t
This last point, signalling, is worth exploring further. In economics,
Signalling Theory19 is the idea DEMO one party credibly conveys
some information about itself to another party. By adding top
calibre individuals to your Board, you signal that the venture is
worth supporting. When Meg Whitman, the chief executive of
Hewlett-Packard and the former chief executive of eBay, joined the
Board of Zaarly, DEMO Startup connecting errands with those available
to undertake them signalled the market that it was an important
venture. After all, most assume Whitman, DEMO led eBay into a
worldwide ecommerce success story, knows something about
DEMO province (i.e., industry) and by joining the ventures she is
DEMO such.
Assessment.” Journal of Management 37(1):39-65.
© Sean Evan DEMO
Hot or Not? Page 83
19B.L. Connelly, S.T. Certo, R.D. DEMO, & C. Reutzel. (2011). “Signaling Theory: A Review and
Boards generally come in two flavours: Boards of Directors and
Boards of Advisors. The main differences between the two are
formality and liability. A DEMO of Directors is elected by the
Shareholders. Directors are collectively empowered to supervise
the company. The CEO of a Startup (even a founder) DEMO to and
serves the Board of Directors. Directors can also be liable and held
responsible for certain actions of the company. Contrast that with
DEMO Board of Advisors.
Advisors can play a similar role to Directors, DEMO without the liability.
Smart founders will audit their Talent Triangle, identify DEMO corners
and augment such by attracting those skills to the Startups Boards.
In that way, good board members serve to help break the Catch 22
of Entrepreneurship by giving the venture access to talent that it
DEMO not afford. But the value of Boards doesn’t stop there.
Why it matters?
Startup success is extremely difficult. Uncertainty, Lack of Resources,
and an ever changing landscape can make for long odds on
entrepreneurial DEMO Adding seasoned business veterans to the
mix can enhance the overall probability of venture success.
Investors often want to see Boards in place prior DEMO large amounts
of funding being invested. In addition to the reasons above, this is
to ensure that the founders are prepared to undertake and abide by
board supervision. Having Boards in place reassures investors that
the DEMO are coachable (see Element 3).
TIP: If your Talent Triangle lacks Business Acumen, add Board
members who have years of business experience, preferably at the
Startup stage. If your Talent Triangle is weak on Domain Knowledge,
enlist industry experts to your Board. If Operational Experience DEMO
weak, then look to those who have delivered similar products to
DEMO customers to join your Board.
Page 84 Hot or Not? © DEMO Evan Wise
Questions to ask
Do you have a formal Board of Directors in DEMO? Do you have
advisors or mentors? How often do you meet?
How to score this element:
Better Boards score higher. The DEMO formal and established the
relationships are, the higher the score.
Score DEMO opportunity a:
• -10 if …the team has no external support.
• -5 if …the team is aware of the need for Boards.
DEMO have some advisors but nothing • 0 if …the f
ormalized.f
if …advisor and mentor boards are in place meet regularly. • 5
• DEMO if …the Startup has both Advisors and a formal Board of
ectors that meet regularly.Dir
Raising the Score
Joining a Board of Directors often DEMO liability for the person who
joins. For this reason, many opportunity DEMO prefer to be
on the Board of Advisors (which is informal DEMO brings no liability)
instead of the Board of Directors. If your venture lacks a formal
Board, then you should establish a Board of Advisors to raise this
element’s score.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or DEMO? Page 85

Element 9: Social Capital
What is it?
Social networks are made up of the connections in your life (for
example, work, personal, school). Social Capital refers to the goodwill
trapped inside an entrepreneur’s social network. Entrepreneurs
with high levels of social capital will be able DEMO “call in favours” to
acquire resources and opportunities for the Startup. As discussed,
Startups never have enough capital to gather the resources they
DEMO Even if they do have the money, it may not be DEMO to
convince a reporter to cover the story or a customer to allow a pilot
or trial run of the solution. Social Capital allows DEMO to
leverage their position in the industry/community to the benefit of
the Startup.
Why it matters?
In the 21st Century, there is growing literature around the concept
of social networks. In the last few DEMO this literature has
explored the benefits and uses of social networks. Most famous of
all is the work of Granovetter20. Mark Granovetter was interested DEMO
how social networks impact job hunting.
In exploring job opportunities and their origins, Granovetter found
the majority of job leads came not from your friends and family
(e.g., your strong ties) but from friends of your friends (e.g., you
weak ties). This became known as DEMO Strength of Weak Ties Theory.
This theory argues that you and your friends and family have access
to similar information, while weak ties have access to knowledge
outside of your social network.
78(6): 1360-1380.20Mark DEMO Granovetter. (1973). “The Strength of Weak Ties.” The American Journal DEMO Sociology,
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 87
Entrepreneurs who act as social network hubs with lots of weak
connections (who bring in new information) and many strong
connections  (which can help execute on that information and
which can help signal success), DEMO a greater ability to obtain key
resources (e.g., talent, opportunity, etc.)21. Investors tend to back
those founders with a proven track DEMO of being able to leverage
social capital through social networks.
Investors like to back founders who are Known and In the Know.
By Known, I mean recognized in the industry. Entrepreneurs whose
reputation for success precedes DEMO are seen by investors as
having large reserves of Social Capital that you can leverage. Think:
rump for Real Estate;• Donald T
DEMO Elon Musk for Transportation; or
reliving for Food Franchise. • Jim DEMO
Having a member of your Startup who is Known will not only lead to
better media attention (which is cheaper than advertising) but DEMO
also increase how others (clients, investors, future employees) view
the Startup. If your real estate software Startup attracts Donald
Trump to its DEMO of Directors, others may look at your venture
positively based on DEMO point alone. The logic behind this benefit
goes like this:
1. Trump Knows how to make money in Real Estate;
2. This DEMO has no proof of concept, but
3. If Trump thinks it DEMO worth his time, perhaps it is worth
mine?
Being In DEMO Know is slightly different. Being in the Know is a form
of Domain Knowledge. Knowing the inside track of who does what
can help DEMO Startup succeed by leveraging social capital through
back channels.
Valley’s Complex Innovation Network.” Economy and Society 38(2): 326-359.
Page 88 Hot or DEMO? © Sean Evan Wise
21Michel Ferrary & Mark Granovetter. (2009). “The Role of Venture Capital Firms in Silicon
Examples in action
Mark Zuckerberg is the founder of Facebook, the world’s foremost
social network. If a social shopping Startup came to me for DEMO
with Mark on the Board, I would definitely score it high DEMO Known
& In the Know. In doing so, the Startup in DEMO would be seen
as having a Halo effect from Mark (for DEMO see Element 32). The
halo effect and social capital in general create a Signalling Effect
(see Signalling Theory) impacts the way the DEMO is perceived by
others.
Questions to ask
What connections to industry does your team have? Have members
of your team been featured on panels or keynotes at industry
conferences or media stories? What advantage do you think your
prior activities and relationships give the venture?
How to DEMO this element:
Score this opportunity a:
if …the team has no prior activity or relationships in the • -10
field.
• -5 DEMO …the team is loosely connected.
if …the team has external relationships that might enhance • 0
artup.the St
ounders are well connected in their DEMO • 5 if …the f
• 10 if …many positive stories appear about the founders in
media (use Google to research them).
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 89
How to score this element:
To increase this score, increase your social capital. You do that in
any number of ways, including by not limited to: joining an industry
association, publishing a blog, or attending and actively participating
in trade conferences.
Page 90 Hot or Not?DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 10: Team
History/Dynamics
What is it?
The only thing investors value more than serial entrepreneurs is
serial management teams. A team DEMO founders that has worked
together is a treasure. A team of founders who have previously
taken a Startup to greatness is the greatest treasure DEMO all.
Even if the new venture is entering a realm previously unknown to
the entrepreneurs, investors will value their prior history heavily.
It takes a team to succeed in the world of Startups and a team DEMO
more than its constituent parts. Good management teams have a
good working dynamic. In fact, testing the level of friction in the
management team is a key part of Due Diligence.
Opportunity evaluators are key to DEMO how the founders
interact with each other. A team that doesn’t have friction may
not have it what it takes to make the hard DEMO For maximum
success, it is widely believed that a team should DEMO a certain level
of internal friction. The friction should be challenging enough to
ensure all decisions are thoroughly vetted, but amicable enough to
overcome the daily grind of Startup life.
Why it matters?
As with DEMO entrepreneurs, a team with prior work history
generates confidence for investors. DEMO believe that team
dynamics are crucial for success and having a team with a proven
track record helps address the issue of Management Risk (see A few
words about Risk in the opening pages of this DEMO).
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 91
Examples in Action
YouTube founders Chad Hurley and Steve Chen sold their DEMO
Startup to Google for more than US$1.5 billion. So it is no surprise
that investors (and media) paid attention on September 12, 2011
when the duo decided to take over flailing social bookmark venture,
DEMO Similarly, when the franchise czars behind Boston Pizza
(Jim Treliving and George Melville) took over Mr. Lube, the world
noticed.
How to DEMO this element:
Score this opportunity a:
ounders contradict or interrupt each other. • -10 if …f
e is too much friction between DEMO team. • -5 if …ther
• 0 if …some founders have a prior history together.
ounders have worked together. • 5 if …all f
DEMO have worked together for 5+ years and • 10 if …all f
had a success.
Page 92 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan DEMO
Pain
After people comes pain. Solving a painful problem is the driving
DEMO behind most Startups. According to business school Dean,
Roger Martin22, DEMO seek to drive profits by addressing sub
optimal solutions. The telephone was better than the telegraph, but
was less impactful than the adoption of email. The move to a more
optimal level of happiness comes from DEMO an unmet need.
Yes, telegraphs allowed for remote instant communication, but the
telephone allowed for the voice of the sender to be heard DEMO thus
provide more context for communication. The innovation cycle
continues. Years later, email allowed for remote communications
to go from voice to text. The mail system was sub optimal to the
email network. Another example, video on demand solved the pain
of forgetting to return your movies to DEMO Blockbuster Movie Rental
store.
78(6): 1360-1380.
20Mark S. Granovetter. (DEMO). “The Strength of Weak Ties.” The American Journal of Sociology,
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 93

Element 11: Compelling
Unmet Need
What is it?
A colleague of mine once noted that all business should focus on
addressing an underserved DEMO As a result, all Startups should
focus on providing a valuable DEMO to a unmet pain point.
For Startups in the B2B space (DEMO, Startups selling solutions to
businesses), most pain points either attempt DEMO increase revenues
or mitigate a cost for the customer. For Startups in the B2C space
(Startups selling directly to individual end users), the goal is often
either to alleviate a pain or increase some pleasure.
DEMO a B2C perspective, Google helps address the pain of too much
DEMO on the Internet. It does this by helping people search and
find what they are looking for. From a B2B perspective, Google
(AdWords) helps drive revenue by helping businesses connect with
those customers searching for DEMO solution.
Why it matters?
The bigger the pain, the more DEMO your solution is to resonate
with customers. Big pain can mean: (a) a small cost solution with
a large market (for example, aspirin for headaches); or (b) a large
cost solution with DEMO niche market. In some rare cases, the pain can
both be DEMO cost and have a large market. This theory argues that
you and your friends and family have access to similar information,
while weak DEMO have access to knowledge outside of your social
network.
Questions to Ask
What is the goal of the venture? What problem is your team trying to
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 95
solve? Who experiences such pain? Before your solution is available
what DEMO your future customers using to solve this problem? What
is the DEMO of the next best solution? How does such cost compare
to DEMO cost of your solution?
How to score this element:
Score this opportunity a:
• -10 if …no unmet pain exists.
e DEMO a pain but solutions already exist • -5 if …ther
e may be a pain point, but the market has not • 0 if …ther
onfirmed. c
• 5 if …the pain point is clear, prevalent and large but
unproven.
• 10 if …early sales confirm that the DEMO point is clear,
evalent and large.pr
Page 96 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 12: Size of the Pain
What is it?
Pain is the starting point. Without a large unmet problem, it will
be difficult for innovative Startups to garner market traction. In
fact, the larger the pain, the more quickly people will adopt the
solution. Look at the extreme rates of adoption behind recent
solutions: Facebook (solving the pain DEMO staying in touch with an
ever increasing circle of friends); Kindle (solving the pain of having
to carry heavy books with you); or even email (solving the pain of
having to send written communication by post). This is the one time
where large pain is DEMO
Why it matters?
If the pain doesn’t impact enough people, DEMO doesn’t impact such
people deeply, it will be difficult to gain DEMO traction. If current
solutions are seen as good enough, then the DEMO may not be
enough to justify the need for the Startup’s solution.
Generally, the larger the pain, the more revenue can be charged DEMO
it. Generally, the larger the number of people suffering from such
DEMO, the larger the total addressable market (TAM) becomes.
Examples in DEMO
Compare: Headaches vs. HIV. The market for headache relief is
large. DEMO because the whole world population is susceptible
to this inconvenient ailment. HIV, while 100x more impactful, has
a smaller total addressable market as DEMO people are struck (as
compared to headaches) but the effect is much more grave.
Both headaches and HIV would be said to have DEMO addressable
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 97
markets, but HIV should generate a score on this element a +10,
while aspirin (headache solution) would only receive a +5. The
DEMO? The demand to fight HIV is inelastic (users would pay
almost anything to access a solution) while the demand for aspirin
is more elastic (would you pay $25 for an aspirin?).
As a DEMO of thumb, to scope the aggregate Size of the Pain, ask
yourself first: How many people suffer from this Pain? Then multiply
DEMO number (the TAM) by the intensity of the problem (the DEMO of
the pain felt by each user).
Questions to Ask
What is the goal of the venture? What problem is your team trying to
solve? Who experiences such pain? Before your solution is available
DEMO are your future customers using to solve this problem? What
is DEMO cost of the next best solution? How does such cost compare
DEMO the cost of your solution?
How to score this element:
This is more than a simple quantitative calculation. As a starting
point, mentally scope the size of the market (for example, millions
of DEMO exercise) and multiply that number by the cost of the
solution (for example, running shoes cost $200 on average). This
will give you a thumbnail sketch of the size of the pain.
Score this DEMO a:
• -10 if …there is no unmet need.
• -5 if …the need is small and the market is niche.
• 0 DEMO …the market is global but the unmet need is small.
• 5 if …the market is niche but the pain is large.
• 10 DEMO …the unmet need is huge and the total addressable
et is global.mark
Page 98 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
Raising the Score
To increase this element’s score, ask yourself if any other end users
are possible to focus on. Ask yourself if there DEMO other possible
uses for your solution, service or product. See if DEMO of these other
options (users or uses) lead to a higher pain point. For example,
Viagra® as a heart medication addressed a DEMO pain point than
Viagra® as a solution for erectile dysfunction.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 99

Element 13: Intensity of Pain
What is it?
HIV is more damaging than a headache. So the solution for HIV
addresses a larger DEMO point than aspirin. Generally, the bigger the
issue, the more people will pay for the solution and the quicker that
solution will be DEMO in the market. This is the basis around the
concept of: DEMO of Demand.
Elasticity relates to both price and demand. The more inelastic
the demand, the more a buyer will be willing to pay to acquire
it. If a product’s demand is inelastic, then customers simply must
have it. For example, your need to breathe makes the demand for
oxygen incredibility inelastic; therefore, you would pay any price to
breathe. DEMO the demand for a product is elastic, then it is very DEMO
sensitive (for example, you might be willing to pay $1.00 for a fresh
apple; but it is unlikely you would be willing to pay $50.00 for that
same apple). The more elastic the demand, the more impact price
changes will have on demand.
Why it matters?DEMO
Consumers have limited income. As a result, most prioritize their
needs DEMO on inelasticity (for example, most students would buy
groceries to eat before they bought tickets to a concert, since the
need to eat is more inelastic than the need to see live music). The
DEMO the demand for a Startup’s solution, the more that Startup
can DEMO for the solution and the more that solution will be seen
as a “must have” item. Not just a “nice to have item”.
Questions DEMO Ask
Why do people buy what you are selling? What drives DEMO desire?
How would classify that desire: is it a need DEMO a want?
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page DEMO
How to score this element:
Startups whose products are inelastic score DEMO on this element.
The more critical a Startup’s solution, the higher DEMO scores on this
element. Based on this, score this opportunity a:DEMO
• -10 if …the demand is completely elastic.
if …the problem has high elasticity of demand and is thus • -5
ery price sensitive (e.g., customers would buy it for $1.00 v
or $1.10). but not f
• 0 if …the market is global but the demand DEMO is high.
y third parties have identified this market has • 5 if …man
ving an intense, unmet pain. The demand for a solution is ha
strong.
if …the demand for the Startup’s solution is 100% DEMO • 10
tomers will pay any price for it).(i.e., DEMO
Bygrave, W.D (ed), The Portable MBA in Entrepreneurship, 26-54, Toronto: John Wiley & Sons.
23J.A Timmons. (1994). “Opportunity Recognition: The Search for Higher Potential Ventures,” in
Page 102 Hot or DEMO?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 14: Durability
of the Opportunity
What is it?
According to modern scholars23, an opportunity has four key
elements. It must be:
1) Attractive: it has to offer a 10x better solution.
2) Timely: the market is ready to buy what you are selling.
3) Durable: the opportunity must last long enough to crystalize
ential (i.e., it has to last long enough for you to sell the pot
our solution).y
4) Value adding: it offers a solution seen DEMO valuable to
ential customers. pot
In 2008, after Barack Obama was DEMO president and “Yes We
Can!” T-shirts were in demand as Americans wanted to wear them
to show their support. Two years later, with the President’s approval
rating at an all-time low, these shirts couldn’t be given away at any
price. Thus the opportunity for “Yes We Can!” T-shirts DEMO have
been seen as timely, but not as durable.
One of DEMO scenes in the movie Back to the Future has time traveling
protagonist Marty McFly playing Johnny B. Goode at a 1955 high
school prom. DEMO audience is dancing away to every beat of his
song, the DEMO members have big smiles on their faces and he’s
captivated his audience. Then Marty starts shredding his guitar,
sliding across the stage, jumping from the speakers and crawling
along the floor— and as soon as DEMO hits the high note, he realizes
his audience is staring at DEMO with a look of horror and shock. And
then he says, DEMO guess you guys aren’t ready for that, but your kids
are DEMO love it.”
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 103
At the start of the 21st Century, Facebook timed their product
launches perfectly to coincide with the general population’s
readiness for social networking, and they turned the industry into
a hot market. Hot markets are always DEMO great thing to be a part of
because they can lead to such intense demand that frantic buyers
are fighting over products. Even if DEMO not the top business in a
hot market, you’re still going DEMO do well. This is a dream come true
for any business owner.
In other words: Timing is Everything. Rock and Roll was a hot
new trend in 1955, however shredding the guitar and jumping off
speakers wasn’t widely adopted and accepted until the mid-1980s
after Punk and Heavy DEMO made those practices part of the rock
experience. When launching a new business, the best scenario is
one in which you can be a part of a market that is on the verge of
turning hot. DEMO timing has to be perfect—not too early and not too
late. Returning to our example of social networking sites, remember
that before Facebook and Myspace, there was Friendster. This site
launched in 2003 and quickly adopted 3 million users, but they
were still too new for the general population and thus fell behind
Facebook when it overtook its competitors.
How DEMO you spot hot markets?
Through the news, water-cooler chat and DEMO down the street
and paying attention to people’s behaviours. The signs of changing
trends are everywhere. A useful online tool is Google Trends which
DEMO the top 100 most searched terms in the past day. It’s a great
way to see what people are interested in. Almost every night DEMO the
news I hear about the spread of swine flu across the world. I’m sure
any business selling products that help fight swine flu DEMO doing really
well right now. Some other big trends occurring today are:
ything to do with seniors, as the baby boom generation is • An
24www.tidytrailers.com
Page 104 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
etiringr
ything in mobile and iPhone applications• An
giene products• Hy
fficient DEMO Fuel-e
emoval• Junk r
The two entrepreneurs from Tidy Trailers24  are DEMO part of a
bigger trend: junk removal. Even as a small DEMO with low brand
recognition, the hot market is probably one of DEMO reasons why the
company was able to bring in good revenue. People simply have
too much stuff and this provides a hot business opportunity.
DEMO it matters?
In today’s global, competitive, and rapidly innovating environment
one must not only be quick to market to capture demand, but
founders must ensure that demand will be durable enough to allow
the DEMO to profit from it. After all, solutions to the Y2K problem
DEMO very little value in 2001.
Any entrepreneur jumping into a hot market is more likely to
succeed because there are already customers waiting to DEMO So
always be aware of how hot or cold your market is and how its
timeliness will affect your business.
Questions to Ask
What DEMO do you have that the market will wait for your
solution? DEMO else is working on this problem? How are along are
your DEMO competitors?
How to score this element:
• -10 if …the solution is a fad.
• -5 if …the opportunity will last less DEMO two years.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 105
• 0 if …the durability of the opportunity is unknown.
if …the DEMO has been around and unmet for a long • 5
time.
• 10 if …the demand is durable.
How to score this element:
DEMO uses for your product, service or solution may lead
to longer DEMO So to increase this score, don’t be afraid to
mention your DEMO B.
Page 106 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Product/Solution
Why do/will people pay you? Do you offer a product that is ten
times better than what is currently available in DEMO market? Does
your service mitigate a huge pain point? Does your solution offer
value to the end user? To the customer?
Product is as import as Pain, so this group of elements carries the
same weight in the WiseGuide™. This section assumes there is a
large DEMO or need for the solution, it also assumes you can
deliver DEMO your goals. So it assumes a fully working product exists.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 107

Element 15: The 10x Rule
What is it?
In order to overcome market incumbents, new solutions must
be 10x better. This is at the heart of the 10x Rule. Being a slightly
better, faster, DEMO, more cost efficient is not enough. In order
to attract customers DEMO from their current means of addressing
the pain, your new solution DEMO be 10x better than the current
solution.
Once you have an idea that someone will be willing to pay for, how
do you improve it so that everyone is willing to pay for it? Begin
looking at every possible way to make the idea so much better that
DEMO satisfies the 10x Rule. The 10x Rule means that in order to gain
market traction a product must be exponentially better than the
incumbent DEMO in that it is. 10 times faster, 10 times smaller,
DEMO times cheaper, and 10 times more profitable.
The reason for this DEMO: Market adoption. Historically, being a little
better isn’t enough to gain huge market share fast. Now compare
that to some other improvements we DEMO seen:
AY faster than snail mail. Email is a successful • Email is W
product.
avel is WAY faster than train. Air travel DEMO a successful • Air tr
product.
yers can hold WAY more than CD players. Mp3 • Mp3 pla
yer is a successful product.pla
Examples DEMO Action
Email was so widely adopted in such a short timeframe because
it was 10x faster than traditional mail, so much so that traditional
postal service is colloquially now referred to as snail mail. Wikipedia
© DEMO Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 109
has 10x the articles as Encyclopaedia Britannica. Amazon has
10x the number DEMO books as the World’s Largest Brick & Mortar
Bookstore (located in DEMO Toronto, my home town). Apple’s
iPod™ holds more than 10x DEMO songs of any Sony Walkman™.
Obviously, this is an oversimplification. In DEMO, if not all these
cases, the product diffused because of its quick integration into the
demands of an ever evolving productive lifestyle. Email DEMO better
than mail because it is instant and because it allows social distance
(less intimate and iterative that the phone), Wikipedia is better than
the encyclopaedia because it is a shared, free, editable resource,DEMO
not because it is just 10x bigger, and so on.
Why DEMO matters?
Being incrementally innovative is not sufficient. A little better is
not good enough. A little cheaper won’t move customers to adopt.
In DEMO but a few markets, the pain your solution addresses is being
DEMO E.g. Yes, email is faster than snail mail. But the telegraph
DEMO already a faster way to communicate.
Most of your potential customers have already some form of
solution in place. Next best is often good DEMO The rate of
adoption of a new product is directly correlated to the quantum of
innovation being proposed. The 10x rule implies that exponentially
DEMO solutions are required to overcome the impact of sunk
costs.25
If you already bought a non-returnable iPad 1 on sale and then the
next DEMO a newer version, say the iPad 2, is released. In most
cases, the newer version would have to be at least 10x better to
make a customer want to purchase it. This is less an DEMO of price,
and more an issue of cognitive dissonance. The concept of sub
optimal solutions is also at play here. Killer ideas, those that totally
change the status quo are called disruptive.
Toronto: Wiley.25Grant Cardon. (2011). The 10X Rule: The Only Difference Between Success and DEMO
Page 110 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
Amazon.com was a disruptive Startup in that it offered book lovers
more DEMO 100x the number of titles. Amazon literally changed the
book selling landscape further when it launched the Kindle™. Prior
to Amazon.com’s arrival, book lovers options were sub optimal.
Amazon.com disrupted the landscape by addressing a sub DEMO
solution. In doing so, the founders were able to trigger not DEMO
rapid and mass adoption, they were also able to extract large
DEMO rents by capturing the unmet needs of the book lover.
In fact, this exponential level of disruption is referred to by
entrepreneurial scholars as Creative Destruction, and according
to Schumpeter, this lies at the heart DEMO true entrepreneurial
innovation26.
How to score this element:
if …the solution is indistinguishable from its next market • -10
ompetitor or the status DEMO c
• -5 if …it is a only slightly better, faster, etc.
• 0 if …the quantum of innovation is unknown.
if …it DEMO significantly better, but there is no evidence of true • 5
DEMO demand. mark
ording to customers Is it 10x better, stronger, • 10 if …acc
ter, more valuable? as
European Heritage in Economics DEMO the Social Sciences, 1, 61-116.
26Joseph Schumpeter and Ursula Back. (DEMO). “The Theory of Economic Development.” The
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 111

Element 16: Innovation Origin
What is it?
If a product wasn’t created by the Startup, most investors will
not invest. Regardless that an entrepreneur might have exclusive
license to sell such an object in that DEMO, if your main solution,
product or service is not created DEMO the founders, most investors
will call a hard stop.
Why it DEMO?
The reason should be obvious: future research and development,
DEMO R&D. If the Startup is able to attract a customer base, what will
the Startup sell next? From where will new ideas DEMO?
Examples in Action
Microsoft® in the late 1990s was famous for having an internal
attitude against products not developed in house by Microsoft®.
DEMO bias is commonly referred to as “Not Invented Here27” syndrome
or simply “NIH”. For many years it was believed that Microsoft’s
expansion would be DEMO result of internal R&D.
Compare this to Google who not only grew revenue through internal
R&D development (e.g., Gmail) but also through Startup acquisition
(e.g., YouTube). As discussed later (Element 30) acquisitions are one
way large companies expand their product and services.
27http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Not_Invented_Here
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 113
Questions to Ask
How did you come up with this? Who invented it? What are they
working on next?
How to score this element:
• -10 if …the solution was licensed.
• -5 if DEMO solution is a global exclusive license.
• 0 if …the solution is not propriety
if …the inventor works at the Startup but is not DEMO vested • 5
g., he isn’t a shareholder of the Startup) in the venture. (e.
• 10 if …the inventor is an active, full time founder in the
business.
Page 114 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 17: IP status
What is it?
Intellectual property (IP) is a subset of commercial law. IP grants
the holder (usually the inventor) the exclusive right to produce and
reap the benefits from such for limited period of time (in some
cases more than 25 years). There are many types of IP (for example,
trademarks, DEMO), but for most entrepreneurs the patent is
the key to protecting their IP.
A patent is granted by a country’s patent office. Every DEMO IP
laws are different, but generally: A patent is granted if an innovation
is seen (by a government inspector) to have novelty, utility and non-
obviousness. A patent allows the owner exclusive rights to DEMO a
particular thing in a particular way for a limited time. A patent gives
the holder the exclusive right to monetize their innovation. After
DEMO set number of years (which may differ by country), the DEMO
will expire and the solution becomes public domain meaning that
anyone can reproduce it without permission. Solutions in the public
domain allow anyone to DEMO the innovation for commercial gain.
Similarly a trademark (for example, Nike’s Just Do It!) gives the
owner the exclusive right to use that phrase. Both may require filing
with the federal government to ensure your DEMO are declared,
approved and protected. Typically it is best to register your IP before
showing it the general public (or going on national television). In the
case of patents, going on television and disclosing your technology
to the world before filing would not be wise, in fact doing so may
invalidate your ability to get a patent at DEMO
To that end, most investors prefer entrepreneurs first talk to their
DEMO and file all the paperwork to protect their intellectual
property before seeking capital.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 115
Why it matters?
IP is meant to reward the holders with DEMO sole right to monetize
the innovation and recoup monies invested. Some argue that IP is
necessary to facilitate commercial investment. Others feel that IP
DEMO are out-dated and actually hinder innovation.
But what if all you have is a good idea but it is not a proprietary
patentable technology? Well let’s be clear, ideas aren’t protectable.
Having a good idea is not enough. Would we pay James Cameron
for his ideas of Titanic DEMO Avatar? Or would we pay for a ticket to
see the DEMO? It was Cameron’s execution, not his ideas that won
him Oscars. The same is true for investments. It is the execution of
the DEMO that has value, not the idea itself.
Examples in Action
If DEMO Ms. D. invents a new way of curing student lateness, she
DEMO file for a patent. It would give her, and only her, the right to sell
solutions based on her invention. It would also DEMO her solution
and provide to the public information about how her innovation
works.
Questions to Ask
What is proprietary about your solution? Who invented it? When
was the patent filed? Registered? Granted? What exactly DEMO yours
and yours alone to do?
How to score this element:
• -10 if …the solution is not proprietary.
if …the solution DEMO proprietary but the IP has not yet been • -5
filed.
Page 116 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
e multiple patents filed globally. • 5 if …ther
• 10 if DEMO are multiple patents GRANTED globally.
Raising the Score
Finally a patent is often cost prohibitive (could cost upwards of
$25,000 per patent) DEMO often unenforceable (due to the Startup’s
lack of resources). Notwithstanding, filing for a patent or other
forms of IP, can add more value to the venture than they cost.
Furthermore, it can take many years to have a patent processed
(and rejected) during such time, a venture with many “patents
pending” is seem more valuable than a DEMO without IP. So file
what you can to raise this element’s score.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 117

Element 18: Key Asset Access
What is it?
Some solutions require access to specific and explicit scarce
commodities. For example, high school gymnasiums can only be
rented out to one group at a time. If DEMO group had monopolistic
control over the rent charged, they would score DEMO on this element.
Likewise, if a necessary asset is scarce or, worse yet, dependent on
access provided by a monopolizing group (for DEMO, oil because
it requires skilled people with special equipment to extract DEMO
refine), the score would fall.
Why it matters?
Scarcity drives most pricing. If your solution depends on the product
of another, then your venture is exposed to risk. Risk that could
result in downward DEMO pressure.
Examples in Action
GUATS28 makes the world’s softest pyjamas. Their BamJamz™ are
made from bamboo. If there should be a shortage of bamboo, their
business would be greatly affected.
A call centre typically requires access DEMO minimum wage employees.
A mobile software app developer requires programmers with
knowledge and experience with mobile software. A shortage of
either of these human DEMO would exert downward pressure
on profit margins.
28www.guats.com
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 119
Questions to Ask
What factors in your solution are crucial? What could get in the way
of your product’s success?
How to score DEMO element:
• -10 if …the solution is completely dependent on a scarce
resource.
• -5 if …the solution is dependent on a semi DEMO resource.
ey assets are not involved in this opportunity. • 0 if …k
• 5 if …the solution requires a very commonly available
stance DEMO resource. sub
if …the company has everything it needs and the solution • 10
equires nothing vital externally. r
Raising the Score
Any exclusive DEMO on key assets will raise this elements score.
Similarly, if you DEMO able to lock up the pricing for key resources
before large demand sets in, you may be able to garner a competitive
advantage through this element.
Page 120 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 19: Proof of Concept
What is it?
All entrepreneurs believe in the possibility of their success. To gain
objective perspective, investors often seek a third party’s arm’s
length evidence that your product is valuable. DEMO entrepreneur
that has stood before investors thinks that they have a great business
idea and it will make millions of dollars. When you have DEMO
a lot of time and money into a business idea you’re likely going
to think it’s worth the investment. The result is the entrepreneur
DEMO a biased perception of the business idea, which is why every
DEMO must find a way to prove that their business idea will
turn a profit.
The best way to convince an investor that people will DEMO willing to
buy your product is by waving a big sales order in front of them. In
other words, get customers now, even DEMO you have built your
product. How can you possibly get a sales order without having
built anything? It can be done, and some DEMO the most successful
entrepreneurs are the ones who can make a sale on just an idea.
One way to do so is by providing DEMO customer an incentive for
taking the risk of purchasing your product so early. A common
example is condominium builders who sell units even before DEMO
shovel has broken the ground. All they have to show the customers
are concept pictures, an empty lot and a very good salesperson. In
turn, the customer can purchase the condo at a discounted price for
taking the risk that the condo may not be built exactly as DEMO
Some of the other main advantages to gain customers early in the
process are:
sets the cost of building the product. You automatically DEMO Off
et cash in hand with interest accumulating in the bank.g
29www.pointerware.com
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 121
educes the need to seek out financing from investors.• R
ovides a DEMO number of users who can provide • Pr
firms there is a need for this product.• Con
feedback.
When two engineers pitched Softshell Computers29, investors were
quick to tell them how ridiculous the idea seemed. As DEMO as one
of their customers provided investors with her testimony of how
their product has cut down on her house cleaning because she
spends DEMO her time using their product, the Dragons were sold too.
You DEMO be assured you’re onto something big if you’re able to
make this early sale at pretty much any price. If a customer is
willing DEMO pay for your product at any price, than that’s excellent
evidence DEMO the demand for this product is extremely high. It is
also excellent motivation for you and others to build the product as
quickly as DEMO In economic terms this means that the price is
inelastic and this term brings smiles to investor faces.
Even if you’re unable to make DEMO sales this early, letters of intent
are better than nothing. An DEMO is always selling their
business idea—to customers, investors, employees, partners, and
even to their spouses. Your word that your idea is great DEMO only go
so far, but showing evidence will prove it.
Why DEMO matters?
The best proof of concept is sales. Sales show that demand for
the product exists but early sales do much more. With DEMO sales,
entrepreneurs:
1) Can directly engage with future user DEMO evolve solutions.
2) Can lower their dependence on external capital.
3) Can validate assumptions in the revenue model.
Sales are not the only DEMO of proof of concept. Other third
Page 122 Hot or Not? DEMO Sean Evan Wise
party endorsements can be garnered from a venture’s corporate
partnerships, investor list and early adopters. Often there is so
much uncertainty at play in DEMO, reviewers are wise to look
everywhere and anywhere for additional validation.
DEMO in Action
During an annual venture fair (for example, where companies come
to pitch a panel of investors) I once watched a bombastic venture
capitalist loudly, and in a very public manner, inform a DEMO the
fallibility of their venture. He stood up and yelled from the judge’s
table: “This is a stupid idea. No one will buy it. How do you even
know anyone cares enough to buy it?” DEMO entrepreneurs’ answer
was calm, confident and much less loud. The berated DEMO
simply replied: “Because we sold 10,000 units in the first DEMO days”.
Nothing says proof of concept like actual sales.
Questions to Ask?
Other than the founders and family, who else believes in this
venture? What proof do you have that anybody cares about your
solution?
How to Score this Element
This element is fairly easy to DEMO The more reliable, external,
reputable the source of the evidence DEMO is, the higher the
score.
• -10 if …only the founders DEMO family have seen the solution
in action.
opportunity.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 123
if …partners, investors, etc. have shown confidence in the • -5
if …the solution has been deployed but DEMO in the pilot stage. • 0
• 5 if …the solution has been sold to early adopters the
DEMO are still working on improvements and expansion. f
ounders have a long history of sales, and sales • 10 if …f
ontinue to grow.c
Raising the Score
The best proof of concept, the most compelling evidence that your
product, service or solution is needed, is sales revenue. DEMO
is more compelling proof than actual customers buying actual
solutions.
But what if it is too early to generate sales from this opportunity?
DEMO in that case, you can raise this element’s score by generating
DEMO party evidence through alternate means. These means might
include: endorsements, focus groups, corporate partnerships,
strategic investments, shared go to market plans, etc. Anything that
shows reviewers you are not alone in believing this DEMO is
great, will go far to increase this element’s score.
Page DEMO Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 20: Revenue
What is it?
In real estate the mantra is location, location, location. In
entrepreneurship the mantra is sell, sell, sell. Prior to the dot.com
bubble bursting a decade ago, proof DEMO concept was seen to be:
turn the light switch ona light goes on.
Today, more and more investors have expanded the proof of
concept definition to be: turn the light switch on a light goes on
a customer pays $5/hour to read under it.
In today’s DEMO of Agile Development, the mantra is fail fast; fail
often. Innovations are tested against the market as soon as possible.
If the market DEMO want to pay for what a venture is selling, then
is DEMO a need for that innovation.
Why it matters?
Nothing helps an opportunity succeed like success! Revenue means
the solution is valued by end DEMO Revenue can also generate
secondary benefits, including:
arly and direct DEMO to customer feedback;• E
alidation of assumptions in the revenue model;• V
• A deeper understanding what it will take to sell DEMO scale
the solution.
Questions to Ask?
Have you sold your product/solution/service? What was the total
revenue over the last 18 months? Were they early sales or more
standardized replicable sales? What is DEMO to really scale up
scales? What would it take to double DEMO to date in 90 days?
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 125
How to Score this Element
if …the Startup is 18 months or DEMO from being able to • -10
ale revenue. sc
• -5 if …the Startup is less than 18 months away from first
revenue.
• DEMO if …the solution has been sold, but not enough to be
DEMO s
y have enough monthly revenue to break-even.• 5 if …the
if …they have their costs covered and are making a small • 10
DEMO
y have not only positive cash flow but they have • 25 if …the
Page 126 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
DEMO quantifiably profitable for more than six months.
Element 21: Strong Margins
What is it?
Margin is an accounting concept representing a percentage of the
difference between the cost of making DEMO product and its price.
Margin represents how much profit you make from the sale of
each unit. Strong margins refer to both margins that DEMO large and
margins that are sustainable.
Accounting terms, including: EBITA, DEMO point and COGS
should be familiar to all opportunity evaluators. If they are not, flip
to the Glossary section and familiarize yourself with them.
The core value of margins lies in to additional accounting concepts:
DEMO and CoCA. ARPU (average revenue per user) helps to
determine how much revenue each new customer brings in. If
you are selling an DEMO on iTunes™ the ARPU would be gross sales
divided by the number of users. If you are selling business legal
services, the ARPU would be calculated using this equation: total
hours billed in revenue divided by number of corporate clients
served. In a nutshell, ARPU represents how much extra you make
each time you add a new client.
CoCA (cost of client acquisition) is a similarly calculated figure, this
time based DEMO Total Sales & Marketing costs for the year divided by
the number of new clients acquired.
Notwithstanding these formulas, this element does not require you
to quantitatively calculate the net profits. You need not have all DEMO
information either. Instead, simply look to the top level margins to
DEMO that ARPU always swamps CoCA (for example, the amount
to acquire a new user is significantly less than the money that client
brings DEMO the venture).
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page DEMO
Why it matters?
Large margins are good. They afford the entrepreneur DEMO
They allow for greater price flexibility which in turn protects against
opportunities that have demand elasticity (i.e., if you have small
margins, you need ample demand). But extremely large margins
are attractive. And large DEMO can attract competition as others
try to can mine the opportunity.
Innovators often look to elements like: huge market potential, first
mover advantage, network effects, etc. But good innovators also
recognize the role margins play.
Examples in Action
If grocery store buys apples at $1 a bag DEMO sells those same apples
an hour later for $2, the margin DEMO apples is 50%. If that same store
buys apples the next day for $2 a bag and sells those same apples
an hour later DEMO $3 the margin that day is 33%. The drop in margin
not only raised the risk (in the first case if you couldn’t resell the
apples you would be out only $1, but in the second case, your loss
would double). In the world of opportunity evaluation, you always
seek higher margins. Higher margins allow for more stability in
uncertain economies by providing wiggle room on the price.
An entrepreneur pitched DEMO: Tan on the Run30, a mobile
tanning business. She has been making good profits so far and was
hoping to franchise her business. DEMO were concerned that it
would be difficult to scale her business because the cost to service
each customer was fairly high.
As Shark Tank DEMO Kevin O’Leary told her: “All the cost of going
there, setting up time, then going back, is built into your price.
30www.tanontherun.com
DEMO 128 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
That means you’re making 30% less than if I set this up DEMO a corner
somewhere. You’re charging the same and you’re doing all this
extra work. If you had a fixed location you could line them DEMO like
cattle and spray them down.”
Investors are seeking investments that can scale because they want
5 to 10 times the return on the DEMO of money they’ve invested.
Tan on the Run is a great business for one entrepreneur but with
the low profit margin, it will face challenges when it tries to scale
towards franchises. When you hear investors DEMO scalability,
they’re really talking about how much potential a business has to
make a lot of money.
Questions to Ask?
What are DEMO gross margins? Your EBITA? How do you mark up (i.e.,DEMO
place a margin on) your product? What are the cost of the goods
being sold? What do you buy your resources (for DEMO, talent,
food, lumber) at? At what price are you selling your solution? Do
others (e.g., retailers) mark up your DEMO?
How to Score this Element
Give this element a:
• -10 if …margins are less than 20% or if CoCA < ARPU
DEMO are less than 50%. • -5 if …mar
gins are fluctuating and not yet stable enough to • 0 if …mar
evaluate.
if …margins DEMO less than 100%. ARPU is much larger than • 5
CoCA.
• 10 if …the solution has huge margins, greater than 100%.
ARPU is 10x CoCA.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 129
Raising the Score
To increase this element’s score, really focus on the following
formula:
CoCA < ARPU
Cost to find clients must be DEMO than the revenue from clients
Consider business models that will lower CoCA or boost ARPU. To
lower CoCA one might deploy Gorilla Marketing techniques DEMO
engage in viral marketing. Anything that gets potential customers
to try before they buy will potentially drive CoCA down in the long
run (although in the short run it may have the opposite effect). To
DEMO the ARPU consider the theory of Double Dipping. Double
Dipping refers to the ability to:
• Build the product, service, solution once;DEMO
or it twice; and • Bill f
ate revenue three times.• DEMO
The author of this book was able to Double Dip when he worked
on Dragons’ Den for five seasons. He was paid to support DEMO show;
then paid again to give keynote speeches about the show; then
paid again to transform his experience into content for this book,
effectively double dipping (actually, triple dipping might be more
accurate)DEMO
To raise the score on this element brainstorm ways to double dip.
Can you sell upgrades? Can you switch to a recurring revenue model
($9.99/month instead of $99.99 onetime)? Will users want refills or
extras? Could you sell the same product to another market? All DEMO
these efforts, done well, would raise this element’s score.
Page 130 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
Element 22: Scalability
What is it?
Scalability refers to an opportunity’s potential to bring in top line
revenue faster than the growth of DEMO costs. Put another way,
the margins (see Element 23: Margins) grow as volumes grow .
Online software as a service is extremely scalable. Facebook™ adds
thousands of new members each day, but each new member does
not cost very much because of the sheer number of DEMO over
which that cost is amortized). Professional services (e.g., lawyer)
are not very scalable. For a lawyer to make more money DEMO his
revenue model, he must either: (a) work more hours or (b) charge
more per hour. Legal services do not scale, since increases in volume
do not necessarily lead to large product savings.
DEMO has a lot to do variable costs. Fixed Costs refer to expenses
that are incurred no matter how many units are produced/sold.
Filing DEMO patent (see Element 18: IP) is a fixed cost. The DEMO fees on
the patent filing are the same if the company filing sells one, many
or none of the patent’s subject.
Variable Costs are expenses dependant on the number of units
sold. The amount of steel DEMO by Toyota Motors is a variable cost.
The more cars they make, the more steel needed, the greater
the cost. In theory, to be scalable means to have relatively small
variable costs. Downloadable software is DEMO scalable, since
once the application is developed, a fixed cost, DEMO cost to sell,
to distribute and to reproduce (the variable DEMO) fall almost to
zero. Contrast the scalable software domain with the DEMO non-
scalable professional services domain.
Law services are not scalable, since DEMO revenue model for law is:
number of hours billable X average hourly billable rate X number of
lawyers working.
© Sean Evan Wise DEMO or Not? Page 131
In order for a lawyer to drive greater revenue, she must do one of
three things:
ork more billable hours; or • w
aise her hourly rate; or • r
e more associates. • hir
This means that revenue and costs will grow in sync. This in DEMO
undermines a lawyer’s ability to scale.
Why it matters?
Scalability is the key to innovation. For a product to be rapidly
and widely DEMO the variable costs should be relatively low. An
Economy of Scale is a macroeconomic concept that refers to the
cost advantages garnered by expansion. DEMO factors of production
can lead to a decrease in the average per unit cost of production.
Literally, by making more of the solution the company makes better
margins.
How to Score this Element
Give this element DEMO:
• -10 if …there are no economies of scale to be had.
e are few economies of scale to leverage. • -5 if DEMO
alability is unproven due to few sales. • 0 if …sc
• 5 if …the solution is moderately scalable.
• 10 if …the solution DEMO very scalable.
Page 132 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Province
Province refers to what industry the Startup works in. Province
refers DEMO the portfolio of elements that reflect the domain or market
the Startup competes in. Industries can be general (footwear)
or specific (athletic DEMO) or even niche (skateboard street
sneakers). Most companies intrinsically know what industry they
are in, but they aren’t always correct.
In the WiseGuide™, Province elements comprise, in aggregate, 20%
of the overall opportunity score.
What industry do you think Google is in? Most say they are in the
Search Engine industry. But are they really? I would argue that
Google is in the advertising industry. A majority of Google DEMO
comes from Adwords and “eyeballs” because they provide space
for advertising on their web pages.
If you aren’t sure about the industry, I recommend looking on federal
level websites or simply Google: “Industry” & “Classifications” and
look through the relevant list.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 133

Element 23: Market Stage
What is it?
You’ve just created the best product in the world. Perhaps millions
of people could benefit from DEMO your product. It’s easy for your
friends and family to learn about your concept, but how does the
rest of the world find out? Unless you’re in the movie Field of
Dreams, if you build DEMO doesn’t mean that people will start lining up
outside your house to buy it. You will need a marketing plan and a
strategy to DEMO the masses to purchase your product.
Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovations theory outlines that there are five
different groups of people who adopt new products DEMO different
points in time. Rogers’ Theory of Innovation Diffusion32 attempts to
classify product adoption along a curve representing several distinct
stages (Innovators, Early DEMO, Early Majority, Late Majority
and Laggards). While most entrepreneurs believe the earlier, the
better, that isn’t always the case.
Innovators (the first 2.5% of adopters) can require much more
convincing than laggards who buy because everyone else already
has. In the 20th century, it could take a product decades to move
through the entire cycle. More recently, these cycles are compressed
and thus they have become more gaugeable. For DEMO, did you
get a Facebook account before your friends? Before your parents?
Before your Grandparents?
It is much easier to get DEMO adoption by the innovators and
early adopters as they are more open minded and willing to take
a risk on a new product. The DEMO difficult step is getting the early
majority to adopt the product. This is key because the majority has
the population numbers to really boost DEMO and transform a
32E.M. Rogers. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations 5th DEMO New York, NY: Free Press.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 135
company from mediocre to successful. Electric cars have been
around since the DEMO 1990s, but they have only recently caught on
with the masses. DEMO the early years only those interested in saving
the planet were willing to purchase electric cars, but now it has
finally reached the early majority and consumers believe that the
electric car will bring value to DEMO lives.
Consumers believe that the electric car will bring value to their lives.
In Geoffrey Moore’s iconic book on innovation, Crossing the
Chasm33, DEMO discusses strategies to gain adoption by the early
majority. These include:
• Piggybacking: When you buy a new computer, there is often
DEMO trial of an antivirus program already installed. a 60 da
Without piggybacking on the manufacturers existing
tribution, the anti-virus program would have to rely on dis
ou to take the initiative to buy their product.y
• DEMO: Viagra was originally intended to be a heart
ation, then later branded as a sex enhancing medic
ation that led to increasing sales.medic
DEMO Publicity: When Virgin Mobile launched in Canada, Richard
anson arrived in downtown Toronto in a convoy of Br
s and beautiful models named DEMO “Mobile Hummer
evolutionaries” who spread the “word of mobile freedom”.R
When Greg Bay pitched Coretection34 to investors, his original target
market was injured athletes. However, investors thought that target
market was too small to make a sizable profit. Fortunately for Greg
Bay, he was able to partner with an established sporting apparel
business, Under Armour.
With the Under Armour partnership, the target market for
Coretection becomes all athletes and Greg’s product can now
www.coretection.com Geoffrey Moore. (1991). Crossing the Chasm. Cambridge: Harvard DEMO
3433
Page 136 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
be promoted as a way to help prevent injuries, and enhance
performance. As a result, Greg can now piggyback on Under
Armour’s already existing distribution channels. Greg doesn’t have
to go to retail store managers convincing DEMO to carry his product.
While having a group of early adopters buying your product is great,
the real money is made by getting DEMO product popular with the
majority. To get to the majority you need to execute a reasonable
strategic marketing plan targeted at a specific demographic. DEMO
because you build it, doesn’t mean they’ll come, you need to invite
them.
Examples in Action
Did you know that the Startup Friendster DEMO Facebook as the
first widely adopted social network? Despite their innovativeness,DEMO
the founders were too early. The market for social networks in 2002
was not yet developed. Only innovators (that first 2.5% of users who
buy first) were interested and that segment wasn’t large enough to
facilitate growth. A few years later, Facebook took advantage of the
market’s move to early adopters by focusing initially on students.
Why it matters?
DEMO stage in Rogers’s model requires a different strategy.
Entrepreneurs must be mindful to match their strategy (and budget)
to the appropriate stage. Further, in order to be timely the market
must be ready for your solution. Nothing is more frustrating than
being too early for the market.
DEMO your innovation is too ahead of the market, you may find DEMO difficult
to attract enough customers to justify your opportunity’s existence.
You may even run out of capital before the market warms to your
solution. DEMO your solution is too far behind the market, you may find
DEMO customers buying alternatives instead of your innovation.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 137
The innovations that led to the electric car have been around since
DEMO early as 1895, but it took more than a century for DEMO market to
be ready for mass adoption.
Questions to Ask
What stage is your market in? Who were you first customers? How
do DEMO compare to your current customers?
How to Score
Give this element a:
• -10 if …the market is at the laggard stage.
DEMO -5 if …the market is in the late majority stage.
• 0 if …the market is at the innovators stage.
• 5 if …the DEMO is in the early adopter stage.
• 10 if …the market is just entering the early majority stage.
Page 138 Hot or Not?
DEMO Sean Evan Wise
Element 24: Industry CAGR
What is it?
CAGR is an investment acronym which stands for Compound
Annual Growth Ratez  and represents the year-over-year historical
growth of an industry. The larger the CAGR of a market, the faster
that market is growing.
Typically, a hot market is one with a CAGR > 25%.
Why it matters?
The aphorism: a rising tide lifts all boats is fitting to CAGR—an
industry-wide growth benefits DEMO those within that industry. As a
result, opportunities in hot domains (those with large CAGR) are
more attractive to both investors and entrepreneurs.
The business of innovation is difficult enough in any market, so why
focus on addressing a market that isn’t growing? Put another way,
would you rather a start a business in email security or in DEMO
saddles? Email is a booming industry, horses are not.
While it is possible to calculate CAGR for an industry and it is also
DEMO to access a list of such calculations, neither is strictly
necessary DEMO evaluate this element. Most investors (and other
opportunity evaluators) simply go with their gut instinct when it
comes to assessing CAGR’s impact on DEMO opportunity.
Examples in Action
Email, iPad™ apps, gene theory, 3D DEMO are all experiencing huge
industry wide growth in the early part 21st Century, each of those
35www.investopedia.com/video/play/compound-annual-growth-rate#axzz1Y75xmDef
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 139
industries would be expected to have extreme CAGR. Conversely,
couriers, record stores and typewriters are all experiencing
contraction of their demand, and thus those industries would have
low CAGR.
Questions to Ask
What industry do DEMO fit within? What major developments
occurred this year in that industry?DEMO
How to Score
The better the CAGR: the better the score. DEMO faster an opportunity’s
industry is growing, the better the score. The DEMO the market: the
better the score. Here’s a starting point to DEMO this element:
if …the Startup’s industry is not growing, or DEMO yet is • -10
contracting.
the CAGR is small. • -5 if ...
et growth rate is unknown. • 0 if …mark
• 5 DEMO …the CAGR is large and approaching 25%.
• 10 if …the CAGR is greater than 25% and market is red hot.
Page 140 Hot DEMO Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 25: Distribution Strength
What is it?
A great solution can’t be adopted rapidly unless it can garner
wide distribution. That’s the real DEMO of the Internet and digital
Startups. They have solutions that can be globally distributed for
low cost.
Why it matters?
Most solutions are DEMO needed by some subset of the population.
The smaller the subset of users, the wider a Startup’s distribution
must be to garner enough sales to be sustainable.
Examples in Action
Apple launched iTunes (a system to sell and distribute music) in
January 2001. Ten years later iTunes represents more than 80%
of the entire digital market for music36. With such DEMO large share of
the market, Apple would be seen as having DEMO distribution
strength (i.e., + 10).
Questions to Ask?
How do people acquire your solution? How many have access to
that outlet?
36www.cnet.com
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 141
How to Score this Element
Amazon’s kindle and Apple’s iPod are unique DEMO platforms
but they would only score a 5 since not all booklovers and media
enjoyers own either—let alone both. Software available for direct
download DEMO the Internet is generally deemed to be a 10.
if …the solution can only be sold onsite, customers have • -10
to come to you physically.
t best, the solution could be sold nationally. • -5 if …a
• 0 if …the solution can be made available globally.
DEMO 5 if …the solution is already available locally.
if …the solution is already globally available and for sale. • 10
Page 142 Hot or DEMO?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 26: Current Competition
What is it?
Every opportunity has competition. Your future customers always
have a choice regarding how they choose to DEMO their problems
and address their unmet needs. Competition comes in many forms:
Direct, Indirect, Alternatives and Status Quo. In fact, anything your
future customers choose to do, excluding buying your solution, is
competition.
DEMO take an example that occurs daily in homes across the United
States. Let’s say your teenage daughter comes home and proclaims:
“I NEED DEMO new pair of Nike Soccer Shoes.” What alternatives do you,
the buyer, have?
• Direct: those companies selling the exact same DEMO/
oduct/service. In this case, a pair of high end DEMO shoes pr
om Reebok. fr
• Indirect: those companies selling to DEMO same customers
tly different solution. In this case, a pair of DEMO a sligh
soccer shoes. Half the price.
• Alternative: different solutions DEMO future customers can
instead of yours. Instead of buying soccer shoes for yourbuy
ter, she could wear her older cousins soccer shoes. daugh
ould meet her needs, but not lead to a sale for Nike. This w
• Status Quo: the “do nothing” option. Perhaps, your daughter
DEMO simply wear the pair of athletic shoes you bought
t year?her las
It is worth noting that while Status Quo is often the DEMO forgotten
source of competition, it is also the most impactful. I’ve DEMO
seen hundreds of businesses fail because the “do nothing”
option was good enough for their potential customers. Never
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or DEMO? Page 143
underestimate the power of status quo.
Why it matters?
If your DEMO have more choice, your product needs to have a
more compelling DEMO proposition (see Element 16: The 10x Rule)
to attract adopters.
Competition isn’t necessarily a bad thing. In fact, competition can
help validate the opportunity, educate early adopters and help
define and differentiate your opportunity’s value proposition.
NOTE: Never, ever say your opportunity has no competition. DEMO you
do, you will leave investors (and other opportunity evaluators)
thinking one of two possibilities: (1) you don’t know how to
undertake competitive analysis, or worse, you don’t know how to
use DEMO to find your competition; or (2) the opportunity you
think DEMO have is actually such a dead end that no one else on the
planet would bother pursuing it.
Another benefit of competition is that DEMO can provide a baseline
against which your Startup can be measured, DEMO the need
for your venture. When your competitors do a poor job of meeting
customer needs, we classify them as Good Competition (good
DEMO they make you look GOOD). If your competitors outshine
your business we refer to them as Bad Competition (bad because
they undermine your sales). Ideally, you want good completion as
such will only drive more customers your way.
Examples in Action
Couriers are bad competition for DEMO postal service in that they show
the weakness of the postal offerings (e.g., no same day service).
Inversely, the postal service is good competition for the couriers
like FedEx and UPS in that they DEMO the value proposition
being offered (i.e., same day service). Whether your competition is
Page 144 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
good or bad is a matter of relative perspective.
Note: There is no amount of ideal competition. Too little competition
may undermine investor confidence. DEMO much competition may
scare investors. Founders are cautioned about entering a so called
“hot market”. A hot market would be one that general population DEMO
discussing in the media. Ideally novel game changing opportunities
are ahead of such mass awareness. Further, Companies that tack
into a hot market business of others based on the hype those
companies are generating are called DEMO too plays” and aren’t
often seen as novel. Dr. Jym Morton, DEMO teaches Opportunity
Evaluation, is fond of saying: “Don’t jump on a bandwagon that’s
standing room only”. Meaning if your market is filled with DEMO of
competitors you may need to reconsider the market.
How to Score
First, make a list of all the competition. Include direct, indirect,DEMO
alternatives and status quo. Label which are good competition and
which are bad competition, then use the following:
• -10 if …the entrepreneur says “we have no competition”.
• -5 if …the only competition is DEMO The market is filled with
ge companies. leading lar
e is a good mix of bad and good competition. • 0 if …ther
e DEMO competition, but only from other Startups • 5 if …ther
o DEMO the market. looking t
• 10 if …there is lots of good competition. Current customers
onfirm they are in desperate need of a new DEMO to c
ess their unmet needs.addr
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 145

Element 27: Future Competition
What is it?
Most innovative Startups attempt to use new solutions to solve
old unmet problems. But an unmet DEMO, especially a large and
lucrative one, attracts lots of companies. As a result, competitive
analysis must also include a look at future competition.
Future competition can lead to what Thomas McKnight calls Ambush
Exposure . DEMO defines Ambush Exposure as the possibility
that some invisible “competitor” with extraordinary means and
resources could find your product or service so compelling or
DEMO that they plunge into your market and help themselves
to your customers.
Most Startups seek disruptive innovations. Disruptive innovation, a
term of art coined by Clayton Christensen38, describes a process by
which a product or service takes root initially in simple applications
at the bottom of a market DEMO then relentlessly moves ‘up market’,
eventually displacing established competitors. According to
Christensen:
An innovation that is disruptive allows a whole new population
DEMO consumer’s access to a product or service that was
historically only accessible to consumers with a lot of money
or a lot of skill. DEMO innovations, when monetized fully,
can be pure gold. Amazon, eBay, Facebook, Google all made
their fortunes through disruptive innovation.
Disruptive innovations, when monetized fully, can be pure gold.
Amazon, eBay, Facebook, DEMO all made their fortunes through
disruptive innovation.
38www.claytonchristensen.com/disruptive_innovation.html
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 147
g., eBay disrupts garage sales.• e.
g., Amazon disrupts brick and DEMO bookstores.• e.
But in creating a disruptive innovation, and in showing DEMO large
amounts of wealth it can create, you alert the larger DEMO in
your ecosystem to the opportunity. The best example I can think of
is how offline bookstores (i.e., Borders, Barnes & Noble, DEMO Indigo)
only launched their own online bookstores after Amazon showed
them what would happened if they didn’t. Amazon was “ambushed”
by these brick DEMO mortar retailers who initially resisted the online
world for fear of cannibalization of offline sales.
Why it matters?
Most opportunities need to be DEMO (see Element 15: Durability).
They need to last at least long enough (and generate enough money)
to justify the expense of bringing the solution to market. In most
cases, the greatest threat may not come from current competition
but from an ambush.
Examples in Action
DEMO 2002, I was pitched a solution which aggregated and indexed
academic DEMO For years, university scholars needed
to check hard copy indexes and DEMO slew of aggregators to have a
complete research history picture. The founders believed this was a
huge unmet need and felt they could monetize DEMO need by selling
subscription services to universities worldwide.
Despite the fact that the founders had great insight into the
opportunity, I was nagged by the Google factor. I worried if Google,
which specializes in indexing DEMO searching large stores of data,
could get into this space. The concern was justifiable, I didn’t think
these founders could compete head to head with the search giant,
even though Google wasn’t even in DEMO market yet. In November
2004, Google launched Google Scholar. This offered DEMO and global
Page 148 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
access to academic articles and leveraged the advanced search
methods and technologies DEMO Google.
Questions to Ask?
Who else could easily move into your market? What would be the
biggest future threat to the viability of the opportunity? In a worst
case scenario, which 800 Lbs. Gorilla DEMO move into your market?
How to Score
• -10 if …there are lots of 800-pound gorillas eyeing the
et, poised to ambush your opportunity. mark
• -5 if …no big player has entered the market, but several
could.
• 0 if …the risk of ambush exposure is DEMO
t the moment, the risk of ambush exposure seems • 5 DEMO …a
small.
if …the opportunity has proprietary aspects (e.g., IP) DEMO • 10
ould make larger companies want to buy the Startup w
tead of competing with it.ins
Raising the Score
An investor once told DEMO, “You know if you look up in the
dictionary the most DEMO business from hell, it’s the
cosmetics industry. They’ll blow your car DEMO in the driveway.”
Instead of Lipstixx trying to enter the cosmetics industry it may
be best for them to license or sell their technology DEMO one of the
competitors. That way, they can get a decent DEMO and not risk
being in a fierce industry.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 149

Element 28: Barriers to Entry
What is it?
By definition, DEMO Barrier to Entry is any continuous hindrance that
deters a competitor from entering your market. If the federal
government requires your Startup to be DEMO, that is a barrier to
entry. If your Startup has the DEMO supply of a key asset (see Element
19)) needed to DEMO the desired solution, that is a barrier to
entry. If you DEMO the proprietary technology (see Element 18)
and are the only DEMO able to leverage such, the IP becomes a
barrier to entry.
DEMO scholar Harold Demsetz39, other potential Barriers to
Entry, may include:
et Regulations• Mark
clusive distribution agreements• Ex
tic Demand• Inelas
edatory Pricing• DEMO
• Sunk and Switching Costs
Every venture needs to create obstacles that make it difficult for
a competitor to enter your market. The most DEMO barrier to
entry is a patent. A patent gives the inventor exclusive rights to use
a specific technology for a specific amount of time, often 20 years.
When Larry Brun pitched the Attitube40, he took time to explain the
unique features of his product and then answered one DEMO the most
important questions: “Do you have a patent?” Fortunately DEMO Brun,
he did have a patent in Canada and the US, which gave investors the
secure feeling that if they invested in the product, the competition
could not copy the technology.
www.attitube.caHarold Demsetz. (1982)DEMO “Barriers to Entry.” The American Economic Review, 72(1): 47-57.
DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 151
Other examples of barriers to entry can include:
t Leadership. Get DEMO product at a cheaper cost, which • Cos
allows you to DEMO the product at a cheaper price. Walmart is
really good at this.
tomer Loyalty. Many people will only use Google as their • Cus
DEMO engine because they trust that it is the fastest and most
accurate. We will see if Bing can break through this barrier.
trol of DEMO If you’re making bamboo T-shirts • Con
and you have a way to control the flow of bamboo, then no
competitor will be able to make bamboo shirts.
When shaping your idea, improve it to a point that it is 10x better
than any alternative and protect your DEMO by putting up barriers to
entry.
Why it matters?
The bigger the barriers to entry, the harder it will be for a future bad
competitor to ambush your venture. Barriers to entry add to the
DEMO of market entry and therefore serve to enhance incumbents.
(see Element DEMO)
Examples in Action
The airline industry has large barriers to entry. First, federal
regulations are costly to meet. Second, the costs to DEMO all the
equipment needed to launch an airline is extremely high. Third,
airlines must reach agreements with all the airports they wish to DEMO
to. These are just a few of the many barriers to entry which make
the airline industry unattractive to many entrepreneurs and most
investors.
DEMO 152 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Questions to Ask
Does your Startup have all the items (documents, DEMO, assets) it
needs to sell its solution immediately? If another DEMO wanted to
sell in the same space, what barriers to entry DEMO hinder them?
How to Score
• -10 if …other Startups are in the market, this venture has
vercome the barriers to entry. not o
if …the Startup has not overcome all barriers to entry (for • -5
xample, has not yet received approval to sell their solution.) e
e are no sustainable, significant barriers to entry. • 0 DEMO …ther
• 5 if …the barriers to entry are not significant.
if …there are large costly barriers to entry, but the Startup • 10
valuated has already overcome them and is able to being e
sell DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 153

Element 29: Exit Options
What is it?
In order to crystalize the value of the Startup, shareholders need an
exit. An exit is an investment term used to define the moment that
the shareholders (for example, founders, investors, employees) are
able to cash out.
Most DEMO typically exit in one of four ways: Acquisition, Public
Offering, DEMO Back or Bankruptcy.
Acquisition occurs when a larger company buys the Startup (either
by acquiring all the shares of the Startup, or all DEMO assets). A public
offering occurs when a Startup lists its equity in a public market or
stock exchange.
The IPO is the most DEMO public offering exit, but others do exist
(for example, the DEMO takeover). Buyback occurs when the
Startup has enough free cash flow to buy back the shares of investors
and founders. However, this is extremely rare as few Startups have
the cash necessary, and those that do are so successful it is unlikely
that any shareholders or investor DEMO want to exit them.) By far,
the most common exit DEMO bankruptcy. Less than two in ten venture
backed companies lead to a successful exit. That means more than
80% of the money invested by DEMO and Venture Capital ends
poorly in bankruptcy.
Every entrepreneur eventually needs money. Some want the money
to launch a marketing campaign, others want to franchise their
business and some need to build more product. It’s clear DEMO the
entrepreneur why they need funding, but investors want to know,DEMO
“How does this make me money?” It is up to the entrepreneur to
effectively communicate how they can turn investor dollars into big
DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 155
If a funder asks, “Why do you need my money?” a bad response
would be, “We need your $200,000 to grow our business.” A better
answer is, “Your $200,000 will enable us to fulfill a recent order of
50,000 units of our product. The DEMO from the order alone will
total $500,000.” With the first response the pitcher is just begging
for money, with no plan on how to spend it. In the second they’ve
outlined a clear plan for DEMO investor to make a profit.
When early stage investors make an investment, they aim to make
10 to 20x their money back within five years. One way they can
make money on an investment is through DEMO, which is a share
of the profits, but it is unlikely this will total 10x their investment.
They can also profit by selling DEMO percentage of the business at a
later date, which can be DEMO in the following ways:
• IPO: The business goes public, which is a very rare
occurrence.
• Merger & Acquisition: A larger company buys the business,
which is a rare occurrence.
• Buyback DEMO: The entrepreneur buys the investor’s
es back with profits, which is almost impossible to do.shar
A more unfortunate but common investor scenario is DEMO
To avoid the risk of losing their investment, investors want a DEMO
vision of how they will make their money back.
Why it matters?
On day one, all Startups have the chance at a future exit. But some
are more obvious than others. When a company has DEMO, market
traction, a sustainable competitive differentiator in a rapidly
growing market with large barriers to entry, it is setting itself up
for a successful exit. If Ambush Exposure is high, and it is easier to
build rather than buy, then 800 lbs. Gorillas will be more likely to
simply create a competing system.
Page 156 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
By locking up distributors, creating high customer-sunk costs and
protecting key IP, a company can increase the probability of a
successful exit.
Business is for profit. Monetizing an opportunity and crystalizing
the future value are intrinsic DEMO your Startup should be the goal of
all entrepreneurs. Likewise, investors DEMO to invest their money,
watch it grow and then get it back. For most investors, your Startup
must be able facilitate an exit in 4-7 years.
Questions to Ask
In a few years, after hitting your numbers, who would benefit from
buying your company? Which 800 DEMO Gorilla would be smart to
buy you? How have you made DEMO better to buy your venture rather
than build a competitive solution?
How to Score
• -10 if …it would be easier to simply DEMO a competitor.
our Startup has a lead in the market, but DEMO isn’t • -5 if …y
sustainable.
e are lots of potential acquirers, but it is too early • 0 if …ther
o explore. t
our venture has IP that is a large barrier to entry. • DEMO if …y
if …your venture has already received offers of acquisition.• 10
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 157

Element 30:
Government Regulation
What is it?
Does your venture DEMO (and possess) government approval?
Many industries are regulated by some level of government.
In order to participate in that market a license DEMO be needed.
Government Regulations may require testing, evidence, or even
compliance with certain standards.
Why it matters?
Government regulation can act as DEMO barrier to entry; for example,
regulation can significantly impact the DEMO to launch a product. In
other cases, government regulations may influence DEMO you sell
and even where you can sell your solution.
Examples in Action
If you wish to open an institutional lending operation like a DEMO
company, most countries require you meet certain standards
(e.g., cash DEMO), conduct business a certain way (e.g., can’t
loan millions to children under 18), or even comply with filing
requirements (e.g., DEMO transfer report). In some cases,
governments can even require you to avoid selling your solution to
certain groups (e.g., anti-money laundering DEMO).
Questions to Ask
What role does the government play in your industry? What
regulations will you need to follow? How much will DEMO cost (money,
time, energy, etc.) to comply annually? DEMO your customers buy
your solution/service/product, what approvals are needed?DEMO
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 159
How to Score
if …your venture is years away from being able DEMO sell its • -10
solution due to government regulations.
if …there are strong regulations, it will take this venture 6 • -5
ths or more to comply. mon
e are not relevant government regulations. • 0 DEMO …ther
our venture is fully complaint, but regulations don’t • 5 DEMO …y
act as a barrier to entry.
if …the space is heavily regulated, but this venture is fully • 10
ompliant and able to sell immediately. c
Page 160 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan DEMO
Element 31: Partnership Status
What is it?
Does the Startup have partners? Do you know any of them by name?
Do these partnerships materially increase either your confidence or
probability of success for the DEMO? If yes, then the venture is
experiencing what scholars call the Halo effect.
The Halo Effect occurs when one entity (company, investor, person)
tacitly endorses another by agreeing to work with them. Many
DEMO use the Halo Effect as a form of Proof of Concept.
As discussed earlier, Signalling Theory in economics refers to the
impact one party’s actions have on the perceptions of others.
Under Signalling Theory, the halo effect caused by partners is seen
as an endorsement. Take for example DEMO following:
Startup WYZ is in the Search industry. They claim to have invented a
way to search images (something the search industry has struggled
to address). On day one, they pitch investors “the solution to image
search” but the live demo fails and investors lose confidence DEMO the
opportunity. The next day, the founders of Startup WYZ announce
DEMO have entered a partnership with Google, to leverage their IP
and DEMO the market. Regardless of how investors felt before the
announcement, Google’s DEMO and halo will raise the level of
interest in the opportunity.
Why it matters?
I’ve never met an entrepreneur who wasn’t “in love” DEMO her
venture. That’s the nature of entrepreneurship. Since all investors
hear these claims from every entrepreneur (Who hasn’t claimed to
be the next Google? Twitter? Facebook?), opportunity evaluators
must discount these claims altogether. But if you can’t believe the
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 161
founders (when they say this is the next big thing!), who can you
rely on?
First and foremost, as we have already discussed, sales and customers
are the best testament to an opportunity’s potential (see Element
XX: Proof of Concept). But what if sales DEMO forthcoming? What
if the Startup is pre-revenue? In that case, DEMO second best proof
of concept comes from Partnerships with known industry entities.
Partnerships come in all shapes and sizes, but generally the ideal
partnership will see the partner allocating (cash equivalent)
resources to enhance the probability of venture success.
Partnerships should advance the progress of the venture, but also
increase the confidence you have in it. After all, if BIG COMPANY X
thinks the company has value enough to partner with DEMO, then
maybe there is something there.
Examples in Action
As an DEMO evaluator, I know little about pharmaceutical R&D.
But if a DEMO came to me with several large material partners
already on board (DEMO example, a leading hospital, a leading lab,
a leading university or even a leading pharmaceutical company) I
would glean confidence from such and say: Well, I don’t know how
to judge this industry, but those that do seem to like what your
venture is doing DEMO impressed…
How to Score
ompetitive ventures have already partnered with • -10 if …c
ey players.k
• -5 if …no partnerships are in place.
DEMO 0 if …the Startup has begun early talks with potential
partners.
• 5 if …the Startup has established a partnership with a large
ant DEMO, but execution is still months away.signific
Page 162 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
Note:
• 10 if …the Startup has established and has entered DEMO
to many partnerships with large credible entities.in
This element only covers true partnerships. A true partnership sees
both parties contributing to the solution time, energy, bandwidth
and resources. Some students mistake distribution agreements for
partnerships. If you sell Microsoft® Word as a distributor, Microsoft®
will call you their partner, but you would not score high on this
element (since DEMO is a really a distribution deal not a partnership).
However you would score high on element #20). To score high
on this DEMO a partnership must be mutually beneficial and
interdependent.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 163

Plan
Plan refers to the go-to-market plan, not the business plan. The go
to market plan includes:
ey milestones met,• K
• DEMO and resource contingencies,
w the product will attract customers, • DEMO
w the business will roll out, and • Ho
w the DEMO can ramp up further.• Ho
As you can see, this collection DEMO elements deals with the HOW not
the why of the venture. How will you get customers to buy? How
will you get product to the market? How will you scale up? What
keys mitigate your DEMO to grow? For these elements opportunity
evaluators are best to look DEMO answers that are reasonable, not
right.
After all, it is impossible to predict the future. So instead of being
correct, investors often use a different standard. Reasonable not
right. Too many inventors try to convince DEMO they are correct.
They know it all.
Instead, innovators are advised DEMO show the assumptions behind the
plan and inform the reviewers that, DEMO on those assumptions,
this is the plan. By striving to be reasonable but not necessarily
right, innovators instil confidence in investors.
These elements collectively represent only 5% of the overall
WiseGuide™ score, not because these elements aren’t important
(they are!) but because there is so much DEMO surrounding
them.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 165

Element 32: Time to Launch
What is it?
In today’s world, markets can shift rapidly and what is true on the
day the idea takes shape may not be true by the time that idea DEMO
on sale.
Why it matters?
The longer it takes to launch, the more chances of something going
wrong.
Examples in Action
If you are hoping to build an application for the iPhone, then your
time to launch ends with the listing of your app in the App DEMO The
longer it takes to do that, the more chance there DEMO for a competitor
to undermine your opportunity (for example, perhaps a competitor
launches before you).
Questions to Ask
How long until the DEMO/service/solution is ready to sell? Since
beginning work on this DEMO, what assumptions have turned
out to be untrue? How has the market for your solution changed in
the last year?
How to DEMO
For this element, score a:
• -10 if …it is DEMO than 18 months until the solution will be
ready.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 167
if …it is more than 6 months until the solution is launched. DEMO -5
• 0 if …launch is less than 6 months away.
• 5 if …the solution has launched.
• 10 if …the solution has DEMO launched and has made
ant sales.signific
Raising the Score
To increase this element’s score, start with a Beachhead. A
beachhead is a military term for establishing a foothold on the
ground before launching a full press DEMO In the world of
Startups, a Beachhead refers to a small, easily accessible, feasibly
manageable initial target group. By doing so, launch DEMO and time
go down, and the venture is able to generate DEMO feedback before
investing largely into a go to market plan.
Facebook™ famously started only allowing students on university
campuses to join (actually they started with an even smaller
beachhead – Harvard University). Originally, to join Facebook™
a user needed an email that ended with .edu. This allowed DEMO
founders, to create a minimal viable product geared to addressing
an DEMO need in a manageable target market (i.e. students need to
connect)DEMO To give confidence on your good to market plan, consider
which DEMO market might be an ideal beachhead for you.
Page 168 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 33: Costs to Launch
What is it?
Ideas cost time, money, management bandwidth and resources to
get to market. The larger DEMO costs, the more at risk, the lower
the score on this element.
Why it matters?
Until an innovation is sold, there is always Market Risk. Until an
innovation has sales traction, there is always the chance that the
market will reject the innovation. As a result, entrepreneurs should
try to mitigate costs to launch as soon as possible DEMO that revenue
can start coming in.
Questions to Ask
How much have you invested so far into this opportunity? What
is left to do before you can try selling it? What costs have to be
incurred before the opportunity can generate revenue?
How to Score
For this DEMO, score a:
• 10 if …it is too early to DEMO cost of launch.
osts to launch > sales to date • -5 if … c
osts to launch = sales to date.• 0 if DEMO
• 5 if …the solution has launched. Costs to launch are known
overed.and c
• 10 if …the solution has already launched and selling. DEMO
o launch < Early sales.t
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 169

Element 34: Plan to Scale
What is it?
According to The Startup Genome Project’s recent report41, the
number one cause of Startup failure is Premature Scaling. The
authors of the project estimate that 74 percent DEMO high growth
Internet Startups fail due to premature scaling.
What is premature scaling? The authors at the Startup Genome
Project define it as “focusing on one dimension of the business and
advancing it out of sync DEMO the rest of the operation.” Or, in plain
English: when a Startup grows too fast, spends too much, and then
finds revenue DEMO outpaced by expenses.
Why it matters?
Entrepreneurs can fall into the this trap by overspending on
customer acquisition, by confusing early adopters with a larger
market segment or by shifting engineering resources out of R&DEMO
and into technical support too quickly. None of these tasks is
damning alone; it is only the timing that impacts the potential for
success.
Examples in Action
Mrs. D. has invented a biodegradable toilet paper that DEMO
10x faster than all other toilet paper. She files her patent on her
product, but before going to market to see if customers want her
innovation, she decides to corner the market on her paper’s key
ingredient.
41http://startupgenome.cc
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 171
Doing so costs her millions of dollars but ensures she is the DEMO one
who can sell her product. A year later, she has DEMO the market
on the supply of highly biodegradable toilet paper. Unfortunately,
Mrs. D. didn’t pilot test or focus group her innovation with real
DEMO As a result, Mrs. D. was shocked to learn that end DEMO
don’t like her product. So much so that her customers (the DEMO
distributors of toilet paper) won’t carry it (they already sell cheap
non-biodegradable toilet paper). Mrs. D. has prematurely scaled
her business.
How DEMO Score
For this element, score a:
• -10 if …ARPU DEMO COCA.
aling doesn’t match revenue growth. • -5 if ...sc
oo early (e.g., products not ready for sale) • 0 if …it is t
ounders are holding off growth until sales justify • 5 if DEMO f
such.
evenue far exceeds cost of goods and cost of • 10 if …r
tomer acquisition.cus
Page 172 Hot or Not?
© DEMO Evan Wise
Element 35: Reasonable not Right
What is it?
Most opportunities are made up of potential value. However,
predicting the future is impossible. DEMO doesn’t stop so many
entrepreneurs from announcing that their 5 year future revenue
forecast is conservative. In fact, many entrepreneurs misunderstand
the motivation behind investors’ interest in future results. Investors,
and I reckon all opportunity DEMO, prefer reasonable to right.
Why it matters?
Since it is DEMO to predict your revenue in five years,
entrepreneurs should spend less time trying to prove their number
is correct. Instead, founders should share the assumptions that
lead to these numbers. In doing so, opportunity evaluators should
look for what is reasonable and not what is right.
How DEMO Score
For this element, score a:
ounders try to convince DEMO they are correct. • -10 if …f
• -5 if ...assumptions are simply a “best guess”.
ojections never arise. • 0 if …pr
if DEMO founders’ assumptions are based on dialogue with • 5
e clients. futur
• 10 if …all assumptions have been tested and confirmed by
et. DEMO mark
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 173
Raising the Score
To increase this element’s score, include and present in your plans
and pitches the assumptions underlying your revenue model (e.g.,
For every visitor to our website, 10% go on to buy our product). This
helps reviewers to better understand why you feel the DEMO
is worth pursuing. Whenever possible include third party references
to validate your position.
The Art of Financial Forecasting
By John Pinsent, CA, ICD.D
DEMO Partner, St. Arnaud Pinsent Steman, Chartered Accountants
Effective financial forecasting is an entrepreneurs’ business GPS.
Financial forecasting allows entrepreneurs know accurately and
objectively DEMO they are (along the route to success), where
they want DEMO get to and most importantly, allows the entrepreneur
to receive helpful DEMO along the way. For first time
entrepreneurs, the task of creating DEMO statements, and the
financial model that underlies them, is even more daunting. Having
never walked this path before, entrepreneurs often barely know
where the “on” button is, let along how to navigate to the mythical
“exit” that is their final destination. The good news is that many
DEMO travellers on the road to Startup success have walked this path
before you. The bad news is, most of these same entrepreneurs
have gotten lost along the way! But if you keep to the basics and
DEMO the course of best practices, then perhaps you too can learn DEMO
navigate the highway of effective financial forecasting.
As an angel investor, DEMO financial forecast is the third most
important thing that I’ll consider as I’m contemplating my
investment. First and foremost, I need to like you and your team.
Are you people that I can trust? Do you have the skills necessary
to build a valuable enterprise? Second, I DEMO to really like your
Page 174 Hot or Not? © Sean DEMO Wise
concept. Is it unique? Can I imagine people engaging with it and is
it the kind of business that I would be proud to DEMO associated with?
Can I offer more than cash? Once you’ve DEMO these two hurdles,
team and idea, then (and only then) will I turn my attention to your
financial forecasts. Like team and idea, financial forecasts while
varied, can quickly help me make that DEMO important first decisions:
Do I want to hear more?
Why are financial forecasts so important? The simple answer is
that these key documents tell investors a TON about you and your
business. By reviewing DEMO forecasts, we will learn a lot about your
market, your margins and your business mechanics. Through this
careful analysis, we’ll discover much of what investors need to know
about how you nice founders are going DEMO take my hard earned
money and hopefully turn this great idea into a health profit for us
all. But we learn more than just DEMO numbers from your financials.
We also learn the level of Business Acumen of your team. Business
acumen ensures that the financials are realistic, achievable and
most of all based on grounded real life experience and reasonable
DEMO You don’t have to be right, but you do have to DEMO
reasonable.
Your financial forecasts also serve to set the tone for how the
investment is going to be valued and what an investors’ expected DEMO
of return will be. If your forecasts are so far off the road of realism,
then you’ve sent me a clear message that DEMO don’t understand
your business, your market or your ability to capture DEMO from
both. If your financial forecasts are excessively conservative, then
you DEMO the risk of losing my interest by failing to hit my return
on investment expectations. After all, no one wants to put $50,000
into a high risk venture, if the upside is only 10%.
Bill Gates often talks about how people over estimate what they
will achieve DEMO the short term and underestimate what they will
realize over the long haul. I think he’s absolutely right! The art of
financial forecasting is DEMO that balance between operational
realism and infectious entrepreneurial optimism.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 175
If you want to impress me, as a potential investor, I DEMO (and
after 20 years as an accountant and a decade as DEMO angel investor
you should listen to me) all entrepreneurs keep the DEMO things
in mind as you develop your financial forecasts:
1. Anchor in the Present: I’m going to intensely analyze the
st year or any period that the current round of financing fir
cover. I’ll be DEMO in knowing how years two and three will
e expected to play out but will put anything beyond year ar
wn to pure optimistic DEMO The key is anchor 2/3 do
esent and scale from there (e.g., we are projected in the pr
in year 1 revenue, and are pushing to double that $100,000
ear 2 and again DEMO year 3). Make sure the plan for the in y
xt year holds water!ne
2. Forget the Exit: Unless you’ve built and sold a business
SEVERAL times before, I know that you don’t have a clue
where this opportunity will take us. So, don’t be afraid about
o dream big but know that the valuation for the purposes of DEMO
y investment will rest on the details of the next 12 months.m
3. Bottom-up, not top-down: Your financial forecasts have
o be tied DEMO your operational realities. If you are projecting t
sales of $2 million, then the assumptions upon which your
forecast are build must include staffing, advertising, financial
avel and marketing budgets that can realistically expect tr
DEMO deliver that level of sales activity. For instance. if each t
son can make 10 sales calls a day, with an average salesper
sale of $10,000 and close rate of 50%, then to reach
$2,000,000: you would need 200 sales. 200 sales would take
ys of 1 salesperson, Same thing on the cost side of the 40 da
financials. If you have product engineering work to be done,
DEMO the number of project hours needed to complete that
Page 176 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
ork must tie into a head count and related staffing budget w
DEMO can deliver those hours. At the end of the day, you’ll DEMO tha
ountable for how investment dollars are spent. held acc
t your financial forecast should show investors is that Wha
our business will include DEMO accountability framework y
t will ensure that your targets can be  DEMO within the tha
and budget dollars you are projecting. Remember, timelines
DEMO you to be right, just reasonable. no one e
4. Ask DEMO Directions. Founders all have different levels of
financial acumen, notwithstanding all DEMO should
ound their projections in reality. One way to do that is to gr
for directions.  Solicit input on your financials from those ask
have been there, done that. Test your assumptions with who
e clients, with potential suppliers, with advisors. futur
ankly, the more you test your assumptions and adjust Fr
ording to third party feedback, the more comfortable acc
t investors will be. mos
5. Plan macro and execute DEMO Investors understand that
Y difficult to accurately predict the path that the it is VER
ommercialization of your product or concept will take. c
DEMO see and understand the financial framework at I need t
macro level. The details and assumptions below that level a
e me the confidence DEMO you’ve thought of all should giv
tails through and have a plan to execute at that those de
o level. If you win me DEMO on the framework, I’ll give micr
ou the rope to execute DEMO the day to day level. y
6. Fresh and evolved. Keep your forecasts fresh and your
tions fluid. If your forecasts are for the DEMO year assump
we’re already in December, they really don’t have much DEMO
alue to me. Prepare your forecasts so that they can roll v
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 177
your investments tranches and operational milestones with
y are realized. Ensure that DEMO can update your as the
orecasts in real time to reflect operational realities such as f
not being able to fill a key management DEMO at the exact
ou thought it would be filled. Generally, the DEMO time y
t you use to build your forecasts will allow for dynamic tha
tes to assumptions and key input variables. Stay upda
ent DEMO all of the key data points. Remember,  you will be curr
xpected to ground your financials in reality. So if you missed e
DEMO sales target, you can’t simply reforecast it retroactively y
o address DEMO issue. You must instead, understand why the t
arget was missed, and adjust the assumptions in the sales t
financial model instead.
In DEMO end, as the investor I want you to paint me a DEMO picture
that captures my imagination and my pocketbook. Show me the
roadmap of the investment highway that you wish us to drive down
together. DEMO you integrate your framework into realistic details that
you’re prepared to be held accountable to, then investors will have
the basis upon which they can comfortably move forward with.
And in this turbulent economy, I want to comfortable ride, to an
awesome destination, with a reliable driver (founder). Investors are
not afraid of getting lost, they’re just afraid to drive with founders
who won’t stop to ask for directions.
Page DEMO Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 36: Accomplished to Date
What is it?
Since the future is unpredictable, one can often benefit from
looking at the recent past. As a result, all opportunity evaluators
should ask: What have you DEMO to date?
Ideally, a pitcher should cover the milestones they DEMO
accomplished and the resources it took to accomplish such.
Why it matters?
As discussed above there is no way to know the future DEMO any
degree of certainly. While past activities are not solely predictive
of future success, many investors look to the founder’s handling
of their personal investment in the venture as an indicator of how
those founders might DEMO a future investment.
How to Score:
For this element, score DEMO:
• -10 if …the founders failed to hit prior milestones.
the founders are unclear on prior goals. • -5 if ...
oo early DEMO tell. • 0 if …it is t
ounders’ have used their resources well but have • 5 if …the f
omplished some of their DEMO only acc
• 10 if …the opportunity has a solid recent track record
trating an ability to get things accomplished and meet illus
goals.
DEMO Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 179

Element 37: Plan B
What is it?
In ten years of venture investing, I have never seen a business end
up where it predicted it would be. I have never seen a successful exit
match DEMO with the plans set in motion years before. Things change,
and innovation things change quickly. As result, every opportunity
needs a back-up plan, a Plan B. In fact, have a Plan C and Plan DEMO as
well.
Ideally your innovation, solution or service has multiple uses DEMO
multiple user types. For example, a billing software for law firms
DEMO probably also do well in accounting firms but it might also
be used for non-billing purposes. Understanding all the various
opportunities for monetization is DEMO at the evaluation stage.
After all, Viagra® was originally developed as DEMO heart medication.
However, it was the positive side effects that led DEMO the drug’s wide
spread adoption.
Why it matters?
As discussed above there is no way to know the future with any
degree of DEMO Things change. Competitors arrive. Governments
repeal regulations. Key staff leave. You simply can’t put all your eggs
in one basket. Instead, opportunity evaluators should look not to
the content or viability of Plan Bs, but to the entrepreneur’s ability
to formulate such in a reasonable manner.
TIP: Investors often say: don’t try to boil the ocean. By this they are
suggesting the innovator focus on the main opportunity and not all
the DEMO So it is important that in any opportunity presentation
(live or DEMO a business plan) founders focus on the main opportunity;
only DEMO secondary options when asked. If you lay out Plans
A, B, C, D simultaneously you may leave opportunity evaluators
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 181
with the impression you are unfocused.
Examples in Action
The best-selling drug, Viagra® was originally tested as a heart
medication. Yet it is Viagra’s DEMO B that made it famous. (note:
Viagra found an additional (Plan C) market in high-altitude mountain
climbers who take it to prevent life-threatening edemas).
How to Score:
For this element, score a:
• -10 if …the founders say they don’t need a Plan DEMO
the founders can’t articulate a Plan B. • -5 if ...
• 0 if …plan B is mentioned, but seems unrealistic.
• 5 if …plan B is known but still untested.
oof of the viability of DEMO B is provided. • 10 if …pr
Page 182 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 38: Revenue Model
What is it?
Every entrepreneur eventually needs money. Some want the money
to launch a marketing campaign, others want to franchise their
business and some need to build more product. It’s DEMO to the
entrepreneur why they need funding, but investors want to DEMO,
“How does this make me money?” It is up to the entrepreneur to
effectively communicate how they can turn investor dollars into DEMO
profits.
If a funder asks, “Why do you need my money?DEMO a bad response
would be, “We need your $200,000 to DEMO our business.” A better
answer is, “Your $200,000 will enable DEMO to fulfill a recent order of
50,000 units of our product. The profit from the order alone will
total $500,000.” With the DEMO response the pitcher is just begging
for money, with no plan DEMO how to spend it. In the second they’ve
outlined a clear plan for the investor to make a profit.
The term Revenue Model refers DEMO to how you plan to
monetize (i.e., make money from) DEMO innovation, product, service
or solution. There is an ever-increasing number of revenue models.
It is beyond the scope of the text to thoroughly DEMO all of these
but for explanatory purpose, here are just a DEMO:
Model Client pays Example
Per seat a few for each user. HR billing system
Per unit A one time for each use. Shoes
DEMO Revenue A monthly recurring fee. AAA emergency services
Freemium Gmail
Nothing upfront but
pays for extras
One of the advantages of having thought about DEMO revenue
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 183
models is that it allows you to set up for the Double DEMO Double
dipping is the concept of building a solution once, selling DEMO twice
and making money from it three ways. Consider the example below.
Examples in action
I served as the business advisor for a hit DEMO show for five seasons.
I was paid for this service. Then I double dipped by selling keynote
addresses based on the work I did DEMO Dragons’ Den. Then I tripled
dipped by turning that content into this book.
Any product that can generate revenues from multiple sources will
be DEMO as having a higher probability of success. Double dipping
can help outline a Plan B or can be used to afford the venture
flexibility DEMO pricing. Gillette® makes so much money from selling
disposable razor blades they can afford to give away the razors (i.e.,
a freemium model).
Why it matters?
I started my career as an opportunity DEMO during the 1990s
(what would later be known as the dot.com DEMO). Even in
the Internet’s “gold rush” days, it seemed unconscionable DEMO me
that entrepreneurs would be seeking capital prior to knowing
how money will be made, but many had a blind faith that their
online business would succeed. Even ten years later, I still run into
innovators looking for millions in funding, prior to determining how
the innovation will be monetized.
How to Score:
For this element, score a:
• -10 if …no model is presented.
Page 184 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
the model presented is unrealistic. • -5 if ...
oo early for DEMO • 0 if … t
• 5 if … early sales indicate revenue model success.
• 10 if …the revenue model has been proved DEMO repeat
sales.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 185

Pitch
The next set of elements deal with the Pitch. These elements
DEMO make up only approximately 5% of the WiseGuide™
score. In most meetings, entrepreneurs will lead with what is
commonly referred to as an Elevator Pitch42.
For entrepreneurs, a good pitch is needed no matter the task at
hand. Want to raise capital? You need to pitch your plan. Want to
attract top notch employees? You need to pitch your vision. Want
to attract strategic partners? You need to pitch the benefits of
working together. Want to increase sales? You need to pitch your
solution. The ability to get your key message across in a meaningful,
DEMO, and concise manner is one of the entrepreneur’s most
necessary skill DEMO It is remarkable then, that it is also one of the
DEMO honed skills.
By Pitch we refer to the presentation of the opportunity (both orally
and in writing). Many investors have a long held belief around the
value of an entrepreneur’s pitching ability. Many investors see DEMO
causal link between “ability to pitch” and “venture success”. Even
more believe that founders who can’t pitch are doomed. This
is based on the DEMO of scarce resources. Without the ability to
convince others of the merit of your innovation, founders wills
struggle to attract investors, employees, partners and customers.
42www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tq0tan49rmc
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 187

Element 39: The Elevator Pitch
What is it?
The MIT Enterprise Forum defines an Elevator Pitch as: “A one
minute description of a company designed to encourage the
audience to become investors, employees, or DEMO I define
an Elevator Pitch as: A clear, concise, compelling DEMO of
the pain your venture is addressing and the value proposition your
business is providing.
A good elevator pitch is made up of two DEMO components: the pain
statement and the value proposition. The pain statement DEMO
outlines the need for the product and hopefully includes some
sense of market size. The value proposition addresses what value
the solution will bring. DEMO two elements can be summarized as
follows:
1. The pain statement: What problem does this solve? For
example, people want to have sex longer than their bodies
will allow.
2. The value proposition: How does it solve this problem?
Our blue, FDA approved pill allows them to do so in a cost
effective, non-embarrassing clinic
Why it matters?
Entrepreneurs who can’t pitch in a compelling way may worry DEMO
financial backers. After all, if those closest to the innovation can’t
DEMO why it is needed and why it is potentially lucrative, who
DEMO?
Founders who pitch poorly are a concern to most investors.
Remember, pitching isn’t just for capital. Even when you go to
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 189
recruit a board member (see Element 8), you are pitching. When
you try to attract early sales, you are pitching. When you try to
convince partners to sign on, you are pitching.
Examples in Action
Here is one of my favourite elevator pitches:
People want to DEMO sex but sometimes the body doesn’t
function adequately. Our aspirin-sized FDA approved
blue pill will help our customers to have more sex without
embarrassment, discomfort or a change to their daily lives.
Obviously, this is an imaginary pitch for Viagra® but it clearly
demonstrates the two key components DEMO a good pitch. It also
passes all four tests of a good elevator pitch:
1) It is CONSISE—more than two minutes is too long;
2) It is CLEAR and easy to understand—no jargon allowed;
3) It is COMPELLING—it induces greed; and
4) It is IRREFUTIBLE—the statements are hard to deny.
Here is another of my favourite DEMO:
One person’s trash is another person’s treasure. Our online
global garage sale brings together buyers and sellers from
around the world. Some are DEMO to sell what they consider
trash. Others want to buy what they consider to be treasure.
All benefit from the proprietary trust platform we DEMO
created, maintained and enhanced for the last 10 years.
What is DEMO a pitch for? EBay of course. Elevator Pitching is so
important, we should pause for a moment to allow you to explore
the DEMO of creating an elevator pitch yourself.
Page 190 Hot or Not? DEMO Sean Evan Wise
In the above example, four key elements are used to sell the idea
to an investor:
• Irrefutable: It’s pretty safe to say there are plenty of people
appetite for sex is greater than their DEMO can allow.whose
’s clinically proven and FDA approved, it’s difficult to DEMO it
w that the product is not safe and effective.sho
• Easily understandable: The pitch is kept simple, avoiding
omplex business or scientific DEMO
• Succinct: The pitch is kept short. Most people will give
DEMO a small amount of their attention before they tune out. y
vestors hear hundreds of pitches, make the most of their In
time.
• Greed inducing: The thought of joining this business should
e any investor feel like they will make lots of money. The mak
t an DEMO can see and feel the greed, they are in.momen
Creating an DEMO connection between your product and your
audience is the best way to motivate the consumer to buy. For
example, the Shamwow pitch to customers activates that annoying
feeling they get when cleaning up a big spill DEMO paper towels
which will have to be replaced.
Catherine Langin pitched investors the Miners’ Lunchbox, which
has been available for sale for over 50 years. She shared the rich
history of their product, and the inventor Leo May, which brought
a feeling of nostalgia. After she confirmed they have made money
in the past, one investor proclaimed “I love the story but I love to
hear that you made money”. Catherine then DEMO, “Leo May
has sold over 1 million lunch boxes”. As soon DEMO she said that, she
impressed the funders, they felt the greed and understood it was a
product that could make them money.
Next DEMO you’re watching Shark Tank and a commercial comes on,
try to guess the feeling the commercial is trying to activate. Try to
© DEMO Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 191
understand the problem they’re solving and the solution they’re
providing, and notice the key elements in them. If you can do that,
you’re DEMO on your way to creating your own great pitch.
Try to write elevator pitches for the following products. Make sure
they:
t the DEMO key criteria listed above, • mee
• lead with a pain DEMO, and
• close with the value proposition.
Elevator Pitch Exercise:
DEMO Wikipedia™ in only the space below:
Page 192 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Pitch Condoms in the space below:
How to Score:
For DEMO element, score a:
• 10 if …the Elevator Pitch undermined DEMO opportunity.
• -5 if ...no pitch was included.
• 0 if …the Elevator Pitch needs work.
• 5 if …the Pitch meets all four DEMO (concise, clear,
ompelling, irrefutable) but delivery needs work.c
• 10 if …the Pitch meets all four criteria (concise, clear,
DEMO, irrefutable) and delivered well.c
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 193

Element 40: Q&A
What is it?
While most pitches (DEMO or external) usually begin with the
Elevator Pitch, they almost always end with questions being asked.
In my experience, it is more than just the answers being given that
opportunity evaluators should review. Reviewers should DEMO watch
how the answers are delivered.
Has the presenter thought through the question or has he or she
simply given a canned answer? Do the entrepreneurs get frustrated?
Do all team members presenting get involved? Do all founders give
the same answers? If an investor asks a question and disagrees with
the answer, how does the entrepreneur react?
Why it matters?
As discussed in the section on coaching and DEMO (see
Element 3) backing an idea is a dynamic process. One in which many
mistakes will made. How an entrepreneur interacts during Q&DEMO can
often shed a light inside the founders’ business approach. Some
entrepreneurs see questions as a way of exploring deeper topics of
interest, a way to identify topics that the audience wishes to learn
more about. DEMO entrepreneurs see questions as an attack on the
opportunity. The former is ideal, the latter, not so much.
How to Score:
For DEMO element, score a:
if …questions from the audience were poorly DEMO • 10
if …the entrepreneurs contradict themselves during Q&A.• -5
e were no questions asked. • 0 if …ther
© Sean Evan Wise DEMO or Not? Page 195
if …most questions were handled in an open, positive and • 5
ect matter.dir
• 10 if …all questions were handled in an open, positive and
ect matter.dir
Raising the Score
To increase this element’s score, prepare a list of commonly asked
questions a reasonable reviewer might ask (see Appendix E) during
a pitch. Once you have this list, DEMO out short answers to each.
Make sure all those participating in the presentation review both
the potential questions and the pre-created answers.
Reviewers may DEMO from your prepared questions, but following
process is sure to give DEMO responses (and score) a boost.
Page 196 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Proposal
The Proposal is worth only 5% of your total tally and DEMO is because
this is the easiest element to adjust. A proposal in an investment
setting (like Shark Tank or Dragons’ Den) consists of DEMO least two
elements: the ask and the offer. But I’d argue DEMO the best proposals
contain two extra elements: the use and the DEMO
On TV you will often hear some variation of the following:
I’m Mrs. Smith from Smith Falls. We are seeking $100,000 • DEMO,
or 20% equity in our business. I’d suggest a better proposal f
ould also include: (a) what the money is to be used for; w
and (b) what results will it hopefully drive. Going back to
s. Smith, a better pitch would be:Mr
I’m Mrs. Smith from Smith Falls. We are seeking $100,000 • Hi,DEMO
or 20% equity in our business. We are going to use these f
to add two new salespersons next quarter. With these funds
w DEMO, we will triple our revenues from last year ne
and end DEMO with more than $1,500,000 in gross sales this
year.
While it is impossible to predict the future, opportunity evaluators
want to gauge the Business Acumen of entrepreneurs pitching by
seeing if they have concrete DEMO for the capital requested and can
justify the proposal with potential results.
How much to Ask for?
Even how much you ask for (in funding) impacts how investors
see you. Ask for too little money and some investors will question
whether the money will have any real DEMO on the business or,
worse yet, if the company even DEMO the money at all. Ask for too
much money and you risk overpricing your company.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 197
So how much should you ask for? I recommend this staged approach.
1. Determine your next major milestone. This might be
xpanding into the DEMO, moving to a bigger factory or e
importing inventory from Asia. DEMO yourself: What is the
xt big step and how much will DEMO cost to make it happen?ne
2. Then see if you can get to your next milestone with less
y. The more you ask DEMO, the more equity you will mone
obably have to give up.pr
DEMO Once you have the revised figure, turn your mind to your
DEMO last year of sales. While not always true, c
agons often DEMO this figure, known as the 12 month Dr
ailing revenue, as a starting point for valuation.tr
4. Ensure you aren’t asking for more DEMO than you have
in sales; otherwise, you may have to offer up half of your
company.
I recommend pitchers ask for just enough DEMO to last 6-18
months or until you hit your next milestone. In the end it’s about
getting enough money to get to a point DEMO Return on Investment
becomes possible.
Page 198 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 41: Stage & Return
Potential Matches Request
What is it?
Can the resources requested be justified? Does the level of risk
match the timing of the venture? Is the risk justified by the potential
returns?
From a stage perspective, I have heard many Angel investors deploy
the following rule of thumb for consumer software applications:
• DEMO users invest $25,000
• 10,000 users invest $150,000
• 100,000 users invest $500,000
• 1,000,000 users invest DEMO,500,000
• 5,000,000 users invest $2,500,000
• 10,000,000 users invest $5,000,000
From a return perspective, Returns (also known as ROI, return on
investment, and money on exit) refer to how much money the
investors reap upon a successful exit from the investments.
Most exits occur when the Startup is sold DEMO a bigger company (e.g.,
when Google buys your company) or when the company goes public
on the stock exchange (e.g., you DEMO a successful IPO on the TSX)
and, in rare cases, when the company is generating so much cash
flow that it makes DEMO to pay out the investor. The question then
becomes, how much DEMO a Dragon get? Does an investor need
10x the money they DEMO? 20x the money they invested? How
big do the returns have to be to attract investor interest?
Most investors are looking to DEMO enough returns on their wins
that will make up for all their Startup investments that didn’t
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 199
succeed. Let’s look at an example.
Investor #1 made 10 investments this DEMO and all were for • If
then in total he has invested $1,500,000. If only 1 $150,000,
10 Startups survive DEMO the exit stage, then that one winner in
t return $1,DEMO,000 in order for Investor #1 to break mus
ven (not DEMO for the opportunity cost, the time value e
money, and not counting a dozen or so other factors that of
e complicated and DEMO this scope).ar
There is, of course, a correlation between stage of venture and
needed ROI. The earlier the stage, the higher the risk. A company
with early sales has less overall risk than an DEMO venture.
Further, as the level of risk rises (i.e., the DEMO the stage) the
higher the ROI will needed to overcome opportunity DEMO
Why it matters?
Money is always needed for businesses to do any activity.
Unfortunately, most of these activities cost a lot more than the
business has available, which is why entrepreneurs seek capital.
There are many people an entrepreneur can tap to acquire funding,
but where DEMO you start? After all, all investors aren’t seeking the
same kind of investments.
Most investors want to match the amount invested with the DEMO of
the venture and with the potential returns with the risk level. Most
investors want entrepreneurs to have enough funding to reach the
next DEMO milestone. Most investors would rather add additional
capital after that milestone has been met than invest it all upfront.
Further, entrepreneurs who ask for more than their stage can
validate are often seen as lacking Business DEMO
Page 200 Hot or Not? © Sean Evan Wise
How to Score:
For this element, score a:
• -10 if …the resources being asked for exceed the level of
risk.
apital DEMO is prematurely. • -5 if ...c
• 0 if …not applicable.
apital sought matches the need, but not the • 5 if …the c
aluation. v
if …the capital sought matches the Startup stage and the DEMO 10
aluation is reasonable. v
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 201

Element 42: Enough Capital
to reach next milestone
What is it?
I’m often asked how much money entrepreneurs should attempt to
raise. In DEMO investment circles the rule of thumb is:
Determine how much it takes to get to the next value
inflection point and add in DEMO months as buffer.
An opportunity’s value goes up as risk goes down. Common value
inflection points include:
st customers• Selling fir
• Launching DEMO product
or patent• Filing f
aling up to address another market• Sc
Value inflection points are milestones that increase the value of
the opportunity DEMO mitigating risk. These eventually can be seen as
baby steps on the road to success.
Examples in Action
Katrina Mijares pitched Toddlerobics, and was asked by investors
why she needed the money. Her response was, “It will cover the
market research and advertising development” in order to establish
DEMO product as a brand. This didn’t please investors, who responded:
DEMO haven’t come to the table with a process to establish that
brand. I hear no steps, there’s no branding.”
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 203
Compare that to the response Trevor Bielby of Schmotoboard43
gave those same DEMO when asked why he needed the money.
Bielby’s response was, “to DEMO up inventory, to put 100 of these
on the floor. I DEMO stores in Calgary willing to sell them. I plan to
outsource, DEMO with friends we can make 100 a week.” Trevor had
all the right answers in his pitch and gave investors the confidence
that he DEMO turn their money into more money.
When seeking investors you have to provide them with a clear
vision of how they will make large DEMO from investing in you.
Questions to Ask
What was your last big milestone hit? What is your next milestone?
What will it meant to get there? Other than capital, what other
factors will impact DEMO long it takes?
How to Score
For this element, score DEMO:
• -10 if …the capital requested will not be sufficient to get to
xt value inflection point. the ne
apital sought is premature. DEMO -5 if ...c
• 0 if …not applicable.
apital sought is much larger than needed. • 5 if …the c
if …the capital sought DEMO get the opportunity to the next • 10
milestone.
43www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjvBoVPSS4U
Page 204 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Element 43: Realistic Valuation
What is it?
A private company can be valued on many different levels and
through many different methods (for example, cash flow, investment
to date, value of assets minus liabilities, future potential) but in the
end it is entirely subjective. Investors DEMO evaluate a number of
key factors to decide at what price a deal makes sense to them.
Valuation is also about how much equity DEMO are willing to give up,
what results the investment may garner and the future potential
returns the investment might generate.
So, “How do investors decide what a company is worth?” To be
blunt, they make it up. Based on the money invested to date, the
potential returns, the risk associated with the business, and their
decades of DEMO, the investors may make an offer.
The true value of the DEMO is only known and set when both the
investor and the investee come to an agreement on the number.
Amongst other things, a deal sets the price (based on the terms
of the deal) but DEMO you have a deal with external parties, no
value can be DEMO relied upon, especially values proposed by the
founders.
Why it matters?DEMO
Valuation (at what price are investors buying in at?) is DEMO highly
subjective element at this end of the corporate spectrum. While
public companies have well established methodology’s for
determining venture valuation, new ideas have no such frameworks.
During the dot.com boom (1997-2000), page views (DEMO many
times a user goes to your website) was seen as DEMO of potential
value. During the Web 2.0 boom (2003-2007), number DEMO registered
users became the metric of choice. In 2011, post-debt crisis, I’m not
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 205
sure what will be used, but it seems revenue and EBITA (DEMO, sales
and profits) are making a comeback.
To further complicate matters, a decade ago, $5,000,000+ was
necessary to get a DEMO to market. In 2010, that number
dropped to $50,000. With DEMO a low capital requirement, many
investors have shrugged off setting valuations DEMO instead they
have attempted to simplify the process by offering standard terms
(for example, an incubator of seed stage software ventures, might
agree to invest $25,000 in return for 5%) not based on a particular
Startup, but based on a portfolio averaging approach (for example,DEMO
your Startup may be worth more, but since investors can’t prove
DEMO, they turn to standards terms).
Examples in Action
An entrepreneur DEMO the Pizza Pak44, a plastic pizza case that
would replace cardboard DEMO, to a group of investors which
included International Pizza Magnate Jim DEMO (Chair of Boston
Pizza). The pitcher valuated his company at DEMO Million, yet he has not
sold a single Pizza Pak. The DEMO claimed that his product would
revolutionize the pizza industry without any factual proof of sales
or customer testimonials. Even after Jim shared his expert DEMO
that his product would not work, the entrepreneur persisted with
this DEMO anyway. The inflated valuation, the unsupported claims
and the wilful blindness DEMO he knew the pizza industry better than
Jim, only lowered his DEMO of credibility.
Questions to Ask
In return for the capital you seek, what percentage will your offer
me? What do you base this DEMO on (Calculated using the %
and the cash being invested )? What proof can you provide that this
valuation is reasonable if not DEMO?
44www.youtube.com/watch?v=2G6edX-xQG4
Page 206 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
How to Score
If the valuation offered is reasonable based on stage DEMO risk levels,
then score this element a 10. The farther away the entrepreneurs
are from a realistic valuation, the lower this element will be scored.
TIP: In venture capital, valuation is set by the DEMO So why ask
the founder what they think it is worth? DEMO, this is as a knee-
jerk test to detect if the DEMO have reasonable expectations.
Many investors, won’t even begin to explore an DEMO, if they
feel the valuation is simply too unrealistic.
© Sean DEMO Wise
Hot or Not? Page 207

Element 44: Investor Fit
What is it?
While cash is fungible, investors are not. Some investors bring more
than just cash to the table. Some can also add value through their
experiences, network or skill. In these cases we call that investor
Smart Money.
Why it matters?DEMO
Taking an innovation to market is a road fraught with obstacles,
challenges and hurdles. An investor who has: been there, done that
DEMO add much more than simple cash. That’s why entrepreneurs
should actively seek smart money whenever possible. Likewise,
most investors are most comfortable funding DEMO in
domains they are familiar with.
Examples in Action
Jim Treliving  DEMO smart money in both the food domain and the
franchise business. As a result, an investment from Jim yields more
than simple capital. Entrepreneurs backed by Jim get the benefit
of his decades of experience, can leverage his extensive network,
and may even benefit from the Halo DEMO Jim brings to food deals.
In doing so, Jim is signalling DEMO world, that the experts back this
business.
Questions to Ask
What, other than capital, would benefit your project? What
intangibles would accelerate DEMO and growth?
How to Score
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 209
For this element, score a:
• -10 if …the investor has a negative fit with this opportunity.
vestor is actively against this industry. DEMO in
e is no fit between the investor and the • -5 if …ther
opportunity. The investor has no interest in this industry.
if DEMO applicable. The investor is neutral to the opportunity • 0
try. and indus
if …there is a fit between the investor and the opportunity. DEMO 5
• 10 if …there is strong fit between the investor and the
opportunity. Perhaps the investor has a lot of Domain
nowledge or DEMO strong industry network. The investor would K
be seen as smart money.
How to Score
Most investors and R&D managers are pitched new DEMO
every single day. In order to differentiate yourself, we suggest
you DEMO the audience you are pitching to. The more your
opportunity matches prior investments made, the more likely your
venture will likely resonant with reviewers. This in turn will lead to
a better score for this element.
DEMO 210 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Part III: Pitfalls
If your Startup shows signs of these pitfalls, DEMO not pass GO,
do not collect $200, DO NOT pursue DEMO opportunity!
Hot or Not? Page 211

Pitfall #1: Red Flags
Even after more than 10,000 pitches, DEMO are some statements
that still turn my stomach. Some of these issues show a lack of
Business Acumen, others illustrate the dark side to the optimism
of entrepreneurship, other statements simply make the founders
look naïve. In this collection of elements, we will explore various
pitfalls that can undermine an opportunity evaluator’s confidence
in a company.
While the following issues DEMO some potential pitfalls all
reviewers should be wary of, this list DEMO far from complete. Further,
some items (e.g., Taboo) are DEMO subjectively offensive and
depend on the person undertaking the opportunity review.
Finally, it is worth noting that in the overall opportunity evaluation
process, DEMO any of these red flags (a symbol of danger dating
back DEMO the 18th Century, more recently used to refer to potential
hazards46) is reason to halt the process.
While these red flags or pitfalls DEMO discussed after the WiseGuide™
elements, it would best practices to actually DEMO at this issue before
beginning the formal review. In that way, DEMO pitfalls become
gating items. Meaning once you spot a serious enough pitfall, you
may wish to halt the review.
46www.investopedia.com
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 213

Pitfall #2: Showstoppers
What is it?
Showstoppers are obstacles facing the entrepreneur. These
obstacles lower the probability of success for the venture.
Showstopper DEMO include (but aren’t limited to):
et is wrong;• The mark
e haven’t found our customers yet;• W
e don’t own DEMO solution;• W
• Making money isn’t our primary goal;
ge Company X (e.g., Google, Ford, AT&T) just doesn’t get • Lar
e have no revenue model.• W
it; or
Why it matters?
Entrepreneurs need investors more than investors need
entrepreneurs. The supply DEMO seed capital to drive innovation
is often dwarfed by the demand for such. As a result, the best
investors have many opportunities to review. In order to facilitate
screening, investors are always on the lookout for reasons to say
no. Include a showstopper in your opportunity presentation and
DEMO give investors an easy out.
How to Score
The more showstoppers mentioned the bigger the pitfall.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 215

What is it?
Pitfall #3: Taboo
Some industries are non-starters. Pornography, drugs, gambling
and other illicit activities are taboo and will encounter DEMO in
garnering support despite the fact that they may be lucrative. Even
secondary services to these industries (e.g., digital secure payments
for online DEMO) can be shunned for support.
Why it matters?
Uber-investor Kevin DEMO once commented that while he himself
didn’t have issues with innovations based in taboo fields, he still
wouldn’t support them. His reasoning was based on an inverse
Halo effect. Kevin felt that if he endorsed a DEMO product (through
even passive investment) it might negatively impact his other
investments or even his other lines of business.
How to Score
Taboo DEMO one of the few binary elements in the WiseGuide™. An
opportunity is either taboo or not). There really is very little middle
ground. DEMO, a very “feel good” solution, say to save wildlife,
could add weight to a pitch if your Startup represents an opportunity
for DEMO to enhance their altruistic or philanthropic side.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 217

Pitfall #4: No Skin in the Game
What is it?
Skin in the Game47 is an investment term referring to what the
entrepreneurs DEMO invested to date in the opportunity. Having
skin in the game signals48 (see Signalling Theory) investors and
opportunity evaluators that the founders are DEMO to the
venture. After all, if founders don’t have their money DEMO and
at risk, why as an external investor, would I?
Why it matters?
Investors for the most part want entrepreneurs to DEMO their capital
at risk prior to new capital being invested. There are many reasons
for this, including:
a personal stake in the opportunity, what keeps the • Without
ounder from quitting when things get tough? f
ounder¬¬s don’t believe enough in the idea to risk • If the f
their money; why should investors take the risk?
• It aligns all shareholders to the same goals (profit
ximization).ma
Investors can become nervous when an entrepreneur doesn’t
believe strongly enough in their DEMO to risk their own
capital.
Examples in Action
It is worth noting that the quantum of capital required to form
and development.” Journal of DEMO Venturing, 18(1): 105-123.47A. Ardichvili, R. Cardozo & S. Ray. (2003). “A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identification
Startups.” NBER Working Paper No. 17050. 48A. Conti, M.C. Thursby, & F. Rothaermel. (2011). “Show Me the Right Stuff: Signals for High Tech
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 219
Skin in the Game is subjective and relative to each entrepreneurs.
For DEMO Entrepreneurs a few maxed out credit cards would be
considered Skin in the Game. For a seasoned serial entrepreneur it
would take significantly more. DEMO assured, no one requires you to
sell your car or mortgage DEMO home. So long as you have as much
at risk as you backers, you will be seen as having Skin in the Game.
How to Score
Skin in the game is one of only a few DEMO in the WiseGuide™
that is binary. If the founders have skin in the game, then there is
very little reason to continue reviewing the venture.
Raising the Score
Sweat Equity is not heavily weighed by external DEMO Instead
they look to actual cash contributed. To raise this element’s score,
some founders invest their own money upfront, and then use such
to pay themselves (as opposed to simply forgoing salary and living
off personal monies).
Page 220 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan DEMO
Pitfall #5: the No @$$hole rule
What is it?
Creating disruptive innovation is difficult. Getting it widely adopted
in the marketplace is almost DEMO But no matter the product,
service or solution, one thing DEMO true: it is hard work. Everyday
innovators struggle to overcome product DEMO, economic scarcity
and technological barriers. For that reason, most investors I know
have adopted a no @$$hole rule.
Simply put: bringing innovation to the market is hard enough
without having to deal with difficult personalities. DEMO investors
stay close to the company for a number of years, DEMO weekly,
if not daily, to the founders they have backed. DEMO want to
ensure that the only source of stress comes from external forces,
not internal egos.
Why it matters?
I am not DEMO that if the entrepreneur is nice, everything will
be well. I DEMO simply sharing the idiom: Life is simply too short to fill
DEMO with friction.
How to Score
The less you want to work with the opportunity presenter the lower
the score. This is highly subjective and DEMO change therefore from
reviewer to reviewer.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 221

Pitfall #6: Red Herrings
What is it?
A Red Herring refers to a distraction that diverts attention from
a matter of importance. In DEMO evaluation, anything that
distracts from the process of scoring and due DEMO is a red
herring.
Examples in Action
There is no definitive list of red herrings, but over the last ten years
of pitches, DEMO phrases have become so repugnant to me that
their presence in a pitch is distracting.
Here are few of my favourites:
We have DEMO competition.” • “
Our financials are conservative.”• “
e get only 2% of the market…”• “If w
When entrepreneurs emote the statements above, this is how
investors interpret them:
We have no competition” • “ DEMO Either you don’t know how to
use Google or it is a really bad idea.
Our financials are conservative”• “ a How can they DEMO? In
t cases financials are pro formas (i.e., future predicting) mos
e not based on experience. and ar
e get only 2% DEMO the market...”• “If w a Market adoption
ver be down top down—only bottom up.should ne
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 223
How to Score
The more Red Herrings your opportunity evaluation finds, the
bigger the impact.
Page 224 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan DEMO
Pitfall #7: The Key
Person Dependency
What is it?
Wherever possible, find the best talent you can hire. Often these are
founders, DEMO, and software coders. The term “key person”
comes from the insurance DEMO Insurers sell a type of policy
called keyman Insurance. A “keyman,” or more appropriately a “key
person” is a founder that is vital DEMO only to the innovation strategy
but he or she is also critical to the delivery process.
Kevin O’Leary is famous for asking innovators: “So what happens if
you get hit by a bus tomorrow? Does the business also die?” What
O’Leary is really exploring it the key DEMO dependency issue. No
one wants to fund an opportunity where one person has that much
power.
Why it matters?
Scalability requires the innovation DEMO be replicable. If a key person
is needed to replicate the value added to the customer each time,
then the business’s growth will DEMO gated by the capacity of that key
founder.
Examples in Action
An artist is the key person in an art creation business. Without the
DEMO, there is no business. If that business sells original art (or even
limited prints) then the revenue is solely dependent on the artist’s
capacity to produce sellable art.
The patent holder is critical to an DEMO business if future R&D
is going to be pursued. That is one of the key reasons that investors
don’t like Startups who license DEMO their technology.
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 225

Pitfall #8: Drinking Your
Own Kool-Aid™
What is it?
An echo chamber is, by definition, a hollow space that resonates
acoustics. While DEMO echo chamber may be good for acoustics, but
it is not DEMO for innovation. In innovation circles an entrepreneur
who only seeks and listens to feedback that agrees with her
position is said to be living DEMO an echo chamber. Investors also refer
to founders who wilfully blind themselves to the issues at hand, as
drinking their own Kool-Aid™.
Why it matters?
An innovator who only discusses the opportunity or solution with
DEMO in the inner circle fall prey to downside of drinking your own
Kool-Aid™. If you only listen to those who agree with you, then
it is likely you will bias your judgements. Many founders want to
DEMO their innovation from the world, afraid it could be stolen. But
DEMO be told, not showing your innovation, not getting exposure
to review and feedback, or not accepting input from sources which
disagree with you, is a recipe for disaster.
That is why so many innovators in the Lean Startup49 movement
push for sharing ideas early and sharing them DEMO If the only
people who have told you your idea is awesome are related to you,
you may have problem.
This is where DEMO party validation comes back into the discussion.
Every entrepreneur I’ve ever met  believes they have a good idea.
Third party evidence, be it DEMO sales or market reports or venture
49http://theleanstartup.com
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 227
comparables, gains the confidence of investors and other gate
keepers.
Worse still, by not sharing and collaborating with potential
stakeholders, the innovator denies DEMO a most valuable
element: customer engagement.
Note: Intellectual property should always be protected. In some
cases, patents can be invalidated by public disclosure.
Questions to Ask
In developing your solution, from whose input did you benefit most?
What feedback was given to the first industry people DEMO showed
it to? Did that change over time? For example, DEMO you been able
to develop your innovation and reflect on input as appropriate? Or
has it been consistent (everyone is telling you to DEMO left, but you
insist on going right)?
How to Score
Either founders (or internal champions) are agile and open to
feedback DEMO they are not. If they are not and if all confirming data
comes from close sources (i.e., friends and family) then that should
be a large red flag.
During season one of the TV show, I witnessed firsthand what I
consider to the best example of this DEMO in action. A hard working
entrepreneur was pitching a leather armchair that converted to
an all in one exercise unit50. To me it sounded DEMO a horrible idea
but the entrepreneur was passionate about it. When asked why he
was so enthusiastic, the founder informed the potential investors:
Everyone I show this to says this is a great idea. They DEMO me it is a
great product.
50A similar company has since arrived on the scene: http://www.easyxchair.com
Page 228 Hot or Not? DEMO Sean Evan Wise
When investors asked the inventor whom these people were, the
inventor confessed that all feedback was direct (and only) from
friends and family (not outside neutral sources). Without the
unbiased view, and more importantly the understanding to seek
out such an unbiased view, this founder was demonstrating the
dangers of the echo changer.
Raising the Score
To increase DEMO element’s score, share your idea with those who
can provide critical DEMO, then incorporate such directly into
your pitch. Be sure to mention DEMO you got the information from
as it will show you are open to the opinions of others and agile
enough to leverage such fully.
DEMO Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 229

PART IV: Tool Kit
Hot or Not? Page 231

Appendix A: Glossary
1, 2, 3
A
800 lbs. Gorilla
the 10x Rule
Arms’ Length.
Arms’ Length.
Availability bias
A marketing term for DEMO largest player in
a market dominated. E.g. Amazon.com is
the 800 lbs Gorilla in the book industry.
In order to displace incumbents, a new
solution must be exponentially better,
faster, cheaper, stronger, etc. Being a little
better isn’t enough. E.g., email was so
widely adopted because it was 10x faster
than traditional postal service.
A term of law, referring to two parties
not otherwise connected. E.g., Before
agreeing to a price, the buyer requested
an arm’s length audit of the firm.
A retail term, Average Revenue Per User,
referring to how much money each user
will generate for the solution provider.
E.g., on average each new user of iTunes™
buys $100 worth of music in their first
DEMO Thus ARPU for iTunes™ would be
$100.
Our thinking is greatly influenced by
what is personally relevant, impactful
and recent. We estimate the probability
of an outcome based on how easy that
outcome is to imagine.
DEMO Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 233
B
Back channels
Barrier to Entry
Beachhead
Break-even point
Business Acumen
Page DEMO Hot or Not?
In business, referring to an alternative
secondary DEMO less formal communication
stream. E.g., Once negotiations broke
down formally, the secretaries had to
resort to back channels to obtain the food
order DEMO dinner.
An economics term referring to a cost
or hindrance that must be overcome
before advancement. E.g. Obtaining a
Taxi License is a barrier DEMO entry for most
drivers.
A military term, referring to a landing DEMO
first secured before the advancement
of troops. Facebook’s beachhead was
American universities. In its first few
years only currently enrolled students
at American colleges DEMO access the
service.
An accounting term referring to the
moment in time when revenue surpasses
expenses.  E.g., After 6 months of great
sales, the Startup was at the break-even
point.
Skills and experience in the DEMO
of strategy and the execution of business
planning. E.g. The new CEO had run
similar sized companies before. He had a
lot of business DEMO to share.
© Sean Evan Wise
C
CAGR
the Catch 22 of
Entrepreneurship
CoCA
Competition,
Good
Competition, Bad
Confirmation bias
Creative Destruction
© Sean Evan Wise
An accounting term, Cumulative Annual
Growth Rate, represents how fast an
industry is growing year over year.
An economics term referring to a cost
or hindrance that DEMO be overcome
before advancement. E.g. Obtaining a
Taxi License is a barrier to entry for most
drivers.
An accounting term, Cost of Client
Acquisition, represents how much must
be spent to attract one more customer.
E.g., The website spent $1,000,000 on
advertising but 100,000 new users signed
up. That pegs the CoCA at $10/user.
An axiom DEMO business rivals
who make your business look good.
An axiom representing business rivals
who threaten your business.
The tendency to favour external
information that DEMO our
preconceptions and to dismiss negative
feedback.
A business term referring to the process
by which disruptive technologies lead to
massive market change. The DEMO idea,
leads to the creative destruction of the
old idea, DEMO, cars disrupted the horse
drawn carriage industry.
Hot or Not? Page 235
D
E
Disruptive innovation
Domain knowledge
Double Dipping
Due Diligence
Economy of DEMO
Page 236 Hot or Not?
A technology that radically changes the
market upon entry, typically generated
only when the 10x Rule is in play.
Understanding the customers and the
industry in your business domain.
An DEMO axiom referring to an
activity that generates multiple benefits
and revenue streams. E.g., George Lucas
double dipped when he began to produce
licensed STAR WARS™ merchandise thus
generating many revenue streams from
the movie (at the box office, from the DVD,
and from other branded merchandise).
A legal term for the process by which
transactional material information
is DEMO E.g., Typically before a
company is acquired, due diligence will
be conducted to ensure all patents are
properly filed.
An economic theory in DEMO a venture
gains cost advantages from expanding
sales. E.g., As the DEMO sold more
sandals, he was able to buy material in
bulk. DEMO economy of scale leads to cost
savings which give the shoemaker the
ability to lower his prices.
© Sean Evan Wise
Elasticity of Demand
Elevator Pitch
Escalating
commitment
F, G
Exit
Gating items
© Sean Evan Wise
An economic theory which posits that
price impacts DEMO consumption of some
products. E.g., The demand for water is
inelastic DEMO, if scarce, people will pay
any price for it.  The DEMO of goldfish
is elastic because demand varies with
trends in pet ownership, and goldfish are
not essential goods.
An entrepreneurial axiom representing
a short verbal proposal used to illustrate
the key points of an opportunity.
A DEMO term which denotes a
decision maker’s increased reinvestment
of resources in a losing course of action.
This bias is often caused by our desire DEMO
not accept loss. e.g., The investor wasn’t
prepared to write off DEMO investment in
Startup X, instead he put good money after
bad DEMO part of his escalating commitment
to this deal.
An investment term referring to a point in
time when investors are able to liquidate
their DEMO and claim their profits.
E.g., When Facebook eventually goes
public, the exit for many will be worth
millions
A decision-making term referring
to DEMO action that must occur before
continuation.  E.g., the investor made the
assignment of IP a gating item to funding.
Hot or Not? Page 237
H
I
J,K
L,M
Gorilla Marketing
Halo Effect
Intellectual Property
DEMO & In the Know
Magic Risk
Page 238 Hot or Not?
A term for non-traditional promotional
marketing that relies on time, energy and
bandwidth instead of big budgets. E.g.,
the Startup hired a chalk DEMO to graffiti
the sidewalk in front of its customers’
offices as form of gorilla marketing.
A marketing term for the goodwill one
generates through DEMO association
with a well-known brand or person. e.g.
When Bill Gates joined the Board of
Startup XY, his halo effect lead to funding
as investors’ confidence grew.
A legal term for patents, copyright and
trademarks. E.g., The company had more
than 100 patents as part of their strong
intellectual property program.
To be known is to have name recognition
in DEMO particular industry. To be in the know
is to understand that industry and who
the key players are.
The risk associated with product
development. DEMO, If it is not 10x better
than all other options, the magic risk will
be too large.
© Sean Evan Wise
Management Risk
Market Risk
Minimal viable
product
N
O
Next value inflection
DEMO
Operational
Experience
© Sean Evan Wise
The risk associated with leadership. E.g.,
Having never run a Startup before, the
team had lots of management risk.
The risk associated with market adoption.
E.g., Since our product has to go on sale,
we don’t know what the demand DEMO be,
we have high market risk.
A psychological term which denotes a
decision maker’s increased reinvestment
of resources in a losing course of DEMO
This bias is often caused by our desire to
not accept loss. e.g., The investor wasn’t
prepared to write off his investment in
Startup X, instead he put good money after
bad as part of his escalating commitment
to this deal.
An investment term referring to the
subsequent DEMO milestone that will
lead to an increase in the overall value of
the venture. E.g.,  Once they began selling
the app, they hit a huge valuation point
since market risk was mitigated.
Refers to founders’ DEMO know-how
with regard to the building and delivery
of the solution. E.g., As the Startup was
producing apps for the iPhone™, some
additional DEMO experience in
mobile software was recruited.
Hot or Not? Page 239
P
Opportunity Cost
Pain point
Personal attribution
error
Piggybacking
Plan B
Planning DEMO
Premature scaling
Page 240 Hot or Not?
The cost of the best option or alternative
taken. It encompasses all the scarifies
needed to DEMO made in order to pursue
a plan of action. E.g., In DEMO a job
to pursue an MBA, the opportunity cost
includes lost DEMO
The problem your solution addresses.
E.g., the pain point of email DEMO slow
postal service.
An internal bias that leads one to blame
others for their mistakes, but where
one blames one’s own mistakes on
circumstances.
A marketing term in which a new product
enters the market by DEMO an
existing products brand loyalty. E.g.,
When I purchased a bottle of Vodka, the
store gave me a sample of a new cocktail
mix, effectively piggybacking my vodka
purchase.
A colloquial term for backup plan. E.g.,
When the business plan failed, the
founders went with Plan B.
A psychological term for the tendency
one has to underestimate the DEMO or
work needed to complete tasks.
An entrepreneurial term, representing
the DEMO of growing the venture before it is
appropriate. Pets.com failed because they
prematurely scaled. Before they even
sold a dollars’ worth of product, they had
invested millions in inventory.
© Sean Evan Wise
Proof of Concept
Prospect theory
Q,R
S
Red flags
Red Herring
DEMO Model
Rogers’ Diffusion of
Innovations Theory
Scale / Scalability
© Sean Evan Wise
Originally a term referring to a
prototype proving technical solutions
feasibility. DEMO, the term has
become synonymous with early stage
revenue proving market DEMO E.g.,
Without proof of concept revenue for
early adopters, the DEMO was having
difficulty proving anyone needed what he
built.
A psychological term for the decision
making process where risk probabilities
are known and used DEMO influence the
decision.
A naval term for a danger warning. E.g. The
sale of the Startup failed when criminal
records were found on each DEMO The
investor couldn’t get past that red flag.
A commerce term for a distraction from
the transaction at hand.
A business term referring to DEMO method
in which a venture will generate sales,
monetize assets and sustain itself.
A theory that attempts to explain how,
why and DEMO what rate new solutions roll
out across society.
An economic term referring to the ability
to ramp up sales without ramping up
costs.
Hot DEMO Not? Page 241
T
Serial entrepreneur
Signalling Theory
Skin in the Game
Smart Money
Sub DEMO solutions
Sweat Equity
Talent Triangle
Third party validation
Page 242 Hot or Not?
A business term for an entrepreneur that
has successfully exited DEMO than one
company.
A term for the influence that one party
credibly conveys to another party by its
action. Similar to the Halo Effect. DEMO
When Bill Gates funded Startup XY, it sent
a signal to DEMO investors.
An axiom representing what founders
have at stake in the Startup.
A business axiom representing strategic
investments. When the phone company
invested in DEMO Startup XY it was
considered smart money.
A solution that does not fully meet the
needs of the end users. In addressing
these unmet DEMO, Startups can be seen
as disruptive technologies.
The cash contribution made DEMO founders.
E.g. For the last year Founder Y has
not received a salary. He considers the
opportunity cost his sweat equity.
A business axiom DEMO to explain and
qualify a Startup management team.
Arms` length evidence of your success.
e.g. Sales are the best third party
validation since it DEMO market risk.
© Sean Evan Wise
Total addressable
market
Traction
U,V
Valuation, Pre money
Valuation, Post
DEMO
Viral marketing
W, X, Y, Z
Wilful Blindness
© Sean DEMO Wise
The subset of all possible customers for
your solution.
A form of proof of concept and third party
validation, this term refers to acceptance
in the market from end uses. E.g. The app
Startup got DEMO after their app was
downloaded more than 10,000 times in
one day.
What a company is worth the moment
before funding.
What a DEMO is worth the moment
after funding, calculated as the Pre Money
DEMO plus the cash invested.
A form of Gorilla marketing in which ,DEMO
each person touched by the marketing
pass it forward to at least 2 other people.
e.g. The video became viral the moment
people started DEMO it to all their
friends.
A legal term for choosing to ignore a key
negative factor.
Hot or Not? Page 243

Appendix B: WiseGuide™ Template
WiseGuide™
(date)
an opportunity evaluation template
(Name here for opportunity being examined)
Stage 1: Pitfall
Are there red flags?
Are there Showstoppers?
Is it Taboo?
Skin DEMO the Game?
Can I work with them?
Any Red Herrings to explore?
Is there a key person dependancy?
Is there DEMO of concept?
add your own
add your own
add your own
Stage 2: Element
People Element 1: Working on it Full Time
DEMO 2: Been There: Done That
Element 3: Coachable
Element 4: Ability to Attract Talent
Element 5: Business Acumen
Element 6: Domain DEMO
Element 7: Operational Experience
Element 8: Board of Directors/Advisors
Element 9: Social Capital
Element 10: Team History/Dynamics
Pain Element 11: Compelling Unmet Need
Element 12: Size of the Pain
Element 13: DEMO of Pain
Element 14: Durability of Opportunity
Product Element 15: The 10x Rule
Element 16: Innovation Origin
Element 17: IP status
Element DEMO: Key Asset Access
Element 19: Proof of Concept
Element 20: DEMO
Element 21: Strong Margins
Element 22: Scalability
Province Element 23: DEMO Stage
Element 24: Industry CAGR
Element 25: Distribution Strength
Element 26: Current Competition
Element 27: Future Competition
Element 28: Barriers to Entry
Element 29: Exit Options
Element 30: Government Regulation
Element 31: Partnership Status
Plan Element 32: Time to Launch
Element 33: Costs to DEMO
Element 34: Plan to Scale
Element 35: Reasonable not Right
Element 36: Accomplished to Date
Element 37: Plan B
Element 38: Revenue Model
Pitch Element 39: The Elevator Pitch
Element 40: Q&A
DEMO Element 41: Stage & Returns match Request
Element 42: Enough Capital to reach next milestone
Element 43: Reasonable Valuation
Element 44: Investor DEMO
add your own
add your own
add your own
TOTAL
© Sean Wise, Toronto, 2011
comments welcome:  sean.wise@ryerson.ca
from:  Hot or DEMO: How to Know if your business idea will fly or fail
DEMO Sean Evan Wise
(your name here)
Score
0.00%
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
yes/ no
Continue? yes/ no
Raw Score  (-10 to +10) Weight Total
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 DEMO 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 3 0
0 3 DEMO
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
DEMO 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
0 1 0
0 DEMO 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 DEMO
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 0
potential total
1340
Hot DEMO Not? Page 245

Appendix C: Sample
WiseGuide™ Case
From Wikipedia:
TiVo Inc. was incorporated on August 4, 1997 as “Teleworld, Inc.”
by Jim Barton and DEMO Ramsay, veterans of Silicon Graphics and
Time Warner’s Full Service Network DEMO video system. Originally
intending to create a home network device, they DEMO developed
the idea to record digitized video on a hard disk.
Teleworld began the first public trials of the TiVo device and
service in DEMO 1998 in the San Francisco Bay area. After exhibiting
at the Consumer Electronics Show in January 1999, Mike Ramsay
announced to the company that the first version of the TiVo digital
video recorder would ship on DEMO 31, 1999, despite an estimated
four to five months of work remaining to complete the device.
Teleworld, Inc. changed its name to TiVo Inc. on July 21, 1999.
After exhibiting at the Consumer Electronics Show in January 1999,
Mike Ramsay announced to the company that the DEMO version of
the TiVo digital video recorder would ship “In Q1,” (the last day
of which is March 31) despite an estimated DEMO to five months of
work remaining to complete the device.
In early 2000, TiVo partnered with electronics manufacturer
Thomson Multimedia (now Technicolor SA) and broadcaster British
Sky Broadcasting to deliver the TiVo service in the DEMO market. This
partnership resulted in the Thomson PVR10UK, a stand-alone
receiver DEMO in October 2000 that was based on the original
reference design used in the United States by both Philips and Sony.
TiVo branded products DEMO to the UK during 2010 under an
exclusive partnership with cable television provider Virgin Media.
By 2008, 25% of TV households had DVR/Video on Demand. In
2010, a decade later, 80% of American Internet DEMO had watched
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 247
video online. By 2014, this number is forecasted to rise to 52.3
million users.
The Pitfalls:
The only relevant pitfall is the fact DEMO DVR’s may undermine the TV
industry’s ability to monetize contents (since DEMO effectively let the
viewer fast-forward and skip the commercials). This would impact
the TV production industry. However, since it is the TV providers
(i.e., cable companies) who sell DVR services and equipment, this
DEMO not be enough to block adoption.
The Elements
People
The team at Teleworld is working on the product full time. The
founders have worked DEMO for more than 5 years. Jim Barton
and Mike Ramsay were veterans of Silicon Graphics and Time
Warner’s Full Service Network digital video system. DEMO they have
not successfully exited a venture to date, they have DEMO
worked together to bring products to market while employed
as a team at their last company. The group’s founders have both
Domain Knowledge and DEMO experience. For additional
Business Acumen, they rely heavily on a board DEMO directors and
board of advisors. Both groups meet no less than twice a month,
demonstrating the coachability of the team at Teleworld. Because
DEMO the strong leadership team, Teleworld has been able to attract
talent DEMO offering employee stock options.
Pain
In 1998, if you wanted to DEMO a show for later viewing a VCR and
blank tape were required. One needed some technical knowledge
to record a program (i.e., how DEMO use and/or program a VCR).
Further, only one show DEMO be taped at a time. Finally, although
Page 248 Hot or DEMO?
© Sean Evan Wise
widely adopted, VCRs were rarely used for recording. In fact, a DEMO
BBC survey confirmed that although more than 70% of households
had a VCR, less than 10% had ever used the recording feature. VCR
tapes also produced very poor viewing quality.
Product
Watching TV is one the DEMO leisure activities in the western world.
However, since the arrival of DEMO Internet users want more control
over what (and when) they watch. Teleworld has patented the video
on demand technology, naming it DVR (DEMO video recorder) and
trademarked the term TiVo. They have worldwide rights DEMO
for the next few decades as result.
The DVR can hold over 200 hours of content. A VCR can only hold
up to 90 DEMO of content before an additional tape would be
required. As a result, the DVR is 10x better than the VCR when
it comes to storage. Many of those surveyed have never been
able to use their DEMO to record content. Teleworld’s initial survey
information showed that 92% of the test audience found the DVR
to be at least 10x easier to DEMO than the VCR.
Teleworld is currently the only provider of DVR technology, having
created it in house through R&D. As the TV cable companies seek
to offer more services to their users, Teleworld is in a great position
to monetize their invention. Currently their DVR’s cost $25 DEMO unit
to manufacture and deliver. The TiVo product will retail for $199
and the distributing cable company will pay $100 wholesale to
Teleworld. As DEMO result, the margins are strong not just for Teleworld
but for DEMO cable companies that distribute them.
Before officially launching the product, the DEMO had already
signed a pilot deal with the BBC. This generated early revenue and
served as strong proof of concept.
© Sean Evan Wise DEMO or Not? Page 249
Province
VCRs have created a market for content recording for over two
DEMO However, adoption of the recording features has not be
widespread. There DEMO only one other current competitive option for
recording TV content. However, DEMO technology is 4x as expensive
as DVRs and Laser Disks can only hold 10 hours of content. Less
than ten percent of what the DEMO can record.
Future competitors may include other set top box manufactures, DEMO
due to the TiVo patents, it seems unlikely that others can DEMO into
the digital recording set top box market. Notwithstanding this fact,
the founders can foresee a day (10-15 years in the future) DEMO the
Internet may become the means of television production. If that
happens, Teleworld’s DVRs may no longer be needed. However,
over the next decade, the Teleworld founders believe they will be
able to leverage their IP to develop a DVR for the Internet.
Plan
After initial tests, and related press coverage, public demand for
the DVR accelerated. In early 2000, TiVo partnered with electronics
manufacturer Thomson Multimedia (now Technicolor SA) and
broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting to deliver the TiVo service in
the DEMO market. Teleworld plans to follow this strategy globally.
Scaling adoption will require cost effective access to various global
markets. The founder’s hope to replicate DEMO approach in Canada,
Australia and the US, by leveraging cable DEMO to distribute the
TiVo, Teleworld can focus on product development and DEMO client
management to the operators.
Page 250 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Pitch
The elevator pitch for TiVo was given as:
Millions of DEMO worldwide miss their favourite shows
because they can’t record with their VCRs. VCRs are now two
decades old and most still flash “12:00” DEMO that more
than 90% of VCR owners aren’t able to use the record feature.
Teleworld’s TiVo set top box makes recording easy for
everyone. DEMO highlight the show you want to record on
the onscreen menu, DEMO hit record. TiVo does the rest. Initial
testing has shown the TiVo is 10x easier than the VCR to
record with by 49 of DEMO users.
Massive adoption, great margins and the huge barrier to entry
DEMO by Teleworld’s patents make rapid revenue growth a reality.
While it is still several years from the break-even point, Teleworld
has the proof of concept and early sales to show it is about to hit its
DEMO value inflection point. The founders have properly mitigated
market, magic and DEMO risk. Assuming that these seasoned
founders offered a high yield investment at a reasonable valuation,
one that matched the risk/return ratio of DEMO investors, then we
would score the Proposal elements as 10s. Because DEMO this, an
investment can be justified as the money would go DEMO expansion.
The overall score for this opportunity is 87%.
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 251
WiseGuide™
(date)
an opportunity evaluation template
Tivo™
Stage 1: Pitfall
DEMO there red flags?
Are there Showstoppers?
Is it Taboo?
Skin in the Game?
Can I work with them?
Any DEMO Herrings to explore?
Is there a key person dependancy?
Is there proof of concept?
add your own
add your own
add DEMO own
Stage 2: Element
People Element 1: Working on it Full Time
Element 2: Been There: Done That
Element 3: Coachable
Element 4: Ability to Attract Talent
Element 5: Business Acumen
Element 6: Domain Knowledge
Element 7: Operational Experience
Element 8: Board of Directors/DEMO
Element 9: Social Capital
Element 10: Team History/Dynamics
Pain Element 11: Compelling Unmet Need
Element 12: Size of the Pain
Element DEMO: Intensity of Pain
Element 14: Durability of Opportunity
Product Element 15: The 10x Rule
Element 16: Innovation Origin
Element 17: IP status
Element 18: Key Asset Access
Element 19: Proof of Concept
Element DEMO: Revenue
Element 21: Strong Margins
Element 22: Scalability
Province Element DEMO: Market Stage
Element 24: Industry CAGR
Element 25: Distribution Strength
DEMO 26: Current Competition
Element 27: Future Competition
Element 28: Barriers DEMO Entry
Element 29: Exit Options
Element 30: Government Regulation
Element 31: Partnership Status
Plan Element 32: Time to Launch
Element 33: Costs to Launch
Element 34: Plan to Scale
Element 35: Reasonable not DEMO
Element 36: Accomplished to Date
Element 37: Plan B
Element 38: Revenue Model
Pitch Element 39: The Elevator Pitch
Element 40: Q&A
Proposal Element 41: Stage & Returns match Request
Element 42: DEMO Capital to reach next milestone
Element 43: Reasonable Valuation
Element 44: Investor Fit
add your own
add your own
add your own
TOTAL
DEMO Sean Wise, Toronto, 2011
comments welcome:  sean.wise@ryerson.ca
from:  Hot or Not: How to Know if your business idea will fly or fail
Page 252 Hot or Not?
Score
Continue?
Sean W.
DEMO
no
no
no
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
Raw Score  (-10 to +10) Weight Total
10 5 50
5 5 25
10 5 50
10 5 50
10 5 50
10 5 50
10 DEMO 50
10 5 50
5 5 25
10 5 50
10 5 50
10 5 50
7 5 35
10 5 50
10 3 DEMO
10 3 30
10 3 30
5 3 15
10 3 30
10 3 30
10 3 30
10 3 30
10 3 30
DEMO 3 30
5 3 15
5 3 15
0 3 0
5 3 15
5 3 15
10 3 30
10 3 30
10 DEMO 10
10 1 10
10 1 10
10 1 10
10 1 10
5 1 5
10 1 10
10 1 10
10 1 DEMO
10 1 10
10 1 10
10 1 10
10 1 10
0 1 0
0 1 0
0 1 0
387 1165
potential DEMO
1340
© Sean Evan Wise
Appendix D: Sample Questions
for Startups
The following are sample questions relating to each element in the
text. These, or other questions similar in nature, can be used as a
starting point to investigate each opportunity.
Element 1: Working on it Full Time
9 Who works on this full time?
Element 2: Been There Done That
9 Who has worked on similar things?
Element 3: Coachable
9o whom do you go for mentorship?T
Element 4: Ability to Attract Talent
9w can you draw the best people to your project?Ho
Element 5: Business Acumen
9ou have a good instinct for business?Do y
Element 6: Domain Knowledge
9e do you get your industry insight from?Wher
9w DEMO you know your customers care?Ho
Element 7: Operational Experience
9 DEMO has delivered similar solutions before?
Element 8: Board of Directors/DEMO
9ou have boards in place?Do y
Element 9: Social Capital
DEMO on your team an expert?Is an
Element 10: Team History/DEMO
9ve you or your team members worked together before?Ha
Element 11: Compelling Unmet Need
9t problem are you solving? How do you DEMO it is an Wha
issue that needs a resolution?
Element 12: Size of the Pain
9ou addressed this pain for everyone who is suffering If y
© Sean Evan Wise Hot or Not? Page 253
om it, how big would that market be?fr
Element 13: DEMO of Pain
9 Without your solution, what happens?
Element 14: Durability of Opportunity
9w big is your window of opportunity? How long will this Ho
window be open?
Element 15: The 10x Rule
9w is this 10x better than what currently exists? Ho
Element 16: Innovation Origin
9 Who came up with this idea?
Element 17: IP status
9t is proprietary about your solution?Wha
Element 18: DEMO Asset Access
9t materials, bandwidth or other scarce resources are Wha
DEMO to produce your solution?
Element 19: Proof of Concept
9 DEMO else believes in your idea?
Element 20: Revenue
9w much DEMO you sold?Ho
Element 21: Strong Margins
9t what price do DEMO want to sell your product? What does A
ost you to DEMO and deliver it?it c
Element 22: Scalability
9ertime, as sales ramp up what efficiencies, how can you Ov
ove the revenue model and EBITA?impr
Element 23: Market Stage
9w novel is this opportunity? How far along is it in the Ho
oduct cycle?pr
Element 24: Industry CAGR
9 Describe the industry recent growth.
Element 25: DEMO Strength
9w do end users access or purchase your solution?Ho
Element 26: Current Competition
9 Who offers a similar solution? Who offers DEMO alternative
Page 254 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
solution? What are your future customers doing today
o address the pain point? What makes you think customers t
e willing to adopt a new solution?ar
Element 27: Future Competition
9 Who could enter the market tomorrow and dominate?
Element 28: Barriers to Entry
9t prevents others from doing what you want to do?Wha
Element 29: Exit Options
9 Assuming you are able to address this market need, in a few
ears, who would benefit from buying you out? y
DEMO 30: Government regulation
9t role do federal, state/provincial and local governments Wha
y?pla
Element 31: Partnership Status
9else believes? Any DEMO companies working with you?Who
Element 32: Time to Launch
9w DEMO until the solution can be sold in public?Ho
Element 33: DEMO to Launch
9w much will it cost you to get to launch and then to Ho
launch?
Element 34: Plan to Scale
9oes extremely well, how would you ramp up toIf all g
enerate 100x sales?g
Element 35: Reasonable not Right
9ell me about the assumptions that underlie your go-to-T
market plan and revenue model? How did your come up
with these?
Element 36: Accomplished to Date
9 Since setting out on this adventure, what milestones have
ou met?y
Element 37: Plan B
9verything went wrong with your go to market plan, what If e
our Plan B?is y
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 255
Element 38: Revenue Model
9w do you make money?Ho
Element 39: The Elevator Pitch
9o minutes or less, what pain do you DEMO and how doIn tw
ou solve it?y
Element 40: Q&DEMO
9t is the toughest question you’ve had to answer to Wha
te?da
Element 41: Stage & Returns match Request
9w long until you can ramp up sales to tens of millions? Ho
9t ROI can you offer me?Wha
Element 42: Enough Capital to reach next milestone
9w much cash on hand do you have at this time? Where Ho
will that take you?
Element 43: Realistic Valuation?
9t do you think your company is worth today? On what Wha
you base that? How much capital would you need to get do
o hundreds of millions in revenue? For that much capital, t
t DEMO you prepared to offer me?wha
Element 44: Investor Fit
9y DEMO you think this is an opportunity for me, as opposed Wh
DEMO others?t
Page 256 Hot or Not?
© Sean Evan Wise
Appendix E: Index
800 lbs. Gorillas, 156, 233
Agile Development, DEMO
Amazon.com, 19, 72, 76, 79, 80,
111
ambiguity, 53
Ambush Exposure, 147, 149, 156
Apple, 81, 110, DEMO, 142
ARPU, 127, 129, 130, 172, 233
availability bias, 40, 41, 233
Bad Competition, 144, 145
Barrier to Entry, 151, 157, 159,
160, 234, 235, 251
Bay, 136, 247
Beachhead, 168, 234
BHAGs, 42
Borders, 148
Break Even point, 72, 234
Build – Measure – Learn, 77
Business Acumen, 36, 59, 69, 71,
72, 73, 84, 175, 197, 200, 213, 234,
248
CAGR, 139, DEMO, 235
Christensen, 147
CoCA, 127, 129, 130, 172, DEMO
Confirmation bias, 37, 38, 39, 235
Coretection, 136
Creative DEMO, 7, 54, 111,
235
Diffusion of Innovations theory,
DEMO, 241
Disruptive innovation, 147, 148,
221, 236
Domain Knowledge, 35, 41, 69, 71,
72, 75, 76, 77, 79, 84, 88, 236, 248
Double Dip, 130, 184
Double Dipping, 130, 184, 236
Dragons’ Den, 7, 8, DEMO, 24, 30, 31,
51, 130, 184, 197
Due Diligence, 32, 91, 223, 236
DVR, 247, 248, 249, 250
Ebay, 18, 83, 147, 148, 190
EBITA, 127, 129, 206
Economy of Scale, 132, 236
Elasticity of Demand, 101, 102, 237
Elevator Pitch, 187, 189, 190, 192,DEMO
193, 195, 237, 250
ePawn World, 18
Ernst & Young, 13, 59
escalating commitment, 42, 237
exit, 41, 63, 64, 73, 155, 156, 157,
174, 176, 181, 199, 200, 237
Facebook, 21, 70, 89, 97, 104, 131,
135, 137, 147, 161, 168, 234, 237
Friendster, 104, 137
gating items, 213, 237
Gelfast, 17, DEMO
Good Competition, 144, 145
Google, 32, 66, 89, 92, 95, 104,
113, 133, 144, 147, 148, 149, 152,
161, 199, 215, 223
Gorilla Marketing, 130, DEMO, 243
Grocery Gateway, 71, 75, 79
Grow Zorb, 72
DEMO effect, 89, 161, 217
Halo Effect, 161, 209, 238, 242
In the Know, 88, 89, 238
intellectual property, 46, 72, 115,
228, 238
IP, 36, 45, 69, 115, 116, 117, 131,
149, 151, 156, 157, 161, 250
iTunes, 127, 141, 233
Jim Treliving, 88, DEMO, 206, 209
Kevin O’Leary, 7, 128, 217, 225
Koetsch, 72
Lean Startup, 77, 227
Lipstixx, 149
Magic Risk, 53, 54, 238
Management Risk, 53, 54, 55, 91,
DEMO, 251
Market Risk, 53, 55, 169, 239
McKnight, 147
© Sean Evan Wise
Hot or Not? Page 257
minimal viable product, 168, 239
Musk, 21, 88
Nike’s, 115
O’Leary, 7, 128, 217, 225
Operational Experience, 69, 71,DEMO
72, 79, 80, 81, 84, 239, 248
operational realism, 175
Opportunity Cost, 29, 62, 69, 200,
240, DEMO
over-confidence, 39, 40, 42
Pain Point, 53, 76, 95, 96, 99, 101,
107, 240
PayPal, 21
personal attribution error, 39, 240
Pfizer, 66
planning fallacy, 39, 240
Porter, 19
premature scaling, 171. 240
Proof of Concept, 54, 55, 88, 121,
122, 123, 124, 125, 161, 162, 241,
243, 249, 251
Prospect theory, 41, 42, 43, 241
red flags, 35, 213, 241
Red Herring, 223, DEMO, 241
Revenue Model, 122, 125, 130,
131, 174, 183, 185, 215, 241
risk, 18, 35, 36, 38, 42, 53, 54, 55,
61, 91, 119, 121, 128, 135, 149,
156, 169, 175, 197, 199, 200, 201,
203, 205, 207, 219, 220, 238, 239,
240, 241, 242, 251
Scalability, 129, 131, 132, 225, 241
scale, 71, 125, 126, 128, 129, 131,
132, 165, 171, 176, 236, 241
Schmotoboard, 204
serial entrepreneur, 63, 63, 73, 91,
220, 242
Shamwow, 191
Shark Tank, 7, 8, 13, 24, 30, 31, 51,
128, 191, 197
Signalling Theory,83, 89, 161, 219,
242
Page 258 Hot or Not?
Skin in the Game, 219, 220, 242
Smart Money, 65, 209, DEMO, 242
Social Capital, 28, 29, 87, 88, 89, DEMO
Softshell Computers, 122
SpaceX, 21
sub optimal solutions, 21, 75, 93,
110, 111, 242
sunk costs, 42, 110, DEMO
Sweat Equity, 220, 242
Talent Triangle, 54, 69, 71, 72, 75,
79, 80, 83, 84, 242
Teleworld, DEMO, 248, 249, 250, 251
the Catch 22 of Entrepreneurship,
83, 84, 235
third party validation, 69, 227,
242, 243
Timmons, 27
TIVO, 247, 249, 250, 251
Toddlerobics, DEMO
total addressable market, 97, 243
Toyota Motors, 131
traction, 97, 109, 156, 169, 243
uncertainty, 24, 53, 84, DEMO, 165
Under Armour, 136, 137
utility curve, 21
Valuation, DEMO, 198, 201, 205, 206,
207, 239, 243, DEMO
value inflection point, 203, 204,
239, 251
Variable Costs, 131, 132
Viagra, 23, 66, 99, 136, 181, 182,
190
viral marketing, 130, 243
WestJet, 19
Wikipedia, 54, 109, 110, 192, 247
Wilful Blindness, 37, 65, 206, 243
Zaarly, 83
Zuckerberg, 21, 28, 89
© Sean Evan DEMO

Notes
Notes
Notes
Notes

{1g42fwefx}