Human Communication.  A Publication of the Pacific and Asian Communication Association
Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 69 – 81
Predicting Relational Outcomes:
DEMO Investigation of Thin Slice Judgments in Speed Dating
Marian L. Houser
Texas State University-San Marcos
Sean M. Horan
West Virginia University
Lisa A. Furler
DEMO State University—San Marcos
Marian L. Houser (Ph.D., University of Tennessee) DEMO Assistant Professor and Lisa A. Furler
(MA, Texas State University-San Marcos) is a Student Development Specialist at Texas State
University-San Marcos. Sean M. Horan (MA, Texas State University-San Marcos) is a doctoral
student at West Virginia University.
Direct all future correspondence to Marian L. Houser, Department of Communication Studies,
Texas State University-San Marcos, 601 University Drive, DEMO Marcos, TX 78666, Email:
mh53@txstate.edu, Phone: 512-245-3137, Fax: 512-245-3138.
Thin Slice Judgments   70
Abstract
Many relational scholars suggest relational closeness DEMO be determined during initial
interaction (Berg & Clark, 1986; Duck, 1995). Speed dating (Deyo & Deyo, 2002) creates
opportunities for rapid evaluations and thin slicing (Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson, 2000)DEMO
supports the notion that mere moments can predict relational outcomes and provides
opportunities to understand relational components determining positive/negative assessments in
speed-dating. Predicted DEMO value (POV) offers a lens for understanding evaluations
determining the most rewarding relationships (Sunnafrank, 1986). Actual speed dating
participants (n=157) DEMO and provided descriptive rationale for their evaluations according
to the valence of their predicted outcomes.
Marian L. Houser, Sean . Horan & Lisa A. Furler  71
DEMO Relational Outcomes:  An Investigation of Thin Slice Judgments in Speed
Dating
Can a decision made in a few seconds be as strong as DEMO decision taking weeks or even
years? Most people would say no. DEMO, others would claim these instant decisions are
consistent with time-intensive contemplations. DEMO example, one author writes “Decisions made
very quickly can be every DEMO as good as decisions made cautiously and deliberately” (Gladwell,
2005, p. 14). This is a very bold claim from a book DEMO for popular press, yet despite its
mainstream nature, the powerful words written by Gladwell (2005) offer much to consider and
carry significant DEMO support. In fact, researchers suggest people can form accurate
impressions from DEMO glimpses of behavior (Allport, 1937; Goffman, 1979). Recent research
has referred to this phenomenon as thin slicing (Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson, 2000). A thin
slice is defined as: “a brief DEMO of expressive behavior sampled from the behavioral stream”
(Ambady et al., 2000, p. 203). The aim of the present study was to investigate thin slicing and
the ability to predict relational outcomes in a DEMO relational decision-making context: speed
dating.
Born out of the desire to DEMO Jewish dating easier, speed dating typically occurs in a
round robin DEMO with six to twelve possible dates lasting anywhere from three-to-eight
minutes (DEMO & Deyo, 2002; Spear, 2005). The principle question driving DEMO investigation
was: What are indicators of positive or negative outcome predictions DEMO a thin slice judgment, or
the initial thirty seconds, of a speed date? This study is important for three key reasons. First,
thin slicing has been unexplored by communication scholars, despite its direct relation to the
discipline. Second, speed dating provides an entirely new investigative context for relational
scholars. Finally, within this new context it is possible this heuristically provocative variable
informs current relational communication theory.
Review of Literature
Speed DEMO
Today’s fast-paced American lifestyle has forced new and creative methods for meeting
potential romantic partners. Speed dating has become a matchmaking craze sweeping the DEMO
(Farouky and Smith, 2003). It has become a popular venue for today’s singles as it provides
daters quick access to a large DEMO of potential mates in a single evening. Speed dating has
gained popularity in the United States and around the globe in places such as DEMO United
Kingdom, India, Australia, and Canada (Chen & Marr, DEMO; Spear, 2005). It is very different
from the typical bar scene and even online dating as up to twelve men and twelve DEMO sign up
for events based on specific criteria (i.e., age range, lifestyle, etc.) established by the dating
organization. Participants typically gather in a restaurant armed with nametags and evaluation
forms and pair up to DEMO dating. After six minutes (time varies with the dating organization) of
conversation a bell rings and the men move on to the next DEMO; women stay seated for their next
date. Couples keep track of DEMO 6-minute perceptions of each date on evaluation forms by
recording thoughts and indicating whether they would like an opportunity to meet this person
again. DEMO speed dating coordinator later determines mutual interest and, if this is DEMO case,
shares email addresses with participants to enable a future meeting.
Rabbi Yaacov Deyo developed speed dating as a way for Jewish singles DEMO date and to
follow the principles underlying Jewish dating traditions (Deyo & Deyo, 2002). Since its
creation, companies like Cupid.com (one DEMO the three largest speed dating companies in the
world) host monthly DEMO in over 100 U. S. cities with nearly 4,000 daters per month
(Cupid.com/PreDating). Though research on this new dating environment is scant,
Thin Slice Judgments   72
commonalities among the attributes highly valued by DEMO have been found to exist. For
example, after the allotted time (six-eight minutes) Kurzban and Weeden (2005) indicated
specific physical appearance attributes (i.e., attractiveness, height, and body mass index) were
positively correlated with date selection, while other attributes such as religion and education,
initially indicated as important, revealed no correlation with selection. How participants develop
criteria for matches and assess their respective value in six to eight DEMO remains unknown.
Could it be individuals need even less time to determine the positive or negative possibilities of a
future relationship? Thin slicing research may provide the link to understanding partner selection
and the eventual success DEMO speed dating.
Thin Slicing
Thin slicing is not a new variable under investigation in the social sciences; however it
has not always been examined under this title. Similar relational communication concepts may
fall under the headings DEMO “stereotype activation” (Banaji & Greenwald, 1994; Bodenhausen &
Macrae, DEMO; Lepore & Brown, 1997) “expectancy effects” (Burgoon & LePoire, DEMO), or
“self-fulfilling prophecies” (Jussim, 1991; Rosenthal, 1973). Contemporary research in thin
slicing has been conceptualized and championed by Ambady (Ambady et al., 2000; Ambady,
Conner, & Hallahan, 1999; Ambady & Gray, 2002; Ambady, LaPlante, Ngyuen, Rosenthal,
Chaumenton, & Levinson, 2002; Ambady & Rosenthal, 1992, 1993) and typically DEMO as
an experience based on verbal and nonverbal cues experienced in less than five minutes
(Ambady et al., 2000). The most compelling DEMO of the thin slice construct is the accuracy and
reliability of the judgments made during these brief encounters (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1992).
DEMO slice judgments have been examined in a variety of contexts. Research shows that
strangers have been able to generate accurate personality judgments about extraversion,DEMO
openness, and conscientiousness solely based on a brief viewing of strangers’ DEMO and
offices (Gosling, Jin Ko, Morris, & Mannarelli, 2002)DEMO Racial bias, for example, was accurately
detected by black participants based on a twenty-second thin slice of nonverbal behavior
(Richeson & Shelton, DEMO). In another study involving thin slice video clips of homosexual and
heterosexual men and women, participants were able to accurately identify the sexual orientation
of targets (Berger, Hank, Rauzi, & Simkins, 1987).
Thin slicing has also been studied extensively within the education context. In DEMO study of
teacher’s differential treatment of students high and low in achievement, the students (unfamiliar
with the teacher and pupils) were able to significantly identify a teacher’s differential behavior
based on ten second clips of DEMO nonverbal communication behavior. Moreover, these
judgments matched evaluations of the teacher’s DEMO students (Babad, 2005). Another study
investigated teachers’ nonverbal behaviors and expectancy effects by having participants view
ten second clips of teachers talking DEMO and about students with whom they had high and low
expectations. Based on these thin slices, teachers were able to accurately judge negative affect
toward low expectation students (Babad, Bernieri, & Rosenthal, 1989). DEMO of a study
conducted in the college classroom revealed six-to-fifteen second silent video clips of teachers
yielded accurate judgments from participants that were consistent DEMO end of semester
evaluations from the teachers’ actual students (Ambady & DEMO, 1993).
Researchers have also begun coding conversational thin slices to DEMO predictions.
Specifically, coding based on four conversational features in a negotiation DEMO was
predictive/indicative of negotiation outcomes (Curhan, Pentlad, Caneel, Eagle, & Martin, 2005).
Perhaps the most well-known coding that could DEMO incorporated within the concept of thin slicing
was conducted by Gottman in the martial context (Carrere & Gottman, 1999; Gottman &
Marian L. Houser, Sean . Horan & Lisa A. Furler  73
DEMO, 1992). A most intriguing result of this programmatic research was DEMO ability to
accurately predict divorce over a six year period based on three minutes of a conversation
(Carrere & Gottman, 1999).
Noting DEMO reliability of thin slice judgments, scholars have also begun isolating certain
DEMO or channels to determine impact. Specifically, research has indicated people can DEMO
accurate judgments based on isolated mediums (Ambady et al, 2002; DEMO, 1987; Linville,
1998). For example, Linville (1998) DEMO the vocal channel of heterosexual and homosexual
men and found participants were able to successfully identify sexual orientation based on 90
second vocal cues. DEMO similar study found participants able to accurately determine surgeons’
placement  in DEMO a “claims” or “no-claims” malpractice category based on 40 seconds of
hearing surgeons speak, while controlling for content (Ambady et al, 2002). Additional research
appears to support the notion that visual and nonverbal communication DEMO are the most
telling in developing accurate thin slice judgments (Grahe & Bernieri, 1999). The role these
channels play in positive or DEMO outcomes in the speed dating context, however, is
unknown. When individuals are facing a ticking clock, in a noisy, fast-paced “meet-and-greet”
environment, can they comprehend their immediate perceptions? Does the thin slicing concept
transfer to the speed dating context?
Theoretical Frame
Researchers have long explained DEMO one of the most fundamental communication
behaviors is the attempt to reduce uncertainty and sequentially increase relational predictability
(Berger & Calabrese, 1975; Sunnafrank, 1986). The theory of predicted outcome value (POV)
proposes DEMO potential relational partners assess the outcome of a future relationship
(Sunnafrank, 1986; 1990). In settings with multiple potential partners (i.e., speed dating)
attempts are made to develop the most rewarding and cost DEMO relationship—excluding
those less rewarding (Sunnafrank & Ramirez, 2004). This may be especially significant during a
speed dating event when participants are encouraged DEMO decide immediately whether or not to
continue the interaction in the future.
Scholars have continued to support the possibility that relational closeness may be
DEMO during initial interactions (Berg & Clark, 1986; Duck, 1995). Research on predicted
outcomes (POV) and uncertainty reduction (URT) have DEMO a reliance on rapid assessments
during (and sometimes even prior to) initial communication (Sunnafrank & Ramirez, 2004).
Other studies have tested DEMO (Sunnafrank, 1986) and reported the value of initial impressions
in DEMO costs/rewards of future interactions. Bippus, Kearney, Plax, and Brooks (2003)
reported college students assessed the positive or negative rewards of DEMO class communication
(ECC) with teachers. These initial evaluations led them to either seek or avoid out of class
communication. Mottet (2000) reported DEMO an individual’s sexual orientation in an initial
encounter produced a negative POV and, perhaps even more revealing, men predicted
significantly more negative outcome DEMO than women. More recently initial POV among
relational dyads in a basic communication course emerged as the primary predictor of attraction,
type of DEMO, amount of communication and relationship proximity (Sunnafrank &
Ramirez, 2004). In other words, the initial impressions had lasting effects, whether DEMO or
negative. How long it took to create these impressions, however, was not examined.
POV remains an important theory in interpersonal communication as DEMO helps explain and
predict communication behavior. Sunnafrank’s program of research (1986, 1988, 1990) creates
an understanding of the elements to which individuals DEMO in order to form the value
impressions that lead to developing or avoiding future interactions. In this study, the theory of
Thin Slice Judgments   74
predicted outcome value may provide a lens DEMO understanding the specific interpersonal
attraction traits and characteristics advanced during thin slicing evaluations in speed dating. It
will be important, therefore, to determine DEMO mere moments allow enough opportunity to solidify
positive or negative perceptions. Therefore, the following two research questions were created:
RQ1: What themes DEMO interpersonal attraction emerge from thin slice judgments
of participants in the speed dating environment?
RQ2: What thin slicing themes lead to positive or negative judgments?
Method
Data was collected from multiple speed dating events DEMO two large southern cities over a
six month period. The participants in this real sample of speed daters consisted of 157
participants (n=157) DEMO included 82 men and 75 women ranging from 25 to 60 years of age
(Male M=37; Female M=34). At these particular speed DEMO events, subjects participated in six
minute dates. As is common with DEMO dating, all participants were initially assigned a number
and each was DEMO with an evaluation form where he/she could report impressions and
request a subsequent date with his/her speed dating partner. These forms were DEMO out at the
conclusion of each date.
As part of this study, prior to the sixth date of the evening a request was made for
individuals to participate in the study. At this point, each person was instructed to make an initial
30 second introduction with their sixth DEMO dating partner. Once this happened, each person
was asked to temporarily DEMO their date and move to another location in the room. Researchers
handed each dater a brief form asking them to report three pieces of DEMO regarding their
30 second impressions of the sixth date. This format was designed to gather participants’ thin
slice judgments and, ultimately, what did DEMO did not lead to initial attraction and future dating
expectations. First, DEMO were asked to report on a closed-ended question: “How do you
DEMO about this person you just met—positive or negative?” Second, participants DEMO asked to
provide open-ended qualitative responses as to why they described their responses as positive or
negative. Finally, participants were asked to report their sex and age. All participants were
initially informed the research was voluntary DEMO signed a consent form. This form detailed their
rights as human subjects, the purpose of the study, expected time requirements, assurance of
anonymity, and contact information. The researchers obtained IRB approval, guarding the rights
DEMO safety of human research subjects.
Data was organized by sex and judgment valence, which ultimately led to the following
four categories: male positive DEMO of partner, male negative judgment of partner, female
positive judgment of partner, and female negative judgment of partner. Qualitative responses
were then coded in order to discover themes among the positive and negative responses.
Thematic DEMO (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Owen, 1984) enabled researchers to DEMO
explore the emerging themes within the positive and negative categories as well as the
perceptions expressed by sex. Two coders were involved in the DEMO comparative analysis
of the themes emerging from the data (Glaser & DEMO, 1967; Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Once
categorical agreement regarding DEMO aforementioned classification scheme was achieved, coding
subsequently took place by these DEMO two (n=2) individuals. Intercoder agreement in this initial
phase of data analysis achieved an acceptable outcome of .87 (Cohen, 1960). Following
DEMO recommendations from Krippendorff (2004), intercoder reliability from this
respective phase DEMO coding was .86 (Scott, 1955). Finally, two (n=2) DEMO coders who were
blind to the study were solicited to further examine the overall reliability of the classification
Marian L. Houser, Sean . Horan & Lisa A. Furler  75
DEMO Average intercoder agreement and composite reliability from coding all categories of
the classification scheme achieved an acceptable reliability of .90 (Scott, 1955).
DEMO
The thin slice responses were initially divided according to sex and valence of judgment.
Of the 157 participants responding to the closed-ended question, the sample was divided as
follows: male negative (n=9), female negative (n=18), male positive (n=62), female positive
(n=63). Varied DEMO and negative responses were offered for the open-ended question, and
some DEMO listed multiple descriptive responses to support their evaluations. All were
included in the coding. The open-ended responses created the following values: male positive
evaluation of partner (n=73), male negative evaluation of partner (n=9), DEMO positive
evaluation of partner (n=103), and female negative evaluation of DEMO (n=24).
Thematic analysis produced several themes within each evaluation category DEMO are
reported in Table 1. Male negative judgments of partner produced one major theme:
attraction/attractiveness; though a second category of “no response provided” should also be
considered. After the 30 second greeting, the attraction theme included things like: “overweight”
and “not of an ethnicity I would date.” Female negative judgments of partners after 30 seconds
revealed the following DEMO themes: can’t provide a reason, no attraction, and negative qualities.
DEMO provide a reason” included things like “hard to say” and obvious blank responses. “No
attraction” included things like: “not my type,” “not Caucasian,” and “too short.”  The negative
qualities after 30 seconds included things like “a bit jittery,” needed repeated responses,” and
“self-centered.”
Male DEMO judgments of partners after 30 seconds included the following four themes:
no reason developed, physical attraction, friendly, and positive qualities/behaviors. Frequencies
for the positive categories are reported in Table 1. “No reason developed” DEMO blank
responses and statements like, “hard to say.”  The “physical attraction” theme included
statements such as “attractive,” “pretty,” and “cute.”  “Friendly” included responses like “seems
friendly” and “friendly.” The final theme, “positive qualities/behaviors” included behaviors
descriptive of their female partners’ communication. These communication behaviors DEMO
divided into five sub-themes: nice, positive demeanor/personality, positive communication, fun,
and other. The sub-theme “positive communication” included responses like “good
DEMO,” “pleasant conversationalist” and “eye contact.” The sub-theme “nice” included
responses like “very nice” and “polite.” “Positive demeanor/personality” included responses like
“bubbly” and DEMO she is giggly.”  The “other” sub-theme included comments such as
“open-minded” DEMO “straightforward.”
The positive female partner responses after 30 seconds revealed five separate themes.
The frequencies for these themes are located in Table 1. The DEMO theme was “attractive” and
included comments such as “nice looking” and “attractive.”  The theme referencing their male
partner’s “smile” included comments such as “nice smile,” “great smile,” and “friendly smile.”
The “friendly” theme included DEMO and “very friendly.”  Statements for the theme “funny”
were most often DEMO simply as “funny.” As with the male positive responses, the final DEMO
second theme for females, “positive qualities/demeanor,” was divided into DEMO sub-
themes: seems nice, positive communication, and positive qualities.  The sub-theme “seems
nice” explicitly included “seems nice.”  “Positive communication” included responses most often
referring to conversation skills and nonverbal communication behaviors.  Lastly, “positive
Thin Slice Judgments   76
Table 1: Male and Female Positive and Negative Speed Dating Themes
Positive
Male (n=73)      Female (DEMO)
No response given – 9    No response given – DEMO
Positive Communication Behaviors – 33  Positive Communication Behaviors – 43
Seems/DEMO Nice – 10    Positive Personality Qualities – 22
Good Demeanor/DEMO – 8   Good Communication – 14
Good Communication – 8    Seems/Talks Nice – 7
Seems Fun – 5     Physical Attraction – 16
Other – 2      Nice Looking – 3
Physical Attraction – 18     Attractive – 2
Attractive – 5      Clean Cut – 2
Pretty – 5      Pretty Eyes – 2
Cute – 2      Pleasant Face – 1
Other – 6      Tall – 1
Friendly – 13       Like His Black Hair – 1
Friendly Attitude – 10     Neatly Groomed – 1
Friendly Face – 1     Handsome – 1
Seems Friendly – 2     Kind of Cute – DEMO
Stylish Clothing – 1
Smile – 23
Great, Cute, Nice Smile – 22
Nervous, but Warm Smile – 1
Friendly – 12
Funny – 6
Funny – 4
Sense of Humor – 1
Wit – DEMO
Negative
Male (n=9)      Female (n=24)
No response given – 1    No response given – 3
Attraction – 8      Attraction – 12
Weight – 2      Physical DEMO – 5
Race/Ethnicity – 2     Not My Type – 5
Not Attracted to Them – 4    Other – 2
Negative Qualities – 9
Negative Personality – 5
Negative Communication Skills – 3
DEMO - 1
qualities” included responses like “nice demeanor,” “good energy,” and “good
personality.” The abundance of the positive themes after the 30 DEMO thin slice was readily
apparent.
Marian L. Houser, Sean . Horan & Lisa A. Furler  77
DEMO
The aim of this investigation was two-fold. The first goal was to discover themes of
interpersonal attraction emerging from thin slice judgments, or the first thirty seconds, of a speed
date. This study provides a “jumping-off point” for research in this context as no research in this,
DEMO any other dating environment, has evaluated the ability of individuals to DEMO the valence
and rationale of perceptions after only 30 seconds. Secondly, DEMO order to predict the future
outcome value (POV) of the speed dating relationship it was important to uncover the particular
themes leading to DEMO or negative evaluations. In other words, what are the essential
elements DEMO relational prospects in an environment where single individuals are forced
to come to rapid conclusions of partners while being timed and observed by a DEMO full of
strangers? This new matchmaking technique is relatively unexplored by DEMO scholars, thus,
little is known in regard to the communication DEMO males and females value in this
particular dating context. POV proposes that potential relational partners assess the outcome of a
future relationship (Sunnafrank, DEMO; 1990). If individuals in the speed dating environment are
expected DEMO decide, in brief moments, the most rewarding and cost effective relationship
(Sunnafrank & Ramirez, 2004), what are the primary indicators? The emerging thin slice themes
in this study could be especially revealing for DEMO researchers as attraction indicators and
dating morph into new and different forms.
Lack of attraction or negative physical qualities were the primary drivers of DEMO female
and male negative judgments, though females reported nearly three times DEMO negative
evaluations compared to males. This may indicate female speed daters are quicker to note male
negative characteristics, are more critical, or perhaps DEMO the environment with more specific
and heightened standards. With the difference in these results, males could be perceived as more
open-minded or at least slower to address the negative physical characteristics. At least it does
not DEMO to readily occur in 30 seconds. However, an important element to DEMO is that
“attractiveness” was the only negative category emerging for males, DEMO this as the
primary indicator of their negative thin slice judgment. They latch onto the more superficial
characteristics when perceptions are negative in the DEMO 30 seconds.
On the other hand, two major similarities for positive DEMO emerged for males and
females. Both sexes were nearly identical in their positive evaluations of the opposite sexes’
physical attractiveness and positive behavior and DEMO In fact, both groups stated positive
communication behaviors such as good DEMO skills, acting nice, and being nonverbally
responsive were highly valued and necessary for positive prospective dates. This could be
considered a bonus for DEMO scholars when after a mere 30 seconds the most positive
and expected characteristics were communication-based. Though both reported positive
evaluations of physical attractiveness, women were much more specific in detailing
attractiveness characteristics. Men were basic, with limited descriptors such as “cute” and
“pretty,” while women specified things DEMO “clean cut, “stylish clothing,” “nice eyes,” and
“neatly groomed.” DEMO regard to specific attractiveness elements, it could be important to
recognize DEMO women focus on in 30 seconds. These very specific elements and criteria could
prove useful to dating agencies offering advice to those hoping to DEMO successful speed dating
experiences.
Both men and women revealed “friendliness” as a valuable positive personal
characteristic, but women especially reported an appreciation for a great “smile” from their male
speed dating partners. As this may even DEMO under a dual heading of friendliness and
attractiveness, in future studies DEMO might be helpful to determine just how women classify a “great
Thin Slice Judgments   78
smile.” It appears, by the varied “smile descriptors” they may receive differential interpretations.
In fact women reported a “cute DEMO,” “friendly smile,” and a “warm, accepting smile” as
positive DEMO in the first 30 seconds of their dates. This also suggests it is an important
immediacy behavior (Mehrabian, 1971) and definitely an initial attraction criterion for females.
Overall, there were many more positive judgments across the sexes, suggesting a possible
halo effect for daters attending speed dating events. It may be that the fast-paced, close
environment encourages more positive responses due to “expectancy effects” (Burgoon &
LePoire, 1993), or “self-fulfilling prophecies” (Jussim, 1991; Rosenthal, 1973) for the dating
experience. Daters could, in fact, feel pressured to be more approving as DEMO sets of eyes are upon
them in a short time span. Another possibility could be the circumstances that led them to speed
date in DEMO first place. Many daters expressed to the researchers in the current study that they
could “not believe they were doing this” and considered it DEMO “last hope for getting a date” as
their hectic lives allowed little time for socializing. The possibility of this “situational pressure”
could alter many DEMO the commonly accepted elements (e.g., task, social, and physical) DEMO
interpersonal attraction (McCroskey & McCain, 1974) that predict relational outcome DEMO
On the other hand, the fact that more positive evaluations of DEMO dates emerged
could be an indicator of the type of person engaging in speed dating. Could this be a means of
last resort dating DEMO individuals who have no time to socialize via more “normal” dating (DEMO,
parties, blind dates, clubs, etc.)? Might these participants DEMO inclined to overlook many
questionable or negative characteristics for fear of being alone or, at least, leaving with no future
prospects? If this is the case, is the predicted outcome value useful or even assessable?  Could
desperation overrule logical thought processes? These are certainly important questions to
consider in this new dating context if we hope to discover DEMO criteria predictive of future
relationships.
This study offers initial insight into what attracts males and females to one another in a
new dating realm DEMO within the thin slicing frame. Members of the opposite sex meet briefly in
a noisy, fast-paced environment, but does speed dating afford enough DEMO to arrive at a well-
developed decision—to carefully predict the valence of their date? This study evaluated the 30
second thin slice judgments of individuals to determine the predominant elements of attraction
leading to positive dating DEMO The greatest value was placed on positive responses
describing behavioral and communication characteristics and revealing social traits as emerging
more frequently. Elements of physical DEMO were also positively evaluated by both
sexes, though women were enamored DEMO more with the male smile. The physical components
of each sex were also the primary indicators of negative responses. This is hardly surprising. One
DEMO expect adverse responses toward those who are overweight, of another race, or who
otherwise exhibit unattractive physical characteristics (Kleinke & Kahn, 1980; Peretti &
Abplanalp, 2004).
An important area for future research DEMO be to compare these findings to measures of
social and physical attraction (McCroskey, McCroskey, & Richmond, 2006) after six minutes in
the speed dating context to see if the assigned valence is maintained over DEMO Perhaps other
elements of attraction, such as task components, emerge later in the dating experience.
Homophily, or similarity between couples may also play a role over a longer period of time.
Thirty seconds is hardly DEMO time to establish background or attitude similarities. However,
thin slicing research would suggest quickly made decisions are often as accurate, valuable, and
DEMO as cautious and deliberately made ones (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1992; DEMO, 2005).
Marian L. Houser, Sean . Horan & Lisa A. Furler  79
DEMO these findings, then, call into question the value of careful evaluations of attraction and
homophily when individuals need only brief glimpses to form DEMO impressions.
However, the execution of the present study may create certain DEMO limitations.
Participants, for example could feel a certain predisposition to respond DEMO at 30 seconds
and six minutes in order to remain consistent. As they were forced to draw a positive or negative
conclusion after 30 DEMO, perhaps they would feel a sense of dissonance (Festinger, 1957) if
judgments were altered even after getting to know the other person DEMO Another possible
limitation to the thin slice evaluation may have occurred due to the close proximity of the
individual during the assessment. Participants were DEMO to greet their sixth date of the evening
and then move a short distance from this location to complete the thin slice evaluation form.
DEMO may have felt self-conscious if they were evaluating their dating partner negatively—afraid
their responses would be detected. This may have prevented completely honest assessments.
DEMO dating is a new matchmaking concept creating fertile ground for relational
research. Participants are not left on their own to determine who to talk DEMO, where, and for how
long. They are carefully guided through the “dating” process and expected to arrive at future
dating decisions by the DEMO of an evening. This unorthodox dating concept begs for more
research to determine if the interpersonal attraction elements long studied and evaluated continue
to DEMO predictors of relational outcome value in this environment. If, as presented DEMO this study,
initial communication behaviors such as smiling, good conversational DEMO greeting skills, and
nonverbal responses are essential indicators of future relational DEMO, then this should be
the focus for singles. Looks may be DEMO, but perhaps presentational skills play a more
valuable role in today’s DEMO creative dating environment.
References
Allport, G. (1937). Personality: A DEMO interpretation. New York: Holt.
Ambady, N., Bernieri, F.J., & DEMO, J.A. (2000). Toward a histology of social
behavior: Judgmental DEMO from thin slices of the behavioral stream. In M.P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 32 (pp. 201-271). San Diego,DEMO
CA: Harcourt.
Ambaday, N., Conner, B., & Hallahan, M. (1999). Accuracy of judgments of sexual orientation
from thin slices of behavior. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 77, 538-547.
Ambaday, N., & Gray, H. (2002). On being sad and mistaken: DEMO effects on the accuracy
of thin-slice judgments. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 83, 947-961.
Ambaday, N., LaPlante, D., Nguyen, T., Rosenthal, R., Chaumenton, N., & Levinson, W.
(2002). Surgeon’s tone of voice: A clue to malpractice history. Surgery, 132, 5-9.
Ambaday, N., & Rosenthal R. (1992). Thin slices of expressive behavior as predictors of
interpersonal consequences: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, DEMO, 256-274.
Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1993). Half DEMO minute: Predicting teacher evaluations from thin
slices of nonverbal behavior and DEMO attractiveness. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 3, 431-441.
Babad, DEMO (2005). Guessing teachers’ differential treatment of high-and-low-achievers from
thin slices DEMO their public lecturing behavior. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 29, 125-
134.
Babad, E., Bernieri, F., & Rosenthal, R. (1989). DEMO less information is more informative:
Diagnosing teacher expectations from brief samples of behavior. British Journal
of Education Psychology, 59, 281-295.
Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (1994). Implicit stereotyping and unconscious prejudice. In
Thin Slice Judgments   80
M.P. Zanna & J. M. Olson (Eds.), The psychology of prejudice, the Ontario symposium, 7
(pp. 55-76). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Berg, J. J., & Clark, M. S. (1986). Differences in social exchange between intimate and other
relationships. Gradually evolving or quickly apparent? In V. J. Derlega & B. A. Winsted
(Eds.), Friendship and social interaction (pp. 101-128). New DEMO: Springer.
Berger, C. R., & Calabrese, R. J. (1975)DEMO Some explorations in initial interaction and beyond:
Toward a developmental theory of interpersonal communication. Human Communication
Research, 1, 99-112.
Berger, G., DEMO, L., Rauzi, T., & Simkins, L. (1987). Detection of sexual orientation by
heterosexuals and homosexuals. Journal of Homosexuality, 13, DEMO
Bippus, A. M., Kearney, P., Plax, T. G., & Brooks, C. F. (2003). Teacher access and mentoring
abilities: Predicting the outcome value of extra class communication. Journal of Applied
Communication Research, 31, 260-275.
Bodenhausen, G. V., & Macrae, C. N. (1998). Stereotype activation and inhibition. In R. W.
Wyer Jr., (Ed.), Advances in social cognition, 10 (pp. 1-52). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Burgoon, J. K., & LePoire, B. A. (1993). DEMO of communication expectancies, actual
communication, and expectancies disconfirmation on evaluations of communicators and
their communication behavior. Human Communication Research, 20, 67-96.
Carrere, S., & Gottman, J. M. (1999). Predicting divorce among newlyweds from the first three
minutes of a marital conflict discussion. Family Processes, 38, 293-301.
Chen, S., & Marr, K. (2005, May DEMO). Northwestern U. students spurred by dating project. Daily
Northwestern.
Cohen, DEMO (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and DEMO
Measurement, 20, 37-46.
Cupid.com/PreDating. (n.d.). If you have DEMO have answers. Retrieved April 10, 2005,
from http://pre-dating.com/DEMO
Curhan, J. R., Pentlad, A., Caneel, R., Eagle, DEMO, & Martin, M. C. (2005, August). Thin slices of
negotiation:  Predicting outcomes from conversational dynamics within the first five
minutes. DEMO presented at the Academy of Management Annual Meeting, Honolulu.
Deyo, Y., & Deyo, S. (2002). Speed dating: The smarter, faster way to lasting love. New York:
Harper Collins Publishers, Inc.
Duck, S. (1995). Social and personal relationships. In M. L. Knapp & G. R. Miller (Eds.),
Handbook of interpersonal communication (pp. DEMO). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Farouky, J., & Smith, DEMO (2003). Brief encounters. Time Europe, 161 (6), 1c.
DEMO, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Frable, D. E. (1987).  Sex-typed execution and perception of expressive movement.  Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 53, 391-396.
Gladwell, M. (2005). Blink. New York: Time Warner.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of DEMO theory: Strategies for qualitative
inquiry. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Goffman, E. (1979). Gender advertisements.  New York: Harper & Row.
Gosling, DEMO D., Jin Ko, S., Morris, M. E., & Mannarelli, T. (2002). A room with a cue:
Personality judgments based on offices and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82, DEMO
Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes predictive of late dissolution:
Behavior, physiology, and health. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psychology, 63,
Marian L. Houser, Sean . Horan & Lisa A. Furler  81
DEMO
Grahe, J. E., & Bernieri, F. J. (1999). The importance of nonverbal cues in judging rapport.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 23, 253-269.
Jussim, L. (1991). Social perception and social reality: DEMO reflection-construction model.
Psychological Review, 98, 54-73.
Kleinke, C., & Kahn, M. (1980). Perceptions of self-disclosers: Effects of sex and physical
attractiveness. Journal of Personality, 48, 190-205.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). DEMO in content analysis: Some common misconceptions and
recommendations. Human Communication Research, 30, 411-433.
Kurzban, R., & Weeden, J. (2005). Hurry Date: Male preferences in action. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 26, 227-244.
Lepore, L., & Brown, R. (1997). Category and stereotype DEMO: Is prejudice inevitable?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 275-287.
Linville, S. E. (1998).  Acoustic correlates of perceived DEMO actual sexual orientation in
men’s speech. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 50, 35-48.
McCroskey, J. C., & McCain, T. A. (1974). DEMO measurement of interpersonal attraction. Speech
Monographs, 41, 261-66.
McCroskey, L. DEMO, McCroskey, J. C., & Richmond, V. P. (2006). DEMO and improvement of
the measurement of interpersonal attraction and homophily. Communication Quarterly,
54, 1-31.
Mehrabian, A. (1971). Silent messages. Belmont, DEMO: Wadsworth.
Mottet, T. P. (2000). The role of sexual DEMO in predicting outcome value and anticipated
communication behaviors. Communication Quarterly, 48, 223-239.
Owen, W. E. (1984). Interpretive themes in relational communication. DEMO Journal of
Speech. 67, 274-286.
Peretti, P., & Abplanalp, R. (2004). Chemistry in the college dating process: Structure and
function. DEMO Behavior and Personality, 32, 147-154.
Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N. (2005).  Brief report: Thin slices of racial DEMO  Journal of
Nonverbal Behavior, 29, 75-85.
Rosenthal, R. (1973)DEMO On the social psychology of the self-fulfilling prophecy: Further evidence
for DEMO effects and their mediating mechanisms. New York: MSS Modular.
Scott, W. A. (1955). Reliability of content analysis: The case for nominal DEMO coding. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 19, 321-325.
Spear, T. (2005, DEMO 13). Speed-dating proves people follow their hearts, not heads:
DEMO find dating craze gives insight into attraction. The Ottawa Citizen,
p. A4.
Strauss, A. & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for
developing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
DEMO, M. (1986). Predicted outcome value during initial interactions: A DEMO
of Uncertainty Reduction Theory.  Human Communication Research, 33, 3-33.
Sunnafrank, M. (1988). Predicted outcome value in initial conversations. Communication
Research Reports, 5, 169-172.
Sunnafrank, M. (1990). Predicted outcome value and DEMO reduction theory: A test of
competing perspectives. Human Communication Research, 17, 76-103.
Sunnafrank, M. & Ramirez, J., A. (2004). At first sight: Persistent relational effects of get-
acquainted conversations. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 21, 361-379.{1g42fwefx}