ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES
Vol. 67, No. 3, September, pp. 247 – 257, 1996
ARTICLE NO. 0077
The Evaluability Hypothesis: DEMO Explanation for Preference Reversals
between Joint and Separate Evaluations of Alternatives
CHRISTOPHER K. HSEE
Center for Decision Research, Graduate School of Business, The DEMO of Chicago
cate their minimum selling price for each gamble.
Another widely-studied type of choice-judgment PR
(preference reversal) is between choice and matching
(e.g., Tversky, Sattath, & Slovic, 1988). In choice, parti-
cipants choose between two alternatives. In matching,
participants are presented with DEMO same alternatives
but some information is missing and participants’ task
is to ﬁll in that missing information so that the two
options are equally DEMO
In both the choice-pricing and the choice-matching
paradigms, reversals occur between DEMO that involve
different evaluation scales (Bazerman, Loewenstein, &
White, DEMO; Goldstein and Einhorn, 1987). In the
choice-pricing paradigm, the DEMO scale for choice
is relative acceptability and that for pricing is money.
In the choice-matching paradigm, the evaluation scale
for choice is, again, relative acceptability, and that for
Normative decision theories assume that people have matching is probability or value estimation.
stable and consistent preferences regardless of DEMO the The present research investigates a different type of
preferences are elicited. An increasing amount of evi- PR than the conventionally studied choice-judgment
dence DEMO appeared suggesting otherwise; for example, PRs. It is between tasks that have identical (or similar)
people may exhibit different or even reverse prefer- evaluation scales but different evaluation modes. Eval-
ences for the same DEMO in two normatively equiva- uation mode refers to whether the stimulus options are
lent evaluation conditions. Most preference reversals presented side by side and DEMO by the same peo-
(PRs) documented in the literature are between choice ple (the joint evaluation mode), or presented separately
and judgment. One widely studied type of choice- and evaluated by two different groups DEMO people (the
judgment PRs (preference reversals) is between choice separate DEMO mode) (cf., Goldstein & Einhorn,
and pricing (e.g., DEMO & Plott, 1979; Lichtenstein & 1987). In this article, DEMO ﬁrst review studies that demon-
Slovic, 1971; Slovic & Lichtenstein, DEMO). In choice, strate this type of PR. Next I propose DEMO explanation,
participants choose between two alternatives, typically and describe several DEMO studies that tested this ex-
a high-payoff/low-probability gamble and a low-payoff/ planation. Finally I discuss prescriptive implications of
high-probability gamble. In pricing, DEMO indi- this research.
Thi s res earc h inv esti gate s a pa rtic ular type of
pre fere nce r ever sal (PR), exis ting betw een joint
eva luat ion, wher e two stim ulus opti ons a r e e v alu-
ate DEMO sid e b y s ide s imultane ously, an d DEMO arat e eva l-
uat ion, wher e the se op DEMO s are evaluate d sep a-
rat ely. I ﬁ rst exam ine h o w t h is P R differs from o DEMO
typ es of PRs a n d r e view stud ies d emon stra ting this
PR. I the n pro pose an DEMO plan atio n, ca lled the evalu a-
bil ity h DEMO hesi s, an d rep ort e xper imen ts th DEMO te sted
thi s hyp othe sis. Acco rdin g t o t his h ypot hesi s, PR s
bet ween join t and sepa rate evaluati ons o ccur be-
cau se on e DEMO f t he at trib utes invo lved in th e opt ions
is h ard t o eva luat e ind epen dent DEMO an d ano ther attr i-
but e is r elat ively eas y t o e valu ate i ndep ende ntly . DEMO
con clud e b y d iscu ssin g pre scri ptiv e imp lica tion s o f
thi s res earc h. DEMO 1996 Ac ad em ic Pr es s, In c.
This DEMO is supported by a fourth quarter funding provided
by the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. Corre-
spondence and reprint requests should be addressed to Christopher
K. Hsee, Graduate School of Business, University of DEMO, 1101
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: christopher.hsee@
gsb.uchicago.edu. I thank Sally Blount, David Budescu, Bill
Goldstein, Josh Klayman, DEMO Larrick, George Loewenstein, Paul
Slovic, Dick Thaler, and Elke Weber for their helpful comments on
drafts of this article.
STUDY 1
Method
DEMO purpose of this study is to illustrate the joint-
separate evaluation PR effect. The study involved the
247
0749-5978/96 $18.00
Copyright q 1996 DEMO Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
248
CHRISTOPHER K. HSEE
evaluations of two hypothetical second-hand music dic-
tionaries:DEMO
Dictionary A Dictionary B
Year of publication: 1993 1993
Number of DEMO: 10,000 20,000
Any defects? No, it’s like new. DEMO, the cover is torn;
otherwise it’s like
new.
The questionnaire DEMO this study had three between-
subject versions, joint-evaluation, separate-evaluation-
A, DEMO separate-evaluation-B. In each version, partici-
pants were asked to assume that DEMO were a music
major and that they were looking for a music dictionary
in a used book store and planned to spend between $10
DEMO $50. In the joint-evaluation condition, participants
were told that there were DEMO music dictionaries in the
store. They were then presented with the information
about both dictionaries (as listed above) and asked how
much they DEMO willing to pay for each dictionary. In
each of the separate-evaluation conditions, partici-
pants were told that there was only one music diction-
ary in the store; they were presented with the informa-
tion on one of the dictionaries and asked how much
they were willing to pay. (Because there was only one
dictionary in each separate-evaluation condition, the
label ‘‘A’’ or ‘‘B’’ was not used.) Note that across the
three conditions the evaluation scale was held con-
stant, namely, willingness-to-pay (WTP) DEMO
Respondents were 116 unpaid college students from
the University of Chicago and the University of Illinois
at Chicago. They randomly received one of the DEMO
versions of the questionnaire and completed it individ-
ually.
Results and Discussion
The results are summarized in Fig. 1,1 As the ﬁgure
shows, there was a PR between joint and separate eval-
uations. In joint DEMO, willingness-to-pay (WTP)
prices were higher for Dictionary B than for Dictionary
A(t Å 7.11, p õ .001), but in separate evaluation WTP
values were higher for Dictionary A than for Dictionary
B(DEMO Å 1.69, p Å .1). The PR was highly signiﬁcant (t
Å 4.56, p õ .001).2 Note that this PR occurred between
1 To prevent their undue inﬂuences, extreme WTP values, deﬁned
DEMO as those at least three standard deviations from the mean, were
DEMO prior to analysis. This footnote applies to all the studies
reported in this article.
2 To assess the signiﬁcance of a joint-separate evaluation PR, one
needs to compare the difference between the valuations of A and DEMO
in joint evaluation with that in separate evaluation. Note that the and for B in joint evaluation and means for A and for B DEMO separate
difference in joint evaluation is within subjects and that in separate evaluation, respectively; S 2,SSA and SSB
evaluation is between subjects. DEMO meet this need, the following t
statistic is used: t Å ((MJA 0 MJB) 0 (M
NSA / SSB2/NSB
1
DEMO joint evaluation, participants were presented with
pairs of options, such as the one listed above, and asked
to indicate which was more acceptable or more satis-
fying. In separate evaluation, participants were pre-
sented with these options one at a time, and asked
to indicate on a rating scale how acceptable or how
satisfying each option was. Overall, rates of preference
reversal between joint and separate evaluations were
quite high. For DEMO, of the two options listed above,
most participants rated Option DEMO more favorably in
joint evaluation, but most rated Option B more DEMO
ably in separate evaluation. Bazerman, Schroth, Prad-
han, Diekmann, and Tenbrunsel (1994) replicated this
PR with business students in the context DEMO hypotheti-
NSB are numbers of participants in the joint, and the DEMO separate-
evaluation conditions, respectively. I thank Jimmy Ye for his help
DEMO,MJB,MSA SAand M0 MSBSB))/[(Sare means for A on this statistic.2/NJ / SSA2/
FIG. 1. Mean WTP values for DEMO A and Dictionary B in
Study 1. The numbers in parentheses indicate numbers of partici-
pants.
conditions that shared a constant, WTP, scale; the only
difference lay in whether the stimulus options were
evaluated jointly DEMO separately.
Joint-separate evaluation PRs have been docu-
mented in other contexts as well. One of the original
demonstrations of joint-separate evaluation PRs was
provided DEMO Bazerman, Loewenstein, and White (1992).
Participants read a description DEMO a dispute between
themselves and their neighbor and then evaluated dif-
ferent potential resolutions of the dispute. Among the
various resolution options were the DEMO two:
A: $600 for self and $800 for neighbor
B: $500 for self and $500 for neighbor
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:DEMO obhas AP: OBHDP
2
2 are variances; NJ,NSA, and
DEMO
J
)]2, where M
EVALUABILITY HYPOTHESES
249
cal job offers which differed in terms of (a) salary for pothesis.3 Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the discussion
oneself and (b) salary for others, and differed in terms below assumes that there DEMO two options to be evalu-
of (a) salary for oneself and (b) fairness of the grievance ated and that the two options DEMO on two attributes.
procedure of the company (see Bazerman et al., 1994,
for details). Similar PRs have also been obtained by DEMO 1 Attribute 2
Hsee (1993) in the context of salary preferences and by Option A: a1 a2
Lowenthal (1993) in the context of political candidates Option B: b1 b2
preferences.
It should be noted that joint-separate evaluation PRs Also assume that Option A is superior to DEMO B on
are different from the observation that effects revealed one of the attributes and Option B superior to Option
in a within-subject design DEMO disappear in a between- A on the other attribute. The two options in Study 1
subject design (e.g., Fox & Tversky, 1995). In a joint- comply with this pattern. The differences between the
separate DEMO PR, the preference revealed in two dictionaries can be interpreted as DEMO:
joint evaluation does not disappear in separate evalua-
tion; it DEMO itself.
Joint-separate evaluation PRs cannot be easily ac-
counted for by theories designed to explain choice-pric-
ing and choice-matching PRs. The standard explana-
tion DEMO choice-pricing PRs is the compatibility principle
(Slovic, Grifﬁn, & Tversky, 1990). According to this
principle, a given attribute will carry more weight in
a response that is on the same scale as this DEMO
than in a response that is on a different scale. For
example, monetary attributes will loom larger if the
evaluation is made on a monetary scale, such as in
pricing, than if it is made DEMO terms of choice. Evidently,
this principle is concerned with PRs involving different
evaluation scales and is not applicable to joint-separate
evaluation PRs. The DEMO explanation for choice-
matching PRs is the prominence principle (Tversky
et DEMO, 1988; see also Fischer & Hawkins, 1993). It
posits DEMO the most prominent attribute of the stim-
ulus options has a greater weight in choice than in
matching. However, there are substantial differences
between choice and joint evaluation, and between
matching and independent evaluation. For example,
in matching the evaluator is exposed to both stimulus
options and DEMO careful trade-off analyses
(Tversky et al., 1988); in separate evaluation the
evaluator is presented with only one option and can-
not perform DEMO analyses. Moreover, as will be
demonstrated later in this article, joint-separate
evaluation PRs can be turned ‘‘on’’ and ‘‘off’’ by vary-
ing the DEMO evaluability of the attributes, even if
the relative prominence of those DEMO remains
the same.
THE EVALUABILITY HYPOTHESIS
In this section I propose an explanation for joint-
separate evaluation PRs, called the evaluability hy-
Entries Defects
Dictionary A: 10,000 no
Dictionary B: 20,000 yes
Dictionary DEMO was superior on the Defects attribute and
Dictionary B superior on the Entries attribute.
According to the evaluability hypothesis, joint-sepa-
rate evaluation PRs occur because one of the attributes
involved in the stimulus options is hard DEMO evaluate
independently and the other attribute is relatively easy
to evaluate independently. To say that an attribute is
hard to evaluate independently means that DEMO evalua-
tor does not know how good a given value on the attri-
bute is without comparisons; to say that an attribute
is easy to evaluate independently means that the eval-
uator knows how good the DEMO is. In study 1, for
example, the Entries attribute was hard to evaluate
independently. Without something to compare with,
most students would DEMO know how good a dictionary
with 10,000 entries (or with DEMO,000 entries) is. On the
other hand, the Defects attribute was relatively easy
to evaluate independently. Even without a direct com-
parison, most people would ﬁnd a defective dictionary
unattractive, and a like-new dictionary attractive.
The relative impact between the hard-to-evaluate
and the easy-to-evaluate attributes will vary DEMO
pending on the mode of the evaluation. In separate
evaluation, because DEMO do not know how to evaluate
an option’s value on the hard-to-evaluate attribute,
they have to base their evaluation chieﬂy on the easy-
DEMO attribute alone. For example, in Study 1,
because those evaluating DEMO one of the dictionaries
would not know how good its number of entries was,
3 Loewenstein, Blount, and Bazerman (1994) proposed DEMO similar
account of the joint-separate evaluation preference reversal which
they cast in terms of attribute ambiguity rather than (in)evaluability.
Although we developed our ideas independently, I have beneﬁted
from discussions with those authors.
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
250
CHRISTOPHER K. HSEE
they would be forced to base their evaluation DEMO the Th e payoff attribute was presumably relatively hard
dictionary on its cosmetic condition alone. In joint eval- to evaluate independently. In contrast, the equality
uation, people could compare one option against the attribute was relatively easy to evaluate indepen-
other, and this comparison would increase the evalua- dently; even without a direct comparison, most peo-
bility of the DEMO hard-to-evaluate attribute. For ple would ﬁn d a n equal settlement appealing and an
example, in the joint evaluation condition of Study 1, DEMO settlement unappealing. Again, the PR ob-
respondents could compare one dictionary DEMO the served in that study was in the direction predicted
other, DEMO through this comparison they would recog- by the evaluability hypothesis, that DEMO, from Option A
nize that a dictionary with 20,000 entries DEMO rela- (superior on the hard-to- evaluate attribute) in joint
tively good and one with only 10,000 entries not as evaluation to Option DEMO (superior on the easy-to-eval-
good. In short, separate evaluation is determined pri- uate attribute) in separate evaluation. Similar analy-
marily by the easy-to-evaluate attribute and not by the ses can be applied to other joint-separate DEMO
hard-to-evaluate attribute, whereas joint evaluation is PR ﬁndings (e.g., Bazerman, et al., 1994; Hsee, 1993;
inﬂuenced by both the hard-to-evaluate and the easy- Lowenthal, 1993).
to-evaluate attributes. So far, the DEMO hypothesis has only been
Based on the preceding discussion, the evaluability DEMO to make post hoc explanations for already ob-
hypothesis can be stated as follows: When two stimulus served PRs. The following studies were designed to test
options involve a trade-off between a hard-to-evaluate whether the evaluability DEMO is capable of mak-
attribute and an easy-to-evaluate attribute, the hard- DEMO predictions. These studies each involved options
to-evaluate attribute has a lesser impact in separate that varied on a hard-to-evaluate attribute and an
evaluation than DEMO joint evaluation, and the easy-to- easy-to-evaluate attribute. The evaluability hypothesis
evaluate DEMO has a greater impact. In terms of was used to predict the direction of a PR. Study 2 used
Study 1, this hypothesis implies that the Entries attri- naturally occurring hard-to-evaluate and naturally oc-
bute had DEMO lesser impact in separate evaluation than curring easy-to-evaluate attributes. In Studies 3 and
in joint evaluation, and the Defects attribute had a 4, DEMO an attribute was hard or easy to evaluate
greater impact. was manipulated empirically.
The evaluability hypothesis makes a speciﬁc predic- STUDY 2
tion for DEMO direction of joint-separate evaluation PRs.
Because the hard-to-evaluate attribute loses impact
and the easy-to-evaluate attribute gains impact from
joint evaluation to separate evaluation, the direction
of any joint-separate evaluation PRs will always be
from the option DEMO on the hard-to-evaluate attri-
bute in joint evaluation to the option superior on the
easy-to-evaluate attribute in separate evaluation. In-
deed, the PR observed in Study 1 conforms to this pat-
tern. (Of course, in DEMO for a PR to happen, the option
superior on the hard-to-evaluate DEMO must be pre-
ferred in joint evaluation; otherwise there would be DEMO
room for a PR. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the above
condition is DEMO to be true in the rest of this
article.)
The evaluability hypothesis is also consistent with
the ﬁnding of the self-neighbor study by DEMO et
al., (1992). In that study, the two outcomes DEMO
Study 2 differed from Study 1 in two major respects.
First, DEMO mentioned earlier, Study 2 was designed to
test the evaluability hypothesis DEMO than simply to
demonstrate a PR. Second, in Study 1 a DEMO well as in the
other studies reviewed previously, the evaluability of
DEMO attribute was confounded with the continuous/di-
chotomous nature of the attribute; the hard-to-evaluate
attribute was always a continuous variable and the
easy-to-evaluate attribute always a dichotomous vari-
able. In Study 2, both the hard-to-evaluate and the
easy-to-evaluate attributes were continuous variables.
Method
Design and stimuli. This study DEMO the evalua-
tions of two hypothetical job candidates for a computer
programmer position. The programmer was expected to
use a computer language called KY. DEMO two candidates
were:
above can be interpreted as varying on two attributes:
(a) payoff to oneself and (b) whether this DEMO equaled
the payoff to one’s neighbor:
Candidate A Candidate B
Education: B.S. in computer B.S. in computer
science from UIC science from UIC
GPA from UIC: 4.9 3.0
Payoff Equality
Option A: $600 unequal
DEMO B: $500 equal
Experience has written 10 KY has written 70 DEMO
with KY: programs in the programs in the
last 2 years DEMO 2 years
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
EVALUABILITY HYPOTHESES
251
(‘‘UIC’’ stands for the University of Illinois at Chicago.
The participants were students of that university and
knew the abbreviation. GPA DEMO UIC is on a 5-point
scale.)
Note that the two candidates differed on two attri-
butes —GPA and Experience. Both are continuous vari-
DEMO For ease of discussion later, let us summarize
the differences between DEMO candidates in the following
format:
Experience GPA
Candidate A: 10 DEMO programs 4.9
Candidate B: 70 KY programs 3.0
FIG. 2. Mean DEMO salaries for Candidate A and Candidate B in
Study 2. The numbers in parentheses indicate numbers of partici-
pants.
As in Study 1, the questionnaire for this study had
three between-subject versions, joint-evaluation, sepa-
rate-evaluation-A, and separate-evaluation-B. In all
three versions, participants were asked to imagine that
they were the owner of a consulting ﬁrm, that they
were looking for a computer programmer to use a com-
puter language called KY, and that they planned to
pay the person between $20,000 and DEMO,000 per year.
In the joint-evaluation condition, participants evalu-
ated both DEMO In each separate-evaluation con-
dition, they evaluated only one of the DEMO The
evaluation scale was constant across the three ver-
sions —willingness-to-pay salary.
Results and Discussion
Measure of evaluability. The mean evaluability
score for GPA DEMO 3.7 and that for Experience was 2.1.
The difference was signiﬁcant (DEMO Å 11.79, p õ .001).
Measure of evaluability.
To assess DEMO attribute
These results established that GPA was a relatively
easy-to-evaluate attribute and Experience a relatively
hard-to-evaluate attribute.
Willingness-to-pay values. According to the evalua-
bility DEMO, there was likely to be a joint-separate
evaluation PR, because one of the attributes involved in
the stimulus options (Experience) was hard DEMO evaluate
independently and the other attribute (GPA) relatively
easy. Given that Candidate A was superior on GPA
and Candidate B superior on Experience, the direction
of the PR would be from Candidate B in joint DEMO
to Candidate A in separate evaluation.
The results, summarized in Fig. DEMO were consistent
with these predictions. There was a signiﬁcant PR be-
was hard to evaluate independently and which was
easy, participants in the two separate-evaluation con-
ditions were asked the following questions after they
had indicated DEMO WTP salaries for the candidate: (a)
‘‘Do you have any idea how good a GPA of 4.9 (3.0) from
UIC is?DEMO and (b) ‘‘If someone has written 10 (70) KY
programs in the last 2 years, do you have any idea
how experienced he/she is with KY?’’ (The numbers
preceding the parentheses were for the separate-evalu-
ation-A condition and those in the parentheses were for
DEMO separate-evaluation-B condition.) To answer each
question, participants would choose among four op-
tions, ranging from (1) Å ‘‘I don’t have any idea.’’ to (4)
Åevaluability scale, where a greater number indicated‘‘I have DEMO clear idea.’’ These options served as an
tween joint and separate evaluations (t Å 4.94, p õ
.001). In joint evaluation, WTP salaries were higher for
Candidate B than for Candidate A (t Å 1.65, p Å .1).
In separate evaluation WTP values were higher for
Candidate A than for Candidate B (t Å 5.50, p DEMO .001).
This study yields two important implications. First,
joint-separate evaluation PRs exist not only when one
attribute is dichotomous and the other DEMO continu-
ous, but also when both attributes are continuous. Second,
DEMO evaluability. this study shows that the evaluability hypothesis is not
only able to provide post-dictions for already-observed
Participants and procedure. Respondents were 112 PRs, but also able to provide predictions.
college students from the University of DEMO at Chi-
cago. They randomly received one of the three versions STUDY 3
of the questionnaire and completed it individually.
Upon completion each participant DEMO a candy bar In all of the studies discussed thus far, DEMO an
as compensation. attribute was hard or easy to evaluate independently was
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
252
CHRISTOPHER K. HSEE
a characteristic of the attribute per se and DEMO never contained two indices, Clarity and Warranty. In the
manipulated empirically. DEMO the two studies described joint-evaluation condition, participants indicated their
below, the evaluability of an attribute was manipulated WTP prices for both TVs and DEMO each separate-evalua-
empirically. As mentioned earlier, the evaluability hy- tion condition DEMO only one of the TVs.4
pothesis asserts that joint-separate evaluation PRs occur Th e t wo Evaluability conditions were Hard/Hard and
because one DEMO the attributes involved in the stimulus Hard/Easy. In the Hard/Hard condition, both the Clar-
options is hard to evaluate independently while the other it y a n d t h e Warranty ratings were DEMO num-
attribute relatively easy, and the relative impact of the bers DEMO hence both hard to evaluate independently.
two attributes changes from joint evaluation to separate Participants were simply told that Clarity reﬂected
evaluation. It implies DEMO if both attributes are hard how clear the picture was, that DEMO reﬂected how
to evaluate independently, or if both easy to evaluate DEMO the warranty was, and that for both indices, the
independently, DEMO the relative impact of the two attri- higher the number, the DEMO In the Hard/Easy condi-
butes will not change between the two evaluation modes, tion, Clarify remained hard to evaluate, but Warranty
and there will be no PR. was made relatively easy to evaluate by DEMO partici-
If the foregoing analysis is correct, then a PR can DEMO that the Warranty rating indicated the length,
be turned either ‘‘on’’ or ‘‘off’’ by varying the relative in months, of the warranty.
evaluability of the attributes. Study 3 and Study 4 were The two Evaluability DEMO were presented
designed to test this intuition. within-subjects. Because the Hard/Easy condition con-
Study 3 involved two evaluability conditions, Hard/ tained information DEMO available in the Hard/Hard con-
Hard and Hard/Easy: In DEMO Hard/Hard condition, both dition but not vice versa, the Hard/Hard condition al-
attributes were hard to evaluate independently; in the ways preceded the Hard/Easy condition.
Hard/Easy condition, one was hard and one easy. The Participants and procedure. Respondents were 98
evaluability of an DEMO was manipulated depending college students from the University of Chicago who com-
on whether or not participants were informed of the pleted multiple questionnaires DEMO received a cash pay-
meanings of the attribute. In the Hard/Hard condition, ment. Each participant received one of the three versions
the values on both attributes (Clarity and Warranty of a of the questionnaire and completed it individually.
TV) were meaningless numbers. In the Hard/Easy condi-
tion, participants were told that the Warranty rating
meant the length of the warranty; presumably the War-
ranty attribute would be easier to evaluate independently
once participants knew its meanings. The prediction for
this study was DEMO there would no PR between joint and
separate evaluations in the Hard/Hard condition and that
there would be one in the Hard/Easy DEMO
Results and Discussion
Method
According to the evaluability hypothesis, there would
DEMO no PR in the Hard/Hard condition, and there was
likely DEMO be a PR in the Hard/Easy condition. Because
TV A was superior on the hard-to-evaluate attribute
(Clarity) and TV B superior on DEMO easy-to-evaluate attri-
bute (Warranty), the direction of the PR would DEMO from
TV A in joint evaluation to TV B in separate evaluation.
The results, summarized in Fig. 3, conﬁrmed these
predictions. In the DEMO/Hard condition, there was no
PR: WTP values were higher for TV A than for TV B
Design and stimuli. Study 3 involved DEMO evalua-
tions of two hypothetical TVs; they varied on two attri-
DEMO, Clarity and Warranty:
Clarity Warranty
TV A: 90 9
TV B: 40 18
in both joint evaluation (t Å 5.5, p õ .001) and separate
evaluation (although the difference in separate evalua-
DEMO was not signiﬁcant). In the Hard/Easy condition,
there was a signiﬁcant PR (t Å 3.47, p õ .01): In DEMO
evaluation, WTP values were higher for TV A than for
The DEMO for this study had three versions and
each included two parts. They constituted 3 Evaluation
TV B (t Å 4.33, p õ .001), but in separate evaluation
Mode 1 2 Evaluability conditions. In all versions, parti-
4 In Study 3 and Study 4, participants in the DEMO condi-
tion ﬁrst indicated whether their WTP price was higher for A or
for B before indicating a speciﬁc WTP price for each option. DEMO
participants in Study 3 and four in Study 4 gave contradictory re-
sponses, i.e., said that they were willing to pay more for DEMO option
but gave a higher WTP price for the other. These responses were
excluded.
cipants were asked to assume that they were shopping
for DEMO basic 209 color TV, and that most such TVs would
cost DEMO $200. Participants were also asked to as-
sume that they were in a store where the salespeople
knew nothing about TVs, and that the tag on the TV(s)
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 DEMO AP: OBHDP
EVALUABILITY HYPOTHESES
FIG. 3. Mean WTP values for TV A and TV DEMO in Study 3. The
numbers in parentheses indicate numbers of participants.
253
tively easier to evaluate if one knows the range of the
attribute DEMO hence knows where the focal value falls
in this range. Finally, DEMO manipulation check was used
in Study 4 to verify the effectiveness of the evaluability
manipulation.
Method
Design and stimuli. This study involved the evalua-
DEMO of two CD changers (i.e., multiple compact disc
players):
DEMO Changer A CD Changer B
Brand: JVC JVC
CD capacity: can hold 5 CDs can hold 20 CDs
Sound quality: THD Å .003% THD Å .01%
Warranty: 1 year 1 year
Note that the two CD changers varied on two attri-
butes: CD-capacity and sound quality; DEMO latter was
indexed by THD. It was explained to participants in
all conditions that THD stands for total harmonic dis-
tortion, and that the smaller the THD, the better the
sound quality. For ease of discussion, let us summarize
the differences between the two CD changers as fol-
lows:
THD CD Capacity
CD Changer A: .003% 5 CDs
CD Changer B: .01% 20 CDs
Th e quest ionn aire for t his stu dy ha d six between-
WTP values were higher for DEMO B than for TV A (t Å su bject ver sion DEMO; th ey constitu ted 3 E va lu a t ion DEMO
1.56, p Å .12). 1 2 E va lu abilit DEMO con dition s. In all con dition s, pa rt ici-
DEMO 4 for a CD ch an ger in a depa rt ment st or e a nd th at th e
pr ice of DEMO CD ch an ger wou ld ra nge from $150 t o $300.
Study 4 was a replication of Study 3 with the follow- DEMO th e joint -eva lu at ion con dition pa rt icipan ts in di-
ing main differences. First, like Study 3, Study DEMO had ca t ed t h eir WTP pr ices for bot h CD ch a n ger s; in ea ch
two Evaluability conditions. Instead of Hard/Hard and sepa ra te-eva lu at ion DEMO dition , for on ly on e of t he CD
Hard/Easy, the two conditions were Hard/Easy and ch a n ger s.
Easy/Easy. It was predicted that there would be a PR DEMO two Evaluability conditions were Hard/Easy and
pa nt s wer e a sked to assu me th at th ey were sh opping
DEMO the Hard/Easy condition, but no PR in the Easy/ Easy/Easy. In the Hard/Easy condition, participants
Easy condition. Second, the DEMO Evaluability conditions received no other information about either THD or CD-
were between-subjects rather than within-subjects. Capacity than described previously. It was assumed
Third, evaluability was manipulated differently in that THD was hard to evaluate independently DEMO CD-
Study 4 than in Study 3. In the Hard/Easy condition, capacity relatively easy. Without a comparison, most
the hard-to-evaluate attribute was DEMO unfamiliar vari- students would not know whether a given THD rating
able (total harmonic distortion of a CD changer); in the (e.g., .01%) was good or bad, but they would have some
Easy/DEMO condition, the possible range of the total- idea of how many DEMO a CD changer could hold and
harmonic-distortion attribute was provided. It is ex- whether a CD changer that can hold 5 CDs (or 20 CDs)
pected that an unfamiliar attribute will become rela- was good DEMO not.
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
254
In the Easy/Easy condition, participants were given
the following additional information about THD: ‘‘For
most CD changers on the market, THD DEMO range
from .002% (best) to .012% (worst).’’ This information
DEMO designed to make THD easier to evaluate indepen-
dently. With this information, participants in the sepa-
rate-evaluation conditions would have some idea where
the given THD rating fell in the range and hence
whether the rating DEMO good or bad. Participants re-
ceived no additional information about CD-capacity.
Measure of evaluability. To ch eck t ha t t he evalua -
DEMO ma nipu la tion wa s effective, par ticipa nt s DEMO t he
two separ at e-evalua tion condit ions were asked t he
followin g quest ions after t hey h ad in dica DEMO t heir
WTP prices: ‘‘Do you h ave a ny idea DEMO good a TH D
ra ting of .003% (.01%) is?’’ an d ‘‘Do you ha ve an y
idea how lar ge DEMO CD capacit y of 5 (20) CDs is?’’ (The
DEMO mber s preceding th e par en th eses were for t he sep-
ar at e-evalua tion -A condit ion a nd th DEMO in t he pa ren-
th eses were for t he sepa ra te-eva lu at ion-B con di-
tion .) As in St udy 2, a nswers to th ose quest ions
ra nged fr om 1 t o 4, great er nu mber s indicat in g
gr ea ter eva lu abilit y.
Participants and procedure. Respon DEMO s wer e
202 college st uden ts fr om th e Universit y of Illin ois
at Ch icago. Th ey ra ndom DEMO received on e of t he six
versions of th e quest ionn aire an d com plet ed it in di-
vidu ally. DEMO ach par ticipa nt received a can dy ba r a s
compen sa tion .
Results and Discussion
FIG. 4. Mean WTP values DEMO CD Changer A and CD Changer
B in Study 4. The numbers in parentheses indicate numbers of parti-
cipants.
tion, because CD Changer A was superior on the hard-
to-evaluate attribute (THD) and CD Changer DEMO supe-
rior on the easy-to-evaluate attribute (CD-capacity),
the direction of the PR in that condition would be from
CD Changer A in DEMO evaluation to CD Changer B in
separate evaluation.
The results, summarized DEMO Fig. 4, conﬁrmed these
predictions. In the Hard/Easy condition, there was a
signiﬁcant PR (t Å 3.32, p õ .01), DEMO the direction of
Easy/Hard condition than in the Hard/Hard condition
the PR was consistent with the evaluability hypothesis:
In joint evaluation DEMO values were higher for CD
(t Å 2.92, p õ .01), suggesting that the evaluability
manipulation for THD was effective. There were DEMO
Changer A than for CD Changer B (t Å 1.96, p Å .06),
but in separate evaluation WTP values were higher
ally no differences in the evaluability of CD-capacity for CD Changer B than DEMO CD Changer A (t Å 2.70, p
between the Easy/Hard and the Easy/Easy conditions. õ .01). In the Easy/Easy DEMO, the PR disappeared
(t õ 1, n.s.). WTP values DEMO higher for CD Changer
Willingness-to-pay values. Based on the evaluabil- A than for CD Changer B in both joint evaluation (t Å
ity hypothesis, the following predictions were made: A 2.81, p õ .01) DEMO separate evaluation (t Å 2.92,
PR was likely to occur DEMO the Hard/Easy condition, butnot in the Easy/Easy condition. In DEMO Hard/Easy condi- Study 4 corroborates Study 3 by showing that thep õ .01).
Measure of evaluability. Mean evaluability scores
for THD and DEMO in the Hard/Easy condition
were 1.98 and 3.25, respectively, and in the Easy/Easy
condition were 2.53 and 3.22. A 2 Attribute (THD ver-
sus CD-capacity) 1 2 Evaluability (Hard/Easy versus
Easy/DEMO) analysis of variance revealed a signiﬁcant
interaction effect (F(1,135) Å 9.40, p õ .01) and a sig-
niﬁcant main effect for Attribute (F(1,135) Å 111.79, p
õity scores for THD were signiﬁcantly higher in the.001). Planned comparisons indicated that evaluabil-
DEMO K. HSEE
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
EVALUABILITY HYPOTHESES
255
presence of a joint-separate evaluation PR depends on the DEMO/Easy condition of that study, THD became
the relative evaluability of DEMO attributes involved in relatively easier to evaluate independently because
the stimulus options. A PR is likely to occur if one participants were given some DEMO information
attribute is hard to evaluate independently and the of that attribute, namely, its range. With this informa-
other relatively easy to evaluate DEMO The tion, people would not know where the THD value of
DEMO of a PR is greatly mitigated if both attributes the given option fell in the range and hence whether it
are hard to evaluate DEMO (such as in the was good or not.
Hard/Hard condition DEMO Study 3), or if both attributes Whether or not an attribute is hard to evaluate inde-
are easy to evaluate independently (such as in the pendently may be related to the certainty with which
Easy/DEMO condition of Study 4). one can evaluate its values. Mellers, DEMO, and
Birnbaum (1992) found that an adjective carries a
GENERAL DEMO lesser impact if the evaluation of the adjective is uncer-
Preference reversals as traditionally studied are usu- tain (and has a large variance) DEMO if it is certain (and
ally between conditions that involve different DEMO has a small variance). It is possible that for hard-to-
tion scales, e.g., acceptability versus pricing. The pres- evaluate attributes there is DEMO uncertainty in
ent paper concerns itself with preference reversals be- judging their values in separate evaluation than in
tween conditions that share the same DEMO scale, joint evaluation, and therefore these attributes have
but differ in the way the options are evaluated —either a lesser impact on separate DEMO than on joint
jointly or separately. According to the evaluability hy- evaluation. For easy-to-evaluate attributes, the uncer-
pothesis, joint-separate evaluation PRs occur because DEMO is likely to be low regardless of the evaluation
one of the attributes involved in the options is hard mode, and hence these attributes will have consistent
to evaluate independently while the other attribute is impact DEMO separate and joint evaluations.
relatively easy. Study 1 demonstrated a joint-separate Another question about this research concerns its
evaluation PR when the easy-to-evaluate attribute DEMO relationship with the prominence principle (Tversky et
a dichotomous variable and DEMO hard-to-evaluate attri- al., 1988). Although that principle was originally for-
DEMO a continuous variable. Study 2 showed that a PR mulated to explain choice-matching PRs, one may in-
could occur even if both attributes were continuous. In terpret it more generally to mean that the most promi-
DEMO 3 and Study 4, the evaluability of an attribute nent attribute DEMO an option will carry more weight in
was manipulated empirically. A PR emerged when one joint evaluation than in separate evaluation. This in-
attribute DEMO hard to evaluate and the other easy to terpretation of the prominence principle is consistent
evaluate, and it disappeared if both attributes were with the results of Studies 1 and 2, but not with those
hard to evaluate or both easy to evaluate. The ﬁndings of Study 3 DEMO Study 4. If a joint-separate evaluation PR
of these studies provide consistent support for the eva- occurs simply because one attribute is more prominent
DEMO hypothesis. than the other, then the Evaluability manipulations
Several potential questions DEMO this research need in Study 3 and Study 4 should not have affected the
to be addressed. First, what determines whether an existence of a PR, because these manipulations would
attribute is hard or easy to evaluate independently? not alter the relative prominence of the attributes.
My speculation is that it depends on how much knowl- Finally, one may wonder if there are other explana-
edge the evaluator has about that attribute, especially tions for joint-separate evaluation PRs than the evalua-
about the value DEMO of that attribute. An attri- bility hypothesis. The answer is probably yes. Gener-
bute will be hard to evaluate independently if the eval- ally DEMO, the evaluability hypothesis is most ap-
uator does not know its DEMO information, such plicable to PRs where the options vary on two DEMO
as the possible values of the attribute, its best and attributes, and one of the attributes is markedly harder
worst values, and so forth. Without such knowledge, to evaluate independently than the other attribute.
the evaluator will not know where a given value on PRs of other DEMO may or may not be explained by
that attribute lies in relation to the other values on the the evaluability hypothesis, and there are also other
attribute and hence will not know how to evaluate it. DEMO explanations. For example, when two options
Indeed, the evaluability manipulations in Study 3 and involving a tradeoff between two attributes, and the
Study 4 were based on these intuitions. For example, values of the options are of the same sign on one attri-
in the Hard/Easy DEMO of Study 4, THD was hard bute but of different signs DEMO the other attribute, a PR
to evaluate independently because most participants DEMO emerge between joint and separate evaluations
did not have any distribution information of THD. In (see Hsee, 1994, for a demonstration). This type of PR
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
256
CHRISTOPHER K. HSEE
can be explained in terms of the different DEMO separately. Similarly, when a person is applying for a
models people DEMO in joint versus in separate evalua- job, she may have the DEMO of either being interviewed
tion and the curvilinearity of the utility functions of at the same time as another job candidate or being
the DEMO (Bazerman et al., 1992; Hsee, 1994). Gen- interviewed on a different day than the other candi-
erally speaking, people use an additive difference date. In the same-time scenario, the candidate is likely
model (Tversky, 1969) in joint evaluation and an addi- to be evaluated jointly with the other candidate. In the
tive model in separate evaluation, and most attributes different-day case, especially if the two interview days
have a concave utility function in the positive domain are scheduled far enough DEMO, she is likely to be eval-
and a convex utility function DEMO the negative domain uated separately from her competitor. Which option
(e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). From these as- should the manufacturer adopt? Which should the job
sumptions it can be derived mathematically that the candidate adopt? According to the ﬁndings of this re-
attribute on which the stimulus options are of the same search, the answers to these questions depend on the
sign will have a lesser impact in separate DEMO type of attributes on which one excels over one’s rival.
than in joint evaluation (Bazerman et al., 1992; Hsee, If one is DEMO to one’s rival on hard-to-evaluate at-
1994). See Bazerman et al. (1992) for an alternative tributes and inferior on easy-to-evaluate attributes,
DEMO of the result of their self–neighbor study one should try to create a joint evaluation environment
from this perspective. so as to facilitate direct DEMO If the reverse is
As another example, consider a study reported DEMO true, one should try to be evaluated separately from
Irwin, Slovic, Lichtenstein and McClelland (1993). Par- one’s rival.
ticipants stated their DEMO values for various options, The present research shows that when two DEMO
including (a) improvement in air quality in Denver and involving a trade-off between a hard-to-evaluate attri-
(b) improvement in a VCR. In DEMO evaluation WTP bute and an easy-to-evaluate attribute are evaluated,
values were higher for improvements in air quality, preference between these options may change de-
but in separate evaluation WTP values were higher for pending on DEMO these options are presented jointly
improvements in consumer products (see also DEMO or separately. More important, the direction of this
man & Ritov, 1994, for similar ﬁndings). This type of change can be predicted, and can even be manipulated.
PR was quite different from the one explored in the
present research; for example, the options in Irwin DEMO REFERENCES
al. (1994) were of two entirely different categories (air
DEMO versus consumer products) and they shared no
common attributes. Irwin et DEMO (1993) considered their
ﬁnding as an instance of choice-judgment PR and ex-
plained it using the prominence principle. Another pos-
sible explanation is DEMO to elastic justiﬁcation
(Hsee, 1995, 1996), the notion that DEMO decision will
be inﬂuenced more by unjustiﬁable considerations
when there is ambiguity as to what one should do than
when there is not. It DEMO reasonable to assume that im-
proving one’s VCR is a less justiﬁable action than im-
proving air quality in Denver, and that separate evalu-
ation entails more ambiguity as to what one should do
than joint DEMO Thus, the results of Irwin et al.
(1993) may be DEMO incidence of elastic justiﬁcation.
I shall conclude this article with a discussion of some
prescriptive implications. In real life, people often face
the option of engaging either in joint evaluation or in
separate evaluation. For example, when a manufac-
turer launches a new product, he may face the choice
of either running a comparative advertisement against
a rival product or DEMO his product by itself. In
the former scenario the focal and the rival products
will likely be evaluated jointly, in the latter scenario,
Bazerman, M. H., Loewenstein, G. F., & White, S. B. (1992). Rever-
sals of preference in allocation decisions: Judging an DEMO
versus choosing among alternatives. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 37, 220 – 240.
Bazerman, M. H., Schroth, H. A., Shah, P. P., Diekmann, K. A., &
Tenbrunsel, A. E. (1994). DEMO inconsistent role of comparison oth-
ers and procedural justice in reactions to hypothetical job descrip-
tions: Implications for job acceptance decisions. Organizational Be-
havior and Human Decision Processes, 60, 326 – 352.
Fischer, G. W., & Hawkins, S. A. (1993). Strategy compatibility, scale
compatibility, and the prominence effect. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception And Performance, 19, 580 – 597.
Fox, C. R., & Tversky, A. (1995). Ambiguity aversion and comparative
ignorance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 585 – 603.
Goldstein, W. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1987). Expression theory and
the preference reversal phenomena. Psychological Review, 94,
236 – 254.
Grether, D. M., & Plott, C. R. (1979). Economic theory of choice and
the preference reversal phenomenon. American Economic Review,
69, 623 – 638.
Hsee, C. K. (1993). When trend of monetary outcomes matters: Sepa-
rate versus joint evaluation, and judgment of feelings versus choice.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
DEMO, C. K. (1995). Elastic justiﬁcation: How tempting but task-irrel-
DEMO factors inﬂuence decisions. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Process, 62, 330 – 337.
Hsee, C. K. (1996). Elastic justiﬁcation: How unjustiﬁable factors
/ a706$$2632 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP
EVALUABILITY HYPOTHESES
257
inﬂuence judgments. Organizational Behavior and Human Deci- of Preference DEMO Independent and Simultaneous Evaluation
sion Processes, 66, 122 – 129. of Alternatives. Working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Hsee, C. K. (1994). Preference reversal between joint and separate
evaluations. Working paper, The University of Chicago.
Irwin, J. R., Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S., & DEMO, G. H. (1993).
Preference reversals and the measurement of environmental val-
ues. Journal of Risk And Uncertainty, 6, 5 – 18.
DEMO, D., & Ritov, I. (1994). Determinants of stated willingness
to pay for public goods. A study in the headline method. Journal
DEMO Risk And Uncertainty, 9, 5 – 38.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis
of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263 – 291.
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (1971). Reversal of preferences between
bids and choices in gambling decisions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 89, 46 – 55.
Loewenstein, G. F., Blount, S., & Bazerman, M. H. (1994). Reversals
Lowenthal, D. (1993). Preference reversals in candidate evaluation.
Working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Mellers, B. A., Richards, V., & Birnbaum, M. H. (1992). Distribu-
tional theory of impression formation. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Process, 51, 313 – 343.
Slovic, P., DEMO, D., & Tversky, A. (1990). Compatibility effects in
judgment and choice. In R. M. Hogarth (Ed.), Insights in Decision
Making: Theory And Applications. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago.
Slovic, P., & DEMO, S. (1968). The relative importance of prob-
abilities and payoffs in risk taking. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology Monographs, 78, (3, Pt.2).
Tversky, A. (1969). Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Re-
view, 76, 31 – 48.
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., & Slovic, P. (1988). Contingent weighting
in judgment and choice. Psychological Review, 95, 371 – 384.
Received: January 9, 1996
/ DEMO 09-16-96 13:33:33 obhas AP: OBHDP{1g42fwefx}