Medium Maximization
CHRISTOPHER K. HSEE
FANG YU
JIAO ZHANG
YAN ZHANG*
A DEMO example, points or money—is a token people receive as the im-
DEMO reward of their effort. It has no value in and of itself, but it can be traded
for a desired outcome. Experiments demonstrate that, when people are faced with
options entailing different outcomes, the presence DEMO a medium can alter what
option they choose. This effect occurs because the medium presents an illusion
of advantage to an otherwise not so DEMO option, an illusion of certainty
to an otherwise uncertain option, or an illusion of linearity to an otherwise concave
effort-outcome return relationship. This DEMO has implications for how points inﬂu-
ence consumer choice and how money inﬂuences human behavior.
Wealth is evidently not the good we are seek-
DEMO; it is merely useful and for the sake of
something else. (Aristotle, Nicomachean
Ethics)
n order to achieve a desired outcome, DEMO usually have
I to exert effort. Often, however, the immediate payoff of
our effort is not the outcome we actually care about. Instead,DEMO
it is merely an instrument, a token, which has no value in
itself but can be traded for the outcome we care about. DEMO
other words, it is merely a “medium” between our effort
and DEMO desired outcome, as in the following:
Effort r medium r DEMO
Media are present in many decision contexts. For ex-
ample, when DEMO frequent-ﬂyer-program member ﬂies, he ac-
cumulates miles. Miles, however, are DEMO what he really cares
about. They are merely a medium that he can trade for free
travel (a desired outcome) later on. When DEMO loyalty-program
member purchases a product, she may earn points, but the
*Christopher K. Hsee is professor of behavioral science and marketing at
the DEMO of Chicago Graduate School of Business, Chicago, IL 60637
(chris.hsee@gsb.uchicago.edu)DEMO Fang Yu is Ph.D. candidate, University of
Chicago School of Business (fang.yu@gsb.uchicago.edu). Jiao Zhang is
Ph.D. candidate, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business
(jiao.zhang@gsb.uchicago.edu). Yan Zhang is research associate at China
Europe International Business School, Shanghai, China (zronnie@
ceibs.edu). Address correspondence to Christopher K. Hsee. Many individuals
have provided helpful comments on this research. DEMO particular, the authors
thank Pankaj Aggarwal, Danny Kahneman, Yuval Rottenstreich, Suzanne
Shu, Jack Soll, Dick Thaler, Stijn van Osselaer, George DEMO, and the JCR
editor, associate editor, and reviewers for their DEMO comments on drafts
of this article. Funding for this project is provided by the University of
Chicago Graduate School of Business, the National Science Foundation, and
China Europe International Business School.
1
points are not what she really wants. They are just a medium
that she can redeem DEMO a gift (a desired outcome) later on
(see, e.g., DEMO and Simonson 2002; Van Osselaer, Alba,
and Manchanda 2001). When children in schools that adopt
a token economy complete a task, they may receive chips
(Kazdin 1982), but the chips are not what the children really
want. They are just a medium that the DEMO can trade
for a piece of candy or some other desired good later on.
More importantly, the money we earn from work is also a
medium. Thus, the potential implication of research on me-
dium is not medium; it is extra large.
Since the medium is inherently worthless, people should
skip it and base their decision solely on the effort r outcome
relationship. However, the effort r outcome relationship is
typically not directly given, and one has to infer it from the
two typically given relationships: the relationship between
effort and the immediate payoff in medium (effort r me-
dium) and the exchange relationship between medium and
DEMO (medium r outcome). In order to effectively skip
the medium, one has to pay equal attention to these two
types of relationships.
DEMO tenet is that people often fail to fully skip the medium
and they maximize not just the effort r outcome return but
also the DEMO r medium return. We refer to the pursuit of
the effort r medium return as medium maximization. For
example, suppose that a person could choose either a less-
effortful action that gives her level of medium , whichM1
corresponds to outcome , or a more effortful action thatO1
gives her level of medium , which corresponds to out-M2
come . Her DEMO of which action to take will be in-O2
ﬂuenced not only by how much is better than butOO
also by how much is greater DEMO . In other words,MM
if is sufﬁciently greater than , then, even if is noMM O
 2003 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 30 ● June 2003
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2004/3001-0001$10.00
21
21
21 2
2
better than , she may still choose the more effortful actionO1
DEMO and .MO
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. We
ﬁrst review the relevant literature and then deﬁne what we
refer to DEMO a medium effect. The main body of the article
focuses on three speciﬁc types of medium effect and presents
empirical ﬁndings for each type. DEMO conclude with a dis-
cussion of theoretical and applied implications.
22
RELEVANT LITERATURE
A medium is similar to what learning theorists refer to
as DEMO conditioned reinforcer. Vast literature on learning sug-
gests that a neutral stimulus can acquire a reinforcement
value through association with a primary reinforcer and DEMO
change behaviors even after the primary reinforcer is re-
moved (e.g., Armus 1982; Boysen et al. 1996; Bugelski
1938; Herrnstein 1964; DEMO 1995; Williams and Dunn
1991). A medium, such as points, may have acquired its
reinforcement value via the extensive learning history ex-
tending back to one’s childhood. For example, more points
on a child’s exam are usually followed by more praise from
parents. As a consequence, points may have acquired a pos-
itive value and remain attractive even DEMO the primary
reinforcers (e.g., praise from parents) are no longer DEMO
Our medium maximization idea is also inspired by prior
research suggesting psychological myopia. Psychological
myopia here refers to a tendency in decision makers to DEMO
on information immediately related to their choice or judg-
ment and to ignore other (e.g., background) information. A
prototypical example is money illusion, a phenomenon that
has intrigued economists and psychologists alike for many
years (Fisher 1928; Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1986;
see also DEMO and Tyran 2001; Shaﬁr, Diamond, and Tversky
1997). Money DEMO is the ﬁnding that, in times of inﬂa-
tion, people overlook inﬂation rate information and base
their judgment of a ﬁnancial outcome on DEMO nominal value
rather than on its inﬂation-adjusted real value. For example,
people ﬁnd a 10% salary increase in times of a 12% inﬂation
DEMO satisfying than a 1% salary deduction in times of no
inﬂation, DEMO though the latter is better in real monetary
terms. The money illusion reﬂects respondents’ tendency to
focus on the face value of the event DEMO be judged and to
ignore the background exchange relationship between the
face value and the real outcome.
The same myopia seems to underlie medium DEMO
zation. As we discussed earlier, in decisions involving a
medium, the two pieces of information decision makers typ-
ically have are (a) DEMO effort r medium relationship and (b)
the medium r outcome DEMO The former is about
the immediate reward of their choice, and DEMO latter is about
the exchange rate between medium and outcome (very DEMO
like the exchange rate between nominal value and real value
in money illusion). In order to effectively cancel the inﬂu-
ence of a DEMO, decision makers should give equal con-
siderations to the two relationships. DEMO psychological my-
opia implies that decision makers will be sensitive to the
effort r medium relationship but relatively insensitive to
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
DEMO medium r outcome relationship. As a result, they will
fail to DEMO cancel the inﬂuence of the medium.
Psychological myopia is a ubiquitous phenomenon and
is implied in many other, seemingly unrelated, studies. One
example DEMO the research on proxy attributes versus funda-
mental attributes (e.g., Keeney 1980; 1994; Keeney and
Raiffa 1976). A proxy attribute is DEMO indirect, and often
more available, index of a more fundamental attribute—a
factor with which the decision maker is more concerned.
For example, the concentration of pollutants in the air is a
proxy attribute for a DEMO fundamental attribute—the health
consequence of pollution to humans. Keeney and Raiffa
(DEMO) argued that the use of proxy attributes may lead to
systematic DEMO and recommended that decision analysts
use fundamental attributes instead. Subsequent research by
Fischer et al. (1987) found that decision makers who were
presented DEMO proxy attributes did not spontaneously trans-
late them into fundamental attributes and gave the proxy
attributes more weight than warranted by expected utility
theories. DEMO with medium maximization, this ﬁnding
reﬂects the tendency to focus on DEMO immediate outcomes
and overlook the more fundamental outcomes.
Another study showing insensitivity to fundamental out-
comes is from the ultimatum games literature. Kagel, Kim,
and Moser (1996) found that, when players bargained over
chips with different exchange rates, their perception of fair-
ness was more focused on the distribution of the chips than
the distribution of the ﬁnal DEMO
In their work on loyalty programs, Van Osselaer et al.
(2001) have documented myopic maximization of intrinsi-
cally worthless points. In one of their simulated airline
choice studies, the authors asked research participants to
imagine that they could receive a free ticket if they had
earned a DEMO number of points from an airline and to
choose among several airlines that awarded points in dif-
ferent temporal sequences. The respondents tended to
DEMO the airline that awarded the most points at the time
of their choice, even though doing this was normatively
suboptimal.
Another example of psychological myopia is the pseudo-
certainty effect. Kahneman and Tversky (1984) found DEMO
most respondents preferred a 20% chance at $45 over a 25%
chance at $30, but when the same problem was framed in
terms of a two-phase problem where one had a 25% chance
to pass the DEMO phase and, if one passes the ﬁrst phase, one
can choose between an 80% chance at $45 or a 100% chance
at $30, most people choose the latter. This result reﬂects
two psychological processes. First, certainty (100%) has a
particularly strong appeal. Second, and more pertinent to
the present work, respondents in the contingent-probability
condition based their decision myopically on the probabil-
ities directly associated with the choice options (80% vs.
100%) and overlooked the background probability of 25%.
Another example of psychological myopia in the context of
a two-phase problem is the recent DEMO by Sood, Rotten-
streich, and Brenner (forthcoming) on decisions leading to
other decisions. For example, when consumers who are
MEDIUM MAXIMIZATION
shopping for a camera are asked at which camera store DEMO
would buy the camera, instead of being directly asked which
camera DEMO would buy, the consumers show high sensitivity
to the characteristics of DEMO stores (e.g., number of options
available) and low sensitivity to DEMO qualities of the available
cameras, which are the actual outcomes.
Another DEMO of psychological myopia is identiﬁed in a
set of recent studies by Leclerc, Hsee, and Nunes (2003).
The studies show that consumers tend to favor a high-rank-
ing product in a low-ranking category over DEMO low-ranking
product in a high-ranking category, holding the acutual qual-
ity DEMO the products constant. This effect presumably occurs
because people evaluate the product relative to the the local
category rather than to all the products DEMO all the cat-
egories. Leclerc et al. refer to this phenomenon as “narrow
focusing.”
More generally, Read, Loewenstein, and Rabin (1999)
DEMO that, in making decisions involving multiple phases,
people often fail DEMO broadly assess all the consequences taken
together and myopically focus on the most immediately
available consequences. They refer to this phenomenon as
“narrow bracketing,DEMO and they use it to explain a wide range
of research ﬁndings, including preferences for temporal se-
quences (e.g., Loewenstein and Prelec 1993; Read et al.
1999), risk aggregation (e.g., Benartzi and Thaler 1995; Tha-
ler et al. 1997), mental accounting (Thaler 1985, 2000),
attribute evaluability and joint-separate evaluation reversals
(e.g., Hsee 1996; Hsee et al. 1999), and taste change (e.g.,
Herrnstein DEMO Prelec 1992; Heyman 1996). In this research,
we study DEMO psychological myopia in the form of a medium
effect. Furthermore, we DEMO factors that moderate this
effect.
THE MEDIUM EFFECT
We deﬁne a medium effect as the difference in decision
between two consequentially equivalent conditions, one
with a medium (which we will refer to as the medium con-
dition) and one without (which we will refer to as the DEMO
condition). For ease of discussion, let us consider the fol-
DEMO simple medium and control conditions: In the me-
dium condition, people are faced with two options (option
1 and option 2), each corresponding to a certain level of
effort, a certain amount of medium, and a certain outcome.
They are informed of the relationship between effort and
medium and the relationship between medium and outcome,
but not DEMO relationship between effort and outcome. The
control condition is the same as the medium condition, ex-
cept that there is no medium and people are directly in-
formed of the relationship between effort and outcome.
Which DEMO will people choose in each condition? For
ease of discussion, let E1 and E2 denote the disutility of
effort associated with option 1 DEMO option 2, respectively;
O1 and O2 denote the desirability of DEMO outcomes; and M1
and M2 denote the levels of medium.
In DEMO control condition, we assume that people will sim-
ply compare the DEMO difference in effort between the
options with the relative difference in outcome between the
3
options. Thus, their likelihood of choosing one option over
the other, say, option 2 over option 1, can be modeled
roughly as
L(control) p OE22 . (1)
OE11
The DEMO for using ratios rather than absolute differences
is that people usually judge the advantage of one option
over another in relative terms (Shaﬁr, DEMO, and Smith
1993).
In the medium condition, our previous discussion on my-
opia and medium maximization suggests that people’s de-
cision will DEMO inﬂuenced not only by the ﬁnal outcome but
also by the medium. Thus, their likelihood of choosing op-
tion 2 over option 1 can be modeled roughly as
L medium()pw MOE22 2+(1 w) , (2)
MOE11 1
where the weight w, ranging between zero and one, indicates
the degree to which the decision maker is inﬂuenced by the
medium.1
A comparison between equation 1 and equation 2 yields
DEMO following propositions. First, the presence of a medium
may lead people DEMO make different choices. That is,
L(medium) may be different DEMO L(control). We shall refer
to this difference as the medium effect. Second, the mere
presence of a medium is not sufﬁcient to produce a medium
effect. As equations 1 and 2 show, whether the presence of
a medium leads to a medium effect depends on whether
DEMO 2 1/MOis different from . If it is not, then DEMO 2/O
will reduce to equation 1, and there will be DEMO medium
effect. We will elaborate on these propositions when pre-
senting the experiments.
THREE CASES OF THE MEDIUM EFFECT
The medium effect manifests itself DEMO different situations.
In this article we focus on three types of situations that we
believe are representative of many real-world decisions in-
volving media. DEMO ﬁrst case is about a choice between a
less effortful action and a more effortful action, where the
more effortful action does not yield a much better outcome
than the less effortful one. Here, the medium may give the
more effortful action an illusion of advantage and lead DEMO
people to choose it. The second case is about options whose
outcomes are uncertain. Here, the medium may give those
options an illusion of certainty and increase their attrac-
tiveness. The last case concerns situations where DEMO mar-
ginal return of effort diminishes over time, that is, the return
function of effort is concave. Here, a medium may create
an illusion of linearity and lead people to exert more effort.
1These equations DEMO not meant to be precise models; they are only
approximations.
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Control condition:
Short task (6 minutes) DEMO vanilla ice cream.
Long task (7 minutes) r pistachio ice cream.
Medium condition:
Short Task (6 minutes) r 60 points r DEMO ice cream.
Long Task (7 minutes) r 100 points r pistachio ice
cream.
Notice that this design ﬁts the characteristics of the sit-
DEMO discussed above, namely, . Here,M21 2 1/M 1 O /O
M /M p 100/60 or 1.67. In a pretest, we found that most
students did not consider pistachio ice cream to DEMO better
than vanilla ice cream. Hence, it is reasonable to assume
DEMO is smaller than .O21 2 1/OM/M p 1.67
Method
Ninety-six students from a midwestern university were
approached on campus and told that DEMO could participate
in an experiment in the following week and receive 1 gallon
of Haagen Dazs ice cream in return. They then ﬁlled out DEMO
questionnaire, ostensibly designed to gather information
from potential participants. In the DEMO condition, the re-
spondents were told about the following week’s experiment
DEMO they could choose between two similar tasks, one re-
quiring six DEMO and one seven minutes; that the ﬂavor
of the ice cream DEMO would receive depended on which
task they chose; and that they DEMO receive vanilla ice
cream, if they chose the short task, and pistachio ice cream,
if they chose the longer task.
The medium DEMO was the same as the control con-
dition, except that a DEMO was introduced: respondents
were told that they would receive 60 points, if they chose
the short task or 100 points, if they chose the longer task,
and that, with 50–99 points, they would DEMO vanilla ice
cream and with 100 or more points they would receive
pistachio ice cream. They were also told that the points had
no DEMO value and were nontransferable.
After having made their choices, respondents were DEMO
asked which type of ice cream they liked more. This question
was designed to test whether the medium inﬂuenced judg-
ments of the actual DEMO
Results and Discussion
As summarized in ﬁgure 1, the result supports DEMO
1a: more respondents chose the long task in the medium
condition DEMO in the control condition (x2 p 7.43, p !
.01). We consider this as preliminary evidence for medium
maximization.
A possible alternative DEMO for the ﬁnding is that
respondents in the medium condition may have used points
to infer the relative desirability of the ice creams and DEMO
fore chose the pistachio ice cream, which required more
points. Had DEMO been the case, then, in the subsequent ice
cream preference question, those respondents should also
have expressed a greater liking for pistachio ice cream than
4
Of these three cases, the ﬁrst is the most basic, and the latter
two are extensions.
MEDIUM EFFECT CASE 1: DEMO
ILLUSION OF ADVANTAGE
This section concerns situations where people choose be-
tween two options (say options 1 and 2), and the advantage
of option 2 over option 1 in medium is large but the ad-
DEMO in actual outcome is small. In other words,
M /MOis DEMO but is small./O
This type of situation is reminiscent of many real-world
decisions where moving from a less effortful action to a
more DEMO action (e.g., from a less demanding job to a
more demanding one) may be highly advantageous in the
medium (e.g., money) DEMO not so advantageous in the ﬁnal
outcome (e.g., overall happiness).
In this type of situation, the medium gives option 2, which
DEMO originally not very advantageous to option 1, an illusion
of advantage, and thereby will increase people’s likelihood
of choosing option 2. This prediction DEMO be easily derived
from equations 1 and 2. Because L(medium) DEMO a function
of both and , and L(control) is a DEMO ofM21 2 1/MO/O
only , it is obvious that when is greater thanO21 2 1/OM/M
O /O (and w DEMO not equal to zero), L(medium) is greater
than L(DEMO). The above analysis leads to the following
hypothesis:
21 2 1
21
21
H1a: When faced with two options (option 1 DEMO op-
tion 2), where is greater than , peo-M21 2 1/MO/O
ple will be more likely to choose option 2 in DEMO
medium condition than in the control condition.
The effect described in hypothesis 1a will be referred to as
a medium effect. If equations 1 DEMO 2 are correct, then the
following hypothesis will also hold:
DEMO: The medium effect could be “turned off” if the
M21/M DEMO is made smaller and closer to the
O21/O ratio.
Hypothesis 1b sets a boundary condition for hypothesis 1a,
suggesting that the mere DEMO of a medium is not suf-
ﬁcient to generate a medium effect.
We now report three studies. Studies 1 and 2 are pilot
studies, and they tested only hypothesis 1a. Study 3 tested
both hypotheses 1a DEMO 1b.
STUDY 1 (TASK/ICE CREAM)
Overview
The study involved DEMO choice between a short task and a
long task, each corresponding DEMO a different ﬂavor of ice
cream as the reward (outcome). DEMO amount of ice cream
was kept constant (1 gallon). There DEMO two between-sub-
ject conditions, control and medium. The relationships be-
tween DEMO and outcome in these conditions can be sum-
marized symbolically as follows:
MEDIUM MAXIMIZATION
FIGURE 1
STUDY 1 RESULTS
NOTE.—The percentage of participants choosing DEMO long task is greater in the
medium condition than in the control condition, although the percentage of par-
ticipants preferring the outcome of the long task (pistachio ice cream) remains
the same across the two DEMO
those in the control condition. But this is not what we found.
As ﬁgure 1 shows, there was no difference. In both con-
ditions, the respondents liked vanilla ice cream more. It
seems that the presence of a medium may lead people to
choose a longer task and DEMO up with a less preferred
outcome.
STUDY 2 (BANKING)
Overview
DEMO 2 replicates study 1 in a marketing-relevant context.
It also includes a poststudy questionnaire to ensure that the
respondents understood the instructions. The decision DEMO the
study was to choose between two branches of a bank at
which to buy a certiﬁcate of deposit (CD). The outcome
was a prize offered by the bank for buying the CD. There
were DEMO possible prizes: $100 now or $150 three years
from now when DEMO CD matured. The study had two be-
tween-subject conditions, which can DEMO summarized as fol-
lows:
Control condition:
Branch 1 (5 DEMO away) r $100 now.
Branch 2 (6 minutes away) r DEMO three years from
now.
Medium condition:
Branch 1 (5 minutes DEMO) r 100 points r $100 now.
Branch 2 (6 minutes away) r 150 points r $150 three
years from now.
Again, this DEMO matches the characteristics conducive
to a medium effect, namely, that . Here,M21 2 1/M 1 O /O
M /M p DEMO/100 p 1.5; O /O p the attractiveness of
$150 in three years/the attractiveness of $100 now. In a
21 2 1
DEMO
pretest, most students preferred $100 now to $150 in three
years. DEMO, is less than one and smaller thanO21/O
M /M p 1.5.
21
Method
Respondents were 236 students from a midwestern uni-
versity DEMO the United States and an east coast university in
China. Those in the control condition were asked to imagine
that they had $5,000 DEMO and planned to buy a three-year
$5,000 CD at one of two nearby branches of a large bank;
one branch was ﬁve DEMO away, and the other was six
minutes away. In a one-day DEMO, the bank was of-
fering a prize for those purchasing a DEMO,000 CD. The re-
spondents were told that, if they bought DEMO CD at the branch
ﬁve minutes away, the bank would give DEMO $100 im-
mediately, and if they bought the CD at the DEMO six
minutes away, the bank would give them $150 three years
DEMO when the CD matured. They were asked to assume that
they only had enough money to buy one such CD. Their
task was to DEMO at which branch to buy the CD.
The medium condition was identical to the control con-
dition, except that a medium (points) was introduced be-
tween choice of branch and type of outcome. Respondents
were DEMO that, if they bought the CD at the branch ﬁve
minutes DEMO, the bank would give them 100 points, and
if they bought the CD at the branch six minutes away, the
bank would give them 150 points. They were also told that,
if they had DEMO points, the bank would give them $100
immediately, and if they had 150 points, the bank would
give them $150 three years later when the CD matured. The
points were said to have no other DEMO The decision was
whether to buy the CD at the ﬁve-minute-away branch that
would give them 100 points or the six-minute-away branch
that would DEMO them 150 points.
To test whether the respondents understood the instruc-
tions, we asked the following questions after they had made
their choice. The ﬁrst question (for both the control and the
medium conditions) asked DEMO many prizes one could pos-
sibly receive from the bank (the DEMO answer was one).
The second question (also for both the DEMO and the me-
dium conditions) asked the respondents to recall the DEMO
they would receive if they bought the CD at the branch six
minutes away; the correct answer was $150 three years
later). The third question (only for the medium condition)
asked whether the points had any other use besides allowing
one to receive a cash prize; the correct answer was no). Of
the 236 respondents, 23 respondents answered one or more
of the questions incorrectly or did not answer DEMO the ques-
tions, and they were excluded from the analysis. (Including
these respondents in the analysys does not signiﬁcantly
change the results.)
DEMO and Discussion
Again, we found a medium effect. The proportion of DEMO
spondents choosing the six-minute-away branch was sig-
6
niﬁcantly higher in the medium con-(x2 p 18.66, p ! .01)
dition (44%) than in the control condition (17%).
This study also rules out several potential alternative ex-
planations for the DEMO effect of study 1 (Tasks/Ice Cream
study). One is DEMO the respondents may have misunderstood
the instructions. This explanation is not likely for this study
because the result is based only on respondents who DEMO
swered all the poststudy questions correctly. Another alter-
native explanation is that points may have served as a cue
to the desirability of the DEMO Again, this explanation
does not easily apply to study 2 because DEMO is unlikely that
people need to infer the desirability of “$100 now” or “$150
in three years” from points. A third alternative explanation
for DEMO medium effect in study 1 is that points may have
served as a cue for the importance of the tasks. Because the
long task DEMO study 1 awarded more points than the short
task, the respondents DEMO have considered the long task to
be more important and therefore chose that task. This ex-
planation is less viable for study 2. Study DEMO is a scenario
study, and, in the scenario, the points DEMO merely a means
of promotion by the bank. It is unlikely that respondents
used these points to infer the relative importance of their
tasks: to bank at ﬁve-minute-away branch or six-minute-
away branch.
STUDY 3 (SNICKERS/ALMOND JOY)
Overview
Study 3 extends studies 1 and 2 in DEMO nontrivial direc-
tions. First, it included three medium conditions, with dif-
ferent ratios. This feature was designed to test hy-M21/M
pothesis 1b, that concerning the boundary condition of the
medium effect. Second, unlike the ﬁrst two studies, where
people with more points could not trade for the reward for
fewer points, in study 3, people with more DEMO could
choose the reward for fewer points. This feature was de-
signed to make the study more realistic. In real life, people
with more medium typically have more options of outcomes.
To hold this feature constant DEMO all conditions, we in-
troduced the ﬂexibility not only to the DEMO conditions
but also to the control condition.
This study contained the following four conditions:
Control condition:
Short task (20 minutes) r DEMO pound of Snickers bars.
Long task (25 minutes) r choice of 1 pound of Snickers
bars or 1 pound of Almond Joy bars.
DEMO condition 1 (the 60/100 condition):
Short task (20 DEMO) r 60 points r 1 pound of
Snickers bars.
Long task (25 minutes) r 100 points r choice of 1
pound of Snickers bars or 1 pound of Almond Joy bars.
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
DEMO condition 2 (the 60/61 condition):
Short task (20 DEMO) r 60 points r 1 pound of
Snickers bars.
Long task (25 minutes ) r 61 points r choice of 1
pound of DEMO bars or 1 pound of Almond Joy bars.
Medium condition 3 (DEMO color medium condition):
Short task (20 minutes) r a DEMO ticket r 1 pound
of Snickers bars.
Long task (25 minutes) r a blue ticket r choice of 1
pound of Snickers bars DEMO 1 pound of Almond Joy bars.
Notice that the ﬁnal rewards associated with the tasks
were held constant across all the conditions. The differences
DEMO the conditions lay in whether there was a medium
and what the medium was. In the control condition, there
was no medium, and DEMO relatively small. Here,O21/O O1
was the desirability of Snickers bars and O2 was the desir-
ability of a choice between Snickers bars DEMO Almond Joy
bars. In a pretest ( ), we found that DEMO (71%) stu-n p 81
dents preferred Snickers bars to Almond Joy bars. Therefore,
the relative advantage of having the option of Almond DEMO
bars was small, and would not be much greater thanO21/O
DEMO In the condition, the ratio was rather60/100 M21/M
large ( ). Thus, based on hypothesis 1a, we expected100/60
more DEMO to choose the long task in this condition than
in the control condition.
The remaining two medium conditions were designed to
test hypothesis 1b, according to which the medium effect
could be turned off by manipulating DEMO In theM21/M 60/61
condition, the ratio was reduced to , close toM21/M 61/60
one. In the color medium condition, DEMO medium was simply
colored tickets, and was either meaningless or one.M21/DEMO
Thus, we predicted that the medium effect found in the
original DEMO condition would fade or vanish in the latter
two medium conditions.
Method
This study was conducted in the dining hall of a southern
university DEMO the United States with 174 unpaid students.
The method was similar to that used in study 1. The choices
were to complete a 20-minute DEMO or a 25-minute survey.
The outcome for completing the short task was to receive
one pound of Snickers bars and that for the long DEMO was
to choose either 1 pound of Almond Joy bars or 1 pound
of Snickers bars.
Other than what is described above, the control condition
and the condition were basically the same as the60/100
control DEMO the medium conditions in study 1, respectively.
The other two medium DEMO were identical to the
60/100 condition, except that 60 points DEMO 100 points were
replaced with 60 points and 61 points, respectively, in the
60/61 condition, and with a brown ticket and a blue ticket,
respectively, in the color medium condition.
After having made their decisions, participants were asked
which type of chocolates they liked more. This question was
designed to replicate the observation in study 1 that the
medium did DEMO affect preferences for the outcomes.
Results and Discussion
The results are summarized in ﬁgure 2. As predicted in
hypothesis 1a, more people signed up for the long task in
the 60/100 condition than in the DEMO condition (x2 p
18.8, p ! .001). As predicted in hypothesis 1b, the medium
effect evaporated in the other two medium conditions
( in both cases), thus leaving the condition asx2 ! 1 DEMO/100
the only one that was signiﬁcantly different from the control.
Further analyses reveal that the condition differed60/100
not only from the control DEMO also from the other two me-
dium conditions from the con-(x2 p 13.47, p ! .001, 60/61
dition, and from the color mediumx2 p 12.81, p ! .001,
condition). These results not only replicate the medium ef-
fect but also show that the DEMO effect did not arise from
the mere presence of the medium but from the illusion of
advantage the medium creates.
The chocolate preference data DEMO at the end of the
study revealed no signiﬁcant differences between the control
and any of the medium conditions, a result consistent with
what we found in study 1. This study mimics real-life sit-
uations in DEMO people can either exert less effort or more
effort where the real advantage of exerting more effort is
to have more options for reward, not more rewards. Nor-
matively, what people ought to do is consider whether the
extra options are any better than the existing ones, and if
7
they are not, then there is no need to make the extra effort.
But what this experiment shows is that, when a medium is
introduced, people may focus on the medium, and, if the
payoff in medium from the extra effort seems relatively
large, people will exert the extra effort, although the extra
options in the reward set are of no extra value to them.
MEDIUM EFFECT CASE 2: THE
ILLUSION OF CERTAINTY
This case is concerned with a choice between DEMO options,
where the outcome of one option is certain, the DEMO of
the other is uncertain, and the levels of medium in DEMO
options are certain. We propose that the medium in this case
will create an illusion of certainty to the uncertain option
and therefore increase DEMO attractiveness. Speciﬁcally, we of-
fer the following hypothesis:
H2: When faced with two choice options, one with a
risky outcome, one DEMO a sure outcome, and both
with certain levels of medium in DEMO medium con-
dition, more people will choose the option with a
DEMO outcome in the medium condition than in
the control condition.
The following study tests this hypothesis.
FIGURE 2
STUDY 3 RESULTS
MEDIUM MAXIMIZATION
NOTE.—The DEMO of participants choosing the long task is greater in the medium condition (where the medium ratio between the long and the short60/100
tasks is high) than in any of the other conditions, although the DEMO of participants preferring the outcome unique to the long task (Almond DEMO) is no greater in
that condition than in any of the DEMO conditions.
8
STUDY 4 (STOCK/CASH)
Overview
The choice in this study was whether to quit a temporary
job now, with a sure outcome, or to quit it in the following
month, with a risky DEMO The outcome was money, and
the medium was stock. The share DEMO of the stock was $1
now and would be either $0 or $2 in the following month.
The two conditions of the study can DEMO summarized as fol-
lows:
Control condition:
Quitting now r $1,000.
Quitting in a month r $0 or $6,000 with even DEMO
Medium condition:
Quitting now r 1,000 shares of stock r $1,000.
Quitting in a month r 3,000 shares of stock DEMO $0 or
$6,000 with even chance.
We predicted that more people would work for the extra
month in the medium condition than in DEMO control condition
because the medium (stock) transformed the original risky
decision between a sure monetary payoff and an uncertain
monetary payoff into a DEMO riskless decision between
two apparently sure stock payoffs.
Method
Respondents (105 DEMO from a southern university and
a midwestern university in the United States) were asked to
imagine that they had worked as a temporary assistant in a
company for one month and that they had the option DEMO
to terminate the job now or to work one more month. For
ease of exposition, let us ﬁrst consider the medium condi-
tion. Respondents were told that they would only receive
stock as their compensation and DEMO they had to redeem
their shares as soon as they received them. Respondents
were further told that the stock value was $1/share at DEMO
present time and would be either $0 or $2 per share with
equal chance a month later and that if they terminated their
job DEMO, they would receive a total of 1,000 shares of stock,DEMO
and if they worked one more month, they would receive a
DEMO of 3,000 shares.
In the control condition, there was no DEMO of the
stock. The respondents were directly informed of the mon-
etary consequence of their choices: the monetary ﬁgures
were simply calculated from the corresponding stock values
in the medium condition. Thus, the control and the medium
conditions were identical in terms of the ﬁnal outcome. In
both DEMO, the dependent variable was whether to quit
now or to work DEMO more month.
Results and Discussion
As expected, signiﬁcantly more people (x2 p 10.30, p !
.001) opted to work one more month DEMO the medium condition
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
(61%) than in the control condition (30%). In support of
hypothesis 2, the medium (stock) indeed increased the pop-
ularity of the risky option. Presumably, DEMO medium (stocks)
endowed the risky option an illusion of certainty.
DEMO real life, the outcome of an activity is often uncertain.
What DEMO ﬁndings suggest is that the introduction of a me-
dium can create an illusion of certainty and thereby increase
willingness to engage in the DEMO For example, the actual
beneﬁt of physical exercises (e.g., jogging) is often uncer-
tain. however, if people are awarded points every time they
jog, they will probably be more motivated to perform the
exercise. Indeed, some fancy heart-rate monitors can present
joggers with feedback of how many calories they have
burned. To some extent, the calorie readings serve as a
medium, which makes people feel that for every unit of
effort they exert, they are achieving a guaranteed reward—a
jump in the reading, even though the actual out-
come—beneﬁt to their health—remains uncertain.
Thaler and Shefrin (1981) hypothesized that keeping track
of one’s calorie consumption DEMO a self-control function and
can lead people to eat less. This hypothesis is probably the
ﬂip side of the heart-rate-monitor effect discussed above.
Just DEMO telling people how many calories they have burned
can motivate them to exercise, telling people how many
calories they have gained can demotivate them to eat. In
both cases, the calorie count serves as a medium that pro-
vides a sense of certainty to an otherwise uncertain outcome.
DEMO EFFECT CASE 3: THE ILLUSION
OF LINEARITY
The two cases discussed DEMO far are about choices between
discrete options. The case to be discussed here is about when
to terminate a continuous activity. In particular, the present
case involves two properties. First, people continuously ex-
ert effort (DEMO endure pain or incur cost) over time, and their
decision is about when to terminate the ongoing process.
Second, the marginal outcome of the activity diminishes
over time. In other words, the outcome is a concave function
of time. Again, this situation is representative of many real-
world decisions, where the marginal return of effort dimin-
ishes over time.
Based on the medium maximization hypothesis, we pro-
pose the following hypothesis:
H3a: If the outcome of an ongoing aversive activity
is a concave function of time but the payoff of
the medium of the DEMO is a linear function
of time, then people in the medium DEMO
will engage in the activity longer than those in
the control condition.
Here, the medium generates an illusion of linearity.
However, according to DEMO medium maximization notion,
the effect postulated in hypothesis 3a does not arise from
the mere presence of the medium but from the fact DEMO the
medium payoff is more linear than the outcome. It implies
that, if the medium payoff pattern is the same as the outcome
MEDIUM MAXIMIZATION
FIGURE 3
RELATIONSHIP AMONG TIME, POINTS, AND M&M’S DEMO STUDY 5
9
NOTE.—In all the conditions, the M&M’s payoff DEMO a concave function of time. In the control condition, this concave DEMO is transparent. In the linear medium
condition, this concave relationship is DEMO by a linear relationship between points and time. In the concave medium condition, this concave relationship is again
transparent.
payoff pattern, the medium DEMO would vanish. This leads
to the following hypothesis:
H3b: If DEMO payoff of the medium of the activity is the
same concave function as the outcome, then there
will be no medium effect.
The following study tested both hypotheses 3a and 3b.
STUDY 5 (NOISE/M&M’S)
Overview
The decision investigated in this study was when to quit
DEMO to a noise emitted from headphones. The reward
for listening to the noise was M&M’s. The medium was
points. The study consisted of DEMO between-subject con-
ditions—control, linear medium, and concave medium. Fig-
10
ure 3 presents a graphic summary of the three conditions.
Note DEMO the ultimate relationship between M&M’s (out-
come) and time (DEMO) was identical in all three conditions:
it was concave.
Participants DEMO informed of these relationships prior to
the noise episode. While listening to the noise, they saw a
readout of the number of M&M’s (in the control condition)
or of the number of points (DEMO the two medium conditions)
changing on a computer screen and could stop the noise at
any time.
We had two predictions. First, people in the linear-me-
dium condition would endure the noise longer than the DEMO
trol condition participants because the linear medium en-
dowed the otherwise concave M&M’s payoff function an
illusion of linearity. Second, people in the concave-medium
condition would not differ signiﬁcantly from those in the
control condition DEMO the pattern of the medium here
maintained the original M&M’s payoff pattern.
Method
Participants (100 students from a large university in
China) DEMO asked to listen to an increasingly loud noise
emitted from a set of earphones, and in exchange they would
receive M&M’s plus a ﬁxed payment of 5 yuans (approx-
imately 60 cents). M&M’s were popular among college stu-
dents there and were expensive relative to DEMO living
expenses.
Participants were run individually, each seated in front of
DEMO computer and wearing a pair of earphones. Once the noise
started, DEMO participant could terminate it at any time by
pressing a key. The dependent variable was how long the
participant would endure the noise before DEMO it. The
longer they endured the noise, the more M&M’s DEMO would
receive. If the participant did not terminate the noise by the
150th second, the computer automatically stopped.
In the control condition, before DEMO noise started, partic-
ipants were told that, for the ﬁrst 10 seconds they listened
to the noise, they would earn 10 M&M’s; for the second
10 seconds, nine M&M’s; for the third 10 seconds, eight
M&M’s; and so forth. During the noise DEMO, they saw
on the computer screen the number of M&M’s DEMO had
earned.
In the linear medium condition, before the noise started,DEMO
participants were told that, for every second they listened
to the DEMO, they would earn one point, and that, for the
ﬁrst DEMO points, they would earn 10 M&M’s; for the second
10 points, nine M&M’s; for the third 10 points, eight
M&M’s; and so forth. During the noise episode, they saw
on DEMO computer screen the number of points they had
earned. As will be elaborated upon later, the prediction is
that respondents in this condition would be willing to endure
the noise longer than those in the control DEMO
In the concave medium condition, prior to the noise ep-
isode, participants were told that, for the ﬁrst 10 seconds
they listened to the noise, they would earn 10 points; for
the second 10 DEMO, nine points; for the third 10 seconds,
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
eight points; and so forth; and that, with every point, they
would receive one M&M.
After the experiment, participants were DEMO how many
M&M’s they thought they would receive for the last 10
seconds they had listened to the noise. This question was
designed DEMO see whether the respondent’s judgment matched
the actual reward rate, as DEMO been recorded by the computer.
We consider a moderately inaccurate judgment acceptable
because the inaccuracy may have resulted from the difﬁculty
of remembering the DEMO of the noise or the difﬁculty
of inferring the return rate from the readings on the computer
screen. But if the judgment was too DEMO from reality, which
we consider as more than 3 from the DEMO answer, the
respondent may have misunderstood the instructions. Nine
respondents fell DEMO this category and were excluded from
analysis. Cutting the data at 2or 3 does not signiﬁcantly
change the results.
Results and Discussion
The results (both the means and the medians) are sum-
marized in ﬁgure 4. As predicted in hypothesis 3a, respon-
dents in the linear medium condition endured the noise
longer than those in the control condition (t p 1.98, p p
.05, two-tailed test; one-tailed test). As predictedp ! .05,
in hypothesis 3b, respondents in the concave medium con-
dition did not differ signiﬁcantly from those in the control
condition ( DEMO, one-tailed test or two-tailed test). Fur-t ! 1,
ther DEMO indicated that the linear medium condition dif-
fered not only from the control condition but also from the
concave medium condition, though the effect was only mar-
ginally signiﬁcant ( , two-tailed test;t p 1.70, p p .09 p !
.05, one-tailed test). A planned contrast analysis that as-
signed a weight of 2 to the linear medium DEMO and a
FIGURE 4
STUDY 5 RESULTS
NOTE.—The amount of time for which participants are willing to endure the
noise is greater in the DEMO medium condition than in either the control or the
concave medium condition.
MEDIUM MAXIMIZATION
weight of 1 to the other two conditions yielded a DEMO
icant result ( ), which further con-F(1, 88) p DEMO, p ! .05
ﬁrmed the prediction that willingness to endure the DEMO
was greatest in the linear medium condition.
Study 5 extends the previous studies to continuous be-
haviors and shows that the presence of a DEMO can indeed
increase willingness to exert effort when the payoff function
of the outcome is concave. It also demonstrates that the
medium effect is DEMO due to the mere presence of the medium
but, rather, is due to the linear payoff pattern of the medium.
If the payoff DEMO of the medium is as concave as the
outcome, there will DEMO no medium effect.
Theoretically, neither the linear pattern of the medium DEMO
the concave pattern of the outcome is a necessary condition
for the medium effect. As long as the medium has a different
payoff pattern DEMO the outcome, there should be a medium
effect.
Ecologically, however, DEMO combination of a linear pattern
of the medium and a concave pattern of the outcome is
signiﬁcant because it resembles many real-world work-
money DEMO, where (a) the amount of money people
earn increases linearly DEMO they work harder or longer, but
(b) the utility function DEMO the money is concave.
A SYNTHESIS OF THE THREE CASES
In this section, we examine the three cases. In the ﬁrst
case, a DEMO makes a not so advantageous option appear
more advantageous. In the second case, a medium trans-
forms a risky choice into a seemingly riskless one. In the
last case, a medium turns a concave payoff relationship into
a seemingly linear one.
Despite the apparent differences, the second and the third
cases are variations of the ﬁrst. In each case, the medium
effect occurs because is greater than . To dem-M21 2 1/DEMO/O
onstrate this, consider the Stock/Cash study (study 4), which
demonstrates the illusion-of-certainty effect. In that study,
M p 1,DEMO shares of stock, and shares ofM p 3,000
stock; and , whereO12p v($1,000), O pw(50%)v($6,000)DEMO
v is the prospect theory value function and w is the prospect
theory probability weighting function. Because the prospect
theory value function is concave DEMO the gain domain and w
(50%) is typically no greater than 0.5 (e.g., Kahneman and
Tversky 1979), it follows that .M21 DEMO 1/M 1 O /O 2 This ex-
plains why people DEMO more willing to work the extra
month in the medium condition than in the control condition.
The same analysis can be applied even to DEMO Noise study
(study 5) involving continuous behavior. Let and de-OO
note the numbers of M&M’s earned at time and time ,tt
respectively , and and denote the number of(t 21 1 21 t ) MM
points earned at and , respectively.tt t12 23 Then, for DEMO 1
2
Note that even if we were to subject and to prospect theory’s valueMM
12
function transformation, it would still hold that v(M )/v(M ) p
v(3,000)/v(1,000) 1 O /O pw(50%)v($6,000)/v (1,DEMO) .
3Strictly speaking, and should denote the desirability of the numberOO12
of M&M’s at and , but the number of M&M’s DEMO its desirablity arett
highly correlated within the range permitted in this study. Even if the two
variables are not perfectly correlated, the basic analysis here will still hold.
12
21
12
12
12
21
11
10 DEMO, the ratio in the linear medium conditionM21/M
was always greater DEMO the ratio , as well as than theO21/O
M /M DEMO the concave medium condition. This explains why
the participants were more willing to endure the noise in
the linear medium condition than in the DEMO two conditions.
These analyses illustrate the underlying similarity of the
illusion-of-certainty and the illusion-of-linearity cases to the
illusion-of-advantage case.
21
GENERAL DISCUSSION
People often DEMO decisions in situations where the im-
mediate outcome is a medium. In this article, we have dem-
onstrated a systematic difference between choice with a me-
dium and choice without a medium, and we have identiﬁed
several boundary conditions of this effect. In this section,
we discuss DEMO topics for future research and practical
and theoretical implications of research on medium.
Potential Topics for Future Research
Research on medium can potentially encompass DEMO
interesting topics. The current research covers only a small
subset of these topics, but we hope that it is seminal and
that, along DEMO other recent works in the area (e.g., Kivetz
and Simonson 2002; Van Osselaer et al. 2001), it will gen-
erate interest for future research. The following are some
potential topics. First, this article has focused only on three
types of medium effects. We believe that a DEMO can
exert its inﬂuence through other channels. For example, sup-
pose DEMO the actual outcome of a behavior has to be deliv-
ered long after the occurrence of the behavior. Then, if a
medium is introduced and is delivered right after the oc-
currence of the behavior, it is likely to have a positive effect.
This effect can be called DEMO illusion of immediacy. Also,
controlling for the actual outcome, a DEMO of medium that
is dispensed in an ascending temporal sequence is likely to
produce a different effect than a stream of medium that is
DEMO in a descending temporal sequence (e.g., Van Os-
selaer and Alba 2000; see also Ariely 1998; Hsee and Abel-
son 1991; Loewenstein and Prelec 1993). This effect can
be called the illusion of DEMO In general, a medium is likely
to have an effect on DEMO to exert effort if the medium
alters the perceived return of the effort.
Second, although we have deﬁned medium narrowly as
an instrument used to trade for something else, our ﬁndings
may be generalized to a more broadly deﬁned medium—any
proxy representation for a more fundamental value. For DEMO
ample, a student’s GRE score can be considered as a medium
DEMO her chance of being admitted to a desired graduate pro-
gram (DEMO) and a professor’s number of publications
can be considered as a DEMO for his contribution to the
ﬁeld (outcome). Just as a DEMO deﬁned medium can
create illusions of advantage, certainty, or linearity for the
outcome, so can a proxy variable create such illusions for
the more fundamental value.
Third, future research may investigate other moderators
of the medium effect than what this research has identiﬁed.
12
Generally, factors that lead people to focus their attention
on the medium phase will enhance the medium effect. One
such factor is cognitive DEMO Cognitive load will limit peo-
ple’s mental capacity to see beyond the immediately avail-
able layer and thereby increase the inﬂuence of the medium.
DEMO such factor is the mental effort needed to ﬁgure
out the amount of medium for each option. The more effort
it requires, the more people will focus their attention on the
medium phase, and the greater will be the medium effect.
A study we recently conducted lent preliminary DEMO to
this idea. The study involved one control condition (without
points) and two medium conditions (with points). In all
conditions, there DEMO three choice options, and the corre-
sponding outcomes were similarly attractive. DEMO the two me-
dium conditions, the three options entailed different numbers
DEMO points. In one of the medium conditions (the easy-medium
condition), DEMO option corresponded to how many points
was transparently given. In the other medium condition (the
difﬁcult-medium condition), which option corresponded to
how many points was not readily given; the research par-
ticipants had to follow a speciﬁed calculation rule to ﬁgure
out the relationship by themselves. Two DEMO emerged
from this study. First, those in the easy-medium condition
were DEMO likely to choose the option with the most number
of points than were those in the control condition. This is
merely a replication of DEMO regular medium effect. Second,
conﬁrming our speculation about effort and the medium
effect, the tendency to choose the option with the most
number of points was even greater in the difﬁcult-medium
condition than in the DEMO condition. It seems that
people who exert effort to deal with the intricacies of media
are more susceptible to the inﬂuence of the media DEMO more
oblivious to the ﬁnal outcomes.
It should be noted that the moderators discussed above
are different from the moderators in the Snickers/Almond
DEMO study (whether the medium ratio was or60/100
60/61) and in the Noise/M&M’s study (whether the medium
return was linear or concave). To appreciate the difference,
let us revisit our DEMO of the medium effect. We have
deﬁned the medium effect as the difference in choice be-
tween the medium and the control conditions, namely, the
difference between
and
L medium()pw MOE
MOE
(2)
22 2
+(1 w)

11 1
L(control) p OE .
OE
(1)
22
11

These equations suggest that the medium effect can be mod-
erated by two types of factors: those inﬂuencing the size of
M /M and those inﬂuencing the size of w. The moderators
in the Snickers/Almond Joy study and in DEMO Noise/M&M’s
study concern . On the other hand, the DEMO weM21/M
proposed in this section—attention and cognitive load—
21
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
concern w. Since the current research has studied M /M
more extensively, future research should focus more on w.
Finally, future DEMO should shed more light on the
psychological process underlying the medium effect. Our
preferred explanation of the effect is psychological myopia;
it is DEMO consistent with the diverse literatures reviewed
earlier. According to that explanation, DEMO effort r medium
relationship is more directly related to one’s decision than
the medium r outcome relationship, and therefore exerts a
greater impact.
We now entertain two other explanations. One also attrib-
utes the medium effect DEMO the excessive inﬂuence of the effort
r medium relationship, but it DEMO the excessive inﬂu-
ence not to myopia but to people’s preference for objective
over subjective information (see Hsee et al. [forthcoming] for
evidence for this preference). Typically, which option brings
more medium (the effort DEMO medium relationship) seems more
objective and unequivocal than which medium level DEMO
the better outcome (the medium r outcome relationship);
therefore it exerts more inﬂuence. However, this explanation
seems incompatible with the results of the Noise/M&M’s
study, in which the number of M&M’s is as unequivocal as
the number of points. Another explanation attributes the DEMO
dium effect merely to people’s preference for more medium.
Obviously, the DEMO two explanations also rely on the as-
sumption that people prefer more medium but that they com-
bine that preference with myopia and preference DEMO objective
information. The last explanation treats the preference for
more medium as a sufﬁcient cause for the medium effect.
This explanation seems most parsimonious, but it also seems
too general and amorphous to be satisfactory. Regardless DEMO
its ultimate explanation, the medium effect, we believe, is an
DEMO and fertile topic, and it entails both practical and
philosophical implications, which we discuss next.
Implications
The practical implications of the current research DEMO ob-
vious. For instance, it can help organizations devise token
reinforcement DEMO to boost worker motivation. It can
also assist marketers in designing point-awarding frequency
programs to enhance consumer loyalty. Frequency programs
have become ubiquitous in DEMO years, and researchers
have identiﬁed many factors that contribute to their DEMO
larity (e.g., Kivetz and Simonson 2002; Van Osselaer et al.
DEMO). The current work provides an additional perspective:
marketers can stimulate purchasing behavior by manipulat-
ing the way the medium in such a DEMO example,
points or credits—is distributed.
More importantly, the current work DEMO broader phil-
osophical implications. Although in this article we have
treated things such as candies and money as “outcomes,” they
are actually also DEMO Arguably, the ultimate outcome of
any action is affective experience—broadly deﬁned, happi-
ness. Anything between our behavior and happiness is a me-
dium. DEMO proposition leads to some interesting corollaries:
First, there are typically DEMO layers of media between
21
MEDIUM MAXIMIZATION
our behavior and the ultimate outcome—happiness. For ex-
ample, when a frequent-ﬂyer-program member ﬂies, he ac-
cumulates miles. He then redeems the miles for a free airline
ticket. With the ticket, he takes a vacation. He then derives
happiness from the vacation. Here, miles, the DEMO, and
even the vacation can all be construed as media, as illustrated
below:
Flying r miles r ticket r vacation r happiness.
DEMO another example, consider a student who uses the
money she has DEMO from work to purchase a camera, then
takes photos, and then derives joy from looking at the pho-
tos. Here, the money, DEMO camera, and even the photos are
all media:
Work r DEMO r camera r photos r happiness.
Indeed, we are surrounded by DEMO layers of
media. If you are “digitally correct,” you may say that life
is a “multimedia system.”
Second, although this research has focused primarily on
the relationship between narrowly deﬁned media (e.g.,
points) DEMO their immediate outcomes (e.g., candies), its
implications are much broader and are applicable to the
relationship between any layer of medium in DEMO “multi-
media system” and the ultimate outcome, happiness. Social
scientists have DEMO that people in industrialized coun-
tries have been working harder and harder and accumulating
more and more wealth, yet their happiness has not increased
appreciably (e.g., Diener and Biswas-Diener 2002; Easterlin
2001; Frank 1999; Frey and Stutzer 2002; Schor 1993; Veen-
hoven 1993). Although DEMO observations have received
numerous interpretations (e.g., Brickman and Campbell
1971; DEMO 1992; see also Kahneman, Diener, and
Schwarz 1999), the DEMO research provides a new per-
spective. Typically, the longer or harder DEMO work, the more
money and material goods we can receive. In DEMO words,
the relationship between work and wealth/material goods is
usually riskless and linear. However, the relationship be-
tween money/material goods and ultimate happiness is usu-
ally uncertain and concave. What the current research DEMO
gests is that money/material goods can serve as a medium
that creates illusions of certainty and linearity. Thus, people,
who focus on these media are likely to overwork and ov-
eraccumulate money/material goods.
DEMO this article, we have portrayed the pursuit of an in-
herently DEMO medium as if it were a mistake. But it
may not be. The accumulation of a medium, especially when
it requires effort, may DEMO a sense of accomplishment
and self-efﬁcacy (e.g., Bandura 1982) and DEMO joy in
and of itself. It may also enhance the enjoyment of the
reward, as the reward may be perceived as a self-gift for
the accomplishment (e.g., Mick and DeMoss 1990). If these
conjectures DEMO, then it is not irrational to pursue media.
For many people, happiness comes not only from the end
of the effort r multimedia DEMO happiness chain but also from
13
amid the multimedia phases. In a way, the multimedia chain
is like an onion. An onion is a multilayer entity. When a
person peels off a layer, his action can be considered as a
means to accessing the heart of the onion. DEMO there is not
really a heart. If people resist the temptation to enjoy each
layer as they peel inward, then there will be nothing left to
enjoy once they reach the center. To enjoy an onion DEMO to
enjoy its layers. To enjoy life is to enjoy its media.
[David Glen Mick served as editor and Joel Huber served
as associate DEMO for this article.]
REFERENCES
Ariely, Dan (1998), “Combining Experiences over Time: The Ef-
fects of Duration, Intensity-Changes, and On-Line Measure-
ments on Retrospective Pain Evaluations,” Journal of Be-
havioral Decision Making, 11 (1), 19–45.
Armus, Harvard L. (1982), “Secondary Reinforcement Strength
and Acquisition Reinforcement Schedule,” Bulletin of the Psy-
chonomic Society, 20 (3), 129
Bandura, Albert (1982), “Self-Efﬁcacy Mechanism in Human
Agency,” American Psychologist, 37 (January), 122–147.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler (1995), “Myopic Loss
Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 110 (February), 73–92.
Boysen, Sarah T., Gary G. Berntson, Michelle B. Hannan, and
John T. Cacioppo (1996), “Quantity-Based Interference and
Symbolic Representations in Chimpanzees (Pan DEMO
dytes),” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behav-
ior Processes, DEMO (January), 76–86.
Brickman, Philip and Donald T. Campbell (1971), “Hedonic Rel-
ativism and Planning for the Good Society,” in Adaptation
Level Theory: A Symposium, ed. M. H. Appley, New York:
Academic Press, 287–302.
Bugelski, Richard (1938), “Extinction with and without Sub-goal
Reinforcement,” Journal of Comparative Psychology,26
(March), 121–134.
Diener, Ed and Robert Biswas-Diener (2002), “Will Money In-
crease Subjective DEMO?” Social Indicators Research,
57, 119–169.
Easterlin, Richard (2001), “Income and Happiness: Towards a Uni-
ﬁed Theory,” Economic Journal, 111, 465–484.
Fehr, Ernst and Jean-Robert Tyran (2001), “Does Money Illusion
Matter?” American Economic Review, 91 (December),
1239–1262.
Fischer, Gregory W., Nirmala Damodaran, Kathryn B. Laskey, and
David Lincoln (1987), “Preferences for Proxy Attributes,”
Management Science, 33 (September), 198–214.
Fisher, Irving (1928), The Money Illusion, New York: Adelphi.
Frank, Robert (1999), Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to Satisfy
in an Era of Excess, New York: Free Press.
Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer (2002), “What Can Economists
Learn from Happiness Research?” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature, 40 (June), DEMO
Herrnstein, Richard (1964), “Secondary Reinforcement and Rate
of Primary Reinforcement,” Journal of Experimental Analysis
of Behavior, 7 (January), 27–36.
DEMO, Richard and Drazen Prelec (1992), “Melioration,” in
Choice over Time, ed. George Loewenstein and Jon Elster,
New York: Russell DEMO Foundation, 235–264.
Heyman, Gene M. (1996), “Resolving the Contradictions DEMO Ad-
14
diction,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 19 (December),
561–610.
Hsee, Christopher K. (1996), “The Evaluability Hypothesis: An
Explanation for Preference Reversals between Joint and Sep-
arate Evaluations of Alternatives,” Organizational DEMO
and Human Decision Processes, 67 (September), 247–257.
Hsee, Christopher DEMO and Robert P. Abelson (1991), “The Velocity
Relation: Satisfaction as a Function of the First Derivative of
Outcome over Time,” Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 60 (March), 341–347.
Hsee, DEMO K., George F. Loewenstein, Sally Blount, and
Max H. Bazerman (1999), “Preference Reversals between
Joint and Separate Evaluation of Options: A Review and The-
oretical Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, 125 (September),
576–590.
Hsee, Christopher K., Jiao Zhang, Fang Yu, and Yiheng DEMO (forth-
coming), “Lay Rationalism and Inconsistency between Pre-
dicted Experience DEMO Decision,” Journal of Behavioral De-
cision Making.
Kagel, John H., Chung Kim, and Donald Moser (1996), “Fairness
in Ultimatum Games DEMO Asymmetric Information and
Asymmetric Payoffs,” Games and Economic Behavior, 13
(March), 100–110.
Kahneman, Daniel, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz (DEMO), Well-
Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Thaler (DEMO),
“Fairness as a Constraint on Proﬁt-Seeking: Entitlements in
the Market,” American Economic Review, 76 (September),
728–741.
Kahneman, Daniel DEMO Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory:
An Analysis of Decision DEMO Risk,” Econometrica, 47
(March), 263–291.
——— (1984), DEMO, Values, and Frames,” American Psy-
chologist, 39 (4), 341–350.
Kazdin, Alan E. (1982), “The Token Economy: A Decade Later,”
Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 15 (3), 431–445.
DEMO, Ralph L. (1980), Siting Energy Facilities, New York:
DEMO Press.
——— (1994), “Creativity in Decision Making with Value-Fo-
cused DEMO,” Sloan Management Review, 35 (Summer),
33–41.
Keeney, Ralph L. and Howard Raiffa (1976), Decisions with Mul-
tiple Objectives: DEMO and Value Tradeoffs, New York:
Wiley.
Kivetz, Ran and Itamar Simonson (2002), “Earning the Right to
Indulge: Effort as a DEMO of Customer Preferences
towards Frequency Program Rewards,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 39 (May), 155–170.
Leclerc, France, Christoper K. Hsee, and Joseph Nunes (2003),
“Best of the Worst or Worst of DEMO Best?” Working paper,
Graduate School of Business, University of DEMO, Chicago,
IL 60637.
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Loewenstein, George F. and Drazen Prelec (1993), “Preferences
for Sequences of Outcomes,” Psychological Review, 100 (Jan-
uary), 91–108.
Mazur, James E. (1995), “Conditioned Reinforcement and Choice
with Delayed or Uncertain Primary Reinforcers,” Journal of
the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 63 (March), 139–150.
Mick, David G. and Michelle DeMoss (1990), “Self-Gifts: Phe-
nomenological Insights DEMO Four Contexts,” Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 17 (December), 322–332.
Read, Daniel, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin (1999),
“Choice Bracketing,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,19
(December), 171–197.
Schor, Juliet B. (1993), The Overworked American: The Unex-
pected Decline of Leisure, New York: Basic Books.
Scitovsky, Tibor (1992), Joyless Economy: The Psychology of Hu-
man Satisfaction, New York: DEMO University Press.
Shaﬁr, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky (1997), “Money
Illusion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (May),
341–373.
Shaﬁr, Eldar, Daniel N. Osherson, and Edward E. Smith (DEMO),
“The Advantage Model: A Comparative Theory of Evaluation
and Choice under Risk,” Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 55 (August), 325–378.
Sood, Sanjay, Yuval Rottenstreich, and Lyle Brenner (forthcom-
ing), “On Decisions That Lead to Decisions: Direct and De-
rived Evaluations of Preference,” Journal of Consumer
Research.
Thaler, Richard H. (1985), “Mental Accounting and Consumer
Choice,” Marketing Science, 4 (Summer), 199–214.
——— (2000), “Mental Accounting Matters,” in Choices, Values
DEMO Frames, ed. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge DEMO Press.
Thaler, Richard H. and Hersh M. Shefrin (1981), “An Economic
Theory of Self-Control,” Journal of Political Economy, 89
(April), 392–410.
Thaler, Richard H., Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, and Alan
Schwartz (1997), “The Effect of Myopia and Loss Aversion
on Risk Taking: An Experimental Test,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112 (May), 647–661.
Van Osselaer, Stijn M. J. and Joseph W. Alba (DEMO), “Consumer
Learning and Brand Equity, Journal of Consumer Research,
DEMO (June), 1–16.
Van Osselaer, Stijn M. J., Joseph W. DEMO, and Puneet Manchanda
(2001), “Loyalty Programs and Process in Mediated Intertem-
poral Choice,” Working paper, Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.
Veenhoven, Rutt (1993), Happiness DEMO Nations: Subjective Appre-
ciations of Life in 56 Nations, Rotterdam: DEMO University.
Williams, Ben A. and Roger Dunn (1991), “Preference for Con-
ditioned Reinforcement,” Journal of the Experimental Anal-
ysis of Behavior, 55 (January), 37–46.{1g42fwefx}