 Academy of Management Learning & Education, 2011, Vol. 10, No. 1, 40 –57.
........................................................................................................................................................................
Scholarship That Matters:
Academic–Practitioner
Engagement in Business and
Management
TIM HUGHES
DAVID BENCE
LOUISE GRISONI
NICHOLAS O’REGAN
DAVID WORNHAM
DEMO of the West of England
Our research explores academic–practitioner engagement by undertaking interviews
with academics, practitioners, and other experts with relevant engagement experience.
DEMO findings highlight the problem of thinking narrowly about the different ways in
which engagement takes place, as well as defining narrowly what is a worthwhile
activity for management academics. We develop a framework that encompasses the DEMO
ways in which engagement takes place, and that relates these to DEMO attitude
groups among both academics and practitioners. This could provide a starting point for
business schools and individual academics to develop plans and put DEMO place the
processes for better engagement.
........................................................................................................................................................................
The relevance of academic research and teaching
to practicing managers has been a subject of de-
bate DEMO many years, with the discussion becoming
more intense in recent times (Bailey & Ford, 1996;
Bennis & O’Toole, 2005; Leavitt, DEMO; Mintzberg,
1996; Pfeffer & Fong, 2002; Porter & McKibben, 1988;
Shapiro, Kirkman, & Courtney, 2007; Starkey &
DEMO, 2001; Van de Ven & Johnson, 2006). Given
the DEMO of this debate and the importance
of the issue to business schools, it is surprising
that there has been little research into the actual
ways in which knowledge passes between aca-
demics and practitioners in the DEMO field.
Starkey and Madan (2001) point out that there are
no clear models relating to how management re-
search is developed and disseminated DEMO
academics and practitioners. Baldridge, Floyd,
and Markoczy (2004) argue DEMO research is needed
to better understand the relationship between ac-
ademic quality and practical relevance.
The link to practice is important because it is
DEMO the question of how close academics are
able to get to the reality of management in their
research. If exchanges are limited to a DEMO pro-
portion of the academic and practitioner commu-
nities, how are DEMO in general meant to
keep in touch with the reality of business practice?
Even academics with practical experience are
likely to lose touch DEMO quickly from a lack of
field exposure. Younger or less experienced aca-
demics may lack the experience to operate effec-
tively at this level, but how are they to develop this
experience and expertise?
Likewise, practitioners do not make the most of
management academics as a source DEMO knowledge.
The significance of knowledge in relation to orga-
nizational survival (DEMO & Zander, 1992) and com-
petitive advantage (Lyles & Salk, 1996; Zahra, Ire-
land, & Hitt, 2000) has long been acknowledged.
However, academics and their institutions com-
pete with other knowledge sources and are only
one of many potential knowledge partners (Van
Wijk, DEMO, & Lyles, 2008). In this respect, practi-
tioners have DEMO make choices as to the most suit-
able partners in different situations. It could be
said that in a highly competitive world manage-
ment DEMO do not “blow their own trumpet”
loudly enough.
40
Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, DEMO, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s
express written permission. Users may print, download or email articles for individual use only.
2011
The debate on academic–practitioner engage-
ment within the academic community can DEMO seen
to take place on two levels. On the one hand, DEMO
raises fundamental issues of epistemology, relat-
ing to questions on the DEMO of scholarly work in
the management field. This was touched on in the
recent special section of AMLE that focused on
“Doing Work That DEMO (Bell, 2009), where the
discussion related to how scholarly work in man-
agement is recognized and rewarded. On the other
hand, the debate can also be seen to take place at
a very practical DEMO, relating to understanding
the processes through which knowledge can most
effectively DEMO developed and exchanged.
We review the debate from these two perspec-
tives and discuss the implications of findings from
our research, which involved undertaking inter-
views with 68 respondents. They were chosen for
their involvement in DEMO en-
gagement and were made up of academics, prac-
titioners, and other experts with relevant experi-
ence in the management field. We will DEMO
with a review of the debate concerning the aca-
demic–practitioner divide in management. In par-
ticular, this will be concerned with different per-
ceptions over whether this is, in fact, a problem
that management academics DEMO be concerned
about and the nature of the challenges involved.
Based on literature from across the management
disciplines, we argue that this is an important
epistemological issue for academics working in
the field, and we set out the aims of our research,
leading into an outline of DEMO methodology and to
the research approach adopted. We then summa-
rize our findings and open up a discussion on the
possible practical implications for DEMO in the
management discipline who want to make their
scholarship matter in the wider world.
THE NATURE OF SCHOLARLY WORK IN
BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT
DEMO question of academic–practitioner engage-
ment is a basic one in relation to how the disci-
pline of management science has evolved over the
past DEMO years. Bennis and O’Toole’s influential
(2005) paper argues that business schools have
adopted an inappropriate model of academic ex-
cellence in order to DEMO credibility within the uni-
versity environment, measuring themselves solely
by the DEMO of their scientific research, thus be-
coming less relevant to practitioners. DEMO the
argument is as follows: Because of the need to get
DEMO status, business schools have become
overfocused on analytics and problem finding
DEMO than problem solving and implementation
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
41
(Leavitt, 1989; Porter & McKibben, 1988). Manage-
DEMO is taught as a science rather than as rooted in
action (DEMO & Ford, 1996), and this has led to a
separation DEMO management academics from the
management profession (Pfeffer & Fong, 2002). As a
result, much of the teaching and research carried
out in universities is irrelevant to the needs to
business (Beer, 2001; Bennis & O’Toole, 2005; Gho-
shal, 2005; Mintzberg, 2004; Mintzberg & Gosling,
2002).
A major concern, for some, is that business
schools may lose their legitimacy in knowledge
generation if their research DEMO seen as irrelevant
(Crowther & Carter, 2002; Huff, 2000; DEMO, 2001).
This could have potentially serious implications
for future funding DEMO the healthy operation of the
sector. For those in the academic community who
believe that those who apply academic knowledge
are important stakeholders (Anderson, Herriot, &
Hodgkinson, 2001), the pervasiveness of the gap
(Rynes, 2007) can be a source of some despair.
However, there is a counterargument that warns
business and management academics of the dan-
DEMO of moving too far to close the gap. Its essence
is that academic freedom is best served through a
degree of separation. If business DEMO are no
more than producers of commercially usable
knowledge, they stand DEMO lose what makes them
distinctive (Grey, 2001). Business schools do not
exist just to serve the profession of management
(Starkey & Tempest, 2008), and much knowledge
emerges from fundamental research that is not
known to be useful at the time of doing the re-
search (Weick, 2001). There is also the question of
power. Learmouth (DEMO), sees a threat to academic
pluralism from practice-based approaches that le-
gitimize a particular elite view of the world. While
less has been DEMO from those defending an
“arms-length” approach to practice, the acknowl-
edgement DEMO their concerns is important. We are
reminded that management research is a frag-
mented field in which there is little paradigm con-
sensus (Tranfield & Starkey, 1998).
A useful contribution to this discussion is the
distinction made between explanatory sciences
and design sciences (Van Aken, 2004)DEMO The explan-
atory paradigm, as predominantly followed in
business schools, is concerned with understanding
what is, while design science (as predominates in
DEMO and engineering) is concerned with what
should be. Design science is DEMO with devel-
oping knowledge that provides answers to prob-
lems. Van Aken (2004) argues that successful
scholarship requires a partnership between the
explanatory DEMO (where the output is a causal
model developed in controlled conditions) and the
42
design sciences (where the output is technological
rules developed in context). Achieving such a bal-
ance of scholarly quality and managerial rele-
DEMO (Pettigrew, 1997) implies a reorientation of
the management field toward DEMO science that
would emphasize work that is prescriptive, field
tested, and grounded in practice (Huff, Tranfield, &
Van Aken, 2006). Furthermore, the prescriptive ap-
proach can also be seen to involve a moral dimen-
sion, addressing Ghoshal’s (2005) critique of
business schools, DEMO making it incumbent on aca-
demics to also focus on the impact of business
activities on the community (Huff & Huff, 2001).
DEMO SOCIAL PROCESS OF
ACADEMIC–PRACTITIONER ENGAGEMENT
At the heart of our argument is the view of knowl-
edge creation as a social process (Amabile et al.,
2001; Nonaka, 1994; Tsoukas, 2005). A strong DEMO
in contemporary organizational thinking is to rec-
ognize that knowledge is socially constructed in
communities and is not confined to formal sources
of information DEMO data (Lang, 2001). Knowledge can-
not be seen solely as disembodied, formal, and
divorced from context (Blackler, 1995; Cook &DEMO
Brown, 1999; Lave, 1993). Knowledge creation in-
volves learning DEMO participation and interac-
tion (Amabile et al., 2001; Nonaka, 1994; Tsoukas,
2005), and has been portrayed as a spiraling pro-
cess of interactions between explicit and tacit
knowledge (Nonaka, 1994).
DEMO body of literature on knowledge manage-
ment emphasizes the perspective of organizations
as social communities specializing in the creation
and transfer of knowledge (Kogut & Zander, 1992).
An organization’s knowledge base is seen to be a
major source of competitive advantage. However,
sharing knowledge between communities DEMO be
challenging (Brown & Duguid, 1998), particularly
where the knowledge to be shared is complex
(Hansen, 1999). An understanding of DEMO to create
the conditions for effective exchanges of knowl-
edge requires consideration of the soft factors in
communication between communities, such as the
degree of mutual understanding between receiver
and sender, and their underlying assumptions and
motivations (Guzman & Wilson, 2005). It is neces-
sary to DEMO individuals to interact, codify,
and share their knowledge internally to DEMO the
firm’s knowledge base, as well as to interact with
external DEMO to access outside knowledge
(Birkinshaw, 2001).
The importance of social processes in knowl-
edge creation is pertinent to the way the problem
DEMO academic–practitioner engagement is ap-
Academy of Management Learning & Education
March
proached. Where the gap is framed in terms of
being about knowledge possession, the failure is
understood to be about ineffective transfer of aca-
demic DEMO (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart,
2003). However, Van de Ven and Johnson (2006)
argue that it can be a knowledge-production
problem, requiring a two-way coproduction of
knowledge between academic and practitioner
communities. Shapiro et al.’s (2007) research with
Academy of Management (AoM) DEMO found
that they support the argument for both ways of
framing the problem. That is to say, while poor
communication to practitioners is an issue, the in-
volvement of practitioners in creating knowledge
is equally important. This conclusion supports
Tranfield and Starkey’s (1998) argument for the in-
DEMO of mode 2 approaches in producing man-
agement knowledge.
The generally poor level of engagement between
academics and practitioners, highlighted in the
literature, DEMO therefore of concern because social
interaction is so fundamental to knowledge cre-
ation. The absence of sufficient direct interaction
between these communities means that DEMO is a
lack of the dialogue and debate that is essential
for the effective development of the discipline.
Rynes’ (2007) message is pertinent DEMO Academics
should seek interaction with practitioners despite
the possible tensions involved, DEMO interac-
tion is so fundamental to knowledge creation.
THE NEED FOR A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF
ENGAGEMENT
Criticisms regarding the quality of engagement
between academia DEMO practice are not restricted
to the organization sciences. Gibbons et al.’s (DEMO)
influential ideas on mode 2 knowledge production
apply to the whole landscape of science and tech-
nology. In mode 2, the social context of knowledge
production is crucial. In contrast to the mode 1
science DEMO model, mode 2 is based on an inter-
action model, emphasizing the relationship be-
tween researchers and users at different stages of
knowledge DEMO, dissemination, and utiliza-
tion (Nowotny, Scott, & Gibbons, 2001). It is very
difficult to make meaningful comparisons between
business and DEMO and other disciplines,
and therefore, we would not claim that DEMO
and management is either better or worse than
other fields of study in relation to engagement.
What seems to be important is that one DEMO the key
defining characteristics of business and manage-
ment research is its applied nature (Tranfield &
Starkey, 1998). It therefore fits well into a mode 2
approach.
2011
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
There has been DEMO certain amount written about
the need to involve the practice community in de-
signing and undertaking management research.
Shrivastava and Mitroff (1984) argued DEMO by con-
sciously formulating research questions in terms
of managerially controllable variables, research-
ers would be more likely to obtain results that
prompt actions. In doing this, cooperation with
companies becomes a prerequisite for the produc-
tion of actionable knowledge rather than an out-
come (Hatchuel, 2001)DEMO Some empirical evidence
suggests that practitioner–academic partnerships
can lead to better management research and its
greater utilization by practitioners (Amabile et al.,
2001; Landry, Amara, & Lamari, 2001). Suggestions
for achieving this DEMO the setting up of partner-
ship teams (Cyert & Goodman, 1997); practitioner
participation in interpreting research (Amabile et
al., 2001; Mohrman, Gibson, & Mohrman, 2001); and
the involvement of practitioners in problem formu-
lation, theory building, research design, and prob-
lem solving (Van de Ven & Johnson, 2006).
There is also an DEMO model that consid-
ers the triangular relationship between teaching,
research, DEMO practice, with two-way relationships
between each of the three elements (Kaplan, 1989).
Burke and Rau (2010) have recently argued that
better integration of teaching and research would
be beneficial to narrowing the academic–practitio-
DEMO gap.
However, there remains the fundamental ques-
tion, as articulated by Shapiro et al. (2007: 262): “Is
creating a more continuous DEMO dialogue be-
tween researchers and practitioners doable?”
While there has been much research in recent
years in the general field of interorganizational
knowledge DEMO (Van Wijk et al., 2008), there is
a knowledge gap relating to understanding the
process of development and exchange of knowl-
edge DEMO academics and practitioners and
their organizations (Rynes, 2007; Shapiro et DEMO,
2007; Starkey & Madan, 2001). For those manage-
ment academics that agree with Adler and Har-
zing’s (2009: 91) view that “academia needs to shift
to designing and implementing environments that
purposefully DEMO research that matters,”
what needs to be done to improve the processes
through which academic–practitioner engagement
takes place?
The research reported here DEMO to explore en-
gagement by interviewing academics and practi-
tioners who do engage with each other. We review
the evidence on the social practice DEMO engagement
and consider the various routes through which en-
gagement takes place in relation to knowledge
transfer and knowledge exchange. This leads to a
DEMO
discussion designed to add to the current debate
on how to create conditions likely to improve
engagement.
METHODOLOGY
The specific objective of the research DEMO here
is to better understand academic–practitioner en-
gagement. The following research questions and
subquestions provided the starting point for our
research:
1. What DEMO the practices and processes associ-
ated with knowledge development and ex-
change between academics and practitioners?
● How is knowledge exchanged?
● DEMO effective and efficient are the different
methods of exchange?
● What are the triggers and barriers to knowl-
edge exchange?
● What DEMO good and bad practice?
2. What are the characteristics and behaviors of
academics and practitioners who engage with
each other?
What are DEMO attitudes of those involved in en-
gagement activities?
How do they view the use of theory in the prac-
tice of business and DEMO?
How do practitioners view academics and vice-
versa?
How do they think their colleagues view this
type of engagement?
•
•
DEMO
•
The interviews were semistructured, based
around a framework designed to DEMO that they
covered common areas. The starting point for each
interview was to get the interviewees to start talk-
ing about their experiences of DEMO
ner engagement. In doing this, we aimed to allow
the interviewees DEMO go into as much depth as they
wanted in their areas of particular interest. An
interview guide was used by the interviewer to
ensure DEMO of aspects not spontaneously
mentioned by the interviewee. The interviews
were all conducted by the authors of this paper,
with each author interviewing DEMO within their
own field of expertise.
In managing a diverse team of researchers, it is
crucial to put in place sufficient research protocols
and processes to ensure dependability and con-
firmability of the findings (Lincoln & Guba, 1985).
The first named author provided continuity across
all subprojects. There was careful control of the
way the data was collected, coded, sorted, and
analyzed (Miles & Huberman, 1994). All interviews
DEMO recorded and transcribed. The NVIVO soft-
ware package was used to facilitate the analysis,
and this proved valuable in handling a large
44
Academy of Management Learning & Education
March
amount of data. The DEMO named author of the pa-
per conducted all coding in close liaison with the
academics who had conducted the interviews.
Through controlling the coding DEMO analysis pro-
cess in this way, it was possible to compare DEMO
contrast responses concerning common issues
across the range of interviews.
In undertaking this research we took a critical
realist approach. The critical realist perspective
DEMO for pluralism of perspectives in looking at
complex phenomena, where different DEMO exist
(Van de Ven, 2007). It is well established as one of
the major research paradigms (Guba & Lincoln,
1994), taking the point of view that there is a real
world to DEMO, but it is only ever imperfectly
understandable (Godfrey & Hill, DEMO; Tsoukas,
1989). Critical realism allows for the independent
existence DEMO the social world made up of abstract
ideas (Magee, 1985). Within this paradigm, in-
depth interviewing, as used in our study, is consid-
ered to be a very suitable method for probing into
DEMO complex social phenomenon (Healy & Perry,
2000). Furthermore, qualitative approaches inves-
tigating perceptions are recognized to have value
in understanding the DEMO area of knowledge
and learning (Sammarra & Biggiero, 2008).
The research covered here comes from inter-
views conducted by the authors in DEMO United King-
dom across the marketing, accountancy, strategic
management, and DEMO studies disci-
plines. Business and management contains a num-
ber of different fields, and there is no universally
agreed definition of the disciplines that should be
included in this area. However, the four disciplines
focused on here reflect core subjects offered in
most business schools, and most importantly, re-
flect the range of expertise represented by the au-
thors. In conducting interviews across a number of
disciplines, we considered it essential to have ex-
pert interviewers who research and teach within
each discipline chosen. DEMO cross-disciplinary
makeup of the team had many advantages in wid-
ening the research rather than constraining it
within one discipline. The four disciplines chosen
DEMO a range of relationships with practice.
Accountancy is highly professionalized, with DEMO
professional bodies controlling the license to prac-
tice. Marketing and strategic management are less
controlled. Professional bodies exist, but practice
is not confined to members of these professional
bodies. Organization studies is at the other end DEMO
the continuum from accountancy, with its empha-
sis on the study DEMO organizations, rather than the
professionalization of practice.
A purposive sampling approach DEMO taken,
through selection of interviewees relevant to the
processes being studied (Denzin & Lincoln, 2002;
Mason, 1996) that were well DEMO to illuminate
the issues (Gerson & Horowitz, 2002). Thus, DEMO aim
was not to provide a sample that represented all
academics or all practitioners. Our respondents
were individuals who were approached because of
their DEMO in some form of academic–
practitioner engagement. The interviewees were
contacted through the extensive network of con-
tacts of the authors of this study. DEMO network was
then extended by “snowballing” from the initial
respondents, in DEMO to identify others who were
suitable (Mason, 1996; Patton, 1987). The interviews
that took place, within each discipline, broke down
DEMO seen in Table 1.
The Appendix provides brief descriptions of the
role and responsibility of each interviewee, dem-
onstrating their suitability and credibility for in-
volvement. Selecting interviewees on the basis of
their credibility and expertise DEMO the area of re-
search is a well-established practice (Marshall &
Rossman, 1989), that puts an emphasis on the va-
lidity of the research through getting close access
to the phenomenon under study (Gummeson, 2002).
The other aspect of the sampling approach was to
gain perspectives from different stakeholders in
the management field. Hence we interviewed aca-
DEMO (20 interviews), practitioners (28 inter-
views), and consultants/experts (20 interviews).
The consultants/experts group consisted of com-
mercial consultants, senior staff from professional
bodies, and expert commentators not directly fall-
DEMO into either the academic or practitioner groups.
The consultants/experts group was included be-
cause its members could give third-party perspec-
tives from a DEMO outside of either academia or
practice. The interviews were either conducted
face to face (40 of 68) or over the telephone (28 of 68).
As a research team, we took the approach of
analyzing the data throughout the research pro-
gram in an iterative process, building our under-
standing progressively from the interview data, as
it became available. Following in the spirit of this
TABLE 1
Interviewees by Discipline
Discipline DEMO Practitioners Experts Total
Marketing
Accountancy
Strategic
management
Organization
studies
Total
77 7 21
46 4 14
39 5 17
66 4 16
20 28 DEMO 68
2011
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
approach, our discussion of the findings below
also contains a significant amount of analysis as DEMO
progresses. The authors believe that the project
benefited by following this iterative process, and
assessing the significance of what was said by the
research participants as the research evolved. The
authors’ collective experience of the politics DEMO
practice and academia was found to be invaluable
in this.
THE PRACTICES ASSOCIATED WITH EFFECTIVE
ENGAGEMENT
As a starting point, we will summarize the different
ways in which, according to our interviewees, en-
gagement occurred. DEMO call these “routes to en-
gagement” and illustrate them in Figure 1.
Most of the routes through which engagement
can take place are self-explanatory. DEMO route that
perhaps does require a little explanation is that of
“knowledge networks.” We found a number of ex-
amples of formal and informal DEMO that had
been set up expressly to provide a means for en-
gagement. One of the most successful has been
running for over 13 DEMO, providing an industry
forum within a particular sector. It involves major
DEMO from the sector, academics working
in the area, and policy makers and regulators. One
participant, “Acmar3,” puts its continuing success
down to very active management and a willing-
ness to evolve in order to DEMO continuing value
to its members:
45
I am just about to start a program of spending
three or four months visiting all of DEMO mem-
bers . . . I act as the primary catalyst for
change, but we do make it our business to get
a lot of feedback from our supporters. Acmar3
The network mentioned is quite formal, involving a
significant level of funding from its members.
Other examples from DEMO research were less for-
mally structured. “Acmar1” has been running his
own knowledge network for many years, relating
to information technology and customer manage-
ment, providing a range of opportunities for aca-
demics to present ideas, and gain up-to-date in-
sight into the challenges faced by practitioners.
Like the previous example, Acmar1 makes the
point that running a successful network takes con-
siderable effort and the skills to liaise with a num-
DEMO of different parties.
Figure 1 also features two major intermediaries
(commercial DEMO and professional bodies),
identified in our research. These intermediaries
can DEMO seen to act in conjunction with the main
routes to engagement, DEMO a greater or lesser extent,
within different management disciplines. For ex-
ample, within the accountancy discipline, where
the professional bodies are particularly DEMO,
they often play a “bridging role,” setting relevant
agendas for teaching and research:
It needs an intermediary and I think we DEMO
do that because, you know, we are talking to
FIGURE 1
Routes of Academic–Practitioner Engagement
46
the academics and we’re sort of thinking
about issues like Measurement, like Report-
ing Models for Business, where we know that
practitioners are interested, we know that
there are also academics who are doing rel-
evant work and so we can bring the two sides
together. Conacc8
DEMO bodies often play an important role in
commissioning research, allocating funds DEMO re-
search by academics, and in setting up joint re-
search DEMO where academics and practitio-
ners can work together. From an academic’s point
of view, as well as funding for research, a profes-
sional DEMO can provide a number of opportunities
for practical research.
The other major intermediary route to engage-
ment is commercial consultancy. “Conmar2” con-
siders his DEMO consultancy’s link with a lead-
ing UK business school to have been very
important in setting the business up, enabling the
consultancy to keep abreast of academic develop-
ments. An academic from the business school sup-
DEMO the body of knowledge, and the consultancy
concentrates on its application. DEMO, the train-
ing consultancy, in interacting with its clients,
sometimes picks up on the development of new
problems and issues before the DEMO commu-
nity. Other consultants that we interviewed also
acknowledged the benefit of having access to the
latest academic research, in one case through tak-
ing an MBA, and in another case through taking a
DBA. In these cases the consultants concerned are
Academy of Management Learning & Education
DEMO
playing an important translation role, that of mak-
ing relevant academic DEMO usable in the context
of their clients’ particular problems.
It is when we consider the ways in which each
route can be said to DEMO enable knowledge
transfer or exchange, that the results become most
interesting DEMO considering the practice of engage-
ment. Providing evidence that learning has actu-
ally occurred through engagement is problemati-
cal (Easterby-Smith, Lyles, & Tsang, 2008), and this
is where the in-depth probing that is possible in
qualitative research is particularly valuable in de-
veloping understanding. In analyzing DEMO inter-
views we have adopted the distinction between
transfer (relating to DEMO communication of
knowledge) and exchange (relating to two-way
knowledge creation), as used by Van de Ven and
Johnson (2006) and Shapiro DEMO al. (2007). Table 2
summarizes our findings in this regard.
DEMO “Courses and Programs” Route
At the undergraduate level, the recruitment of DEMO
cent graduates can be seen as an important source
of bringing up-to-date theory into practitioner or-
ganizations, as illustrated by this quote from a
partner in an accountancy firm:
I think you will see it DEMO in through the
bottom. . . . partners tend to be dinosaurs and
our job is to understand the commercial driv-
ers of our DEMO, not necessarily the latest
theory or the finest points of financial DEMO
TABLE 2
Effectiveness of Routes for Engagement in Enabling Knowledge Transfer and Knowledge Exchange
Routes to Engagement Knowledge Transfer Knowledge Exchange
Courses & programs
DEMO
Publication
Conferences
Knowledge networks
Academic consultancy
Great variability in application into practice
Indirect through undergraduates
More direct through postgrads and executive courses
Certain research DEMO such as action research
can be effective, but this is not DEMO case with the
majority of types of research
● Academic publications very limited direct
dissemination to practice
Limited number of conference forums that cross DEMO
between the two communities
Where active can be effective way to disseminate
relevant theory and models to interested parties
Easily broken up
Impact depends DEMO type of consultancy and
overcoming practical and ethical barriers
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● Can be a “touch point” with DEMO,
but not a systematic source of
knowledge
● Few examples of publications where
there are contributions from both
academics and practitioners
● Where DEMO can provide a forum for
dialogue and a source of support for
relevant research
Easily broken up
May be very limited because of
commercial DEMO and
because agenda largely set by
requirements of the client
●
●
2011
ing. That actually comes in from the machine
behind us. . DEMO . it sort of feeds in at the more
junior levels and goes up into the firm that
way. Pracc11
At the postgraduate level DEMO knowledge transfer
link will tend to be more direct. Prmar1 found that
a part-time MBA provided him with models that
helped him simplify real DEMO problems and
solve them. Many of these were simple models that
people within his organization (one of the largest
global blue-chips) were not DEMO of. For Conmar3,
a recently completed MBA served to remind him
of the basics and refresh his thinking. However,
embedding the learning DEMO courses and pro-
grams in organizational practice is often not that
effective:
It needed the organization to actually under-
stand that knowledge was DEMO to its fu-
ture, and it needed the university to under-
DEMO that working together with the business
was critical to its future, DEMO it didn’t quite
work that out. Conmar5
The knowledge transmitted through “courses and
programs” is often theoretical, and across a wide
range of contexts; therefore, it needs to be selec-
tively and appropriately adapted to DEMO organiza-
tional context.
The “Research” Route
Research, in itself, can be a route to engagement,
where it involves the researcher as an DEMO of
change rather than purely an observer, as is the
case DEMO participative types of research, such as
action research. Participative and collaborative DEMO
search is particularly encouraged in some man-
agement disciplines. Where this is the case, this
type of research has the potential to offer both
knowledge transfer and exchange, covering
knowledge that is applied and context specific.
However, there are many fields of management
where participative and collaborative research is
discouraged by lack of inclusion in top-ranked
journals and, in turn, by audits of research quality.
The “Publication” Route
Across the management fields we studied, one of
the most consistent findings was that practitioners
seldom read academic journals and when they do,
they are put off DEMO the language, content, and style:
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, DEMO, and Wornham
47
Academics tend to write for themselves in
arcane DEMO, and even if an MD is given
one, he/she would not want to read past the
first page. The articles are often DEMO to
demonstrate what the academic knows rather
than what is useful to someone doing the job.
Constrat16
Few small business managers read academic
journals.... (they are) too busy to bother with
what they see as high-level theory, and are
more content to attend trade conferences and
exchange information between themselves.
Constrat18
A summary of the views expressed in the inter-
DEMO is that academic journals are inaccessible to
practitioners because of their language, style, and
poor readability, and there is a need for translation
to distill the information into a meaningful and
relevant framework. While popular DEMO pub-
lications disseminate information much more
widely, they have a limited DEMO in disseminating
academic research, often are seen as the domain
of DEMO, and as containing few articles from
academics. We did speak to DEMO concerned
with hybrid journals that specifically try to appeal
to both practitioner and academic audiences, but
in these cases the practitioner component had
proved difficult to sustain. There are exceptions,
such as the Harvard Business DEMO and some
publications from the larger consultancies. How-
ever, a fair DEMO of our respondents’ views is
that there are few common publication arenas
where academics and practitioners debate or
share knowledge. The point here is DEMO potentially
useful research knowledge is not effectively trans-
mitted. There is, DEMO, a need for the develop-
ment of more academic management writers, who
can effectively engage with, and excite the interest
of, the DEMO business and management
population.
The “Conference” Route
This problem of lack of common areas where aca-
demics and practitioners might maintain a dia-
logue DEMO also evident in the interviewees’ com-
ments on conferences. While we did find examples
of conferences set up by academics for both com-
munities, it can be difficult to attract large num-
bers of practitioners. In DEMO, the input from
academic speakers needs to be credible and rele-
DEMO if attendees are to feel that they have gained
value:
48
You have to know that what you are providing
is something DEMO will find of value, and if
you haven’t done your homework DEMO really
aren’t up to speed with what is going on in
professional practice, they will crucify you.
Acmar4
Conferences do have the potential to facilitate
both knowledge transfer and knowledge ex-
change, but in reality there are few that truly at-
tract both parties. Achieving the presence of DEMO
parties at conferences is problematic. It is crucial
that the subject matter is of mutual interest, rais-
ing the issue of how much common ground the two
parties actually share.
The “Knowledge Networks” Route
Formal or DEMO knowledge networks exist in
order to share information between members. In
the accountancy field, where there are strong pro-
fessional bodies, we found DEMO evidence of net-
works involving both academics and practitioners
outside of those provided by the professional bod-
ies. In contrast, in the marketing field, where the
professional bodies are weaker and less formal,
networks can play an important role in academic–
practitioner engagement. These networks would
seem DEMO provide great potential for social interac-
tion between the academic and practitioner com-
munities, and hence, may be very important for
cocreation of DEMO This route focuses on
knowledge that is applied and pragmatic, often DEMO
very specific contexts. However, successful and
long-term networks are said by DEMO respondents to
be few and far between.
The “Consultancy” Route
At their best, academic consultants were seen as
capable of making a very real contribution to prac-
tice, through widening the intellectual resource
available to the client, bringing an objective ex-
pertise, and acting as a knowledgeable DEMO
In order to get in this position, the individual aca-
demic DEMO to have the track record and ability to
undertake direct consultancy. For this reason aca-
demics invited into the company or organization
will tend DEMO have significant industry knowledge
rather than simply theoretical knowledge. The ac-
ademic’s ability to apply theory requires an under-
standing of the company or DEMO context. How-
ever, the idea of the academics as “experts” runs
DEMO risk of putting them on a pedestal, and treating
them in DEMO unquestioning manner, as a kind of
guru. Acmar1, an academic who has had a long
Academy of Management Learning & Education
March
and DEMO consultancy practice, stressed the
importance of engaging with practitioners on an
DEMO footing. He believes academics should take
part in:
frequent in depth consulting, in which you are
looking at the issues and arguing the toss,
and not behaving like a guru, but as a peer
amongst senior people where you are open to
be questioned. Acmar1
Conducted DEMO this way, consultancy carries the
potential for knowledge exchange and sometimes
DEMO opportunities for joint publication and
conference presentations with practitioners. The
nature of the knowledge exchanged tends to be
applied and pragmatic and related to DEMO specific
context. However, the consultancy route posed the
most ethical dilemmas DEMO academics in relation to
their own independence and the motives of the
client for using them. Furthermore, commercial
confidentiality may pose restrictions on wider dis-
semination of knowledge gained through this
route.
THE PEOPLE INVOLVED IN DEMO
Within the academic community, individual atti-
tudes toward working with practice DEMO to re-
flect the lack of consensus revealed in the litera-
ture. However, in analyzing our interviews we
discerned three distinct attitude groups that might
be worth further investigation. First, we found
many academics that engage with practice as a
matter of course and believe that it is DEMO
and greatly enriching to their scholarship:
I think the thing that gives me the greatest
satisfaction as a researcher is when people
actually DEMO the research I have generated; or
you go to a practitioner DEMO, and there
are two or three speakers referring to re-
search DEMO I have done; or they are using the
model that I DEMO in the past. Because you
know you are making a practical difference.
Acmar4
There is a kind of, a sense of an underlying
value which revisits from time to time, and
one is unconscious of. It relates to beneficial
change, social benefit, making a difference,
making DEMO positive difference. Acorg16
We would characterize these as the “Willing &
DEMO group of academics, who currently do work
with practice, having both the experience and
2011
the motivation. At the same time, many of our
interviewees mentioned individual academics
that do not wish to engage with practice, some of
whom believe that this should not be part of their
role. We DEMO characterize this group as the
“Theoreticians,” who have no wish to engage
with practice:
If I look around . . . I DEMO I think there is
unwillingness, a simple unwillingness,
(among) DEMO of my colleagues to want to
communicate to the sorts of issues and prob-
lems that many practitioners really face,
sadly, you know. Acorg13
I think there are a few people, quite a minor-
ity, who would look with disdain on the world
of practice. I won’t name names, but there are
one or two . . . but they look askance at people
in practice in principle, because they think
it’s contaminated, caught up with capitalist
values and they are out really to provide cri-
tique of that whole system, so they look
askance at any kind of involvement of prac-
tice. Acorg14
Alongside these polarized DEMO, our research sug-
gests that there is also a third group DEMO manage-
ment academics, who are not strongly negatively
disposed to working DEMO practitioners, but only
have limited opportunities to do so. We classify
DEMO as the “Willing, but underexposed” of those
who would like to DEMO more, but lack the expe-
rience. In this respect, the credibility of individual
academics in engaging with practice emerges as
an issue:
DEMO think that there’s a credibility issue . . . The
credibility of the academics for the practitio-
ners. You know the practitioners see the DEMO
demics as removed from it; from the action as
it were. DEMO
Another barrier is to do with source credibil-
ity: beyond Harvard DEMO a few others aca-
demics have little credibility in the business
community . . . Too often delivery is by people
without exposure to DEMO Acstrat19
I think part of that lies in the fact that al-
though many academics in marketing, for ex-
ample, are fully engaged DEMO industry,
they’re interested and so on, they perhaps
lack the DEMO, or indeed the connec-
tions, or practical experience to actually crit-
icize. Acmar1
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
49
And DEMO other thing we have learnt is that the
academic community has difficulty in very
practical terms in presenting its work to the
practitioner community. DEMO
This raises the question of how younger manage-
ment academics learn to deal with the practitioner
community:
The general culture in most universities DEMO I
see it is you eat what you kill and you go out
and make your own way, and it’s a very indi-
vidualistic culture. There’s no sense of the
collective, you sink or swim as a young re-
searcher. Acmar5
Following from our research we would suggest
DEMO it might be useful to consider academics
within the management field in terms of these
three segments in relation to engagement: The
“Willing & able”; the “Theoreticians”; and the
“Willing, but underexposed.”
On the practitioner side, in terms of attitude and
motivation we also found distinct groups. We have
called these the “Enthusiasts,” the “Uncommitted,”
and the DEMO Because of the nature of our
sample, many of the practitioners DEMO we inter-
viewed had embraced academia and been proac-
tive in developing links. We would characterize
these as “Enthusiasts” in relation to engagement.
For DEMO Prmar1 had been involved in a num-
ber of academic–practitioner networks in his se-
nior management role, within a multinational blue
chip company. Prmar1 related how education had
been a continuous process for him as he DEMO
in his career:
I think we are unusual people in the way we
work, and other people rely on us to be infor-
mation brokers. I am not quite sure how this
has come about, but it does go back a long
way . . . But DEMO wanted to keep learning, so I did
HNC computer studies and DEMO exams and
I’ve never stopped. So then I did a Diploma in
Accounting & Finance and, of course, the
MBA, and I did the marketing .... I’ve never
stopped....So it’s a continual self-
development program. DEMO are people like
this, I know other people like this, but they are
not the norm.
As Prmar1 notes, his experience is not typical and
for the great majority of practitioners the immedi-
ate demands DEMO their role seem to take priority over
ongoing development. For this reason, we suggest
that there is a group of practitioners who we call
50
the “Uncommitted,” who may be open and sympa-
thetic to DEMO work, but do not maintain these
links on an ongoing basis DEMO of other
priorities:
I find it quite challenging just to get through
the necessary technical reading. There’s only
so many hours in a DEMO I get to work, I don’t
know seven thirty in the DEMO, leave seven
o’clock at night. Sometimes work much later.
And somehow DEMO that working day, and
there’s not really a slot for it, I have to update
myself with all the technical material. Pracc8
What DEMO get there is a lot of people who’s . . .
and this happens all the time in corporates,
their nose is down DEMO the grindstone and
churning out charts for management meet-
ings, and DEMO never get any downtime, they
never get to step back and DEMO about where
this is going. Acmar5
On the other hand you have got industry,
which over the last 10 or so years has DEMO
ever more focused on bottom line short-term
profit. And so, the DEMO within industry keeps
quickening up and, in part, technology has
driven that. People’s days are being driven by
emails for example and the DEMO, in my
judgment, far from making business more ef-
ficient and effective, is in many ways making
it less efficient. Because there is less proac-
tive management of executive time and more
reactive usage of DEMO time. So this adds
to an overall culture in which short-term ac-
tivity, fire fighting, becomes ever more the
norm. Acmar3
As a DEMO of these pressures practitioners often
seem to require simplistic answers to complex
problems:
From the practitioners view they want silver
bullets as they DEMO complexity. When the two
sides are not even talking on the same plane,
then communication is impossible. Constrat 16
I sympathize with the DEMO that lots of prac-
titioners feel, that they want a list, they want it
to be simplified, but it cannot be so. Acorg17
As suggested by this last quote, simplification may
not be possible and desirable, and therefore, the
academic needs to find more practitioners like
DEMO, who are prepared to be open in their
thinking:
Academy DEMO Management Learning & Education
March
Exactly right, exactly right! It’s challenging
DEMO thinking. That to me is the key thing for
me, going DEMO talking to you guys, because I
can go in this direction DEMO no one will chal-
lenge me in the organization apart from “we
can’t afford to do it.” Prorg15
Targeting those who are attitudinally likely DEMO re-
spond positively is crucial:
I would say possibly 20-30% of the people
really got fired up about new ideas and they
are DEMO just creative tools to enable
them to think in a different way. They got
really fired up about it. The rest actually
thought it DEMO a waste of time, a waste of
their time, because they had to be focusing on
their business plans, which is quite interest-
ing, isn’t it? I suppose that’s what I mean by
you DEMO to pick your people to sometimes
apply more theoretical concepts. Conmar5
Three segments of practitioners are suggested by
our research: the “Enthusiasts” as epitomized by
Prmar1 above, who actively embrace links with
academia; the “Uncommitted,DEMO made up of those
who may be open and sympathetic to academic
work, but do not maintain these links on an ongo-
ing basis; and finally a group who may be closed
to academia and academic ideas. We call these
the “Cynical.”
As exemplified by our research, there are many
academics engaging with practice and a number
of practitioners who DEMO open to engagement. The
problem is not that academics and practitioners do
not engage with each other. The problem is the
narrowness of the DEMO, being generally
limited to those we term as the “Willing & DEMO
academics and the “Enthusiast” practitioners. As
illustrated in Figure 2, the DEMO is about
depth of engagement on both sides.
The solid arrow represents the existing relation-
ship between the “Willing & able” group of aca-
DEMO and the “Enthusiast” group of practitioners.
The arrows with the dotted lines illustrate the ar-
eas for potential development, with the “Uncom-
mitted” group of practitioners and the “Willing but
underexposed” group of academics. The “Enthusi-
DEMO seem to be open to academic ideas and pre-
pared to pick and choose between models and
ideas, selectively applying those that they identify
to be relevant. This group would seem to be more
open to DEMO to exchange, such as courses and
programs, that offer exposure to theories and more
general concepts. In contrast the “Uncommitted”
and “Cynical” groups DEMO seem to be more
2011
closed to theory, where it is not seen to be relevant
to their immediate context and particular chal-
lenges. The “Uncommitted” group in DEMO
might be more likely to respond to engagement
routes that emphasize pragmatic knowledge de-
velopment related to specific contexts, such as a
knowledge network or a consultancy program.
ENGAGING APPROPRIATELY:
THE RIGHT PEOPLE AND THE DEMO ROUTES
Our review of the effectiveness of knowledge
transfer and knowledge exchange, across the dif-
ferent routes, touches on many of the reasons DEMO
the lack of effective academic–practitioner en-
gagement. As depicted in Table 2, every route has
its own limitations, and therefore, we conclude
that engagement needs to take place across mul-
tiple routes in order to DEMO effective in relation to
different practitioner segments. This includes
routes outside of traditional teaching and re-
search, which provide greater opportunities for so-
cial and informal interaction. In our research, we
found a number of successful knowledge networks,
where a common feature was that academics had
taken DEMO lead in working with a range of practi-
tioners and policy makers, in developing common
agendas for future research. A network can also
provide a means to access research subjects
among network members and a forum DEMO dissem-
inating and discussing the implications of the re-
search results. In this, the academic can overcome
the limitations of the inaccessibility of traditional
publications to the practitioner community by
translating, synthesizing, and interpreting the DEMO
sults. At the same time, we would not want to paint
DEMO rosy a picture. Other research has pointed to the
complexities and uncertainties of such collabora-
tions (Alteroff & Knights, 2009), and our DEMO
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
51
found that they tend to break up easily. Therefore we
should not underestimate the skills DEMO resources
required to maintain successful engagement.
Achieving impact outside of the academic com-
munity generally requires participation in routes
that inevitably involve close interaction, as well as
the building of relationships between academics
and current practitioners. DEMO requires a design
science approach (Van Aken, 2004, 2005) in so far as
the practitioners involved will be interested
mainly in knowledge DEMO is valid to field prob-
lems. The practitioner view on the appropriateness
and applicability of the content of academic man-
agement research needs to DEMO taken into account.
Others (e.g., Bailey & Ford, 1996; Guest, 2007) have
stressed the importance of the relevance of subject
matter DEMO practitioners’ immediate needs. Mode 2
(Gibbons et al., 1994) approaches DEMO knowledge
generation recognize that knowledge development
takes place iteratively, with a DEMO of interactive
exchanges between the parties involved. Our re-
search points to ways in which effective engage-
ment can be established, for a much more bal-
anced and two-way interaction that provides
demonstrable value to both DEMO
At the same time, our research suggests that if
engagement is DEMO be effective, it is also crucial to
identify the right people DEMO both sides, as illus-
trated in Figure 2. Therefore, we argue that it is
important to distinguish between academics that
might feel compromised DEMO engagement (Grey,
2001; Learmouth; 2008), whom we have DEMO the
“Theorists,” and those that have had little oppor-
tunity to engage, the group we have called the
“Willing but underexposed.” Arguably, DEMO is this
group where the most effort needs to be made, DEMO
order to support them in working with practice. It is
this latter group that would benefit most from
FIGURE 2
Engagement by Attitude Group
52
Academy of Management Learning & Education
March
training, support, and DEMO On the practitio-
ner side, the focus should be on the DEMO
and “Uncommitted” groups.
We therefore propose that a useful framework for
considering academic–practitioner engagement is
to focus on the two key elements of (1) the right
people (by attitude), and (2) the routes DEMO
which they engage, as illustrated in Figure 3.
We believe that DEMO strongest engagements take
place where “Willing & able” academics engage
with “Enthusiasts” across a large number of differ-
ent routes. Greater depth of engagement DEMO
the communities will be achieved where “Willing
& able” academics are able to engage more “Un-
committed” practitioners, through more use of un-
conventional routes such as knowledge networks.
But, most important for the future, DEMO “Willing but
underexposed” group of academics needs care-
fully controlled involvement across a wide range
of routes if we are to develop a bigger DEMO of
“Willing & able” academics.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
As established at the commencement of this arti-
cle, there is widespread concern among academics
across business and management disciplines
about the academic–practitioner gap. Much has
been written DEMO the problem, but little about the
lessons to be learned where DEMO is taking
place. The contribution of our research is to put
forward a framework that encompasses the main
ways in which engagement takes place DEMO re-
lates these to different attitude groups among both
academics and practitioners. As with all qualita-
tive research, we must acknowledge its limitations
in terms of generalizability. Our purposive sample
of 68 interviewees, all undertaken in the United
Kingdom, produced a wealth of valid and interest-
ing data. However, the reader must judge the ap-
plicability of these findings in different contexts
and cultures.
Through analyzing the routes by which academ-
ics DEMO practitioners may transfer and exchange
knowledge with each other (see Tab. DEMO), the poten-
tial limitations of overdependence on any single
route are exposed. This highlights the problem of
thinking narrowly about the different ways DEMO
which engagement can take place, and defining
narrowly what is a DEMO activity for man-
agement academics. From a practical point of
view, DEMO map of routes to engagement (see Fig.
1) could provide a starting point for business
schools to develop strategic plans and put in
DEMO the processes for better engagement. Our
research suggests that business schools need
strategies that address multiple routes and rec-
ognize the varying needs of DEMO attitudinal
groups among practitioners. Nontraditional
routes, such as knowledge networks and DEMO
tancy, may well be necessary to reach new
groups of practitioners, such as the “Uncommit-
ted” and the “Cynical.”
The development of relationships DEMO practitio-
ners does not happen automatically. This raises
the point about ways in which business schools
and their academic staff can be most effective DEMO
reaching out to the various communities that they
serve. While we found some individual academics
that had intricate webs of practitioner and policy-
maker DEMO, there would seem to be the
potential for business schools to DEMO more proactive
in broadening and deepening the links and involv-
ing many more academic staff in this. To do so will
require significant investment DEMO time and re-
sources on the part of individuals and institutions.
Again, the will to make this investment will de-
pend on individual and institutional motivation, in
relation to the perceived importance of crossing
the academic–practitioner divide. Our research
suggests it is not as simple as putting effort DEMO
reaching out into the practitioner community, in an
attempt to create DEMO and communities.
We found many examples where considerable ef-
fort had been put into these types of initiatives
with disappointing results. If attention is DEMO given
to encouraging and developing academic staff that
are “Willing and able,” and to providing training,
support, and mentoring to less experienced aca-
demic staff (“Willing, but underexposed”), the ini-
FIGURE 3
DEMO Appropriate People by Multiple Routes
2011
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
53
tiatives will DEMO flat. Similarly, better understand-
ing of different practitioner attitude segments is
DEMO, in order to focus efforts on those practi-
tioners who are DEMO receptive.
The map of routes to engagement (see Fig. 1)
DEMO also provide a framework for individual ac-
ademics planning how to undertake and dissemi-
nate their own research. This is a potentially im-
portant DEMO, in so far as it relates to the debate
about the DEMO of existing academic as-
sessment systems. The focus on academic publica-
tion, as the single metric of performance (Adler &
Harzing, 2009; Seggie & Griffith, 2009), is further
exposed as an inadequate way of encouraging and
rewarding scholarship in a field such as manage-
ment DEMO the theory–practice link is so much a
part of what makes it distinctive (Tranfield & Star-
key, 1998).
As a source of DEMO for practitioners, aca-
demics do bring potential benefits. First, academ-
ics are not usually using their knowledge as a
means to sell other DEMO or services. This aca-
demic objectivity is potentially valuable to practi-
tioners seeking advice that is unencumbered by
vested interest. Second, the academic perspective
comes from outside the “rough and tumble” of day-
to-day business concerns DEMO can insert a healthy
skepticism into any analysis, going beyond the
DEMO fad or fashion. Third, the management aca-
demic has skills in DEMO and learning that can
contribute to creating behavior change. Fourth, the
DEMO often has access to his or her own net-
works and colleagues, providing a wider source of
expertise, drawing from areas such as DEMO social
sciences, humanities, and liberal arts (Starkey &
Tempest, DEMO).
We would argue that, too often, these benefits
have not been communicated to the vast majority
of practitioners, and we are left with unhelpful
stereotypes. One stereotype is of the ivory tower
academic, out of touch with practice. Another is
of the professor as an all-knowing DEMO This
latter view can be seen as an uncomfortable
conspiracy between practitioners, who are look-
ing for expert help in solving difficult problems,
and academics, who want to boost their credibil-
ity, and perhaps DEMO, in the consultancy
arena. A more realistic and mature relationship
of DEMO is required, one based on a recognition
that many questions in DEMO and manage-
ment are complex and deep. Practitioners will
not always get the easy answers that they would
like, but working with business and manage-
ment academics can be very fruitful in deepen-
ing understanding and DEMO change.
FURTHER RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
A next step on from our exploratory research
would be to conduct a more comprehensive in-
vestigation into attitude groups; among both ac-
ademics and practicing managers. Our findings
are based on DEMO perceptions of those, on both
sides, who are currently involved in some form of
engagement. A fuller investigation could provide
evidence from wider DEMO populations of aca-
demics and practitioners. For example, do aca-
demic DEMO see themselves as such?
Are most practitioners negative about academia
(DEMO of the “Cynical” attitude group) or just
waiting to be convinced (members of the “Un-
committed” attitude group)? It would extend our
DEMO to quantify the size of the differ-
ent attitude groups and understand their rela-
tionships with demographic factors, such as age,
experience, DEMO gender. Within the academic
community, we would speculate the existence of
DEMO between career factors, such as previous
employment outside of academia and DEMO,
but this needs to be empirically tested. On the
practitioner side, we would expect there to be a
link between education experience (DEMO as hav-
ing taken an MBA), and attitude toward links
with academia. Furthermore, other factors, such
as size of the practitioner’s organization DEMO type
of business sector, might be expected to have an
impact DEMO propensity for engagement and on
capacity to engage. International comparisons
may also be particularly informative in identify-
ing factors that promote or discourage engage-
DEMO across cultures.
Further work is needed to test the relationship
between the use of different routes to engagement
and the attitude groups on both DEMO We would
hypothesize a positive relationship between a pos-
itive attitude to engagement and the use of multi-
ple routes, and a negative relationship between a
negative attitude to engagement and the use of
multiple routes. DEMO, the knowledge net-
work route would seem to be worthy of DEMO
research because of its strong association with
many of the cases of effective engagement that we
found in our research. Of particular interest would
DEMO the relationship between academic–practitio-
ner networks and wider knowledge networks (Van
DEMO et al., 2008). This would provide interesting
perspectives that would DEMO to extending
our understanding of interorganizational knowl-
edge transfer and exchange, DEMO general, as well as
in the specific area of academic–practitioner
engagement.
54
Academy of Management Learning & Education
March
APPENDIX
Details of Interviewees
DEMO Role and experience
Acmar1 Professor; company director; runs academic–
practitioner network
Acmar2 MBA director; trustee of professional body
Acmar3 Visiting professor; chief DEMO of an
academic–practitioner forum
Acmar4 Professor; runs an academic–practitioner
network
Acmar5 DEMO director; academic consultant
Acmar6 Professor; extensive research and
consultancy experience
Acmar7 Senior lecturer
Acacc8 Associate dean at a business school
Acacc9 Lecturer at DEMO business school
Acacc10 Lecturer and journal editor
Acacc11 Director of Admissions at a business school
Acorg12 Academic with extensive consultancy
experience
Acorg13 Academic with DEMO consultancy
experience
Acorg14 Professor with extensive consultancy
experience
Acorg15 Academic with business development role
for a business school
Acorg16 Academic with extensive consultancy
experience
DEMO Professor with extensive consultancy
experience
Acstrat18 Dean of highly rated international
management college
Acstrat19 Professor and Head of Center for Regional
Competitiveness [research and
DEMO
Acstrat20 Senior lecturer with international experience
Practitioners Role and experience
Prmar1 Executive within international company;
completed MBA around 15 years ago;
coauthor DEMO a number of business articles
and books
Prmar2 Executive with varied experience of working
with academics in various capacities
Prmar3 Senior copywriter in direct DEMO
agency
Prmar4 Executive within major insurance company
Prmar5 Executive with international company with
experience of taking part in company
sponsored university executive course
Prmar6 DEMO within the food industry who has
recently completed a part-time master’s
degree in a marketing-related area
Prmar7 Executive with extensive experience of
working in DEMO marketing across a
number of sectors
Pracc8 Audit partner for international accountancy
practice
Pracc9 Technical director of a national accountancy
practice
Pracc10 Business services DEMO at a national
accountancy practice
Pracc11 Corporate finance partner at a national
accountancy practice
Pracc12 Finance director for major building firm
Pracc13 Finance director DEMO international company
Prorg14 Experienced manager in public sector
(Customs and Excise)DEMO
APPENDIX
Continued
Practitioners Role and experience
Prorg15 Experienced manager in public sector
(Defense)
Prorg16 Senior manager with extensive experience
in IT industry
Prorg17 Experienced manager in public sector (Health)
Prorg18 Experienced manager in finance sector
Prorg19 Public sector manager (Local Government)
Prstrat20 Strategic planning manager of major
aerospace company
Prstrat21 Chief executive of engineering company
Prstrat22 Strategy DEMO of NHS Primary Care Trust
Prstrat23 International director of engineering
company
Prstrat24 Strategy director public service organization
Prstrat25 Partner in regional law practice
Prstrat26 DEMO director of SME construction
company
Prstrat27 Director of a family business
Prstrat28 Director of a family business
Consultants/
experts
Role and experience
Conmar1 DEMO in consultancy; recently completed a
DBA
Conmar2 Partner in training consultancy; previously
executive in international blue chip
company; author of a number of business
books
Conmar3 Freelance consultant; recently completed an
MBA; previously executive DEMO a number of
companies
Conmar4 Founder and director of professional body
within the marketing field; leading
authority in his field; published author
Conmar5 DEMO in training consultancy; previously
executive in large blue chip company;
DEMO MBA 5 years ago
Conmar6 Head of independent research group;
business author
Conmar7 Leading journalist specializing in the
marketing field with regular column DEMO the
marketing press
Conacc8 Technical manager in financial reporting for
a professional body
Conacc9 Deputy editor of major professional
publication
Conacc10 Part of research DEMO of international
accountancy body
Conacc11 Head of education for professional body
Conorg12 Ex-director of university faculty, now a
private consultant
Conorg13 Former academic now a commercial
consultant
Conorg14 Experienced commercial consultant and
visiting lecturer
Conorg15 Experienced DEMO sector manager then
commercial consultant and visiting
lecturer
Constrat16 Experienced commercial consultant
Constrat17 Head of employers representative body
Constrat18 Experienced commercial consultant
Constrat19 Senior DEMO of national body representing
regional employers’ bodies
Constrat20 Senior official of body representing an
employers’ association
2011
Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
55
REFERENCES
Adler, N. J., & Harzing, A. 2009. When knowledge wins: Tran-
scending the sense and nonsense of academic rankings.
Academy of Management Learning & DEMO, 8: 72–95.
Alteroff, C., & Knights, D. 2009. Making DEMO mending your nets:
Managing relevance, participation and uncertainty in
academic-practitioner DEMO networks. British Journal
of Management, 20: 125–142.
Amabile, T. M., Patterson, C., Mueller, J., Wojcik, T., Odomirok,
P. DEMO, Marsh, M., & Kramor, S. J. 2001. Academic practitioner
collaboration in management research: A case of cross-
profession collaboration. Academy of Management Journal,
44(2): 418 – 431.
Anderson, N., Herriot, P., & Hodgkinson, G. P., 2001. The
practitioner-researcher divide in industrial, work and orga-
nizational (IWO) psychology: Where are we now DEMO where
do we go from here? Journal of Occupational and Organi-
DEMO Psychology, 74: 391– 411.
Bailey, J., & Ford, C. DEMO Management as science versus man-
agement as practice in postgraduate business education.
Business Strategy Review, 7(4): 7–12.
Baldridge, D. C., Floyd, S. W., & Markoczy, L. 2004. Are managers
from Mars and academicians from Venus? Toward an un-
derstanding of the relationship between academic quality
and practical relevance. Strategic Management Journal, 25:
1063–1074.
Beer, DEMO 2001. Why management research findings are unimple-
mentable: An action science DEMO Reflections, 2(3):
58 – 65.
Bell, M. 2009. DEMO: Special Section, Doing Work That
Matters. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 8:
96 –98.
Bennis, W. G., & O’Toole, DEMO T. 2005. How business schools lost
their way. Harvard Business Review, DEMO: 96 –104.
Birkinshaw, J. 2001. Why is knowledge management so difficult?
Business Strategy Review, 12(1): 11–18.
Blackler, F. 1995. DEMO, knowledge work and organiza-
tions: An overview and interpretation. Organization Stud-
ies, 16(6): 1021–1046.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, DEMO 1998. Organizing knowledge. Califor-
nia Management Review, 40(3): 90 DEMO
Cook, S. D. N., & Brown, J. S. 1999. Bridging DEMO: The
generative dance between organizational knowledge and
organizational knowing. Organization Science, 10(4): 381–
400.
Crowther, D., & Carter, C. 2002. Legitimating irrelevance: Man-
agement education in higher education institutions. The
International Journal of Educational Management, 16(6):
268 –278.
Cyert, R. M., & Goodman, P. S. 1997. Creating effective university-
industry alliances: An organizational learning perspective.
Organizational Dynamics, Spring: 45–57.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. 2002. Handbook of qualitative
research, 2nd ed. CA: Sage.
Easterby-Smith, M., Lyles, M. A., & Tsang, E. DEMO K. 2008. Inter-
organizational knowledge transfer: Current themes future
prospects. Journal DEMO Management Studies, 45: 677– 690.
Gerson, K., & Horowitz, DEMO 2002. Observation and interviewing:
Options and choices in qualitative research. In T. May,
(Ed.), Qualitative Research in Action: 144 –160. DEMO:
Sage.
Ghoshal, S. 2005. Bad management theories are destroying
good DEMO practice. Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 4: 75–91.
Gibbons, DEMO, Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott,
DEMO, & Trow, M. 1994. The new production of knowledge. The
dynamics of science and research in contemporary societ-
ies. London: Sage.
Godfrey, DEMO C., & Hill, C. W. L. 1995. The problem of unobserv-
ables in strategic management research. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 16: 519 DEMO
Grey, C. 2001. Re-imagining relevance: A response to Starkey
and Madan. British Journal of Management, 12: 27–32.
Guba, E. G., & DEMO, Y. S. 1994. Competing paradigms in
qualitative research. In N. K. DEMO, & Y. S. Lincoln, (Eds.),
Handbook of Qualitative Research. CA: Sage.
Guest, D. E. 2007. Don’t shoot the messenger: A wake up call for
academics. Academy of Management Journal, 50(5): 1020 –
1026.
Gummeson, E. 2002. Practical value of adequate marketing
management theory. European Journal of Marketing, 36(3):
325–349.
Guzman, G. A. C., & Wilson, J. 2005. The ‘soft’ dimension of
organizational DEMO transfer. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 9(2): 59 –74.
Hansen, M. T. 1999. The search-transfer problem: The role of
weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization sub-
units. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(1): 57– 81.
Hatchuel, A. 2001. The two pillars of new management research.
British Journal of Management, 12(Special Issue): 33–39.
Healy, M., & Perry, C. 2000. Comprehensive criteria to judge
validity and reliability of qualitative research within the
realism paradigm. Qualitative Market Research: An Inter-
national Journal, 3(3): 118 –126.
Huff, A. S. 2000. 1999. DEMO address: Changes in organi-
zational knowledge production. Academy of Management
Review, 25(2): 288 –293.
Huff, A. S., & Huff, J. O. 2001. Re-focusing the business school
agenda. British Journal of Management, 12(Special Issue):
S49 –S54.
Huff A. S., Tranfield, D., & Van Aken, J. E. 2006. Management as
a design science mindful DEMO art and surprise. Journal of
Management Inquiry, 15(4): 413– DEMO
Kaplan, R. S. 1989. Connecting the research-teaching-practice
triangle. Accounting Horizons, 3(1): 129 –132.
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. 1992. Knowledge of the firm, combinative
capabilities, and the replication of technology. Organiza-
DEMO Science, 3: 383–397.
Landry, R., Amara, N., & Lamari, M. 2001. Utilization of social
science research knowledge in Canada. Research Policy,
30: 333–349.
Lang, J. C. 2001. Managerial concerns in knowledge DEMO
ment. Journal of Knowledge Management, 5(1): 43–57.
Lave, J. 1993. The practice of learning. In S. Chaiklin, & J. Lave,
(Eds.), Understanding practice: Perspectives on activity and
context: 3–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Learmonth, M. 2008. Speaking out: Evidence-based manage-
56
Academy of Management Learning & Education
March
ment: A backlash against pluralism in organizational stud-
ies? Organization, 15(2): 283–291.
Leavitt, H. J. 1989. Educating our MBAs: On teaching what we
haven’t taught. California Management Review, Spring:
38 –50.
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. 1985. Naturalistic inquiry. CA: Sage.
Lyles, M. A., & DEMO, J. E. 1996. Knowledge acquisition from
foreign parents in international joint DEMO: An empiri-
cal examination in the Hungarian context. Journal of Inter-
DEMO Business Studies, 27: 877–903.
Magee, B. 1985. Popper. London: Fontana.
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. 1989. Designing qualitative re-
search. London: Sage.
Mason, J. 1996. Qualitative researching. London: Sage.
Miles, M. DEMO, & Huberman, A. M. 1994. Qualitative data analysis,
2nd ed. CA: Sage.
Mintzberg, H. 1996. Musings on management. Harvard Business
Review, 74: 61– 67.
Mintzberg, H. 2004. Managers not MBAs. London: Pearson Edu-
cation.
Mintzberg, H., & Gosling, J. 2002. Managing beyond borders.
Academy of Management Learning & Education, 1: 64 –76.
Mohrman, S. A., Gibson, C. B., & Mohrman, A. M. 2001. Doing
DEMO that is useful to practice: A model and empirical
exploration. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 44(2): 357–
375.
Nonaka, I. 1994. A dynamic theory of knowledge creation. Or-
ganization Science, 5(1): 14 –37.
Nowotny, H., Scott, P., & Gibbons, M. 2001. Re-thinking science:
Knowledge and the public in an age of uncertainty. Oxford:DEMO
Blackwell.
Patton, M. 1987. How to use qualitative methods in evaluation.
DEMO Park: Sage.
Pettigrew, A. M. 1997. The double hurdles for management re-
search. In T. Clarke (Ed.), Advancement in organizational
behaviour: DEMO in honour of J. S. Pugh: 277–296. London:
Dartmouth Press.
DEMO, J., & Fong, C. T. 2002. The end of business DEMO? Less
success than meets the eye. Academy of Management
Learning & DEMO, 1: 78 –95.
Porter, L. W., & McKibbin, L. DEMO 1988. Management education and
development: Drift or thrust into the 21st DEMO New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Rynes, S. L. 2007. Editor’s afterword. Let’s DEMO a tipping point:
What academics and practitioners can do, alone DEMO to-
gether. Academy of Management Journal, 50(5): 1046 –1054.
DEMO, A., & Biggiero, L. 2008. Heterogeneity and specificity
of inter-firm DEMO flows in innovation networks. Jour-
nal of Management Studies, 45: 785– 814.
Seggie, S. H., & Griffith, D. A. 2009. What does it take to get
promoted in marketing academia? Understanding excep-
tional publication productivity in the leading marketing
journals. Journal of Marketing, 73(1): 122–132.
Shapiro, D. L., Kirkman, B. L., & Courtney, H. G. 2007. Perceived
causes and solutions of the translation problem in manage-
DEMO research. Academy of Management Journal, 50(2):
249 –266.
Shrivastava, P., & Mitroff, I. I. 1984. Enhancing organizational
research utilization: DEMO role of decision makers’ assump-
tions. Academy of Management Review, l9(DEMO): 18 –26.
Starkey, K. 2001. In defence of modes one, two and three: A
response. British Journal of Management, 12(Special DEMO):
77– 80.
Starkey, K., & Madan, P. 2001. Bridging the relevance gap: Align-
ing stakeholders in the future of management research.
British Journal of Management, 12(Special Issue): 3–26.
Starkey, K., & Tempest, S. 2008. A clear sense of purpose? The
evolving DEMO of the business school. Journal of Manage-
ment Development, 27: 379 –390.
Tranfield, D., & Starkey, K. 1998. The nature, social DEMO
and promotion of management research: Towards policy.
British Journal of Management, 9: 341–353.
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. DEMO Towards a method-
ology for developing evidence-informed management
knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal
of Management, 14: 207–222.
Tsoukas, H. 1989. The validity of idiographic research explana-
tions. Academy of Management Review, 14(4): 551–561.
Tsoukas, H. 2005. Complex knowledge: Studies in organiza-
DEMO epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Aken, J. E. 2004. Management research based on the para-
digm of the design sciences: The quest for field tested and
grounded technological rules. Journal of Management
Studies. 41(DEMO): 219 –246.
Van Aken, J. E. 2005. Management research as DEMO science:
Articulating the research products of mode 2 knowledge
production in management. British Journal of Management,
16: 19 –36.
Van de Ven, A. H. 2007. Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for
Organizational and Social DEMO Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Johnson, P. E. 2006. Knowledge for theory
and practice. Academy of DEMO Review, 31(4): 802–
821.
Van Wijk, R., Jansen, J. J. P., & Lyles, M. A. 2008. Inter- and
intra-organizational DEMO transfer: A meta-analytic
review and assessment of its antecedents and conse-
DEMO Journal of Management Studies, 45: 830 – 852.
Weick, K. DEMO Gapping the relevance bridge: Fashions meet
fundamentals in management research. British DEMO of
Management, 12(Special Issue): 71–75.
Zahra, S. A., DEMO, R. D., & Hitt, M. A. 2000. International
expansion by DEMO venture firms: International diversity,
mode of market entry, technological learning and perfor-
mance. Academy of Management Journal, 43: 925–950.
2011 Hughes, Bence, Grisoni, O’Regan, and Wornham
Tim Hughes (PhD, University of the West of England) is a reader in applied DEMO at
Bristol Business School, University of the West of England. His DEMO interests include
academic–practitioner engagement in management and also service-dominant logic, in DEMO
tion to considering the impact of self-service technology on service provision.
David Bence (PhD, University of the West of England) is a chartered accountant (ICAEW) and
lecturer in corporate finance, financial strategy, and DEMO statement analysis at Bristol
Business School, University of the West of DEMO His main research interests are business
valuation, financial reporting theory, and knowledge exchange.
Louise Grisoni (PhD, University of the West of England) is a principal lecturer of organization
studies at Bristol Business School, University of the West of England. Current research
interests include aesthetics and arts-based DEMO, organizational learning and develop-
ment, leadership and public-sector management.
Nicholas O’Regan (PhD, Middlesex University) is a professor of strategy/enterprise and inno-
vation at Bristol Business School, University of the West of England. His research interests
include the organizational culture, leadership and the strategic planning processes of small-
and medium-sized organizations.
David Wornham (MBA, London Business School) is the director of business development at
Bristol Business School, University of the West of England. His research interests cover
knowledge exchange between universities DEMO the commercial sector, consulting practice,
and the relation between strategy DEMO corporate social responsibility.
57
Copyright of Academy of Management Learning & Education is the property of DEMO of Management and
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
DEMO written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles DEMO individual use.{1g42fwefx}