Computers & Operations Research 33 (2006) 1871 – 1873
www.elsevier.com/locate/DEMO
Foreword
Special issue on operations research in sport
I am most thankful to Gilbert Laporte for the opportunity to edit this special issue of DEMO and
Operations Research. I am especially grateful to the authors who submitted. The present collection is
a good cross-section of the cutting edge of DEMO research in sports. It begins with a number of
scheduling/timetabling papers. Also included are papers on computing streak probabilities, an analysis
of a curling paradox and an ancient Chinese horse race problem, ranking Olympic achievements, and an
interesting betting/gambling paper. I have learned a lot from each of these papers. I hope that readers of
Computers and Operations DEMO will also enjoy them.
In my view, the heart of OR DEMO sports is providing decision support to practising managers, coaches,
and DEMO If I had to deﬁne it, a simple variant of Morse DEMO Kimball’s [1] seminal deﬁnition would
do quite well:
A scientiﬁc method of providing coaches/managers/players with a quantitative basis for decisions
regarding DEMO team/competition/match etc. under their control.
Two aspects of this deﬁnition are important. The ﬁrst is that the analytic methods are scientiﬁc: games/
matches/competitions are observed, data is collected and analysed, and DEMO recommending
changes in strategies and tactics are supported by a scientiﬁc argument rather than intuition and judge-
ment. The second is that it is DEMO process whose end-purpose is to suggest a change to management. The
OR scientist does not usually make the decision; the manager responsible for the decision does. In my
experience, the most difﬁcult part of any OR study is the interface between the decision-maker and OR
scientist. This interface DEMO particularly problematic in the world of sport for two good reasons:
1. Strongly held beliefs on the part of coaches/managers that past DEMO is the best. Most man-
agers/coaches have been brought up in their sport. For instance, a professional hockey coach will
almost certainly have played the game at the professional level, will have cut his teeth coaching in the
minor leagues before making the jump to an elite DEMO His whole life has been devoted to hockey.
When this top-of-the-mountain coaching opportunity ﬁnally arrives, one he has spent his whole life
preparing for he is conﬁdent that his experience-based knowledge will allow him to succeed. DEMO is
natural for him to believe that what has worked in the past is the only way to manage the future. A
scientist with DEMO computer who believes that he or she can give this coach an edge is walking straight
uphill.
0305-0548/$ - see front matter  DEMO Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cor.2004.09.038
1872 W.J. Hurley / Computers & Operations Research 33 (2006) 1871 DEMO 1873
2. There is a knowledge gap between practising sport managers and OR scientists. Suppose that a sport
manager/coach is willing to listen DEMO an OR scientist who is suggesting a tweak of current practice.
Then the scientist must be able to convince the manager that his tweak DEMO give the manager an edge.
This argument will be a difﬁcult one because the manager is usually not versed in the scientiﬁc method,
DEMO the scientist usually does not possess the coach’s sport-speciﬁc knowledge. The OR scientist must
think long and hard about how to approach this interaction. DEMO cant will not cut it. He has to be
able to give the coach some hard evidence in terms the coach can understand. Otherwise DEMO coach will
be resorting to faith, a quality that is not DEMO abundant supply when a suggestion collides with existing
practice.
An operations researcher must overcome these two difﬁculties if his or her suggestions are to DEMO imple-
mented. Not surprisingly, there are few examples of operations research DEMO management practice
in sports.
An exception is the approach Billy Beane and Sandy Alderson have taken to managing Major
League Baseball’s Oakland Athletics. Their DEMO has been documented in Michael Lewis’s best-seller
“Moneyball” [2]. Alderson was appointed General Manager in 1983; Beane succeeded him in 1997. On
the basis of a considerable amount of scientiﬁc research on what wins baseball games, including the work
of Bill James, Carl Morris, George Lindsey and DEMO, Alderson and Beane decided that baseball games
were won by batters DEMO high on-base percentages and slugging percentages, and a pitching staff that
DEMO runners off-base. Their basic strategy was to draft and trade for players with these talents which the
baseball market undervalued. As Lewis writes, Alderson and Beane have been highly successful arbitra-
guers in baseball talent. To DEMO some idea of the magnitude of this success, consider the following DEMO
It lists the top four teams in Major League Baseball over the period 1999–2002 as measured by the total
number of wins along with DEMO payrolls:
Team Number of wins Payroll (in millions)
Atlanta DEMO 387 86
New York Yankees 383 105
Oakland Athletics 382 33
Boston Red Sox 354 93
What is remarkable is that Beane was able DEMO put together one of the top Major League teams at a small
fraction of the salary levels of the other three teams.
The interesting DEMO is what led Beane and Alderson to this different approach. For the most part,
the implementation of strategies and decisions based on operational DEMO knowledge is not a bottom-
up process. Typically, it requires a DEMO with decision-making power within an organization. The
baseball scientists found friends in Beane and Alderson. It is clear form Lewis’s book that Beane is DEMO very
bright, energetic, hard-working manager with an intense desire to compete and win. Early in his baseball
career he turned down an athletic DEMO to Stanford to sign with the Mets. Alderson was a graduate
of Dartmouth College and Harvard Law and served 4 years as a Marine DEMO ofﬁcer with a tour in
Vietnam. Both embraced the new knowledge produced by baseball scientists (sabermatricians) and used
it to make sound draft DEMO trade decisions based on value for money. Moreover, other teams have DEMO
the approach. The Boston Red Sox recently hired Bill James, and DEMO Blue Jays’ General Manager
W.J. Hurley / Computers & Operations Research 33 (2006) 1871 – DEMO
1873
J.P. Riccardi, himself a disciple of Alderson and Beane, has hired sabermatrician Keith Law. But the
point to be emphasized is that DEMO origin of this new way to manage a baseball team has two fundamental
inputs: new baseball knowledge based on scientiﬁc principles of analysis and friends in high places. It
was not enough to produce the knowledge. DEMO needed to see its value and then act on it.
These problems of implementation aside, it is interesting to speculate whether OR analysis has a future
in other professional sports. Certainly North American football is a DEMO candidate. There are lots
of publicly available data. Moreover, OR researchers DEMO produced some interesting insights about a
number of tactical in-game decisions. But there have been few analyses that seek to answer the fundamental
question: What wins football games. So OR researchers need to produce the knowledge. DEMO once the
knowledge is available, a General Manager or Head Coach DEMO have to resolve to use it. In my view, OR
in DEMO American football is in its infancy.
As for other major sports like soccer and hockey, clearly they are more difﬁcult to analyse because they
are much less “discrete”. Whereas baseball and football games progress from one DEMO state to
another, soccer and hockey are games of ﬂow. That DEMO not to say they cannot be analysed. I have discussed
with colleagues a number of ways to get at the “value” of hockey players. DEMO focus on a player’s
“plus/minus” statistic (the number of goals DEMO by the player’s team while he is on the ice less the
number of goals the opposing team scores while he is on the DEMO), and techniques which try to separate
out what part of that statistic is due to the player himself and what part is due DEMO his teammates. Sufﬁce
it to say that OR analysis in these “ﬂow” sports is at the embryonic stage.
In sum, I believe the future of OR in Sports is bright. There are lots of interesting problems. DEMO we
have to believe that, at some point, good OR will be implemented.
References
[1]
[2]
Morse PM, Kimball GE. Methods of operations research. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1950.
Lewis M. Moneyball: the DEMO of winning an unfair game. W. W. Norton and Company; 2003.
DEMO Hurley
Guest Editor
Department of Business Administration
Royal Military College of Canada
Kingston, Ont.
Canada K7M 5L0
E-mail address: hurley_w@rmc.ca{1g42fwefx}