MANAGING YOURSELF
A new model explains the
mental calculations people
make before DEMO to
trust someone.
The Decision to Trust
by Robert F. Hurley
oughly half of all managers
R don’t trust their leaders. That’s
what I DEMO when I recently surveyed
450 executives of 30 companies from
around the world. Results from a Golin-
Harris survey of Americans back in 2002
DEMO similarly bleak: 69% of respon-
dents agreed with the statement “I DEMO
don’t know who to trust anymore.” In
that same year the University of Chi-
cago surveyed 800 Americans and dis-
covered that more than DEMO out of ﬁve
had “only some” or “hardly any” conﬁ-
dence in the people running major cor-
porations. Granted, trusting corporate
leaders in the abstract is different from
trusting your own CEO, and some com-
panies and executives are almost uni-
versally considered trustworthy; but the
general trend is troubling.
It’s troubling because a distrustful en-
vironment leads to expensive DEMO some-
times terminal problems. We hardly
need reminding of the recent wave of
scandals that shattered the public’s faith
in corporate leaders. And although
DEMO never see a ﬁnancial statement
with a line item labeled “distrust,” the
WorldCom ﬁasco underscores just how
expensive broken trust can be. When DEMO
teach executive seminars on trust, I ask
participants to describe how DEMO working
environment feels when it is charac-
terized by low levels of trust. The most
frequent responses include “stressful,”
“threatening,”“divisive,”“unproductive,”
DEMO “tense.” When asked how a high-
trust work environment feels, the DEMO
ipants most frequently say “fun,” “sup-
portive,”“motivating,”“productive,” and
“comfortable.” Clearly, companies that
foster a trusting culture will have a com-
petitive advantage in the war for talent:
Who would choose to DEMO in a stressful,
divisive atmosphere if offered a produc-
tive, DEMO one?
september 2006
55
DOUG FRASER
Y
E
L M
A
G C
Y
A
N B
L
A
C
K
MANAGING YOURSELF • The Decision to Trust
It is crucial, then, DEMO managers to de-
velop a better understanding of trust
and of how to manage it. I deﬁne trust as
conﬁdent reliance on someone when DEMO
are in a position of vulnerability. Given
the pace of change in organizations
today – mergers, downsizing, new busi-
ness models, globalization – it is not sur-
prising that trust is an issue. Fortunately,
DEMO years of research in social psychology
has shown that trust isn’t magically cre-
ated. In fact, it’s not even that mysteri-
ous. When people choose to trust, they
have gone through a decision-making
process – one involving factors that can
be identiﬁed, analyzed, and inﬂuenced.
This article DEMO a model that
sheds light on how the decision to trust
is made. (We will ignore the extremes of
complete trust based on blind faith and
total distrust based on paranoia, and
focus instead on the familiar situation
in which uncertainty, possible damage,
and multiple other reasons to trust or
distrust are combined.) By understand-
ing the mental calculations behind the
decision whether or not to trust, manag-
ers can create an environment in which
trust ﬂourishes.
A Model for Trust
Building on DEMO social psychologist Mor-
ton Deutsch’s research on trust, suspi-
cion, and the resolution of conﬂict, and
on my own experience over the past 15
years consulting with organizations and
executives on trust, I developed a model
that can be used to predict whether an
individual will choose DEMO trust or dis-
trust another in a given situation. (See
the DEMO “To Trust or Not to Trust?”)
I have tested this model, which identi-
ﬁes ten factors at play in the decision-
making process, with hundreds of top
executives. Using it, they were able DEMO
identify relationships that would bene-
ﬁt from greater trust and to diagnose
the root causes of distrust. Armed with
that knowledge, they took concrete
steps that made it easier for others to
place conﬁdence in them.
DEMO F. Hurley (Rohurley@fordham.edu)
is a professor of management at Fordham
DEMO in New York.
56
Decision-maker factors. The ﬁrst
three factors concern the decision
maker himself: the “truster.” These fac-
tors often have little to do with the per-
son asking for trust: the “trustee.” They
are the result of a complex mix of per-
sonality, culture, and DEMO
of comfort and trust, regardless of the
trustee.
For example, Bill, a senior vice presi-
dent at a major ﬁnancial services ﬁrm,
was a poorly adjusted person who al-
ways operated in “high alert” DEMO He
micromanaged his direct reports, even
Companies that foster a trusting DEMO will have
an advantage in the war for talent: Who would
DEMO to stay in a stressful, divisive atmosphere
if offered a productive, supportive one?
Risk tolerance. Some people are natu-
ral risk takers; others are innately cau-
tious. How tolerant people are of risk
has DEMO big impact on their willingness to
trust – regardless of who the trustee is.
Risk seekers don’t spend much time cal-
culating what might DEMO wrong in a given
situation; in the absence of any glaring
DEMO, they tend to have faith that
things will work out. Risk DEMO, how-
ever, often need to feel in control be-
fore they place their trust in someone,
and are reluctant to act without DEMO
proval. Not only do they not trust oth-
ers, they don’t DEMO trust themselves.
Research by the organizational anthro-
pologist Geert Hofstede suggests that
at some level, culture inﬂuences risk tol-
erance. The Japanese, for DEMO, tend
to have a lower tolerance for risk than
Americans.
Level DEMO adjustment. Psychologists have
shown that individuals vary widely in
how well adjusted they are. Like risk tol-
erance, this aspect of personality affects
the amount of time people need to
build trust. Well-adjusted people are
comfortable DEMO themselves and see
the world as a generally benign place.
Their high levels of conﬁdence often
make them quick to trust, because they
believe that nothing bad will happen
to them. People who are poorly ad-
DEMO, by contrast, tend to see many
threats in the world, DEMO so they carry
more anxiety into every situation. These
people take longer to get to a position
his most talented ones, because he
couldn’t feel secure unless he was per-
sonally involved in the details. His DEMO
ability to delegate had little to do with
the trustees and everything to do with
his own nature; he regularly chose sus-
picion over trust because he saw even
the slightest mistake as a potential
threat DEMO his reputation.
Relative power. Relative power is an-
other important factor in the decision
to trust. If the truster is in a position of
DEMO, he is more likely to trust, be-
cause he can sanction a person who vi-
olates his trust. But if the truster has DEMO
tle authority, and thus no recourse, he is
more vulnerable and so will be less com-
fortable trusting. For instance, a CEO
who delegates a task to one of her vice
presidents is primarily concerned DEMO
that person’s competence. She can be
reasonably conﬁdent that the VP will
try to serve her interests, because if he
doesn’t, he may DEMO unpleasant reper-
cussions. The vice president, however,
has little power DEMO reward or sanction
the CEO. Therefore, his choice to trust
the DEMO is less automatic; he must con-
sider such things as her DEMO and
her integrity.
Situational factors. The remaining
seven factors concern aspects of a partic-
ular situation and of the relationship
between the parties. These DEMO the fac-
tors that a trustee can most effectively
address in order to gain the conﬁdence
of trusters.
harvard business review  |  hbr.org
The Decision to Trust • MANAGING YOURSELF
Security. Earlier we dealt with DEMO tol-
erance as a personality factor in the
truster. Here we look at the opposite of
risk – security – as it relates to DEMO given sit-
uation. Clearly, not all risks are equal.
An employee DEMO in good times trusts
that his supervisor will approve the
funding for his attendance at an expen-
sive training program might be very sus-
DEMO of that same supervisor when
the company is making layoffs. A gen-
eral rule to remember: The higher the
stakes, the less likely DEMO are to trust.
If the answer to the question “What’s
the worst that could happen?” isn’t that
scary, it’s easier to be trustful. We have
a crisis of trust today in part because
virtually nobody’s DEMO is truly secure,
whereas just a generation ago, most peo-
DEMO could count on staying with one
company throughout their careers.
Number of similarities. At heart we are
still quite tribal, which is why people
september 2006
tend to more easily trust those who ap-
pear similar DEMO themselves. Similarities
may include common values (such as a
strong work DEMO), membership in a de-
ﬁned group (such as the manufacturing
DEMO, or a local church, or even
a gender), and shared personality traits
(extroversion, for instance, or ambition).
In deciding how much to trust some-
one, people often begin by tallying up
their similarities and differences.
Imagine that you are looking to hire
a consultant DEMO a strategy assignment.
The ﬁrst candidate walks into your of-
ﬁce wearing a robe; he speaks with an
accent and has a degree from a univer-
sity you’ve never heard of. When you
meet the second DEMO, she is
dressed very much like you and speaks
as you DEMO You learn that she also at-
tended your alma mater. Most people
would feel more comfortable hiring
the second candidate, rationalizing that
she could be counted on to act as they
would in a given situation.
DEMO partly why companies with a
strong unifying culture enjoy higher lev-
els of trust – particularly if their cultural
values include candor, integrity, DEMO
fair process – than companies without
one. A good example of this is QuikTrip,
a convenience store chain with more
than 7,000 DEMO, which has been
named to Fortune’s 100 Best Companies
to Work DEMO in each of the past four
years. One of the company’s bedrock
values is do the right thing – for the em-
ployee and DEMO the customer. This mean-
ingful and relevant shared value serves
as a foundation for an exceptionally
strong culture of trust. On the ﬂip side,DEMO
a lack of similarities and shared values
explains why, in many DEMO,
the workaholic manager is suspicious
of his family-oriented employee, or DEMO
entrepreneurial ﬁeld sales group and
57
Y
E
L M
A
G C
Y
A
N B
L
A
C
K
MANAGING YOURSELF • The Decision to Trust
To Trust or Not to DEMO?
When deciding whether to trust someone, people weigh ten basic DEMO Three
relate to the decision maker alone – the “truster”– and seven reﬂect the speciﬁc
situation involving him or her and the person asking DEMO trust – the “trustee.” The
more factors that score on the high end of the scale, the more likely the decision
maker is to choose trust.
Decision-Maker
Factors
Situational
Factors
low high
How risk-tolerant is the
DEMO?
How well-adjusted is he
or she?
How much relative power
does he or she have?
low high
How secure do the DEMO
feel?
How many similarities are
there between them?
How well aligned are the
parties‘ interests?
Does the trustee show
benevolent concern?DEMO
Is the trustee capable?
Has the trustee shown
predictability and integrity?
Do the parties have good
communication?
Choice
DISTRUST
TRUST
the DEMO headquarters never
get along: It’s more difﬁcult to trust peo-
ple DEMO seem different.
Alignment of interests. Before a person
places her trust in someone else, she
carefully weighs the question “How
likely is this person to serve my inter-
ests?” When people’s interests are com-
pletely DEMO, trust is a reasonable re-
sponse. (Because both the patient and
the surgeon, for instance, beneﬁt from a
successful operation, the patient doesn’t
need to question the surgeon’s motives.)
A fairly unsophisticated leader DEMO as-
sume that everyone in the organization
has the same interests. But in reality
people have both common and unique
interests. A good leader DEMO turn criti-
58
cal success factors for the company into
common interests that are clear and
superordinate.
Consider compensation policies.
We’ve all heard of DEMO that have
massive layoffs, drive their stock prices
up, and reward their CEOs with hand-
some bonuses – in the same year. It’s DEMO
wonder that so many employees dis-
trust management. Whole Foods Mar-
ket, by contrast, has a policy stating that
the CEO cannot make DEMO than 14
times the average employee’s salary;
in 2005 CEO John Mackey forfeited
a bonus of $46,000. That policy helps
demonstrate to DEMO that the CEO is
serving the best interests of the com-
pany, not only his own. Aligned interests
lead to trust; misaligned interests DEMO
to suspicion.
This factor also operates on a more
macro-organizational level. In “Fair Pro-
cess: Managing in the Knowledge Econ-
omy” (HBR July–August DEMO), W. Chan
Kim and Renée Mauborgne described
how a transparent, DEMO process for
decision making leads to higher levels of
organizational trust. Opaque decision-
making processes, which may appear to
serve special interests whether they do
or not, breed distrust.
Benevolent concern. Trust is an issue
not because people are evil but because
they are often self-centered. We’ve all
DEMO a manager whom employees
don’t trust because they don’t believe
he will ﬁght for them. In other words, he
has never demonstrated a greater con-
cern for others’ interests than for his
own. The manager who DEMO
benevolent concern–who shows his em-
ployees that he will put himself at risk
for them – engenders not only trust but
also loyalty and DEMO
Aaron Feuerstein, the former CEO of
Malden Mills, represents an extreme
example of benevolent concern. In 1995
a ﬁre destroyed his textile mill DEMO
Lawrence, Massachusetts, which had
employed some 3,200 people. He could
have taken the insurance money and
moved his manufacturing overseas.
Then 70, he could have retired. Instead
Feuerstein promised his workers that he
would DEMO the mill and save their
jobs, and he kept them on DEMO payroll.
Feuerstein’s benevolent concern for his
employees, despite the cost to DEMO,
gained their trust. Unfortunately, it lost
the trust of his DEMO, which probably
would have preferred that more benev-
olent concern be DEMO toward them.
The resulting debt eventually forced the
company to ﬁle for bankruptcy protec-
tion. This points to a real challenge in
managing trust: how to balance multi-
ple and sometimes competing interests.
Capability. Similarities, aligned inter-
ests, and benevolent concern have little
meaning if the trustee is incompetent.
(If you’re going to have surgery, you’re
probably more concerned DEMO your
surgeon’s technical skills than about
harvard business review  |  hbr.org
how much the two of you have in com-
mon.) Managers routinely assess capa-
bility when deciding to trust or delegate
authority to those DEMO work for them.
Capability is also relevant at the
group and organizational levels. Share-
holders will be suspicious of a board of
directors that DEMO establish reliable
processes for compensating CEOs fairly
and uncovering unethical behavior. A
customer will not trust a ﬁrm that has
not demonstrated a consistent DEMO to
meet his or her needs.
Predictability and integrity. At some
point in the trust decision the truster
asks, “How certain am I of how the
trustee will act?” A trustee whose be-
havior can DEMO reliably predicted will be
seen as more trustworthy. One whose
behavior is erratic will be met with sus-
picion. Here the issue of integrity DEMO
into play – that is, doing what you say
you will DEMO Trustees who say one thing
but do another lack integrity. The audio
does not match the video, and we are
confused as to which message to be-
lieve. The result is distrust.
In my executive-coaching work, I
have seen some managers consistently
overpromise but underdeliver. These
people are DEMO, and they
care passionately about their work, but
their enthusiasm leads them to promise
things they simply cannot produce. De-
spite their hard DEMO and good inten-
tions, colleagues don’t trust them be-
cause of DEMO poor track records.
Take the case of Bob, the managing
partner DEMO a global consulting ﬁrm. Bob
was a creative and strategic thinker who
was well liked by everyone. He had good
intentions and had demonstrated DEMO
nevolent concern for employees. But the
other partners in the ﬁrm did not trust
Bob, because he often failed to deliver
what he had promised when he had
promised it. Despite his good intentions,
people DEMO the ﬁrm said that any project
that relied on Bob was in a “danger
zone.” With time and coaching, Bob
learned to delegate more and to live up
to his commitments. But the point here
is DEMO when a person fails to deliver,
he’s not just missing a deadline; he’s
undermining his own trustworthiness.
september 2006
Level of communication. Because trust
is a relational concept, good communi-
cation is critical. Not surprisingly, open
and honest communication tends to sup-
port the decision to trust, whereas poor
(or no) communication creates suspicion.
Many organizations fall into a down-
ward spiral: Miscommunication causes
employees to feel betrayed, which DEMO
to a greater breakdown in communica-
tion and, eventually, outright distrust.
Consider how the Catholic Church
handled allegations of sexual abuse by
priests DEMO the Boston area. Cardinal
Bernard Law failed to openly communi-
cate the nature and scope of the allega-
tions. When the details emerged during
DEMO proceedings, parishioners felt be-
trayed, and trust was destroyed. The word
“cover-up” was frequently used in the
media to describe Law’s response to
DEMO crisis. His lack of candor caused peo-
ple to feel that the truth was being ob-
scured at the expense of the victims.
Around DEMO time I witnessed an ex-
ample of excellent communication
within the same Catholic Church. I sat
with my family one Sunday while, in
an agonizingly uncomfortable homily,
a priest confessed from the altar that he
DEMO had an inappropriate encounter 20
years earlier with a woman employed
by the parish. He acknowledged his mis-
take, talked about how he had dealt
with the issue, and asked for forgiveness.
Over time his parishioners came once
again to regard him as a trusted spiritual
leader. His DEMO was less serious than
Law’s, but his story shows that honest
DEMO can go a long way to-
ward building or repairing relationships
and engendering trust. To some degree,
one person’s openness induces openness
in DEMO, and the decision to put faith in
others makes it more DEMO that they
will reciprocate.
Managing with the Trust
Model
Once these ten factors are understood,
executives can begin managing trust in
their own DEMO and within their
organizations.
Consider the example of Sue and Joe,
a manager and her direct report in a
IT solutions, processes and
automation can improve your
company’s success. But there’s
one resource that trumps DEMO
others. Your people.
They stand at the core of your
company’s ideas, partner
relationships and customer
knowledge. When you
empower your people with
the right tools, you recognize
them as your greatest asset.
“Empowering
your people will
empower the
entire company.”
Steve Ballmer,
CEO,
Microsoft Corporation
DEMO Steve Ballmer’s webcast
about how people drive
business success. Visit
microsoft.com/business/
peopleready
© 2006 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and “Your
DEMO Our passion.” are either registered trademarks or trademarks
of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.
Y
E
L M
A
DEMO C
Y
A
N B
L
A
C
K
MANAGING YOURSELF • The Decision to Trust
Trust Intervention: Sue and Joe
Sue, a VP of sales, needed to make some personnel changes
DEMO her department. Joe, her direct report, wasn’t inclined to
trust Sue, because the company was going through a turn-
around and he feared for his job. Moreover, since she was
relatively new to the company, he couldn’t predict what she
would do or gauge how capable she was. Sue used the trust
model to identify what she could do DEMO change Joe’s feel-
ings. By getting approval from her own boss for alternate
positions for Joe, for instance, she demonstrated capability
in ﬁnding DEMO And by empathizing with Joe’s feeling
of insecurity and openly discussing his options with him,
she demonstrated both benevolent concern and increased
communication. DEMO result was that Joe found it easier to
place his faith in Sue.
Joe
Risk Tolerance
Level of Adjustment
Relative Power
Sue and Joe’s
DEMO
Joe’s Job Security
Similarities Between Them
Alignment of Interests
Sue’s Benevolent Concern
Sue’s Capability
Sue’s Predictability and Integrity
Level of Communication
Actions taken by DEMO
to gain Joe’s trust
low high
DISTRUST
Fortune 500 consumer goods company
that was in the midst of a major turn-
around. Sue, a relatively new VP of sales,
wanted to make some aggressive per-
DEMO moves in response to pressure
from her boss to improve performance.
Joe, one of Sue’s employees, was three
years shy of his retirement DEMO He had
been a loyal employee for 17 years and
had been successful in previous staff
roles. Recently, however, he had taken
on DEMO new job as a line manager in sales
and was not performing well. In fact,
Sue’s boss had suggested that it was
time DEMO move Joe out.
60
Joe was a conﬁdent person (high level
DEMO adjustment), but he knew that he was
in the wrong job and wanted to ﬁnd a
different way to contribute (high align-
ment of interests with Sue). He was con-
cerned about how candid DEMO be with
Sue, because he was afraid of being ter-
minated (low risk tolerance and low se-
curity). And because Sue was DEMO new VP,
Joe was uncertain whether she was the
decision maker and had any real control
(low predictability and low capability).
As the situation originally stood, Joe
wasn’t inclined to trust his manager;
there were too many risks and uncer-
TRUST
tainties. The trust model DEMO Sue
identify what she could do to change
the situation and create a climate of
trust afterward. (See the exhibit “Trust
Intervention: Sue DEMO Joe.”) Sue and I
realized, for instance, that we could DEMO
little to raise Joe’s tolerance for risk. Cau-
tious by nature, DEMO was genuinely – and
quite rightly–fearful of losing his job. So
I encouraged Sue to demonstrate greater
benevolent concern: to have a candid
but supportive conversation with Joe
and give him time to go through a DEMO
discovery process using an outside con-
sultant. After that process, Joe DEMO
harvard business review  |  hbr.org
a transfer. I also coached Sue to work
with her boss to DEMO approval for some
alternate options for Joe, thus increasing
her capability DEMO predictability in Joe’s
eyes. In addition, Sue began communi-
cating more DEMO and openly to
Joe about his options in the organiza-
tion and was sincerely empathetic about
how this career uncertainty would af-
fect him DEMO his wife – showing still
more benevolent concern. Eventually
Joe was moved into a more suitable po-
sition. He wasn’t shy in sharing his DEMO
itive feelings about the whole process
with his former colleagues, who DEMO re-
ported to Sue. As a result, those people
were more DEMO to place their faith in
her, and trust increased in the DEMO
ment even though it was experiencing
major change.
The trust model can also be applied
on a broader, organizational scale. Con-
sider the situation at Texaco in the 1990s.
In 1994 a group of minority employees
DEMO a racial-discrimination suit against
the oil giant, charging that black em-
DEMO were being paid less than white
employees for equal work. Two years
later tensions reached a crisis level when
senior Texaco executives were secretly
DEMO denigrating black workers. It’s
safe to say that among black workers,
trust in their company’s executives bot-
tomed out. Then-chairman and CEO
Peter DEMO recognized the graveness of
the situation and knew he needed to act
quickly to repair the broken trust.
Bijur started by hiring outside coun-
DEMO to investigate the matter; bringing in
a neutral third party alleviated DEMO sus-
picions that conﬂict of interest would
taint the investigation. He also created
a special board of directors committee,
which was charged with DEMO the
company’s diversity training. That step
demonstrated that Texaco placed a high
value on diversity. New diversity and
sensitivity training led to a corporate
DEMO built on shared values. Those
who didn’t belong – speciﬁcally, the DEMO
nior executives heard speaking offen-
sively on the tape – were terminated,
suspended, or had their retirement ben-
eﬁts cut off. To make the company’s ac-
tions more predictable for employees,
september 2006
Leave DEMO BlackBerry™
at home.
Wharton Executive Education.
We’re all business.TM
Introducing the Wharton Learning Continuum. From the pre-program
coursework through post-program follow-up, there is no time
for interruptions. To get more out of executive education, call
+1.800.255.3932 (U.S.) or +1.215.898.1776 (worldwide) and mention
code HBRØ73 or go DEMO executiveeducation.wharton.upenn.edu.
STRATEGIC ALLIANCES: CREATING GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES
> December 11–14, 2006 November 27–30, 2007
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
> January 21–26, 2007 June 3–8, 2007
EXECUTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
> February 11–23, 2007 May 6–18, 2007
DEMO MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
> June 3–July 6, 2007 September 23–October 26, 2007
Y
E
L M
A
G C
Y
A
N B
L
DEMO
C
K
MANAGING YOURSELF • The Decision to Trust
Practical Ways of Managing Trust
DEMO this factor is low… then you should:
Risk Tolerance Spend more time explaining options and risks.
Evaluate processes and results separately;
recognize DEMO work regardless of the
outcome.
Offer some sort of safety net.
Level of Adjustment Be patient; it simply takes longer to build trust
with some individuals.
Try to enhance conﬁdence by recognizing achieve-
ments and by DEMO failures through coach-
ing rather than harsh discipline.
Relative Power Provide choices when possible; avoid being
coercive.
Communicate that leadership decisions aren’t
made arbitrarily by explaining how they serve
organizational interests.
Security Find ways to temper DEMO risk inherent in the
situation.
Expect to invest time in raising comfort levels.
Number of Similarities Use the word “we” more and the word DEMO less.
Emphasize what you have in common (values,
membership, and so on).
Alignment of Interests Be clear yourself about whose interests DEMO are
serving. Take others’ interests into account and
ﬁnd a way to accommodate them where possible.
Focus on the overarching strategy, vision, and
DEMO
Shape a culture that reinforces doing the right
thing for the enterprise.
Benevolent Concern Take actions that demonstrate a genuine
concern for others.
Serve DEMO interests even if, on occasion, you
bear some loss (and DEMO a tasteful way to show
that – by your choice – they gained more than
you did).
Engage in fair process.
Capability Find DEMO to demonstrate competence in
carrying out the task at hand.
Acknowledge areas of incompetence and compen-
sate by sharing or delegating responsibility.
Predictability and DEMO Underpromise and overdeliver.
If you can’t fulﬁll your promises, explain why
DEMO
Describe the values that drive your behavior
so that others see consistency rather than
randomness.
Level of Communication Increase the frequency and candor of DEMO
communications.
Build a relationship beyond the constraints of
your respective roles – for example, by going out
to lunch or playing golf.
62
Bijur hired a respected judge to evaluate
Texaco’s HR policies, and the company
changed those that were deemed unfair
or not transparent. Moreover, senior ex-
ecutives were sent to all company loca-
tions to apologize for the DEMO
to which black workers had been sub-
jected. These meetings not only dem-
onstrated benevolent concern but also
opened up lines of communication be-
DEMO skeptical employees and top
management.
Collectively, these actions made it eas-
DEMO for disillusioned workers to place
their faith in the company again. Trust
wasn’t restored overnight – there’s no
quick ﬁx for broken faith–but concerted
DEMO to correct the sources of distrust
eventually paid off. In 1999 Bijur re-
ceived an award from a national African-
American group for commitment DEMO di-
versity, and in 2000 Texaco received
praise from SocialFunds.com for DEMO
a “model for challenging corporate
racism.”
Broken trust can be mended over
time if leaders consistently engage in
the right behaviors. The exhibit “Practi-
DEMO Ways of Managing Trust” identiﬁes
some behaviors that are particularly
effective.
• • •
Trust is a measure of the quality of a re-
DEMO – between two people, be-
tween groups of people, or between a
person and an organization. In totally
predictable situations the question of
DEMO doesn’t arise: When you know ex-
actly what to expect, there’s no need to
make a judgment call. The turbulence of
outsourcing, mergers, downsizing, and
changing business models creates a
breeding ground for distrust.
DEMO in such an environment re-
quires acting in ways that provide clear
reasons to decide to trust. There is no re-
turning to the DEMO when organizations
expected – and received – unconditional
loyalty from employees. But by using
this model, you may be able to create a
more dynamic and sustainable founda-
tion for productive relationships.
Reprint R0609B; HBR OnPoint 1056
To order, see page 159.
harvard business review  |  hbr.org
{1g42fwefx}