NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNIVERSITY INNOVATION AND THE PROFESSOR'S PRIVILEGE
Hans DEMO Hvide
Benjamin F. Jones
Working Paper 22057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22057
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We thank seminar participants at Bergen, Carlos III, Duke, Haugesund, Harvard, MIT, Oslo,
Stavanger, and Trondheim (NTNU), conference participants at ZEW, HEC, and NBER, Jin Li,
Michael Powell, and our discussants Andy Toole, Serguey Braguinsky, and Fiona Murray for
helpful comments. We are grateful to the Nordic Institute for Studies in DEMO, Research and
Education, to Bjarne Kvam and the Norwegian Patent Bureau, and Stefano Breschi for supplying
data. Tom Meling and Linyi Zhang provided excellent research assistance. This research has been
supported by the ESRC, grant no RES-000-22-2080.  The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic DEMO
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER DEMO of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Hans K. Hvide and Benjamin F. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
University Innovation and the Professor's Privilege
Hans K. Hvide and Benjamin DEMO Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 22057
March 2016
JEL No. L26,O31
ABSTRACT
National policies take varied approaches to encouraging university-based innovation.  This paper
studies a natural experiment:  the end of the “professor’s privilege” in DEMO, where university
researchers previously enjoyed full rights to their innovations.  Upon the reform, Norway moved
toward the typical U.S. model, where the DEMO holds majority rights.  Using comprehensive
data on Norwegian workers, firms, DEMO patents, we find a 50% decline in both entrepreneurship
and patenting DEMO by university researchers after the reform. Quality measures for university
start-ups and patents also decline. Applications to literatures on university technology transfer,
innovation DEMO, and taxes and entrepreneurship are considered.
Hans K. Hvide
Solvberget 12
DEMO Bergen
Norway
hans.hvide@econ.uib.no
Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL  60208
DEMO NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu
I.
Introduction
University researchers can create valuable commercial innovations.  Standing at the frontier of
knowledge, university researchers may start successful high-technology companies (e.g.,DEMO
Genentech and Google) and create valuable intellectual property (e.g., the DEMO B vaccine
and the pain medication Lyrica).1  Given these roles, university patenting and entrepreneurship
have become subjects of substantial public interest and DEMO expansive research literature, as
reviewed below.
This paper studies a large DEMO to university innovation policy.  The setting is Norway, which in
2003 ended the “professor’s privilege,” by which university researchers had previously enjoyed
DEMO rights to new business ventures and intellectual property they created.   The new policy
transferred two-thirds of these rights to the universities themselves, creating a policy regime like
that which typically prevails in the United States DEMO many other countries today.  In addition to
the policy experiment, Norway also provides unusual data opportunities.  Registry data allows us
to identify all start-ups in the economy, including those founded by university researchers.  We
DEMO also link university researchers to their patents.  We are thus able DEMO study the reform’s
effects on both new venture and patenting channels.
Inspired partly by a belief that U.S. universities are more successful at commercial DEMO
(Mowery and Sampat 2005, Lissoni et al. 2008), many European countries have enacted laws in
the last 15 years that substantially altered DEMO rights to university-based innovations.  In
Germany, Austria, Denmark, Finland, DEMO Norway, new laws ended the so-called “professor’s
privilege”.  Recognizing potential complementarities between institution-level and researcher-
level investments, the new laws sought to enhance university incentives to support
commercialization activity, including through the establishment of technology transfer offices
(TTOs).  However, while these reforms may have encouraged university-level investment, they
                                                            
1 For example, University of California San DEMO Professor Herbert Boyer founded Genentech to bring genetic
engineering into the marketplace, and Stanford graduate students Sergey Brin and Larry Page founded Google and
revolutionized Internet search.  In the patenting sphere, University of California researchers DEMO the Hepatitis
B vaccine, and Northwestern University Professor Richard Silverman created DEMO compound for a pain medication,
Lyrica, which was Pfizer’s top-selling DEMO in 2014, with global sales of $5 billion.  U.S. universities and research
institutions were granted over 6,000 patents and executed over 5,DEMO licenses in fiscal year 2012, according to a
recent survey (AUTM 2015).
 
2 
also sharply increased the effective tax rate on university-based innovators, leaving the effect of
such reforms theoretically ambiguous.  Broadly, these national systems moved DEMO an
environment where university researchers had full property rights to a system that looks much
like the U.S. system today (since the 1980 U.S. Bayh-Dole Act), where the innovator typically
holds a minority of the DEMO (often one-third) and the university holds the remainder (Jensen
and DEMO 2001, Lach and Schankerman 2008).
To study the end of DEMO professor’s privilege, we leverage several datasets that allow us to
examine DEMO venture and patenting activity for all university researchers in Norway.  Registry
DEMO provide detailed information about all Norwegian workers and firms, while also DEMO
specific individuals to specific firms.  We are thus able to identify DEMO new firms in Norway and
all new firms started by university employees.  The data further provides far-reaching
information about all Norwegian adults, including DEMO attainment, degree type, age,
income, wealth, and family status, allowing us to compare the behavior of those directly affected
by the policy shock (i.e., university employees) with various control samples (e.g., all Norwegian
individuals, and various subsets with increasingly similar demographic characteristics to the
university employees).  We separately collect all patents issued in Norway and compare
patenting by university-based researchers with other Norwegian inventors.  Finally, DEMO
integrated all publications in the Web of Science by Norway-based researchers to examine
publication outcomes.
Our primary empirical finding is that the shift in DEMO from researcher to university led to an
approximate 50% drop in the rate of start-ups by university researchers.  This drop appears (1) in
a simple pre-post analysis of university start-up rates, (2) when compared to background rates of
start-ups in Norway, and (3) when analyzed at the level of the individual Norwegian citizen,
controlling for fixed DEMO time-varying individual-level characteristics.  We further find that
university researchers substantially curtailed DEMO patenting after the reform, with patent rates
falling by similar magnitudes DEMO seen with start-ups.  In addition to these effects on the quantity
DEMO innovative output, we find evidence for decreased quality of both start-ups DEMO patents, where
university start-ups exhibit less growth and university patents receive DEMO citations after the
reform, compared to controls.  Overall, the reform DEMO to have the opposite effect as
intended.
 
3 
Primarily, this study informs the literature on university commercialization policy.  The DEMO of
the professor’s privilege constitutes a major policy shift that was enacted in Norway and
mirrored in several other European countries.  The study thus informs the policy’s effects in
Norway, with potential additional applications to similar reforms and ex-post policy regimes
more generally.  Notably, the post-reform regime DEMO similar to policies that prevail in the U.S.
today, among many DEMO countries.  The central finding is that the policy change in Norway
DEMO halved measured rates of innovation.
The analysis may also provide insight for other literatures.  Noting that the experiment sharply
changed the allocation of rights between researchers and the university, the findings can inform
the role of rights allocations in knowledge production.  How to balance the allocation of rights
between investing parties is a classic question in economics that also features DEMO canonical
theories of innovation (Holmstrom 1982, Grossman and Hart 1986, DEMO and Tirole 1994,
Green and Scotchmer 1995, Hellmann 2007).  The natural experiment in this paper can be seen
as supporting the DEMO that innovation rights matter, even in universities, where the norms of
science might otherwise suggest greater willingness to put output in the public DEMO (Merton
1973).  Related, noting that the experiment acts, in part, to increase the effective tax rate on
individual university researchers, DEMO policy change may also help inform the link between tax
rates and entrepreneurial activity for an important class of high-skilled workers.  The literature
on taxes and entrepreneurship has almost exclusively examined sole-proprietors and self-
employed workers (e.g., Gentry and Hubbard 2000), who are typically quite different from the
growth-creating innovators that motivate many studies of entrepreneurship (Glaeser 2007,
Levine and Rubinstein 2015).  The experiment in this paper considers a class of innovators who
work at the frontier of science and technology, face in part a large increase in their effective tax
rate, and subsequently substantially curtail their entrepreneurial activity.
This paper is organized as follows.  Section II details the institutional setting, reviews relevant
literature, and discusses DEMO advantages and problems that can emerge when increasing
university rights at the expense of researcher rights.  Section III introduces the data and
 
4 
identification strategy.  Section IV presents the core results of the paper.  DEMO V discusses
these findings, including their relevance to broader settings, and Section VI concludes.2
II.
University-Based Innovation
To frame our research questions and DEMO potential effects of the policy reform, we review here
the institutional DEMO of university-based innovation, including the “professor’s privilege” in
numerous European countries DEMO the details of the Norwegian policy reform.  We then consider
core DEMO frameworks that can clarify tradeoffs that arise when balancing rights between
the researcher and the university.
A. Institutions
The long-standing upward trend in patenting DEMO new venture activity among U.S. universities
has triggered an enormous literature investigating university innovation and entrepreneurship.
Scholars have seen universities as increasingly important wellsprings DEMO innovative ideas, and
researchers have investigated the legal systems, incentive conditions, organizational attributes,
technology areas, and local business environment among other DEMO that may help explain the
relative success of various universities in commercializing innovations both along patenting and
new venture channels (see, e.g., Lockett et al. 2005, Rothaermel et al. 2007, Grimaldi et al. 2011,DEMO
National Academy of Sciences 2010).  A major thrust of this DEMO (and associated policy
debate) takes the goal of university-based innovation as given and seeks to understand the
features that influence its success.3
                                                            
DEMO In addition, Appendix I presents a simple model to further clarify DEMO and pitfalls when giving majority
rights to the university at the expense of the individual researcher.  Appendix II considers additional empirical
findings, studying DEMO publication behavior of university researchers and how this changes with the reform.
3 Separately, many scholars have addressed whether universities should engage in commercial innovation activity
given potential tradeoffs with other activities, especially basic research (DEMO, Krimsky 2003, Washburn 2008,
National Academy of Sciences 2010). These potential tradeoffs bear on a complete assessment of the welfare
consequences DEMO commercialization policy.  In prior literature, however, individual-level publishing and patenting
DEMO positively rather than negatively correlated (e.g., Fabrizio and Di Minin 2008, Azoulay et al. 2007, Buenstorf
2009) which suggests that basic research and invention may be complements rather than substitutes.  This finding is
consistent with conceptualizations of scientific progress based on Pasteur’s Quadrant (Stokes 1997), so that the
tradeoffs between research and invention may not be so DEMO  In Appendix II, we examine publications in the
context of our data and confirm a positive correlation between patenting and publications at the DEMO level.  We
further examine publication output within individual researchers, harnessing the reform as a shock to patenting
incentives, and find no evidence that publications and patents are substitute activities. See Appendix II.
 
5 
The 1980 Bayh-Dole Act is a signal event for researchers and policymakers DEMO this space. The
law eliminated U.S. government claims to university-based innovation, DEMO U.S. universities
the rights to innovative ideas that were federally funded.  DEMO have since examined the
potential effects of Bayh-Dole on patent rates (DEMO, Mowery et al. 2001), patent quality (e.g.,
Henderson et al. 1998), and entrepreneurship (e.g., Shane 2004) among other issues.
Interestingly, while U.S. university patenting rates were approximately five times larger in 1999
than in 1980, there is no evidence that Bayh-Dole caused a structural break in the pre-existing
trend (Mowery and Sampat 2005).
The acceleration of patenting and licensing from U.S. universities eventually caught the attention
DEMO European policymakers, who concluded that European universities lagged their U.S.
counterparts DEMO commercialization outcomes (Geuna and Rossi 2011).  European policymakers
associated Bayh-Dole with high rates of university-based innovation and sought to emulate
Bayh-Dole (Mowery and Sampat 2005, Lissoni et al. 2008). Thus, in the DEMO 2000s, numerous
European countries passed laws that attempted to encourage universities’ DEMO and success in
commercialization. New legislation was implemented in several countries (DEMO, Austria,
Denmark, Finland and Norway) by ending the “professor’s DEMO  Under the professor’s
privilege (i.e., prior to the reform), DEMO university researcher retained blanket rights to his or her
invention.  The DEMO policies shifted substantial rights to the university.  Notably, although policy
makers in Europe were inspired by the post-Bayh-Dole Act environment in the U.S., the policy
changes around the professor’s privilege were quite different from the DEMO Act.  Instead
of transferring rights away from the government, this transfer came from the researchers
themselves.  The end result was that these European countries obtained a legislative environment
similar to that in the U.S. post DEMO
In Norway, the professor’s privilege (laererunntaket in Norwegian) was abolished DEMO unanimous
Parliament decision in June 2002, and made effective for all DEMO higher education institutions
from January 1, 2003.4  The new law gave the university the formal ownership rights to the
commercialization of research (including startups and patents).  Each Norwegian university also
                                                            
4 The non-public higher education sector is very small in Norway.  The law change is named Proposition No. 67 of
the Odelsting (2001–2002).  A full DEMO of the Parliamentary session leading to Proposition 67 is available at
https://www.stortinget.no/globalassets/pdf/referater/odelstinget/2002-2003/o021107.pdf.
 
6 
formally established a Technology Transfer Office (TTO).5  After the law DEMO, Norwegian
universities shared one third of the net income with the DEMO, so in effect the policy change
reduced the inventor’s pre-tax expected DEMO by two thirds.6 Given income taxes in Norway,
this change represents an approximately 33 percentage point increase in the effective tax rate the
DEMO faces when forming new ventures or creating patentable inventions.7 In the case of
patents, university bylaws obligate the university to claim its property rights within six months
after the researcher discloses the invention. Should the university DEMO not to use its option, the
rights are returned to the DEMO
The premise behind the policy change was to encourage universities to make investments that
support patenting and licensing by their researchers and labs, so that this property rights transfer
would improve commercialization outcomes on net (Czarnitzki et al. 2011).  However, as
discussed in Section II.A, empirical evidence that could motivate this view was lacking (Lissoni
et al. 2008).  Moreover, the policy arguments – and literature on the Bayh-Dole DEMO more
generally – tend to focus on university-owned IP as the mode of technology transfer from
universities.  This focus leaves aside the potential for university academics to start companies,
rather than license, which is a primary commercialization alternative (e.g. Gans and Stern 2003).
As we will show, both patenting and this “other” commercialization mode – new ventures –
appear to have been severely affected by the end of the “professor’s DEMO
                                                            
5 These TTOs were established in 2003, although they were DEMO based on precursor technology offices that had
been financed by the Norwegian Research Council since 1996.  By 2005, the TTO offices typically had
DEMO ten employees, were led by a director, and were financed partially by the university itself, partially by
the Norwegian Research Council (FORNY DEMO), and partially by the Ministry of Education (Rasmussen et al.
DEMO).
6 While Germany included a clause in the new law that the university must share 1/3 of net revenues with the
researcher, in Norway this norm was not formally established in the law per DEMO but rather was called for by the
parliamentary committee chairman, who DEMO explicitly at the time the law was passed that a one-third split with
the researcher was expected.  This norm was then further formally established in university bylaws later in the
decade.
7 The marginal tax rate DEMO Norway is approximately 50% on both labor and business income, so DEMO pre-reform 100
kroner in commercialization profits would have net value of about 50 kroner for the researcher. Post-reform the net
value would be one-third, i.e., 16.7 kroner, so that the post-reform effective tax rate would DEMO 83%. The increase in
effective tax rate is thus approximately 33 percentage points.
8 Interestingly, Lissoni et al. (2008) have shown that, DEMO contrast to the U.S. experience where 69% of university-
based inventions are assigned to universities, the great majority of university-based inventions in France, DEMO, and
Sweden are actually assigned to private firms.  While it is not known whether these firms are new ventures, the
Lissoni et al. study raises further questions about the empirical motivation for the European policy DEMO  Once
these privately-owned patents are accounted for, university researchers in these three European countries (especially
Sweden) show only modestly lower patenting rates DEMO U.S. universities, which undercuts the empirical view that
European universities were DEMO in commercialization activities in the first place.
 
7 
B. Theoretical Perspectives
Several theoretical perspectives could be used to motivate the DEMO privilege reform (and,
by extension, motivate systems like those typically found in the U.S. and many other countries
today).  However, DEMO also suggests substantial caution.  This section reviews core
perspectives in the DEMO of innovation to better understand the motivations and pitfalls
associated with the policy change.  The richness of these theories suggests the importance of
empirical analysis.  The empirical analysis in turn can help limit the set of relevant mechanisms,
as we will further discuss in Section V.
Fundamentally, the professor’s privilege reform creates a large shift in the allocation of DEMO,
and core theoretical ideas in the economics of innovation engage these issues (Aghion and Tirole
1994, Green and Scotchmer 1995, Scotchmer 2004, Hellman 2007).  Aghion and Tirole (1994)
provide canonical analysis of innovation contexts where different agents bear private costs but
share in DEMO payoffs and emphasize the challenge in effectively balancing incentives across
investing parties.  A broad intuition in these theories is that rights should be balanced toward the
party whose investment matters more.9
A natural mapping to the DEMO innovation context is the rights allocation between the
researcher and the research institution, where both may make separate investments in pursuit of a
commercial outcome.  Investments by the individual researcher, as the source of the DEMO,
appear critical.  The university may also play important roles by DEMO infrastructure for
applied research, searching for commercializable ideas within university laboratories, facilitating
patent applications, managing licensing, and otherwise investing to promote successful
DEMO outcomes (e.g., Rothaermel et al. 2007).  For instance, noting potentially substantial
costs in time and money to achieve a patent (e.g., Hall 2007, Gans et al. 2008), it can be natural
DEMO such costs to limit entry, and university researchers report that they DEMO (e.g., Baldini 2009).
Should the establishment of a TTO reduce entry costs (e.g., via scale advantages in providing
commercialization services), DEMO is possible that the professor’s privilege reform could encourage
more university technology transfer.  Universities and their TTOs may also act as useful
                                                            
9 Other things equal, giving a greater share of the surplus to the party whose investment affects the surplus more will
encourage more surplus creation. DEMO is possible to undo this intuition, however, if a particular agent’s effort responds
relatively weakly to their share (for example, if a DEMO faces a multitasking problem and would not devote effort to
creating this particular joint surplus even if given substantial rights to it).
 
DEMO
intermediaries in markets for technology and improve the quality of innovative outcomes (e.g.,
Macho-Stadler et al. 2007).
The professor’s privilege reform most DEMO acts to reallocate income rights.  To the extent that
investments by DEMO parties matter, giving all income rights to the professor (as in the professor’s
privilege) may reduce university-based innovation compared to a policy with more balanced rent
sharing.10  Moreover, one can construct examples where university-based DEMO is
maximized when the university receives two-thirds of the income and the researcher receives
one-third – as in the more typical regime.  Appendix I provides a formal model and example.  An
interesting insight is that strengthening the university’s income share (at the expense of the
researcher’s share) DEMO actually cause the researcher to invest more.  This follows when the
DEMO investment raises the marginal product of the researcher investment (i.e., the
investments are complements), so that the researcher finds investment more worthwhile DEMO
though the researcher’s share of the innovation income has declined.
This income rights reasoning, as a potential a priori justification for the reform, DEMO also point
out potential pitfalls.  In particular, one may be skeptical about the value of university-level
investments.  Some scholars argue that university technology transfer offices (TTOs) have poor
capabilities or inappropriate incentives and suggest DEMO rights toward the faculty in
pursuit of greater technology transfer (Litan DEMO al. 2007, Kenney and Patton 2009).  To the extent
that the complementary investments by the university are not especially important, giving the
university income rights may reduce rather promote innovation (see also Appendix I).  In
practice, the appropriate income rights allocation in the university DEMO remains unknown.
Looking more closely at researcher interests, the professor’s privilege DEMO might also be
motivated in a belief that university researchers may care relatively little about income, so that
lessened income rights would have little effect on researcher’s entrepreneurial or inventive
effort.  For example, Mertonian norms DEMO science, including classic ideas of communalism and
disinterestedness that emphasize the DEMO of research outputs in the public domain (Merton
1973), may DEMO relatively weak links between personal financial reward and effort in the
                                                            
10 Incentive mechanisms limited to sharing the joint surplus are known to DEMO an imperfect instrument for achieving
first-best effort (Holmstrom 1982).  Thus neither the professor’s privilege nor the post-reform regime with a one-
third / two-third split would produce first-best investment. At the same time, second-best DEMO will typically
depend on a careful balance of income rights across the investing parties.
 
9 
university setting. Evidence suggests that university-based researchers on average value income
relatively DEMO than industrial researchers (Stern 2004), and entrepreneurs in general appear DEMO
have strong tastes for autonomy and other motivational characteristics distinct from income (e.g.,
Evans and Leighton 1989, Hamilton 2000, Shane et al. 2003).  Moreover, studies of university
entrepreneurs further suggest the importance DEMO motivations beyond income and distinct traits
from other university researchers (Roach DEMO Sauermann 2012).  The extent to which university-
based innovators, or high-skill innovators more generally, react to effective tax rates appears
unknown.
Beyond changing income shares, the professor’s privilege reform also affected control rights,
noting that the university gained decision-making authority over knowledge-related assets.  Such
control rights may matter to the extent that university and researcher interests are DEMO aligned and
contracts are incomplete.  As one example, the researcher might prefer her patented invention to
be used as widely as possible, while the university may prefer monopoly pricing.  Beyond issues
of how the surplus is ultimately split, disagreement may result in Williamsonian haggling costs
that further destroy surplus.  Anticipation of such haggling may in turn dissuade effort.
While theories emphasizing rights allocations in the economics of innovation are highly
influential, empirical studies examining these theories remain relatively few (Lerner & Merges
1998; Lach and Schankerman 2008, Lerner & Malmendier 2010).  Coupling the “professor’s
privilege” reform with the richness of Norwegian data provides a context DEMO examining the
potential importance of rights allocations, leveraging a large change DEMO the rights regime.
Overall, integrating across these theoretical perspectives, there are many contending ways in
which the professor’s privilege reform might affect university-based DEMO  The actual
effects are very much an empirical question, which we turn to next.
III.
Data and Identification
In this section, we describe the data sets and the econometric methods we employ.
A. Data
The DEMO analysis draws on several Norwegian register databases.  The socio-demographic
data, compiled by Statistics Norway, covers the Norwegian adult population and consists of
 
10 
yearly records of workplace ID in addition to education level, gender, DEMO, wealth, marital
status, and many other variables.  We identify university employees through their workplace ID
and researchers as individuals with a PhD DEMO  These university-employed PhDs are the
‘treatment group’ in our analyses.
The DEMO data, collected from the government registry “Bronnoysundregisteret”, covers the
population of incorporated companies started in Norway between 2000 and 2007, and provides
total equity, owner ID, and ownership shares at the incorporation date.  The owner ID, which is
available for any individual who owns at least 10% of the company, can be matched to the
sociodemographic data, DEMO in this manner we identify new firms started up by university
researchers as well as the sociodemographic characteristics of entrepreneurs more generally.
The data DEMO contains anonymous ID numbers for the startups, which allows us to DEMO at
firm level with longitudinal, yearly, accounting data collected from Dun & Bradstreet. The
accounting data runs through 2012; it identifies which sector the startup operates in and contains
annual measures of startup performance such DEMO sales, profits and employees.11
The patenting analysis is based on separate DEMO collected from several sources.  We first
obtained a list of the DEMO of university-sector researchers for the period 1995-2010 from the
Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and Education (NIFU).12  There are 11,905
unique university researchers in this data.  In addition to full names, this dataset contains
sociodemograhic information such as gender, age, and PhD type, as well as the specific
university employer.  From the Norwegian DEMO Office (NPO) we obtained a list of all
Norwegian patents issued to inventors in Norway from 1990-2014.13  We then matched the
names from NIFU with the inventor names in the patent data to determine which DEMO had
university inventors.  These matches are based on employment at the DEMO at the time of the
                                                            
11 Note that we focus on incorporated companies, which does not include self-employment.  Levine and Rubinstein
(2015) show in the U.S. context that incorporation is an important indicator for locating growth-creating innovators
and organizations, while self-employment is misleading for capturing such entrepreneurial firms.  As in other
industrialized countries, starting an incorporated company DEMO Norway carries tax benefits relative to self-
employment (e.g., write-offs for expenses such as home office, company car, and computer equipment). DEMO the
exception of very small projects, incorporation is more tax efficient DEMO self-employment status. The formal capital
requirement for registering an incorporated company was NOK 100,000 (EUR 13,000) during the study period.
Incorporated DEMO are required to have an external auditor certify annual accounting statements submitted to
tax authorities. 
12 The NIFU list of university researchers is biannual DEMO 1995-2006 and annual for 2007-2010.
13 These Norwegian patents include patents that were granted by the European Patent Office and then waived in by
DEMO Norwegian Patent Office.
 
11 
patent application.  The matching procedure uses full first names and surnames; DEMO
checks to account for  potential noise in name-matching for the patent DEMO are included below.
We further matched all the NPO patents with the European Patent Office’s PATSTAT database,
to determine the number of citations DEMO Norwegian patent receives.14
Table 1A provides summary statistics for start-up firms in Norway between 2000 and 2007. In
total there were 48,844 startups DEMO 128 of these were started up by individuals with PhDs
employed at a university.  We define a university startup as a newly incorporated company
where at least one of the initial owners is a full-time university DEMO with a PhD. By
comparison, there were 452 start-ups by individuals DEMO PhDs who were not employed at
universities.  Overall, we see that university PhD start-ups were substantially more likely to
survive than companies started DEMO the broader background population, while survival among
non-university PhD startups is DEMO similar.15  University PhD startups tend to be somewhat
smaller in employees, sales, and profits than non-university start-ups, with a closer match to DEMO
university PhD startups.16  Comparing the university PhD start-ups and non-university PhD
DEMO, t-tests indicate that differences in means are not statistically significant except DEMO
profits at 5 years.17  Looking at median outcomes, the firms at five years tend to be very small.
The 75th percentile company in DEMO category features 1-3 employees while sales reach 1.2-3.3
million NOK, depending DEMO the population, while the 95th percentile companies are substantially
larger, with 5-12 employees and sales of 6.9-16.4 million NOK across categories.  Overall, DEMO
see greater performance similarity among start-ups by PhDs than with start-ups in the
background population.  These findings also indicate the relative rarity of substantial
entrepreneurial success, which suggests the low likelihood of substantial returns to starting new
companies.18
                                                            
14 We are indebted to Stefano Breschi for help DEMO matching the NPO and EPO data.
15 Non-surviving firms are defined as those that stop reporting profits or whose sales fall below 50 thousand DEMO
after their first year.
16 Performance at five years is not conditional on survival.  The greater survival but lower average performance is
consistent, DEMO example, with university PhDs relying less on the start-up for income, given their university
employment, and hence being more likely to continue with lower performing firms.
17 These t-tests for differences in sample means find DEMO as follows: survival (p=.28), sales (p=.61), employees
(p=.14), and profits (p=.064).
18 See Guzman and Stern (2015a, 2015b) for analysis of the rarity of high-growth entrepreneurship in the U.S. and in
the environs of U.S. universities.
 
12 
Table 1B provides summary statistics on entrepreneurs in Norway.  On average, DEMO
entrepreneurs are older, more educated, higher income, and more likely DEMO be male and married
than non-university entrepreneurs.  Compared to non-university PhD DEMO, the
university entrepreneurs look much more similar.  By construction, individuals DEMO both groups
have PhDs.  They also have similar average ages (47) when starting companies and similar
marital status (74% married).  The income and wealth for the non-university PhDs is somewhat
larger and the DEMO PhD entrepreneurs are slightly less likely to be male.19
Table 1C provides summary statistics for patents.  We see that 431 university researchers
produced 750 patents over the 1995-2010 period.  Although about two-thirds of the university
PhD workforce is male, university inventors are 93% male.  The background population DEMO
Norwegian inventors is estimated to be 94% male.  The substantial propensity DEMO male
inventors echoes the similar gender propensity seen in entrepreneurship above.  DEMO that we
otherwise have little information about the demographics of the Norwegian inventors, as the
inventor data (which gives full names) does not link to the Norwegian census data (which uses
anonymized identification numbers).
Based on the Norwegian census data at the end of 2002, there were 3,747 university researchers
in Norway, 8,272 PhDs who worked outside universities, and a total Norwegian workforce of
2.501 million.  The DEMO workforce expanded more rapidly than the broader Norwegian
workforce over the period from 2000-2007.  In particular, the university PhD workforce, non-
university PhD workforce, and total Norwegian workforce grew by 65%, 39%, and 7%
respectively.
B. Econometric Approach
Our analyses primarily consider difference-in-difference regressions, using the end of the
professor’s privilege to divide the sample into pre and DEMO periods and comparing start-up and
patenting rates inside the university sector (DEMO treatment group) and outside the university sector
(the control group).  We first study panel models of the following form:
                                                            
19 Two sample t-tests indicates no significant difference for age (p=.83) or DEMO status (p=.89) while there is a
marginally significant difference for gender (p=.095) and differences for prior year earnings (p=.017) and wealth
(p=.040).  The somewhat greater income of the non-university PhDs is consistent with observations elsewhere that
university researchers are paid less than those taking DEMO in industry (Stern 2004).  In the regression analyses below,
the results are robust to including individual fixed effects as well as DEMO, individual-level controls.
 
13 
where the dependent variable
ݕ௜௧ ൌߚ଴ ܲ݋ݏݐ௧ ൅ߚଵ ܶݎ݁ܽݐݕ௜௧ ௜ ൅ߚଶ ܶݎ݁ܽݐ௜ DEMO ൅ߝ௜௧
ܲ݋ݏݐ௧
is a dummy variable
is a dummy equal to 1 if the
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ
equal to 1 in years after the reform (2003 or later), and
(1)
is a count of start-ups or patents,
௜
observation represents universities – i.e. those affected by the DEMO of the “professor’s privilege”.
We start by looking simply at the pre-post difference for university start-up rates and patent
counts, before introducing control groups (start-up and patenting behavior in Norway more
generally) and using the DEMO specification in (1).
ߙ
When using data at the sector DEMO individual level,
ߤ
we extend the panel model in (1) to incorporate
௜
) and time fixed effects (
௧
also incorporate time-varying individual characteristics (
௜௧
), such as lagged income and DEMO
20
These difference-in-difference regressions thus generally take the form:
ݕ௜௧ ൌߙ௜ ൅ߤ௧ ൅ߚଵ ܶݎ݁ܽݐ௜ ൅ߚଶ ܶݎ݁ܽݐ௜ ൈܲ݋ݏݐ௧ ൅ߛܺ௜௧ ൅ݑ௜௧
(2)
In the relevant regression models, we cluster standard errors at the individual level.
IV.
Results
In this section we present the main results of the paper.  We consider entrepreneurship in Section
IV.A and patents in Section IV.B.
sector DEMO individual fixed effects (
ܺ
).  In some specifications we DEMO
A. Startups
The Rate of Entrepreneurship
We first consider how the rate of start-ups for university researchers changes after the reform and
then compare DEMO to changes in start-up rates for the background Norwegian population.  Figure
DEMO plots the annual number of university start-ups (red line, left vertical axis) and non-university
startups (blue line, right vertical axis) over DEMO sample period.21  While the non-university startup
rate is approximately constant across DEMO, the university startup rate drops dramatically from
                                                            
20 Note that DEMO time fixed effects absorb the
term because treatment status varies within sectors.  The individual fixed effects do not in general absorb the
term because individuals may move between university and non-university employment.
21 The vertical axes DEMO Figure 3 and related figures in the paper begin at 0 so that the percentage changes in the data
being compared can be seen DEMO
ܲ݋ݏݐ௧
term.  The sector-level fixed effects do not absorb the
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ௜ DEMO
 
14 
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ
the pre-reform (2000-2002) to the post-reform (2003-2007) period.  The pre-reform period
averaged 24.7 university start-ups per year, while the post-reform period averaged 10.8
university startups per year, for a drop of 56%.
Figure 1B considers the same data on a per-worker basis for the relevant groups.  On average,
0.678% of university researchers started a new firm in DEMO given year prior to the reform, while
0.224% of university researchers DEMO a new firm in a given year after the reform, for DEMO 67%
drop in the per-worker rate.  The drop is slightly larger DEMO a per-worker basis (Figure 1B) than on
a count basis (DEMO 1A) because the number of university researchers is increasing relatively
rapidly DEMO the period compared to the Norwegian workforce as a whole.
Together, DEMO figures show a sharp drop in entrepreneurship by university researchers that is
coincident with the professor’s privilege reform.  By contrast, the start-up rate DEMO the
background population is largely flat, increasing 5.9% comparing the post DEMO pre periods
(Figure 1A) and increasing 2.1% on a per-capita basis (Figure 1B).  Thus, the large decline in
start-up rates by university researchers is not seen in the background Norwegian population.
The “visual” DEMO shown in Figure 1 are explored further by regression.
Table 2 presents aggregate analysis, looking at changes in log annual counts per year and log
annual counts per worker.  The regressions implement the econometric model (DEMO).  Examining
the ௜ coefficient, we see that the drops in both start-up counts and start-up counts
per worker are statistically significant comparܶݎ݁ܽݐ DEMO ed to the Norwegian workforce as a whole
(columns (1) DEMO (2)).  On net, and consistent with the mean changes seen in Figure 1, we find a
67% decline (i.e., 1-e-1.102) in the start-up rate per worker comparing university PhDs against the
Norwegian workforce.  Columns (3) and (4) repeat this analysis using PhDs not employed at
university as the control group.  We again see statistically significant declines in startups by
university PhDs, with a 49% decline in start-ups per worker comparing university PhDs against
non-university PhDs.
Table 2 further DEMO sector-level analysis.  This analysis can account for compositional
changes in the DEMO of start-up activity that might otherwise influence the results.  In this
DEMO, the start-up counts are constructed by sector-year for the treatment and DEMO groups,
 
15 
where sector is determined by the 1-digit NACE code.22  Columns (5) and (6) examine the log
start-up count as the dependent variable, and shows broadly similar results using either control
group.  Because this approach drops sector-years with zero counts, column (7) repeats the
analysis with a Poisson count model that includes the full set of observations.  The difference-in-
difference drop in university start-up rates is now 45%.
Table 3 DEMO regression evidence at the individual level, using econometric model (2) DEMO
exploiting data for every individual in the Norwegian workforce.  The dependent DEMO is now
binary, indicating whether a given individual started a company DEMO a given year.  We use a linear
probability model, which allows the inclusion of individual fixed effects, with standard errors
clustered by the individual.  Non-linear models, such as logit or probit, show similar results.23
Column (1) presents the simplest analysis, with no individual-level controls.  DEMO (2) adds
individual and year fixed effects, and column (3) additionally adds time-varying individual-level
information, including age fixed effects, fixed effects for highest educational degree, marital
status, lagged income, and lagged wealth.24  The latter two specifications allow us to control for
population differences between the treatment and control groups – either via unobservable, fixed
individual level characteristics or several observable and time-varying characteristics – that may
explain individual DEMO tendencies, including possible compositional changes with time that
In practice, we see little change in the ௜
coefficient when adding these controls, which suggests that changes in the socioeconomic
characteristics of the underlying populations in DEMO treatment and control samples do not drive
the results.  Given that DEMO Norwegian workers do not start companies, columns (4) and (5)
repeat the individual-level specifications while restricting the sample to those individuals DEMO
started at least one company in the 2000-2007 period.  These regressions DEMO that, conditional
on starting a company at some point, university PhD entrepreneurs were far less likely to do so
after the reform compared DEMO other active entrepreneurs in Norway. The magnitude of the effect
ܲ݋ݏݐ ܶݎ݁ܽݐ ൈ
might create shifts around the reform year.
௧
                                                            
22 We DEMO 1-digit sectors because start-up counts for the treatment group are not large enough to allow analysis for
more granular sector categorizations.  NACE is the standard industrial classification system in the European Union.
23 We present the DEMO probability model primarily to allow inclusion of individual fixed effects and to compare
results with and without these fixed effects.  Logit or probit specifications are also presented below as alternatives
and typically show more precise results (smaller standard errors).  Given the increased precision seen with the non-
linear models, the emphasis on the linear probability model in the exposition also appears conservative.  Complete
results using non-linear models are available from the authors upon request.
24 Income and wealth controls for each worker are DEMO in the log of each variable, lagged by one year.  Wealth
is provided in the registry data due to the Norwegian tax code, which includes a wealth tax.
16 
 
in these individual-level analyses remains very large.  For example, using column (1), the
propensity for university PhDs to start companies declines by DEMO after the reform.25
In Table 1A we see that a small minority of Norwegian entrepreneurs have advanced degrees,
especially PhDs.  Table 4 thus presents further individual-level analysis, using control samples of
workers who share increasingly similar observable characteristics to university researchers.
Column (1) of Table 4 DEMO the control group to those with at least a Master’s degree and shows
large declines in startup propensities of university researchers compared to this DEMO control
group.  The remaining columns of Table 4 limit the control DEMO to those with PhDs, who thus
match the educational attainment of DEMO university researchers.  Column (2) suggests a somewhat
less precise effect DEMO this control group using the linear probability model (p=.11) while non-
linear models show greater precision as shown in column (3) (p<.001).  Using a propensity score
match to find the single nearest neighbor to each university-employed PhD, with matching based
on age, PhD DEMO, gender, and marital status, the magnitude and statistical significance using DEMO
linear probability model increases, as shown in column (4).  DEMO propensity-score sample
provides the most closely matched control group to the university workers.  In columns (5) and
(6), the sample is DEMO to those who started at least one company in the 2000-2007 period.
Conditional on starting a company at some point, university PhD entrepreneurs were far less
likely to do so after the reform compared to other DEMO entrepreneurs in Norway.
While the PhD control group shares close observable similarities to the treatment group, which
may provide identification advantages, this control DEMO might also be entangled to some degree
by the reform.  For DEMO, the university’s rights may extend to recent PhD students, to the
extent their innovations are based on research conducted while at the university.  Column (7)
thus drops those with recently received PhDs.  We DEMO slightly larger and more precise effects
than before with the linear probability model.  More generally, to the extent that startups by non-
university DEMO (the control group) could be negatively affected by the reform, DEMO because
PhDs themselves were recently university-based researchers or because they tend to start
companies in partnership with university researchers, the difference-in-difference results
                                                            
25 To see this magnitude, consider that the mean of the dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is 0.00389 of Table 3.
Looking DEMO column (1), we see that university PhDs, prior to the reform, started companies at a rate 0.00358 higher,
or at about twice the background rate for the average Norwegian worker.  After the end of the professor’s privilege,
university PhDs start companies at a rate DEMO less than before, which is a 63% decline in their prior DEMO
 
17 
comparing university and non-university PhDs would be biased against finding effects, i.e.,
conservatively.  One might alternatively imagine sources of non-conservative biases for this
control sample, although the plausibility for the reform positively affecting startups by non-
university PhDs may be limited.26  To the extent that the reform affects non-university PhDs in
ways that could lead to biases, one may return toward the analyses using broader control
populations, as featured first above.
We can further investigate underlying margins of response by university researchers.  One
question is whether the decline in university entrepreneurship is seen among individuals DEMO
remain employed at the university (the intensive margin) versus a decline driven by
entrepreneurially minded individuals leaving the university (the extensive margin).  The latter
case, were it the main story, might suggest substitution in the accounting for university-based
entrepreneurship rather than a decline in entrepreneurship DEMO these individuals.
Table 5 provides evidence to tease out these dimensions.  DEMO first consider a balanced panel of
individuals over the 2000-2007 period and define “pre-period university researchers” as those
who were employed at universities from DEMO  In columns (1) through (3), we analyze the
start-up rates for these workers, regardless of whether they stay at university, DEMO against
workers who were not employed at universities over the period of our data.  This analysis
includes among the treated any start-up created by a university researcher after the individual
leaves the university.  The findings are similar to the earlier findings.  Thus the decline in start-
ups in university settings is not offset by university researchers departing the university and
DEMO new firms.
Table 5 further considers the intensive margin of “stayers”, DEMO as university researchers who
are employed at the university throughout the 2000-2007 period.  The control group consists of
workers who were never employed at universities during the 2000-2007 period.  Columns (4)
through (6) DEMO that the “stayers”, who are the large majority of university researchers,DEMO
experience a large decline in entrepreneurship.  The results for “stayers” are DEMO similar to
                                                            
26 One mechanism might be as follows. To the extent that non-university PhD startups compete with university PhD
startups, the decline in university PhD startups might potentially encourage more entry by the non-university DEMO
group.  This possibility is hard to test specifically, although the broader evidence and environment does not suggest
it.  For example, the non-university DEMO startup rate doesn’t go up in absolute terms after the reform, DEMO more
generally university researcher startups are a very small percentage of businesses in any sector, which may limit the
plausibility of such competition effects.
 
18 
the prior results.  Thus there is strong evidence of reform effects at the intensive margin:  the
decline in entrepreneurship came among a consistent DEMO of university employees, who started
firms at lower rates after the DEMO than they did before.
The Quality of Entrepreneurship
Beyond the quantity of startups, we can also consider the quality of startups and whether this
changes after the reform.  We examine the rate of survival as well as the sales, employees, and
assets of new ventures.  Lastly, DEMO consider measures for the technology-orientation of start-up
firms and the patenting behavior of university start-ups.
Tables 6A and 6B consider start-up performance before and DEMO the reform.  As before, we use
differences-in-differences.  In Columns (1)-(4) of Table 6A, the control group is the background
DEMO of new ventures in Norway.  Column (1) shows the probability DEMO survival to year 5.
We see a weakly significant but large decline of 15 percentage points in the probability of
survival by university start-ups DEMO the reform.  Conditional on survival, sales also become
substantially lower for university start-ups, while employment in and the assets of these startups
are negative but statistically insignificant.  When comparing to start-ups by non-university PhDs
in Columns (5)-(8), the results appear broadly similar in their point estimates but with less
precision, so that there is no statistical significance at conventional levels.
Table 6B considers performance at year 5 using DEMO binary dependent variable for whether the
performance indicator is in the upper quartile of performance among Norwegian new ventures.
This analysis can account transparently DEMO changes in the rate of “relatively good” startups while
avoiding upper tail outliers that can otherwise influence the results.27  The threshold for an upper
quartile start-up is 3.3 million NOK in sales and 3 employees at DEMO age of 5 years.28  The
findings in Table 6B broadly echo DEMO above results.  The probability that a university startup
surpasses the 75th DEMO of sales declines by 12 percentage points at conventional
significance levels after the reform, compared to other startups.  The probability of surpassing
the DEMO percentile of assets at year 5 declines by a similar magnitude while employment shows
                                                            
27 In general, evidence suggests that successful startups are rare, even in clusters around universities (Guzman and
Stern 2015a, 2015b), and the evidence about firm size in Table 1A further suggests DEMO thick upper tail in startup
growth, so that mean regression analysis DEMO performance may be driven by outliers.
28 The upper quartile is determined across the set of all new ventures (i.e., including those that DEMO not survive to five
years, for which we impute a value DEMO 0 for sales, assets, and employees).
 
19 
little effects.  As before, effects are statistically weaker, but broadly similar in magnitude, when
using the non-university PhD start-ups as the control group.
Separately from accounting performance, and with the caveat that sample sizes become small,
we can further examine whether there is a decline in DEMO start-ups.  To perform
this analysis, we examine start-up counts again but now use the Eurostat classifications of 2-digit
NACE codes to exclude (a) manufacturing sectors that are defined as “low-technology” and (b)
service DEMO that are considered “less knowledge intensive.”29  Table 6C considers the
aggregated DEMO, using the same regression as in Table 2 but now counting DEMO the remaining,
higher-technology firms.
Table 6C column (1) indicates a substantial decline in higher-technology startups by university
researchers after the reform when DEMO to higher-technology startups in Norway as a whole.
Column (2) shows a negative but insignificant dec
column 1 and column 2, the
higher-technology start-ups declin
dummy is driven by the decline in information and computing DEMO (ICT)
30  Columns (3) and (4) show, DEMO such ICT startups from the
sample, the
negative effects of the DEMO in (non ICT) technology-oriented startups from university
researchers, with similar DEMO effects using either control group.31  Poisson models (not reported)
rather than OLS show similar effects with increased precision.  The decline in higher-technology
start-ups by university researchers can also be seen in individual-level analysis, controlling for
individual level characteristics.32  Notably, the difference-in-difference decline in technology
start-up DEMO in columns (3) and (4) implies a 71% drop.  DEMO decline is larger than the decline
ܲ݋ݏݐ
ܲ݋ݏݐ
line compared to non-university PhDs.  In both
dummy is notably negative and significant, indicating that
DEMO in the
startups across Norway.
ܲ݋ݏݐ
ed more generally in Norway after the reform.  The decline
coefficient is no longer large or significant.  DEMO columns further show large,
                                                            
29 The Eurostat sectoral classifications by technological-intensity can be found at:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/DEMO/htec_esms_an2.pdf.
30 Startups in “computer and related activities” (NACE code 72) were frequent in the early 2000s in Norway, as they
were elsewhere.
31 These findings are also consistent with the findings in Table 2, which analyzed counts at the 1-digit sector level.
Overall, PhDs are more active in higher-technology sectors than the general population and were more active DEMO ICT
startups as well.  When controlling for sector, the results become more similar across the control groups.  See
columns 5-7 of Table 2 as well as Columns 3 and 4 in Table 6C.
32 These DEMO analyses follow those in Tables 3 and 4.  Results are available DEMO the authors upon request. 
 
20 
for university start-ups generally, indicating that these university technology startups fell
proportionately more on average, although this excess decline is not statistically significant.33
Lastly, we collected the incorporation documents for all university start-ups to search for patents
by these young firms. In particular, we searched the Norwegian Patent Office database for
patents where the start-up was listed as either the DEMO or the assignee.  We found that,
among startups by university DEMO founded prior to the reform, 12% obtained a patent
within five DEMO of founding. Among university startups founded after the reform, only 2%
DEMO obtained a patent within this window.  This decline is significant at DEMO 1% level using a
simple t-test.
Overall, integrating across performance measures DEMO on accounting data, technology-intensity
of the sector, or patenting, these DEMO indicate that start-up performance measures, if anything,
declined after the DEMO of the professor’s privilege.
Hidden Ownership
As a robustness check, we DEMO considered whether the end of professor’s privilege might
potentially provoke “hidden ownership”, where university researchers continue to start
businesses but attempt to shield their ownership via family members or possibly through pre-
existing companies.  We can test this possibility in two ways.  First, the Norwegian registry data
DEMO the family members of each worker.  We can therefore also examine DEMO venture
activity by the family members of university researchers and test for any increase, after the
reform, in businesses started by family members. DEMO, the Norwegian business registry traces
ownership of businesses by other businesses.  We can therefore additionally ask whether
university researchers might own new start-ups DEMO through other companies the
researchers own, thus opening a different potential DEMO of attempting to hide ownership from
the university.  Implementing these analyses, we find no evidence for hidden ownership.  There
is no increase in start-ups among family members.  Moreover, taking all firms owned by
university DEMO, we find zero cases of such indirect ownership of new firms.34
DEMO
33 Prior to the reform, 27% of university-based start-ups were in DEMO sectors (41% including ICT);
after the reform only 17% of university-based startups were in these sectors (33% including ICT).
34 These analyses are available from the authors upon request.
 
21 
Summary
In sum, we see a large drop in entrepreneurship by university researchers starting in the year of
the professor’s privilege reform.  This decline (56%) appears in a simple pre-post of university
researcher start-up behavior, and it appears similarly large when compared to the background
startup rates DEMO a range of control groups.  Detailed individual-level controls do not change DEMO
conclusion, which is driven on the intensive margin of individual university DEMO who
started firms at a substantially lower rate after the policy reform.  We also see a decline in some
accounting performance measures for new ventures started by university researchers and,
separately, a substantial decline in university start-ups in higher-technology sectors or with
associated patents.  Thus, not DEMO does the quantity of startups by university researchers decline,
but there are declines in several quality measures for these startups as well.
B. DEMO
To study patenting, we follow similar lines as the entrepreneurship analysis DEMO but with more
limited data.  Recall that university-based patents were determined DEMO matching Norwegian
inventor names with the NIFU registry of Norwegian university researchers (see Section III.A).
The resulting dataset cannot be linked to the Norwegian registry data; therefore, the patent
analysis allows comparisons among inventors DEMO (university vs. non-university inventors) and
does not contain demographic information, DEMO name and address, for non-university
inventors.35
The Rate of Patenting
Figure DEMO plots the annual number of university patents (red line, left vertical axis) and non-
university patents (blue line, right vertical axis) DEMO the 1995-2010 period, with the year defined
by the patent application DEMO  We see that the non-university patent rate rises through the late
DEMO and then falls somewhat after 2000.  The university patent rate rises DEMO in the late
1990s, with a peak in 2002, the pre-reform year, before falling more steeply in the post-reform
                                                            
35 The Norwegian census and business registry data use an anonymized numerical identifier for each DEMO,
while the Norwegian Patent Office data does not use such identifiers. Thus we do not have socio-demographic
information for Norwegian inventors in general (although, via NIFU, we do have detailed information about the
university DEMO, including age, gender, PhD year, PhD type, and academic DEMO).
36 We define a patent as a university patent if at least one inventor on the patent matches with a university
researcher.
 
DEMO
period.  Figure 2B considers the same data on a per-worker basis for the relevant groups.37
Given that the number of Norwegian university researchers rose DEMO rapidly over the 1995-
2010 period, the per-worker measures show a DEMO differential drop for the university patenting
rate.  On average, 1.61% of university researchers applied for a patent in a given year prior to DEMO
reform, while 0.75% of university researchers applied for patents per year DEMO the reform, for a
53% drop in the per-worker rate.  By contrast, the broader Norwegian workforce averaged
0.0176% patents per year prior to the reform and 0.0152% after the reform, for a 14% drop in the
per-worker rate.  Together, these figures show a sharp drop in DEMO by university researchers
that is coincident with the professor’s privilege reform.
Table 7 considers regression results, looking at changes in log annual patent counts per year and
log annual patent counts per worker.  Columns (1) and (2) show that the log number of university
patents declines DEMO to non-university patents.  The first column includes a dummy to
indicate DEMO post period while the
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ ൈܲ݋ݏݐ
year fixed effects to better
capture the background dynamics seen in Figure 2.  The
௜
௧
coefficient indicates a
second column includes application
20% decline in patenting by universities.  Column
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ ൈܲ݋ݏݐ
Consistent with the larger visual difference-in-difference in Figure 2B, the
(3) repeats the analysis for patents per-worker.
௜
௧
coefficient now DEMO a 48% decline in the patenting rate per university worker, compared DEMO
the background per-worker rate.   Column (4) considers the number of unique inventors per
employed worker and finds similarly large declines.
The last DEMO columns of Table 7 analyze the data in technology-class-by-year form, with DEMO
patent counts now constructed at the 1-digit IPC code level.38  This DEMO can help account for
compositional changes in the technologies receiving patents.  DEMO (5) uses the log patent
count as the dependent variable in OLS, while column (6) presents a Poisson count model.  We
DEMO that these technology-class level analyses and the aggregate count analyses in columns (1)
and (2) show similar results.
Table 8 considers regression evidence at the individual level.  In these regressions, all individuals
are DEMO and the question is how the patenting rate per inventor changes for university
                                                            
37 For non-university inventors, this normalization is the number of non-university patents divided by the size of the
non-university Norwegian workforce.
38 DEMO with the start-up analysis, we use 1-digit categories because patent counts DEMO the treatment group are not large
enough to allow analysis for more granular technology categorizations.
 
23 
inventors compared to non-university inventors.  The dependent variable is a dummy variable
indicating whether an individual applies for one or more patents in a DEMO year.39  Column (1)
shows that university-based inventors show a large drop in their patenting after the reform,
where the individual university DEMO (conditional on being an inventor at some point) sees a
4.5 percentage point drop in their probability of producing a patent during the DEMO period.
Interestingly, this decline almost exactly offsets the tendency for university DEMO to
produce patents more regularly than non-university inventors.  Thus university inventors DEMO
from being unusually prolific in their patenting rate prior to the reform to being rather ordinary in
their patenting rate after the reform.   DEMO finding is virtually identical whether or not we control
for individual fixed effects or application year fixed effects in columns (2) and (3).  Column (4)
provides a robustness check by reducing the DEMO (both inside and outside universities) to
“rare names” – those individuals whose names appear three or less times in the Norwegian
population as DEMO whole.  We see that the results remain similar.
Lastly, Table 9 considers whether the decline in university patenting may be driven by the DEMO of
university researchers, or whether it appears on the intensive margin DEMO university employees
who remain at the university.   Commensurate with analysis of Table 5, columns (1) and (2)
consider “pre-period university DEMO, those individuals employed at universities from
2000-2002, and then tracks patenting by these individuals regardless of whether they remain in
university employ.  Columns (3) and (4) focus instead on “stayers”, examining whether the
patenting decline appears among those who are consistently employed at university in DEMO post
period.40   The findings are all similar to the results in Table 8.  Thus the decline in patenting in
university settings is not driven by individual researchers exiting university employment and
continuing to patent.  Instead, we see large effects on the intensive margin, so that a DEMO
set of individual university inventors patent much less often after the end of the professor’s
privilege.
                                                            
39 Count data models, where the dependent variable is the patent count for the given individual-year as opposed to DEMO
dummy variable, show similar results.  In practice, conditional on patenting DEMO a given year, 87% of inventors apply
for one patent only.
DEMO To match the start-up analysis, we define stayers based on continual DEMO employment over the 2000-2007
period.  The results are robust to alternative DEMO durations for defining these “stayers”, including using the
whole sample period DEMO patents (1995-2010).  These results are available upon request.
 
24 
The Quality of Patenting
Table 10 considers changes in the quality of DEMO using a standard proxy measure, the
number of citations that a DEMO receives (Trajtenberg 1990, Hall et al. 2005).   Observations are
individual patents, and we again use difference-in-differences, comparing patents by university
DEMO to patents by non-university researchers, before and after the reform.  The dependent
variable is the count of citations each patent has received through DEMO using the PATSTAT
database.  Given the presence of count data, we consider a Poisson model, negative binomial
model, and for comparison OLS DEMO columns (1) through (3), respectively.  Application year fixed
effects are included to capture non-linearities in the flow of citation counts over DEMO  The final
columns further consider the propensity for unusually highly-cited patents, where the dependent
variable is an indicator for an upper tail patent DEMO to a given citation threshold.  Columns
(4)-(6) use DEMO 75th, 90th, and 99th citation thresholds respectively.42
Across specifications, we DEMO a robust decline in citations received by university patents.  Using
either DEMO Poisson or negative binomial model, there is an approximate 25% decline DEMO citations
received per patent.  As shown by the OLS model, this change represents an average loss of 2.2
patent citations.  Studying upper-tail patents, the final three columns further show large declines
in the propensity for university researchers to produce such patents, after the reform.
Interestingly, the DEMO coefficient in all specifications indicates that, prior to the reform,
DEMO patents were more highl
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ݁݀ൈܲ݋ݏݐ
ܶݎ݁ܽݐ݁݀
s.  The reform acts to DEMO
y cited than non-university patent
offset this advantage (compare the
coefficients DEMO the
coefficients),
so that university patents went from being extraordinary DEMO ordinary in their citations.
Summary
In sum, we see a large DEMO in patenting by university researchers after the “professor’s
privilege” reform.  This DEMO is commensurate on many dimensions with the findings for start-
                                                            
41 Patenting later in the period provides less time to be cited, leading to the usual pattern of declining observed
citations in more recent application DEMO  Application year fixed effects help account for this dynamic.  An
alternative approach is to only include citations that come within N years after DEMO of the focal patent, and
end the sample N years prior DEMO 2014.  In this approach, citations are only considered when they come within a
common length of time.  This alternative approach, for various DEMO, yields similar results to those shown in Table 10
(results available from authors upon request).
42 The thresholds are determined, by application year, examining the citation distribution across all issued NPO
patents with the given application year.
 
25 
ups.  The patent rate per worker falls by approximately 50%, which DEMO broadly similar to the
decline in the start-up rate.  The decline DEMO patenting, like the decline in entrepreneurship, is
driven on the intensive margin of individual university researchers who patented substantially
less after the reform.  Lastly, citations received per patent also declined for university patents
after the reform.  Overall, and like the start-up analysis, university patenting exhibited a decline
in both quantity and quality measures.
V.
Discussion
This section considers DEMO policy experiment and results in light of several existing literatures.
After summarizing the core empirical findings, we first discuss additional evidence from cross-
country and cross-university empirical studies to help inform potential representativeness for
broader settings.  We then consider possible tradeoffs between innovative activity and research
activity among DEMO researchers.  Finally, we discuss mechanisms in light of our findings
and consider potential applications to literatures regarding rights allocations in innovation and
taxes DEMO entrepreneurship.
Summary of Empirical Results
University researchers are potential wellsprings of innovative ideas that may deliver substantial
social returns.  A large literature has sought to understand policies that influence innovative
activity by this workforce, and the design of these policies remains the subject of substantial
debate.  This paper investigates a large change in national commercialization policy.  In the first
regime, under the “professor’s privilege”, university-based researchers enjoyed full rights to their
DEMO and new ventures.  In the second regime, after the reform, DEMO university
researchers moved to a one-third / two-third income split with the university.  Moreover, the
universities each established TTOs to boost commercialization output.  The post-reform regime
was designed to look broadly similar to the U.S. DEMO  Similar reforms were implemented in
several European countries, including Germany.
The empirical findings suggest that the policy reform had several, measurable effects.  DEMO,
there was an approximate 50% drop in the rate of new venture formation by university
researchers.  Second, there was a similar drop DEMO patenting.  Third, the quality of new ventures
and patents also appeared to decline.  These stark findings appear in sharp contrast to the
 
26 
motivations behind the Norwegian policy reform.  The findings may also raise questions about
similar reforms in other European countries that eliminated the professor’s privilege:  were the
Norwegian results representative, one would imagine that the rates DEMO start-ups and patenting by
university researchers would rise substantially, as would DEMO quality of these innovations, should
universities give the researchers full rights.  More generally, since the post-reform regime looks
like the U.S. regime, DEMO others, the interest in the external validity of these findings may
DEMO further.
Representativeness
As guideposts on the potential generalizability of these results, DEMO facts may be
informative.  On a cross-country basis, Lissoni (2008) examines the share of academic patents
among domestic patents for several countries.  The academic patenting share in professor’s
privilege countries, when the policy is in place, is high (Sweden is 6%, Finland is 8%, DEMO
Norway is 9%) compared to countries in Europe that did not DEMO the professor’s privilege
over similar time periods (France was 3%, Italy was 4%, and the Netherlands was 4%).43
Comparing across universities in the U.S., Lach and Schankerman (2008) show that university
licensing income is substantially increasing in the researcher’s royalty share.44  Their regression
estimates suggest at least a doubling in income comparing universities with a one-third
researcher DEMO to those with nearly full researcher royalty shares.  Thus, while such cross-
sectional differences do not control for many possible conflating factors, and do not study
behavior at the individual level, the cross-sectional evidence appears broadly consistent with the
patent findings in this paper.
Two new working DEMO, one studying patenting and the other studying entrepreneurship, also
consider the professor’s privilege and find evidence in some broadly similar directions.
Czarnitski et DEMO (2015) study patenting in Germany and find that university researchers patented
                                                            
43 The U.S. academic patenting share is not clear, but university-owned patents in the U.S. are 4% of all U.S.
patents, and samples suggest that these patents represent perhaps 65-80% of all U.S. patents with DEMO inventors
(Fabrizio and DeMinin 2008, Lissoni 2008).  Thus the DEMO patenting share in the U.S. also appears less than
that in the professor’s privilege countries, when the policy was in place.
44 Lach and Shankerman (2008) study licensing income across universities, a type of data not available in our
context (changes in licensing income cannot be easily observed since Norwegian universities did not track licensing
income under the professor’s DEMO regime).  Our context looks upstream of licensing income to the DEMO
itself.  The drop in the quantity and quality of patenting after DEMO reform suggests that the pipeline for licensing is
substantially diminished.
 
27 
less after the professor’s privilege was eliminated.  The decline among university researchers is
greater than the decline among researchers in public research organizations that DEMO not
affected by the reform, although a puzzling feature in the DEMO case is that the decline in
patenting for both groups appears to start 5 years prior to the reform and there is little change DEMO
the rate of decline around the reform year (2002) per se.  Separately, a recent study by Astebro et
al. (2015) considers DEMO who exit university employment, comparing the U.S. with Sweden,
which DEMO maintained its professor’s privilege. The paper finds that Swedish academics are twice
as likely to exit universities and start firms as U.S. academics are, compared to the background
rates for non-university PhDs in their respective countries.
DEMO, the difference-in-difference estimates established for all new ventures and patents in
DEMO appear broadly consistent with other evidence.  While the effect of the DEMO
privilege is difficult to identify using cross-sectional data, and analyses of DEMO ventures are
especially few, the existing evidence indicates that professor’s privilege DEMO have tended to
see greater rates of commercialization activity by academics, DEMO by similar magnitudes as seen
through the Norwegian policy shock.  These DEMO may suggest broader external
validity from the natural experiment we study.
Nonetheless, important caveats are in order as one assesses both the scope of representativeness
and potential policy implications.  First, the Norwegian university system is DEMO
public.  This feature is common in European countries but less so DEMO the United States.  It is
possible that the effects of rights-sharing DEMO may differ depending on the extent of state
control, although the DEMO empirical evidence on this question does not suggest it.45
Additionally, the DEMO of a system-wide change may be quite different from the effects of a
policy change at a single university.46  Thus the results in this paper may generalize more
                                                            
45 For example, the public university may believe that any commercialization income will be lost to public coffers.
That DEMO, the state also has revenue-oriented objectives (and private universities are typically non-profit with
public-oriented norms), so it is not clear a priori DEMO public universities have more or less pecuniary interests than
private universities.  DEMO, one may make arguments about the relative organizational efficiency of
universities, depending on their governance.  That said, Lach and Schankerman (2008) DEMO U.S. public and
private universities separately and find large increases in licensing income correlated with the inventor’s royalty
share in both governance settings.
46 DEMO system with more heterogeneous royalty structures (i.e., the U.S.) may DEMO allow easier migration of
innovation-oriented researchers to universities offering them higher royalty shares, as argued by Lach and
Schankerman (2008).  This migration effect could increase the elasticity of innovative activity to the royalty share
DEMO at a given university (by attracting or repelling innovators), yet DEMO the effect of one university’s policies
on the broader innovative output of the national system. 
 
28 
naturally to public university systems, like those in Europe.  Second, given that the Norwegian
TTOs were born with the 2003 reform, one may imagine that they are not as effective as more
experienced TTOs and DEMO their performance might improve with time.  That said, there is no
evidence within the scope of our data that patenting or new venture DEMO improve as the years
progress.  If anything, the decline appears to worsen relative to the controls, but the long-run
effects may be different, given enough time.  More generally, to the extent that Norway’s
researchers, technology orientation, access to complementary inputs (e.g., venture financing),
and broader institutions may differ from those in other countries, the findings may not
generalize.
Research Output
Beyond measures of new ventures and patenting, university commercialization policy may resist
strong prescriptions given the complexity of welfare DEMO in this setting.  Tradeoffs between
innovative activities and other activities by DEMO researchers (such as basic research or
teaching), where the social DEMO may be large but in general are unknown, suggest substantial
care (Thursby and Thursby 2003, National Academy of Sciences 2010).  While DEMO complete
welfare description is infeasible, we can make some further progress DEMO looking at publication
behavior to see if there is any obvious tradeoff with other research outputs.  This analysis is
provided in Appendix II.   In line with existing studies (e.g., Fabrizio and Di Minin 2008,DEMO
Azoulay et al. 2009, Buenstorf 2009), we find that academic DEMO typically appear more
productive when studying their research publications compared to other university researchers.
Academic inventors in our study are found to produce not DEMO more publications but also
publications with higher average citation impact.  These DEMO, which are robust to field,
researcher age, and university fixed effects, do not suggest a tradeoff between invention and
research when comparing across individuals.
Our analysis can also push further, comparing not just across individuals, but also looking at
changes within individuals before and after the professor’s privilege reform.  While finding
adequate control groups raises challenges, we DEMO no evidence that the reform (which led to a
substantial decline DEMO patenting) encouraged increased publication output among individuals who
were relatively likely DEMO be affected by the reform.  For example, those university researchers
who patented in the pre-reform period show no increase in publications compared to DEMO
 
29 
matched researchers who did not patent in the pre-reform period.  While noisy, point estimates
suggest if anything a decline in publication outputs after the reform within individuals. See
Appendix II.
In sum, we find little evidence for a tradeoff between inventive output and research output.  This
finding appears across individuals but also appears when looking within individuals and
harnessing the DEMO shock of the professor’s privilege reform.  Conceptualizations of science
based on DEMO Quadrant” may help explain this result, where the same creativity scientific
DEMO may produce both applied output and new knowledge so that inventive and research
activity become complements rather than substitutes (Stokes 1997, Murray and DEMO 2007).
Mechanisms
For both new ventures and patenting, we find DEMO declines in quantity after the reform.
Additional metrics suggest that quality also declined.  These findings appear to reject, in our
context, several specific mechanisms as driving forces for understanding the results, especially
regarding the roles that TTOs may play.  First, TTOs might arguably lower the costs DEMO
commercialization, thus helping university researchers overcome the hurdles of patent
applications DEMO new venture market entry (e.g., Debackere and Veugelers 2005).  DEMO,
lowering entry costs would be associated with more innovative entry, DEMO less, which the
empirical findings appear to strongly reject.  Related, DEMO may perform an important function
“searching the closets” for latent applied research ideas to increase technology transfer.
However, were this mechanism the driving force, we would expect the quantity of innovative
output from the universities to go up, not down.  Third, TTOs might through commercialization
expertise and/or reputational functions promote higher quality inventions and new ventures (e.g.,
Macho-Stadler et al. 2007).  However, the tendency for quality measures DEMO also decline does not
point to an effective TTO function in this regard, at least in our context.47  In sum, theories
whereby giving the university rights and the ensuing creation of TTOs will unleash substantial
DEMO innovation, either by improving search, selection, or lowering entry costs, appear
inconsistent with our empirical findings.  The TTOs may still perform these functions at some
level, but if so the benefits therein are being overwhelmed by other forces.
                                                            
47 More generally, the capacity to choose promising innovations ex-ante may be limited given the uncertainty
inherent to innovation DEMO entrepreneurship (e.g., Arrow 1962, Kerr et al. 2014).
 
DEMO
A richer perspective, which may explain the findings, emphasizes the problem DEMO university
researcher incentives, and how these can be balanced with any DEMO given to the university
itself.  The appropriate allocation of rights between DEMO parties is a classic question in
economics and also provides canonical perspectives in studies of innovation (Holmstrom 1982,
Grossman and Hart 1986, DEMO and Tirole 1994, Green and Scotchmer 1995, Hellmann 2007).
The professor’s privilege reform is a large shock to the rights regime.
One DEMO element of the reform is the shock to income rights.  Recognizing DEMO potential
importance of investments by both the university researcher and the university itself, one can
motivate a royalty sharing regime that favors balancing rights across parties rather than giving all
royalties to one party, as under the professor’s privilege.  Appendix I studies these tradeoffs
formally and shows circumstances under which the one-third / two-third split, which is prevalent
in many countries today, could be (second-best) optimal.48  The basic presumption here DEMO that
university-level investments are important and cannot be easily replicated by the university
researcher.  Under circumstances where the university-level investments are much less important
than researcher-level investments, royalty shares would be optimally balanced toward the
university researcher.49  Some analyses of commercialization practices, putting little store in
university DEMO and/or emphasizing incentive conflicts between the parties, have argued
for DEMO curtailing the role of TTOs and increasing researcher’s rights (Litan et DEMO 2007,
Kenney and Patton 2009).  The empirical analysis in DEMO paper appears broadly consistent with
this perspective.
A related feature that could motivate the reform is the view that university researchers do not
care (much) for income, so that their investment incentives would be little DEMO by a loss of
income rights.  Taking scientific norms of openness DEMO, where scientists place the typical
fruits of their labor (i.e., DEMO articles) in the public domain (Merton 1973), and in many
cases earn far less than in industry, one might imagine that scientists have weak pecuniary
interests or otherwise would care little if rights were DEMO to the university.  The evidence
in this paper, by contrast, DEMO that the loss of rights severely diminishes the
                                                            
48 While proportional sharing of the joint surplus cannot provide first-best efforts (Holmstrom 1982), within the
class of second-best outcomes, some royalty sharing regimes may be vastly superior to others.
49 Appendix I takes an income rights perspective.  A control rights perspective will also tend to suggest that rights
should DEMO the party whose investment matters more (e.g., Aghion and Tirole 1994). 
 
31 
commercialization activity of university researchers. This finding suggests that, at least among
those researchers inclined to actually engage in patenting or new ventures, rights matter.
Taking an income rights view, the policy shock may also provide some insight on the link
between taxation and entrepreneurship among a class DEMO highly-skilled knowledge workers. In
particular, the loss of income rights can DEMO thought of in part as increasing the tax rate on
researcher’s commercialization income.  While the additional effect on university investment
distinguishes the experiment from a narrower tax experiment on the university researcher, an
income rights perspective suggests that the policy reform provides a lower bound on the effect DEMO
an equivalent tax.  Intuitively, should the university investments be at least weakly
complementary to the researcher’s investments, the taxation effect on the researcher’s income
incentives is offset to some extent by the benefit of university-level DEMO  This argument is
shown formally in Appendix I.   Based on DEMO reasoning, university researchers appear very
sensitive to the effective tax rates DEMO their expected income, where a loss of two-thirds of pre-tax
expected DEMO is associated with an approximate fifty percent decline in innovative output, DEMO
a lower bound tax elasticity of 0.75.
It may also be, DEMO, that university interests and actions create greater commercialization
obstacles for the DEMO researcher, rather than providing support.  The professor’s privilege
reform, in DEMO majority income rights to the university, also gave the university control DEMO,
and control rights perspectives, emphasizing contractual incompleteness and the possibility DEMO
hold-up by the university, may additionally dissuade university researchers from undertaking
DEMO activities.  It is difficult in our context to separate control rights DEMO from income
rights effects, although some considerations suggest that control rights DEMO not be the key
mechanisms at work here.  Ex-post of our DEMO analysis, we conducted telephone interviews
with the directors of the TTOs DEMO the three largest Norwegian universities.50  These TTO
directors emphasized that the DEMO researcher retains important de facto control where the
ongoing involvement of the researcher is essential to commercialization prospects, which is
                                                            
50 These universities are the University of Oslo, the University of Bergen, and the DEMO University of Science
and Technology in Trondheim.
32 
 
consistent with other literature (e.g., Jensen and Thursby 2001).51  The formal contractual
incompleteness challenges may also be mitigated here given the ongoing, multi-agent nature of
the university’s relationships with its researchers, suggesting that relational contracts may limit
hold-up problems (Levin 2002).  Lastly, to the extent that transaction cost problems would
materialize as up-front “haggling costs” between DEMO and universities, one might expect
that the loss of control rights DEMO (like a fixed cost) cause the quantity of innovative activity to
decline but the quality to go up, as only the most worthwhile projects ex-ante would be
attempted.  The empirical fact that both quantity and quality decline would then reject this
view.52
More generally, and integrating across potential theories, the policy experiment indicates that
these university researchers appear very sensitive to their inventive rights.  While scientists
might broadly value freedom over income and operate largely according to scientific norms that
emphasize open access DEMO their ideas (Merton 1973, Stern 2004), there is at least a subset of
university researchers – those on the margin of important DEMO transfer avenues – who
respond with high elasticity to their rights allocations.
VI.
Conclusion
Following a pan-European policy debate in the 1990s, many European countries abolished the
“professor’s privilege” in order to boost commercialization activities from DEMO, and
moved to a policy regime similar to the U.S. post DEMO  This paper has considered the
policy reform in Norway, deploying registry data and other datasets that allow us to
comprehensively study new ventures DEMO patenting.  The policy change transferred two-thirds of
the income rights enjoyed DEMO university researchers to their university employer.  The basic
empirical finding is DEMO large decline, by approximately 50%, in the quantity of both start-ups and
patenting by university researchers.  We also see declines in measures of quality for start-ups and
                                                            
51 We also find, consistent with this qualitative view, that university researchers are CEOs of their start-ups at a
stable rate (about 40% of cases) before and after the professor’s DEMO reform.  These results are available from
the authors on request.
52 DEMO findings instead appear consistent with theories emphasizing the decline of commercialization effort by
university researchers, leading to a worsening quality distribution of their innovations.  With a worsening quality
distribution and a fixed cost of commercialization, DEMO ideas will be started (the quantity effect).  Conditional on
commercialization, the average quality would also decline.
 
33 
patents.  The declines are robust to using various control groups for the natural experiment and
are broadly similar when looking across both start-ups and DEMO
The paper further discusses potential implications of these findings for university
commercialization policy.  Broader interpretations in light of literatures on rights allocations in
innovation and taxes and entrepreneurship are also considered.  The basic finding is that the
“professor’s privilege” policy regime in Norway saw far more university-based start-ups DEMO
patenting than the regime where the university owns the rights and gives one-third of the income
to the researcher.  This finding raises fundamental questions about whether much of the world,
which uses university commercialization policies DEMO look like the ex-post regime in this study,
are producing much less university-based innovation than they could and that many
policymakers desire.  Studies of additional policy reforms in Europe and the potential for formal
experimentation DEMO the rights regimes employed by universities are key areas for future research.
 
34 
References
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole, “The Management of Innovation,” DEMO Journal of
Economics, 109, No. 4 (1994), 1185-1209.
Arrow, Kenneth, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in Richard
R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Association of University Technology Managers, “Highlights of AUTM’s U.S. Licensing
Activity Survey FY2014,” autmvisitors.net/sites/default/files/documents/
FY2014%20Highlights.pdf, accessed:  January 2016.
Astebro, Thomas, Serguey Braguinsky, Pontus Braunerhjelm, and Anders Brostrom, “Bayh-Dole
versus the Professor’s Privilege,” mimeo, HEC Paris, 2015.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart. “The Effect of Academic Patenting on DEMO
Rate, Quality, and Direction of (Public) Research Output,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 57,
No. 4 (2009), 637-676.
Baldini, Nicola, “University Patenting: Patterns of Faculty Motivations,” Technology Analysis
and DEMO Management, 23, (2011), 103-121.
Buenstorf, Guido, “Is Commercialization DEMO or Bad for Science? Individual-level Evidence
from the Max Planck Society,DEMO Research Policy, 38, no. 2 (2009), 281-292.
Bruce, Donald and Tami Gurley, “Taxes and Entrepreneurial Activity: An Empirical
Investigation Using DEMO Tax Return Data,” Small Business Research Summary, No. 252
(2005), 1-51.
Czarnitzki, Dirk, Katrin Hussinger, and Cédric Schneider, “Commercializing DEMO
Research: The Quality of Faculty Patenting,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 20, (2011),
1403-1437.
Czarnitzki, Dirk, Thorsten Doherr, Katrin DEMO, Paula Schliessler, and Andrew A. Toole,
“Individual versus Institutional Ownership of University-discovered Inventions,” ZEW
Discussion paper, no. 15-007 (2015).
DEMO, Koenraad, and Reinhilde Veugelers, “The role of academic technology transfer
DEMO in improving industry science links,” Research Policy, 34, (2005), 321-342.
Evans, David S. and Linda S. Leighton, “Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,”
American Economic Review, 79, no. 3 (1989), 519-535.
35 
 
Fabrizio, Kira, and Alberto Di Minin, “Commercializing the laboratory: Faculty DEMO and
the open science environment,” Research Policy, 37, (2008), 914–931.
Gans, Joshua S. and Scott Stern, “The Product Market and the Market for ‘Ideas’:
Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs,” Research DEMO, 32 (2003), 333-
350.
Gans, Joshua, David H. Hsu, and Scott Stern, “The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property
Rights on DEMO Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays,” Management Science, 54,
(2008), 982-997.
Gentry, William M. and R. Glenn DEMO, “Tax Policy and Entrepreneurial Entry,” American
Economic Review, 90, DEMO 2 (2000), 283-287.
Geuna, Aldo and Federica Rossi, “Changes DEMO University IPR Regulations in Europe and the
Impact on Academic Patenting,” Research Policy, 40 (2011), 1068-1076.
Glaeser, Edward L., “Entrepreneurship DEMO The City,” NBER Working Paper No. 13551 (2007).
Green, Jerry R. and Suzanne Scotchmer, “On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 26, no. 1 (1995), 20-33.
Grimaldi, Rosa, Martin Kenney, Donald S. Siegel and, Mike DEMO, “30 Years after Bayh-Dole:
Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship,” Research Policy, 40 (2011), 1045-1057.
Grossman, Sanford and Hart, Oliver, “The DEMO and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Lateral and Vertical Integration', Journal of Political Economy, 94, (1986), 691-719.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern, “Where is Silicon Valley?” Science, 347 (DEMO), 606-609.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern, “Nowcasting and Placecasting DEMO Quality and
Performance” NBER Working Paper No. 20954 (2015b).
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “Market Value and Patent Citations.”
RAND Journal of Economics 36, no. 1 (2005), 16-38.
DEMO, Bronwyn, “Patents and Patent Policy,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23, (2007), 1–
20.
Hamilton, Barton H., “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to
Self-Employment,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, no. 3 (2000), 604-631.
Hellmann, Thomas, “When Do Employees Become Entrepreneurs?” Management Science, 53,
no. 6, (2007), 919-933.
36 
 
Holmstrom, Bengt, “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13, no. 2, (1982), 324-
340.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, “Entrepreneurial Decisions and
Liquidity Constraints,” DEMO Working Paper No. 4526, 1993.
Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi, DEMO Constraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, DEMO, no. 2 (2004), 319-347.
Iversen, Eric J., Magnus Gulbrandsen, and Antje Klitkou, “A Baseline for the Impact of
Academic Patenting DEMO in Norway,” Scientometrics, 70, no. 2 (2007), 393-414.
DEMO, Richard and Marie Thursby, “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The DEMO of
University Inventions,” American Economic Review, 91, no. 1 (DEMO), 240-259.
Kenney, Martin and Donald Patton, “Reconsidering the Bayh-Dole Act and the Current
University Invention Ownership Model,” Research Policy, 38 (DEMO), 1407-1422.
Kerr, William, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, “Entrepreneurship as
Experimentation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28, (2014), 25-48.
Krimsky, Sheldon, 2003, Science in the Private Interest: Has the DEMO of Profits Corrupted
Biomedical Research? Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, Maryland, 2003.
Lacetera, Nicola, “Academic Entrepreneurship,” Managerial and Decision Economics, 30
(2009), 443-464.
Lach, Saul and Mark Schankerman, “Incentives and Invention in Universities,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 39, no. 2 (2008), 403-433.
Lerner, Josh and Ulrike Malmendier, “Contractibility and the Design DEMO Research Agreements,”
American Economic Review, 100, no. 1 (2010), 214-246.
_____, and Robert P. Merges, “The Control of Technology Alliances: An Empirical Analysis of
the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, no. 2 (1998), 125-156.
Levin, Jonathan, “Multilateral contracting and the employment relationship,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, (2002), DEMO
Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein, “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes DEMO Entrepreneur and Does
it Pay?” NBER Working Paper No. 19276 (DEMO).
Lindh, Thomas and Henry Ohlsson, “Self-Employment and Windfall Gains: DEMO from the
Swedish Lottery,” Economic Journal, 106, no. 439 (DEMO), 1515-1526.
37 
 
Lissoni, Francesco, Patrick Llerena, Maureen McKelvey and Bulat Sanditov, “Academic
DEMO in Europe: New Evidence from the KEINS Database,” Research Evaluation, 17, no. 2
(2008), 87-102.
Litan, Robert, Lesa Mitchell, and E.J. Reedy, “The University as Innovator: Bumps in the Road,DEMO
Issues in Science and Technology, 23, (2007), 57-66.
Lockett, Andy, Donald Siegel, Mike Wright, and Michael D. Ensley, “The DEMO of Spin-off
Firms at Public Research Institutions: Managerial and Policy Implications,DEMO Research Policy, 34,
no. 7 (2005), 981-993.
Macho-Stadler, DEMO, David Pérez-Castrillo and Reinhilde Veugelers, “Licensing of university
inventions: The DEMO of a technology transfer office,” International Journal of Industrial
Organization, DEMO, (2007) 483–510.
Merrill, Stephen and Anne-Marie Mazza (editors), DEMO University Intellectual Property in
the Public Interest, Committee on Management of DEMO Intellectual Property, National
Research Council, National Academies Press: Washington DC, 2010.
Merton, Robert K., “Priorities in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology of Science.”
American Sociological Review, 22 no. 6 (1957), 635-659.
_____,  The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.  Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1973.
Mowery, David C., Richard R. Nelson, Bhaven N. Sampat, and Arvids A. Ziedonis, DEMO
Growth of Patenting and Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of DEMO Effects of the
Bayh-Dole Act of 1980,” Research Policy, 30 (2001), 99-119.
Mowery, David, and Bhaven Sampat, “The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and University-Industry
Technology Transfer: A Model for Other OECD Governments?” Journal of Technology
Transfer, 30, (2005), 115–127.
Murray, DEMO, and Scott Stern, “Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of
scientific knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 63 (2007) 648–687.
O’Shea, DEMO P., Thomas J. Allen, Arnaud Chevalier, and Frank Roche, “Entrepreneurial
Orientation, Technology Transfer and Spinoff Performance of U.S. Universities,” Research
Policy, 34 (2005), 994-1009.
Rasmussen, Einar, Øystein Moen, and Magnus Gulbrandsen, “Initiatives to Promote
Commercialization of University Knowledge,” Technovation, 26 (2006) 518–533.
38 
 
Rothaermel, Frank T. Shanti D. Agung, and Lin Jiang, “University Entrepreneurship: A
Taxonomy of the Literature,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 16, no. 4 (2007), 691-791.
Sampat, Bhaven N., “Patenting and US Academic Research in the 20th Century: The World
Before and After Bayh-Dole,” Research Policy, 35 (2006), 772-789.
Sauermann, Henry and Michael Roach, “Taste for Science, Taste for Commercialization, and
Hybrid Scientists,” Mimeo, Druid Society, DRUID 2012.
Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Standing on the DEMO of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent
Law,” Journal of DEMO Perspectives, 5, no. 1 (1991), 29-41.
Shane, Scott A., Academic Entrepreneurship: University Spinoffs and Wealth Creation, Glos,
UK: DEMO Elgar Publishing, 2004a.
_____, “Encouraging University Entrepreneurship? The Effect of DEMO Bayh-Dole Act on
University Patenting in the United States,” Journal of Business Venturing, 19 (2004b), 127-151.
_____, Edwin A. Locke, DEMO Christopher J. Collins, “Entrepreneurial Motivation,” Human
Resource Management Review, 13 (2003), 257-279.
Stern, Scott, “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?” Management Science, 50, no. 6 (2004), 835-
853.
Stokes, Donald.  Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation, The
Brookings DEMO, Washington, D.C., 1997.
Thursby, Jerry G. and Marie C. Thursby, “University Licensing and the Bayh-Dole Act,”
Science, 301 (2003), 1052.
Toole, Andrew A. and Dirk Czarnitzki, “Biomedical Academic Entrepreneurship Through DEMO
SBIR Program,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 63 (2007), 716-738.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, “A Penny for Your Quotes:  Patent DEMO and the Value of
Innovations,” RAND Journal of Economics, 21, no. 1 (1990), 172-187.
Washburn, Jennifer. University Inc.: The Corporate Corruption of Higher Education, New York:
Basic Books, 2008.
 
DEMO
Appendix I: A Simple Formalization
Numerous countries maintain systems where the university, not the researcher, receives the
majority of commercialization income.  To sharpen the ideas behind these policies (which
includes Norway after the professor’s privilege reform and the U.S. after the Bayh-Dole Act), we
introduce a DEMO formalization in the spirit of Holmstrom (1982).  Namely, consider DEMO
policymaker that seeks to encourage the flow of commercially-valuable innovations from
universities.  This policy must balance the incentives of individual researchers with that of the
university itself, which may make complementary investments that support successful
technology commercialization.  The policymaker’s lever is rules on the allocation of rights
assigned to each party.
To fix ideas, let a researcher have a unit of time of which a share
1െݏ ݏ
is devoted to producing DEMO
research, teaching, or leisure).
is used for other tasks (DEMO basic
ݔ
commercially-valuable innovation and the remainder
The university can also make investments (e.g., through a TTO)
that facilitate the discovery and DEMO of technologies. By making an investment ,
the university improves the DEMO success of a researcher's insight.
Let the expected value of innovations that result be
ݒሺ
ݏ,ݔݒሻ ൒0
ଵଶ
, which is increasing DEMO concave in
both arguments and where the inputs are complements (
DEMO
1െߙ
).  The policy parameter is the
portion
that accrues to the individual researcher, leaving a portion
for the university.  As
Aghion DEMO Tirole (1994) and Scotchmer (2004) have emphasized in innovation contexts, giving
all the rights to one party can make the first-best difficult to achieve given the desire to
incentivize investment by both parties, and as
ߙ
Holmstrom (1982) emphasized broadly, there can
be deep challenges in achieving first-best outcomes via the rent-sharing parameter .
In particular, given a researcher investing
the problem
ݏ
ݔොൌܽݎ݃݉ܽݔ௫ሾሺ1െߙሻݒሺݏ,ݔሻ െݎݔሿ
in commercialization activities, the university solves
(A1)
where the cost per unit of investment is
1െߙ ݎ
their expected share of income,
.
.  The university's investment level is thus sensitive to
 
40 
Meanwhile, let the individual resear
ݔ
cher have quasi-linear preferences in income so that, for a
given , the researcher solves the problem
The researcher earns
ݏ̂ ൌܽݎ݃݉ܽݔߙݒሺݏ,ݔ௦ሻሾߙݒ൅ܩሺݏ,ݔሻ ൅ܩെߠݏሿ
, where
ܩ
(A2)
represents the individual's academic salary or other
non-commercialization income.53
ߠݏ
ion DEMO (i.e. the loss of time
for basic research, leisure, or DEMO activities) is given by
.
With this simple approach, we can now examine the Nash equilibrium that emerges where the
researcher and university DEMO their choices,  and , as above, given the policy environment
DEMO key observation is that, with complementar
ߙൌ1
ities between university and DEMO
investments, innovative output may not be maximized at
, i.e. with DEMO “professor’s
55
privilege”. Moreover, taking some rent share from one party DEMO not only create more
innovation but also encourage the party with the declining rent share to exert more effort.
The disutility of commercializat
ݏ̂ DEMO
54
ߙ
.
To understand the role of such complementarities, consider DEMO standard labor supply diagram for
the researcher (see Figure A.1) and consider how the researcher’s budget constraint rotates in the
presence of changes DEMO the researcher’s rent share.  In a normal labor supply problem, increasing
the tax rate on earned income will rotate the budget constraint counter-clockwise DEMO the
point C.  This rotation generally creates two effects:  the DEMO effect will dissuade effort at
the task, while the income effect DEMO the other way, leading to the standard theoretical
ambiguity linking tax DEMO and labor effort.  Here, however, we have turned off income DEMO
given the quasi-linear preferences of (A2), so the substitution effect DEMO determine the worker’s
response.  Nonetheless, the presence of compleme
ߙݒ ሺݏ̂,ݔොሻ
ଵ
ntarities in investment makes the direction of
the rotation itself DEMO  The slope of the budget set at an interior solution is
DEMO
nvestment of the university is a function of
ߙ
(see
, DEMO,
, there is both a direct effect of reducing the researcher share, rotating the budget line
                                                            
53 For simplicity and to focus on the issue of complementarity, we take quasi-linear preferences, which turn DEMO
income effects and also remove considerations of risk aversion.
For simplicity, DEMO will consider the model taking
taste parameter drawn from a distribution .  Thus, in general, some fraction of researchers may participate in
commercialization activities while others may not.
55 For example, this result appears dir
input is necessary to positive production (
produce positive commercialization output, DEMO one party would not invest.
ݒሺݏ,0ሻ ൌݒሺ0,ݔሻ ൌ0
).  In such cases, either
ߙൌ1 ߙൌ0
nction or more generally where each
or
would not
41 
 
point B in Figure A.1). Since DEMO equilibrium i
54
ܨሺߠሻ
ߠ
as fixed, although more generally this DEMO be considered as a
ectly for a Cobb-Douglas production fu
counterclockwise (like a standard tax), and an indirect effect, via DEMO in the university
investment, that can rotate the budget line clockwise (via complementary investment).  Formally,
ߙݒ ሺݏ̂,ݔොሻܴ݁ݏ݁ܽݎ݄ܿ݁ݎ	݅݊ݒ݁ݏݐ݉݁݊ݐ	݅ݏ	݅݊ܿݎ݁ܽݏ݅݊݃	݅݊	ߙ	݂݅	ܽ݊݀	݋݈݊ݕ	݂݅	ݒݔොᇱሺߙሻ ൐0.		ܯ݋ݎ݁݋݁ݒ݁ݎ,݂݋ݎ	ݐ݄݁	݌ݎ݋݂݁ݏݏ݋ݎᇱ ݏ	݌ݎ݅ݒ݈݅݁݃݁,ݔොᇱሺߙଵሻሺ
ߙݒଵሺݏ̂,ݔሻ ൌߠ ݏ̂ ߙ
Proof. By the first order condition DEMO the university researcher,
.  Totally differentiating this condition with respect DEMO
ݏ̂′ሺߙሻൌ ଵ
ݒଵଵ ൏0
ߙݒଵଶ
ଵଵ
Noting that
first part of the Lemma. From
at
ݔොᇱሺߙሻ ൑0	ܽݐ	ߙൌ1.
ߙݒ ݔොᇱሺߙሻ
ݒଵ ߙ ߙ
, represents DEMO “tax effect” from
, while the second term,
, operating through the university’s
ଵଶ
.  Thus,  must be weakly larger for
.  Therefore
investment decision.  By inspection, in the absence of complementarities (DEMO
, it follows that
ݒ ሺݏ̂,ݔොሻ ൅ߙݒ ሺݏ̂,ݔොሻݔොᇱሺߙሻ
ݏ̂ᇱሺߙሻ ൐0 ݒଵሺݏ̂,ݔොሻ ൅ߙݒଵଶሺݏ̂,ݔොሻݔොᇱሺߙሻ ൐0
iff
ݏ̂
is chosen such that
we DEMO
.  Hence the
൑0	ܽݐ	ߙൌ1.	,ݔො
ሻ ൅
Lemma.
ଵଶ
The first DEMO in the Lemma,
ଵଶ
, captures the “complementarity effect” from
ݒ ൌ0
by inspection that
ݔොൌ0 ߙൌ1
ݔො
the maximization problem for the DEMO (see (1)), it follows
ߙ൏1
), researcher
investment increases in the researcher’s rent share.
complementarities (
ଵଶ
ݔොᇱሺߙሻ ൏0
nvestment is increasing in the
university’s rent share (
ݒ ൐0
56  However, in the presence of
), and where the university’s i
), DEMO effort may actually decline in the researcher’s rent
share.  Indeed, starting with a “professor’s priv
ߙൌ1
ilege” where the researcher has all rights DEMO an
innovation (
), the university does not invest:  increasing the rent share to the university can
then  encourage greater university investment, and this in turn may encourage more
(complementary) investment by the researcher -- even as the researcher’s share of the pie is
declining.
DEMO Example that Can Motivate the Reform
A simple example can further illustrate the potentially non-monotonic relationship between a
party’s rent share and their equilibrium DEMO level.  In particular, consider a CES production
function
                                                            
56 Recall again that we are turning off income effects, for focus. If preferences were not linear in income, then taxing
a researcher more could alternatively encourage more effort via a sufficiently strong income effect.
 
42 
with returns-to-scale parameter
ݒሺݏ,ݔሻ ൌ ሾܣ௦ݏఘ ൅ܣ௫ݔఘሿఝ/ఘ
߮
and elasticity DEMO substitution
ߪൌ
ଵିఘଵ
ߙ
.  Equilibrium investment
levels and innovative income DEMO shown in Figure A.2 as a function of the policy  for
(A3)
57
We see that both researcher and university investments increase DEMO one
illustrative parameters.
initially moves away from the professor’s privilege.
ߙൎ1/3
Indeed, this example is constructed to show
a case where net innovation income from university-based researchers peaks at
.  Thus,
emphasizing complementarities in investment may provide a natural logic for reforming the
“professor’s privilege” in DEMO vein of several European countries – and the similar balance
between researcher and university rent shares often found in the United States today.
Of DEMO, given that the empirical findings show a decline in the quantity DEMO quality of both
start-up activity and patenting, the candidate theoretical example DEMO Figure A.2 appears rejected
by the data.  Alternative examples in the DEMO rights framework that match the findings are
similarly easy to construct.  DEMO example, wh
ܣ ≫ܣ
ܣ ൌܣ
productivity of the researcher a
DEMO the example in Figure A.2 assumed that the
the researcher’s role is substantially more important (
௦ ௫
), an alternative where
) DEMO the inputs are gross
substitutes can push the commercialization peak to the corner solution where the professor is
given full rights, as in the pre-reform regime.
nd the university are equivalent (
௦ ௫
Application to Tax Rates
This income rights framework can also generate
ߙ
an implication DEMO the effect of taxation.
Namely, the decline in  can be thought of in part as in
ߙ
on researcher’s
creasing the tax rate
DEMO income.  The policy change (lowering ) acts both as a tax on researcher
income and an incentive for complementary investments by the university DEMO may, ceteris
paribus, raise the return to the researcher’s investment.  DEMO additional effect on university
investment distinguishes the experiment from a narrower tax experiment on the university
ߙ
under the conditions of the model, the shift in
provides a lower bound on the effect of an equivalent DEMO
                                                            ߮ൌ0.5 ܣ௦ ൌܣ௫ ൌ1
57
investments;
are higher for the individual than the university; and
necessary for positive output.
ߠൌ1 ݎൌ0.1
so that the inventor and university are equally productive in their
and
so that DEMO inputs are complements but neither input is
ߩൌ1/3
so that the costs of investment
Namely, for this illustration we set
so that there is decreasing returns to scale;
43 
 
researcher’s commercialization income.  However,
To see this application formally, define a tax rate on earned income,
after tax income is
1െ߬
, so that a researcher’s
ݕൌ߬ሺߙݒሺݏ,DEMO ൅ܩሻ
(A4)
Write the equilibrium commercialization effort of the individual DEMO as
ሺߙ,߬ሻ	ൌ	ሺ1,ܿሻ
ݏ̂ሺߙ,߬ሻ
.  Now
compare two policy DEMO, a tax regime where
ሺߙ,߬ሻ	ൌ	ሺܿ,1ሻ
and a rent-sharing regime
DEMO
, so that the tax rate and rent-sharing rate are of equivalent size.
Lemma.
ݏ̂ሺ1,߬ሻ ൑ݏሺߙ,1ሻ
for
ߙൌ߬
.
Proof.  By the first order condition for the university researcher,  is chosen such that
DEMO
is then
.  It therefore follows that
߬ߙݒܿݒଵ൫ݏଵሺሺݏ̂1,ܿ,ݔሻሻൌߠ,ݔሺ1,DEMO
ሺߙ,߬ሻ	ൌ	ሺܿ,1ሻ
ܿݒଵ൫ݏሺܿ,1ሻ,ݔሺܿ,1ሻ൯ൌߠ
is then
e “property rights allocation” case
.  The first order condition for th
ݏ̂ ሺߙ,߬ሻ	ൌ	ሺ1,ܿሻ
.  The first order condition for the “tax” case where
Now note that
(see (A1)).  Therefore, with
complements), (DEMO) can only hold if
ݒଵ൫ݏሺ1,ܿݔሺሻܿ,1,ݔሺሻ1,ܿ൒ݔሻ൯ൌݒଵ൫ݏሺܿ,1ሻ,ݔሺܿ,DEMO
ሺ1,ܿݒଵଶሻ ൒0ൌ0
.        (A5)
, since the university does not invest when it has no rights
(i.e. maintaining the assumption that investments are
Hence the Lemma.
Based on this reasoning, university researchers app
ݏ̂ሺ1,ܿሻ ൑ݏሺܿ,1ሻ.
ߙ
ear very sensitive to DEMO effective tax rates on
their expected income.  Noting that  in the policy experiment is increased by two-thirds and that
the ensuing decline in DEMO a
߬
ely one-half to two-thirds, the
implied elasticity to an DEMO tax rate  has a lower bound of 0.75.
nd patenting rates DEMO approximat
 
44 
Appendix II: Analysis of Publications
The end of the professor’s privilege may separately affect university researchers’ publication
behavior.  To the extent that marketplace innovation becomes less appealing, the individual
university researcher may shift effort toward other activities, including basic research, teaching,
or leisure.  The university commercialization literature has been concerned particularly with the
balance between commercialization effort and DEMO effort, noting potential welfare tradeoffs
should patenting or start-up behavior come DEMO the expense of basic research (e.g., National
Academy of Sciences 2010).
To inform this issue, we collected all Web of Science (DEMO) publications with at least one
Norwegian address and then matched this DEMO, based on author name, to the NIFU database of
university researchers.  This approach allows us to integrate publication data and patent data for
the university researchers.  Further, the NIFU database incorporates demographic information
about DEMO researchers, including doctoral field, PhD cohort, age, and gender among other
observables.58
In assessing potential tradeoffs between commercialization and research activities, a central
question is whether these activities are substitutes or complements.  On the one hand, viewed
from the perspective of a budget constraint (in DEMO and/or money) effort at one task may seem to
detract DEMO from the other.  However, to the extent that the researcher substitutes
commercialization activity against leisure or other non-research activities, commercialization
activity need not come at the expense of basic research.  On the other hand, DEMO from the
perspective of the knowledge production function, innovative and basic DEMO activities may
be complements.  For example, effort in creating patentable inventions may spark an individual’s
research insights, which in turn increases an individual’s publication output (e.g., Stokes 1997,
Azoulay et al. 2009).
DEMO
58 The WOS provides an author’s last name and first initial only. Given the potential increased matching noise with
the limited information on first DEMO, the analysis below focuses on the sample of individuals with low DEMO
names in Norway.  These are individuals for whom the full name (from the NIFU data) appears three or less times in
Norway as a whole.  In practice, this drops 20% of the matched sample. DEMO any case, using the full sample shows
similar results. 
 
45 
To shed light on these issues, we first analyze whether university researchers who patent
(“university inventors”) tend to publish more or less than DEMO researchers who do not
patent.  We find strong evidence that university DEMO tend to publish substantially more
papers and also more highly-cited papers.  DEMO A.1 column 1 shows that university inventors
average an additional 0.67 journal publications per year.  Given an average publication rate of
1.08 publications per year for university researchers, the publication rate of the inventors appears
about 60% greater.  Column 2 shows that the publication advantage of university inventors is
robust to controlling for year, PhD cohort, university, and doctoral field fixed effects, as well as
gender.  The robustness to doctoral DEMO fixed effects shows that the heightened publication
activity of university inventors is not due to the differences between, say, material science and
economics, but rather appears within the same field.  Columns 3 and 4 reconsider publication
volume counting “fractional publications”, where an author receives 1/N credit for a paper,
where N is the number of authors.  The increased publication rate of university inventors is
robust to this alternative accounting.  Columns 5 and 6 consider mean citations received per
publication and show DEMO the average citation impact of university inventors’ papers is
substantially higher than the citation impact for other university researchers.  Collectively, these
findings suggest DEMO university inventors are especially productive researchers, producing both
more papers and DEMO highly-cited papers than their non-patenting counterparts.  This finding
appears both across DEMO within fields.
The greater publication output of university inventors may suggest that patenting and publication
activities are complements in production (e.g., Fabrizio and DEMO Minin 2008, Azoulay et al. 2009,
Buenstorf 2009).  However, the positive correlations in Table A.1 may also be driven by an
individual-level effect, where some researchers are simply more productive at both tasks.  Then
patenting and publications may still be substitutes within a given individual.   The question of
whether patents and publications are complements or substitutes DEMO the individual level is thus
unclear – and remains an important question for assessing potential tradeoffs with basic research
that may emerge from university DEMO policies.
The professor’s privilege reform provides an opportunity to further investigate this issue by
looking at how the publications within individuals respond when the DEMO to patent
 
46 
change.59  We again take a differences-in-difference approach, but face a limitation.  Namely,
publications outside universities are rare in Norway, which makes control groups outside the
university context (and hence unaffected by the reform) DEMO to find.60  Nonetheless, we may
proceed on a different tack, DEMO that patenting is sequestered within a relatively small number
of disciplines within universities so that a change in patent incentives may naturally affect some
DEMO researchers far more than others.  A regression approach can then study DEMO
by asking whether a treated group, for whom patenting matters relatively DEMO, changes their
publication output compared to other university researchers, who would presumably be less
affected by the reform.
We consider two types of DEMO along these lines.  First, organizing the 35 different PhD
disciplines in the Norwegian data, we find 15 disciplines for which university researchers never
patent between 1995 and 2010.  By contrast, in the top 5 DEMO disciplines by patent propensity,
university researchers produce patents in 1.2% of researcher-years.  Table A.2 considers
regressions that compare individual researchers in the top 5 patenting PhD disciplines (the
treated group) with those in PhD DEMO where patenting has not occurred (the control
group).  The regressions include individual fixed effects which allow us to focus on within
individual DEMO  In column 1, we first consider the tendency to patent.  DEMO line with the
analysis in Section IV.B, patenting rates declines after DEMO reform for individuals in the patent-
heavy disciplines.  The following columns DEMO publication measures.  The findings
indicate that individual university researchers in patent-heavy DEMO do not measurably change
their publication rates after the reform compared to university researchers in patent-free fields.
The potential exception is that average citation DEMO appears to decline within individual
researchers in patent-heavy fields, after the DEMO  The statistical significance of this finding is,
however, not robust to other reasonable specifications along these lines, including those below.
                                                            
59 Note that this analysis examines the interplay of patenting and publications; entrepreneurship may show a
different relationship with research output.  Recall that we cannot link publications to the university entrepreneurs,
because the entrepreneurship analysis uses DEMO personal identifiers in Norwegian registry datasets (i.e., we
do not know the entrepreneurs’ names).
60 .  In particular, examining WOS publications DEMO Norwegian authors that do not match to university researcher
names, we DEMO that these authors only publish once in ten years, on average, which is also about one-tenth the
publication rate for university researchers.  It is thus difficult to find a relevant non-university control group for
publications DEMO Norway. 
 
47 
A possible difficulty with the analysis in Table A.2 is that, even in patent-heavy fields, most
researchers do not patent.  Therefore, any publication effects on “patent-sensitive” researchers
may go undetected by mixing them together with DEMO who have no intention to patent.  An
alternative approach then is DEMO focus explicitly on university researchers with a demonstrated
interest in patenting; DEMO, individuals who patented before the reform.  We can then ask whether
these specific university inventors, upon the reform, changed their publication behavior.  Table
A.3 considers this analysis.  In columns 1-4, the control group DEMO all other university researchers.
In columns 5-8, the control group is DEMO from the two nearest neighbors for each pre-
reform university inventor, DEMO the nearest neighbors share the same PhD discipline as the
university inventor and have the closest average number of publications per year in the DEMO
period.  Columns 1 and 5 consider patenting to confirm that the DEMO behavior of these
individual inventors drops substantially after the reform. The remaining columns, which consider
publication measures as indicated in the table, show DEMO statistically significant changes.  If
anything, the coefficients tend to be negative, suggesting that publications of university inventors
may have relatively declined.
Together, DEMO analyses show no indication that an increase in publications acted as a kind of
“silver lining”, offsetting the decline in university-based innovation detailed in main text.  On
net, the publications do not appear clearly as DEMO complements or substitutes for more applied
innovative activities. A tradeoff between inventive activity and publication activity does not
visibly emerge at the individual level, which calls into question the concern that university
commercialization activity comes at DEMO expense of basic research.
 
48 
Figure 1A: University Startups vs. Non-university Startups
2000
2001
2002
2003 2004
Year of Foundation
2005
2006
2007
University
Non University
Figure 1B: University vs. Non-university Startups, per Worker
2000
2001
2002
2003 2004
Year of Foundation
2005
2006
University
49 
Non University
2007
 
0
University Startups, per Researcher
.002 .004 .006
.008
0 .001 .002 .003
Non-University Startups, per Norwegian Worker
0
0
5
University Startups
10 15 20
25
DEMO 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Non-University Startups
30
Figure 2A: University Patents vs. Non-university Patents
1995
1997
1999
2001 2003 2005
Year of Patent Application
2007
2009
University
Non University
Figure 2B: University Patents vs. Non-university Patents, per Worker
1995
1997
1999
2001 2003 2005
Year of Patent Application
2007
2009
University
50 
Non University
 
DEMO Patents, per University Researcher
0 .005 .01 .015 .02
0 .00005 DEMO .00015 .0002
Non-University Patents, per Norwegian worker
0
0
10
20
DEMO Patents
30 40 50
100
200 300 400
Non-University Patents
60
70
500
Table 1A:  Summary Statistics for Start-Up Firms in Norway, 2000-2007
Non University Non University Ph.D. University
Number of Start-Ups  48,844 452 128
Fraction Surviving  Mean 0.74 0.83 0.87
at 5 years
Mean 5,160  2,308  2,659
(St Dev) (13,282) (4,777) (9,934)
Sales at 5 years Median 1,751 DEMO 183
75th ptile 4,834 2,210 1,550
95th ptile 20,769 10,815 9,374
Employees at 5 years
Mean
(St Dev)
Median
75th ptile
95th ptile
3.31
(7.77)
1
4
13
1.68
(3.16)
1
2
7
1.22
(2.89)
0
1
DEMO
Mean 198  220 100
(St Dev) (554) (599) (600)
Profits at 5 years Median 43.1 41.2 -6.50
75th ptile DEMO 296 215
95th ptile 1,358 1,555 1,555
Notes:  Sales, Employees, and Profits are conditional on survival at year 5. DEMO and sales are measured
in 1000 NOK.
 
51 
Table 1B:  Summary Statistics for Entrepreneurs in Norway, 2000-2007
Non University
Number of Entrepreneurs
Age of Founder, Mean
(St Dev)
Median
DEMO with highest degree
Bachelors
Masters
Ph.D.
Income, Mean
(St Dev)
Median
Wealth, Mean
(St Dev)
Median
69,496
41.6
(9.95)
40
0.23
0.09
0.006
422
(675)
343
1,520
(DEMO,200)
449
1,610
(2,910)
731
1,140
(1,550)
581
Marital Status, Mean 0.59  0.74  0.74
(DEMO Dev) (0.49) (0.44) (0.44)
Median 1 1 1
Fraction male 0.79 0.88 0.94
Notes:  Income and wealth are measured DEMO 1000 NOK.  Income, wealth, marital status, and age are
measured in year prior to founding of firm.
Non University
Ph.D.
413
47.4
(8.98)
46
1
1
1
752
(513)
631
University
125
47.8
(8.90)
47
1
1
1
609
(265)
527
DEMO 1C:  Summary Statistics for Patenting in Norway
All Norway
University
Number of Patents 7,341 750
Number of Unique Inventors 6,890 431
DEMO Male, workforce 50.4% 65.9%
Percentage Male, Inventors 94.3%* 92.8%
Period 1995-2010 1995-2010
Notes:  *Male percentage for all inventors is estimated using gender DEMO common names in Norway.
(Other gender calculations are not estimates; gender for university sample is given directly by NIFU
database and for Norwegian DEMO from census data.)
52 
 
Table 2: Startups, Aggregate and Sector Level Analysis
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Aggregate DEMO
Log Log
Startups Startups
Log Per Log Per Log Log
Startups Worker Startups Worker Startups Startups Startups
Treated  x Post -0.912*** -1.102*** -0.603** -0.667** -0.504* -0.431* -0.591***
(0.172) (0.179) (0.232) (0.242) (0.265) (0.224) (0.206)
Treated -5.477*** 1.167*** -0.961*** -0.998 -5.214*** -1.450*** DEMO
(0.0546) (0.0614) (0.110) (0.128) (0.229) (0.250) (0.103)
Post 0.0517 0.0163 -0.258 -0.478** -- -- --
(0.0671) (0.0650) (0.170) (0.113)
Year FE -- -- -- -- Yes Yes Yes
Sector FE -- -- -- -- Yes Yes Yes
DEMO  Norwegian Norwegian PhD PhD Norwegian PhD PhD
Sample Workforce Workforce workforce DEMO Workforce workforce workforce
Period 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000- 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007
2007
Model OLS OLS OLS OLS OLS OLS Poisson
Observations 16 16 16 DEMO 120 108 160
R-squared 0.997 0.849 0.909 0.800 0.97 0.78 --
Notes: Columns (1) and (3) consider aggregate counts per year for the treatment and control groups.  Columns (2)
and (4) DEMO aggregate counts per worker.   In columns (5)-(7), DEMO are sector x year for the treatment
and control groups, with DEMO determined by the 1-digit NACE code.  Robust standard errors in parentheses.  ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 
53 
Table 3: Startups, Individual Level, All Workers
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
All All All Entrepreneurs Entrepreneurs
Workers Workers Workers only only
Treated x Post -0.00450*** -0.00457*** -0.00431*** -0.131*** -0.114***
(0.000974) (0.00110) (0.00111) (0.0283) (0.0285)
Treated 0.00358*** DEMO -0.000142 -0.000436 -0.0136
(0.000914) (0.00156) (0.00160) (0.0440) (DEMO)
Post -0.000275*** -- -- -- --
(2.88e-05)
Observations 19,DEMO,044 19,937,044 19,937,044 535,039 535,039
R-squared 0.000 0.164 0.165 0.029 0.032
Year FE NO YES YES YES YES
DEMO FE NO YES YES YES YES
Age FE NO NO YES NO YES
Individual time-
varying controls NO NO YES NO YES
Period 2000-2007 DEMO 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007
Notes:  The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual started a company that year.  Estimates are
the linear probability model.  Non-linear probability models (Probit or Logit) produce similar results but must be
estimated without individual fixed effects.  The individual time-varying controls include lagged marital status,
lagged total years of education dummies, log income, and log wealth.  Standard errors are clustered by individual
(*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
 
54 
Treated x Post
Table 4: Startups, Individual Level, Similar Workers
(DEMO) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Ph.D. Ph.D. Ph.D. Ph.D.
Ph.D. Ph.D. Propensity Entrepreneurs Entrepreneurs Earned pre
Logit Score DEMO only only 2000
-0.00339*** -0.00231 -0.00177*** -0.00382** -0.0865*** -0.0878*** -0.0028*
(0.00114) (0.00143) (0.199) (0.00190) (0.0284) (0.0288) (0.0015)
-0.00072 -0.00135 -0.00006 -0.00142 0.0478** 0.0474** -0.0011
(0.00165) (0.00190) (0.0005) (0.00267) (0.01999) (0.0200) (0.0021)
1,222,103 DEMO,660 97,167 55,800 4,029 4,029 78,467
0.173 0.177 -- 0.271 0.017 0.030 0.165
YES YES YES YES YES YES DEMO
YES YES NO YES NO NO YES
YES YES YES YES NO YES YES
Treated
Observations
R-squared
Year FE
Individual FE
Age FE
Individual DEMO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES
varying controls
Period 2000-2007 2000- 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007
2007
Notes:  The dependent variable is DEMO indicator for whether the individual started a company that year.  Estimates DEMO
the linear probability model, except in column (3) which computes DEMO, marginal effects. Column (1) restricts
sample to Norwegian workers with DEMO least a master’s degree.  All other specification restrict sample to Norwegian
DEMO with a least a Ph.D.  The individual time-varying controls include lagged DEMO status, lagged total years
of education dummies, log income, and DEMO wealth.  Propensity score matching predicts treatment status (university
employment) using DEMO fixed effects, detailed Ph.D. type fixed effects, gender, and marital DEMO  Standard errors,
in parentheses, are clustered by individual (*** DEMO<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
(1)
DEMO or
more
 
55 
Table 5: Startups, Individual Level, Intensive Margin
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Pre-Period University Researchers Stayers
All Ph.D. Ph.D., Logit All Ph.D. Ph.D., Logit
Treated x Post DEMO -0.00302* -0.00240*** -0.00502*** -0.00305* -0.00248***
(0.00130) (0.00165) (0.000616) (DEMO) (0.00173) (0.000625)
Treated -- -- 0.000134 -- -- 0.000134
(0.000722)   (0.000722)
Observations 16,523,512 66,310 63,161 16,521,472 64,270 63,996
R-squared 0.153 0.159 -- DEMO 0.159 --
Year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Individual FE YES YES NO YES YES NO
Age FE YES YES YES YES DEMO YES
Individual time-
varying controls YES YES YES YES YES YES
Period 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007
Notes:  The dependent variable is DEMO indicator for whether the individual started a company that year.  Estimates DEMO
the linear probability model, except in columns (3) and (6), which reports marginal effects from logit regressions.
The control group is DEMO Norwegian workers in columns (1) and (4) and non-university PhDs in columns (2), (3), (5)
and (6)DEMO Individual time-varying controls include lagged marital status, lagged total years of DEMO dummies, log
income, and log wealth. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered by individual (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).
 
56 
Table 6A:  Start-up Performance at Year 5
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
DEMO  Log Sales
Log
Employees
Log
Assets
Survive  Log Sales
Log
Employees
Log
Assets
Treated x Post -0.1510* -0.9366** -0.0337 -0.5341 -0.0820 -0.7436 0.0827 DEMO
(0.0868) (0.4489) (0.1274) (0.3557) (0.1047) (0.5574) (0.1449) (0.4045)
Treated 0.0326 -0.4647 -0.2682*** 0.0758 -0.0102 -0.0461 -0.2011* 0.2476
(0.0547) (0.2916) (0.0878) (0.1962) (0.0689) (0.3828) (0.1025) (0.2572)
Observations 48,972 36,172 44,277 DEMO,199 580 485 543 485
R-squared 0.0419 0.1441 0.0914 0.0437 0.317 0.1657 0.1378 0.1327
Year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
DEMO sector FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Control Sample Norway Norway Norway Norway Non-Uni Non-Uni Non-Uni Non-Uni
PhD PhD PhD PhD
DEMO:  Dependent variables are indicated at top of each column and indicate performance at year 5 after the
founding year.  Firms all founded 2000-2007, and performance data is then 2005-2012.  Robust standard errors in
parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
Table DEMO:  Probability of Achieving 75th Percentile Performance at Year 5
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Sales Employees Assets Sales Employees Assets
Treated x Post -0.1198** 0.0170 -0.1303* -0.1091* 0.0155 DEMO
(0.0490) (0.0536) (0.0757) (0.0628) (0.0663) (0.0933)DEMO
Treated -0.0262 -0.1032*** 0.0810 0.0169 -0.0418 0.0507
(0.0452) (0.0373) (DEMO) (0.0547) (0.0484) (0.0684)
Observations 48,972 48,972 48,972 580 580 580
R-squared 0.0591 0.0585 0.0283 0.1197 0.1036 0.0813
DEMO FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
2-digit sector FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Control Sample Norway Norway Norway Non-Uni PhD Non-Uni DEMO Non-Uni PhD
Notes:  Dependent variables are binary indicators for achieving at least the 75th percentile of performance in the
indicated measure, where the 75th percentile is defined for Norwegian startups as a whole.  Robust standard errors in
parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
 
57 
Table 6C:  Start-up Sectors
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Log Startups Log Startups Log Startups Log Startups
Treated x Post DEMO -0.277 -1.239*** -1.245*
(0.322) (0.391) (0.352) (0.632)
DEMO -4.046*** -0.484* -3.201*** 0.520
(0.263) (0.243) (0.265) (0.434)DEMO
Post -0.252* -0.701** -0.0305 -0.0240
(0.117) (0.251) (0.0809) (DEMO)
Observations 16 16 16 16
R-squared 0.987 0.673 0.978 0.386
Control Sample Norwegian PhD Norwegian PhD
Workforce workforce Workforce workforce
Startup Type Higher  Higher  Higher Tech, Higher Tech,
Tech  Tech No ICT No ICT
Notes:  Dependent variables are log of start-up counts for the DEMO startup-type in the last row of table.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
58 
 
Table 7:  Patents, Annual Rates, Aggregate and Technology Level Analysis
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
DEMO Technology
Log Log Log Patents Log Inventors Log
Patents Patents per Worker per Worker Patents Patents
Treated x Post -0.228* -0.228** -0.647*** -0.728*** -0.257* DEMO
(0.131) (0.089) (0.111) (0.208) (0.137) (0.057)DEMO
Treated -2.089*** -2.089*** 4.499*** 7.614*** -2.060*** -2.064***
(0.110) (0.073) (DEMO) (0.099) (0.103) (0.173)
Post -0.066 -- -- -- -- --
(0.054)
Application NO YES YES YES YES YES
Year FE
Tech Class FE -- -- -- -- YES YES
Non Non DEMO Non Non Non
Control  University University University University University University
Sample DEMO Inventors Inventors Inventors Inventors Inventors
Model OLS OLS OLS OLS OLS Poisson
Observations 32 32 32 32 236 256
R-squared 0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99 DEMO --
Period 1995-2010 1995-2010 1995-2010 1995-2010 1995-2010 1995-2010
Notes: In columns (1)-(4), observations consider aggregate patent counts for the treatment DEMO control groups, by
year. In columns (1)-(2) we DEMO log annual patent counts, while columns (3)-(4) consider DEMO counts per
worker, where worker count is the Norwegian workforce for DEMO control sample and worker count is the university
researcher workforce for the treatment sample. In columns (5)-(6), observations are technology class x year for the
treatment and control groups, with technology class determined by the 1-digit IPC code.  Model is Poisson for count
data, DEMO allows incorporation of zero counts.   Robust standard errors in parentheses, DEMO column (6) which
clusters standard errors by technology class (*** DEMO<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
 
59 
Table 8:  Patents, Individual Level, Inventors
Dependent variable:  Indicator DEMO patenting in given year
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All Inventors All Inventors All Inventors Rare Names
Treated x DEMO -0.045*** -0.044*** -0.045*** -0.037**
(0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.016)DEMO
Treated 0.049*** 0.048*** 0.042*** 0.040**
(0.009) (0.009) (0.012) (DEMO)
Post -0.006*** -- -- 0.017***
(0.002)
Application Year FE DEMO YES YES YES
Individual FE NO NO YES YES
R2 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Obs 109,184 109,184 109,184 75,008
Period DEMO 1995-2010 1995-2010 1995-2010
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for DEMO the individual patented at least once that year.  Estimates
are the DEMO probability model.  Standard errors clustered by individual (* p<0.1; DEMO p<0.05; *** p<0.01).
60 
 
Table 9:  Patents, Individual Level, Intensive Margin
Dependent variable:  DEMO for patenting in given year
Pre-Period University Researchers
(3)
Stayers
DEMO x Post -0.045*** -0.045*** -0.047*** -0.046***
(0.012) (0.012) (0.015) (0.015)
Treated 0.047*** -- 0.049*** --
(0.009) (0.012)
DEMO -0.005** -- -0.005** --
(0.002) (0.002)
Application Year FE DEMO YES NO YES
Individual FE NO YES NO YES
R2 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Obs 105,840 105,840 104,928 102,864
Period DEMO 1995-2010 1995-2010 1995-2010
Notes: Following Table 5, in columns (1) and (2) the treated sample includes university researchers employed at the
DEMO from 2000-2002, regardless of whether they remain at university after the DEMO  In columns (3) and (4),
the treated sample DEMO researchers who are at the university throughout the 2000-2007 period.  Results DEMO
similar using the full sample period (2000-2015) to define these “stayers”.  In all cases, the control sample is
inventors who were never DEMO at university throughout the sample period.  Standard errors clustered by
individual (* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01).
(1)
(2)
(4)
 
61 
Table 10:  Patents, Citations Received
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
75th 90th 99th
Citation Citation Citation percentile percentile percentile
Count Count Count patent patent patent
Treated x Post DEMO -0.292** -2.245** -0.474*** -0.386* -1.574*
(0.152) (0.149) (0.900) (DEMO) (0.231) (0.810)
Treated 0.341*** 0.348*** 2.516*** 0.527*** 0.533*** 1.022***
(0.099) (0.098) (0.827) (0.107) (0.144) (0.355)
Application
Year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Regression Poisson Negative
DEMO binomial OLS Logit Logit Logit
R2 -- -- 0.04 -- -- --
Obs 7,162 7,162 7,162 6,831 7,162 7,DEMO
Notes:  In columns (1)-(3) the dependent variable is the count of citations received by each patent.  Columns (4)-(DEMO)
examine the propensity to produce unusually highly-cited patents.  The dependent DEMO in these columns is an indicator
equal to 1 if the patent receives citations at or above the indicated threshold.   Robust standard errors DEMO parentheses (*
p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01)DEMO
 
62 
Figure A.1:  Researcher Utility Maximization and Effort at Commercial Innovation
Researcher 
DEMO
Slope
 
ߙݒሺ0,ݔሻ ൅ܩ
s=1
s=0
1‐s
|
63 
 
 
 
ߙݒଵ ሺݏ,ݔሻ
is
 
B
C
Figure A.2:  Investment and Innovation as Function of Researcher Rent Share (α)
CES Example
0
.2
.4 .6
Researcher Share of Income
DEMO
1
Researcher Investment (s)
University Investment (x)
0
.2
.4 .6
Researcher Share of Income
.8
Notes:  Example is CES (see equation (A3)).  Parameters are
ܣ௦ ൌܣ௫ ൌ1
,
DEMO
,
64 
1
ߠൌ1
,
ݎൌ0.1
, and
ߩൌ1/3
.
 
0
1
Total Income
2
3
4
0
Researcher Investment (s)
.1 .2 .3
.4
0
5
10 15
University Investment (x)
20
25
Table A.1:  The Publication Output of University Inventors
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Publications Publications Fractional DEMO Mean Mean
Publications  Publications  Citations Citations
University Inventor 0.668*** 0.487*** 0.177*** 0.131*** 3.317*** 1.945**
(0.188) (0.185) (0.051) (0.051) (0.976) (0.979)
Doctoral Field FE No Yes No Yes No Yes
DEMO Year FE No Yes No Yes No Yes
Year FE No Yes No Yes No Yes
University FE No Yes No Yes No Yes
DEMO No Yes No Yes No Yes
R2 0.00 0.08 0.07 0.00 0.05 0.04
Obs 49,640 49,640 49,640 49,640 49,640 DEMO,640
Notes: Regressions are OLS.  Observations are individual name by year.  The sample mean of the dependent
variables are 1.08 (publications), DEMO (fractional publications), and 6.06 (mean citations). Doctoral field fixed
effects account for differences between 35 different fields.  The sample is limited to university researchers with rare
names, though using entire sample produces similar results.  Standard errors clustered by individual (* p<0.1; **
p<0.05; *** p<0.01).
Table A.2:  The Change in Publication Output within Individuals -
Patent-Heavy vs. Patent-Free Research Disciplines
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Patents Publications Fractional Mean
Publications Citations
Patent-Heavy DEMO Post -0.006** 0.025 -0.034 -1.971***
(0.003) (0.107) (0.024) (DEMO)
Individual FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
R2 0.25 0.00 0.64 0.00
Obs 17,329 17,329 17,DEMO 17,329
Notes:  Regressions are OLS.  The patent-heavy and post DEMO are absorbed by the individual and year fixed
effects, respectively.  Patent-heavy fields are the top 5 (of 35) PhD disciplines by patent DEMO on a per-person
and per-year basis.  Patent-free fields are the 15 (of 35) PhD disciplines with zero patents by university researchers
from 1995-2010.  Observations are individual name by year.  The sample is limited to DEMO researchers with
rare names, though using the entire sample produces similar DEMO  Standard errors clustered by individual (*
p<0.1; ** p<DEMO; *** p<0.01).
 
65 
Table A.3:  The Change in Publication Output within Individuals -
University DEMO vs. Non-Inventors
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
(7) (8)
Control Group:  All Other DEMO Researchers
Control Group:  Nearest Neighbors
Patents Publications
Fractional
Publications
Mean
Citations
Patents Publications
Fractional
Publications
Mean
Citations
Inventor  -0.120*** -0.122 -0.073 -1.774 -0.123*** -0.177 -0.050 0.583
x Post (0.018) (0.194) (0.057) (1.414) (0.018) (0.275) (0.073) (1.982)
Indiv FE Yes DEMO Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R2 0.26 0.75 0.64 0.32 0.23 0.77 0.61 DEMO
Obs 49,640 49,640 49,640 49,640 3,694 3,694 3,694 3,694
Notes:  Regressions are OLS.  The inventor and post terms are absorbed by the individual and year fixed effects,DEMO
respectively.  Inventors are those university researchers who patented prior to the DEMO  In columns (1)-(4) the
control group is all DEMO university researchers.  In columns (5)-(8) the control group DEMO the two nearest neighbors
to the inventor based on pre-reform publication rates, conditional on being in the same PhD field.  Observations are
individual DEMO by year.  The sample is limited to university researchers with rare DEMO, though using the entire
sample produces similar results. Standard errors clustered DEMO individual (* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01)DEMO
 
 
 
66 {1g42fwefx}