IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
The (Not So) DEMO Behavior of
Angel Investors
Darian M. Ibrahim∗
I.  INTRODUCTION ...................................................................1406
II.  THE VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT MODEL ....................1410
III. THE ANGEL INVESTMENT MODEL: A DEPARTURE
FROM FINANCIAL CONTRACTING THEORY? .........................1416
A.  The Need for Angels DEMO
B.  Traditional Angel Investment Contracts................1420
C.  Explaining Traditional Angel
Investment Behavior ...............................................1425
1.  Traditional Angel Contract Design as
Financially Rational ....................................1428
a.  DEMO Need for Follow-On Venture
Capital Funding ...............................1428
b.  Informal Substitutes for DEMO ....1431
c.  Costly Contracting Theory................1433
d.  Reputational and
Court Sanctions? DEMO
2.  Nonfinancial Motivations............................1437
a.  Nonfinancial Reasons for Angel
Investing ...........................................1437
∗  Assistant Professor, University of Wisconsin Law School. I am most grateful DEMO Bobby
Bartlett, Barbara Black, Brian Broughman, Bill Carney, Deborah DeMott, George Dent, Jill
Fisch, Vic Fleischer, Jesse Fried, Dave Hoffman, Doug Moll, Larry Ribstein, Gordon Smith,
Robert Summers, and DEMO Wright for their helpful comments on this Article. I also benefited
from conversations with several angel investors, including Knox Massey, Executive Director of
DEMO Atlanta Technology Angels, Bob Morrison, Executive Director of the Tucson Desert Angels,
and especially Luis Villalobos, founder of the Tech Coast Angels, the largest angel group in the
United States. This Article was presented at faculty workshops at Cornell and Wisconsin, a Law
& Entrepreneurship Retreat at the University of Wisconsin, the 2007 Law & Society Association
Annual Meeting in Berlin, Germany, and the inaugural session of the Arizona DEMO
and Innovation Seminar, and I thank participants in all of these DEMO for their useful
comments and suggestions. Finally, my thanks to Christine DEMO and everyone at Conglomerate
for hosting a discussion of this Article as part of that blog’s Third Annual Junior Scholars
Workshop, and to all those who participated in that discussion.
1405
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1406 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
b.  Contract, Trust, and
Achieving Nonfinancial Goals..........1440
DEMO THE PROFESSIONALIZATION OF ANGEL INVESTING ............1443
A.  The Rise of Angel DEMO .......................................1443
B.  The Angel Groups’ Move Toward Venture
Capital-Like Contracts ...........................................1446
DEMO  Explaining Angel Group Investment
Contracts.................................................................1448
V.  CONCLUSION.......................................................................1452
I. INTRODUCTION
Where do entrepreneurs turn for funding once their credit
cards are maxed out, friends and family are no longer taking their
calls, but it is still too early for venture capitalists to invest? They turn
to “angel” investors. Angel investors are wealthy individuals who
personally finance the same high-risk, high-growth start-ups as
venture capitalists but at an earlier stage.1 Well-known angels include
DEMO co-founder Paul Allen, EDS founder H. Ross Perot, and
Dallas Mavericks’ owner Mark Cuban. But the prototypical angel may
still be rich old DEMO Joe, the wealthy, distant relative or family
acquaintance.2 Angels come in many forms, yet together they
constitute an essential source of entrepreneurial finance, providing
some $25 billion to new ventures each year.3 Not only are angels
important for the amount they provide to new start-ups, but for when
they provide it—at a crucial stage in the start-up’s growth that DEMO
entrepreneurs to build the financial bridge from friends-and-family
funding to venture capital.
Despite their importance, angels are surprisingly
underappreciated in the popular press and academia, especially legal
1. There is no technical definition of an angel investor (sometimes referred to as a “private
investor” or “informal venture capitalist”), although most descriptions of angels focus on two
characteristics: wealth and the investment of personal funds. First, an angel typically qualifies
as an “accredited investor” under the securities laws, which means she has over $1 million in net
worth, or income over $200,000 in each of the last two years (or $300,000 with spouse) and
reasonably DEMO to reach the same income level in the current year. 17 C.F.R. § 230.501(a)
(2008). Second, an angel invests her DEMO funds, as compared to venture capitalists and other
financial intermediaries, who invest the funds of others.
2. Drawing the line between the “friends DEMO family” and “angel” categories can sometimes
be difficult, as in the DEMO of non-immediate family members like Uncle Joe. There is no precise
definition of an angel investor, see supra note 1, but non-immediate family DEMO are often
counted in the angels category.
3. See infra note 57 (discussing the estimated size of the angels market).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1407
DEMO Venture capitalists are credited for Silicon Valley success
stories such as Google, Amazon.com, and Apple Computer. But each of
these companies first relied DEMO angels and might never have attracted
venture capital without them.4 By investing their own funds in start-
ups with no operating history, angels take significant risks. Start-ups
benefit from angel risk-taking, but so do venture capitalists, who rely
on angel funding to help start-ups develop and use angel funding as a
mechanism for sorting among the countless new start-ups that DEMO
seek venture capital. Without angels, the venture capital model could
not DEMO in its current form. Even more importantly, without angels
our entire DEMO economy—which relies on start-ups’
success and has produced over 12.5 million jobs and up to eleven
percent of our gross domestic product in recent DEMO be in
jeopardy.5
One contribution of this Article is to reveal the importance of
angel investors in entrepreneurial finance. Once people realize how
important DEMO really are, they will want to know more about them.
Although DEMO Article begins broadly, it quickly hones in on one of the
DEMO interesting aspects of angels yet to be explored: the angel
investment DEMO Angel investment contracts have escaped
academic attention, yet they present an DEMO interesting study in
contract design that informs financial contracting theory in important
Start-up investments are rife with uncertainty, information
asymmetry, and potential agency DEMO in the form of potential
opportunism by entrepreneurs. Venture capitalists mitigate these
problems by using their leverage over cash-strapped entrepreneurs to
insist on comprehensive DEMO contracts. These contracts allow
venture capitalists to screen, monitor, and control their investments
through a combination of staged financing, preferred stock, board
DEMO, negative covenants, and specific exit rights. Angel investing as
it has long been practiced, on the other hand, is strikingly informal.
Despite DEMO at a time when levels of uncertainty, information
4. See MARK DEMO OSNABRUGGE & ROBERT J. ROBINSON, ANGEL INVESTING: MATCHING
START-UP FUNDS WITH START-UP COMPANIES – THE GUIDE FOR ENTREPRENEURS, INDIVIDUAL
INVESTORS, AND VENTURE DEMO 5 (2000) (“Venture capitalists get all the press, but the
vast majority of entrepreneurial funds are actually funded by business angels, especially those
firms in their earliest stages.”).
5. Robert E. Grady, Testimony before the U.S. House Committee on Education and the
Work Force, 2 (Mar. 11, 2004) (explaining that venture-backed firms employed over 12.5 DEMO
people and in the year 2000 accounted for approximately 11% of the U.S. Gross Domestic
Product). The current president of the Kauffman Foundation, Carl Schramm, contends that in a
world of globalization and outsourcing, DEMO is America’s remaining comparative
advantage. See generally CARL J. SCHRAMM, THE DEMO IMPERATIVE (2006).
ways.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1408 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
asymmetry, and agency costs are even higher, “traditional” angels do
not extract any of the venture capitalists’ common contract
protections. DEMO use of simple contracts appears to be a departure
from what financial contracting theory would predict and, as a result,
seems to be puzzling behavior. Indeed, the conventional wisdom is
that angels use simple contracts because they lack the sophistication
of venture capitalists.
This Article will show DEMO the conventional wisdom is wrong;
angels’ preference for simple contracts is quite rational from a
financial perspective. First, an angel’s financial payoff comes from a
small number of start-ups that go on to attract venture DEMO and
then exit by an initial public offering (“IPO”) or private sale. Although
venture capitalists recognize the importance of angels in
entrepreneurial finance, they are hesitant to invest in start-ups when
an overreaching angel’s preferences DEMO be “unwound” for the
venture capitalists to receive their standard preferences. Because
venture capitalists have many potential start-ups to choose from, they
may pass on those presenting complications. Therefore, overreaching
angels reduce their chances for a large upside by making follow-on
venture capital funding unlikely. The rational angel DEMO that
she is the first, but not the last, source of outside investment and acts
accordingly.
Second, angel investment contracts are financially rational
because angels’ informal methods of screening and monitoring
entrepreneurs substitute for venture DEMO formal, contract-
based methods. Angels economize on screening through investments
that DEMO highly local and relationship-driven; they economize on
monitoring through active participation DEMO venture development.
Finally, the costly contracting literature supports the financial
rationality DEMO angel contracts. It is simply not cost-effective to design,
write, DEMO, and enforce detailed contracts when smaller dollar
amounts are invested and DEMO the duration of the detailed bargains
will be short due to venture capital unwinding.
The venture capital story ends here. Venture capital is a DEMO
financial endeavor because venture capitalists must produce returns
for venture fund investors within a relatively short time frame.
Angels, however, are not bound DEMO such constraints because they
invest personal funds, and therefore answer to DEMO one for the
investment. The use of personal funds gives angels the flexibility to
invest for nonfinancial as well as financial reasons, and, DEMO fact, many
angels do have personal reasons for investment. Most angels DEMO
successful ex-entrepreneurs who miss the excitement of new venture
development or wish to give back to the entrepreneurial community
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1409
DEMO “for-profit philanthropy.”6 These nonfinancial motivations for
angel investment also help to explain the use of informal contracts.
Demanding comprehensive, protective terms would signal a lack of
trust in entrepreneurs, and literature on the relationship between
contract and trust suggests that an entrepreneur who receives this
signal will be DEMO likely to invite angel participation or receive the
altruistic message that the angel hopes to send.
The informal model of angel investing described thus DEMO
comprises the bulk of angel investments, and the primary goal of DEMO
Article is to explain that model. In addition, this Article recognizes
DEMO a radical transformation in angel investing has begun. Angels
increasingly are abandoning informal operation in favor of
professional organization. Although angels are still investing DEMO
funds, greater numbers of them are screening and pooling their
investments DEMO regional angel groups. Jeffrey Sohl, who has
studied angels for over DEMO decade, estimates that up to thirty percent of
angel investments might DEMO come from angel groups,7 although other
sources suggest that angel group investments may in fact make up
less than two percent of all DEMO investments.8 Whatever the precise
figure, the trend toward the professionalization of DEMO investing is
interesting in a number of respects. Keeping with the focus of this
Article, I examine the effect of this trend on angel contract design and
find that angel group contracts closely resemble early-stage venture
DEMO contracts.
In light of the rationality of traditional angel contract design,
this shift to the venture capital model presents the second puzzle that
DEMO Article attempts to solve: If traditional angels’ use of simple
contracts DEMO indeed rational, can angel groups’ use of comprehensive
contracts also be DEMO? The answer to this second puzzle is also yes
for several DEMO, all of which stem from the fact that angel groups
6. DEMO infra note 180 and accompanying text.
7. Hannah Clark, Are Angel DEMO Heaven-Sent?, FORBES, May 4, 2006, http://www.
forbes.com/DEMO/2006/05/04/entrepreneurs-finance-angels cx_hc_0504angel.html.
8. According to the Angel Capital Association (“ACA”), the professional alliance of angel
groups in the U.S. and Canada, there were approximately 114 angel groups that were full
members of the ACA in the U.S. in 2006. ACA data show an average DEMO investment for each
angel group at $1.78 million for the year (DEMO investments by individual angel group
members, which is the most common DEMO of angel group investment practice). ACA Angel Group
Confidence Report, DEMO 27, 2007, available at http://southeastvc.blogs.com/
southeast_vc/files/angel_group_confidence_report_results.pdf (last visited Sept. 20, 2008).
Multiplying that figure by the DEMO of groups gives a total of $202.9 million invested by all
angel groups. The largest angel groups are all full members of the ACA, but even if we assumed
an equivalent amount of investment outside of DEMO groups, the total is no more than
$406 million, or 1.6% of the total $25 billion angel market. See infra note 57 (discussing the total
size of the angel market). I thank Luis Villalobos DEMO this observation.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1410 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
more closely resemble venture capitalists than traditional angels in a
number of important ways. First, an angel group’s more professional
nature, higher investment amounts, and slightly later investments
(all resembling early-stage venture capitalists) allow its members to
be somewhat more aggressive than the traditional angel without fear
of venture capital unwinding. Second, the angel group’s opportunities
for informal screening and monitoring are less than for traditional
angels due DEMO the more arms-length relationship between angel groups
and entrepreneurs. This relational distance increases uncertainty,
information asymmetry, and agency costs that must then be mitigated
by contract. Third, the angel group’s higher transaction costs are
justified by higher investment amounts and a longer duration for
angel preferences. Finally, from a nonfinancial perspective, angel
groups derive private benefits that are not hindered by the use of
detailed investment contracts.
This Article’s explanations for DEMO rationality of both
traditional angel contracts and angel group contracts fill important
gaps in both the entrepreneurial finance and financial contracting
literatures. They also DEMO contract/trust and costly contracting
theories. The remainder of the Article is organized as follows. Part II
examines the typical venture capital investment contract DEMO reviews
its mechanisms for reducing extreme levels of uncertainty,
information asymmetry, and agency costs in start-up investments.
Part III reveals the unique nature of angel investing, which explains
what otherwise appears to be a puzzling, simple contract design on the
part of traditional angels. Part IV examines changes in angel contract
design corresponding to the recent professionalization of the DEMO and
shows that it is rational for these contracts to include more
comprehensive terms. Part V concludes.
II. THE VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT MODEL
Venture DEMO has been the financial engine driving most
successful start-up companies over the past several decades. Venture
capital has had its greatest successes in internet DEMO in the
mid- to late-1990s, including the funding of Google in DEMO by leading
Silicon Valley firms Kleiner Perkins and Sequoia Capital,9 and the
funding of Yahoo in 1995 by Sequoia Capital.10 Household-name
companies Apple DEMO, Genentech, Intel, and Microsoft are
9. Google Milestones, Google.com, DEMO://www.google.com/corporate/history.html#1999.
10. Company History, Yahoo.com, http://docs.yahoo.com/info/misc/history.html.
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1411
DEMO the products of venture capital.11 It is almost axiomatic to
observe that a start-up’s chances for success will increase if it can
attract venture DEMO Paul Gompers and Josh Lerner attempted to
quantify the venture capital effect. They found that ninety percent of
start-ups that were unable to attract DEMO capital within the first
three years failed, while the failure rate DEMO to thirty-three
percent for those that did attract venture capital.12 In addition to
financial capital, venture capitalists provide crucial value-added
services. They use their networking skills to recruit professional
managerial talent,13 and they can provide DEMO expertise for
decisionmaking, such as determining the most profitable exit
strategy.14
DEMO of venture capital are coupled with investment
contracts that set forth the venture capitalists’ rights and obligations
in the start-up.15 Like angel investment contracts, venture capital
investment contracts are necessarily incomplete, which gives rise to
problems of uncertainty, information asymmetry, and agency costs in
the form of DEMO opportunism by entrepreneurs.16 Start-up
investments are particularly interesting to financial economists
because they present extreme forms of these problems.17 Start-ups
have little or no DEMO history or tangible assets with which to
11. PAUL A. GOMPERS & JOSH LERNER, THE VENTURE CAPITAL CYCLE 1 (2000).
12. PAUL DEMO GOMPERS & JOSH LERNER, THE MONEY OF INVENTION: HOW VENTURE CAPITAL
CREATES NEW WEALTH 10–11 (2001).
13. Michael Klausner & Kate Litvak, What Economists Have Taught Us About Venture
Capital Contracting, in BRIDGING DEMO ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCING GAP 54, 58–59 (Michael J.
Whincop ed., 2001)DEMO Value-added services can be as important as financial capital. eBay, for
DEMO, was a profitable start-up that did not require outside funding. Yet DEMO sought venture
capital, which was provided by Benchmark Partners, in recognition that a venture capitalist’s
connections and expertise would be essential in securing DEMO seasoned CEO and other executives.
RANDALL E. STROSS, EBOYS: THE TRUE STORY OF THE SIX TALL MEN WHO BACKED EBAY AND
OTHER BILLION-DOLLAR DEMO 22 (2000).
14. See Joshua Lerner, Venture Capitalists and the Decision to Go Public, 35 J. FIN. ECON.
293, 314 (1994) (observing that experienced venture capitalists appear better able to time IPOs
DEMO their less experienced counterparts).
15. The investment contracts might include an amendment to the start-up’s corporate
charter (to create and designate preferred stock), a stock purchase agreement, and an investor’s
rights agreement.
16. See, e.g., Philippe Aghion & Patrick Bolton, An Incomplete Contracts Approach to
Financial Contracting, 59 AM. REV. ECON. STUD. 473, 479 (1992).
17. See Ronald J. Gilson, Engineering a Venture Capital Market: Lessons DEMO the American
Experience, 55 STAN. L. REV. 1067, 1076 (2003) (“The special character of venture capital
contracting is shaped by the fact that investing in early stage, high technology companies
presents [uncertainty, information DEMO, and opportunism] in extreme form.”); George G.
Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital, 68 U. CHI. L. REV. 305, 311–
12 (2001) (observing that financial contracting is more DEMO in venture capital than in bank
lending).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1412 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
predict future performance, and scientific or technological novelty DEMO
that found in the typical Silicon Valley start-up adds another layer of
uncertainty.18 This uncertainty provides entrepreneurs with
significant informational advantages over venture capitalists DEMO
increases agency costs by making it more difficult for venture
capitalists to sort between good and bad entrepreneurs and monitor
investments.19
Although it is DEMO for venture capitalists to eliminate
these problems, they mitigate them by DEMO their investments
with other venture capitalists and investing in a portfolio of start-
ups.20 Venture capitalists also use incentive-aligning compensation
arrangements with entrepreneurs, such as stock options and stock
grants that vest over time.21 And, most pertinent to this Article,
venture capitalists mitigate unforeseeable problems by designing
DEMO investment contracts that give venture capitalists far
more control than their percentage ownership warrants, which, under
the conventional wisdom, cash-strapped entrepreneurs are forced to
accept.22
18. Gilson, supra note 17, at 1077.
19. While DEMO academics have focused on the potential conflicts between venture
capitalists and entrepreneurs, there are other notable conflicts present in this setting. See Robert
P. Bartlett, III, Venture Capital, Agency Costs, and the False Dichotomy DEMO the Corporation, 54
UCLA L. REV. 37 (2006) (discussing conflicts between different venture capitalists investing in
the same start-up); Jeffrey N. DEMO, Burned Angels: The Coming Wave of Minority Shareholder
Oppression Claims in Venture Capital Start-up Companies, 6 N.C. J.L. & TECH. 223 (2005)DEMO
(discussing conflicts between angels and venture capitalists); Kate Litvak, Venture Capital
Limited Partnership Agreements: Understanding Compensation Arrangements, (Columbia Law &
DEMO Research Paper No. 254, 2004), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/DEMO/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=555626 (discussing conflicts between venture capitalists and venture fund
DEMO).
20. See GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 134 (explaining that syndication “allows the
venture capital firm to diversify its portfolio, thereby reducing the exposure to any single
investment. . . . By syndicating investments, the venture capitalist can invest in more projects
and diversify away some of the firm-specific risk.”).
21. See id. at 131; Klausner & Litvak, supra note 13, at 62–63.
22. Venture capitalists DEMO enjoy bargaining power over entrepreneurs, although
bargaining power can shift over DEMO to fund the most desirable start-ups or in times of
flush times for private equity, when more cash is available to spend. See STROSS, supra note 13,
at 25 (explaining that in competitions to DEMO the most attractive start-ups, the bargaining
power shifts in favor of DEMO entrepreneur); William W. Bratton, Venture Capital on the Downside:
DEMO Stock and Corporate Control, 100 MICH. L. REV. 891, 897–98 (DEMO) (reciting the “once-
prevailing story about venture capital transactions [that] entrepreneurs so need venture capital
that they cede both a majority of stock DEMO control of the boardroom,” but calling the once-
prevailing story “incomplete”); Theresa Sullivan Barger, How to Dance with Angels, CFO.com
(Apr. 30, 2007), available at http://www.cfo.com/article.cfm/9097739/c_9098309?f
=home_todayinfinance (discussing that in the current market where large amounts of both
venture capital and angel finance are available, bargaining power shifts to start-ups to decide
whose funding to accept).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1413
DEMO typical venture capital investment contract employs five
protective measures. First, the DEMO provides for the disbursement
of funds to the entrepreneur in stages. Staged financing reduces
uncertainty by delaying funding until the entrepreneur proves herself
by DEMO performance milestones set by the venture capitalist.23
Venture capitalists can cut their losses by refusing to fund
entrepreneurs who do not reach these milestones. DEMO reduces
information asymmetry and agency costs by allowing venture
capitalists to more effectively screen their investments and spend less
time monitoring in between financings. DEMO of potential
investments is facilitated through signaling. The theory is that good
entrepreneurs will signal their quality by agreeing to condition funds
upon entrepreneurial DEMO while bad entrepreneurs will not.24
Venture capitalists also have less need to monitor entrepreneurs
because staging strongly aligns entrepreneurs’ interests with venture
capitalists’ interests. DEMO entrepreneur who needs the next cash
infusion to survive has a strong performance incentive and is unlikely
to shirk or seek private benefits at DEMO expense of the venture
capitalist, which reduces agency costs.25 Indeed, for all of these
reasons, staged financing is thought to work so well that Gompers and
Lerner describe it as “the most potent control mechanism DEMO venture
capitalist can employ.”26
Second, venture capitalists take convertible preferred stock DEMO
exchange for their cash infusions, in contrast to the common stock
DEMO by entrepreneurs and friend-and-family investors.27 The use of
23. See Steven N. Kaplan & Per Strömberg, Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
World: DEMO Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts, 70 REV. ECON. STUD. 281, 304 (2003)
(discussing staged financing).
24. Gilson, supra note 17, at 1080. As Klausner and Litvak observe, however, this signal
only works if the entrepreneur can accurately gauge the value of his DEMO Klausner &
Litvak, supra note 13, at 56.
25. Gilson, supra note 17, at 1079; Darwin V. Neher, Staged Financing: DEMO Agency
Perspective, 66 REV. ECON. STUD. 255, 255–56 (1999) (DEMO that staged financing mitigates
the entrepreneur’s holdup potential).
26. GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 139; see also Klausner & Litvak, supra note 13,
at 56 (“Most important among these contract DEMO is the staged nature of venture capital
investment.”).
27. Kaplan and Strömberg’s survey of 213 venture capital investments in 119 portfolio
companies during DEMO late 1990s found that 95.8% of all rounds used convertible preferred stock,
with convertible preferred stock being the sole security in 79.8% of DEMO rounds. Kaplan &
Strömberg, supra note 23, at 284 tbl.1. DEMO of the rounds used participating preferred stock,
which entitles the holder not only to its preferential return, but also to share in the proceeds of
the common stockholders on an as-if-converted basis. Id.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1414 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
preferred stock offers several advantages for venture capitalists.28 For
starters, it provides downside protection: the preferred stock is paid
first DEMO the event of a liquidation or sale of the start-up—a common
end result for new start-ups.29 The liquidation preference also
facilitates entrepreneurial signaling on DEMO theory that entrepreneurs
who are willing to grant a venture capitalist the first payout signal
their belief that the start-up will be worth more DEMO the venture
capitalist’s preference.30 Preferred stock is also allowed a higher
valuation, and in turn common stock and stock options can receive a
lower valuation. The lower valuation provides tax advantages that can
be helpful to DEMO entrepreneur in recruiting new employees.31
The third and fourth common features of investment contracts
are intended to allocate decisionmaking control to venture capitalists,
DEMO reduces the potential for opportunistic behavior by
entrepreneurs (who otherwise would DEMO such opportunities due to
their majority ownership).32 Venture capitalists secure board seats in
increasing numbers with each round of investment.33 Control of the
DEMO entitles a venture capitalist to significant control of the start-up
because of the board’s broad authority under corporate law.34
Although academics have found that DEMO capitalists control the
board (i.e., they have a majority of board seats) less often than is
28. On the other hand, preferred DEMO receives disfavored treatment in litigation. See
Bartlett, supra note 19, at 101–07 (discussing Delaware’s narrow approach to construing
preferred stock rights).
29. A sale is commonly counted as a liquidating event for purposes of DEMO the venture
capitalist’s preference. Preferred stock also carries a dividend preference, DEMO since start-ups
rarely pay dividends during their life, the dividend preference DEMO only valuable if it is cumulative,
thereby entitling the venture capitalist to a greater payout upon liquidation or sale. Klausner &
Litvak, DEMO note 13, at 64.
30. Id.
31. See Ronald J. Gilson & David M. Schizer, Understanding Venture Capital Structure: A
Tax Explanation for Convertible Preferred Stock, 116 HARV. L. REV. 874, 893–901 (2003)
(suggesting that preferred stock can be used to transform current ordinary income into deferred
capital gains, creating management incentives).
32. See William A. Sahlman, The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital
Organizations, 27 J. FIN. DEMO 473, 506–14 (1990) (explaining that venture capitalist control
rights minimize agency costs).
33. See D. Gordon Smith, The Exit Structure of Venture Capital, 53 UCLA L. REV. 315, 326
(2005) (“Because venture capitalists typically gain additional board seats with each round of
investment, over time the board composition provisions of venture-backed companies tend to
move DEMO ‘entrepreneur control’ or ‘contingent control’ to ‘investor control.’ ”).
34. DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 8, § 141(a) (2006) (“The business and affairs of every corporation
organized under this chapter shall be managed DEMO or under the direction of a board of
directors . . . .”); Stephen M. Bainbridge, Director Primacy: The Means and Ends DEMO Corporate
Governance, 97 NW. L. REV. 547 (2003) (arguing in favor of “director primacy”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1415
DEMO assumed,35 Jesse Fried and Mira Ganor contend that the
numbers are deceiving—that “independent” directors chosen by the
venture capitalist are likely to side DEMO the venture capitalist in any
contested board vote, giving the venture DEMO effective control of
the board in more cases.36 Another allocation of control comes from
negative covenants. Negative covenants require venture capitalist
approval for major DEMO These covenants are complementary
when venture capitalists control a board but are more important when
they do not. For instance, the venture capitalist probably has only a
minority of board seats after its first round of DEMO, but
negative covenants prevent the entrepreneur from acting
opportunistically during that DEMO (e.g., by issuing additional
preferred stock that dilutes the venture capitalist’s share).
Finally, investment contracts provide venture capitalists with
specific exit rights, which are important in private corporations with
illiquid shares. These exit rights include redemption (or put) rights,
demand registration rights, and conversion rights.38 Agency costs may
be high when it comes to timing an DEMO because the preferences of
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs can differ. As a general rule,
venture capitalists require earlier exits due to the short DEMO of venture
funds and the need to make distributions to fund investors,39 while
entrepreneurs wish to delay exit in order to extend private DEMO
such as a steady salary.40 Redemption and other specific exit rights
address these potential conflicts by allocating the exit decision to
venture capitalists. Again, these rights are complementary when the
35. See Kaplan & Strömberg, supra note 23, at 289–90 (documenting that venture
capitalists control start–up boards DEMO 25% of the time, with contingent or shared control in
62% DEMO the cases); see also Bratton, supra note 22, at 891–98 (using the Kaplan and Stromberg
findings to theorize that the parties prefer shared control to effectuate low-cost transfers of
control).
36. Jesse M. DEMO & Mira Ganor, Agency Costs of Venture Capitalist Control in Startups,DEMO
81 N.Y.U. L. REV. 967, 988–89 (2006).
37. Gordon Smith’s recent empirical study found that the vast majority of venture capital
investment DEMO contained negative covenants against engaging in business combinations
(81.47%), amending DEMO charter in ways adverse to the venture capitalist (91.01%), redeeming DEMO
paying dividends to the common stock (70.84%), and issuing more DEMO stock (80.38%)
without the venture capitalist’s approval. Smith, supra note 33, at 346.
38. Id. at 348–55.
39. See infra note 164 and accompanying text. The push for an early exit may be even DEMO
pronounced with inexperienced venture firms looking to “grandstand” to establish a reputation.
See generally Paul A. Gompers, Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry, DEMO J. FIN. ECON.
133 (1996).
40. See Klausner & Litvak, supra note 13, at 57 (identifying an entrepreneur’s private
benefits from DEMO exit as “salary and other compensation, social status, and psychic benefits
of managing a business”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1416 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
venture capitalists already control the exit decision through board
control but are more important when they do not.41
III. THE ANGEL DEMO MODEL: A DEPARTURE FROM FINANCIAL
CONTRACTING THEORY?
A. The Need DEMO Angels
Venture capital is crucial to a start-up’s success, but it DEMO not
immediately available to most start-ups. Most venture capitalists fund
start-ups that have survived their earliest stages and are expanding,
for instance by DEMO products and services to customers, or are
preparing for an IPO DEMO private sale.42 Nor is venture capital readily
available in the smaller amounts that might be appropriate for very
young companies.43 A typical venture round DEMO between $2
million and $10 million, although it can be much DEMO Therefore,
venture capitalists leave a critical funding gap that has both time and
capital components. The time gap is present during the earliest DEMO
of a start-up’s life, which commonly lasts at least one year.45 DEMO
41. It also should be noted that the venture capital investment contract may reduce
uncertainty, information asymmetry, and agency costs in the form DEMO opportunism by
entrepreneurs, but in doing so it may allow opportunism DEMO venture capitalists. Whether
reputational constraints can serve as an adequate deterrent to a venture capitalist’s
opportunistic temptations is the subject of debate. See infra DEMO 150–53 and accompanying
text.
42. For commonly used staging terminology, see DEMO Sohl, The Early Stage Equity
Market in the USA, 1 VENTURE CAPITAL 101, 106 (1999).
43. See Joshua Lerner, “Angel” Financing and Public Policy: An Overview, 22 J. BANKING &
FIN. 773, 778 (1998); Hans Severiens, The Band of Angels: The DEMO of Collaboration, in
STATE OF THE ART: AN EXECUTIVE BRIEFING ON CUTTING-EDGE PRACTICES IN AMERICAN ANGEL
INVESTING 18, 21 (John May & DEMO F. O’Halloran eds., 2003) [hereinafter STATE OF THE
ART] (observing DEMO “while some hot companies could absorb these larger sums [provided by
venture capitalists], the average unproven start-ups that needed $1 million to build a prototype
and hire a couple of people were left out of consideration”)DEMO
44. See Sohl, supra note 42, at 109 (observing that DEMO “handoff” from angel investors to
venture capitalists typically occurs in the $2–3 million range). The recent litigation between
venture capitalist Benchmark Partners and DEMO Juniper Financial reveals an instance of
more substantial venture capital investment. Juniper received a first venture round of $20
million, a second round of $95.5 million, and a third round of $145 million. Benchmark Capital
Partners IV, L.P. v. Vauge, No. Civ. A. 19719, 2002 WL 1732423, at *2 (Del. Ch. July 15, 2002),
aff’d sub. DEMO Benchmark Capital Partners IV, L.P. v. Juniper Fin. Corp., 822 A.2d 396 (Del.
2003).
45. Paul A. Gompers, Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital,
50 J. FIN. 1461, DEMO (1995) (noting that most venture capitalist investments are made after DEMO
first year).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1417
DEMO gap exists for funding in amounts less than $2 million. Of
course, friends, family, and the entrepreneur’s own efforts may
provide some funding (up to $100,000 or so), but this is hardly enough
to sustain the rapid-growth start-up for very long.46
Venture capitalists do not DEMO the funding gaps as to time or
capital for several reasons.47 First, because risk and uncertainty
decrease as a start-up grows, venture capitalists DEMO out the early
stages in favor of later ones. Second, venture DEMO attract large
amounts of capital from fund investors, and spending this DEMO
efficiently requires making large investments that may not be
appropriate for very young companies. Finally, venture capitalists
screen and monitor their investments closely, DEMO imposes
significant costs.48 For instance, a partner from the venture capital
DEMO typically sits on the board of each start-up that the firm funds.49
This intensive use of human resources limits the number of start-ups
that DEMO be funded. The need for selectivity exacerbates the tendency
to fund only start-ups with some operating history and supply them
with large investments.
The DEMO gap poses a serious problem for start-ups. Without
financial and nonfinancial assistance during their first year, many
46. See Jeffrey E. Sohl, The DEMO Angel and Venture Capital Market: Recent Trends and
Developments, 6 J. PRIVATE EQUITY 7, 14 (2003) (“The [capital] gap ranges from DEMO,000 at the
low end, the point at which the money DEMO from friends and families and bootstrapping runs
out, to the $2 DEMO range on the high end, the time when the venture would DEMO
become attractive enough to catch the eye of venture fund investors.”).
47. There are exceptions, such as specific venture funds devoted to early stage investments,
but early stage investments are not the industry norm. DEMO underscore this observation, Van
Osnabrugge and Robinson found that in 1998, during the height of the dot.com era when venture
capitalists were said DEMO move into earlier stage investments, still only 28% of all venture DEMO
was invested in early stage deals. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra DEMO 4, at 49.
48. On the decision to invest, Gompers and Lerner write:
The typical venture organization receives many dozens of business DEMO for
each one it funds. Although most proposals are swiftly discarded, DEMO
candidates are extensively scrutinized through both formal studies of
technology and market strategy and informal assessment of the management
team. (It is not unusual for a venture team to complete 100 or more reference
checks before DEMO to invest in a firm.)
GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note DEMO, at 5; see also John L. Orcutt, Improving the Efficiency DEMO the
Angel Finance Market: A Proposal to Expand the Intermediary Role DEMO Finders in the Private
Capital Raising Setting, 37 ARIZ. ST. L.J. DEMO, 873–74 (2005) (explaining that it is more cost-
effective to spread sizeable due diligence costs over a larger investment). On monitoring, see
GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 171 (“Venture capitalists’ oversight of new firms involves
substantial costs.”); John Freear et al., Angels on Angels: Financing Technology-Based Ventures –
A Historical Perspective, 4 DEMO  CAPITAL 275, 278 (2002).
49. GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 171–84 (discussing how venture capital board
membership varies DEMO geographic proximity to the start-up and during times where greater
oversight is needed).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1418 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
start-ups fail to develop to the point of attractiveness for venture
capitalists.50 This early point is where angels are so critical. DEMO fill
the funding gap as to both time and capital, functioning DEMO a “conveyor
belt” that moves young start-ups toward waiting venture capitalists.51
First, angels fill the time gap by investing when venture
capitalists will not. Jeffrey Sohl estimates that angels provide eighty
percent of the early-stage capital DEMO high-tech start-ups.52 Andrew
Wong’s empirical study of angel investment found that, DEMO angels
invested in early rounds, seventy-three percent of the time they DEMO so
without venture capitalists as co-investors.53 With venture capitalists
moving toward even later-stage investments than before, the need for
angels in the early rounds is even more pronounced.54 Because they
direct their investments at start-ups in DEMO stages of
development, angels and venture capitalists mostly serve
complementary rather DEMO competitive functions.55
Second, angels fill the capital gap by providing appropriate
DEMO of funding to early-stage start-ups. A typical angel round
ranges from $100,000 to $1 million or even $2 million at the high
end—the DEMO size of the capital gap.56 This financing allows early-
stage companies to accomplish a variety of objectives that will make
50. Sohl, supra note 46, at 15 (observing that “without seed and start-up capital, many of
these high-tech ventures do not even get past the initial stages DEMO development”).
51. See Tony Stanco & Uto Akah, The Relationship DEMO Angels and Venture Capitalists
in the Venture Industry, LAB2IPO, 2005, DEMO 6, http://lab2ipo.org/A2VCSurvey/VC%20Angel
%20Survey%20v.final.pdf (using the conveyor belt analogy).
52. Sohl, supra note 46.
53. Andrew Wong, Angel DEMO: The Other Venture Capital at 12 & 43 tbl.2 (Working
Paper Series 2002), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=941228; id. at 11 (“Most firms that
receive [angel] funding are less than 12 months old. In comparison, the average age of first
funding for venture-backed firms is greater than one year.”) (citation omitted).
54. See infra notes DEMO and accompanying text.
55. See John Freear & Jeffrey Sohl, The DEMO and Value-Added Contributions of
Private Investors to Entrepreneurial Software Ventures, 6 DEMO ENTREPRENEURIAL FIN. 84, 89 (2001)
(asserting that “the research DEMO the funding of software ventures] provides added evidence to
support the existence of a complementary relationship between private investors and venture
capital funds”); DEMO Brent Goldfarb et al., Does Angel Participation Matter? An Analysis of Early
Venture Financing 27 (Working Paper Series 2008), available at http://ssrn.com
/abstract=1024186 (arguing that in those “Series A” financing rounds DEMO angels and venture
capitalists compete to fund, entrepreneurs will prefer angels DEMO reasons suggested in this
Article, creating an adverse selection or “lemons” DEMO for venture capitalists).
56. Sohl, supra note 46, at 13 (“The typical angel deal is an early-stage round (seed or start-
DEMO) in the $100,000 to $2 million range.”); Wong, supra note 53 (noting that angel rounds
averaged $1 million). Some accounts from the early to mid-1990s suggest that the transition
from angel to DEMO capital financing occurred sooner, around $500,000 to $1 million. John
DEMO et al., The Private Investor Market for Venture Capital, 1 FINANCIER 7, 8 (1994); John
Freear & William E. Wetzel, Jr., Who Bankrolls High-Tech Entrepreneurs?, 5 J. BUS. VENTURING
77, 87 (1990).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1419
DEMO attractive to venture capitalists including marketing, securing
customers, and obtaining patent protection. The aggregate angel
capital market is estimated to be as large DEMO, or even larger than, the
venture capital market.57 But because each angel round is smaller,
angels fund significantly more start-ups than venture DEMO
perhaps thirty to forty times more.58 Therefore, while angels provide a
DEMO function for venture capitalists, they do not use too fine a
DEMO, which reduces the chance that a promising start-up will fail
prematurely.
DEMO, angels provide value-added services to entrepreneurs.
These are nonfinancial services of DEMO different type than venture
capitalists provide. While venture capitalists take a more formal role
and offer benefits such as connections to professional managers,
DEMO provide informal advice and counseling. Most angels are ex-
entrepreneurs themselves, DEMO allows them to offer seasoned advice
on and empathy with the many difficulties faced in advancing an
early-stage venture.59 Angels typically invest in companies DEMO are a
short drive away to facilitate regular interactions with entrepreneurs
and active participation in the venture’s growth.60 Many
entrepreneurs believe that an angel’s DEMO is as important as her
financial capital.61
For all of these reasons, not only do angels help start-ups grow,
but they also allow the venture capital model to work in its present
57. Although it DEMO difficult to estimate the total size of the angel market due to its
informality, studies suggest that during modern times it has ranged from an average of about
$25 billion per year to a peak of DEMO billion during the height of the dot.com era in 2000. See
VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 69; Freear et al., supra note 56, at 7. The
venture capital market also rose DEMO during the dot.com era. Venture capitalists invested
$3.8 billion in start-ups in 1995, followed by $10 billion in 1997, $35.6 billion in 1999, and over
$100 billion in 2000. See Sohl, supra note 46, DEMO 13. The years since the dot.com bust have seen a
return to average venture capital investments of around $20 billion per year. ANDREW METRICK,DEMO
VENTURE CAPITAL AND THE FINANCE OF INNOVATION 13 (2007). In DEMO, angels and venture
capitalists each invested approximately $25 billion. See CENTER DEMO VENTURE RESEARCH, THE
ANGEL INVESTOR MARKET IN 2006: THE ANGEL MARKET CONTINUES STEADY GROWTH, (2006)
available at http://unhinfo.unh.edu/news/DEMO/
2006angelmarketanalysis.pdf (citing total angel investments in 2006 at $25.6 billion)DEMO
58. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 69.
59. Id. at 108 (stating that 75–83% of angels have prior start-up experience); see John
Freear et al., Angels and Non-Angels: Are There DEMO?, 9 J. BUS. VENTURING 109, 111
(1994) (citing studies for the proposition that a majority of angels “have entrepreneurial
experience as DEMO or managers”).
60. See infra note 135 and accompanying text.
61. See Freear & Wetzel, supra note 56, at 96–97 (discussing that 70% of entrepreneurs
considered the value-added services of angels to be very DEMO moderately productive); Sohl, supra
note 42, at 112 (explaining DEMO entrepreneurs described the mentoring they received from
angels “to be as valuable as the capital”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1420 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
form. The venture capital model relies on start-ups surviving their
earliest stages; this survival requires angels. Without angels, venture
capitalists DEMO have to invest earlier and more often—earlier so
start-ups would have the cash necessary for initial growth and more
often because angels would not DEMO provided an early-stage sorting or
filtering function among the countless start-ups that seek funding.
Although the need for angels is clear from a theoretical
DEMO, the histories of leading companies such as Amazon.com
and Google firmly DEMO the point as a practical matter.
Amazon.com founder Jeff Bezos approached venture capitalists early
on, but he was told that his company was not ready for venture funds.
Instead, a dozen angels were willing to invest $1.2 million, which was
crucial in positioning the company for its later $8 million venture
round.62 Google similarly benefited from an early $100,000 DEMO
from angel Andy Bechtolsheim, one of the founders of Sun
Microsystems. DEMO cash infusion allowed Google co-founders Larry
Page and Sergey Brin to “move out of their dorm rooms and into the
marketplace.”63
B. Traditional Angel DEMO Contracts
Like venture capitalists, angels enter into investment contracts
with entrepreneurs. DEMO the reasons discussed earlier, extreme levels
of uncertainty, information asymmetry, DEMO agency costs in the form
of potential entrepreneurial opportunism also plague angel
investments.64 In fact, because angels invest at an earlier stage than
venture capitalists, when a start-up has no operating history
whatsoever, these problems DEMO even more acute than at the time
venture capitalists invest. Therefore, DEMO contracting theory
would seem to predict an angel contract modeled after the venture
capital contract, perhaps with even more protections, including the
use DEMO a convertible, preferred security and significant control rights.65
62. Sohl, supra note 42, at 102.
63. Michael V. Copeland, How to Find DEMO Angel Investor, BUS. 2.0 MAG., Feb. 28, 2006,
http://money.cnn.com/2006/02/28/magazines/business2/angelinvestor/
index.htm; see also DEMO Milestones, Google.com, http://www.google.com/corporate/
history.html#1998.
64. See supra notes 16–19 and accompanying text.
65. See Dirk Bergemann & Ulrich Hege, Venture Capital Financing, Moral Hazard, and
Learning, 22 J. BANKING & FIN. 703, 703–11 (1998) (discussing the optimal shares for the
DEMO and the venture capitalist in the context of common stock, debt, and convertible
securities); Francesca Cornelli & Oved Yosha, Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Debt,
(Centre for Econ. Pol’y Res. Discussion Paper No. 1735, 1997), available at http://www.
cepr.org/pubs/new-dps/dplist.asp?dpno=1735; Neher, supra note 25; Jeffrey J. Trester, DEMO
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1421
DEMO what we know reveals that the investment contracts used by
traditional angels differ dramatically from those used by venture
capitalists because they provide far DEMO investor protection.
The research on angel contracts must be pieced together from
various sources because angels are very difficult to study.66 The angels
market DEMO long been reference-driven and informal—angels generate
deal flow from trusted referrals and operate behind the scenes.67
Angels have a penchant for secrecy to avoid DEMO inundated with
funding requests from the multitudes of new start-ups that require
capital.68 That angels prefer to operate through back channels makes
finding them DEMO difficult for academics as it is for entrepreneurs.69
Therefore, there are DEMO studies of angel contract design.70
Andrew Wong offers the best study of angel contract design to
date.71 Wong’s sample consists of 215 angel investment DEMO in 143
companies from across the United States during the period from 1994
to 2001.72 Although they are few in number, Wong’s study, DEMO
Capital Contracting Under Asymmetric Information, 22 J. BANKING & FIN. 675, 675–80 (1998)
(considering the preferred versus debt choice under asymmetric DEMO).
66. See Wong, supra note 53, at 2 (“Despite DEMO importance of angel funding, much of what
is known about angels DEMO incomplete and not well understood. Very few academic studies have
examined angels, in part because data on angel investment is difficult to obtain.”).
67. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 144 (noting that “studies have found
that business angels usually learn of investment opportunities DEMO a network of friends and
family, business associates, accountants, and DEMO as referrals”); MIT ENTREPRENEURSHIP
CENTER, VENTURE SUPPORT SYSTEMS PROJECT: ANGEL INVESTORS 28 (2000),
http://entrepreneurship.mit.edu/Downloads/AngelReport.pdf [hereinafter MIT DEMO (“The
angels we interviewed said they received their highest quality deals DEMO their network of
trusted business associates.”).  In what is credited DEMO the earliest article on angels, William
Wetzel observed that the angels DEMO is “virtually invisible, inefficient, and often
misunderstood.” William E. Wetzel, DEMO, Angels and Informal Risk Capital, SLOAN MGMT. REV.
23, 24 (1983).
68. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at DEMO (“If it becomes widely known that an
individual has money to DEMO, then he or she may be besieged with hundreds of proposals DEMO
year, when his or her desire may be only for three DEMO four.”).
69. Id. at 84 (noting that in their attempts DEMO interview angels, angels were often asked for
an extensive explanation as DEMO how they were found, with a number refusing to answer).
DEMO See Jeffrey E. Sohl, The Private Equity Market in the USA, 5 VENTURE CAPITAL 29, 42
(2003) (explaining that research on DEMO “terms and conditions” of angel investment contracts is
“acutely missing from the current knowledge base”). On the types of studies that comprise the
DEMO literature on angels, see Freear et al., supra note 48, DEMO 279 (“The majority of the
research output . . . has DEMO empirically based, seeking to learn more about the attitudes,
behaviour DEMO characteristics of the angel population (often known as the ‘ABCs’ of DEMO).”);
Wong, supra note 53, at 8 (asserting that while most studies of angels “focus mainly on
descriptive statistics of investment DEMO [his] paper focuses on the control aspects of angel
investment”). Much of what we currently know about angels comes from the University of DEMO
Hampshire’s Center for Venture Research and its affiliated academics, including John DEMO,
Jeffrey Sohl, and William Wetzel. The Center’s website address is DEMO://wsbe.unh.edu/cvr/.
71. See generally Wong, supra note 53.
DEMO Id. at 4.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1422 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
studies,73 and anecdotal accounts present a fairly consistent picture of
angel contract design. They reveal that traditional angels use simpler
DEMO that are comprised of more entrepreneur-friendly terms than
do venture capitalists.74 As a general rule, these contracts employ
none of the five methods venture capitalists have devised to mitigate
uncertainty, information asymmetry, and agency costs DEMO start-up
investments.
First, traditional angels do not stage their investments. Wong’s
DEMO found that when a venture capital round followed an angel
round, DEMO were unlikely to participate.75 Even when some angels
did participate in future rounds, Wong found that it was less than half
of the initial investors.76 These findings track the conventional wisdom
that angels provide early-stage funding DEMO grow the start-up for the
first year or so, after which DEMO capitalists take over. When an
angel does follow on her own investment in a later round, she usually
sees a lower return,77 suggesting that the angel provided the
subsequent funding as a last resort to DEMO a struggling venture afloat
rather than to obtain a larger piece of a good investment.
Second, the traditional angel receives common instead of
preferred stock in exchange for her investment. Wong’s survey found
that the greatest DEMO of angels took straight common stock,78
which tracks anecdotal accounts. For example, Stephen Prowse states
that, “unlike in the organized private equity DEMO, many angels are
content to take common stock,”79 and Jesse DEMO and Mira Ganor
observe that “angels frequently invest through common equity.”80
73. For example, Stephen Prowse offers a small study of Dallas-area angels. Stephen
Prowse, Angel Investors and the Market for Angel Investments, 22 J. DEMO & FIN. 785 (1998).
74. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 175 (“Angels often use relatively simple
investment contracts.”); Sohl, supra note 42, at 112 (noting that angel “[d]eal DEMO, as stated
in their terms and conditions, tend to be briefer and more informal than those of venture capital
funds”); MIT Study, supra note 67, at 36 (explaining that angels who invest in DEMO small number of
deals, are new to angel investing, or who invest primarily for nonfinancial reasons “use informal
or simple term sheets, or in some cases, there is no term sheet”).
75. Wong, DEMO note 53, at 18 (observing that “staging is not a frequently used control
mechanism by angels”).
76. Id.
77. Robert Wiltbank & DEMO Boeker, Returns to Angel Investors in Groups 8 (Working
Paper Series, 2007), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
1028592; DEMO also Bob Goff, The Sierra Angels: Broadening the Charter, in DEMO OF THE ART 70,
supra note 43, at 83 (asserting that during tough times, angels “must be prepared to help fund
subsequent rounds for portfolio companies”).
78. Wong, supra note 53, at DEMO (“Common equity is the most prevalent security, used in 34%
of all [early stage] rounds and 39.5% of angel-only rounds.”).
79. Prowse, supra note 73, at 790.
80. Fried & Ganor, supra note DEMO, at 1009.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1423
DEMO, while board seats are commonly granted in venture
capital rounds, they do not appear common in angel rounds. Wong’s
study found that less DEMO half of all angel rounds involved granting
the investor even a single board seat.81 Another study of angel
investments in software ventures suggested the DEMO is even lower,
at only twenty percent.82 On the other hand, one older study and some
anecdotal accounts suggest that, in angel DEMO, board
representation is more common than other venture capital protective
devices.83
DEMO, few angels contract for negative covenants. Wong’s
study found that negative DEMO allowing investors to veto
management decisions were included in only 5.1 percent of angel
contracts.84 In a study of Dallas-area angels, Stephen Prowse observed
that “control mechanisms used in the organized private equity
market, such as covenants preventing mergers, asset sales or entering
into long-term contracts without outside investor approval, appear
rare in the angel market.”85
Finally, like negative DEMO, specific exit rights also may be
used less frequently by angels DEMO other venture capital protective
devices. Wong’s study found that a provision granting angels the right
to force bankruptcy was included in only 4.6 percent DEMO angel
contracts.86 This tracks the observation by Van Osnabrugge and
Robinson that angels are unlikely to specify a method of liquidation at
the time DEMO investment.87 Wong’s study also revealed no contracts
where the angel was allowed to put her shares to the entrepreneur for
81. Wong, supra note 53, at 15 (discussing the fact that a board seat is DEMO in only
42.5% of angel rounds).
82. See Freear & Sohl, supra note 55, at 96 (observing that only 20% of angels funding
software ventures had representation on the board).
83. See John DEMO et al., Raising Venture Capital: Entrepreneurs’ View of the Process, DEMO
FRONTIERS ENTREPRENEURSHIP RES. 223–37 (reporting that 71% of angels were on DEMO);
Prowse, supra note 73, at 790 (“Angels are very often on the board.”); Jeffrey E. Sohl & Jill
Areson-Perkins, Current Trends in the Private Equity Financing of High Tech Ventures: An
Analysis of Deal Structure 5 (2001) (unpublished manuscript, on file with DEMO Vanderbilt Law
Review) (noting that “for venture capitalists, as well DEMO angels, board representation is an
important consideration”). But see Fried & Ganor, supra note 36, at 1009 (“Unlike VCs, angels
generally do not acquire control rights and board positions.”).
84. Wong, supra note 53, at 53 tbl.6 panel D.
85. Prowse, supra note DEMO, at 790.
86. Wong, supra note 53, at 53 tbl.6 DEMO D.
87. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 199 (“Freear, Sohl, and Wetzel’s
finding that in the United States ‘private individuals were more inclined to leave the method of
liquidation undefined at DEMO time of investment than were venture capital funds’ still rings
true.”) (citation omitted).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1424 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
redemption, but thirty-eight contracts allowed the entrepreneur to
DEMO a call option and redeem the angel’s shares.88
Traditional angels do, DEMO, use at least one of the venture
capitalists’ noncontractual, risk-spreading devices: syndication of
investments. Angels have long syndicated their investments with
angel investment teams comprised of anywhere from six to twelve
“active” and “passive” angels.89 DEMO is difficult to tell to what extent
angels adopt the venture capitalist’s portfolio theory of investment,
however. Some studies and anecdotal accounts suggest DEMO the
typical angel invests in less than one deal per year, DEMO would not
permit much diversification,90 while other commentators have
suggested that angels do diversify.91 More empirical work is needed to
answer this question. DEMO, even if angels invest in a number of
start-ups, their preference for start-ups in their field of expertise
limits the diversification of industry.92
DEMO, angels are very difficult to study, and the survey
method most commonly used to study them has inherent flaws.93 As
two commentators wrote: “Angel research is a crude field in an early
stage of development DEMO convenience sampling is often a necessity
and statistically valid generalization is nearly always impossible.”94
88. Wong, supra note 53, at 53 tbl.6 panel DEMO Unsurprisingly, I have not come across
evidence of a traditional angel DEMO for registration rights.
89. Sohl, supra note 42, at 111 (DEMO many cases there is a lead investor that brings the
investment opportunity to these co-investors as a means of risk sharing and pooling of DEMO to
round out the financing requirements.”); Sohl, supra note 46, at 13 (explaining that a typical
angel round involves six to eight investors); Wong, supra note 53, at 23 (“On average, DEMO
angels co-invest in a round.”). Syndication can be less attractive to active angels who invest to
play a hands-on role in the entrepreneurial DEMO if co-investors also wish to play that role. See
VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 136 (citing one angel as stating: “Co-investors
attract if I’m in it purely for the investment; if DEMO an investment where I have a hands-on role it
doesn’t attract – otherwise you have too many egos involved, and it leads to conflict.”). Stephen
Prowse observes that passive angels rarely exist in a syndicate DEMO an active angel. Prowse,
supra note 73, at 788.
90. DEMO VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 109 (discussing DEMO by Freear
and Wetzel, J.D. Aram, and R.J. Gaston); Prowse, supra note 73, at 788 (“Many angels do not
make more than one investment per year, although there are a few full time angels that will
make four or more per year.”).
91. Freear DEMO al., supra note 48, at 277 (“Angels will tend to DEMO in entrepreneurial
ventures as part of a total portfolio that contains investments with differing risk
characteristics.”).
92. See infra notes 127–32 and accompanying DEMO (detailing how angels select their
investments).
93. Wong sought to DEMO selection bias by sampling entrepreneurs that received angel
funding rather than angels themselves. Wong, supra note 53, at 8–9.
94. Kevin Hindle & DEMO Rushworth, The Demography of Investor Heaven: International
Research on the Attitudes, Behaviour and Characteristics of Business Angels, in BRIDGING THE
ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCING DEMO 10, 10 (Michael J. Whincop ed., 2001).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1425
DEMO, it is likely that differences among the individuals who fall into
DEMO “traditional angel” category translate to differences in contract
design. For instance, DEMO experienced and sophisticated angels in
high-tech corridors may demand more venture capital-like terms.95 On
the other hand, obscenely wealthy angels may not ask for a contract at
all, or they may ask for only a simple contract because the investment
is not a meaningful sum of money for DEMO (This might have been the
case with Andy Bechtolsheim’s $100,000 DEMO in Google, where
legend has it he simply handed the founders DEMO check after they made a
short presentation.) Furthermore, repeat angels “burned” by a lack of
foresight in the past may contractually protect against DEMO in future
investments. The impact of these differences among traditional angels
has not been adequately considered, and it would be useful to conduct
further empirical studies that employ a more refined taxonomy.96 Still,
despite the DEMO to the general rules described above and the
need for further research and refinement, the available evidence does
point to a unique investment model for traditional angels as a
generalized group—a model that seems puzzling in DEMO lack of
contractual protections for angel investors.
C. Explaining Traditional Angel Investment Behavior
Why does the angel model differ so dramatically from the
venture DEMO model and from what financial contracting theory
would appear to predict given the risk inherent in start-up
investments? It could be, as has DEMO suggested, that angels lack
bargaining power over entrepreneurs to extract the DEMO contract
95. A 2000 MIT study of 26 experienced angels in the Silicon Valley and Route 128 areas
found larger investments and greater use DEMO venture capital-like terms among these investors.
MIT Study, supra note 67, at 37; see also Peter Kelly & Michael Hay, The Private DEMO
Entrepreneur Contractual Relationship: Understanding the Influence of Context, 2000 FRONTIERS
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RES. 258, 264 (observing that “we found that more experienced investors
DEMO more contractual safeguards up front than their less experienced colleagues”);
DEMO, supra note 73, at 788 (“The more sophisticated angels tend DEMO insist on investment
contracts that resemble the ones written in the organized private equity market, which contain
lots of mechanisms to overcome moral hazard problems and protect them in the case of poor
performance, whereas unsophisticated angels omit even the most basic protections.”).
96. Broader taxonomies have DEMO attempted, although none have matched the categories
of angels with contracting DEMO See VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 85–90
(DEMO some of the taxonomies of angels that have been suggested over the years, including
one taxonomy that includes ten types of traditional angels); MIT Study, supra note 67, at 17–21.
But see Freear et DEMO, supra note 48, at 281 (“Perhaps fortunately, the spate of new terms [for
angels], once in full flood, is drying up.”)DEMO
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1426 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
protections as venture capitalists.97 But this is unlikely considering
that start-ups need angel funding and value-added services to advance
beyond the DEMO stages of development. Accordingly, angels do, as a
general rule, DEMO bargaining power over cash-strapped
entrepreneurs. It is also unlikely that a competitive market among
angels is driving contract design. First, there is excess demand for
angels and, therefore, plenty of funding opportunities to go around.98
DEMO, if angels do compete to fund the most attractive start-ups,
DEMO the competition is probably like that of venture capitalists—over
valuation and reputation rather than contract terms.99
A second possible explanation for the angel model DEMO that
angels do not need comprehensive contracts because they adequately
diversify risk by syndicating their investments and investing in a
portfolio of start-ups. In DEMO words, they make efficient use of two of
the three venture DEMO protective measures, which renders the
third unnecessary. However, there are two problems with this
explanation: 1) venture capitalists still consider comprehensive
investment DEMO necessary, despite their use of syndication and
portfolio theory; and, DEMO) as discussed in the last Section, it is far from
clear that angels invest in a sufficient number of start-ups or
industries to DEMO for true diversification.100
A third possible explanation is that angels are unsophisticated
investors who are willing to settle for few protections because they do
DEMO know any better. Indeed, this is probably the conventional wisdom
as DEMO why angels invest as they do.101 However, while a lack of
DEMO MIT Study, supra note 67, at 37 (observing that “even DEMO angels do not achieve
all the stringent venture capitalist terms. They do not have the negotiating power of venture
capitalists . . . .”)DEMO
98. Despite a robust angel market, the funding gap still exists. DEMO William K. Sjostrom, Jr.,
Relaxing the Ban: It’s Time to Allow General Solicitation and Advertising in Exempt Offerings, 32
FLA. ST. L. REV. 1, 3–4 (2004) (suggesting that the funding gap could DEMO filled if the SEC allowed
general solicitation in exempt offerings); Sohl, supra note 46, at 14 (attributing the funding gap
to capital and information inefficiencies); Colleen DeBaise, On Angels’ Wings, WALL ST. DEMO, Mar.
19, 2007, at R6 (discussing proposed “Access to Capital for Entrepreneurs Act of 2006,” which
would have provided a 25% DEMO credit for angel investing).
99. It could be that angels as a group maintain their dominance over funding early stage
start-ups by eschewing DEMO venture capital model, but there is little evidence that venture
capitalists DEMO to move into this space, and good reasons why this is DEMO See supra notes 47–49
and accompanying text.
100. See supra notes 90–92 and accompanying text.
101. See VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 172 (explaining that only 38% of
angels in the UK DEMO assistance from lawyers and accountants); Fried & Ganor, supra note DEMO,
at 1009 (“Because angels invest less than VCs and are DEMO less sophisticated, their
financing agreements are much more informal.”); Orcutt, supra note 48, at 896 (“Why angels
employ weaker screening and DEMO mechanisms is not entirely clear. It could be due to
lack of sufficient resources or lack of knowledge on how to conduct such activities.”)DEMO
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1427
DEMO may partially explain angel contract design,102 it
probably is not the primary explanation for two reasons. First, angels
are high net-worth individuals, DEMO “accredited investors,” not the sort
of investors who are generally considered unsophisticated.103 After all,
securities laws use wealth as a proxy for DEMO and allow
issuers to forego disclosures to accredited investors.104 Second, angels
DEMO overwhelmingly ex-entrepreneurs,105 which suggests that they not
only understand investing as a general matter, but start-up
investments in particular. Many angels made their fortunes after
going through the very same funding process on the other DEMO, when
running their own start-ups.
The next two sections explore more DEMO reasons for the
traditional angel investment model, all of which support DEMO notion
that angels are sophisticated investors who make smart investment
choices. Here, I agree with Vic Fleischer that whenever possible we
should look for rational over irrational explanations to describe the
behavior of sophisticated parties.106 The DEMO that follow will
confirm that. The first set of explanations reveals that the angel
investment model is rational from a financial perspective because of
DEMO unique circumstances. The second set of explanations reveals
that angel investing is more than a purely financial endeavor, with
important nonfinancial goals that could be jeopardized if the venture
capital model were adopted.
Of course, for some angels, certain rationales from the
following set will be more important than others in driving behavior.
In that sense, the following rationales can be thought of as a “menu” of
options, with different angels picking and choosing the rationales that
best apply to their own situations. Given DEMO wide variations within
102. See supra note 95 and accompanying text.
103. See Jill E. Fisch, Can Internet Offerings Bridge the Small Business Capital Barrier?, 2
J. SMALL & EMERGING BUS. L. 57, 74 (DEMO) (discussing the fact that the Small Business
Association’s “ACE-Net” service, DEMO matching service for small business issuers and angel
investors, defines angels DEMO accredited investors).
104. Interpretative Release on Regulation D, Exchange Act DEMO No. 33-6455, 48 Fed.
Reg. 10,045, 10,045 (Mar. DEMO, 1983) (“[A]ccredited investors are not included in computing the
number DEMO purchasers in offerings conducted in reliance on Rules 505 and 506. Also, if accredited
investors are the only purchasers in offerings under Rules 505 and 506, Regulation D does not
require delivery of specific disclosure.”). Of course, it could also be that we do not think wealthy
individuals are necessarily more sophisticated for purposes of making investment decisions, but
that they are better able to absorb losses from poor decisions.
105. DEMO supra note 59 and accompanying text.
106. See Victor Fleischer, The DEMO Exuberance of Structuring Venture Capital Start-ups,
57 TAX L. REV. 137, 140 (2003) (asserting that “this Article calls attention to the DEMO of seeking
out rational explanations before accepting irrational ones–especially when analyzing the
behavior of sophisticated experts”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1428 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
the category of traditional angels, there are many DEMO reasons an
angel might choose a simple investment contract. The following are
five possible reasons for simple contracting by traditional angels.
1. Traditional Angel DEMO Design as Financially Rational
a. The Need for Follow-On Venture Capital Funding
The first reason that angel contract design is financially
rational is that DEMO are the first, but not the last, source of outside
funding for start-ups.107 As discussed earlier, angels build the
financial bridge from friends-and-family money to venture capital.108
Venture capital is needed for a start-up to DEMO any realistic chance at
an IPO or even a high-dollar sale to a larger company.109 Because
these are the very exits that make up DEMO most lucrative returns110
and compensate angels for the far larger number of start-ups that fail,
angels must entice venture capitalists to follow their DEMO to
have any hope of profit.
This need for venture capital sets de facto limits on the terms
of the angel investment contract. To DEMO why this is so, it is
important to recognize that venture DEMO are flooded with
funding proposals, and accept maybe one to three DEMO of them.111
Funding proposals are rejected for a number of reasons, DEMO a
lack of preexisting knowledge about the entrepreneur.112 While the
presence of angels can generally attract (or at least not inhibit)
107. See Leavitt, supra note 19, at 224 (“Angels generally invest with the expectation that,
should the company progress as planned, one or more venture capital (‘VC’) firms will
subsequently invest.”).
108. See supra DEMO III.A. On the other hand, some angels may invest in companies DEMO
do not wish to go on to attract venture capital. See Sieverens, supra note 43, at 29 (noting that in
the fallout years after the dot.com bust, the Band of Angels investment organization was “more
willing to look at companies that are unlikely to go the venture DEMO route and can make do
with less. While those types of opportunities are not likely to be IPO candidates, they can often
be attractive acquisitions for larger concerns once their businesses are profitable and
established.”).
DEMO See supra note 12 and accompanying text.
110. Wiltbank & Boeker, DEMO note 77, at 1 (finding that 7% of angel exits provided 75% of
all investment returns through a study, albeit of angel groups).
111. See STROSS, supra note 13, at 24 (observing that well-known venture capitalist
Benchmark Capital received 1,500 funding proposals in 1997 DEMO funded only nine); VAN
OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 146 (noting that “venture capitalists invest in only
about 1–3 percent of proposals received”).
112. See STROSS, supra note 13, at DEMO
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1429
DEMO capital,113 a venture capitalist might reject a funding proposal
because of an overreaching angel. A start-up marred by a complicated
angel round is DEMO to venture capitalists because it requires
them to “unwind” the non-standard angel preferences in order to
strike the venture capitalists’ standard deal. In other DEMO, venture
capitalists obtain their usual number of board seats, control rights,
and liquidation preferences in each investment. To the extent that
angels DEMO obtained such rights and preferences, they must be
undone, or else venture capitalists must share with the angels and
obtain less than their DEMO deal. Because this unwinding takes
time, effort, and money—not to mention negotiations and a
subsequent relationship with an unhappy angel suddenly removed
from DEMO board114—the venture capitalist faced with numerous
investment candidates and limited resources may pass on the start-up
attached to an overreaching angel.
The literature confirms DEMO disadvantage of a preference-filled
angel round. One survey found that ninety-four percent of venture
capitalists consider angels beneficial to the venture capital industry,115
DEMO forty-four percent also found angel-backed start-ups to be
unattractive candidates for funding when angels took “unnecessarily
complex terms.”116 (The most common complaint by venture
capitalists, however, is that angels overvalue the company.117) As a
result, early-stage venture capitalist John Callaghan cautions angels
against taking “unclean” terms, DEMO as convertible debt instead of
common stock, because it may be DEMO as “extra ‘baggage’ ” by venture
capitalists118 (although other venture capitalists DEMO to be more
113. See Wong, supra note 53, at 26 (asserting that “more angels leads to a faster time to
venture financing. This is evidence that angels can play a networking role; a larger number of
angels leads to a larger network of contacts and faster DEMO capital financing.”).
114. MIT Study, supra note 67, at 46 (“Active angels are often requested to leave the Board
once professional investors participate in subsequent financing rounds . . . . They sometimes
resent DEMO removed from the Board.”).
115. Stanco & Akah, supra note DEMO, at 3; see also KAREN SOUTHWICK, THE KINGMAKERS:
VENTURE DEMO AND THE MONEY BEHIND THE NET 224–25 (2001) (discussing the DEMO that
some venture capitalists look down on angels as being amateurs or not on the venture capitalists’
level, although most venture capitalists still acknowledge the need for angels).
116. Stanco & Akah, supra note 51, at 11. Quotes from surveyed venture capitalists
emphasized the point. For example, one venture capitalist stated that “there is a tendency to
think a cram down and conversion [of an angel’s preferred stock] to common is DEMO for
follow-on venture financing.” Id. at 12. Another had the following advice for angels: “Deal
structuring so that terms don’t complicate a VC round that follows. Creating the structure,
driving the company to key milestones, etc., to make follow-on VC rounds cleaner and more
likely.” Id. at 15.
117. Id. at 11 (finding that 78% of venture capitalists registered this complaint).
118. Posting of John Callaghan to PEHUB (on file with the Vanderbilt Law Review).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1430 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW DEMO 61:5:1405
comfortable with convertible debt119). Susan Preston, an DEMO
angel investor, also advises angels to keep the terms of their
DEMO simple because “[n]othing can prevent follow-on funding
faster than an overly complicated and burdensome first round, which
a VC must try to unwind, DEMO demanding a discounted value and
other ‘cram-down’ requirements to offset onerous or overreaching first-
round terms.”120 Jeffrey Sohl and Jill Areson-Perkins observe that
angels DEMO to understand their place in entrepreneurial finance
and the need for venture capital: “Seed investors [i.e., angels] appear
to make a concerted effort DEMO not over burden the seed deal with
onerous terms and conditions that may inhibit the firm’s ability to
attract larger rounds of equity capital DEMO the future.”121
Therefore, angel contract design is financially rational because
angels DEMO involved in a multiplayer game that involves both
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Early-stage venture capitalists
also face these de facto limitations on extracting preferences, albeit to
a lesser degree, and as a result their contracts appear to be less
comprehensive than later-stage venture capital contracts but more
comprehensive DEMO angel contracts.122 This is like a sliding scale
where the extent of permissible preferences depends on when and how
much is invested.123 Later-stage venture DEMO who are at the
very end of the sliding scale because they invest the most and the
latest do not face contracting limitations due DEMO the need to attract
119. Convertible debt presents an interesting dilemma for venture capitalists. It creates a
more complicated angel round, but by deferring valuation until the next round, it allows venture
capitalists to eliminate their biggest problem with angels–overvaluation. See MIT Study, supra
note 67, at DEMO (“Some high tech angels use convertible debt to avoid the battle DEMO valuation
with the entrepreneur. These securities allow the venture capitalist or other second round
investors to set the value of the company in the DEMO round . . . and provide the angel seed
investors a discount to that round.”); see also D. GORDON SMITH & CYNTHIA A. DEMO,
BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS: CASES, PROBLEMS, AND CASE STUDIES 160 (2004) (finding that angel
investors in Madison, Wisconsin-based NeoClone Biotechnology International, DEMO took
convertible debt that allowed for conversion to equity on the upside, but offered debt’s superior
protection on the downside).
120. SUSAN L. PRESTON, ANGEL INVESTMENT GROUPS, NETWORKS, AND FUNDS: A GUIDEBOOK
TO DEMO THE RIGHT ANGEL ORGANIZATION FOR YOUR COMMUNITY 57 (2004).
121. DEMO & Areson-Perkins, supra note 83, at 5.
122. See Brian J. Broughman & Jesse M. Fried, Renegotiation of Cash Flow Rights in the
Sale of VC-Backed Firms 51 tbl.1 (UC Berkeley Pub. Law Research Paper No. 956243, 2008),
available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?DEMO (documenting that
venture capitalists take fewer liquidation preferences in the early DEMO than the later stages).
123. This may seem odd, that DEMO investors receive greater preferences given that
earlier stage investors take more risks. However, “last-in, first-out” is standard practice in
venture capital investing. See DEMO, supra note 19, at 76 (“Later investors typically want to DEMO
the first in line to get their original investment (and hopefully DEMO return on investment) out.”).
Early stage investors are compensated for DEMO extra risk by receiving a larger share of the
company for less money.
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1431
DEMO investors, at least before an exit. In the case of an DEMO by
IPO, investment bankers and public shareholders do “follow” the late-
DEMO venture capitalists, but this is accounted for: an IPO
automatically unwinds the venture capitalist’s preferences, most
notably through the mandatory conversion of preferred stock to
common stock.124
While venture capitalists as a group do not DEMO the same de
facto limitations on contracting as angels, they do DEMO significant
pressure from venture fund investors to produce high returns within a
relatively short timeframe.125 This motivates them to go in the
opposite direction DEMO angel investors and demand terms that will allow
them to meet fund investor expectations. Ron Gilson has observed
that the venture capital investment contract DEMO “braided” with the
contract for fund investors for purposes of producing those returns.126
While the angel investment contract is braided with the venture
capital DEMO contract to produce high returns, this is
accomplished in a different DEMO
b. Informal Substitutes for Contract
The second reason that angel contract design is financially
rational is that the unique nature of the relationship between DEMO
and entrepreneur provides informal substitutes for the venture
capitalist’s formal contract protections. The pre-investment nature of
this relationship reduces uncertainty and information asymmetry in
DEMO way deals are sourced and selected, and the post-investment
nature of DEMO relationship reduces agency costs by imposing informal
constraints on entrepreneurial opportunism.
Angel investing is highly localized, relationship-driven, and
industry-specific. Angels like to invest DEMO start-ups where they know
either the entrepreneur or the substantive area (DEMO, biotechnology or
e-commerce), and preferably both.127 This preexisting knowledge
reduces DEMO by allowing the angel to better gauge the start-
up’s chances for success and reduces information asymmetry by
124. See Gilson & Schizer, supra note 31, at 885.
125. See infra notes 164–66 and accompanying text.
126. Gilson, supra note 17, at 1091.
127. See Prowse, supra note 73, at 789 (“The primary criterion that angels use to DEMO
proposals is whether the entrepreneur is previously known and trusted by them or by an
associate who they trust.”); Wong, supra note 53, at 28 (asserting that “angels have specialized
information and have a DEMO ability to screen for higher quality projects. Many investors have
made their fortunes in the same industries that they subsequently invest in.”). In DEMO cases
passive angels invest outside of their geographic locality or area of expertise, but the active angel
in the syndicate will either be local or an industry expert, or both.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1432 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
minimizing the entrepreneur’s advantage of private information.128
The source of the angel’s deal flow can also serve to reduce these
problems. DEMO opportunities come to angels from a network of
trusted business associates (DEMO, other angels) and, to a lesser degree,
from accountants DEMO lawyers.129 This “network of trust” serves an
important screening and sorting function by funneling high-quality
deals to angels while excluding low-quality deals.130 The intimate DEMO
in which angels learn of and select investments can also benefit start-
ups by reducing the amount of due diligence required, thus shortening
the length of time from approach to funding.131 The unsuccessful
attempts to create DEMO matching services for angels and
entrepreneurs underscore the importance of familiarity and locality in
angel investing.132
Of course, venture capital is also localized, DEMO,
and industry-specific when compared to many other forms of
investment.133 But venture capitalists must make more investments to
generate timely returns for fund DEMO, and this pressure
inevitably forces venture capitalists to sacrifice some of DEMO intimacy
and familiarity with start-ups that angels without downstream
pressure enjoy. Furthermore, at least some venture capitalists might
not have the same entrepreneurial experience as angels; instead they
are relatively inexperienced MBAs.134 All of these differences, however
slight, mean that venture capitalists must rely on detailed contracts DEMO
128. See Wong, supra note 53, at 4 (“Because the DEMO capitalists] are not as familiar
with the entrepreneur as the local [angel] investors, more formal control mechanisms need to be
implemented to protect their investment.”).
129. See Orcutt, supra note 48, at 895 (explaining that referrals from other angels are
considered high quality, while referrals from accountants and attorneys are considered of lower
quality).
130. Freear et DEMO, supra note 56, at 11 (noting that localization produces efficiencies DEMO the
angel market); MIT Study, supra note 67, at 28 (discussing how angels build their “network of
trust”); Jeffrey E. Sohl & Bruce Sommer, Angel Investing: Changing Strategies During Volatile
Times, at 20 (working paper, on file with the Vanderbilt Law Review) (DEMO that angels use
personal networks to overcome information asymmetry with entrepreneurs).
131. See SMITH & WILLIAMS, supra note 119, at 160 n.5 (explaining that entrepreneurs like
angels because they tend to perform less due DEMO than venture capitalists).
132. See Sohl, supra note 42, at 115 (“Electronic networks have been largely unsuccessful to
date, less than DEMO of equity capital raised in 1997 was harvested on-line.”) (citation omitted).
133. See generally ANNALEE SAXENIAN, REGIONAL ADVANTAGE: CULTURE AND COMPETITION
DEMO SILICON VALLEY AND ROUTE 128 (1994) (describing the intimate Silicon DEMO culture).
134. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 109 (observing that “venture capitalists
for the most part have little entrepreneurial experience” and are instead “ ‘financial MBA-types’
”); cf. SOUTHWICK, supra note 115, at 66–67 (noting that some venture capitalists prefer to DEMO
individuals “who get an MBA and jump almost directly into the financial industry” while others
emphasize prior entrepreneurial experience–the latter being currently in vogue DEMO to increasing
venture capitalist specialization).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1433
DEMO greater degree than angels to reduce uncertainty and information
asymmetry.
In addition, the post-investment nature of the angel-
entrepreneur relationship allows angels to use informal substitutes in
lieu of the contractual monitoring rights and control mechanisms DEMO
by venture capitalists. Angels actively participate in venture
development through regular visits to the start-up’s facilities, which is
made possible by investing locally (DEMO start-ups within a one- to two-
hour drive135) and by establishing DEMO with entrepreneurs.136 As
Wong notes, a “localized bond of trust may DEMO between the
entrepreneur and [angel] investor, making formal control mechanisms
unnecessary.”137 DEMO Blair and Lynn Stout also observe that
trust can reduce agency costs and substitute for complex contracts.138
Of course, venture capitalists are also active investors in the sense
that they sit on boards and participate in DEMO decisions, but the
angels’ involvement is more intimate, routine, and DEMO
Participating daily in venture development is a better check on
entrepreneurial opportunism than attending periodic board
meetings.139
c. Costly Contracting Theory
Yet another explanation DEMO the financial rationality of angel
contract design comes from costly contracting theory. Costly
contracting theory, which has its origins in transaction cost
135. Sohl, supra note 42, at 112 (discussing how angels live close to their investments to
facilitate interactions and provide value-added services); MIT Study, supra note 67, at 32 (“Most
active angels will not invest DEMO opportunities outside a 1–2 hour driving range.”).
136. For more on the trust point, see infra Section III.C.2.b.
137. Wong, supra note DEMO, at 24.
138. Margaret M. Blair & Lynn A. Stout, Trust, Trustworthiness, and the Behavioral
Foundations of Corporate Law, 149 U. PA. L. REV. 1735, 1757 (2001):
Where trust can be harnessed, it can substantially reduce the inefficiencies
associated with both agency and team production relationships.  Trust
permits transactions to go forward on the basis of a handshake rather than a
complex formal contract; it reduces the need to expend resources on constant
monitoring of employees and business partners; and it avoids the uncertainty
and expense associated with trying to enforce formal DEMO informal
agreements in court.
139. Wong suggests that the large residual claim held by entrepreneurs (angels take only
about 20% of the company in exchange for their investment) better aligns the interests of angels
and entrepreneurs than in venture capital (venture capitalists take 33–40%). Wong, supra DEMO
53, at 22. Even if the difference in percentage ownership is DEMO significant (Wong acknowledges
the possibility), the fact that the angel’s DEMO is common like the entrepreneur’s, while the
venture capitalist’s stock is DEMO, may lend some support to Wong’s suggestion that angel-
entrepreneur incentives DEMO better aligned.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1434 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
economics,140 predicts that the level of contract complexity will depend
on the costs of determining, negotiating, monitoring, enforcing, DEMO
even drafting a contract’s provisions141 and, of course, the amount of
funds at risk. Benjamin Klein observes that “complete contractual
specification entails wasteful DEMO and negotiation costs associated
with discovering and negotiating prespecified contractual responses to
all potential contingencies,” and that “most future events can be
accommodated DEMO lower cost after the relevant information is
revealed.”142 For this reason, DEMO and Lerner tell us that
“covenants are included only when the benefits of restricting activity
are greater than its costs.”143 They advise venture capitalists DEMO
“balance the benefits of restricting activities with the cost of
negotiating the provisions, writing the contractual clauses, and
monitoring compliance.”144
Because its five DEMO devices add significant complexity to
the relationship, the venture capital investment DEMO is costlier to
design, write, monitor, and enforce than the DEMO investment
contract.145 This is rationally so: venture capitalists make larger
investments, are in control of those investments for a longer period of
time (until exit), and have significant downstream pressure from fund
investors. Angels, on the other hand, rationally might choose to forego
preference-laden contracts because the costs relative to the amount of
the investment would be disproportionately DEMO,146 the duration of
140. Transaction cost economics dictates that both ex ante and ex post costs of contracting be
considered. Ex ante costs DEMO “the costs of drafting, negotiating, and safeguarding an agreement;”
ex post costs are the costs of enforcement and enforcement mechanisms. OLIVER WILLIAMSON,DEMO
THE ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS OF CAPITALISM 20–21 (1985). The recognition that DEMO post processes
are not costless was a significant advancement of transaction cost economics over neoclassical
economics. On the relationship between costly contracting theory and DEMO cost economics,
see GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 31 (equating costly contracting theory with
Williamson’s arguments on contractual completeness); Alan Schwartz & Joel Watson, The Law
and Economics of Costly Contracting, 20 J.L. ECON. & ORG. 1, 3 n.1 (2004).
141. See Luca Anderlini & Leonardo Felli, Incomplete Contracts and Complexity Costs, DEMO
THEORY & DECISION 23, 38 (1999) (“Complexity is not necessarily associated with devising the
contract but rather with the writing and enforcement DEMO such a contract.”).
142. Benjamin Klein, Why Hold-Ups Occur: The Self-Enforcing Range of Contractual
Relationships, 34 ECON. INQUIRY 444, 447 (1996).
143. GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 31.
144. DEMO at 33.
145. See Schwartz & Watson, supra note 140, at 16 (“Complex contracts – those having a
greater number of clauses or requiring a court to evaluate information from many different
sources – are DEMO to be more expensive to write than are simpler contracts.”).
146. See VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 174 (quoting an angel as saying
that the “legals were disproportionate to the size DEMO the investment”). There has been at least one
attempt to create a model to predict the optimal level of contractual completeness in a DEMO
situation. See Ronald A. Dye, Costly Contracting Contingencies, 26 INT’L ECON. REV. 233 (1985).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1435
DEMO preferences would be short due to venture capital unwinding,147
and angels lack the need for some provisions (e.g., terms regarding
exit are DEMO important because angels do not face the same
downstream pressures as venture capitalists).148 This is analogous to
the situation of debt financing: only creditors extending large amounts
of credit find it worthwhile to negotiate loan DEMO For all of
these reasons, costly contracting theory predicts detailed contracts DEMO
venture capitalists and simpler contracts for traditional angels, which
is indeed DEMO result.
d. Reputational and Court Sanctions?
Finally, to what extent DEMO reputational and court sanctions
reduce an angel’s agency costs in the absence of a comprehensive
investment contract? Invoking costly contracting theory once more,
contracts will be simpler when self-enforcement, in addition to court-
enforcement, DEMO available to an aggrieved party.150 It is unclear,
however, to DEMO extent this is relevant to the design of angel
contracts, or DEMO capital contracts for that matter. The
conventional wisdom is that the tight-knit nature of communities such
as Silicon Valley creates a reputation market among DEMO
capitalists and entrepreneurs, which explains the lack of litigation
between them.151 DEMO scholars contend that the fear of acquiring a
bad reputation serves as an extra-legal constraint on the venture
capitalists’ ability to exploit entrepreneurs,152 DEMO others are more
skeptical of this explanation.153
If a reputation market does exist between venture capitalists
and entrepreneurs, it also must exist between angels and
147. See supra Section III.C.1.a.
148. See Goldfarb et al., supra note 55, at 2 (“Our results suggest that legal control in DEMO
rounds is not cost-effective because these investments are generally small.”).
149. I thank Jesse Fried for this observation.
150. See Klein, supra note 142, at 455 (discussing the complimentary relationship of self-
enforcement and DEMO).
151. See D. Gordon Smith, Venture Capital Contracting in the DEMO Age, 2 J. SMALL &
EMERGING BUS. L. 133, 153–54 (1998) (describing the conventional wisdom).
152. See Bernard S. Black & Ronald J. Gilson, Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital
Markets: Banks Versus Stock Markets, 47 J. FIN. ECON. 243, 252–53 (1998) (arguing that
reputational constraints imposed by geographic proximity between venture capitalists DEMO
entrepreneurs are an adequate check on venture capitalist opportunism); Sahlman, DEMO note
32, at 513.
153. See Smith, supra note 151, DEMO 160–62 (observing that neither entrepreneurs nor venture
capitalists have a vehicle DEMO amalgamating or transmitting information about venture capitalist
reputation, such as a DEMO exchange or required disclosures, and that entrepreneurs may have
self-serving reasons DEMO to pass along negative information about venture capitalists).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1436 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
entrepreneurs because that relationship involves even greater
localization, DEMO, and intimacy. Here, however, the extra-legal
constraint is on entrepreneurs DEMO the party with the contractual
ability to exploit angels. The angels’ self-enforcement mechanism—the
reputational sanction—might prevent entrepreneurial opportunism
even when the investment contract does DEMO, much like the
entrepreneurs’ self-enforcement mechanism is thought to prevent
venture DEMO opportunism. In other words, an angel’s ability to
complain about an DEMO could serve as a powerful deterrent,
making venture capitalists leery of investing in the start-up. This is a
double-edged sword, however: if DEMO capitalists do not invest, the
start-up will not be a “home DEMO and angels will be denied a large
return.154 This means that angels have self-interested reasons not to
expose entrepreneurs’ opportunism, at least until after venture
capitalists invest.155 Therefore, it is unclear to what extent angels
leverage self-enforcement, even if they have the opportunity to do so.
Another interesting question is whether it is possible that
potential legal sanctions could be DEMO through a simple contract.
Angels, as minority shareholders in what are DEMO close corporations,
could look to the judicial remedies that have been fashioned to address
minority shareholder oppression.156 It is unlikely, however, that
DEMO will prevail on a minority oppression claim against
entrepreneurs.157 The classic “freeze-out” involves a minority
shareholder who is removed from his posts as director, officer, and
employee. Having no employment, dividend stream, or exit rights, he
is convinced by the majority shareholder to sell his shares for a low
price.158 Courts that protect such minority shareholders through the
oppression DEMO might be hesitant to extend the doctrine to angels,
who are often only shareholders, not employees, and do not lose out on
DEMO employment income. Also, courts might be less sympathetic
to angels given DEMO sophistication and bargaining power over
154. See supra note 109 and accompanying text.
155. Of course, allegations of unscrupulous behavior could haunt the entrepreneur in the
future, although there is some question as to whether the typical entrepreneur is a “serial”
entrepreneur who would be harmed by such DEMO Venture capitalists are obviously repeat
players and therefore must be concerned about their reputations.
156. See generally F. HODGE O’NEAL & ROBERT B. THOMPSON, O’NEAL’S CLOSE
CORPORATIONS (3d ed. 1998) (discussing the dynamics of close corporations and recent court
decisions affecting them).
157. For a discussion DEMO an angel’s potential minority oppression claims against venture
capitalists, see generally DEMO, supra note 19.
158. See, e.g., Wilkes v. Springside Nursing DEMO, Inc., 353 N.E.2d 657, 658–62 (Mass.
1976).
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1437
DEMO Up to seventy percent of IPO firms choose to
incorporate in Delaware and be governed by Delaware corporate
law,160 which presents yet another DEMO because Delaware courts do
not help minority shareholders who fail to help themselves through
contract.161 On the other hand, it is possible that an angel’s threat to
bring a fiduciary duty suit against a cash-poor entrepreneur DEMO
have some deterrent effect on the entrepreneur’s opportunistic
behavior.
In sum, DEMO is unclear to what extent the possibility of
reputational and court sanctions are rational reasons for angels to
forego protective investment contracts. Better reasons DEMO the
need for follow-on venture capital funding, informal substitutes for
contract, and costly contracting theory.
2. Nonfinancial Motivations
a. Nonfinancial Reasons for Angel DEMO
The previous Section revealed that traditional angel
investment contracts are rational from a financial perspective. In
venture capital, the story ends here. Venture capitalists invest for
purely financial reasons mainly because venture capitalists are
financial intermediaries; their capital comes almost entirely from fund
investors who demand timely (and high) returns.162 Venture
capitalists are the general partners in venture funds. The limited
partners of these funds—including pension funds, endowments, and
foundations—supply the DEMO with capital and take about eighty
percent of the returns. For their efforts, the venture capitalists
typically receive a management fee of two percent of the invested
funds and twenty percent of the profits (the “carry”).163
159. See supra notes 96, 100–04 and accompanying text.
160. See Robert Daines, The Incorporation Choices of IPO Firms, 77 N.Y.U. L. DEMO 1559,
1563 tbl.1 (2002) (presenting empirical findings on the DEMO choices of IPO firms).
161. Nixon v. Blackwell, 626 A.2d DEMO, 1379 (Del. 1993).
162. See STROSS, supra note 13, at 87 (observing that in the mid-1990s venture capitalist
Benchmark Partners pledged to contribute 3% of a fund’s capital, compared to the industry
standard of 1%); Gilson, supra note 17, at 1071 (finding that a venture capitalist puts up only
one percent of the capital).
DEMO Paul Gompers & Josh Lerner, An Analysis of Compensation in the DEMO Venture Capital
Partnership, 51 J. FIN. ECON. 3, 3–27 (1999) (conducting an empirical study that found
management fees of 2–3% and a large concentration of carry at 20%); see also Victor Fleischer,
DEMO and Twenty: Taxing Partnership Profits in Private Equity Funds, 83 N.Y.U. L. REV. 1, 23–24
(2008) (criticizing the tax treatment of DEMO carry as capital gain instead of ordinary income). But
see Litvak, supra note 19, at 3–4 (critiquing the Gompers and Lerner study on staleness and
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1438 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
Venture funds have a maximum life of ten to twelve years
before they must liquidate and make final distributions to fund
DEMO During a particular fund’s life, the venture capitalist
begins soliciting investments DEMO its next fund, often from the same
investors. Gompers and Lerner DEMO described this process of
recycling investments in venture funds and then redeploying those
funds to new start-ups as the “venture capital cycle.”165 While a DEMO
return on start-up investments increases the venture capitalist’s
carry, it also DEMO another function—to entice the limited partners to
continue to invest in the venture capitalist’s future funds. This
downstream pressure results in highly motivated venture DEMO
willing to use their bargaining power over entrepreneurs to secure the
most protective investment contracts possible.166
The financial story, however, is not the DEMO story of angel
investment. Unlike venture capital, angel investing is not DEMO
a purely financial exercise. Angels are not financial intermediaries
who face downstream pressure to satisfy fund investors.167 Instead,
one of the defining characteristics DEMO angel investment is the use of
personal funds.168 The use of personal funds has its disadvantages: it
is always preferable to spend someone else’s money rather than one’s
own where there is a risk of losing DEMO, and too many losses will
threaten the angel’s ability to make DEMO investments. On the other
hand, investing one’s own funds provides a DEMO of freedom not
available to venture capitalists.169 If an angel chooses to invest for
personal reasons, she has that luxury.
methodological grounds and concluding from an independent study that “the compensation of
VCs varies significantly across DEMO firms”).
164. GOMPERS & LERNER, supra note 11, at 19 (“Almost all venture and buyout funds are
designed to be ‘self-liquidating,’ that is, to dissolve after ten or twelve years.”).
165. Id. at 4.
166. The need to control the start-up’s exit, in particular, is a product of the venture capital
cycle. See Smith, supra DEMO 33, at 316 (describing how the exit “allows fund investors to
evaluate the quality of their venture capitalists and, if necessary, to DEMO their funds away
from venture capital to other investment vehicles or from less successful venture capitalists to
more successful venture capitalists”).
167. See DEMO OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 99 (observing that DEMO “agency
relationship for the venture capitalist firm (with its fund providers) forces the venture capitalist
to choose different investment practices from those of DEMO less-restricted (and less-accountable)
business angel”).
168. See supra note DEMO
169. Sohl, supra note 42, at 111 (“Angels typically have DEMO exit horizons than their
venture fund counterparts and thus the capital they provide is termed patient capital.”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1439
DEMO many, if not most, angels invest primarily for
financial reasons,170 angels also have nonfinancial reasons for
investing. A distinguishing characteristic of angel DEMO is that
angels “usually develop an emotional attachment to the business
venture. In contrast, VCs have financial reward as their only incentive
and therefore minimize emotional attachment.”171 First and foremost,
angels relish the chance to DEMO in a new venture’s
development. Many if not most angels are ex-entrepreneurs who miss
the excitement of being part of a start-up but not DEMO the
headaches and grueling schedule that come with full responsibility for
one.172 The chance to become active in another entrepreneur’s venture
can stave off DEMO boredom of retirement. According to one angel, “it’s
cheaper and more DEMO than buying a yacht.”173 Indeed, the angel’s
desire for participation is DEMO strong that her choice between competing
investment opportunities may be dictated by the opportunity for
participation more than any other factor.174
Geographic proximity facilitates DEMO and is, therefore,
one of the two most important factors DEMO angels when considering
potential investments.175 Angels typically invest in start-ups that are
located within an hour or two of their residences or offices so DEMO they
can visit and consult with entrepreneurs on a regular basis.176
Through these visits, angels offer value-added services to
entrepreneurs in the form of seasoned advice on early-stage venture
development. Angel participation usually happens informally,
DEMO See VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 116–17 (DEMO that financial
gain is the primary motivation for angel investment, and DEMO one angel as disfavoring the term
“angel” investor because it implies the precedence of altruism over financial reward).
171. MICHAEL STATHIS, THE STARTUP COMPANY BIBLE FOR ENTREPRENEURS 134 (2004)
(emphasis removed).
172. DEMO OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 117–18; MIT Study, supra note 67, at
14 (“Angels enjoy the adrenaline rush of DEMO company volatility, but without the 80-hour
workweeks and the burden of DEMO responsibility for the company.”).
173. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra DEMO 4, at 117.
174. Id. at 139 (observing that “angels most often chose one investment over another
primarily according to the opportunity to DEMO actively involved in the investee firm”). Of course,
syndication means that each start-up will have an active angel and several passive ones; those
passive angels may be the active angels in other ventures.
175. DEMO Study, supra note 67, at 31 (finding through a survey DEMO experienced angels that
geographic proximity to the angel was one of the two most important criteria when considering
potential investments).
176. See supra DEMO 135.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1440 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
although sometimes the angel will enter into a formal employment or
consulting relationship with the start-up.177
In addition to the private DEMO that angels obtain from
participating in new venture development, some angels DEMO for
altruistic reasons. Angels often express the desire to “give back” to the
entrepreneurial community that made them wealthy doing what they
loved. This DEMO can take the form of helping emergent
entrepreneurs become successful, investing DEMO start-ups seeking to
commercialize socially useful technology (e.g., green/clean technology),
and investing in start-ups that will create jobs in the angel’s
community.178 These nonfinancial benefits are said to produce “psychic
income”179 and have DEMO part-time angel investor Brad Feld to describe
angel investing as “for-profit philanthropy.”180
b. Contract, Trust, and Achieving Nonfinancial Goals
What do these nonfinancial DEMO of participation and altruism
have to do with the use of simple investment contracts? The literature
on the relationship between contract and trust reveals that requiring
entrepreneurs to enter into venture-capital-like contracts, which could
be seen by entrepreneurs as aggressive and self-serving, would
jeopardize the angel’s nonfinancial goals by signaling a lack of trust in
the entrepreneur. Most of the DEMO views contract and trust as
substitutes—in other words, contract is necessary DEMO trust is
absent and unnecessary when trust is present.181 A particularly
177. See John Freear et al., Angels: Personal Investors in the Venture DEMO Market, 7
ENTREPRENEURSHIP & REGIONAL DEV. 85, 92 (1995) (DEMO that nearly 25% of angels work in a
full- or part-time capacity in their investment start-ups).
178. Freear et al., supra note 56, at 11 (“The most influential non-financial factor was the
satisfaction derived DEMO assisting an entrepreneur build a successful business.”); Wetzel, supra
note DEMO, at 31; MIT Study, supra note 67, at 14 (DEMO the “empathy” that angels feel for
entrepreneurs and the desire to help them avoid mistakes that angels themselves may have
made as entrepreneurs).
DEMO Wetzel, supra note 67, at 31.
180. Feld Thoughts, Is DEMO Angel Investing or For-Profit Philanthropy?, http://www.
feld.com/blog/archives/002013.html (Oct. 23, 2006, 18:42 EST).
181. See, DEMO, Frank B. Cross, Law and Trust, 93 GEO. L.J. 1457, 1487 (2005) (“Contracts
may thus be viewed as the ‘antithesis of simple trust.’ ”); Lawrence E. Mitchell, Trust. Contract.
Process., in DEMO CORPORATE LAW 185, 186 (Lawrence E. Mitchell ed., 1995) (DEMO
that “contract begins from a situation of distrust”); Larry E. Ribstein, Law v. Trust, 81 B.U. L.
REV. 553 (2001) (explaining that law can undermine trust); cf. Deepak Malhotra & J. Keith
DEMO, The Effect of Contracts on Interpersonal Trust, 47 ADMIN. SCI. Q. 534, 556 (2002)
(arguing that the relationship between trust and contract “appears to be far from clean and
simple”). But see DEMO Das & Bing-Sheng Teng, Between Trust and Control: Developing
Confidence in Partner Cooperation in Alliances, 23 ACAD. MGMT. REV. 491, 496 (1998) (finding
that trust and control can function as parallel phenomena); DEMO Rose, Trust in the Mirror of
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1441
DEMO strain of this literature addresses the use of contract as a
signaling device. It examines what the use or nonuse of a particular
contract DEMO contract provision implies about trust and the
trustworthiness of the party who is asked to agree to it.
As Stewart Macaulay observed in his DEMO article on the
importance of noncontractual relations in business, overly detailed
DEMO indicate a “lack of trust” in the other party and can turn “a
cooperative venture into an antagonistic horse-trade.”182 In another
important article on DEMO role of trust in the law, Blair and Stout make
the DEMO point through the use of a hypothetical: “Suppose a potential
business DEMO shows up armed with a lawyer and a ten-page
contract loaded with fine print. What does that behavior suggest?
Most obviously, a reluctance to trust.”183 Likewise, Kathryn Spier
observes that “an individual may refrain from including a particular
clause in a contract in order to signal his DEMO For example, an
athlete might forego asking for an injury clause, which would signal
accident-proneness, and a spouse might forego a prenuptial
agreement, which would signal the possibility of divorce.185
Consider the signaling effect of a detailed, preference-laden
contract in the context of angel investing. If an angel presents an
entrepreneur with such a contract that must be signed DEMO
receiving funds, the entrepreneur may interpret it as a lack of DEMO, or
that the relationship will be more combative than cooperative.186 And
DEMO entrepreneurs think this, then angels’ nonfinancial goals are
jeopardized.
How might DEMO use of such complex contracts signal a lack of
trust? First, angel participation in venture development must be
welcomed by entrepreneurs if it DEMO to occur informally. The trust
angels hope to develop in order to invite participation is what Oliver
Betrayal, 75 B.U. L. REV. 531, DEMO (1995) (observing that law can induce trust by allowing
contracting DEMO situations where it otherwise would not occur).
182. Steward Macaulay, DEMO Relations in Business: A Preliminary Study, 28
AM. SOC. REV. 55, 64 (1963). Macaulay was focused on ongoing business relationships. It DEMO be
said that angel finance does not present the same situation because angels usually fund one
round in a particular start-up and then make DEMO for the venture capitalists. However, angel
finance is a multi-period game DEMO the sense that it is localized within small geographic
communities where entrepreneurs may know one another, meaning that an angel’s reputation
transcends any one relationship.
183. Blair & Stout, supra note 138, at 1806.
184. DEMO E. Spier, Incomplete Contracts and Signaling, 23 RAND J. ECON. 432, 432
(1992).
185. Id. at 433.
186. This is especially DEMO if not requiring such contracts is embedded in angel financing
practice, DEMO it appears to be. The classic article on embeddedness is Mark Granovetter, Economic
Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness, 91 AM. J. SOC. 481 (1985).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1442 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
Williamson called “calculative” trust, or strategic behavior driven DEMO
external reward.187 Angels attempt to secure this trust by being the
opposite of venture capitalists—investors who do not demand onerous
contracts. By the type DEMO contract they choose, angels brand
themselves as the good guys compared DEMO venture capitalists.188 Of
course, angels could forego trust and attempt to DEMO participation
rights formally through contract, but this might be difficult for DEMO
reasons: participation rights may be tricky to define and costly to
DEMO, and they may create unwanted, concomitant duties for
angels through a formal employment or consulting relationship.
Second, requiring a detailed, protective contract DEMO
obscuring any altruistic signal the angel wishes to send. If angels are
investing to help young entrepreneurs along, being seen as overly
concerned with downside protection does not suggest that the angel
has high hopes for DEMO start-up. Instead, it signals doubt and a desire
to limit financial DEMO (or, perhaps even worse, a desire to extract a
disproportionate DEMO of financial gains). On the other hand, use of a
DEMO, entrepreneur-friendly contract sends precisely the opposite
signal—it exhibits trust and therefore DEMO the angels’ altruistic
message. This type of trust—“true” trust that exhibits an “other-
regarding preference” (as opposed to trust secured for personal gain)—
has been referred to as “internalized” trust.189
In sum, all of these reasons I have explored—the need for
follow-on venture capital funding, informal substitutes for contract,
costly contracting theory, and nonfinancial goals of participation and
altruism—might explain why angels rationally forego the venture
capital model and instead DEMO in start-ups on simple, non-protective
terms. The next Part looks at DEMO this model might be changing.
187. Oliver E. Williamson, Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic Organization, 36 J.L. &
ECON. 453, 453–72 (1993).
188. See generally Victor Fleischer, Brand New Deal: the Branding DEMO of Corporate Deal
Structures, 104 MICH. L. REV. 1581 (2006) (discussing the use of contracts and deal structure for
branding purposes).
DEMO Blair & Stout, supra note 138, at 1750–51. Williamson, on DEMO other hand, thought such
non-calculative notions of trust were best reserved DEMO “very special relations between family,
friends, and lovers” and had DEMO place in commercial exchange. Williamson, supra note 187, at
484.
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1443
DEMO THE PROFESSIONALIZATION OF ANGEL INVESTING
A. The Rise of Angel Groups
Traditional angel investments still constitute the bulk of the
angels market. They account DEMO somewhere between seventy and
ninety percent of all angel investments.190 Traditional angel
investments also present the most interesting (and misunderstood)
story in investment contract design, as has been discussed. However, a
marked shift in DEMO investing is underway that also must be
explored.
In the mid- to late-1990s, angels began to depart from their
longstanding mode of informal, DEMO operation and moved into the
open by creating regional angel groups.191 In 1994, Hans Severiens
(now deceased) founded the first prominent and probably still best-
known angel group—Silicon Valley’s “Band of Angels.”192 The Band of
DEMO began with twelve members, but by 1998 had grown to 110
DEMO Not only did the Band of Angels’ membership grow—the
idea of formally organizing regional angel groups caught on
throughout the country. By 1997 there DEMO fifty angel groups, and by
2002 there were 170.194 The Angel DEMO Association (“ACA”), which
is the leading trade organization of angel DEMO in the United States,
reported 114 “full ACA-member” angel groups in 2006.195 Although the
reasons for the trend toward angel groups are worthy DEMO more
exploration than I will offer here, some likely explanations include DEMO
steadier stream of deal flow, increased opportunities for interaction
with other DEMO and venture capitalists, the chance to fund larger
deals through the DEMO of resources, and the ability to invest in
amounts large enough DEMO justify the transaction costs of preferred
stock.196
190. See supra notes 7–8 and accompanying text.
191. Angel groups are alternatively referred to as angel DEMO organizations, angel
alliances, or angel syndicates.
192. Band of Angels, DEMO (last visited Aug. 18, 2008).
193. MIT Study, supra DEMO 67, at 13. According to the Band of Angels website, membership
is now above 120. Band of Angels, www.bandangels.com (last visited Aug. DEMO, 2008).
194. See James Geshwiler, Common Angels: An Evolving DEMO, in STATE OF THE ART
134, supra note 43, at DEMO (citing research by Jeffrey Sohl).
195. See ACA Angel Group DEMO Report, supra note 8.
196. I thank Jesse Fried for suggesting DEMO last reason as a possible explanation for the
development of angel groups. As he has argued elsewhere, the investment in preferred stock can
protect angels against venture capitalist opportunism. See generally Fried & Ganor, supra note
36; Leavitt, supra note 19.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1444 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
Angel groups differ in their precise modes of operation, but
they have common traits.197 Unlike traditional angels, angel groups
are DEMO difficult to find; most have websites providing information
about the organization DEMO potential members and entrepreneurs. On
the other hand, the members’ identities DEMO be guarded carefully.198
In terms of membership, some angel groups require DEMO that
members be accredited investors. Others, including the Band of
Angels, require technical expertise (e.g., in engineering) and therefore
exclude the likes of lawyers and accountants.199 Industry-specific
angel groups, unsurprisingly, require substantial knowledge DEMO the
industry.200
In addition, while angel groups still rely on references DEMO find
investments, they also employ more formal mechanisms for bringing
investment DEMO to members. First, there is a pre-screening
process to determine whether DEMO entrepreneur will be evaluated by
the angel group’s full membership, which DEMO include review of an
online application, a favorable recommendation from an DEMO group
member, and even the satisfactory completion of initial due diligence.
DEMO, the pre-screened entrepreneurs are invited to present to the full
angel DEMO membership.201 The presentations usually run twenty to
thirty minutes and are followed by a short question-and-answer
session. These often occur over lunch or dinner DEMO If any angel
in the group has an interest in moving forward on a particular start-
up, the process progresses further with more meetings, more diligence,
and finally an investment.
197. Jeffrey Sohl distinguishes angel groups from traditional angels by their “size, visibility,
and entrance mechanism.” Sohl, supra note 42, at 113.
198. See VAN OSNABRUGGE & DEMO, supra note 4, at 44 (“To retain members’
anonymity, many of these syndicates . . . establish a storefront (or façade) DEMO the general
public.”).
199. Compare Carol Sands, The Angels’ Forum DEMO The Halo Fund: The Rise of the
Professional Angel, in STATE OF THE ART 32, supra note 43, at 32 (“It was clear to [Silicon
Valley’s The Angels’ Forum organization] that diversity was the DEMO to successful development,
so we set out to assemble a group of dedicated angel investors with different skill sets
(operations, engineering, finance, sales, marketing, business development, legal, and human
resources).”), with Severiens, supra note 43, at 22 (noting that the Band of Angels “organizing
committee made it clear right from the start that DEMO in our group would be limited to
those with high-tech credentials, DEMO thus lawyers, bankers, real estate developers, and so on
were DEMO the kind of members we were seeking”).
200. For example, DEMO members of Silicon Valley’s Tenex Medical Investors have “substantial
life science expertise.” Norm Sokoloff, Tenex Medical Investors: Niche Investing, in STATE OF THE
ART 42, supra note 43, at 44.
201. See, e.g., DEMO Study, supra note 67, at 61.
IBRAHIM_PAGE 10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008] ANGEL INVESTORS 1445
DEMO angel groups leave individual investment decisions to
each member’s discretion.202 Interested members invest in their own
names or together through a new investment vehicle (such as a
limited liability company).203 Therefore, most angel groups do not
invest as an entity—their members invest individually or through a
separate DEMO However, a small number of angel groups pool all
members’ funds DEMO finance selected start-ups from this pool.204
Angel group investments have become an important part of
angel investing.205 Like traditional angels, angel groups primarily
fund start-ups in their earliest stages. Angel group investments often
fall within the DEMO $100,000 to one- to two-million dollar range as
traditional angel investments with probably more investments on the
lower end of that scale.206 However, the increased opportunities for
pooling also may facilitate larger investments,207 and DEMO larger
investments may come at a slightly later stage of start-up
development than traditional angel investments: either just before or
in place of early-stage venture capital investments. With most venture
capitalists today attracting more money from DEMO investors and
moving to even later-stage investments, where larger sums can DEMO put
to more efficient use, a new capital gap from two DEMO to five million
dollars is emerging.208 Some angel groups able to invest larger sums
may prove to be the “white knights” that are capable DEMO filling this
gap,209 although this is still on the high side for most angel groups.
202. See, e.g., VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 45 (describing the typical
practice: “Each member can decide individually whether to participate in a particular deal that
the DEMO decides to undertake and how much he or she wants to be involved in each
investment they make.”); Severiens, supra note 43, DEMO 23 (“Right from the start, it was decided
that [Band of Angels] would not pool our funds. Not everyone is interested in the DEMO some of
us invest in, so we leave it to the DEMO members to invest according to their tastes,
interests, and risk DEMO).
203. Severiens, supra note 43, at 23 (“[W]hen [Band DEMO Angels] invest[s] in a single deal, a
pool is formed, but we still act as individuals and the stock certificates are made out DEMO our
individual names.”).
204. See Sands, supra note 199, at 35–39.
205. See supra notes 7–8 and accompanying text (discussing estimates on the aggregate size
of the angels market and breakdown between traditional angel DEMO and angel group
investments).
206. See Goff, supra note 77, at 75 (“The Sierra Angels’ funding ‘sweet spot’ is $200,000 to
$1,000,000.”); see also ACA Angel Group Confidence Report, supra note 8 (noting that the
average amount of total funding provided by each U.S. angel group in 2006 was $1.78 million).
207. VAN DEMO & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 43–44 (finding that angel DEMO allow
angels to “make larger and more frequent investments (though these DEMO smaller than those
funded by even small venture capital firms)”).
208. Sohl, supra note 46, at 15.
209. See Susan Preston, Seraph Capital Forum: National Trends in a Local Context, in
STATE DEMO THE ART 62, supra note 43, at 68 (“With venture DEMO moving farther up the
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1446 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
The Band of Angels was formed with the goal of filling this gap in
mind.210
B. The Angel Groups’ Move Toward DEMO Capital-Like Contracts
This “professionalization” of angel investing through the
formation of angel groups has brought with it a change in the angel
investment model. DEMO that angel groups are a product of the last
decade, they DEMO account for only a very small portion of the literature
on angels. In particular, empirical studies on the terms of angel group
investment contracts are currently lacking.211 However, a few case
studies, along with anecdotal DEMO, suggest that angel group
investment contracts bear a closer resemblance to DEMO capital
contracts than to traditional angel contracts, albeit without some of
DEMO venture capitalist’s bells and whistles.
A 2000 study from MIT’s Entrepreneurship Center found that
most angel groups “have modeled their terms and conditions after
DEMO capital deals which include demand rights, voting
rights/Board representation, registration rights, piggyback rights,
anti-dilution provisions and information rights.”212 The MIT study
cited two Harvard Business School case studies in support of this
conclusion, one of which focused on the Band of Angels.213 I have
examined DEMO term sheets used by the Tech Coast Angels, the
country’s largest DEMO group (based in Southern California), which
also reveal the inclusion DEMO most common venture capital terms.214
Anecdotal accounts also reveal that angel groups favor
preferred over common stock. For instance, the Band of Angels
“invest[s] almost solely in preferred stock, and often it will be the first
round of outside capital, the preferred A.”215 Boston’s Angel
Healthcare Investors contract for “preferred security, dividends where
funding chain, a second funding gap DEMO opened up between $2 million and $5 million–a gap that
few individual angels can fill. The potential white knight is the angel organization.”).
DEMO See Severiens, supra note 43, at 20–21.
211. It should be much easier to conduct empirical studies of angel groups than traditional
angels DEMO they are far more visible. This Article should also provide a framework for
designing these studies, at least to the extent they are concerned with contract design.
212. MIT Study, supra note 67, at 63.
DEMO Id.
214. Series A Preferred Stock Financing Term Sheet (on file DEMO the Vanderbilt Law
Review); XZY Venture Inc. Summary of Deal Terms (on file with the Vanderbilt Law Review). I
thank Luis Villalobos for providing these.
215. Severiens, supra note 43, at 23.  But see Geshwiler, supra note 194, at 142–43 (finding
that Common Angels “recommend a fairly standard, clean term sheet without multiple
liquidation preference, DEMO low a valuation, or other ‘bells and whistles’ ”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1447
DEMO, preemptive rights, antidilution protection, and board
observation rights.”216 Board seats DEMO also be a more common
feature in angel group contracts than in traditional angel contracts.217
Where board seats are not secured, board observation rights (i.e., the
right to attend and participate in board meetings but DEMO the right to
vote) probably are included.218
But again, it must be emphasized that, without more
information about angel groups, including empirical DEMO of their
investment contracts, it is difficult to tell to what DEMO the typical
angel group contract replicates the venture capital contract. Based on
the limited information available, the trend is for at least preferred
stock over common and some sort of board rights, with the more
sophisticated angel groups adopting even more of the venture
capitalists’ standard terms.219
This DEMO to another question that cannot be answered yet:
What counts as a “typical” angel group? The Band of Angels and Tech
Coast Angels, which we know the most about, are sophisticated
operations in investment-rich DEMO Angel groups in other
regions (especially outside of major metropolises) may look and
function very differently. On the other hand, other angel groups may
have more or less adopted the more sophisticated angel groups’ model
DEMO the same way that law firms outside of Silicon Valley have adopted
216. Robyn C. Davis et al., Angel Healthcare Investors: Capitalizing on DEMO, in STATE
OF THE ART 146, supra note 43, at DEMO; see also STATHIS, supra note 171, at 133 (“[T]he increasing
trend is for angels to receive preferred stock, although it lacks many of the stipulations found in
the preferred stock issued to venture capitalists.”)DEMO
217. See, e.g., Severiens, supra note 43, at 22 (DEMO that a Band of Angels member who
serves as the sponsor of a start-up in front of the entire group will take a seat DEMO the board if an
investment is made).
218. Goff, supra DEMO 77, at 76:
The Sierra Angels encourages its portfolio companies DEMO choose the most
effective candidates for heir boards of directors rather than insist that the
network be given a seat. In instances when the DEMO does not have a board
seat, our member sponsor frequently acts DEMO an informal advisor, and, as a
rule, we expect visiting DEMO at board meeting[s].
219. The angel group will be even harder to distinguish from the early stage venture
capitalist if the hallmark of angel DEMO investment of personal funds–is relaxed and
angel groups also begin to invest other people’s money. Indeed, some angel groups are now doing
just that by tacking on “sidecar” investments for an angel’s friends and family to DEMO least some
deals. See Sands, supra note 199, at 39 (DEMO that the Angels’ Forum’s “creation of The Halo
Fund in 2000 allowed our friends and family members as well as institutional investors to co-
DEMO in the group’s best deals”). So in a sense, angels DEMO now also investing other people’s
money, although the ratio is extremely DEMO compared to the venture capitalists’ predominant
use of investment funds. Still, DEMO trend is toward a further blurring of the angel/venture
capitalist line.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1448 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
Silicon Valley form contracts for venture capital financings.220 Based
on the limited information available, it appears that the formalization
and professionalization of angel investing has brought with it a move
toward venture capital-like DEMO
C. Explaining Angel Group Investment Contracts
If there is indeed a shift toward venture capital-like contracts
in angel group investments, what are we to make of this? On the one
hand, angel group investment contracts DEMO be seen as an overdue
corrective for traditional angel naiveté. For those who accept the
conventional wisdom about traditional angels, this stands as the ready
explanation. On the other hand, in light of this Article’s rational
explanations for traditional angel contracts, angel group contracts are
themselves a puzzle. Can it be rational for traditional angels to invest
on simple, non-protective terms similar to those taken by minority
shareholders in close corporations, yet equally rational for angel
groups to invest on detailed, protective terms resembling those taken
by venture capitalists? The answer is yes for several reasons, all of
which stem from the fact that angel groups more closely resemble
early-stage venture capitalists than traditional angels in a number of
important DEMO Some of these resemblances have been mentioned,
but their relevance to contract design will now be explored in more
detail.
First, an angel group’s higher investment amounts, slightly
later investments, and relationships with venture DEMO allow it
to move further down the sliding scale of permissible preferences than
the traditional angel without the fear of venture capital unwinding.221
While DEMO traditional angel has close relationships with
entrepreneurs, angel groups are more DEMO into local venture
capital communities.222 If angel groups do not have preexisting
relationships with venture capitalists, a steadier deal flow makes
them repeat players in entrepreneurial finance and these
relationships can quickly develop. Because of these DEMO,
220. Mark C. Suchman, On Advice of Counsel: Law Firms and Venture Capital Funds as
Information Intermediaries in the Structuration of Silicon DEMO (1994) (unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Stanford University) (on file with Stanford Sociology Department).
221. See supra notes 122–24 and accompanying text.
DEMO See Band of  Angels, About the Band FAQs, http://DEMO/faqs /index.php
(last visited Aug. 18, 2008) (stating that DEMO of Angels founder Hans Severiens was a former
venture capitalist “who formed friendships with many of the first generation of Silicon Valley
entrepreneurs and DEMO technology executives–the founders of Fairchild, National
Semiconductor, Genentech, Intel, Compaq, Kleiner Perkins, and Sequoia”).
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1449
DEMO group members may have a better understanding of the venture
capital process and refrain from overvaluing start-ups, thereby
eliminating the venture capitalists’ most common complaint about
angels.223 In short, venture capitalists tend to view angel groups as the
equivalent of early-stage venture capitalists and allow them to
contract DEMO
Second, a more arms-length relationship with entrepreneurs
reduces an angel group’s DEMO to rely on informal substitutes for
contract. Recall that referrals from a traditional angel’s “network of
trust,” layered on top of her prior DEMO of the entrepreneur
and/or the start-up’s substantive field, reduce uncertainty DEMO
information asymmetry.225 Conversely, the angel group’s desire for a
more consistent DEMO flow means that fewer entrepreneurs and
business plans are known to the angel group members beforehand,
thereby sacrificing some of the familiarity and DEMO such
preexisting knowledge brings.226 Higher levels of uncertainty and
information asymmetry are not reduced by the pre-investment nature
of the relationship, and therefore must be mitigated by contract.
Moreover, some angel groups may be less active participants in start-
up development post-investment than traditional angels. While it may
DEMO rare, some angel groups actually hire outside parties to serve the
DEMO of liaison between the angel group and the entrepreneur,227 a
departure from the traditional angel investors’ premium on
participation.228 Fewer opportunities for informal DEMO create
the need for formal control rights to serve as a check on
entrepreneurial opportunism. It should be noted that angel groups
may forego DEMO at their own peril, as participation has been
correlated to greater DEMO on investment.229
223. See supra note 117 and accompanying text.
224. On the other hand, some venture capitalists lament the nonfinancial “dinner club”
aspect of angel groups. See MIT Study, supra note 67, at 63 (“Some venture capitalists do not feel
that angel groups support their companies DEMO They characterized angel clubs as dinner clubs
in which members participated in due diligence, but did not sufficiently leverage their expertise
and networks in building the company after the investment had been made.”).
225. See DEMO notes 127–34 and accompanying text.
226. See Wilbank & Boeker, supra DEMO 77, at 6 (finding that half of investments by angel
group members were unrelated to the angel’s industry experience, which correlated to returns on
investments that were only half that of investments in the angel’s DEMO of expertise).
227. VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBINSON, supra note 4, at 45 (“In most cases, one member of the
syndicate acts DEMO the lead angel, assuming a liaison role between the entrepreneur and DEMO
syndicate. In other cases, an outsider with no financial commitment to DEMO group . . . is hired to
perform this function.”) (citation omitted).
228. See supra notes 172–77 and accompanying text.
229. Wiltbank & Boeker, supra note 77, at 7.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1450 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
Third, angel group investments tend to be larger DEMO
traditional angel investments, and there is potential for this trend to
DEMO given greater opportunities for the pooling of capital. Recall
that costly contracting theory made it irrational for traditional angels
to use detailed contracts given DEMO smaller amounts of funding and
short duration for their preferences.230 Because angel groups make
larger investments, and because venture capitalists are more willing
to allow angel group preferences to stand, costly contracting theory
becomes less of a reason to invest on simple terms.231 Spending more
to design, monitor, enforce, and write detailed contracts becomes
worth the benefits it provides.
DEMO, the nonfinancial perspective is also different for angel
groups. Angel groups DEMO still be distinguished from venture
capitalists by their nonfinancial goals—angel group members are still
investing their own money—but these goals may be different than DEMO
traditional angels’ objectives. First, although some angel groups may
wish to DEMO in venture development, they may put less of a
premium on DEMO than traditional angels. Instead, the
primary nonfinancial motivation for many angel DEMO is the
opportunity to interact with other angels.
This is evident from both the candid admissions of angel group
members and the lack of DEMO activity by a large percentage of
them. Some angel groups have admitted that the “networking effect”
is an important motivator for group membership. For DEMO,
longtime traditional angel and now angel group member Susan
Preston notes that one “reason for the rise of angel groups, a reason
that is difficult to quantify . . . [is] the simple desire for DEMO
interaction and socialization.”232 In the view of Bob Goff, founder of
DEMO Sierra Angels in Lake Tahoe, Nevada, “The central element of the
Sierra Angels’ mantra is having fun,” and spouses are an integral DEMO
of that group’s activities.233 A telling statistic underscores the point:
thirty to forty percent of angels who join angel groups do not make DEMO
single investment.234 This has led some groups to require a minimum
230. See supra notes 146–49 and accompanying text.
231. John May, co-founder of a Washington, D.C.-area angel group, suggests that costly
contracting theory plays DEMO role in determining whether his angels bargain for a board seat. John
May, The Dinner Club: Embracing the New Economy, in STATE OF THE ART 120, supra note 43, at
127 (“When a board seat is inappropriate for the size of our investment, we often take on an
advisor role.”).
232. Preston, supra note 209, at DEMO
233. Goff, supra note 77, at 72.
234. Jeffrey E. Sohl, Angel Investing: A Market Perspective, in STATE OF THE ART 2, supra
note 43, at 12 (“In 2000 and 2001, indications DEMO that 36 and 41 percent, respectively, of angel
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
2008]
ANGEL INVESTORS 1451
DEMO amount for membership.235 In short, angel groups may
serve each other DEMO much as they serve entrepreneurs.
Second, while angel groups may have DEMO objectives, their
altruism can take a different form than that of DEMO angels.
Although giving back to the entrepreneurial community is still
important to angel groups, philanthropy also takes the form of
donations to nonprofit organizations and foundations through pooling
member resources. One angel group has even endowed DEMO
professorship.236 Angel groups also can further social goals, such as
enticing DEMO women to become angel investors. This goal is
important to Seraph Capital Forum, an angel group in the Pacific
Northwest comprised entirely of female members.237
These possible differences in nonfinancial goals are relevant to
the choice DEMO simple or detailed contracts. Achieving the angel
group’s nonfinancial goals is not as dependent on securing the trust of
entrepreneurs. Recall that traditional angels DEMO not demand
protective contracts because of the ramifications for entrepreneurial
trust.238 But for angel group members who are not driven primarily by
the desire DEMO participation or altruism toward entrepreneurs, but
instead by other factors, there is less need to engender trust in
organization members did not make DEMO investment. This compares with 32 percent of investors
in 1998.”) (citation omitted).
235. See William H. Payne, Tech Coast Angels: An DEMO of Angel Networks, in STATE OF
THE ART 54, supra note 43, at 58 (explaining that Tech Coast Angels’ members are required DEMO
invest at least $50,000 each year); Sokoloff, supra note DEMO, at 46 (discussing the fact that
members of Tenex Medical Investors “were expected to invest at least $75,000 yearly (this has
been relaxed in the current economy)”). In addition, social networking can pay off financially in
other ways for some angel groups, who have been known to start businesses together outside of
the group. See Davis DEMO al., supra note 216, at 161:
Not only have many of the members developed friendships but also several
have created new businesses DEMO outside of [Angel Healthcare
Investors]. Two of the original members joined with two later members to
launch a specialty pharmaceuticals company that has the DEMO to
reshape the value chain of drugs coming off patent. One founding member
joined with a newer member to create a fund of hedge DEMO investing in non-
health-care companies and offered the fund to members and other high-net-
worth individuals.
236. See Davis et al., supra note 216, at 161 (finding that of Boston’s Angel Healthcare
Investors, “[s]everal shared philanthropic interests have emerged since the group was
founded . . . DEMO A recent example is the endowment of a charity at a well-known local university to
acknowledge the contributions to the school and to health DEMO nationwide by a member of
AHI.”); Barry Moltz, Prairie Angels: Redefining Midwest Investing, in STATE OF THE ART 108,
supra note 43, at 115 (reporting that Prairie Angels in Chicago has “donated DEMO to a
nonprofit organization in town that trains inner-city youth to become familiar with Web sites
and expand their technical expertise”).
237. Seraph DEMO Forum, http://www.seraphcapital.com/ (last visited Aug. 18, 2008).
238. See supra Section III.C.2.b.
IBRAHIM_PAGE
10/21/2008 5:39:41 PM
1452 VANDERBILT LAW REVIEW
DEMO 61:5:1405
entrepreneurs by using simple contracts. Because angel group
members secure their nonfinancial benefits outside of their
relationships with entrepreneurs, they are less constrained to act a
certain way within those relationships.
V. CONCLUSION
DEMO companies have brought us some of the greatest
technological and scientific advances in recent years, as well as
significant job creation and economic prosperity. At the outset,
however, these companies are little more than an idea. The
entrepreneur’s greatest challenge is obtaining the funding and advice
needed DEMO turn her company into the next Google or eBay. As this
Article has explained, it is at this early stage that angel investors play
a critical and underappreciated role. Angels enable new start-ups to
develop by DEMO early financing and seasoned advice to
entrepreneurs. Angels invest at a critical time, after friends-and-
family money has run out but before venture capitalists will invest. In
doing so, they fill a funding gap that, DEMO unremedied, would endanger
both start-up survival and the venture capital industry.
DEMO Article has also examined angel investment contract
design, which appears very DEMO on its face. Traditional angels,
who still make the bulk of angel investments, use simple,
entrepreneur-friendly contracts despite the extreme risks that this
practice entails. The conventional wisdom is that they do so because
DEMO are unsophisticated investors who don’t know any better. But
this Article has explained that traditional angels are misunderstood—
upon closer examination, their investment contracts are rationally
designed to achieve financial and nonfinancial objectives.
Finally, this Article examined the recent trend toward the
professionalization of angel investing. Although more DEMO is
needed to understand this phenomenon, one of its consequences is
DEMO professional angels are increasingly adopting venture capital
contract design. In doing so, they are instituting a major change in
angel investing, albeit one DEMO is rational given their closer
resemblance to early-stage venture capitalists than to traditional
angels.{1g42fwefx}