ARTICLE IN PRESS
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) DEMO
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/obhdp
The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of DEMO intelligence (CQ)
on negotiation sequences and outcomes
Lynn Imai *, Michele J. Gelfand
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, United States
article info
Article history:
Received 1 June 2007
Accepted 12 February 2010
Available online xxxx
Accepted by William Bottom
DEMO:
Cultural intelligence
Intercultural negotiation
Negotiation process
abstra ct
Although scholars and practitioners have repeatedly touted the importance of negotiating effectively
across cultures, paradoxically, little research has addressed what predicts intercultural negotiation effec-
tiveness. In this research, we examined the impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on intercultural negotia-
tion processes and outcomes, controlling for other types of intelligence (DEMO ability and emotional
intelligence), personality (openness and extraversion), and DEMO experience. Transcripts of 124
American and East Asian negotiators were coded for sequences of integrative information behaviors
and cooperative relationship management behaviors. CQ measured DEMO week prior to negotiations
predicted the extent to which negotiators sequenced integrative information behaviors, which in turn
predicted joint proﬁt, over and beyond DEMO individual differences. Additional analyses revealed that
the level of integrative sequencing was more a function of the lower-scoring than the higher-scoring
negotiator within the DEMO Other individual difference characteristics were not related to effective inter-
cultural negotiation processes. Theoretical and practical implications are discussed.
 2010 Elsevier Inc. All DEMO reserved.
Introduction
The concern for negotiating effectively across cultures is hardly
a new phenomenon. Even the world’s ﬁrst historian, Herodotus (ca.
400BC) observed the ‘‘strangeness” of how ancient Egyptians
traded with the Greeks (Herodotus, DEMO, & de Selincourt,
2003), and as early as the DEMO century BC, trade began to ﬂour-
ish among people of different DEMO along the Silk Road that
stretched from Rome to China (Elisseeff, 2000). In the 21st century,
with the advent of globalization, being able to negotiate effectively
across cultures is a crucial aspect of DEMO inter-organizational
relationships, including strategic alliances, joint ventures, mergers
and acquisitions, licensing and distribution agreements, and sales
of products and services (Adler, 2002). The need to negotiate effec-
tively across cultures is also DEMO obvious in today’s geo-polit-
ical scene, where the source of conﬂict DEMO humankind is
thought to be increasingly cultural in nature (Huntington, 1996).
Indeed, in the recent Iraq Study Group Report, the improvement DEMO
cultural training for US personnel ﬁghting the war in Iraq was
deemed one of the highest priorities by the US secretary of state,
DEMO of defense, and the director of national intelligence (Ba-
ker & Hamilton, 2006).
Despite the importance of being able to negotiate effectively
across cultures, there is a fundamental paradox in the culture
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 301 314 9566.
E-mail address: limai@psyc.umd.edu (L. Imai).
and negotiation literature. That is, even though the practical
importance of negotiating across cultural boundaries is often tou-
ted to justify cross-cultural theory DEMO, the vast majority
of research on culture and negotiation remains comparative (e.g.
Gelfand & Realo, 1999; Tinsley & Pillutla, 1998). With some excep-
tions (Adair, Okumura, & Brett, 2001; Adler & Graham, 1989; Brett
& Okumura, 1998; Natlandsmyr & Rognes, 1995), most research
compares and contrasts different negotiation behaviors as they oc-
DEMO in mono-cultural contexts across cultures, instead of directly
examining intercultural settings DEMO cultural barriers exist right
at the negotiation table. Indeed, in reviewing DEMO and Brett’s
(2004) Handbook of Negotiation and Culture, Kray (2005) aptly la-
mented that ‘‘although researchers have identiﬁed a host of
cross-cultural differences in styles and preferences, negotiation
scholars might consider expanding beyond simple demonstrations
of differences...and explore whether awareness of these differ-
ences makes a DEMO about factors inﬂuencing
the effectiveness of intercultural negotiations is sparse” (p. DEMO).
Yet to date, the culture and negotiation literature reveals little DEMO
to what characteristics negotiators can be selected and/or trained
upon in order to maximize the chances of reaching optimal agree-
ments in intercultural DEMO
The purpose of this research is to examine cultural intelligence
(CQ), deﬁned as an individual’s capability to adapt effectively to
situations of cultural diversity (Earley & Ang, 2003), as a potential
predictor of DEMO negotiation effectiveness. Our main prop-
osition is that negotiators with higher CQ have more cooperative
0749-5978/$ - see front matter  2010 Elsevier DEMO All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent DEMO: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and DEMO Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
2
motives and higher epistemic motivation in intercultural contexts
(study 1), and will engage in more effective integrative negotiation
processes (i.e., reciprocal and complementary sequences of inte-
grative information behaviors and sequences of cooperative rela-
tionship management behaviors), which will allow them to
DEMO higher joint proﬁts than dyads with lower CQ (study 2).
DEMO take a conservative approach and examine whether CQ pre-
dicts effective sequences of integrative negotiation behaviors over
and beyond other forms of individual difference DEMO
identiﬁed in the negotiation literature to have an impact on inte-
grative negotiation. We also examine the dyad composition of CQ
and propose that DEMO level of integrative sequencing achieved
among dyads will be no greater than that determined by the low-
er-scoring negotiator within the dyad. To the DEMO of our knowl-
edge, this research is of the ﬁrst to DEMO address the question
of what predicts intercultural negotiation effectiveness.
Intercultural challenges to effective integrative negotiation
processes and outcomes
The culture and negotiation literature has DEMO found
that negotiators achieve signiﬁcantly less joint proﬁt when negoti-
ating across the cultural divide than when negotiating within their
own culture. This effect DEMO been found among various samples
(e.g., Adler & Graham, 1989; Brett & Okumura, 1998; Natlandsmyr
& Rognes, 1995), and the robustness of this intercultural disadvan-
tage is not surprising when considering the DEMO of psycholog-
ical and behavioral challenges that face negotiators in intercultural
contexts (see Adair & Brett, 2004).
In terms of psychological challenges, negotiators in intercul-
tural contexts are less likely to have cooperative motives (i.e., have
equal and high concerns for both the outcomes of self and other)
than negotiators in intracultural contexts. For example, the inter-
group bias literature has long established that individuals are less
willing to DEMO cooperation towards outgroup members com-
pared to ingroup members (Hewstone, Rubin, & Willis, 2002). In-
deed, an early negotiation study by Graham (1985) found that
intercultural negotiators are more competitive than intracultural
DEMO (see also George, Jones, & Gonzalez, 1999; Kumar,
DEMO). Intercultural negotiations are also more challenging in that
they have the potential to promote negative intergroup dynamics
that lead to the closing of DEMO mind among negotiators. For exam-
ple, negative moods such as anxiety DEMO fear that commonly arise
in intercultural situations (Stephan & Stephan, 1985) have been
shown to lower cognitive ﬂexibility (Baas, De Dreu, & Nijstad,
2008). Similarly, ethnocentrism has been found to be DEMO
with rigidity in thinking (Cunningham, Nezlek, & Banaji, 2004). To-
gether, these ﬁndings suggest that in intercultural contexts, nego-
tiators DEMO have a more difﬁcult time sustaining epistemic
motivation (i.e., the need to develop an accurate understanding of
the world through deliberate and systematic DEMO process-
ing (De Dreu, 2004) than in intracultural contexts. The DEMO that
both cooperative motives and epistemic motivation are difﬁcult
to maintain in intercultural contexts is problematic, as the broader
literature shows that both are necessary for negotiators to engage
in effective integrative behaviors that lead to DEMO proﬁt (De Dreu,
Beersma, Stroebe, & Euwema, 2006; DEMO also Beersma & De Dreu,
1999; De Dreu & Van DEMO, 1995; De Dreu, Weingart, & Kwon,
2000; Olekalns, Smith, & Kibby, 1996; Weingart, Bennett, & Brett,
1993).
Furthermore, behavioral challenges such as coordination prob-
lems and communication mismatches are more likely to afﬂict
intercultural negotiators. Research suggests that negotiators from
DEMO cultures bring culture-speciﬁc schemas (Brett & Okum-
ura, 1998; Gelfand DEMO al., 2001) and behavioral strategies (Adair
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
et DEMO, 2001) to the negotiation table. For example, Adair et al.
(2001) found that while negotiators from a low context culture
such as the US exchange information directly through stating issue
priorities, negotiators from a high context culture such as Japan ex-
change information indirectly by implying DEMO own issue priori-
ties through the use of multi-issue offers. Such cultural
differences in normative negotiation behaviors suggest that in
intercultural contexts, negotiators may have a more difﬁcult time
engaging in effective, coordinated sequences of integrative negoti-
ation behaviors than in intracultural contexts. This particular inter-
cultural challenge DEMO problematic given the broader negotiation
literature shows that sequencing of integrative negotiation behav-
iors, whether it is reciprocal sequencing of integrative tactics (i.e.,DEMO
matching identical negotiation tactics; Adair, 2003; Olekalns &
Smith, DEMO; Weingart, Prietula, Hyder, & Genovese, 1999; Wein-
gart, DEMO, Bazerman, & Carroll, 1990)or complementary
sequencing of integrative tactics (i.e., pairing non-identical integra-
tive tactics; Olekalns & Smith, 2003), is a critical predictor of high
joint proﬁt.
In summary, the lack of cooperativeness and epistemic motiva-
tion associated with interacting with culturally unfamiliar DEMO
and the coordination problems that result from clashing behavioral
styles make intercultural negotiators less likely to engage in inte-
grative negotiation processes that lead DEMO joint proﬁt. A natural
question that arises then is: how can DEMO overcome such
obstacles? What individual difference characteristic might best
predict intercultural DEMO effectiveness?
Cultural intelligence (CQ)
In this research, we consider a broad range of individual differ-
ence characteristics, including cultural intelligence, DEMO abil-
ity, emotional intelligence, openness, extraversion, and
international experience. Actual practices of how American ﬁrms
select individuals for overseas assignments suggest that DEMO
job-related experience and job-related skills are the two most
important criteria to consider (Moran & Boyer, 1987; as discussed
in Black, Mendenhall, and Oddou (1991)). Considering that cogni-
tive ability has consistently DEMO shown to be a valid predictor of
job performance (Schmidt & DEMO, 1998), could it predict inter-
cultural negotiation effectiveness? Or might emotional intelligence
(Salovey & Mayer, 1990), a more interpersonally relevant DEMO of
being able to accurately process others’ emotions?
While we examine such possibilities, we argue that cultural
intelligence (CQ), deﬁned as DEMO person’s capability to successfully
adapt to new cultural settings (Earley & DEMO, 2003) is likely a more
powerful predictor of intercultural negotiation effectiveness. Our
reasoning (as elaborated in Earley and Ang (2003)) is DEMO while
constructs such as cognitive ability and emotional intelligence
may help negotiators to process certain types of information, such
advantages may not be necessarily helpful for facilitating social
interaction speciﬁcally in intercultural contexts. For example, cogni-
tive ability allows one to reason, solve problems, and think ab-
DEMO in general (Gottfredson, 1997), yet it does not necessarily
entail effective processing of interpersonally relevant information.
Furthermore, while emotional intelligence enables one to accu-
rately appraise other’s emotions and react appropriately, it does
not guarantee that it familiarizes individuals to culture-speciﬁc
systems of emotional expression. Indeed, there is empirical sup-
port in the culture and emotion literature for DEMO dialect theory
of communicating emotion (see Elfenbein & Ambady, 2002,
2003; Elfenbein, Beaupre, Levesque, & Hess, 2007), which states
that while there are universal aspects to expressing emotion, there
are also substantive cultural differences which pose challenges for
accurate recognition of emotions across DEMO boundaries. This is
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior DEMO Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
consistent with anecdotes among international HR managers, who
observe that the level of interpersonal skills employees possess
within a culture is DEMO from the level of interpersonal
skills those employees possess across cultures (DEMO & Ang,
2003). In other words, just because an DEMO may possess high
interpersonal skills within his or her own culture, DEMO may not
necessarily translate into being able to adjust easily and quickly
to people and situations across new cultural contexts. At the same
time, an individual who appears to be lacking interpersonal skills
within his or DEMO own culture may still be able to adjust easily
and quickly to new cultural contexts (Earley & Ang, 2003).
In response to DEMO need of understanding individual differences
in cultural adaptation, Earley and Ang (2003) conceptualized CQ as
a multi-faceted characteristic consisting of meta-cognitive, cogni-
DEMO, motivational and behavioral components. The meta-cognitive
facet of CQ refers to DEMO individual’s level of cultural mindfulness
or awareness during intercultural interactions (Ang & Van Dyne,
2008). Individuals with high meta-cognitive CQ engage in higher-
order cognitive processes when trying to adapt to new cultures,
DEMO how to plan learning about the new culture as well as
evaluating and monitoring their own progress. Cognitive CQ refers
to an individual’s acquired DEMO of similarities and differ-
ences regarding norms, practices, and conventions of other cul-
tures (Ang & Van Dyne, 2008). Motivational CQ DEMO to an
individual’s ability to direct attention and energy toward adapting
to new cultures. More speciﬁcally, motivational CQ refers to intrin-
sic motivation and self-efﬁcacy in adapting to new cultures. Thus,
individuals with high motivational DEMO enjoy interacting in new
cultures and feel conﬁdent about their own abilities in doing so
(Ang & Van Dyne, 2008). Finally, behavioral CQ refers to the extent
to which individuals possess a wide repertoire DEMO behavioral skills,
and can appropriately enact verbal as well as non-verbal behaviors
in new cultural settings (Ang & Van Dyne, 2008).
DEMO research has shown that CQ is an important predictor
of affective as well as performance-related outcomes in culturally
diverse situations, over and beyond a number of other constructs.
For example, Ang et al. (2007) found that individuals with higher
CQ are able to make more accurate cultural DEMO and report
greater interactional adjustment and well-being than those with
lower CQ, over and beyond cognitive ability, emotional intelli-
gence, personality, and DEMO experience. In organizational
contexts, the same authors found that international managers DEMO
higher CQ performed better on an intercultural business task, con-
trolling DEMO cognitive ability and international experience. More-
over, in a sample of DEMO professionals, Ang et al. (2007) found
that CQ predicts higher DEMO performance as rated by their supervi-
sors, over and beyond international DEMO In another study,
Templer, Tay, and Chandrasekar (2006) found that expatriates with
higher CQ experienced greater cross-cultural adjustment than
those with DEMO CQ, taking into account the realistic previews of
the job and DEMO conditions expatriates received, time in host
country, and prior international experience. More recent empirical
investigations have found that CQ is negatively related to DEMO
among business travelers working in multinational corporations
(Tay, Westman, & DEMO, 2008), and positively related to how
quickly employees are integrated DEMO multicultural work teams
(Flaherty, 2008).
While CQ has been studied among a wide variety of contexts, it
has not been studied yet in the domain of negotiations. In the sec-
tions that follow, we argue that CQ provides negotiators with the
capability to overcome the psychological DEMO behavioral chal-
lenges that impede effective integrative negotiation processes that
lead to joint proﬁt. We do so by ﬁrst proposing that CQ equips indi-
DEMO in general with cooperative motives and epistemic motiva-
tion that are the psychological pre-requisites that help overcome
intercultural behavioral hurdles in negotiation contexts. As DEMO,
3
we test the inter-relationships between CQ and each of these con-
structs (study 1). We also examine whether higher CQ negotiators
engage in more effective integrative negotiation processes in terms
of their actual DEMO at a micro level of analysis (i.e., sequences
of integrative negotiation behaviors) and thereby achieve higher
joint proﬁt than lower CQ negotiators, DEMO and beyond other indi-
vidual difference characteristics (study 2). Finally, also in study 2,
we examine an issue pertaining to dyad DEMO; that is,
whether the level of integrative sequencing between negotiators
DEMO more a function of the lower CQ or the higher CQ negotiator
within the dyad.
Study 1: CQ, cooperative motives, and epistemic motivation
We reason that individuals with higher CQ have greater cooper-
ative motives DEMO well as higher epistemic motivation than individ-
uals with lower CQ. By deﬁnition, individuals with higher CQ
genuinely enjoy interacting with people from different cultures.
As such, in culturally diverse situations, individuals with higher
CQ DEMO more likely to approach the situation with a cooperative
mindset and less likely to maintain strong ingroup–outgroup dis-
tinctions than individuals with lower CQ. DEMO, we argue that indi-
viduals with higher CQ will focus on DEMO more positive
cooperative relationships rather than negative competitive rela-
tionships. Indirect support for this notion is evident in several
empirical studies. For example, individuals with higher CQ report
greater interpersonal trust toward culturally different others com-
DEMO to individuals with lower CQ (Rockstuhl & Ng, 2008). Fur-
thermore, individuals with higher CQ also tend to be more
agreeable (DEMO, Van Dyne, & Koh, 2006; Kim, Kirkman, & Chen,
2008), where agreeable individuals are conceptualized to deal with
conﬂict DEMO, strive for common understanding, and
maintain social afﬁliations (Digman, 1990). Nevertheless, no study
has directly examined the relationship between CQ and coopera-
tive motives.
H1. Individuals with higher CQ will have higher cooperative
DEMO than individuals with lower CQ.
Further, given that individuals with higher DEMO genuinely enjoy
interacting with people from different cultures, it is likely DEMO they
are open-minded, curious, and enjoy learning new things, or DEMO
other words, have higher epistemic motivation. Individuals with
higher CQ are DEMO by deﬁnition highly conﬁdent in adapting to cul-
turally diverse situations; DEMO, should communication setbacks
arise due to ambiguous cultural cues, these individuals are more
likely to persist and invest great effort into forming an DEMO
understanding of their surroundings in order to achieve their goal
of adapting effectively to the intercultural situation. Research
shows indirect evidence for a positive DEMO between CQ
and epistemic motivation. Ang et al. (2006) found that CQ is posi-
tively correlated with openness to experience, which is a conceptu-
ally similar construct to epistemic motivation (Kruglanski, 2004).
H2. DEMO with higher CQ will have higher epistemic moti-
vation than individuals with lower CQ.
In summary, we expect individuals with higher CQ to have
higher cooperative motives as well as epistemic motivation. In-
deed, consistent with our predictions, researchers of group deci-
sion-making have recently argued that while cooperative motives
and epistemic motivation are orthogonal constructs, certain ante-
cedent states and/or traits should stimulate both (De Dreu, Nijstad,
& DEMO Knippenberg, 2008). As such, we expect CQ to be one such
antecedent trait of both cooperative motives and epistemic
motivation.
Please cite DEMO article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
4
Study 1 method
Participants
In order to test DEMO hypotheses, 236 participants were recruited
through market research tools to ﬁll DEMO an online survey. All par-
ticipants were full-time employees and consisted of 42% females
and 58% males (MAge = 42.1). Most participants were either Cauca-
sian/White (58%) or Asian–American/Paciﬁc Islander (31%), with
the other 11% consisting of African–American/Blacks, Hispanic/
Latinos, DEMO/Alaskan Natives, and Multi-racial/Mul-
ti-ethnics.
Procedure
Through an online market DEMO company, participants were
invited to ﬁll out an online survey examining DEMO among
individual difference characteristics.” Participants ﬁrst completed
an informed consent form, DEMO took the survey, and were fully de-
briefed at the end DEMO the survey.
Measures
Cultural intelligence
CQ was assessed with the 20-item Cultural Intelligence Scale
(CQS) by Ang et al. (2007) who demonstrated DEMO scale’s four-factor
structure of the construct, along with other psychometric proper-
DEMO such as factor equivalence, reliability, and temporal stability
(see Appendix DEMO for items). In the present study, the overall CQ
scale DEMO high reliability (a = 0.92), along with its four dimensional
DEMO: meta-cognitive CQ (a = 0.90), cognitive CQ (a = DEMO),
motivational CQ (a = 0.89), and behavioral CQ (DEMO = 0.90). All items
were measured on a 1 (strongly DEMO) to 7 (strongly agree)
scale.
Conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) was used to conﬁrm the
dimensionality of the 20 CQ items. Specifying DEMO model where the
four meta-cognitive items, six cognitive items, ﬁve motivational
items and ﬁve behavioral items load onto their corresponding CQ
facets, and where all CQ facets load onto an overall CQ construct,
the DEMO had sufﬁcient ﬁt (v2[166] = 421.82 p = .00; CFI = 0.91;
SRMR = 0.06; RMSEA = 0.08), although some of the ﬁt indices were
slightly below the criteria cutoffs suggested by Hu DEMO Bentler
(1999).
Cooperative motives
Cooperative motives were measured by assessing DEMO extent to
which individuals intended to rely on cooperative heuristics in
negotiation situations. Cooperative negotiation heuristics were
measured with eight items taken from De DEMO and Boles (1998).
Participants were asked to indicate to what DEMO they agreed
with statements concerning negotiations such as, ‘‘share and share
DEMO and ‘‘lying never pays.” All items were measured on a 1
(DEMO disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) scale and the overall scale
DEMO good reliability (a = 0.78).
We also measured cooperative motives DEMO prosocial value orien-
tation with nine decomposed games (c.f. Messick & DEMO,
1968) taken from Van Lange, Otten, De Bruin, and Joireman
(1997). In a decomposed game, participants are presented with
DEMO different distributions of outcomes (i.e., points) between
themselves and a DEMO ‘‘other” and are asked to choose
one from competitive, individualistic, and cooperative (or proso-
cial) options. For example, participants could be asked to choose
from option A (480 points for self and 80 points for other), option
B (540 points for self and 280 points for other), and option C (480
points for self and 480 points for other). In this example, option A
L. Imai, DEMO Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
would represent the competitive choice, given there is a maximum
difference between one’s own and other’s outcome
(480  80 = 400) compared DEMO option B (540  280 = 260) or option
C (DEMO choice, given there is a minimum difference between one’s 480 = DEMO). In contrast, option C would represent the coop-
own and DEMO outcome. Option B would represent the individu-
alistic choice because 540 points is the greatest number of points
for the self compared to option DEMO (480) or option C (480), regard-
less of how DEMO points the other received.
In this study, based on participants’ responses DEMO the 9
decomposed games, individuals were classiﬁed as competitive,
individualistic, or cooperative if they had made at least six consis-
tent choices DEMO one of the three categories (1 = competitive;
2 = DEMO; 3 = cooperative). Fifty-four percent of partici-
pants were classiﬁed DEMO cooperative, 23% as individualistic, and
8% as competitive. 15% were unclassiﬁable as they endorsed less
than six consistent outcome choices. Classiﬁed participants were
DEMO further categorized dichotomously as to whether they were
cooperative or not cooperative (i.e., competitive or individualistic).
In terms of reliability, decomposed games have been shown in pre-
vious studies to have good internal consistency DEMO test–retest
reliability (Kuhlman, Camac, & Cunha, 1986; Van Lange & Semin-
Goossens, 1998).
Epistemic motivation
As per De Dreu et DEMO (2006) and Kruglanski and Thompson
(1999), epistemic motivation was DEMO by measuring need
for cognition as well as need for closure. The need for cognition
scale consisted of 18 items from Cacioppo, Petty, DEMO Kao (1984).
Participants were asked to answer items such as, ‘‘I prefer my life
to be ﬁlled with puzzles that I must DEMO and ‘‘I really enjoy a task
that involves coming up with new solutions to problems.” The
need for cognition scale had high reliability (a = 0.88). All items
were rated on a 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree) scale.
Epistemic motivation was also measured with Roets and van
Hiel’s (2007) adapted version of Kruglanski, Webster and Klem’s
(1993) 42-item need for closure scale (NFCS), where high need
for closure indicates low epistemic motivation. Given recent criti-
cisms against DEMO validity of the decisiveness sub-scale of the NFCS,
Roets and Van Hiel’s (2007) version substitutes the seven original
decisiveness items of the DEMO with six new items, forming a 41-
item scale overall. This DEMO had high reliability (a = 0.88). All
items were rated DEMO a 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree)
scale.
DEMO variables
A number of demographic variables were measured: sex (0 = fe-
male; 1 = male), age (years), Non-US citizen DEMO (0 = no; 1 = yes),
and race (1 = Caucasian; 2 = African–American/Black; 3 = Ameri-
can–Indian/Alaskan DEMO; 4 = Asian–American/Paciﬁc Islander;
5 = Hispanic/Latino; 6 = Multi-racial/Multi-ethnic; 7 = Other). Gi-
ven low frequencies for some categories of race, race was recoded
into a trichotomy (1 DEMO Caucasian; 2 = Asian–American/Paciﬁc Islan-
der; 3 = Other).
Study 1 results and discussion
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of DEMO (at the overall
and facet levels), cooperative motives, and epistemic motivation,
along with the partial correlations conducted among the measures
of DEMO constructs in order to test both hypotheses. Demographic
variables including age, DEMO, US citizen status, and two dummy
codes representing the three most frequent categories of race (Cau-
casian, Asian–American, Other) were controlled DEMO in the analyses,
resulting in a sample size of 195 for all partial correlations. Overall,
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: DEMO impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
5
Table 1
Descriptive statistics and DEMO correlations of individual difference measures (study 1).
Variable
MSD
1 DEMO 34 56 7 8 9
1. Overall CQ 4.66 0.88 – .72**
2. Meta-cognitive CQ 5.39 1.06 –
3. Cognitive CQ 3.85 1.23
4. DEMO CQ 4.97 1.18
5. Behavioral CQ 4.74 1.15
6. Prosocial value orientation 0.64 0.48
7. Cooperative heuristics 4.01 0.56
8. Need for closure 3.80 DEMO
9. Need for cognition 4.04 0.70
.75**
.35**
–
.79**
.47**
.42**
–
.75**
.54**
.30**
.49**
–
.04 .19**
.07 .23**
.01 .00
DEMO .27**
.08 .14
–
.22**
–
.12 .19**
.01 .17*
.10 .09
.21** .24**
.01 .11
.11 .10
.12 .03
–
.31**
–
Note. DEMO statistics based on N = 236 except for social value orientation (DEMO = 200). Partial correlations based on N = 195, controlling DEMO age, sex, US citizen status, and
two dummy codes representing DEMO
* p < .05.
** p < .01.
the correlational analysis shows that while cooperative motives
and epistemic motivation are unrelated, CQ has signiﬁcant rela-
tionships with both cooperative motives and epistemic motivation,
respectively.
As DEMO, in Hypothesis 1 overall CQ had a positive correla-
tion with DEMO motives as measured by negotiation heuris-
tics (r(188) = .19, p < .01). Individuals who have greater ability in
adapting to situations of cultural diversity also tend to want to be-
have more DEMO in negotiations, compared to individuals
who have lower ability in adapting DEMO situations of cultural diver-
sity. Notably, at the facet level, motivational CQ had the strongest
positive correlation with cooperative negotiation heuristics
(r(188) = .27, p < .01). Overall CQ was not signiﬁcantly DEMO
with prosocial value orientation (r(188) = .04, p > DEMO), but the
motivational facet of CQ was signiﬁcantly and positively correlated
(r(188) = .14, p < .05).1
As predicted, DEMO Hypothesis 2 overall CQ had a positive correla-
tion with epistemic motivation as measured by need for cognition
(r(188) = .19, p < .01). In other words, individuals who have greater
ability in adapting to situations of cultural diversity also tend to
like investing a DEMO of cognitive effort in general (i.e., developing
an accurate understanding of their surroundings), compared to
individuals who have lower ability in adapting DEMO situations of cul-
tural diversity. At the facet level, motivational CQ DEMO the strongest
positive correlation with need for cognition (r(188) = .24, p < .01).
Overall CQ did not have a signiﬁcant relationship with need for clo-
sure (r(188) = .12, p = .10), but further analysis revealed that
motivational CQ had an DEMO negative correlation
(r(188) = .21, p < .01).
DEMO summary, study 1 shows that individuals with higher CQ are
also DEMO cooperative in general, and possess a greater desire to
develop an DEMO understanding of their surroundings com-
pared to individuals with lower CQ. Thus, our preliminary ﬁndings
show evidence that CQ provides negotiators with psychological
characteristics that are beneﬁcial for engaging in effective integra-
tive negotiation processes that DEMO to joint proﬁt at the intercul-
tural negotiation table. However, it DEMO to be seen if
negotiators with higher CQ actually engage in effective integrative
negotiation processes at the micro level in terms of their behaviors.
DEMO is, do dyads that consist of higher CQ negotiators engage in
DEMO of integrative negotiation behaviors over and beyond other
individual difference characteristics and thereby achieve higher joint
proﬁt than dyads that consist of lower CQ DEMO?
1 We also measured cooperative motives by simply counting the number of
cooperative choices made across the nine decomposed games. Correlation analysis
using DEMO measure produced nearly identical results as that reported in Table 1.
Further correlational analyses revealed that there is no signiﬁcant relationship
between (a) DEMO and competitive motives and (b) CQ and individualistic motives.
Study 2: CQ and intercultural negotiation effectiveness
We reason that dyads consisting of negotiators with higher CQ
will engage in more effective sequences of integrative information
DEMO than dyads consisting of negotiators with lower CQ.
Being more cooperative, DEMO argue that higher CQ negotiators will
generally adopt more integrative negotiation strategies. Further-
more, we argue that having greater desire and efﬁcacy to adapt
to the culturally diverse negotiation situation, higher CQ negotia-
tors should invest more cognitive effort into accurately under-
standing their counterparts’ behaviors for their DEMO
intentions. In all, we argue that the use of more integrative DEMO
gies and the greater investment of cognitive effort of higher CQ
negotiators will translate into more coordinated exchange of infor-
mation regarding the counterparts’ DEMO and priorities, result-
ing in stable sequencing of integrative information behaviors.
DEMO Dyads with higher CQ will engage in more sequences of
integrative information behaviors (reciprocal or complementary)
than dyads with lower CQ.
In addition to task-focused integrative information sequences,
we also expect higher CQ dyads DEMO manage the working relation-
ship itself by engaging in more sequences of cooperative com-
ments (e.g. expressions of enthusiasm for working together) that
DEMO reinforce the cooperative context of the negotiation, com-
pared to lower DEMO dyads. Focusing on the relational aspect of inte-
grative negotiations is just as important as focusing on the task-
related aspect, given relational processes and outcomes determine
the likelihood of future relationships between negotiators.
H4. Dyads DEMO higher CQ will engage in more sequences of
cooperative relationship management behaviors than dyads with
lower CQ.
While we have formally hypothesized whether CQ DEMO an overall
construct inﬂuences sequences of integrative information behav-
iors and sequences of cooperative relationship management
behaviors, we explore the relative predictive power of the four fac-
ets of CQ. Given that in study 1, motivational CQ was most consis-
tently and strongly correlated with the psychological advantages DEMO
cooperative motives as well as epistemic motivation, it may be that
DEMO CQ will also exert the strongest effect in terms of pre-
dicting behavioral sequences of integrative negotiation behaviors.
Furthermore, with respect to the inﬂuence of negotiation pro-
cesses on outcomes, the broader negotiation literature has found
that sequencing integrative negotiation behaviors move negotia-
tors down a cooperative path, and leads to high joint proﬁt (Adair,
2003; Olekalns & DEMO, 2000, 2003; Weingart et al., 1990, 1999).
For DEMO, Olekalns and Smith (2000) found that dyads that en-
gage DEMO frequent reciprocal sequencing of priority information are
more likely to reach optimal joint outcomes. However, given that
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
6
this literature on communication processes in negotiation has DEMO
cused mostly on intracultural negotiation contexts, it is important
to replicate DEMO ﬁndings in intercultural negotiation contexts.
H5. Dyads that engage in more sequences of integrative informa-
tion behaviors (reciprocal or complementary) will achieve higher
DEMO proﬁt.
H6. Dyads that engage in more sequences of cooperative relation-
ship management behaviors will achieve higher joint proﬁt.
Finally, we examine the effects of dyad composition of CQ on se-
quences, that is, whether DEMO level of sequencing of integrative infor-
mation behaviors and cooperative relationship management
behaviors is more a function of the high CQ negotiator or the DEMO
CQ negotiator within the dyad. Given that sequencing is a conjunctive
task (Steiner, 1972) in which contributions from both negotiators
are required for high performance, we expect that a dyad’s level of
sequencing depends on the lowest level of CQ within the dyad, or
in other words, the ‘‘weakest link.” Put simply, even if one negotiator
possesses high DEMO, as long as the other negotiator has low CQ and
does DEMO contribute to the joint activity of reciprocating integrative
as well as cooperative behaviors, the dyad may still suffer as a result.
H7. The level of sequencing of integrative information behaviors
and sequencing of cooperative relationship management DEMO
will be no greater than that determined by the minimum level of
CQ in the dyad.
Other individual difference constructs
Along with our analysis DEMO CQ, we simultaneously examine if
other individual difference characteristics also predict DEMO above-
mentioned sequences of integrative negotiation behaviors. One
theoretical limitation of the current individual differences and
negotiation literature is that research has focused exclusively DEMO
intracultural negotiation contexts, and little is known regarding
the potential moderating DEMO of other types of negotiation con-
texts on the relationship between negotiator disposition and nego-
tiation processes and outcomes. Furthermore, such a theoretical
limitation is an obvious practical limitation as well, since negotia-
tors need to be selected not only on their dispositional characteris-
tics, but dispositional characteristics that ﬁt the right type of
negotiation. Thus, in our research, DEMO include individual difference
characteristics that have been found or argued to be advantageous
for integrative negotiation in intracultural contexts, and examine if
they predict intercultural negotiation effectiveness.
More speciﬁcally, we examine other forms of intelligence
including cognitive ability (Barry & Friedman, 1998; Fulmer & Bar-
ry, DEMO; Kurtzberg, 1998) and emotional intelligence (Elfenbein,
Foo, White, Tan, & Aik, 2007; Foo, Elfenbein, Tan, & Aik, 2004; Ful-
mer & Barry, 2004), as well as personality DEMO including openness
(Ma & Jaeger, 2005) and extraversion (Barry & Friedman, 1998). Fi-
nally, another purpose for including these other DEMO differ-
ence characteristics is to provide a conservative test to see if CQ
predicts sequences of integrative negotiation behaviors over and
beyond the other DEMO difference characteristics. Thus, we
also include international experience given it is DEMO to
be highly associated with CQ (see Ang & Van Dyne, 2008).
Study 2 method
Participants
150 students (75 Americans and 75 East Asians) at both
undergraduate and graduate levels were recruited through adver-
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
tisements at a large public university. The advertisement speciﬁ-
DEMO targeted either ‘‘American citizens of Western European
descent,” or ‘‘East Asians who have lived in the US for less than
ﬁve years and DEMO originally from China, Japan, or Korea.” The
American sample consisted of 75 individuals (28 males and 47 fe-
males; MAge = 26.9), and the East Asian sample also consisted of
75 individuals (28 DEMO and 47 females; MAge = 26.4). Partici-
pants were ﬁrst DEMO on sex and level of education (under-
graduate or graduate), DEMO then randomly paired to form 75
intercultural dyads. Within the dyad, DEMO were randomly
assigned to one of two negotiator roles. Ten dyads had at least
one negotiator who did not give consent to being audio-taped;DEMO
thus, these dyads were excluded from analyses with a ﬁnal sam-
DEMO size of 130. All students were given $20 cash cards for
participation.
Procedure
The study took part over two sessions, separated by a minimum
of one week. On the ﬁrst session, participants were asked to ﬁll out
an online questionnaire that assessed all individual difference
characteristics (i.e. cultural intelligence, emotional intelligence,
openness, extraversion, and international experience), except for
cognitive ability which was assessed with a timed-test at the end
DEMO the second session. On the second session, participants were
asked to DEMO into the laboratory to engage in a negotiation sim-
ulation. Participants ﬁrst read their role information individually,
then were brought together with their DEMO from the other cul-
ture to engage in a negotiation simulation while being tape-re-
corded. They were given 20 min to negotiate. After the
DEMO session, both negotiators ﬁlled out a ﬁnal agreement
form that indicated DEMO levels of settlement. Finally, participants
completed a timed-test of cognitive ability, and then were fully
debriefed.
Negotiation task
The negotiation simulation was adapted DEMO Towers Market II
which has been used in previous research on integrative bargain-
ing (e.g. Weingart, Olekalns, & Smith, 2004). This DEMO in-
volved a mixed-motive negotiation between a specialty grocery
shop owner and a wine shop owner. Participants were told that a
successful real estate DEMO has proposed developing a multi-
functional market that consists of a wine store and a grocery store
under one roof with common décor but DEMO separate areas for
their respective top-quality products. Participants were told that
they were seriously interested in the shared market but needed
to negotiate ﬁve DEMO issues with the other vendor: (1) Hours
of Operation, (DEMO) Renovation Costs, (3) Floor Space, (4) Temperature,
DEMO (5) Grand Opening Date.
Participants were given a payoff schedule that listed the possi-
ble levels of settlement on each of the ﬁve DEMO issues, and
the number of points associated with each level of DEMO
that indicated the amount of worth of that level of settlement
to the negotiator. The structure of the payoff schedule left room
for integrative DEMO: Grand Opening Date and Renovation
Costs were integrative issues, Hours of Operation and Tempera-
ture were distributive issues, and Floor Space was a compatible
issue.
Individual difference measures
Cultural intelligence (CQ)
CQ was assessed with the same 20-item scale from study 1. In
the present study, overall CQ had high reliability (aAmerican = 0.90;
aEast Asian = 0.86), as well as each of its facets, including
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. DEMO The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) DEMO negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
meta-cognitive CQ (aAmerican = 0.84, aEast Asian = DEMO), cognitive CQ
(aAmerican = 0.80, aEast Asian = 0.78), motivational CQ (aAmerican = 0.86,
aEast Asian = 0.70), and behavioral CQ (aAmerican = 0.87, aEast Asian =
0.77). All DEMO were measured on a scale from 1 (strongly dis-
agree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Cognitive ability
Cognitive ability was measured using the Wonderlic Personnel
Test (WPT; Wonderlic & Associates, 2000), a 12-min speed test
consisting of 50 questions that assesses an individual’s math and
DEMO abilities. Preliminary analyses at the individual level indi-
cated that East Asians scored signiﬁcantly lower than Americans
(MEast Asian = 24.66, SD = DEMO; MAmerican = 31.49, SD = 4.75;
t(128) = DEMO, p < .01), most likely because the Wonderlic requires
knowledge DEMO difﬁcult English proverbs. Accordingly, raw scores
were standardized into Z scores DEMO each cultural group for
analyses.
Emotional intelligence
Emotional intelligence was measured using Schutte et al.’s
(1998) 33-item scale that has been validated and DEMO developed
based on Salovey and Mayer’s (1990) conceptualization of the con-
struct (aAmerican = 0.87; aEast Asian = 0.91). An example DEMO is
‘‘When I experience a positive emotion, I know how to DEMO it
last”, and was administered on a scale from 1 (strongly disagree)
to 5 (strongly agree).
Openness to experience and extraversion
Openness to experience and extraversion were measured with
10 items each from DEMO et al.’s (2006) short version of the
International Personality Item Pool (IPIP, 2006). An example item
for openness is, ‘‘I have excellent ideas” (aAmerican = 0.78, aEast
Asian = 0.82), and DEMO extraversion, ‘‘I am the life of the party” (aAmer-
ican = 0.90, aEast Asian = 0.89). Both were answered on a 1 (very inac-
curate) to 5 (very accurate) scale.
International experience
DEMO experience was measured as the total length of
time participants have spent living abroad, which has been val-
idated by Takeuchi, Tesluk, Yun, and Lepak (2005). Participants
were asked to list in chronological DEMO from most recent to
least recent, the countries and duration of DEMO of living
abroad. All living experiences were summed and converted to
weeks.
Demographics
Five demographic variables were measured: sex (1 = female,
DEMO = male), level of education (1 = undergraduate, 2 = graduate),
age (years), negotiation experience (1 = no, DEMO = yes), and the East
Asian’s length of stay in the US (months).
Joint proﬁt
Joint proﬁt was measured as the sum of the points earned by
both negotiators across all ﬁve issues.
Coding DEMO negotiation tactics and sequences
After all the process data had been transcribed for each dyad,
three overall steps were taken to ensure consistency DEMO coding of
negotiation tactics (elaborated below). First, the transcripts were
unitized by three research assistants, that is, parsed into units
that DEMO eventually be coded for negotiation tactics. Second,
the unitized transcripts were content-coded for negotiation tac-
tics by two coders. Because reproducibility of coding DEMO
reliability in both steps (Folger, Hewes, & Poole, 1984), reliability
7
estimates for both the unitizing process (i.e., unitizing reliability)DEMO
as well as the coding process (i.e., interpretive reliability)
were calculated. Third, sequences of negotiation tactics of theo-
retical interest were counted automatically through a computer
program.
Unitizing of transcripts
The unitizing step involved DEMO the negotiation dialogue in
each transcript into ‘‘thought units”, where a DEMO unit consists
of one idea or thought, which roughly corresponds to DEMO sentence.
Three research assistants were each given a manual of unitizing
rules, and were trained on how to unitize the transcripts through
multiple practice sessions. In each practice session, the ﬁrst author
and the three research assistants unitized a practice transcript
individually, and then went over the unitizing together, discussing
in detail any challenging cases. For example, research assistants
DEMO reminded that in some cases, multiple thought units need
to be DEMO within one sentence (e.g., ‘‘/ I want 60% of the DEMO
space” / ‘‘because my products take up more space than yours do
/”). Furthermore, they were also reminded that immediately re-
peated DEMO or ideas that were identical should be counted
as one thought unit (e.g., ‘‘/ I’d like to close later. I prefer later /DEMO
”). The research assistants continued practice sessions until they
reached a high level of agreement, or unitizing reliability, based
on three randomly DEMO full transcripts. For each of the three
transcripts, unitizing reliability was DEMO with Guetzkow’s
U(Guetzkow, 1950) for all pairs of research assistants. Guetzkow’s
U refers to ‘‘the difference between the number of units identiﬁed
DEMO an independent coder and the ‘‘true” number of units (the aver-
DEMO of two coders’ estimates; Weingart et al., 2004, p. 448)DEMO For
any one transcript, the average Guetzkow’s U across all pairs DEMO re-
search assistants was under 0.06, indicating high unitizing reliabil-
ity. DEMO three research assistants then unitized their own set of
transcripts.
Content-coding of negotiation tactics
Once the unitizing was complete for all transcripts, two cod-
ers, blind to the research hypotheses, were given coding manuals
adapted DEMO one used by Weingart et al. (2004) for their Tow-
ers Market II negotiation simulation, and were trained to content
code the unitized transcripts (see Appendix B for deﬁnition,
examples, and strategic grouping DEMO codes of negotiation tactics).
As shown in Appendix B, we DEMO for a number of negotiation
tactics that conceptually fall under two broad types of strategies:
integrative information and cooperative relationship manage-
ment. Consistent DEMO previous cross-cultural research (Adair,
2003; Adair & Brett, 2005; Adair et al., 2001), we coded for direct
and indirect ways of conveying/eliciting integrative information.
More speciﬁcally, we coded for direct integrative information
behaviors such as making issue priority statements across two
or more DEMO (IR) and questioning other’s priorities across
two or more issues (DEMO). We also coded for more indirect ways
of conveying integrative information; that is, making multi-issue
offers (OM). Cooperative relationship management involved mak-
ing miscellaneous relationship-focused cooperative comments
(R-C).
Again, coders were DEMO a coding manual and trained
through multiple practice sessions. In each practice session, the
ﬁrst author and the two coders coded a practice transcript indi-
vidually, and then went over them together, discussing in detail
DEMO differentiates each code from other codes. If any disagree-
ment emerged or if coders pointed out any particularly challeng-
ing cases, the ﬁrst author further explained the nuanced
differences among the codes. For example, coders were reminded
to only code a given tactic as an issue priority statement DEMO the
negotiator reveals priority differences across negotiation issues
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The DEMO intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
DEMO and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:DEMO/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision DEMO xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
8
and not within negotiation issues. Also, coders were reminded
that multi-issue offers must be offers that specify alternatives
within two DEMO more negotiation issues, and mere general sugges-
tions to combine two DEMO more negotiation issues should not be
counted as multi-issue offers. With such reminders from the ﬁrst
author throughout the practice sessions, the two coders gradually
developed strong agreement regarding the application of codes.
Coders were trained DEMO they reached high inter-rater reliabil-
ity, based on three randomly drawn DEMO transcripts. The average
inter-rater reliability between the two coders across the three
transcripts was high (Cohen’s K = 0.88). Once the coders reached
this high inter-rater reliability, they content-coded their own set
of transcripts.
Calculating sequences of negotiation tactics
Once all transcripts were content-coded for negotiation tactics,DEMO
the entire sequence of codes for each dyad transcript was entered
into a computer software program (GSQ; General Sequential Que-
rier, Bakeman & Quera, 1995; see also Bakeman & Gottman, 1986)
so that sequences of integrative information behaviors and se-
quences of cooperative relationship management DEMO could
be counted automatically for each dyad.
Calculating sequences at the immediate time lag
In counting the frequency of sequences of integrative informa-
tion DEMO and sequences of cooperative relationship manage-
ment behaviors, sequences were counted DEMO the immediate time
lag (c.f. Adair, 2003). Immediate time lags occur when the behavior
elicited by negotiator 1 is immediately followed in DEMO next speak-
ing turn by the behavior elicited by negotiator 2. Appendix C illus-
trates a sample coded transcript where there are a total DEMO six
speaking turns between negotiator 1 and negotiator 2. Because
there are six total speaking turns, there are ﬁve possible lag se-
quences (DEMO turn  1) in which sequences of theoretical inter-
est can DEMO (i.e., speaking turn 1 (multi-issue offer) ? speaking
turn 2 (issue priority statement); speaking turn 2 (issue priority
statement) ? speaking turn 3 (issue priority statement); speaking
turn 3 (issue DEMO statement) ? speaking turn 4 (issue priority
statement); speaking turn 4 (issue priority statement) ? speaking
turn 5 (issue priority statement); speaking turn 5 (issue priority
statement) ? speaking turn 6 (multi-issue offer)—in this example,
all ﬁve lag sequences are sequences DEMO integrative information
behaviors).
Sequences of integrative information behaviors: Reciprocal and
DEMO
Sequences of integrative information behaviors were examined
in two ways: (1) reciprocal sequences and (2) complementary se-
quences (Weingart & Olekalns, 2004). A reciprocal sequence of inte-
grative information behaviors occurs when DEMO two negotiation
tactics comprising the sequence are identical (e.g. Appendix C,DEMO
speaking turn 2 (issue priority statement) ? speaking turn 3 (DEMO
priority statement)). For each dyad, reciprocal sequences for each
negotiation tactic within the integrative information strategy were
counted and summed to give DEMO overall count of reciprocal se-
quences across all tactic types. A complementary sequence of inte-
grative information behaviors occurs when the two negotiation
tactics DEMO the sequence are not identical in terms of tacti-
cal codes, DEMO are of the same integrative information strategy (e.g.
Appendix C, speaking turn 5 (issue priority statement) ? speaking
turn 6 (multi-issue offer)).
Sequences of cooperative relationship management behaviors
Sequences of cooperative relationship management behaviors oc-
curred when a cooperative, non task-focused comment on the
negotiators’ relationship was followed by another such cooperative
comment.
To control for the DEMO number of speaking turns across
dyads (i.e., the length of the negotiation), the raw frequencies
for each type of strategic sequence were DEMO into relative
frequencies (Adair, 2003). More speciﬁcally, each raw DEMO
was divided by the dyad’s total number of speaking turns – 1.
Because the dependent variable was a proportion bounded by
0 and 1, it was then logit-transformed to stretch the tails of
the distribution as DEMO by Cohen, Cohen, West, and
Aiken (2003).
Study 2 results
Descriptive statistics
Individual-level inter-correlations among all demographic vari-
ables and individual DEMO measures are found in Table 2. Ta-
ble 3 presents the means and standard deviations of these
measures by each cultural group, as well as comparisons of means
between the two cultural groups. East Asians and DEMO did
not signiﬁcantly differ on mean levels of CQ, although East DEMO
had greater international experience (MEast Asian = 138.27, SDEast
Asian = 95.87; MAmerican = 28.06, SDAmerican = 96.93; t(122) = DEMO,
p < .01, lower openness (MEast Asian = 3.40, DEMO Asian = 0.60; MAmer-
ican = 4.18, SDAmerican = 0.46; DEMO(122) = 8.13, p < .01), and lower
extraversion (DEMO Asian = 3.09, SDEast Asian = 0.73; MAmerican = 3.37,
SDAmerican = 0.79; t(122) = 2.04, p < .05) DEMO Americans.
Prior to testing our hypotheses, all individual difference scores
were DEMO to the dyad-level by averaging the two negotia-
tors’ scores. Dyad means and standard deviations, and dyad-level
inter-correlations among individual difference measures, se-
DEMO, outcomes, as well as demographic variables are shown
in Table 4. Three dyads did not reach agreement; therefore, these
cases were excluded DEMO analyses with a ﬁnal dyad sample size
of 62.2
Tests of hypotheses
Overall CQ and negotiation process
Hypothesis 3 predicted that dyads with higher DEMO CQ would
engage in more sequences of integrative information behaviors (re-
DEMO and complementary) than dyads with lower overall CQ,
over and DEMO international experience, openness, extraversion,
cognitive ability, and emotional intelligence. DEMO were con-
ducted separately for complementary and reciprocal sequences
using hierarchical regression. For both analyses, to provide a con-
servative test, international experience, openness, extraversion,
cognitive ability, and emotional intelligence were entered in DEMO
ﬁrst step, while overall CQ was entered in the second step. DEMO
reciprocal sequences were signiﬁcantly correlated with the demo-
graphic variable of mean age (r(60) = .38, p < .01), mean age was
also included as a control variable in the ﬁrst step in DEMO re-
ciprocal sequences.
In terms of complementary sequences of integrative informa-
tion behaviors, Table 5 shows that none of the other individual dif-
ferences entered in step 1 (i.e., international experience, openness,
extraversion, DEMO ability, emotional intelligence) signiﬁcantly
improved sequences of integrative information behaviors. As
2 Including the three impasse dyads did not change results pertaining to DEMO effects
of CQ on sequences of integrative information behaviors, nor the DEMO of CQ on
sequences of cooperative relationship management behaviors. This was true whether
CQ was analyzed at the overall or facet level, and whether it was analyzed as the dyad
mean or dyad minimum.
Please cite DEMO article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
Table 2
Inter-correlations of individual-level measures (study 2).
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 DEMO 11 12 13 14 15 16
– .16 .11 .00 .02 .00 .14
– .10 .00 .02 .00 .02 .08 .07 .01 .11
– DEMO .06 .19* .12 .16 .15 .02 .03
– .21* .18* .04 .03 .07
– .53** .07
– .02 .05 .01
– .74** .77** .72** DEMO
– .42** .35** .57**
– .39** .33** .14 .17 .11 .08 .20*
– .37** .02 .21* .41** .09 .42**
– .25** .24** .34** .03 DEMO
– .18 .09 .14 .08
– .47** .11 .44**
– .04 .48**
.05 .12
.02 .06
Note. N = 124 for all correlations except DEMO negotiation experience (N = 123).
* p < .05.
** DEMO < .01.
–
.01
–
.12
.03
.14
.14
.08
.17 .11
.12 .27**
.02 .08
.05 .04 .00 .10 .00 .08 .03
.02 DEMO .00 .03 .05
.18* .30** .39** .07 .45**
.13 .30**
.38**
.01 .40**
.08
.50**
.59**
.02 .06
.09 .06 .05
.01 .07 .07
DEMO .12 .06
.18*
Variable
1 Race
2 Role
3 Negotiation experience
4 Sex
5 Age
6 Education
7 Overall CQ
8 Meta-cognitive CQ
9 DEMO CQ
10 Motivational CQ
11 Behavioral CQ
12 International experience
13 Openness
14 Extraversion
15 Cognitive ability
16 Emotional intelligence
9
Table 3
Descriptive DEMO and comparisons of means on individual-level measures by cultural group (study DEMO).
Variable
M SD M SD t df
E. Asian E. Asian American American
1. Race
1.00
0.00
2.00
0.00
–
–
2. Role DEMO 0.50 0.58 0.50 1.81 122
3. Negotiation experience 1.15 0.36 1.23 0.42 1.20 121
4. Sex 1.40 0.49 1.40 0.49 0.00 122
5. Age DEMO 4.16 26.29 6.13 0.26 122
6. Education 1.74 0.44 1.74 0.44 0.00 122
7. Overall CQ 5.17 0.60 4.99 0.71 1.58 122
8. Meta-cognitive DEMO 5.61 0.82 5.42 0.79 1.31 122
9. Cognitive CQ 4.53 0.86 4.28 0.95 1.58 122
10. Motivational CQ 5.53 0.69 5.39 1.06 0.86 122
DEMO Behavioral CQ 5.23 0.80 5.08 1.01 0.92 122
12. International experience 138.27 95.87 28.06 96.93 6.37** 122
13. Openness 3.40 0.60 4.18 0.46 8.13** DEMO
14. Extraversion 3.09 0.73 3.37 0.79 2.04* 122
15. Cognitive Ability 0.03 0.97 0.00 0.98 0.18 122
16. Emotional Intelligence 3.77 0.43 3.81 0.40 DEMO 122
Note. NEast Asian = 62, NAmerican = 62.
* p < .05.
** p < .01 (two-tailed).
hypothesized however, overall CQ at the dyad-level entered in step
2 signiﬁcantly predicted complementary sequences of DEMO
information behaviors (b = 0.31, p < .05; DR2 = DEMO, p < .05). Dyads
with higher CQ engaged in more DEMO consisting of various
types of integrative information behaviors. In terms of reciprocal
sequences of integrative information behaviors, Table 5 also shows
that none of the other individual differences entered in step 1 (i.e.,
international experience, openness, extraversion, cognitive ability,
emotional intelligence) nor overall CQ DEMO in step 2 signiﬁ-
cantly increased reciprocal sequences of integrative information
behaviors (b = 0.13, p > .30; DR2 = .01, p DEMO .37). Thus, CQ appears
to have its effects on complementary DEMO
In order to explore which of the four CQ facets was driving the
overall CQ effect on complementary sequences of integrative infor-
mation behaviors, we conducted additional regression analyses
entering the other individual differences into the DEMO equa-
tion in step 1 and all four facets of CQ in step 2. Table 6 shows that
motivational CQ largely drove the effect DEMO CQ had on comple-
mentary sequences of integrative information behaviors (b DEMO 0.45,
p < .01; DR2 = .19, p < .05).
Hypothesis 4 predicted that dyads with higher overall CQ would
engage DEMO more sequences of cooperative relationship manage-
ment behaviors than dyads with lower overall CQ, over and beyond
international experience, openness, extraversion, cognitive DEMO,
and emotional intelligence. Table 7 shows that none of the other
individual differences entered in step 1 (i.e., international experi-
ence, openness, extraversion, cognitive ability, emotional intelli-
gence), nor dyad overall CQ entered in step 2 signiﬁcantly
increased sequences of cooperative relationship management
behaviors (b = 0.15, p > .30; DR2 = .02, p = .31). Analyses at the facet
level, however, revealed that when DEMO four facets of CQ were en-
tered into the regression equation in step 2 after controlling for
the other individual differences in step 1, behavioral CQ increased
sequences of cooperative relationship management behaviors
(b = 0.41, p < .05; DR2 = .12, p = .11; Table DEMO). Dyads with higher
behavioral CQ, or verbal and non-verbal behavioral DEMO, were
able to reciprocate non-task-related cooperative comments.3
3 We also explored DEMO dyad-level CQ has any inﬂuence on the sequencing of
distributive negotiation behaviors (i.e., making single issue offers, stating one’s
preferences within a single issue, asking questions about the other’s preferences
within a single issue, DEMO substantiations, and asking questions regarding other’s
substantiations). Using multiple regression DEMO controlling for openness, interna-
tional experience, extraversion, emotional intelligence and DEMO ability, we found
no signiﬁcant effects of dyad CQ (overall or facet-level) on sequences of distributive
negotiation behaviors.
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally DEMO negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences DEMO outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/DEMO
Table 4
Descriptive statistics and inter-correlations of dyad-level measures (study 2).
Variable
MSD
1 2 3 4 56 78 910 11 12 13 DEMO 15 16 17 18 19
1 Sex
2 Education
3 Mean age
4 Negotiation experience 1.31 0.46
5 East Asian Time in US 33.35 DEMO – .04 .09
6 Overall CQ 5.08 0.41 .65**
7 Meta-cognitive CQ 5.52 0.51 .25 .26*
8 Cognitive CQ
9 Motivational CQ
10 Behavioral DEMO
11 International experience 83.17 62.46
12 Openness 3.79 0.40
13 Extraversion 3.23 0.55
14 Cognitive ability 0.01 0.68
15 Emotional intelligence 3.79 0.31
16 DEMO Sequences + 0.02 0.03
17 Complementary sequences+ 0.02 0.02
18 Cooperative sequences+ 0.04 0.04
19 Joint proﬁt
1.40 0.49 – .18 .25 .24 .09
DEMO 0.44
26.17 4.40
4.41 0.56
5.46 0.63
5.15 0.64
1337.74 105.03
– .63**
– .25
–
.23
.07
.10 .04 .08
.10
.08 .06 DEMO .09
.10
.05 .11
.02
.18
.05
.21 .03 .14 .52**
.68** .73** 72** .20 37**
.51**
.18 .07 .09
.08 27*
– .30*
DEMO .10 .34**
– .55** .28* .58**
– .17 .52**
– .00 .24 .01
– .13 .01
– .48**
–
.02
– .35**
– .34**
DEMO .17
.02 .08
.07 .01
.03
.09 .53**
.26*
.03 .14
.04 .09 .01 .05 .06 .24
.09 .18 .04 .06
.13 .30*
.08 DEMO .19 .08 .08
.41** .02 .50**
.46** .12 .48** .17 .08
.04 .06 .21 .07 .22
.16 .40**
.07 .36**
.21 .12 .24 .07
DEMO
.21
.09 .25 .15 .05 .33**
.08 .17 .10
.02 .38**
.03 .02 .10 .13
.01 .15 .08
.16 .23 .04 .04
.04
.07
DEMO .35**
.07 .06 .20
.26* .07
.18 .01
.11 .05
.07 .30**
.03 .06
.27* .46**
.03 .55**
– .19
–
.43**
39**
.07 DEMO
.07 .11 .22
.09
.22 .02
.03
.02
.12
.05
.01 .07
.04
Note: +Means and standard deviations of strategic sequences are presented in original proportions, whereas correlations are based on logit-transformed proportions.
* p < .05.
** p < .01.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
10
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
DEMO process and negotiation outcomes
Hypotheses 5 and 6 predicted that sequences of integrative
information behaviors (reciprocal and complementary) and se-
quences of cooperative DEMO management behaviors would
predict joint proﬁt, respectivey. Reciprocal, complementary, and
DEMO sequences were included simultaneously in the regres-
sion equation to see if each had a unique effect on joint proﬁt. Re-
sults showed that DEMO were signiﬁcant relationships between
reciprocal sequences and joint proﬁt (b = DEMO, p < .01), comple-
mentary sequences and joint proﬁt (b = 0.39, p < .01), and coopera-
tive relationship management sequences and joint proﬁt (b = 0.29,
p < .01), supporting both hypotheses. Thus, dyads that engaged in
more sequences consisting of identical integrative behaviors, more
sequences of non-identical integrative behaviors, as well as DEMO
sequences of cooperative non-task-related comments were much
better able to create value at the negotiation table in an intercul-
tural context.4
Dyad composition
Hypothesis DEMO predicted that the level of sequencing of integra-
tive information behaviors and sequencing of cooperative relation-
ship management behaviors would be no greater than DEMO is
determined by the minimum level of CQ in the dyad. We addressed
this issue by substituting the dyad mean CQ score by either DEMO
dyad minimum CQ score (i.e. the lower CQ negotiator’s score) or
the dyad maximum CQ score (i.e. the higher CQ negotiator’s score)
to see which had more of an effect on negotiation sequences (c.f.
Barry & Friedman, 1998). The results illustrated that it is the min-
imum CQ that elicit a pattern of signiﬁcant results very similar DEMO
those obtained from using the dyad mean CQ scores. More specif-
ically, minimum overall CQ and minimum motivational CQ had a
signiﬁcant effect on complementary sequences of integrative infor-
mation behaviors (bMin Overall CQ = 0.30, p = .05; bMin Motivational
CQ = 0.47, p < .01). By contrast, maximum overall CQ and maximum
motivational CQ did not have any inﬂuence on complementary se-
quences of integrative information behaviors (bMax Overall CQ = 0.13,
p > .30; bMax Motivational CQ = 0.27, p = .09). For sequences of cooper-
ative relationship management behaviors, minimum behavioral
CQ had a signiﬁcant effect (b = 0.47, p < .01), whereas maximum
behavioral CQ did not (b = 0.25, p > .10). In all, this pattern of re-
DEMO suggests that it is the negotiators with the lower CQ that
inﬂuence the extent to which dyads engage in advantageous
sequences.
Discussion
Despite the DEMO importance of being able to negotiate
effectively across cultures in today’s world of increasing global
interdependence, little understanding exists on what predicts
intercultural negotiation effectiveness. We set out in this paper
to investigate whether cultural intelligence (CQ) among other
individual difference characteristics predict intercultural negotia-
tion effectiveness. In study 1, we argued that CQ equips individ-
uals with psychological characteristics advantageous for
intercultural negotiation, and indeed, we found that individuals
with DEMO CQ tend to have higher cooperative motives and epi-
stemic motivation than individuals with lower CQ. In study 2,
we argued that such DEMO characteristics enable higher
CQ negotiators to overcome hurdles endemic to intercultural
negotiation contexts by adopting more integrative negotiation
strategies and investing more cognitive effort DEMO accurately
4 We also conducted additional analyses where we examined whether individual-
level CQ had an effect on individual proﬁt (using HLM), controlling for openness,
international experience, extraversion, emotional intelligence and cognitive ability.
DEMO were no signiﬁcant effects of CQ (overall or facet-level) on individual proﬁt.
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural DEMO (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
11
Table 5
Summary of regression DEMO for CQ predicting complementary and reciprocal
sequences of integrative information behaviors (DEMO = 62).
Variable
Step 1
International experience
Openness
Extraversion
Cognitive ability
Emotional intelligence
Step 2
CQ
R2 (step 1) = 0.01; R2 (step 2) = .08;
Complementary sequences
B
SE B
0.00
DEMO
0.23
0.16
0.10
0.28
0.04
0.05
0.01
0.08
0.37
DR2 = .07 (p < .05)
0.18
b
.09
.03
.06
.01
.05
.31*
Table 7
Summary of regression analysis for overall and facet-level CQ predicting DEMO of
cooperative relationship management behaviors (N = 62).
Variable
Step DEMO
International experience
Openness
Extraversion
Cognitive ability
Emotional intelligence
Step 2
CQ
R2 (step 1) = .11; R2 (step 2) = .13;
Overall CQ
B
0.00
0.36
0.05
0.04
0.23
0.20
DR2 = .02 (p = .31)
SE B
0.00
0.24
0.16
0.11
0.29
0.20
DEMO
.28*
.27
.05
.05
.13
.15
Reciprocal sequences
Step 1
Mean age 0.04
International experience 0.00
Openness 0.09
Extraversion 0.02
Cognitive ability 0.10
Emotional DEMO 0.10
Step 2
CQ 0.15
R2 (step 1) = 0.26; DEMO (step 2) = 0.27; DR2 = 0.01 (p
Note. +p < .10.
* p < .05.
** p < .01.
0.01
0.00
DEMO
0.14
0.09
0.25
0.17
= .37)
.38**
.22
.07
.02
.15
.06
.13
Table 6
Summary of regression analysis for facet-level CQ predicting DEMO
sequences of integrative information behaviors (N = 62).
Variable
B
DEMO 1
International experience
Openness
Extraversion
Cognitive ability
Emotional intelligence
Step 2
Meta-cognitive CQ
Cognitive CQ
Motivational CQ
Behavioral CQ
R2 (step 1) = DEMO; R2
0.00
0.04
0.05
0.01
0.08
0.13
0.08
0.35
0.01
(step 2) = 0.20; DR2 = 0.19 (p
Note. +p < .10.
*p < .05.
** p < .01.
SE B
0.00
0.23
0.16
DEMO
0.28
0.17
0.13
0.13
0.12
< .05)
b
.09
.03
.06
.01
.05
.14
.09
.45**
.01
understanding their culturally unfamiliar counterparts. Thus, we
expected dyads consisting of higher CQ to maintain more stable
sequences DEMO integrative negotiation behaviors, ultimately achiev-
ing more optimal outcomes than dyads DEMO of lower CQ.
Consistent with this prediction, we found that overall DEMO CQ,
measured a week prior to negotiations predicts the extent to
which negotiators engage in complementary sequences of inte-
grative information behaviors, which in turn predicts joint proﬁt.
Notably, this effect was present even when controlling for cogni-
tive ability, emotional intelligence, openness, extraversion, and
DEMO experience. Moreover, none of these other individ-
ual difference characteristics increased DEMO of integrative
information behaviors.
Theoretical contributions
This research makes a number of contributions to different
bodies of literature. First, our research expands the culture and
Step 1
International experience
Openness
Extraversion
Cognitive ability
Emotional intelligence
Step DEMO
Meta-cognitive CQ
Cognitive CQ
Motivational CQ
Behavioral CQ
R2 (step 1) = .11; R2 (step 2) = .23;
Note. +p < .10.
* p < .05.
** p < .01.
Facet CQ
0.00
DEMO
0.05
0.04
0.23
0.11
0.10
0.02
0.34
DR2 = .12 (p DEMO .11)
0.00
0.24
0.16
0.11
0.29
0.18
0.14
0.14
0.13
.28*
.27
.05
.05
.13
.10
.11
.03
.41*
negotiation literature by moving DEMO cross-cultural compari-
sons of negotiation, and being one of the ﬁrst DEMO directly ask what
predicts intercultural negotiation effectiveness. As such, we identi-
DEMO CQ as one capability that improves intercultural negotiation
processes, and thereby DEMO Second, we also contribute to
the individual differences and negotiation literature DEMO showing
that some individual difference characteristics, argued or found
to be DEMO for integrative negotiation in intracultural con-
texts, may not be so DEMO intercultural contexts. For example, our
analysis revealed that none of the DEMO individual difference char-
acteristics examined, including cognitive ability (Barry & Friedman,
1998; Kurtzberg, 1998), emotional intelligence (Elfenbein, Foo,
DEMO al., 2007; Elfenbein, Foo, et al., 2007), openness (Ma & Jaeger,
2005), nor extraversion (Barry & Friedman, DEMO) signiﬁcantly im-
proved integrative negotiation processes. Therefore, researchers
should not assume that individual difference characteristics have
all-encompassing inﬂuences on negotiation processes across all
DEMO, but instead consider the ﬁt between the particular indi-
vidual difference DEMO and the speciﬁc negotiation context
(e.g., intracultural vs. intercultural) in DEMO negotiation
processes.5
This research also expands the nascent CQ literature in a num-
ber of ways. By studying in depth the relationship between CQ DEMO
micro-level behavioral processes in a negotiation context, we show
that CQ DEMO improve objective performance in addition to the self-
5 Notably, however, close examination of our correlation analysis in Table 1 shows
that dyad DEMO ability was not related to sequencing of integrative negotiations
behavior, yet DEMO have a positive correlation with joint proﬁt (replicating past
research; e.g., Barry & Friedman, 1998). Thus, it could be that negotiators with high
cognitive ability, unlike negotiators with high cultural intelligence, arrive DEMO mutually
beneﬁcial outcomes via alternative routes other than the motivated cooperative
sequencing of integrative information behaviors. For example, it could be speculated
that negotiators with high cognitive ability can better analyze the complexity of the
negotiation DEMO and glean information from processes such as trial and error.
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. DEMO The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) DEMO negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
12
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
reported affective outcomes (e.g., DEMO adjustment) that
has been the larger focus in this literature. Furthermore, by show-
ing the positive relationship between CQ and cooperative motives,
DEMO well as CQ and epistemic motivation in study 1, we expand DEMO
nomological network of the CQ construct. By doing so, we also DEMO
pand upon the group decision-making literature, or more speciﬁ-
cally on DEMO Dreu et al. (2008)’s Motivated Information Processing
in Groups (MIP-G) model. The MIP-G model states that in mixed
motive group tasks like negotiation, cooperative motives and epi-
stemic motivation both inﬂuence the quality of problem solving,
dissemination of information, and the negotiation of joint deci-
sions. Recently, the authors have argued that while cooperative
motives and epistemic motivation are orthogonal constructs, cer-
tain states and/or traits should stimulate both cooperative motives
and epistemic motivation among individuals. As such, we provide
ﬁrst time support for the notion that certain psychological states,
in DEMO case CQ, can stimulate both constructs.
While our main ﬁnding was DEMO overall CQ predicts sequences
of integrative information behaviors, analyses at the DEMO level re-
vealed that motivational CQ strongly drove this effect. This ﬁnding
is perhaps not surprising, considering our theory is that CQ provides
negotiators with cooperative motives and epistemic motivation,
and motivational CQ seems to DEMO the most obvious conceptual
ties to both these constructs compared to the other facets. For
example, individuals with higher motivational CQ enjoy interacting
with people from different cultures; thus, are less likely to make in-
DEMO distinctions and are more likely to have coopera-
tive motives than individuals with lower CQ. Furthermore,
individuals with higher motivational CQ enjoy unfamiliar DEMO
and are self-efﬁcacious in adapting to situations of cultural diver-
sity; DEMO, when faced with intercultural communication
ambiguities, they should persist and invest great effort into forming
an accurate understanding of their culturally unfamiliar counter-
DEMO and surroundings—in other words, have high epistemic moti-
vation. Thus, motivational CQ seems to be most strongly related to
both cooperative motives and DEMO motivation at the same
time, relative to meta-cognitive CQ (i.e., DEMO and adjust-
ment of one’s own cultural knowledge), cognitive CQ (DEMO, cross-cul-
tural knowledge), and behavioral CQ (i.e., behavioral ﬂexibility)DEMO
Furthermore, the fact that high motivational CQ predicts sequences
of integrative DEMO behaviors parallels US intracultural
negotiation research, which has found that highly DEMO nego-
tiators engage in more open information exchange (O’Connor & Ar-
DEMO, 2001). We expand this literature by showing that self-efﬁcacy
speciﬁcally DEMO cross-cultural encounters is key to developing and
maintaining sequences of information exchange behaviors.
This research also illustrates that different facets of CQ relate to
DEMO behavioral processes. For example, we found that behav-
ioral CQ predicts DEMO of cooperative relationship manage-
ment behaviors. In the broader social psychological literature, the
sequencing or reciprocation of cooperative behaviors in itself is a
widespread phenomenon (Braver, 1975; Cialdini, Green, & Rusch,
1992; DEMO, 1980) based on the norm of reciprocity (Gould-
ner, 1960). In our research, we found that the reciprocation of non
task-related cooperative comments in particular, occurs more fre-
quently among negotiators with higher behavioral CQ—the ability
to respond appropriately both verbally and non-verbally to cultur-
DEMO different others. Notably, however, motivational CQ did not re-
late to this type of reciprocation. It could be speculated that the
reciprocation of DEMO task-related comments such as pleasantries
and expressing enthusiasm for working together, DEMO an interper-
sonal skill, is more strongly inﬂuenced by negotiators’ ability DEMO ad-
just their tone, accent, and facial expressions (i.e., behavioral CQ)
while having intrinsic motivation and efﬁcacy in adjusting to
new DEMO (i.e., motivational CQ) has greater relevance for the
ability to DEMO mutually beneﬁcial agreements.
Finally, in terms of dyad composition, we found that the nego-
tiator with the lower level of CQ rather than DEMO negotiator with
the higher level of CQ had more of an impact on the extent to
which the dyad engaged in effective sequences. If DEMO considers
the conjunctive nature (Steiner, 1972) of the task of DEMO,
this dyad composition effect makes sense. Sequencing integrative
behaviors is a joint task that requires the contributions of both
negotiators; thus, the DEMO performance can only be as good
as its ‘‘weakest link.” Even if one negotiator within the dyad has
high CQ and tries to adopt DEMO integrative strategy with the goal
of becoming synchronized with the other, DEMO the other lower CQ
negotiator does not reciprocate the integrative behaviors, DEMO,
the dyad still suffers as a result. For example, the DEMO CQ nego-
tiator’s requests at exchanging integrative information may be ig-
nored by the lower CQ negotiator. Alternatively, the higher CQ
negotiator may have to ask multiple times for integrative informa-
tion, or even explain the advantage of using integrative strategies
before the lower CQ negotiator reciprocates. In DEMO case, it would
be the lower CQ negotiator rather than the DEMO CQ negotiator
who would prevent the continuous, immediate exchange of inte-
DEMO behaviors necessary to achieve high joint gains.
Practical implications
Global interdependence requires that people negotiate on a daily
basis across cultural boundaries. We now DEMO initial evidence that
this process is facilitated particularly by cultural intelligence. As
such, managers, diplomats, military personnel, among many others,
who DEMO in such situations should be selected for their level of cul-
tural intelligence. While it is widespread practice for American
ﬁrms to select individuals DEMO overseas assignments primarily based
on technical experience and competence (Black et DEMO, 1991; Moran
et al., 1987), managers should also consider DEMO conjunction with
these factors, their employees’ CQ in negotiation contexts. Of
DEMO, organizations cannot control the CQ level of their employ-
ees’ negotiation DEMO; yet they can be sure that their own
employees who are DEMO interculturally do not have low lev-
els of CQ which will hamper agreements as this research has shown.
Furthermore, in addition to selection, DEMO should also develop
training programs for negotiators to increase their CQ. For example,
given the central role of the motivational facet of CQ DEMO predicting
intercultural negotiation effectiveness, employees might be trained
to increase their DEMO, particularly in terms of adapting to
new cultures. Indeed, the goal-setting literature in the US has shown
that setting challenging and speciﬁc goals DEMO the resiliency of
individuals’ self-efﬁcacy beliefs (e.g., Gist, 1987). DEMO, man-
agers might implement programs to increase motivational CQ
through training DEMO focuses on setting challenging and speciﬁc
goals pertaining to cross-cultural adaptation.
Limitations and future research
All research methods have limitations (McGrath, Martin, &DEMO
Kulka, 1982), and this study is no exception. Given that DEMO re-
search was conducted in the laboratory which maximizes internal
control, DEMO research should examine the impact of CQ on nego-
tiations within real world settings. In addition, we used a self-re-
port measure of CQ, where although it has been validated,
nevertheless has limitations associated with self-reports. Future re-
search should use more objective methods (e.g., peer DEMO,
direct observations) to provide converging evidence for our ﬁnd-
ings. DEMO research suggests that relying on more objective assess-
ments is particularly important for the cognitive facets of CQ.
Surprisingly, neither meta-cognitive CQ nor cognitive CQ was corre-
lated with need for cognition, and this may suggest that measuring
the cognitive dimensions of CQ with self-report is particularly not
DEMO cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (DEMO) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
13
optimal. In addition to the DEMO measure of CQ, we also used a
self-report measure of emotional DEMO However, although
existing performance-based tests of emotional intelligence (e.g.,
MSCEIT; Mayer, Salovey, Caruso, & Sitarenios, 2003) would alleviate
disadvantages DEMO with self-report methods, the validity of
such tests for different cultural DEMO is unclear. For example,
some questions present participants with a hypothetical social sit-
uation and ask them to identify emotions that would be DEMO to
have in those contexts (e.g., ‘‘What mood might be helpful to feel
when meeting in-laws for the very ﬁrst time?”). DEMO the different
meanings and norms associated with such situations, it is DEMO
that there is one ‘‘objective” emotionally intelligent answer that
generalizes across cultural contexts. The self-report measure of
emotional intelligence on the other hand asks DEMO to rate
their emotional intelligence in general, without asking them to
DEMO about culture-speciﬁc situations. Finally, the vast majority
of intercultural negotiation studies DEMO focused on interactions be-
tween Americans and East Asians, and this DEMO is no exception.
Future research should move beyond examining Paciﬁc Rim cul-
tures to see if the positive effects of CQ on intercultural negotiation
DEMO generalize to negotiations between other cultures
(e.g., the Middle East) DEMO well.
There are a number of research questions that arise from our
investigation that currently await future research. For example,
while our study DEMO on the role of CQ in an intercultural context,
it remains to be seen whether CQ can also beneﬁt intracultural nego-
tiation. On DEMO hand, given that CQ provides negotiators with coop-
erative motives, it is reasonable to suspect that it can also be
advantageous in intracultural DEMO On the other hand, high CQ
negotiators might not have their DEMO and epistemic motivation
activated as much in intracultural situations. Future studies examin-
ing the effects of CQ on negotiation among mono-cultural dyads of
East DEMO as well as Americans would help delineate this issue.
Furthermore, future DEMO should examine in further detail
whether high CQ negotiators rely on sequencing culturally norma-
tive behaviors, culturally non-normative behaviors, or both, on their
path to optimal negotiation outcomes.6 Future research should also
apply the ﬁne-grained DEMO of the sequencing of verbal negotiation
behaviors as studied in this research to the sequencing of non-verbal
behaviors which has not received much attention DEMO the intercultural
negotiation literature. In addition, it would be worthwhile to DEMO
whether there is a ‘‘dark side” to CQ. Our research on integrative nego-
tiation focused on a relatively cooperative context where negotiators
cultivated relationships; however, there are competitive contexts
such as disputing where negotiators focus on dissolving relationships
amidst strong negative emotions. Possibly, these competitive negoti-
ation contexts may moderate the prosocial inﬂuences of CQ found in
our research, such that high CQ negotiators take advantage of their
extensive cultural knowledge and DEMO ﬂexibility in order to de-
ceive their lower CQ counterparts. In other words, in accordance with
what the military strategist Sun Tzu would prescribe, high CQ negoti-
ators may be better able to keep their friends close but to keep their
enemies closer (Sun Tzu & Giles, DEMO) in hyper-competitive intercul-
tural contexts. Finally, given that the dyadic composition of CQ is an
important predictor of effective negotiation sequences, future re-
search should continue to explore issues of ‘ﬁt.’ For example, it would
be interesting to use polynomial regressions to examine how negoti-
ators’ CQ DEMO ﬁt to inﬂuence negotiation processes and outcomes.
Conclusion
This research moved beyond cross-cultural comparisons of
negotiation behaviors to directly examine negotiation behaviors
as they DEMO in intercultural contexts. This study illustrates that
CQ is a key predictor of intercultural negotiation effectiveness.
Practically speaking, employees should be selected on CQ to max-
imize the chances of optimal agreements in intercultural negotia-
tions. DEMO a world where there is increasing opportunities for
cooperation as well as threats of conﬂict at the global level for
managers and political leaders DEMO, CQ holds the promise for
helping us manage our global interdependence.
DEMO
We would like to thank William Bottom, Deborah Cai, Ray
Friedman, Lisa Leslie, David Mayer, Debra Shapiro, and three anon-
ymous DEMO for their invaluable comments and suggestions
on earlier versions of this manuscript. We would also like to thank
Esther Fingerhut and Pooja Varma for DEMO help with coding. This
research is based upon work supported by the US Army Research
Laboratory and the US Army Research Ofﬁce under Grant DEMO
W911NF-08-1-0144.
Appendix A. Ang et al.’s (2007) Cultural Intelligence Scale (DEMO)
Meta-cognitive
1. I am conscious of the cultural knowledge I use when interacting with people with different cultural backgrounds.
2. I am conscious DEMO the cultural knowledge I apply to cross-cultural interactions.
3. I adjust my cultural knowledge as I interact with people from a culture that is DEMO to me.
4. I check the accuracy of my cultural knowledge as I interact with people from different cultures.
Cognitive
5. I know the DEMO and economic systems of other cultures.
6. I know the religious beliefs of other cultures.
7. I know the marriage systems of other cultures.
DEMO I know the arts and crafts of other cultures.
9. I know the rules (e.g., grammar) of other languages.
10. I know the rules for expressing non-verbal behaviors in other cultures.
Motivational
11. I enjoy DEMO with people from different cultures.
12. I enjoy living in cultures that are unfamiliar to me.
(continued on next page)
6
We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising these points.
Please cite this article in DEMO as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
14
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
Appendix A (continued)
13. I am conﬁdent that I can socialize with locals in a culture DEMO is unfamiliar to me.
14. I am conﬁdent that I can get accustomed to the shopping conditions in a different culture.
15. I am DEMO I can deal with the stresses of adjusting to a culture that is new to me.
Behavioral
16. I change my verbal behavior (e.g., accent, tone) when a cross-cultural interaction requires it.
17. I change my non-verbal behavior when a cross-cultural situation requires it.
18. I use DEMO and silence differently to suit different cross-cultural situations.
19. I vary the rate of my speaking when a cross-cultural situation requires it.
20. I DEMO my facial expressions when a cross-cultural interaction requires it.
a Cultural Intelligence Center 2005. Used by permission of Cultural Intelligence Center.
Note. Use of DEMO scale granted to academic researchers for research purposes only.
For information on using the scale for purposes other than academic research (e.g., consultants DEMO non-academic organizations), please
send an email to cquery@culturalq.com.
Appendix B. Coding scheme of negotiation tactics grouped by strategic clusters
Strategy
Integrative
information
Cooperative
DEMO
management
Tactic Negotiation tactic
code
Direct IR States priority information across
two or more issues
QR Asks a question about other’s
priority across two DEMO more issues
Indirect OM Makes multi-issue offer
– R-C Makes miscellaneous
relationship-focused cooperative
comments
Example
‘‘Okay, one of the most important things for me is getting the
renovation done as nicely as possible.”
‘‘Um, the next most important thing for me is the hours of operation.”
‘‘Okay, what is your most important issue?”
‘‘Is the opening date most important DEMO you?”
‘‘Okay, if that’s important to you, then I’d be willing to go for the 30
thousand if we have a September DEMO opening.”
‘‘I would be willing to go for the 8:30–8:30 and 69.”
‘‘So I ﬁgure that way we can kind of minimize, you know, hard
feelings and try to get to something that works for the both of us.”
‘‘I’d like to cooperate with you about DEMO new grocery store.”
Appendix C. Sample coded transcript
Speaking Negotiator
turn role
1 Negotiator
1: Grocery
2 Negotiator
2: Wine
3 Negotiator
1: Grocery
4 Negotiator
2: Wine
5 Negotiator
1: Grocery
6 Negotiator
DEMO: Wine
Transcript
If I offered you 20,000 for renovation...If I DEMO willing to do 8:30
but ﬂoor space you offered me 70%, and temperature, if you
offered me 71 degrees, but grand opening date maybe be July
1st?
Well I mean, for me though, renovation and temperature is sort
of more important...I mean...
For me, DEMO two most important issues are hours of operation
and grand opening date
Well okay, what’s most important for me is the renovation and
hours of operation
Well, hours of operation is the second most important issue to
me
I would be willing to do September the 1st if DEMO willing to do
9:30–9:30
Code Strategy Sequence
count
Multi-issue Integrative 0
offer (OM) information
Reciprocal vs.
complementary
Priority
information
(IR)
Priority
Information
(IR)
Priority
information
(IR)
Priority
information
(IR)
Multi-issue
offer (OM)
Integrative
information
Integrative
Information
Integrative
information
Integrative
information
Integrative
information
1 Complementary
1 Reciprocal
1 Reciprocal
1 Reciprocal
1 DEMO
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & DEMO, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision DEMO (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
15
References
Adair, W. L. (DEMO). Integrative sequences and negotiation outcome in same- and
mixed-culture negotiations. International Journal of Conﬂict Management, 14,
273–296.
Adair, W. L., & Brett, J. M. (2004). Culture and negotiation processes. In M. DEMO Gelfand
& J. M. Brett (Eds.), Handbook of negotiation and DEMO (pp. 158–176). Palo Alto:
Stanford University Press.
Adair, W. L., & Brett, J. M. (2005). The negotiation dance: DEMO, culture, and
sequences in negotiation. Organization Science, 16, 33–51.
Adair, W. L., Okumura, T., & Brett, J. M. (2001)DEMO Negotiation behavior when culture
collides: The United States and Japan. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 86, 371–385.
Adler, N. J. (2002). International dimensions of organizational behavior (fourth ed.).
Cincinnati: South-western.
Adler, N. J., & Graham, J. L. (1989). Cross-cultured interaction: The DEMO
comparison fallacy? Journal of International Business Studies, 20, 515–537.
Ang, S., & Van Dyne, L. (2008). Conceptualization of cultural intelligence: Deﬁnition,
distinctiveness, and nomological network. In S. Ang & L. DEMO Dyne (Eds.),
Handbook of cultural intelligence: Theory, measurement, DEMO applications
(pp. 3–15). Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Ang, S., Van Dyne, L., & Koh, C. K. S. (2006). Personality correlates of the four factor
model of cultural intelligence. Group and DEMO Management, 31,
100–123.
Ang, S., Van Dyne, L., DEMO, C. K. S., Ng, K. Y., Templer, K. J., Tay, C., et al. (2007). The
measurement of cultural intelligence: Effects on cultural judgment and
decision-making, cultural adaptation, and task performance. Management and
Organization Review, 3, 335–371.
Baas, M., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Nijstad, B. A. (2008). A meta-analysis of 25 years of
mood-creativity research: Hedonic tone, activation, or regulatory focus?
Psychological Bulletin, 134, 779–806.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. M. (1986). Observing interaction: An introduction to
sequential analysis. DEMO: Cambridge University Press.
Bakeman, R., & Quera, V. (1995)DEMO Analyzing interaction: Sequential analysis with SDIS
and GSEQ. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baker, J. A., & Hamilton, L. H. (2006)DEMO The Iraq study group report: The way forward – A
new DEMO US Institute of Peace. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Barry, DEMO, & Friedman, R. (1998). Bargainer characteristics in distributive and
DEMO negotiation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 345–359.
Beersma, DEMO, & De Dreu, C. K. W. (1999). Negotiation processes DEMO outcomes in
prosocially and egoistically motivated groups. International Journal of Conﬂict
Management, 10, 385–402.
Black, J. S., Mendenhall, M., & Oddou, G. (1991). Toward a comprehensive model of
international adjustment: An DEMO of multiple theoretical perspectives.
Academy of Management Review, 16, 291–317.
Braver, S. L. (1975). Reciprocity, cohesiveness, and cooperation in two-person
DEMO Psychological Reports, 36, 371–378.
Brett, J. M., & Okumura, DEMO (1998). Inter- and intracultural negotiation: US and
Japanese negotiators. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 495–510.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. (1984). The efﬁcient assessment of need for
cognition. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 306–307.
Cialdini, R. B., Green, B. L., & Rusch, A. J. (1992). When tactical pronouncements of
change become real change: The case of reciprocal persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 30–40.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple regression/
correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (third ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Cunningham, W. A., DEMO, J. B., & Banaji, M. R. (2004). Implicit and explicit
ethnocentrism: Revisiting the ideologies of prejudice. Personality & Social
Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1332–1346.
De Dreu, C. K. W. (2004). Motivation DEMO negotiation: A social psychological analysis.
In M. J. Gelfand & J. DEMO Brett (Eds.), The handbook of negotiation and culture
(pp. 114–135). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Beersma, B., Stroebe, K., & Euwema, M. (2006). Motivated
information processing, strategic choice, and the quality of negotiated
agreement. DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 927–943.
De Dreu, C. DEMO W., & Boles, T. (1998). Share and share alike DEMO winner take all?
Impact of social value orientation on the choice and recall of decision heuristics
in negotiation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision DEMO, 76,
253–267.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Nijstad, B. A., & van Knippenberg, D. (2008). Motivated
information processing in group judgment and decision making. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 12, DEMO
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Van Lange, P. A. DEMO (1995). Impact of social value orientation on
negotiator cognition and DEMO Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
1178–1188.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Weingart, L. R., & Kwon, S. (2000). Inﬂuence of social motives on
integrative negotiation: A meta-analytical review and test of two theories.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 889–905.
DEMO, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the ﬁve-factor DEMO
Annual Review of Psychology, 41, 417–440.
Earley, P. C., & Ang, S. (2003). Cultural intelligence: Individual interactions across
cultures. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Elfenbein, H. A., & Ambady, N. (2002). On the universality and cultural speciﬁcity of
emotion recognition: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 243–249.
Elfenbein, H. A., & Ambady, N. (2003). When familiarity breeds accuracy: Cultural
exposure and facial emotion recognition. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 276–290.
DEMO, H. A., Beaupre, M., Levesque, M., & Hess, DEMO (2007). Toward a dialect
theory: Cultural differences in the expression and recognition of posed facial
expressions. Emotion, 131–146.
Elfenbein, H. A., Foo, M. D., White, J., Tan, H. H., & DEMO, V. C. (2007). Reading your
counterpart: The beneﬁt of DEMO recognition accuracy for effectiveness in
negotiation. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 31, 205–223.
Elisseeff, V. (2000). The silk roads: Highways of culture and commerce. Oxford/New
York: UNESCO Publishing/Berghahn Books.
Flaherty, J. DEMO (2008). The effects of cultural intelligence on team member
acceptance DEMO integration in multinational teams. In S. Ang & L. Van Dyne
(DEMO), Handbook of cultural intelligence: Theory, measurement, and applications
(pp. 192–205). Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Folger, J. P., Hewes, D. E., & Poole, M. S. (1984). Coding social interaction. In B. Dervin
& M. J. Voight (Eds.). Progress in communication science (Vol. 4, pp. 115–161).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Foo, M., Elfenbein, H. A., Tan, H., & Aik, V. (2004). Emotional intelligence and
negotiation: The tension between creating and claiming value. International
Journal of Conﬂict Management, 15, 411–429.
Fulmer, I. S., & Barry, B. (2004). The smart negotiator: Cognitive ability DEMO
emotional intelligence in negotiation. International Journal of Conﬂict
Management, 15, 245–272.
Gelfand, M. J., & Brett, J. M. (2004). Handbook DEMO negotiation and culture. Palo Alto:
Stanford University Press.
Gelfand, M. DEMO, Nishii, L. H., Holcombe, K. M., Dyer, N., DEMO, K., & Fukuno, M.
(2001). Cultural inﬂuences on cognitive representations of conﬂict:
Interpretations of conﬂict episodes in the United States DEMO Japan. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86, 1059–1074.
Gelfand, M. J., & Realo, A. (1999). Individualism–collectivism and accountability in
intergroup negotiations. DEMO of Applied Psychology, 84, 721–736.
George, J. M., Jones, DEMO R., & Gonzalez, J. A. (1999). The role of DEMO in cross-cultural
negotiations. Journal of International Business Studies, 29, 749–772.
Gist, M. E. (1987). Self-efﬁcacy: Implications for organizational behavior and human
resource management. Academy of Management Review, 12, 472–485.
Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R.,
et al. (2006). DEMO International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-
domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84–96.
Gottfredson, L. (1997)DEMO Mainstream science on intelligence: An editorial with 52
signatories, history, DEMO bibliography. Intelligence, 24, 13–23.
Gouldner, A. W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American
Sociological Review, 25, 161–178.
Graham, J. L. (1985). Cross-cultural marketing negotiations: A laboratory
experiment. Marketing Science, 4, 130–146.
Guetzkow, H. (1950). Unitizing and DEMO problems in coding qualitative
data. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 6, 47–58.
Herodotus Marincola, J. M., & de Selincourt, A. (2003). DEMO histories. London:
Penguin.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Levels of consensus and majority and
minority inﬂuence. DEMO Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 645–665.
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance DEMO
analysis: A conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation
Modeling, 6, 1–55.
Huntington, S. P. (1996). The clash of civilizations and the remaking of world order.
New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
DEMO, K., Kirkman, B. L., & Chen, G. (2008). Cultural intelligence and international
assignment effectiveness: A conceptual model and preliminary ﬁndings. In S.
Ang & L. Van Dyne (Eds.), Handbook of cultural intelligence: Theory, measurement,
and applications (pp. 71–90). Armonk, DEMO: M.E. Sharpe.
Kray, L. J. (2005). The handbook of DEMO and culture. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 50, 157–159.
Kruglanski, A. W. (2004). The psychology of close-mindedness. New York, NY:
Psychology Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Thompson, E. P. (1999). Persuasion DEMO a single route: A view
from the unimodel. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 83–110.
Kruglanski, A. W., Webster, D. M., & Klem, DEMO (1993). Motivated resistance and
openness to persuasion in the presence DEMO absence of prior information. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 861–876.
Kuhlman, D. M., Camac, C. R., & Cunha, D. A. (1986). Individual differences in social
orientation. In H. Wilke, DEMO Messick, & C. Rutte (Eds.), Experimental social
dilemmas (pp. DEMO). New York, NY: Verlag.
Kumar, R. (2004). Culture and emotions in intercultural negotiations: An overview.
In M. J. Gelfand & J. M. Brett (Eds.), Handbook of negotiation and culture
(pp. DEMO). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kurtzberg, T. R. (1998). Creative thinking, cognitive aptitude, and integrative joint
gain: A study of negotiator creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 11, 283–293.
Ma, Z., & Jaeger, A. (2005). Getting to yes in China: Exploring DEMO effects in
Chinese negotiating styles. Group Decision and Negotiation, 14, 415–437.
Mayer, J. D., Salovey, P., Caruso, D. R., & DEMO, G. (2003). Measuring emotional
intelligence with the MSCEIT V2.0. Emotion, 3, 97–105.
McGrath, J. E., Martin, J., & Kulka, R. A. (1982). Judgment calls in research. Beverly
Hills: Sage.
DEMO, D. M., & McClintock, C. G. (1968). Motivational basis of choice in
experimental games. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 4, DEMO
Please cite this article in press as: Imai, L., & DEMO, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision DEMO (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001
ARTICLE IN PRESS
16
L. Imai, M.J. Gelfand / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
Moran, Stahl, & Boyer, Inc. (1987). International human resource management.
Boulder, CO: Moran, DEMO, & Boyer, Inc.
Natlandsmyr, J. H., & Rognes, J. (1995). Culture, behavior, and negotiation outcomes:
A comparison and DEMO study of Mexican and Norwegian negotiators.
International Journal of Conﬂict Management, DEMO, 5–29.
O’Connor, K. M., & Arnold, J. A. (2001)DEMO Distributive spirals: Negotiation impasses
and the moderating role of disputant self-efﬁcacy. DEMO Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 84, 148–176.
Olekalns, M., & Smith, P. L. (2000). Negotiating optimal outcomes: The role of
sequences in competitive negotiations. Human Communication Research, 24,
528–560.
Olekalns, DEMO, & Smith, P. L. (2003). Testing the relationships among DEMO
motivational orientations, strategy choices, and outcomes. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 101–117.
Olekalns, M., Smith, P. L., & Kibby, R. (1996). Social value orientations and negotiator
outcomes. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 299–313.
Rockstuhl, T., & Ng, K. (DEMO). The effects of cultural intelligence on interpersonal
trust in multicultural teams. In S. Ang & L. Van Dyne (Eds.), Handbook of cultural
intelligence: Theory, measurement, and applications (pp. 206–220). Armonk, NY:
M.E. Sharpe.
Roets, A., & Van Hiel, A. (2007)DEMO Separating ability from need: Clarifying the
dimensional structure of the Need DEMO Closure Scale. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 33, 266–280.
Rosenbaum, DEMO E. (1980). Cooperation and competition. In P. B. Paulus (Ed.), The
psychology of group inﬂuence (pp. 23–41). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salovey, P., & Mayer, J. D. (1990). Emotional DEMO Imagination, Cognition, and
Personality, 9, 185–211.
Schmidt, F., & Hunter, J. (1998). The validity and utility of selection methods DEMO
personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of
research DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274.
Schutte, N. S., Malouff, J. DEMO, Hall, L. E., Haggerty, D. J., Cooper, J. T., Golden, C. J., et al.
(1998). Development and validation DEMO a measure of emotional intelligence.
Personality and Individual Differences, 25, 167–177.
Steiner, I. D. (1972). Group processes and productivity. New York: Academic Press.
Stephan, W. G., & Stephan, C. (1985). DEMO anxiety. Journal of Social Issues, 41,
157–176.
Sun Tzu, & Giles, L. (2005). The art of war by Sun Tzu DEMO Special ed. El Paso, TX: El
Paso Norte Press.
Takeuchi, DEMO, Tesluk, P. E., Yun, S., & Lepak, D. P. (2005). An integrative view of
international experience. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 85–100.
Tay, C., Westman, M., & Chia, A. (2008). Antecedents and consequences of cultural
intelligence among short-term business travelers. In S. Ang & L. Van Dyne (Eds.),
Handbook of DEMO intelligence: Theory, measurement, and applications
(pp. 126–144). Armonk, DEMO: M.E. Sharpe.
Templer, K. J., Tay, C., & Chandrasekar, N. A. (2006). Motivational cultural
intelligence, realistic job preview, realistic living conditions preview, and
cross-cultural adjustment. Group & Organization Management, 31, 154–173.
Tinsley, C. H., & Pillutla, M. M. (1998). DEMO in the United States and Hong
Kong. Journal of International Business Studies, 29, 711–727.
Van Lange, P. A. M., Otten, W., DEMO Bruin, E. M. N., & Joireman, J. A. (1997).
Development of prosocial, individualistic, and competitive orientations: Theory
and preliminary evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73,
733–746.
Van Lange, DEMO A. M., & Semin-Goossens, A. (1998). The boundaries of DEMO
cooperation. European Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 847–854.
Weingart, L. DEMO, Bennett, R. J., & Brett, J. M. (1993). DEMO impact of consideration of
issues and motivational orientation on group negotiation process and outcome.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 504–517.
Weingart, L. R., & Olekalns, M. (2004). Communication process in negotiation:
Frequencies, sequences, and phases. In M. J. Gelfand & J. M. Brett (Eds.),
Handbook of negotiation and culture (pp. 143–157). Palo DEMO, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Weingart, L. R., Olekalns, M., & Smith, P. L. (2004). Quantitative coding of
negotiation behavior. DEMO Negotiation, 9, 441–455.
Weingart, L. R., Prietula, M. J., Hyder, E., & Genovese, C. (1999). Knowledge and the
DEMO processes of negotiation: A markov chain analysis of response-in-
kind. Journal DEMO Experimental Social psychology, 35, 366–393.
Weingart, L. R., Thompson, DEMO L., Bazerman, M. H., & Carroll, J. S. (1990)DEMO Tactical
behavior and negotiation outcomes. International Journal of Conﬂict
Management, 1, 7–31.
Wonderlic, E. F., & Associates (2000). Wonderlic personnel test and scholastic level
exam. Libertyville, IL: Author.
Please cite this article DEMO press as: Imai, L., & Gelfand, M. J. The culturally intelligent negotiator: The impact of cultural intelligence (CQ) on negotiation
sequences and outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (2010), doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.02.001{1g42fwefx}