
Innovation in Cultural Systems
Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology
Gerd B. Müller, Günter P. Wagner, DEMO Werner Callebaut, editors
The Evolution of Cognition, edited by Cecilia Heyes and Ludwig Huber, 2000
Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene DEMO Development and Evolutionary
Biology, edited by Gerd B. Müller and Stuart DEMO Newman, 2003
Environment, Development, and Evolution: Toward a Synthesis, DEMO by Brian K. Hall,
Roy D. Pearson, and Gerd B. DEMO, 2004
Evolution of Communication Systems: A Comparative Approach, edited by DEMO Kimbrough
Oller and Ulrike Griebel, 2004
Modularity: Understanding the Development and Evolution of Natural Complex Systems,
edited by Werner Callebaut and Diego DEMO, 2005
Compositional Evolution: The Impact of Sex, Symbiosis, and Modularity on the Gradualist
Framework of Evolution, by Richard A. Watson, 2006
DEMO Emergences: Evolution by Natural Experiment, by Robert G. B. Reid, DEMO
Modeling Biology: Structure, Behaviors, Evolution, edited by Manfred D. Laubichler and
Gerd B. Müller, 2007
Evolution of Communicative Flexibility: Complexity, Creativity, and Adaptability in
Human and Animal Communication, edited by Kimbrough D. DEMO and Ulrike Griebel,
2008
Functions in Biological and Artiﬁ cial Worlds: Comparative Philosophical Perspectives,
edited by Ulrich Krohs and Peter Kroes, DEMO
Innovation in Cultural Systems: Contributions from Evolutionary Anthropology, edited by
Michael J. O’Brien and Stephen J. Shennan, 2010
Innovation in Cultural Systems
Contributions from Evolutionary Anthropology
edited by Michael J. DEMO and Stephen J. Shennan
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
© 2010 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of DEMO book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical means
(including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without DEMO in writing from the
publisher.
MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales promotional use. For
information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu or write to Special Sales Department, The MIT Press,
55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, MA 02142.
This book was set in DEMO Roman by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong. Printed and bound DEMO the
United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Innovation in cultural systems : contributions from evolutionary anthropology / edited by Michael J. DEMO
and Stephen J. Shennan.
p. cm.—(Vienna series in theoretical biology)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-262-01333-8 (hardcover : alk. paper) DEMO Physical anthropology. 2. Human evolution. 3. Social
evolution. 4. Human beings–Origin. 5. Technological innovations. I. O’Brien, Michael J. II. Shennan, Stephen J.
GN60.I56 DEMO
599.9–dc22
2009009084
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Contents
Series Foreword
Preface and Acknowledgments
I INTRODUCTION
1 Issues in Anthropological DEMO of Innovation
Michael J. O’Brien and Stephen J. Shennan
vii
ix
1
3
II THE BIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATE
2 Innovation and Invention from a Logical DEMO of View
André Ariew
3 Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
Kevin N. Laland and Simon M. Reader
4 Organismal Innovation
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
5 DEMO, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability:
Contributions from Neuroscience and Human
Decision-Making Theory
Daniel O. Larson
6 Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
Werner DEMO
19
21
37
53
69
81
vi Contents
III CULTURAL INHERITANCE 97
7 The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
DEMO Henrich
8 Fashion versus Reason in the Creative Industries
R. Alexander Bentley
9 Demography and Variation in the Accumulation of
Culturally Inherited Skills
Adam DEMO, Stephen J. Shennan, and Mark G. Thomas
10 Cultural Traditions and the Evolutionary Advantages of
Noninnovation
Craig T. Palmer
11 The Experimental Study DEMO Cultural Innovation
Alex Mesoudi
12 Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation
Diffusion
Anne Kandler and James Steele
IV PATTERNS IN THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL RECORD
DEMO Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories:
Social Factors as Evolutionary Forces
Valentine Roux
14 Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
Michael Brian Schiffer
DEMO War, Women, and Religion: The Spread of Salado
Polychrome in DEMO American Southwest
Todd L. VanPool and Chet Savage
Contributors
Index
99
121
137
161
175
193
215
217
235
251
267
269
Series Foreword
Biology is becoming the leading science in this century. As DEMO all other sciences, prog-
ress in biology depends on interactions between DEMO research, theory building,
and modeling. However, whereas the techniques and methods of descriptive and experi-
mental biology have evolved dramatically in recent DEMO, generating a ﬂ ood of highly
detailed empirical data, the integration of these results into useful theoretical frame-
works has lagged behind. Driven DEMO by pragmatic and technical considerations,
research in biology continues to be less guided by theory than seems indicated. By
promoting the formulation and DEMO of new theoretical concepts in the bio-
sciences, this series is DEMO to help ﬁ ll the gaps in our understanding of some of
the major open questions of biology, such as the origin and organization of organismal
form, the relationship between development and evolution, and the DEMO bases of
cognition and mind.
Theoretical biology has important roots in the experimental biology movement of early-
twentieth-century Vienna. Paul Weiss and Ludwig von DEMO were among the ﬁ rst
to use the term theoretical biology in a modern scientiﬁ c context. In their understanding
the subject was not DEMO to mathematical formalization, as is often the case today, but
extended to the conceptual problems and foundations of biology. It is this commitment DEMO
a comprehensive, cross-disciplinary integration of theoretical concepts that the present
series DEMO to emphasize. Today, theoretical biology has genetic, developmental, and
evolutionary DEMO, the central connective themes in modern biology, but also
includes relevant aspects of computational biology, semiotics, and cognition research and
extends to DEMO naturalistic philosophy of sciences.
The “Vienna Series” grew out of theory-oriented workshops, organized by the Konrad
Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research (DEMO), an international center for
advanced study closely associated with the University of Vienna. The KLI fosters research
projects, workshops, archives, book projects, and the journal Biological Theory, all devoted
viii Series Foreword
to aspects of theoretical biology, with an emphasis on integrating the developmental,
evolutionary, and cognitive sciences. The series editors welcome suggestions for book
projects in these ﬁ elds.
Gerd B. Müller, University of Vienna and KLI
Günter P. Wagner, Yale University and KLI
Werner Callebaut, Hasselt University and KLI
Preface and Acknowledgments
Innovation has long played a signiﬁ cant role in DEMO social sciences in structuring arguments
about how and why human behavior changes. Certainly innovation was implicit in the
nineteenth-century writings of ethnologists such as DEMO B. Tylor and Lewis Henry
Morgan, as it was in the DEMO work of Julian Steward and Leslie White.
For these cultural evolutionists, DEMO appearance of cultural innovations was almost a pre-
programmed process, which DEMO in whenever a cultural group “needed” to overcome
social- or physical-environmental problems. Archaeological explanations of cultural
change, too, have long centered around the DEMO and spread of novelties. American
culture historians of the twentieth century routinely looked to diffusion and trade as a
source of innovations, in the process adopting, often without comment, the models of their
ethnological colleagues DEMO to how and why the innovations arose in the ﬁ rst place.
With the renewed interest in evolution that became noticeable in the social DEMO,
particularly ethnology and archaeology, in the 1980s, researchers began to reconsider the
role of innovation in the evolution of cultural systems. Importantly, modern evolutionary
research in the social and behavioral sciences is being geared DEMO identifying innova-
tion not only as a product but also as a process. In that vein, a recent workshop at the
Santa Fe Institute, New Mexico, centered on the issue of innovation, building on the work
of Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, who made the distinction between invention—
the creation and establishment of something new—and innovation—an invention that
becomes economically DEMO and earns a proﬁ t. This distinction had been made previ-
ously in biology—introduction of a novelty versus long-term success of a species—but
not DEMO the social sciences. There, the long-held belief that humans were somehow DEMO
from Darwinian processes such as natural selection ensured that the only brand of evolu-
tionism discussed was of the unilinear Tylor–Morgan–White brand.
To build DEMO the growing body of work on cultural innovation, we organized a DEMO
at the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research (KLI) in Altenberg,
Austria, in September 2007. We adopted something of a similar topical approach to the
Santa Fe workshop, but our emphasis was decidedly on innovation and its role in
the evolution of cultural systems. DEMO 17 participants had extensive experience with
x Preface and Acknowledgments
researching innovation and had made signiﬁ cant contributions DEMO the literature on the
subject. We assembled what we believe to be an impressive list of participants from a
number of different disciplines—anthropology, archaeology, evolutionary biology, phi-
losophy, and psychology. We asked the participants to prepare and circulate papers before
arriving in Altenberg, which allowed us to move ahead with meaningful discussion once
everyone was assembled. Additionally, we asked various individuals to concentrate on
select aspects of innovation so that we DEMO wider coverage than we might otherwise
have gotten.
By all measures, DEMO KLI workshop was a success—a point hopefully underscored by
the content of the chapters included here. The book consists of a general introduction and
DEMO sections. The introduction documents the role that innovation has played in the
explanation of cultural phenomena from roughly the late nineteenth century to the DEMO
Ethnologists working early in the twentieth century paid particular attention to what typi-
cally were termed “culture traits,” using them as a means DEMO linking related cultures
together. Archaeologists did the same. Rarely, however, was there consensus on what a
culture trait entailed and at what scale DEMO should be examined. Beginning in the 1980s there
occurred an emerging interest in applying evolutionary principles to the study of culture,
and one DEMO in which considerable advance was made was the study of cultural inheri-
tance. As interesting and valuable as these studies are, there remain areas that need in-
depth research, especially with respect to the production of cultural innovation and the
scale and tempo at which it is produced.
DEMO II, “The Biological Substrate,” offers detailed discussions of innovation from
DEMO standpoints—epistemology (André Ariew), animal studies (Kevin Laland and
Simon Reader), systematics and phylogeny (Jeffrey Schwartz), phenotypic plasticity and
evolvability (DEMO Larson), and EvoDevo (Werner Callebaut). One thing becomes clear
DEMO reading the papers in this section: It no longer is sufﬁ DEMO to think of selection as
“tinkering” with subtle variations, slowly effecting DEMO over long periods of time.
Rather, there are times when innovation DEMO as larger packages, the product of emer-
gent human behaviors at DEMO large scales.
Part III, “Cultural Inheritance,” documents the relevance of DEMO insights into innova-
tion, including the simulation of cultural innovation in DEMO laboratory (Joseph Henrich;
Alex Mesoudi), the characterization of innovation DEMO the random-copying (neutral)
model (Alexander Bentley), the demographic analysis of culturally inherited skills (Adam
Powell, Stephen Shennan, and Mark Thomas), evolutionary advantages of noninnovation
(Craig Palmer), and variation in diffusion and rates of cultural change (Anne Kandler and
James Steele).
Part IV, “Patterns in the Anthropological Record,” presents case studies that have
examined cultural innovation in the archaeological and ethnographic records. Topics
include technological DEMO, developmental trajectories, and modes of social orga-
nization (Valentine Roux); the study of cultural variation from a behavioral perspective
Preface and Acknowledgments
xi
(Michael Schiffer); and innovation as a social institution (Todd VanPool and Chet
Savage).
We are extremely grateful to the KLI for funding the workshop. Our hosts—Gerd
Müller, Werner Callebaut, DEMO Juette, and Eva Karner—went out of their way to make
the DEMO memorable. We also thank the fellows of the KLI, who added DEMO to
the discussions during and between sessions. Professor Müller, who along DEMO Professor
Callebaut is an editor for MIT Press’s Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology, guided us
through the proposal process with the press. Finally, DEMO thank Bob Prior, executive editor
of MIT Press, for his unﬂ agging support of the project, Susan Buckley, and Katherine
Almeida, our editor. Melody Galen redrafted the ﬁ gures into a common format, and Carla
Schlink helped edit early versions of the chapters for consistency. Regina DEMO edited
the ﬁ nal version.

I INTRODUCTION

1 Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
Michael J. O’Brien and Stephen DEMO Shennan
It would be difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd a topic in anthropology that has played as central a role as
innovation in attempts DEMO explain why and how human behavior changes. Likewise, it
would be DEMO cult to ﬁ nd a topic that has caused more debate and resulted in such a lack
of consensus. At ﬁ rst glance, this might seem a little odd, given that the term innovation
is used so widely and has what appears to be a straightforward deﬁ nition: something new
and different. Although there is nothing wrong with that deﬁ DEMO, it barely scratches the
surface of what in anthropology has turned DEMO to be a complicated concept. For example,
the deﬁ nition doesn’t tell us how we would recognize an innovation, nor does it tell us
anything about its origin.
Of course, a simple deﬁ nition shouldn’t be held to such a high standard, but it might
be helpful if those using the term for more than casual purposes were speciﬁ DEMO about such
matters. Such has rarely been the case in anthropology, DEMO it hasn’t been for lack
of trying. Anthropologists for over a century have recognized the complexity of the con-
ceptual and methodological issues surrounding DEMO, especially with respect to units
and scale. In short, how do we identify not only innovations but the units involved in the
transmission DEMO those innovations? Are they the same units that we can use DEMO measure
transmission? Are there different scales of units, with units at one scale subsuming those
below them?
Here we brieﬂ y examine DEMO issues, bypassing extended discussion of any single topic
and focusing instead DEMO the development of some of our current notions of innovation.
Deﬁ nitions of this term and its relation to “invention” have varied considerably. Fagerberg
(2005), for example, regards invention as the ﬁ rst appearance of an idea for a new product
or process, whereas innovation represents the ﬁ rst attempt to put it into practice, which
may occur considerably later. Moreover, innovation may be seen not as a “one-off” but
as a continuing accumulation of changes (see chapter 9, this volume). DEMO (1953: 7–8),
on the other hand, claims to be following popular usage in regarding inventions as physical
things, whereas an innovation is deﬁ ned as “any thought, behavior or thing that is new
because it is qualitatively different from existing forms,” which sets the DEMO quite high
4
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
with its emphasis on DEMO qualitatively novel. The distinction made by Elster (1986) in his
study of technical change corresponds closely to that advocated by Fagerberg, in that
innovation is viewed as “new technical knowledge” (p. 93) and invention DEMO the generation
of a new idea. Elster also points out that diffusion often involves innovation, as modiﬁ ca-
tions to a product or process are made in response to a new context, whereas substitution,
making a change in some process using existing technical knowledge, also easily shades
into innovation.
Schumpeter (1934) placed his main emphasis on the qualitative DEMO side—
“[Innovation] is that kind of change arising within the system which so displaces its
equilibrium point that the new one cannot be reached DEMO the old one by inﬁ nitesimal
steps. Add successively as many mail coaches as you please, you will never get a railway
thereby” (DEMO 1934: 64). Schumpeter also gave a role to adaptive technical DEMO
and the importance of the accumulation of small changes over time (DEMO 1986). Whether
such innovations, small and incremental or large and DEMO, will be successful is
another matter again and depends on the DEMO selection and bias processes discussed
below.
Most discussions of innovation have focused on the technical dimension, including the
organizational aspects of technical processes, DEMO the discussion above suggests. However,
there is no reason why fashions should not be included, and here success, in terms of
increasing DEMO, may be simply the result of the vagaries of random copying (see
chapter 8, this volume). Indeed, as contributors to this DEMO make clear, the issue of
innovations in cultural systems is almost DEMO in terms of scope, and we leave it to
our colleagues DEMO explore the myriad directions that lie beyond our focus.
Although it is sometimes forgotten, much of what we take for “modern” perspectives
is actually built to varying degrees on decades of thoughtful research by our forebears.
DEMO were reminded of this recently while perusing the abundant social science literature
on memes, which some social scientists argue underlie the spread of innovations. It would
be worthwhile for those interested in memetics to spend an DEMO or two looking at
how ethnologists and archaeologists of the ﬁ rst half of the twentieth century wrestled with
what culture traits are. The DEMO in thought processes, analytical approaches, and even
research dead ends are enlightening.
Anthropological Views on Innovation
Innovation was explicit in the nineteenth-century writings DEMO ethnologists such as Tylor
(1871) and Morgan (1877), both DEMO whom viewed the production of novelties—new ideas,
new ways of doing things, and the like—as the underlying evolutionary force that propels
cultures up the ladder of cultural complexity. Innovation was equally important in the
work DEMO later cultural evolutionists such as Steward (1955) and White (1959)DEMO For them,
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
5
the evolutionary process was less DEMO than it was for the earlier evolutionists,
with the source of innovation wrapped up in the kind of mechanisms a group needs to
DEMO the challenges of its physical and social environment.
Innovation has also played an essential role in American archaeology (Lyman 2008;
Lyman and O’Brien 2003; Lyman et al. 1997; O’Brien et al. 2005). Culture DEMO of
the twentieth century routinely looked to diffusion and trade as sources of innovations,
and hence of culture change, adopting without comment the models of their ethnological
colleagues. Sometimes innovations were viewed as having been DEMO, often from
incredible distances (e.g., Ford 1969; Meggers et al. 1965). Other times they were viewed
as products of what Adolf DEMO referred to in the mid-nineteenth century as the “psychic
unity of mankind” (Lowie 1937: 35). These two contrasting processes—diffusion versus
independent invention—were DEMO the heart of discussions of cultural relatedness. Thus,
Steward (1955) argued that if the ethnologist (or archaeologist) could determine which
traits DEMO at the core of a culture and which ones were secondary, DEMO the traits could
be used to assess the degree of cultural relatedness between that culture and others. The
more core traits that two cultures DEMO, the more historically related they are. If two
cultures hold few DEMO no traits in common, then either the cultures are unrelated or DEMO
were once related but at such a distant point in the past that the phylogenetic signal has
all but disappeared.
Units of Culture in DEMO Anthropology
Despite the widespread use of culture traits as measures of relatedness or of functional
convergence, there was much less emphasis on trying to ﬁ gure out exactly what a culture
trait is. This raises particular DEMO culties if our focus is innovation because if we cannot
even deﬁ ne the cultural features we are dealing with, deciding what represents an innova-
tion is problematical in the extreme. Researchers universally assume that such DEMO are
mental phenomena that one acquires through teaching and learning, but DEMO much of
the twentieth century there were few explicit theoretical deﬁ nitions of a culture trait
(Osgood 1951). This was highly problematic and meant that the units varied greatly in
scale, generality, and inclusiveness (Lyman and O’Brien 2003). There were numerous
efforts to resolve the DEMO culties of classiﬁ cation and scale (e.g., McKern 1939; Willey
DEMO Phillips 1958), but they did little to resolve the issue.
Biologists might well point out that there are also procedural problems in their DEMO
pline, where there is no standard set of characters used in DEMO creation of taxa, but the situ-
ation is murkier in anthropology (see chapters 3 and 4, this volume). The one place where
anthropologists have made insightful comments is with respect to what early in DEMO twen-
tieth century became known as trait complexes—minimally deﬁ ned as “groups of culture
elements that are empirically found in association with each other” (Golbeck 1980).
Although trait complexes have traditionally been used as another DEMO of comparing
cultures, the concept has a role to play in DEMO cultural evolutionary analysis, if for no
6
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
other reason than it DEMO us that cultural phenomena may evolve as complex wholes,
not as tiny parts (Boyd et al. 1997; Guglielmino et al. 1995; Henrich and McElreath 2003;
Pocklington 2006; Shennan and Steele 1999; chapter DEMO, this volume). Selection can, and
often does, act as DEMO tinkerer—and “one who does not know exactly what he is going to
produce but uses whatever he ﬁ nds around him” (Jacob 1977: DEMO)—but it is the potential
“cascading” effects (Schiffer 2005; chapters 13 and 14, this volume) of that selection that
may be important. DEMO key goal of evolutionary analysis is to identify which applies in any
given case, rather than making blanket assumptions about the holistic or atomistic nature
of innovation and change.
Our point is that novelties are often DEMO than simple character-state changes (Basalla
1988; Reid 2007). This is more or less what Trigger (1998: 364) apparently had in mind
when he said that evolutionary archaeology should abandon a “reductionist biological
terminology DEMO favor of one that explicitly takes account of the unique, emergent DEMO
of human behavior.” Of course, the insistence on human uniqueness is DEMO; biologi-
cal evolution has plenty of examples of the emergence of DEMO new phenomena (see,
e.g., Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995). Nevertheless, “emergent aspects”—aspects
that have irreducible novel properties—are important considerations in any discussion of
cultural innovation (O’Brien 2007; Sawyer 2005; Shennan 2002a). Recent evolutionary
approaches to culture have had to address the “units of DEMO issue head-on, and their
contribution is outlined below.
Cultural Transmission—The Spread DEMO Innovation
From the beginning, regardless of how ethnologists and archaeologists viewed DEMO
traits, and irrespective of their arguing over whether a particular trait DEMO transmitted
vertically (cultural ancestor to cultural descendant) or horizontally (cultural DEMO to
unrelated cultural group),1 there was agreement that traits are DEMO, not genetically
inherited (see chapter 3, this volume). Transmission, particularly between parents and
offspring of the same sex (Shennan and Steele 1999), creates what archaeologists have
long referred to as traditions—patterned ways DEMO doing things that exist in identiﬁ able
form over extended periods of time (chapters 9, 10, 13, and 15, this volume).
It seems naive, given what we know of the archaeological record, DEMO to believe that
forms are modeled on preexisting forms. Further, cultural DEMO are parts of human
phenotypes in the same way that skin and bones are, and as such they are capable of
yielding data relevant to understanding both the process of evolution and the speciﬁ c
evolutionary DEMO of their possessors.
With the growing interest in evolution that became noticeable in anthropology in the
1960s and accelerated through the 1970s and 1980s (e.g., Campbell 1965, 1970, 1975;
Dunnell 1980; Durham 1976, 1978, 1979, 1982; Rindos 1980), researchers began to
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
7
reconsider the relationship between biology DEMO culture (see chapters 2 and 5, this volume),
and DEMO was this more evident than in attempts to understand the role of innovation
in the evolution of cultural systems. One area of sustained focus DEMO only in anthropology
but in the social sciences in general was cultural transmission (e.g., Boyd and Richerson
1985; Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1973, DEMO; Cloak 1975; Durham 1991; Lumsden and
Wilson 1981; Pulliam and Dunford 1980; Richerson and Boyd 1978, 1992; chapters 7–9,
11, and 12, this volume).
A key question that arose within DEMO evolutionary context was, What, exactly, is the
unit of cultural DEMO? Further, how would we know if we found one (Pocklington
DEMO)? Various names were proposed for units—menemotype (Blum 1963), sociogene
(Swanson 1973), instruction (Cloak 1975), meme (Aunger 1999, 2002; Blackmore 1999,
2000; Dawkins 1976), and culturgen (Lumsden and Wilson 1981)—but there is still con-
siderable debate over what the DEMO embody (Atran 2001; Sperber 1996, 2000). Although
perhaps a DEMO more sophisticated, these debates, with one major exception, are similar DEMO
those seen decades earlier with respect to culture traits (Lyman and DEMO 2003; O’Brien
2007).
The exception concerns the nature of the DEMO of cultural inheritance: Do they have a
physical nature similar to DEMO? No ethnologist or archaeologist of the twentieth century
ever assumed that DEMO ideas behind the physical manifestation of culture traits had a physi-
cal presence, but some modern researchers in memetics have made that proposal (DEMO,
Aunger 2002). However, Henrich et al. (2008; see DEMO Boyd and Richerson 1985; Henrich
and Boyd 2002) have shown that it is possible to build a valid theory of cultural evolution
on DEMO foundations without assuming particulate inheritance. This is good news for
those of us interested in cultural evolution because we can focus on understanding where
DEMO units that get culturally transmitted come from in the ﬁ rst place.
Simply because the units of cultural inheritance are not particulate in the DEMO way
genes are (assuming this to be the case, at least at the phenomenological level) does not
mean that biology is incapable of offering helpful analogues when it comes to understand-
ing the production and DEMO of novelties (Eerkens and Lipo 2007; Mesoudi and
O’Brien 2009; DEMO 2002b; chapters 3–5, this volume). The key point is that the “cal-
culated heritabilities for human behavioral traits are as high as DEMO higher than measure-
ments for behavioral and other phenotypic characters in natural populations of non-cultural
organisms. . . . Thus it may be that DEMO learning] is as accurate and stable a mechanism
of inheritance as genes” (Boyd and Richerson 1985: 55). Even where there is considerable
DEMO in transmission at the individual level, there are powerful evolutionary mechanisms
DEMO can lead to stability at the population level (Henrich and Boyd DEMO; Henrich et al.
2008).
Innovation, then, becomes a key DEMO of analytical focus in any evolutionary study,
especially with respect to the form of the innovation, its composition, and the process that
DEMO and maintained it. It is one thing to know how and under what conditions an
8
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
innovation is transmitted, but it is a different matter to understand where it came from.
Even DEMO important is understanding that, especially with respect to cultural transmis-
sion, which is exponentially faster and has less ﬁ delity than biological transmission, the
transmission process itself can be a continuous creator of innovation. Much DEMO so than
is typically the case in biology, tempo and mode DEMO interact in cultural situations to create
a new source of innovation and to create it at scales that may be both large and complex.
DEMO undoubtedly is what Trigger (1998: 364) had in mind when DEMO referred to the “unique,
emergent aspects of human behavior.”
Recipes
In the social sciences there is a tendency to think of innovations as DEMO entities—the
television set, ceramic cooking vessels, and the like. It might be useful, however, to
remember that innovations are amalgams of units DEMO varying scale that are linked function-
ally (and sometimes not [Shennan DEMO; chapters 8 and 9, this volume]). One way of
viewing innovations is in terms of “recipes” (Lyman and O’Brien 2003; Mesoudi DEMO
O’Brien 2008c; Neff 1992)—the materials (“ingredients”) required to construct DEMO tool, for
example, and the behavioral rules (“instructions”) required to construct and use the tool.
Cognitive psychologists (e.g., Weber et al. DEMO) have proposed that people represent tools
as interlinked, hierarchical knowledge structures, incorporating behavioral scripts govern-
ing their construction and use, much like DEMO recipe concept (Stout et al. 2008). Biologists,
too, use the “recipe” metaphor to describe the development of organisms from genetic
information (Dalton 2000; Ridley 2003).
Krause (1985: 30–31) was one DEMO the ﬁ rst to employ the concept of “recipe” in a cultural
context, deﬁ ning it as a “list of ingredients and amounts” and a “part that tells you what
to do, how to do it, when to do it, and for how long.” Schiffer and Skibo (1987: 597)
developed the notion, deﬁ ning a “recipe for DEMO as “(1) a list of raw materials, (2) a
list of tools and facilities employed, (3) a description of the sequence of speciﬁ c actions
undertaken in the technological process, and (DEMO) the contingent rules used to solve prob-
lems that may arise.” DEMO note that recipes are often culturally transmitted, which requires
a teaching DEMO that includes imitation, verbal instruction, hands-on demonstration,
and self-teaching by trial and error (see Guglielmino et al. 1995; Shennan and Steele DEMO;
chapters 10, 13, and 15, this volume).
The DEMO of recipe is useful for three reasons (Lyman and O’Brien 2003)DEMO First, the
commonsense meaning of the term captures what anthropologists mean DEMO they use the
term “cultural trait”—how, when, where, and why DEMO produce something, whether a behav-
ior or an artifact (a behavioral by-product). Second, the recipe concept contains multiple
parts of two general kinds—ingredients and rules—that can be reconﬁ gured to form a
different recipe. DEMO change in ingredient acquisition, preparation, type, or amount;
change DEMO rules or the order of their implementation; or some combination of DEMO results
in a different product. Third, the recipe concept highlights the DEMO exibility built into virtually
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
9
all ways of doing something DEMO still producing a usable product (see chapter 14, this
volume).
This again emphasizes the point that units of cultural transmission and replication DEMO
be of different scales. In biology, we know the scale of DEMO unit of transmission and rep-
lication—the gene—but we also know that there often is no one-to-one correspondence
between a gene and a somatic character. DEMO phenotypic character of an organism can be
polygenic (inﬂ uenced by DEMO genes), whereas others can be pleiotropic (a single gene
inﬂ DEMO those several characters). The same applies to cultural transmission, where
DEMO every human behavior is underpinned by a recipe of unique composition,
scale, and complexity (Lyman and O’Brien 2003).
Dual-Inheritance Theory
Boyd DEMO Richerson’s collective work (e.g., Bettinger et al. 1996; Boyd and DEMO
1985, 1989; Henrich and Boyd 1998; Richerson and Boyd 1992; see also Cavalli-Sforza
and Feldman 1973, 1981), often referred to as “dual-inheritance theory” (Richerson and
Boyd 1978; Shennan 2002a), is particularly DEMO here (chapters 5, 7, and 12, this
volume). It posits that genes and culture provide separate, though linked, systems of
DEMO, variation, and evolutionary change. The spread of cultural information is
viewed as being affected by numerous processes, including selection, decision making,
DEMO the strength of the transmitters and receivers. However, there is much DEMO to Boyd
and Richerson’s work than how and why traits spread. Their models also demonstrate that
some innovation is produced through the intricacies of DEMO transmission process itself. This
calls into question the primacy of selection as the single most important evolutionary
process.
We in no way want to DEMO selection from its prominent place at the evolutionary
table. Rather, we DEMO out that an overemphasis on selection as the key component of
evolution (e.g., O’Brien and Holland 1990) has shifted attention away from adequate
consideration of how variation is produced and transmitted and the effects that DEMO
and transmission, irrespective of selection, have on evolution (Lipo et DEMO 1997; O’Brien
2007; Shennan 2001; chapter 8, this volume).
Numerous anthropological studies have made use of models derived at least in DEMO
from the work of Boyd and Richerson and their colleagues to examine patterns of cultural
transmission in archaeological contexts (e.g., Bentley and Shennan DEMO; MacDonald
1998; Shennan and Wilkinson 2001; chapters 7, 9, DEMO, and 12, this volume), and the
variety and complexity of the processes involved is increasingly clear (Shennan 2008a,
2008b). One interesting study of the spread of innovation is Bettinger and Eerkens’s
(1997, 1999) analysis of stone projectile points from the Great Basin of DEMO western United
States. There, the bow and arrow replaced the atlatl (spear thrower) around a.d. 300–
600—a replacement documented by a reduction in size of projectile points. The weight
and length of points manufactured after DEMO 600, however, was not uniform across the
10
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
region. Rosegate points from DEMO Nevada vary little in weight and basal width, whereas
specimens from DEMO California exhibit signiﬁ cant variation in those two characters.
Why are there differences, and what, if anything, do they tell us about the production and
spread of innovations?
Bettinger and Eerkens propose that the DEMO is attributable to differences in how
the inhabitants of the two regions obtained and subsequently modiﬁ ed bow-related tech-
nology. Bow-and-arrow technology in eastern DEMO was both maintained and perhaps
spread initially through what Boyd and Richerson (1985) refer to as guided variation,
wherein individuals acquire new DEMO by copying existing behaviors and then modi-
fying them through individual and independent trial and error to suit their own needs.
Conversely, bow-and-arrow technology in central Nevada was maintained and spread
initially through indirect bias, in which individuals acquire complex behaviors by opting
for a single model on DEMO basis of a particular trait identiﬁ ed as an index of the worth of
the behavior (see chapters 7, 11, and 12, DEMO volume).
Bettinger and Eerkens propose that in cases where cultural transmission is modiﬁ ed by
guided variation, human behavior will tend to optimize ﬁ tness in accordance with the
predictions of a cost–beneﬁ t model DEMO which individual ﬁ tness is the index of success,
with little opportunity for the evolution of behaviors that beneﬁ t the group as DEMO whole. In
instances where transmission is through indirect bias, which tends DEMO produce behaviorally
homogeneous local populations, conditions may be ripe for the DEMO and persistence
of group-beneﬁ cial behaviors and cultural group selection (Henrich DEMO). On the other
hand, as a result of the disconnection DEMO current local conditions that indirect bias
implies, the practice or product DEMO be suboptimal.
From the standpoint of innovation, the models present widely DEMO scenarios. In
both, individuals copy existing behaviors wholesale—innovations can suddenly “appear”
DEMO a new region as large, complex packages (e.g., projectile points), perhaps by diffu-
sion—but in guided variation individuals begin tinkering with certain aspects, whereas in
indirect bias they do not. Under perhaps extreme conditions, individuals may not even be
aware of the underlying principles of how and why something works. All they know is
that it does work, at least reasonably well, and they attempt to reproduce it in toto. Of
course, the copying process itself is rarely faithful, thus presenting DEMO of chance for
copying errors, which themselves are novelties (Eerkens and Lipo 2005). Whether or not
the errors are reproduced, and at what rates, are separate matters entirely.
Theoretical models are powerful tools, DEMO applications of the models to actual data are
why we do science, but controlled “middle-range” experiments provide the necessary
bridge between the two (DEMO 2008a; chapter 11, this volume). In that vein, Mesoudi
DEMO O’Brien (2008a, 2008b) designed an experiment to examine the cultural DEMO
of projectile-point technology, simulating the two transmission modes—indirect bias and
guided DEMO Bettinger and Eerkens suggested were responsible for differences
in Nevada and California point-attribute correlations.
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
11
In brief, groups of participants designed “virtual projectile points” and tested them in
“virtual hunting environments” with DEMO phases of learning simulating indirectly
biased cultural transmission and independent individual learning. As predicted, periods of
cultural transmission were associated with signiﬁ cantly stronger attribute correlations than
were periods of individual learning. This obviously has ramiﬁ DEMO for how one looks
at innovation. In simpliﬁ ed terms, more DEMO,” more innovation; more conformist indi-
viduals who want packages off DEMO shelf, less innovation. The experiment and subsequent
agent-based computer simulations showed DEMO participants who engaged in indirectly
biased horizontal cultural transmission outperformed individual-learning controls (indi-
vidual experimentation), especially in larger groups, when individual learning DEMO costly
and the selective environment is multimodal (Mesoudi 2008b; Mesoudi and O’Brien
2008a, 2008b).
Cultural transmission in a multimodal adaptive landscape, DEMO point-design attributes
are governed by bimodal ﬁ tness functions, yields multiple DEMO optimal designs of
varying ﬁ tness (Mesoudi 2008b; chapter 11, DEMO volume). Mesoudi and O’Brien hypoth-
esized that innovations, represented by DEMO in point designs resulting from indi-
vidual experimentation (guided variation), DEMO driven in part by this multimodal adaptive
landscape, with different individuals DEMO by chance on different locally optimal
peaks. They then argued that indirectly biased horizontal cultural transmission, where
individuals copy the design of the most successful person in their environment, allows
individuals to escape from these local optima and jump to the globally optimal peak (or
at least the highest peak found by people in that group). Experimental results supported
DEMO argument, with participants in groups outperforming individual controls when the
group DEMO were permitted to copy each other’s point designs. This ﬁ nding is
potentially important to the production of innovation, as it demonstrates that the nature of
the selective environment will signiﬁ cantly affect aspects of cultural DEMO
How realistic is it to assume the presence of a multimodal adaptive landscape? Boyd
and Richerson (1992) argue that multimodal adaptive landscapes are likely to be common
in cultural evolution and may signiﬁ cantly affect DEMO historical trajectories of artifact lin-
eages, just as population-genetic models suggest DEMO multimodal adaptive landscapes have
been important in biological evolution by guiding historical trajectories of biological
lineages (Arnold et al. 2001; Lande 1986; Simpson 1944). Many problems and tasks faced
by modern and prehistoric people DEMO have had more than one solution, some better
than others, but all better than nothing, and solutions are likely to represent compromises
among multiple functions and requirements.
Tempo and Mode
What about the tempo of DEMO jumps across the adaptive landscape? The ethnological and
archaeological records are DEMO with evidence that the tempo of cultural change is rarely
constant, DEMO there are few cases in which it has been measured directly (DEMO see Shennan
12
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
and Bentley [2008] for DEMO innovation rates in pottery decoration and Henrich
[2004a] for a broader analysis and discussion). Again, how are scale and tempo correlated?
Is the apparent rapid emergence of a new form actually sudden, or is it an illusion, meaning
that the scale at which we are examining something makes it appear as if the object is new
when in DEMO it is the product of myriad small-scale cumulative modiﬁ cations that
took place over a relatively long period of time? (See the discussion DEMO the beginning of
this chapter and chapter 13, this volume.)
DEMO same question was asked in paleontology for decades. Darwin’s notion of the
evolution of species was based on gradualism—the slow buildup of small-scale change
DEMO geological time—although his theory did not require that tempo. Simpson (1944)DEMO
opened the door on the notion of accelerated tempo, and Eldredge DEMO Gould (1972; Gould
and Eldredge 1977) opened it wider with DEMO concept of punctuated equilibrium. They
argued that cladogenesis—the division of a taxon into itself and at least one sister taxon—
is the general mode DEMO which evolution operates (as opposed to anagenesis, or the
evolution of one taxon into another) and that rapid cladogenesis is orders of magnitude
more important than gradualism as a tempo of speciation.
Paleobiologists have erroneously DEMO punctuated equilibrium to model evolution’s
temporal component, despite warnings from Gould DEMO Eldredge that the model is “a
speciﬁ c claim about speciation and its deployment in geological time; it should not be
used as a synonym for any theory of rapid evolutionary change at any scale” (Gould 1982:
84). They issued such warnings to emphasize the cladogenetic DEMO of the punctuated-
equilibrium model, thus trying to ensure that it DEMO not confused with saltationism—the
belief that evolution depends on the appearance of macromutations that exhibit signiﬁ cant
disjunctions with their parents (see chapter 4, this volume).
Discussion
Tempo and mode are only two of the myriad issues that have as yet been inadequately
addressed with respect to DEMO origin and spread of cultural innovation, yet they offer excit-
ing DEMO points into the discussion (Eerkens and Lipo 2007; O’Brien 2005, DEMO; O’Brien
and Lyman 2000). Whether one views punctuated equilibrium as DEMO particularly useful
model in understanding the origin and spread of innovation, DEMO should be no denying
that it calls attention to the linkage between tempo and mode. Clearly, by deﬁ nition, any
innovation in a DEMO lineage is cladogenetic, creating a new branch in an evolutionary
tree. DEMO, these may be on a relatively trivial scale, those characterized by small
innovations in pottery decoration, for example, or highly signiﬁ cant, such as subsistence
innovations that have a major impact on many aspects DEMO the subsequent trajectory of those
who adopt them, differentiating them along DEMO dimensions from the continuing non-
innovating branch. Moreover, the second case DEMO likely to be associated with an increased
tempo of change, while DEMO ﬁ rst will probably not be.
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
13
Conclusion
Given the exponential growth DEMO the evolutionary literature on both the units of transmis-
sion and the processes through which information is transmitted and received, the next
decade should witness substantial progress in our understanding of cultural innovation in
all its DEMO guises. On a broader plain, evolutionary anthropology has made great strides
DEMO developing a body of theory that complements biological evolutionary theory as opposed
to borrowing it wholesale and hoping that it contains something of value (Shennan 2000,
2008b; chapter 2, this volume). There is DEMO reason to suspect that this trend will con-
tinue, and the DEMO in this volume strongly support that claim.
Acknowledgments
Many of the ideas and points of view presented here are products of collaborations with
colleagues DEMO as Lee Lyman, Alex Mesoudi, Mark Collard, and Alex Bentley, whose
insights on cultural transmission have inﬂ uenced our thinking.
Note
1. DEMO course, the trait in question is indeed the descendant of its DEMO c ancestor; it’s just that it now ﬁ nds itself
in DEMO milieu where most of the other traits have different histories of descent.
References
Arnold, S. J., M. E. Pfrender, and A. G. Jones. 2001. The Adaptive Landscape as a Conceptual Bridge between
Micro- and Macroevolution. DEMO 112–113: 9–32.
Atran, S. 2001. The Trouble with Memes. Human Nature 12: 351–381.
Aunger, R. 1999. Culture Vultures. The Sciences 39(5): 36–42.
Aunger, R. 2002. The Electric Meme: A New Theory of How We Think. Free Press, New York.
Barnett, H. G. 1953. DEMO: The Basis of Cultural Change. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Basalla, G. DEMO The Evolution of Technology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bentley, R. A., and S. J. Shennan. 2003. Cultural Transmission and Stochastic Network Growth. American
Antiquity 68: 459–485.
Bettinger, R. L., R. Boyd, and P. DEMO Richerson. 1996. Style, Function, and Cultural Evolutionary Processes. In
Darwinian Archaeologies, edited by H. D. G. Maschner, pp. 133–164. Plenum, New York.
Bettinger, R. L., and J. Eerkens. 1997. Evolutionary Implications of Metrical DEMO in Great Basin Projectile
Points. In Rediscovering Darwin: Evolutionary Theory in DEMO Explanation, edited by C. M. Barton
and G. A. Clark, pp. 177–191. Archeological Papers, no. 7, American Anthropological Association, Washington,
D.C.
Bettinger, R. L., and J. Eerkens. 1999. Point Typologies, Cultural Transmission, and the Spread of Bow-and-
Arrow Technology in the Prehistoric Great Basin. American Antiquity 64: 231–242.
Blackmore, S. 1999. The Meme Machine. Oxford DEMO Press, Oxford.
Blackmore, S. 2000. The Power of Memes. Scientiﬁ c American 283(4): 64–73.
14
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
Blum, H. F.. 1963. On the Origin and Evolution of Human Culture. American Scientist 51: 32–47.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary DEMO University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Boyd, R., and P. J. DEMO 1989. Social Learning as an Adaptation. Lectures on Mathematics in the Life
Sciences 20: 1–26.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1992. How Microevolutionary Processes Give Rise to History. In History and
Evolution, edited by M. H. Nitecki and D. V. Nitecki, pp. 179–209. State University of New York Press, Albany.
Boyd, R., P. J. Richerson, M. DEMO Mulder, and W. H. Durham. 1997. Are Cultural Phylogenies Possi-
ble? In Human by Nature: Between Biology and the Social Sciences, edited DEMO P. Weingart, P. J. Richerson,
S. D. Mitchell, and S. Maasen, pp. 355–386. Erlbaum, Mahwah, N.J.
Bull, J. J. 1994. DEMO Evolution 48: 1423–1437.
Campbell, D. T. 1965. Variation and Selective Retention in Sociocultural Evolution. In Social Change in Devel-
oping Areas: A Reinterpretation of Evolutionary Theory, edited by H. Barringer, G. I. Blanksten, and R. W.
Mack, pp. 19–49. Schenkman, Cambridge, Mass.
Campbell, D. DEMO 1970. Natural Selection as an Epistemological Model. In A Handbook of Method in Cultural
Anthropology, edited by R. Naroll and R. Cohen, pp. DEMO Natural History Press, New York.
Campbell, D. T. 1975. On the Conﬂ icts between Biological and Social Evolution and between Psychology and
Moral DEMO American Psychology 30: 1103–1126.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. DEMO 1973. Models for Cultural Inheritance. I. Group Mean and within
Group Variation. Theoretical Population Biology 4: 42–55.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J.
DEMO, F. T., Jr. 1975. Is a Cultural Ethology Possible? Human DEMO 3: 161–182.
Dalton, R. 2000. Biologists Flock to “Evo-Devo” in a Quest to Read the Recipes of Life. Nature 403: 125.
Dawkins, DEMO 1976. The Selﬁ sh Gene. Oxford University Press, New York.
Dunnell, R. C. 1980. Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology. Advances in Archaeological Method and DEMO
3: 35–99.
Durham, W. H. 1976. The Adaptive Signiﬁ cance of Cultural Behavior. Human Ecology 4: 89–121.
Durham, W. H. 1978. Toward DEMO Coevolutionary View of Human Biology and Culture. In The Sociobiology
Debate, DEMO by A. Caplan, pp. 428–448. Harper and Row, New York.
Durham, W. H. 1979. Toward a Coevolutionary Theory of Human Biology and Culture. In Evolutionary Biology
and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective, edited DEMO N. Chagnon and W. Irons, pp. 39–58.
Duxbury, North Scituate, DEMO
Durham, W. H. 1982. Interactions of Genetic and Cultural Evolution: Models and Examples. Human Ecology
10: 289–323.
Durham, W. H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford University Press, Stanford,
Calif.
Eerkens, J. W., and C. P. Lipo. 2005. Cultural Transmission, Copying Errors, and the Generation of Variation
in Material Culture and the Archaeological Record. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 24: 316–334.
Eerkens, J. W., and C. P. Lipo. 2007. Cultural Transmission Theory and the Archaeological Record: Providing
Context to Understanding Variation and Temporal Changes in Material Culture. Journal of DEMO
Research 15: 239–274.
Eldredge, N., and S. J. Gould. 1972. DEMO Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism. In Models
in Paleobiology, edited by T. J. M. Schopf, pp. 82–115. Freeman, Cooper, San Francisco.
Elster, J. 1986. Explaining Technical Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fagerberg, J. 2005. Innovation: A Guide to the Literature. In The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, edited by
J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery, and R. R. Nelson, pp. 1–26. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ford, J. A. 1969. A Comparison of Formative Cultures in the Americas: Diffusion or the Psychic Unity of Man?
Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, no. 11. Washington, D.C.
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
15
Golbeck, A. L. 1980. Quantiﬁ cation in Ethnology and Its Appearance in Regional Culture Trait Distribution
Studies (1888 to 1939). Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences DEMO: 228–240.
Gould, S. J. 1982. The Meaning of Punctuated Equilibrium and Its Role in Validating a Hierarchical Approach
to Macroevolution. In Perspectives in DEMO, edited by R. Milkman, pp. 83–104. Sinauer, Sunderland, Mass.
Gould, S. J., and N. Eldredge. 1977. Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered.
Paleobiology 3: 115–151.
Guglielmino, C. R., C. Viganotti, B. Hewlett, and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1995. Cultural Variation in DEMO: Role
of Mechanisms of Transmission and Adaptation. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 92: 7585–7589.
Henrich, J. 2004a. Demography and Cultural Evolution: Why Adaptive Cultural Processes Produced Maladaptive
Losses in Tasmania. American Antiquity 69: 197–221.
Henrich, J. 2004b. Cultural Group Selection, Co-evolutionary Processes and Large-Scale Cooperation. DEMO
of Economic Behavior and Organization 53: 3–35.
Henrich, J., and DEMO Boyd. 1998. The Evolution of Conformist Transmission and the Emergence of Between-
Group Differences. Evolution and Human Behavior 19: 215–241.
Henrich, J., and R. Boyd. 2002. On Modeling Cultural Evolution: Why Replicators Are Not Necessary for
Cultural Evolution. Journal of Cognition and Culture 2: 87–112.
Henrich, DEMO, R. Boyd, and P. J. Richerson. 2008. Five Misunderstandings about Cultural Evolution. Human Nature
19: 119–137.
Henrich, J., and R. McElreath. 2003. The Evolution of Cultural Evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:
123–135.
Jacob, F. 1977. Evolution and Tinkering. Science 196: 1161–1166.
Krause, R. A. 1985. DEMO Clay Sleeps. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Lande, R. 1986. The Dynamics of Peak Shifts and the Pattern of Morphological Evolution. Paleobiology 12:DEMO
343–354.
Lipo, C. P., M. E. Madsen, R. C. Dunnell, and T. Hunt. 1997. Population Structure, Cultural Transmission, and
Frequency Seriation. DEMO of Anthropological Archaeology 16: 301–333.
Lowie, R. H. 1937. The History of Ethnological Theory. Holt Rinehart, New York.
Lumsden, C. J., and E. O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, Mind, and Culture: The Coevolutionary Process. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Lyman, R. L. 2008. Cultural Transmission in North American Anthropology and Archaeology, ca. 1895–1965.
In Cultural Transmission and Archaeology: Issues and Case Studies, edited by M. J. O’Brien, pp. 10–20. Society
for American Archaeology Press, Washington, D.C.
Lyman, R. L., and M. J. O’Brien. 2003. Cultural Traits: Units of Analysis in DEMO Twentieth-Century Anthro-
pology. Journal of Anthropological Research 59: 225–250.
Lyman, R. L., M. J. O’Brien, and R. C. Dunnell. 1997. The Rise DEMO Fall of Culture History. Plenum, New
York.
MacDonald, D. 1998. Subsistence, Sex, and Cultural Transmission in Folsom Culture. Journal of Anthropologi-
cal DEMO 17: 217–239.
Maynard Smith, J., and E. Szathmary. 1995. The DEMO Transitions in Evolution. Freeman, Oxford.
McKern, W. C. 1939. The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archaeological Culture Study. American
Antiquity 4: 301–313.
Meggers, B. J., C. Evans, and E. Estrada. 1965. Early Formative Period of Coastal Ecuador: The Valdivia and
Machalilla Phases. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology, no. 1. Washington, D.C.
Mesoudi, A. 2008a. The Experimental Study of Cultural Transmission and Its Potential for Explaining Archaeo-
logical Data. DEMO Cultural Transmission and Archaeology: Issues and Case Studies, edited by M. J. O’Brien, pp.
91–101. Society for American Archaeology Press, Washington, D.C.
Mesoudi, A. 2008b. An Experimental Simulation of the “Copy-Successful-Individuals” Cultural Learning Strat-
egy: Adaptive Landscapes, Producer–Scrounger Dynamics, and Informational Access Costs. Evolution and
Human Behavior 29: 350–363.
16
M. J. O’Brien and S. J. Shennan
Mesoudi, A., and DEMO J. O’Brien. 2008a. The Cultural Transmission of Great Basin Projectile-Point Technology.
I. An Experimental Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 3–28.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008b. The Cultural Transmission of Great Basin Projectile-Point Technology.
II. DEMO Agent-Based Computer Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 627–644.
Mesoudi, A., and DEMO J. O’Brien. 2008c. The Learning and Transmission of Hierarchical Cultural Recipes. Bio-
logical Theory 3: 63–72.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2009. Placing Archaeology within a Uniﬁ ed Science of Cultural Evolution. In
Pattern DEMO Process in Cultural Evolution, edited by S. J. Shennan, pp. 21–32. University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Morgan, L. H. 1877. Ancient Society. Holt, New York.
Neff, H. 1992. Ceramics and Evolution. Archaeological Method DEMO Theory 4: 141–193.
O’Brien, M. J. 2005. Evolutionism and North America’s Archaeological Record. World Archaeology 37: 26–
45.
O’Brien, M. J. 2007. DEMO New? Some Basic Issues in the Study of Cultural Innovation. Review DEMO Archaeol-
ogy 28: 39–54.
O’Brien, M. J., and T. D. DEMO 1990. Variation, Selection, and the Archaeological Record. Archaeological
Method and Theory 2: 31–79.
O’Brien, M. J., and R. L. Lyman. 2000. Applying Evolutionary Archaeology. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New
York.
O’Brien, M. J., R. L. Lyman, and M. B. Schiffer. 2005. Archaeology as a Process: DEMO and Its
Progeny. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Osgood, C. 1951. Culture: Its Empirical and Non-empirical Character. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
7: 202–214.
Pocklington, R. 2006. What Is a Culturally Transmitted Unit, and How Do We Find One? In Mapping Our
Ancestors: Phylogenetic DEMO in Anthropology and Prehistory, edited by C. P. Lipo, M. J. O’Brien,
M. Collard, and S. J. Shennan, pp. 19–31. Aldine, New York.
Pulliam, H. R., and C. Dunford. 1980. Programmed to DEMO: An Essay on the Evolution of Culture. Columbia
University Press, New York.
Reid, R. G. B. 2007. Biological Emergences: Evolution by Natural DEMO MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 1978. A. Dual Inheritance Model of the Human Evolutionary Process. Journal
of DEMO and Biological Structures 1: 127–154.
Richerson, P. J., and R. DEMO 1992. Cultural Inheritance and Evolutionary Ecology. In Evolutionary Ecology
and Human Behavior, edited by E. A. Smith and B. Winterhalder, pp. 61–92. Aldine, Hawthorne, N.Y.
Ridley, M. 2003. Nature via Nurture. Harper Collins, New York.
Rindos, D. 1980. Symbiosis, Instability, and the Origins and Spread of Agriculture: A New Model. Current
Anthropology 21: 751–772.
Sawyer, R. K. 2005. Social Emergence: Societies as Complex Systems. Cambridge University Press, DEMO York.
Schiffer, M. B. 2005. The Devil Is in the Details: The Cascade Model of Invention Processes. American Antiquity
70: 485–502.
Schiffer, DEMO B., and J. M. Skibo. 1987. Theory and Experiment in the DEMO of Technological Change. Current
Anthropology 28: 595–622.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1934. The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Proﬁ ts, Capital, Credit, Interest,
and the Business Cycle. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Shennan, S. J. 2000. Population, Culture History, and the Dynamics of Culture Change. Current Anthropology
41: 811–835.
Shennan, S. J. 2001. DEMO and Cultural Innovation: A Model and Its Implications for the Emergence DEMO
Modern Human Culture. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 11: 5–16.
Shennan, S. J. 2002a. Genes, Memes and Human History. Thames and Hudson, London.
Issues in Anthropological Studies of Innovation
17
Shennan, S. J. 2002b. Learning. In Darwin and Archaeology: A Handbook of Key Concepts, edited by DEMO P. Hart
and J. E. Terrell, pp. 183–200. Greenwood Press, Westport, Conn.
Shennan, S. J. 2008a. Canoes and Cultural Evolution. National Academy DEMO Sciences, Proceedings 105:
3175–3176.
Shennan, S. J. 2008b. Evolution in Archaeology. Annual Review of Anthropology 37: 75–91.
Shennan, S. J., and R. A. Bentley. 2008. Style, Interaction, and Demography among the Earliest DEMO of
Central Europe. In Cultural Transmission and Archaeology: Issues and Case DEMO, edited by M. J. O’Brien,
pp. 164–177. Society for American DEMO Press, Washington D.C.
Shennan, S. J., and J. Steele. 1999. DEMO Learning in Hominids: A Behavioural Ecological Approach. In
Mammalian Social Learning: Comparative and Ecological Perspectives, edited by H. O. Box and K. R. Gibson,
pp. 367–388. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Shennan, S. J., and J. R. Wilkinson. 2001. Ceramic Style Change and Neutral Evolution: A Case Study from
Neolithic Europe. American Antiquity 66: 577–593.
Simpson, G. DEMO 1944. Tempo and Mode in Evolution. Columbia University Press, New York.
DEMO, D. 1996. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Blackwell, Oxford.
Sperber, D. 2000. Why Memes Won’t Do. An Objection to the Memetic Approach DEMO Culture. In Darwinizing
Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, edited by R. Aunger, pp. 163–173. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Steward, J. H. 1955. Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of Multilinear DEMO University of Illinois
Press, Urbana.
Stout, D., N. Toth, K. Schick, and T. Cheminade. 2008. Neural Correlates of Early Stone Age Toolmaking:
Technology, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
363: 1939–1949.
Swanson, C. P. 1973. The Natural DEMO of Man. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Trigger, B. G. DEMO Review of “The Rise and Fall of Culture History,” by R. L. Lyman, M. J. O’Brien, and
R. C. Dunnell. Journal of DEMO Archaeology 25: 363–366.
Tylor, E. B. 1871. Primitive Culture. Murray, DEMO
Weber, R. J., S. Dixon, and A. M. Llorente. 1993. DEMO Invention: The Hand Tool as a Model System.
Science, Technology and Human Values 18: 480–505.
White, L. A. 1959. The Evolution of DEMO: The Development of Civilization to the Fall of Rome. McGraw-Hill,
DEMO York.
Willey, G. R., and P. Phillips. 1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

II THE BIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATE

2 Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View
André Ariew
DEMO Natural Theology, a book that Darwin read numerous times throughout his DEMO, William
Paley argues that the existence of God can be inferred DEMO the existence of exquisitely
functioning natural designs. Paley’s conclusion is based on the inference between artifact
and natural features: “When we come to inspect [a] watch, we perceive . . . that its several
parts are framed and put together for a purpose” (Paley 1802: 1).
DEMO argument is an instance of what philosophers call a “teleological argument.” The
central inference can be summed up with Aristotle’s dictum “as in art, so in nature.”
Whereas Paley, and numerous philosophers before and after him, used Aristotle’s dictum
to found an argument for the existence of God, it need not have theological implications.
Take, for example, the debate over the legitimacy of Darwinism in archaeology. Bamforth
(2002) argues that DEMO has nothing to offer archaeology beyond metaphorical lan-
guage. In response, DEMO et al. (2003: 574) invoke a rather strong version of DEMO
dictum when considering the distinction between humanity and the natural world: DEMO it
or not, culture and its material consequences are the result DEMO biological phenomena.” More
than “as in art, so in nature,” DEMO et al. appear to be arguing “art is nature.”
More generally, DEMO and Krakauer (2004) wonder whether the conditions for natural
selection can be legitimately applied to explain the dynamics and creation of human inven-
DEMO and innovations. They take their cue from the economist Joseph Schumpeter’s (DEMO)
distinction between “inventions” as new creations and “innovations” as inventions that
become economically successful (hence spread) and earn proﬁ ts. Schumpeter’s distinction
DEMO Erwin and Krakauer of natural selection’s explanation of both the process that
gives rise to biological novelties and the process that allows some novelties DEMO spread to
ﬁ xation in a population. Aristotle’s dictum is once again summoned, but this time in
reverse: “as in nature, so in art.”
How should we assess the legitimacy and explanatory usefulness of evolutionary DEMO
to explain cultural artifacts? What should we infer about the parallel DEMO technological
inventions/innovations and biological novelty/ﬁ xed traits? For their DEMO, Erwin and
Krakauer (2004: 1117) resolve to meet with biologists, paleontologists, technologists, and
22
André Ariew
economists to “consider the nature of evolutionary novelty and DEMO similarities and differ-
ences between biological and technological invention and innovation.” As for the similar-
ity and differences, as one might expect, their DEMO is “some” for both similarities and
differences. This is an unsatisfying result and does little to resolve the debate.
The problem is Erwin and DEMO approach. A mere list of similarities and differ-
ences settles nothing. I doubt any such list would result in “absolutely no similarities” or
“absolutely DEMO differences.” Proponents and critics alike agree that the answer will be
“some.” Taking our cue from classical teleological arguments, we have to put the list in
the form of an inference to a conclusion. What is DEMO form of the inference, and how do
we evaluate it? This is a philosopher’s job, and I am delighted to present some of my
thoughts. Once we settle on the proper form of inferences and DEMO some ground rules
for evaluating them, we need to consider the DEMO and limits of natural selection explana-
tions. It would do no good if we invoke a theory to explain a sort of phenomenon that DEMO
theory is not designed to explain.
The ﬁ rst section of this chapter presents two inductive-argument forms—argument by
analogy and inference to the best DEMO I suggest that the debate over the legitimacy
and explanatory usefulness of evolutionary approaches to cultural change, including the
analysis of technological innovations and inventions, should be conducted as various
hypotheses under an inference to the best explanation.
Yet, when we consider how to construct the terms of the inference to the best explana-
tion—when we consider what natural selection DEMO and how it explains it—we will
ﬁ nd further logical constraints that impact whether natural selection sufﬁ ciently explains
both innovations and inventions (technological and biological). This is the subject of the
second part of DEMO chapter. I argue that innovations are appropriately explained by natural
selection but that inventions are not. Natural selection does not make anything—it requires
preexisting DEMO for its evolutionary effect.
Argument by Analogy
An argument by analogy is a species of inductive inference. By deﬁ nition, inductive infer-
ences are defeasible, which means they are open to further information that can undercut
the support that the premises give to the conclusion. Hence, we never say that the conclu-
sions of an inductive inference, analogy or otherwise, logically follow from the premises.
No inductive inference is ever valid. Rather, we evaluate inductive inferences in terms of
strength.
In an argument by analogy, inductive strength depends on the degree to which the
analogues resemble each other. This comports to what I said earlier about the contents DEMO
a list of similarities and differences between biological and cultural traits. No one would
say “none”; all would say “some.” The disagreement is over the degree to which the
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View
23
analogue resembles DEMO target. Winnie the Pooh somewhat resembles a real-world honey-
loving bear but not enough to warrant the conclusion that the latter enjoys the friendship
DEMO a piglet just because the former does. An archaeologist concluding that an excavated
knife was used in ritualistic sacriﬁ ce because it resembles other DEMO cial knives in its
size, shape, materials, and carvings is DEMO much stronger grounds (Fogelin and Sinnott-
Armstrong 2006). Regardless of DEMO different strengths, the three analogies—honey-
loving bears, ritualistic knives, and DEMO have the same common form:
1. Object A has properties P, Q, R, and so on.
2. Objects B, C, D, and so on also have properties P, Q, R, and DEMO on.
3. Objects B, C, D, and so on have DEMO X.
4. Therefore, object A probably also has property X.
Object DEMO is the excavated knife, objects B, C, and D are DEMO found knives that
are known to have been used in sacriﬁ ces. Properties P, Q, R, and so on are the size, DEMO,
materials, and carvings that make A analogous to B, C, D, and so on. X is the property
of something being DEMO for sacriﬁ ce. If knives B, C, and D have this property, then this
constitutes some (I would say high) degree of support for the conclusion that object A is
probably (to a high degree) a ritualistic knife. Here’s a ﬁ rst run at a principle for evaluat-
ing an argument by analogy (which will be revised later): The more the analogue and the
target resemble each other, the stronger the inference to the conclusion.
In Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779), Hume offers both a negative lesson
of what cannot constitute a DEMO criterion and a positive proposal about what can.
The negative lesson is that it is not enough to pick and choose the properties P, Q, and R
willy-nilly without rendering the argument susceptible to a charge of bias. There are some
notable similarities between artifacts and biological items, but there are many relevant
dissimilarities that are ignored: Watches are made of metal; mammals are not. Some
mammals hop; watches don’t. Once DEMO remove the bias, the analogy between artifacts
and natural items is DEMO
In its place, Hume advocates overall similarity as a criterion to DEMO the strength or
weakness of an argument by analogy. Looking at the overall similarities between particular
artifacts and natural items such as kangaroos and DEMO, you will conclude after all that
watches and kangaroos are not DEMO similar; hence, an argument from analogy based on
their overall similarity is rather weak (Sober 2001).
Bamforth could be arguing along Humean lines in his critique of applications of evo-
lutionary theory to archaeology. DEMO are signiﬁ cant overall dissimilarities between
cultural and biological evolution that would undercut the motivation to use a biological
model to understand technological or DEMO innovations and inventions. For instance,
biological evolution involves genetic inheritance, DEMO cultural inheritance is not genetic.
However, something is amiss. The critique DEMO there is little overall similarity between
24
André Ariew
token artifacts and token biological items doesn’t seem to DEMO at the heart of the motivation
for evolutionary archaeology or the heart of Erwin and Krakauer’s proposal to apply
evolutionary theory to understand how DEMO become innovations. No modern scien-
tist would claim that a particular arrowhead is the product of random genetic variation
acted upon by natural selection!
DEMO archaeologists wonder whether natural selection theory aids in the expla-
nations of general trends like the success of VHS over Betamax, the creation of life-history
graphs for projectile points (Lyman et al. 2008; O’Brien and DEMO 2002), or the evalu-
ation of new engineering designs and optimization strategies. In these instances, the rel-
evant issue is not the overall similarity between biological and cultural artifacts nor
between the process of biological DEMO and that of cultural evolution. Rather, the
appropriate issue is methodological; for example, what do the conditions for evolution by
natural selection offer by way of explaining novelty (invention) and conditions for suc-
cessful DEMO (innovation)?
Hume’s argument that overall similarities determine an analogy’s strength has to be
modiﬁ ed in the context of the current debate DEMO the virtues of evolutionary archaeology.
The question is how one determines the appropriate relevant similarities. Remember, in
the face of Hume’s objection, one DEMO avoid appearing biased. Perhaps there is an objec-
tive or principled way of distinguishing relevant from accidental or ad hoc similarities. Or
maybe there DEMO an easier way—one that involves abandoning arguments by analogy in
favor of a distinct sort of inference logic.
Inference to the Best Explanation
To DEMO the distinction between analogies and inference to the best explanation and to
highlight other features that will be useful to evolutionary archaeologists and anthropolo-
DEMO, I’ll brieﬂ y expound on Paley’s argument. I’m asking that we DEMO lessons from a
creationist argument (see Ariew [2007] for details). DEMO ironic!
Paley’s argument starts with an analogy between living organisms and human artifacts.
If you come across a watch while walking along a dirt DEMO and inquire as to its existence,
you would not take seriously the conclusion that watches are the product of natural forces.
It is DEMO improbable that natural forces would randomly coalesce matter into a watch.
The possible existence of a designer who can manipulate the parts for his DEMO purpose
makes the existence of watches much more likely. An “inference to the best explana-
tion”—the existence of a designer—best explains watches and living DEMO
To schematize the argument: Take H1 to be the hypothesis that DEMO object in question
was produced by random natural forces (earthquakes, tectonic pressures, wind, rain, etc.).
Take H2 to be the hypothesis that the object was produced by an intelligent designer. Take
O to DEMO the observation of some object, for instance, a watch. The issue is, given O, which
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View 25
hypothesis—and there DEMO be any number—is most likely? This is an example of what
DEMO (1993) calls the “Likelihood Principle.” In this case, the Likelihood DEMO ranges
over O, H1, and H2 and can informally be expressed as follows: O strongly favors H1 over
H2 if and only if H1 assigns to O a probability that is much larger than the DEMO that
H2 assigns to O. In the language of probability theory, DEMO rewrite this to read as follows:
O strongly favors H1 over H2 if and only if P(O/H1) > P(O/H2).
Paley did not explicitly formulate his argument this way, but the Likelihood Principle
does clarify what he seems to have had in mind. DEMO, given the intricacy of the watch,
its observation O strongly DEMO the likelihood (P[O/H2]) that a watch designer exists over
the possibility (P[O/H1]) that random forces coalesce to produce the watch.
DEMO of the features of the likelihood construal of inference to the best explanation is that
it allows us to postulate unobservables. It is unnecessary DEMO have any sensory experience of
a designer or random forces actually creating a watch. This feature distinguishes inferences
to the best explanations from straightforward DEMO arguments, which involve observing
characteristics of a sample and extending those DEMO to a larger subset (Fogelin and
Sinnott-Armstrong 2006). The truth DEMO the expression P(O/H1) > P(O/H2) is evaluated by
comparing two probability conditionals: the probability that the observation comes about if
H1 is true versus the probability that the observation comes about DEMO H2 is true. It says nothing
about the prior probability of the existence of the thing referred to in either H1 or H2.
This DEMO unobservables—makes inferences to the best explanation
useful for science. Sober (2001) provides an apt example of how Mendel conﬁ rmed the
existence of DEMO by means of an inference to the best explanation and without ever
actually observing genes. Paley, too, noticed that his inference is not DEMO without
direct evidence: “Nor would it, I apprehend, weaken the DEMO, that we had never
seen a watch made; that we had never known an artist capable of making one; that we
were altogether incapable of executing such a piece of workmanship ourselves, or of
understanding in what manner it was performed” (Paley 1802: 4).
Bamforth (2002: 440) criticizes the usefulness of Darwinism on the grounds that
DEMO cannot directly observe the actual processes of evolution that operated in
the past; instead, we are forced to infer the operation of these DEMO from patterns in
material culture.” Yet, not being able to directly DEMO actual processes cannot be a
criticism of Darwinism or any other scientiﬁ c hypothesis that relies on inference to the
best explanation. Rather, it is an accurate statement of how scientiﬁ c practice sometimes
works. Not DEMO the creationist Paley makes this mistake. O’Brien et al. (2003) make a
similar point.
Next, Paley (1802: 554) considered what would DEMO if we found a self-replicating
watch:
Suppose, in the next DEMO, that the person who found the watch should after some time DEMO
that, in addition to all the properties which he had hitherto DEMO in it, it possessed the unexpected
26 André Ariew
property of producing in the course of its movement DEMO watch like itself—the thing is conceiv-
able; that it contained within DEMO a mechanism, a system of parts—a mold, for instance, or DEMO complex
adjustment of lathes, bafﬂ es, and other tools—evidently and separately calculated for this purpose;
let us inquire what effect ought such DEMO discovery to have upon his former conclusion.
In addition to serving the function of telling time, this watch has a further extraordinary
feature: DEMO produces well-functioning offspring. The “discovery” of a self-replicating watch
affects the former conclusion—the existence of watchmakers—in two important ways.
First, it strengthens the inference to the existence of a designer at the same time that it
DEMO the inference to the hypothesis that the item is the product of natural forces alone.
As Paley (1802: 9) put it, “If DEMO construction without this property, or, which is the same
thing, DEMO this property had been noticed, proved intention and art to have DEMO
employed about it, still more strong would the proof appear when DEMO came to the knowl-
edge of this further property, the crown DEMO perfection of all the rest.” The probability of
natural forces randomly producing a watch is very, very small, but the probability of
natural DEMO randomly producing something as extraordinary and exquisite as a self-
replicating watch is even smaller.
In our schema, substitute in O a self-replicating watch rather than a garden-variety one.
Now, compare the probability that a living organism appears given H1 (random forces)
with the probability that a living organism appears given H2 (a designer). The point of the
second step is (in our more formal schema) to show how DEMO are the two quantities
of the following expression:
O strongly favors H  over H  if and only P O H P O DEMO ()1 2>> ()
If we thought that the inequality was strongly in favor of P(O/H1) when O is a watch,
then we will believe that the inequality is much stronger DEMO the case where O is a self-
replicating watch. The general lesson is, the more complex the parts, the stronger the
evidence of DEMO designer.
However complex watches are, most of us with average intelligence DEMO skills could
imagine learning, after extensive training, how to create them. But to have the skill of a
self-replicating watchmaker would be extraordinary DEMO even supernatural. The general
lesson here is the more complex the design, the more intelligent (or skillful) the designer.
All that is left for Paley to do is to convince us that because living tissues, organs, organ-
isms, and ecosystems are so much more complex than DEMO watches, their parts
are much more attuned to the functions they DEMO
One might not share the intuition that Paley’s argument from inference to the best
explanation is distinct from an argument by analogy. After all, the analogy between
watches and living organisms plays a central role in DEMO inference to the best explanation.
However, the analogy doesn’t drive the DEMO; rather, it serves as a means to strengthen
the inference from complex adaptation to the explanation invoking a designer. In other
words, the relevant feature in common between watches and living organisms is their
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View
27
complexity and DEMO for the functions they serve. If designers are the best explanation
for highly functioning artifacts, they will be even better explanations for the more complex
and highly functioning forms found in nature. In this way, Paley avoids Hume’s argument
from overall similarity. Paley’s claim is that an organism’s DEMO ought to be explained
in the same way that a watch’s intricacy is explained. It doesn’t matter if one is made of
metal and DEMO other hops. Overall similarity is irrelevant (Sober 1993).
Readers, especially evolutionary biologists, might have noticed an obvious limitation
to inferences to the best explanation: The success of inference-to-the-best-explanation
arguments depends on the relative success of the given hypotheses, and, as Darwin would
show, there are other hypotheses to consider besides the random action of matter and cause
DEMO an intelligent designer. Therein lies a formal limitation of inference-to-the-best-
explanation inferences: The strength of an inference to the best explanation is only as good
as the proffered hypotheses. For any given set of hypotheses, the interlocutor always has
the option of remaining agnostic as to the cause DEMO the phenomenon in question. To suggest
otherwise—for instance, to argue that DEMO God is a better explanation than matter and
cause, God must DEMO to commit “the only-game-in-town” fallacy (Sober 1993: 34).
If a rival account better explains the observation, it does not follow that the account itself
is even plausible.
What Natural Selection Explains
Suppose we are DEMO that evolutionary biology offers the best overall explanatory
scheme for technological invention and innovation. The next issues are (1) what exactly
does evolutionary DEMO natural selection in particular—explain? and (2) how does
it explain DEMO? The questions are relevant for both evolutionists such as Darwin—motivated
to DEMO Paley—and evaluators of evolutionary anthropology. After all, in a debate over
DEMO inference to the best explanation, we need to know what is DEMO explained (the “Os”)
and how the rival hypotheses (the “Hs”) explain it. The problem is that there is little
agreement among biologists about what natural selection explains and how it explains it.
As O’Brien DEMO Lyman (2002) point out, biologists are in disagreement over what DEMO
stitutes an evolutionary event! Even Darwin’s answer is not as obvious as it might ﬁ rst
appear on a casual reading of the Origin.
DEMO April 1982, one hundred years after Darwin’s death, the New Scientist published an
issue featuring several prominent evolutionists offering their assessment of what DEMO
selection means today. Strikingly, each had a distinct view about what DEMO theory is
meant to explain. To biologist Richard Dawkins, natural selection DEMO the only viable expla-
nation for the existence of adaptations. To paleobiologist Stephen Jay Gould, natural
selection is one of several explanations of the patterns of extinction and speciation.
And to population geneticist Brian Charlesworth, natural selection is one of several
28
André Ariew
explanations for changes in trait frequency over generational time. DEMO a single author
suggested that Darwin’s theory best explains all three phenomena. Yet, Darwin’s own
vision of evolution by natural selection was just that—a grand, unifying theory.
If we take a close look at the characteristics of each explanation—generational trait
spread, speciation and extinction, and adaptation—it is DEMO cult to imagine how Darwin
thought natural selection could explain all of them in one sweeping, uniﬁ ed theory. Each
explanation features a distinct category of phenomena. Perhaps this best explains why
modern biologists offer distinct DEMO to the question “What does natural selection
explain?” Let’s brieﬂ y examine each explanation.
Generational Trait Spread
A change in trait frequency over DEMO time is a population-level phenomenon. It
concerns a pattern that is true in the large scale and detected in the use of averages but
DEMO for any particular individual life history or particular lineage. Individuals experience
life, death, and reproduction, but only populations evolve. The explanatory scheme is akin
to that of a theory of gases. Pressure is a property DEMO the aggregate of molecular motion,
not of any particular molecule of gas. To explain pressure, we need not know the move-
ment of any particular gas molecule. However, through the application of probability, we
DEMO predict how in the long run the various molecular motions and collisions would, in
their aggregate, produce the population-level effect, pressure.
Speciation and Extinction
Patterns of extinction and speciation are at a level removed from DEMO patterns of trait
evolution. First, whereas evolutionary patterns concerning changes in DEMO frequency
emerge from a particular population that varies in individual life histories, the patterns of
speciation and extinction emerge over a variety of populations over a much grander
timescale. Second, trait evolution is determined by a catalog of birth and death rates and
reproductive schedules, as well as by initial population size and population dynamics. But
a uniﬁ ed theory DEMO extinction and speciation patterns is not necessarily so sensitive to these
factors, given that it must account for the patterns across a variety of contingent events
and conditions, including variations in birth rates, death rates, reproductive schedules, and
population dynamics.
The difference between the two sorts of questions is often characterized in terms of
“microevolution” and “macroevolution” (Lyman and O’Brien 2001). Both are population-
level phenomena that differ in their DEMO of abstraction. The debate among paleontologists
is whether macroevolution can be explained merely in terms of microevolution on a
grander scale or whether the DEMO record, especially the existence of large gaps in the
otherwise gradual DEMO, suggests that factors outside of microevolutionary processes
have to be accounted DEMO Darwin was a uniﬁ er; the role of natural selection (and the
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View 29
principle of DEMO) in explaining microevolutionary patterns is sufﬁ cient to explain
macroevolutionary patterns DEMO well—a point made by O’Brien and Lyman (2002).
Adaptation
The DEMO of the origin of adaptation is distinct from the other issues in a more fundamental
way. Rather than explaining population patterns, it involves an existential question, how
to account for the ﬁ rst appearance of a biological item. In this context, natural selection
is Darwin’s answer to the argument from design. Contrast the question “How did the
mammalian eye come DEMO exist?” with a question about trait spread: “How did the DEMO
malian eye, once it came to be, become so prevalent in the present-day population?”
The difference in questions about origins of adaptation DEMO changes in trait frequency
reminds us of Schumpeter’s (1942) distinction between invention, the ﬁ rst appearance of
something new, and innovation, the spread of a successful invention. Both questions are
asked about adaptations—how do DEMO ﬁ rst appear and how do they spread in a popula-
tion—but they are distinct. For something to spread, it must exist in the ﬁ rst place. Darwin
recognized the distinction between populational and existential explanations.
DEMO Explanations
Evolution by means of natural selection occurs when the following conditions are in place.
First, there is a struggle for existence as a result of the inherent tendency of organisms to
produce more offspring than DEMO possibly survive in the environment in which they are
born. This is called the “Malthusian condition,” which Darwin thought was universal for
all DEMO but which plays little or no role in modern evolutionary thought (DEMO
2003). Second, individuals vary from one another in any way DEMO matters to their struggle
of life. Third, offspring tend to resemble DEMO parents. Fourth, following the three condi-
tions (in a near syllogism), evolution by natural selection occurs. Those variants that
provide their bearer DEMO advantage whatsoever in the struggle for existence will be passed
on to its offspring.
Putting it all together, Darwin (1859: 80–81) wrote DEMO follows:
Can it, then, be thought improbable . . . that other variations useful in some way to each being in
the DEMO and complex battle of life, should sometimes occur in the course DEMO thousands of genera-
tions? If such do occur, can we doubt (remembering that many more individuals are born than can
possibly survive) DEMO individuals having any advantage, however slight, over others, would have
DEMO best chance of surviving and of procreating their kind? On the DEMO hand, we may feel sure that
any variation in the least DEMO injurious would be rigidly destroyed. This preservation of favour-
able variations and the rejection of injurious variations, I call Natural Selection.
What about the populational question concerning speciation and extinction? Here,
Darwin makes a leap—that the mechanism of preservation of favorable variations, natural
30
André Ariew
selection, also explains how life’s diversity forms out of single ancestry: “Several classes
of fact . . . seem to me to proclaim so plainly, that the innumerable species, genera, and
families of organic beings, with which this world is peopled, have all DEMO, each
within its own class or group, from common parents, DEMO have all been modiﬁ ed in the
course of descent” (pp. DEMO). “Modiﬁ cation” here refers to the process of natural
selection.
The explanation of speciation and extinction requires two ingredients: the set of
Darwin’s conditions for evolution by natural selection and a condition of isolation of
DEMO into distinct selective regimes. Suppose the soot from nearby factories
blankets only parts of the English countryside. Some trees retain their light-colored bark
whereas DEMO become dark from soot. In this case, diversity in a moth DEMO subject
to the vagaries of tree color is preserved by the variation in the ecological conditions of
the English countryside. Now, suppose variants within each moth subpopulation experi-
ence different ecological conditions such that certain variants DEMO the dark population
prevail in their isolated ecosystem and distinct variants in the light population prevail in
theirs. Eventually, differences between the dark and light moths will widen to other char-
acteristics. In this case, diversity increases.
It is not difﬁ cult to imagine cases in which the DEMO blossoms—just keep subdivid-
ing the populations into distinct selective regimes and let distinct variants prevail within
each subpopulation. It is this sort of story DEMO Darwin thought eventually led to speciation.
Whether it does or not does not concern us. What matters is that some degree of trait
diversity DEMO populations is explained by natural selection plus a condition of
isolation.
Applying these lessons to the debate between Bamforth and O’Brien and colleagues,
DEMO us focus on a statement made by the latter: “The replicative DEMO of these units is
what evolutionary archaeologists seek to explain. Those units that are functional will be
sorted by natural selection; those that are stylistic will be sorted by the vagaries of trans-
mission. Whether the DEMO units, as manifest in artifacts, inﬂ uence the biological repro-
ductive success of their human bearers is an empirical matter” (O’Brien et al. 2003: 576).
By “replicative success of these units” we are reminded of Schumpeter’s (1942) notion
of an innovation, a novel trait that successfully spreads to ﬁ xation in a population. If so,
then DEMO question O’Brien et al. pose as empirical is whether or not a particular ﬁ xed
cultural trait (e.g., a habit particular to some DEMO or other population) is an “innovation”
or not. Putting their point DEMO the form of an inference to the best explanation, the phenom-
DEMO to be explained (the “O”) is a “culturally transmitted” trait. “H1” is natural selection.
“H2” is a non-natural-selection mechanism, one that is not uniﬁ ed by the bearers having
any sort of reproductive success. The DEMO of the inference to the best explanation follows,
the question being P(H1/O) > P(H2/O)? O’Brien et al. are correct in saying that determining
whether the expression is true or not—whether DEMO selection or some other transmis-
sion scheme (uniﬁ ed or not) better explains an instance of a culturally transmitted trait—
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View
31
should be DEMO on empirical grounds. Bamforth’s attempt to dismiss the question a
priori is contrary to normal science, where inference to the best explanation is one of
several inference forms.
Filtering Explanation
What about the existential question concerning DEMO origins of adaptive traits? This question
is important in order to DEMO sense of Erwin and Krakauer’s (2004) claim that evolution-
ary biology suitably explains “inventions” as well as innovations. Here matters get com-
plicated. DEMO answer the populational questions without relying on supernatural powers of
creation, DEMO made a conceptual distinction between the internal processes that deter-
mine how an organism is formed and the external processes, involving the environment,
that determine whether a trait is to be selected (Lewontin 2000). The process that deter-
mines how individuals vary is causally independent from DEMO conditions of selection.
Darwin knew little about the causes of variation, DEMO to say that they are external effects
on the “reproductive functions” (DEMO 1977).
By hypothesizing that the mechanism that produces variations is independent from the
conditions for their adaptive evolution, Darwin’s theory serves as an alternative to
Lamarckian “use and disuse” theories, whereby adaptive variants appear for the sake of
their usefulness. Further, by requiring that variants preexist their spread in the population,
natural selection serves as an alternative to DEMO view that novel traits appear all
at once.
Natural selection is not, strictly speaking, a primary cause of anything. The mechanisms
of variation DEMO produce novel traits. Natural selection operates over premade vari-
ants. Further, DEMO selection explains not an existential event (such as the cause of DEMO
organic form) but a populational event, the “spread” of a “favorable” trait. Individuals
struggle to live and reproduce, and, on the theory, their existence is a condition for natural
selection, not the object to be explained.
Notice a paradox emerging. On the one hand, Darwin is known primarily for his non-
supernatural answer to the existential question about DEMO exquisite adaptations arise.
However, on the other hand, Darwin’s distinction between how individual variants arise
and how traits evolve by selection suggests that DEMO existential question is not part of
natural selection because, for Darwin, the spread of traits requires the prior existence of
traits. Darwin had DEMO (useful) to say about how new variations come about.
If so, this has ramiﬁ cations for Erwin and Krakauer’s call for an explanation of innova-
tions and inventions in terms of natural selection. It seems DEMO enterprise of modeling
explanations of innovations and inventions on Darwin’s theory is ﬂ awed—Darwin’s
theory is tailor-made to explain only innovations, given that inventions (novel variants)
preexist selection.
32
André Ariew
In the quote above where Darwin deﬁ nes natural DEMO, his conception of “preserv-
ing” advantageous traits suggests that natural selection DEMO a type of “ﬁ ltering explana-
tion.” Abstractly, natural selection explains DEMO “all Qs are P” by referring to a ﬁ lter
whose role is to sort out all non-Ps in the population (preserving some, DEMO
others). For example, all descendants of earlier wolf populations are (to some standard
metric) swift because all nonswift wolves were eliminated by selection—the ﬁ lter. Now,
one would think that if natural selection DEMO why all Qs are Ps, then by an explana-
tory version DEMO the mathematical principle of transitivity the ﬁ lter would also explain
why a particular Q is a P in virtue of the fact that DEMO Qs are Ps. Yet, surprisingly, tran-
sitivity does not hold in ﬁ ltering explanations. This is the source of the paradox, and it
harkens back to the distinction between an explanation of how variations arise DEMO the
conditions for which traits are selected. There may be a reason why a particular Q is
P—why Harry the wolf is swift as DEMO to slow—but natural selection does not
explain it because natural selection merely eliminates non-Ps and preserves Ps. It does
not create Ps.
Explaining Invention
DEMO upshot of the discussion of “Darwin’s paradox” is that we should draw a line between
the explanation of innovation and that of invention. Natural DEMO is a ﬁ ltering process
and hence is well suited to explain innovations—the spread of variants—but not to explain
inventions, the existence of new traits. This preliminary conclusion gives lie to claims
made by popular evolutionary DEMO, such as Carroll (2006), who claim that natural
selection is the primary cause of adaptation. Carroll prefers the metaphor of “forging” as
DEMO “natural selection for incremental variation forged the great diversity of life” (DEMO
2006: 30).
Darwin (1859: 459) himself recognized the paradox: “Nothing at ﬁ rst can appear more
difﬁ cult to believe than that the more complex organs and instincts should have been
perfected, not by means superior to, though analogous with, human reason, but by the
accumulation of innumerable slight variations, each good for the individual possessor.”
The key to Darwin’s brilliant way out of the paradox is to DEMO to the difference between
the process of natural selection and one of its many products or consequences. The process
of natural selection is a DEMO ltering of proﬁ table from unproﬁ table variants. When reiterated
over many generations, the product of natural selection is the prevalence in the population
of a single proﬁ table variant. Reiterate natural selection over many more DEMO and
over many more variations, and the product is the gradual DEMO of forms, each
better adapted than the ones before it. At DEMO even larger timescale, the product of natural
selection and the mechanism DEMO variations is the ﬁ rst appearance of an organ of “extreme
perfection,” such as the mammalian eye.
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View
33
Arrival of DEMO Fittest
Still, reiterated natural selection does not make anything. The mechanisms DEMO variation do
the making; they are the primary cause of the DEMO of exquisite traits. The role of
natural selection in the explanation of the ﬁ rst appearance of a trait is derivative of its
ﬁ DEMO function. To illustrate, suppose after a year of reading lessons there DEMO a selection
for entering the ﬁ fth-grade reading class (my example DEMO modiﬁ ed from Sober 1993).
Suppose Tom and Allison make it and Joel does not. True, in the case of reiterated selec-
tion the selection of Tom and Allison to the fourth-grade reading class in DEMO explains
why they are in the ﬁ fth-grade reading class. Further, DEMO the question is why Tom and
Allison are in the ﬁ fth-grade class, then both selection events—the one for the fourth grade
and the one for the ﬁ fth grade—fully explain that. However, if the question is existential,
for instance, why Tom and Allison read at the ﬁ fth-grade level, or why there are ﬁ fth-grade
readers to be selected in the ﬁ rst place, then the selection events are insufﬁ cient. The
answers to the latter question might vary—Tom got a tutor, Allison bribed the
committee.
Let me summarize by placing the point in DEMO form of an inference to the best explana-
tion. Let the phenomenon to be explained, “O,” be a novel trait formed from a new variant
and derived from an adaptive trait more or less ﬁ DEMO in the population. Let H1 be natural
selection as the purported cause of the trait “O.” Let H2 be developmental mechanisms,
including the DEMO for variation (e.g., recombination). The question is whether in
this instance P(O/H1) > P(O/H2). My conclusion is that natural selection alone does not
explain novel traits, but a history (etiology) of developmental mechanisms stretching back
through the lineages does. Thus, the answer to the question will be “no.”
And so it remains DEMO, despite Darwin’s answer, that the language of “forging,”
“forming,” and “creating” inherent in the popular discussion of natural selection explana-
tions DEMO adaptations is misleading. Selection is a ﬁ lter, and as a DEMO consequence of its
ﬁ ltering, it provides some explanatory role in DEMO ﬁ rst appearance of traits. Strictly speak-
ing, a distinct line DEMO between innovation and invention—natural selection is tailor-
made to explain innovations and how they spread, but it explains inventions only
derivatively. Perhaps that is why advocates of evolutionary developmental biology—
“EvoDevo”—state that while Darwin’s natural selection DEMO “the survival of the
ﬁ ttest,” EvoDevo explains “the arrival of the ﬁ ttest.” As Müller (2002) explains, the study
of invention (he calls it “novelty”) addresses causal factors in organismal evolution,
DEMO the study of the spread of innovation addresses the macroevolutionary processes
of trait spread.
Nevertheless, there is still a way to apportion explanatory responsibility between the
processes of development and the conditions for selection in the DEMO for the origins
of a trait, though it is not straightforward, given that each plays a distinct role. This is akin
to apportioning DEMO responsibility for the creation of a brick wall between two workers,
34
André Ariew
one of whom spreads the mortar and the other DEMO whom lays the bricks. Take an extreme
case where a mortarless wall is one brick high. The bricklayer is fully responsible (unless
the mortar spreader retains a supervisory role). Label a trait in question as DEMO The
mechanism of variation fully explains the ﬁ rst appearance of V. The role of selection as
making probable compound variations is nil. Darwin DEMO the other extreme,
whereby the mechanism of variation produces only minute differences. In this case, the
buildup from the prevalence of V to the prevalence of, say, 10,000V would require 10,000
reiterations DEMO the two-step schema, just as a wall 100 feet high made DEMO standard-size
bricks would require the equal cooperation of the two workers. Yet, imagine a middle case
whereby some bricks are extraordinarily tall. The taller the brick, the less there is a need
for the mortar spreader to exert herself. Likewise, the emergence of a “sport,” or discon-
tinuously large variant, reduces the number of reiterations required from the two-step
schema.
Conclusion
The deﬁ nition of novelty I have offered—a new variant—that DEMO rise to my argument
against natural selection as the best explanation for novelty is open to the charge that the
sort of novelty I DEMO considering is not the sort of thing that interests biologists or cultural
evolutionists. Erwin and Krakauer (2004) recognize that “evolutionary novelty” has
several DEMO in evolutionary biology and offer three deﬁ nitions polled from a work-
shop they conducted at the Santa Fe Institute.
First, evolutionary novelties are “rare morphological transitions that result from breach-
ing genetic or morphological constraints, exempliﬁ ed by a developmental mutation in the
Yucca moth that gave DEMO to a new antennal limb” (Erwin and Krakauer 2004: 1117).
This is a paradigm example of the notion of novelty that faces DEMO charge that natural
selection derivatively explains novelties because natural selection operates over new vari-
ants but does not cause them. Second, evolutionary novelties are changes that have impor-
tant consequences for the environment, the classic example being the origin of
oxygen-dependent photosynthesis that led to an oxygenated atmosphere. DEMO, evolution-
ary novelties are changes resulting in the generation of abundant DEMO diversity, such
as the cichlid ﬁ shes of East African lakes DEMO the diversiﬁ cation of ﬂ owering plants. For
the purposes of understanding the consequences of my distinction between explaining
innovations and inventions, the third deﬁ nition offers nothing that is not inherent in
the ﬁ rst.
DEMO lesson learned is, contrary to my simplistic deﬁ nition of novelty DEMO a new variant,
no one is particularly interested in the ﬁ rst appearance of just any garden-variant, given
that many new variants are disadvantageous and most cause death. Rather, we are inter-
Innovation and Invention from a Logical Point of View
35
ested in DEMO ﬁ rst appearance of “successful” traits. Success is indicated either by spread
as a result of selection or by design analysis—the remarkable adaptiveness of DEMO trait to
its local environmental condition. Thus, it is a bit DEMO to say (so goes the objection
to my claim) that we are particularly interested in the ﬁ rst appearance of traits because
what DEMO are really interested in is ﬁ rst appearance of “successful” traits.
Yet, this is not to dismiss the importance of the distinction between an explanation of
a trait’s prevalence and an explanation of a trait’s ﬁ DEMO appearance. Once again, Darwin’s
distinction between the source of variation and DEMO of natural selection is important
here. Complex traits are built by the reiteration of two distinct steps. One is the primary
cause of novel DEMO, and the other describes the conditions for which a trait spreads.
DEMO (reiterated), they answer the existential question of how traits come DEMO exist, but
natural selection alone answers the question about the prevalence DEMO preexisting traits.
Consequently, if one favors a natural selection explanation for DEMO spread of a particular
trait, it does not necessarily follow that DEMO selection is the sole explanation for the
diversity of or ﬁ rst appearance of a trait or that ﬁ ltering explanations do the causal DEMO
required to explain the existence of a novel trait.
References
Ariew, DEMO 2007. Teleology. In Cambridge Companion to the Philosophy of Biology, edited DEMO M. Ruse and
D. Hull, pp. 160–181. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bamforth, D. 2002. Evidence and Metaphor in Evolutionary Archeology. American Antiquity 67: 435–452.
Carroll, S. 2006. The Making of the Fittest: DNA and the Ultimate Forensic Record of Evolution. Norton, New
York.
Darwin, C. DEMO On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection; or DEMO Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life. Murray, London.
DEMO, D. H., and D. C. Krakauer. 2004. Insights into Innovation. Science 304: 1117–1119.
Fogelin, R., and W. Sinnott-Armstrong. 2006. Understanding Arguments: DEMO Introduction to Informal Logic.
Thompson Wadsworth, Belmont, Calif.
Gayon, J. DEMO From Darwinism to Today in Evolutionary Biology. In Cambridge Companion to Darwin, edited
by J. Hodge and G. Radick, pp. 240–264. Cambridge University DEMO, Cambridge.
Hume, D. 1779. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. London (privately DEMO).
Lewontin, R. 2000. Triple Helix. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, DEMO
Lyman, R. L., and M. J. O’Brien. 2001. Misconceptions of Evolutionary Archaeology: Confusing Macroe-
volution and Microevolution. Current Anthropology 42: 408–409.
Lyman, R. L., T. L. VanPool, and M. J. O’Brien. 2008. Variation DEMO North American Dart Points and Arrow
Points. Journal of Archaeological Science 35: 2805–2812.
Müller, G. 2002. Novelty and Key Innovations. In Encyclopedia of DEMO, edited by M. Pagel, pp. 827–830.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.
DEMO, M. J., and R. L. Lyman. 2002. Evolutionary Archeology: Current DEMO and Future Prospects. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology 11: 26–36.
O’Brien, M. J., R. L. Lyman, and R. D. Leonard. 2003. What Is Evolution? A Reply to Bamforth. American
Antiquity 68: 573–580.
36
André Ariew
Paley, W. 1802. Natural Theology, or, Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity. Morgan,
Philadelphia.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper, New York.
Schweber, DEMO 1977. The Origins of the “Origin” Revisited. Journal of the History of Biology 10: 229–
316.
Sober, E. 1993. The Nature of Selection: Evolutionary Theory in Philosophical Focus. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Sober, DEMO 2001. Core Questions in Philosophy: A Text with Readings. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,
N.J.
3 Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
Kevin N. Laland and Simon M. DEMO
In 1921 in Swaythling, a village in the south of England, a blue tit began opening milk
bottles left outside homes, drinking the high-energy cream (Fisher and Hinde 1949; Hinde
and Fisher 1951; Martinez del Rio 1993). Ornithologists noted the repeated appearance of
the behavior, and over the next 30 years milk-bottle opening was observed at tens DEMO sites
and in thousands of birds across the United Kingdom and mainland Europe (Hinde and
Fisher 1972), producing the best characterized and perhaps best known example of the
spread of a novel behavior pattern (innovation) in nonhuman animals. Experimental tests
on captive birds (Kothbauer-Hellman 1990; Sherry and Galef 1984, 1990), combined with
wave-of-advance models borrowed from archaeology (Lefebvre 1995), demonstrated that
the innovation rate can be quite high and that the likeliest explanation for the spread of
bottle-opening behavior was DEMO innovation, where milk bottles were introduced, fol-
lowed by social learning from bird to bird within that locality (Ingram 1998).
Milk-bottle opening is just one example of hundreds of innovations reported in non-
human DEMO, with examples ranging from the incorporation of new items or techniques
DEMO avian foraging repertoires and novel elements in the songs of birds to novel courtship
displays, deceptive acts, social behavior, and tool use in primates (Byrne 2003; Casanova
et al. 2008; Lefebvre et al. 2004; Reader and Laland 2003a). Many innovations are in
response to changed circumstances such as human impacts, but innovations are also pro-
duced in stable environments, where an animal discovers a new method of exploiting the
environment (Reader and Laland 2001). Thus, many animals invent new DEMO patterns,
modify existing behavior to a novel context, or respond DEMO social and ecological stresses
in an appropriate and novel manner (Biro DEMO al. 2003; Kummer and Goodall 1985; Lefebvre
et al. 1997; DEMO and Laland 2001, 2002, 2003b). We have long argued that such behav-
ior can sensibly be termed “innovation,” and although the DEMO of animal and
human innovation is a matter of debate (Reader DEMO Laland 2003a), we believe that experi-
mental, comparative, and observational research on animal innovation can also inform
studies of human innovation.
Research DEMO animal innovation is at a formative stage with many unanswered ques-
tions. For example, it is conceivable that a variety of alternative psychological processes
38
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
underlie innovation and that DEMO is not a unitary phenomenon. There still are open
questions as to what roles innovation plays in facilitating the ﬂ exibility of individual
development, survival, reproductive success, and evolution of animal species. Is the ability
DEMO innovate an adaptation, and if so, what factors have selected for a propensity to inno-
vate? Under what circumstances is innovation adaptive? DEMO innovation a driver of brain
evolution, or is it simply a DEMO of more fundamental characteristics (e.g., sociality
or foraging mode) or DEMO indicator of more general abilities (such as behavioral ﬂ exibility)?
Many of these issues would be problematic to address using human studies DEMO but can
be addressed using animal models or through comparative work.
We argue here that a strong case can be made for the assertions DEMO many animals, not
just humans, innovate; that innovation can be DEMO as qualitatively distinct from related
processes such as exploration and learning; DEMO that innovation has played an important
role in primate and avian brain evolution. The goal of this chapter is to provide an overview
of DEMO recent research on animal innovation, illustrating comparative and experimental
approaches to DEMO issue.
The Ecological and Evolutionary Signiﬁ cance of Animal Innovation
Innovation is phylogenetically widespread, but behavioral scientists have long noted that
species differ in their tendency to innovate (Cambefort 1981; Cousteau 1958; Lefebvre
et al. 2004; Thorpe 1956). For instance, Morgan (1912) speculated that DEMO may be
composed of a repetitive component that has occurred before and a smaller proportion of
novel behavior—found particularly in so-called “higher” organisms—that can DEMO regarded
as a creative departure from routine. Although there are long traditions of research into
related topics such as neophilia, exploration, and insight DEMO in animals, and whereas
innovation in humans has been subject to DEMO investigation, animal innovation
has only recently begun to receive attention. A DEMO paper drawing attention to the topic
was Kummer and Goodall’s (1985) review of primate innovation, which suggested that
some innovations derive from the ability of the individual to proﬁ t from an accidental
happening, others result from the ability to use existing behavior patterns for new purposes,DEMO
and still others are completely new behavior patterns. Innovation may be prompted by two
factors: need (such as a period of drought or DEMO social challenge) or an excess of resources,
which will allow DEMO to bear the costs of exploration (Kummer and Goodall 1985;
DEMO and Reader 1999a). Necessity is likely the dominant factor prompting animal
innovation (Gajdon et al. 2006; Laland 2004; Laland and Reader 1999a, 1999b; Sol,
Lefebvre, and Rodríguez-Teijeiro 2005).
Two major surveys of innovation have documented over 2,200 examples of foraging
innovations in DEMO (Lefebvre et al. 1997, 2004)—the most complete survey of animal
innovation—and over 500 examples of innovations in primates (Reader and Laland 2001,
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
39
2002). These surveys collated reports DEMO published literature, using keywords such as
“novel” or “never seen before” DEMO classify behavior patterns as innovations. Although these
kinds of studies are vulnerable to reporting biases, Lefebvre and colleagues have devised
statistical methods for evaluating and counteracting these biases, and there are reasonable
grounds to be conﬁ dent that these innovation data represent a valuable, robust measure of
an aspect of behavioral ﬂ exibility (Lefebvre et al. 2004).
Furthermore, DEMO rate correlates with laboratory measures of learning, support-
ing the idea DEMO innovation is a cognitive measure (Lefebvre et al. 2004). In DEMO birds
and primates, innovation rate (per avian parvorder or primate species) has been shown
to correlate positively with measures of forebrain size. This parallel ﬁ nding in two inde-
pendent taxa, and at different taxonomic levels, supports the idea that brain volume is
an indicator of behavioral ﬂ exibility and raises the possibility that increased innovative-
ness may have DEMO a selective advantage, thus driving brain enlargement over evo-
lutionary time.
DEMO individuals and species tend to show low neophobia and superior perfor-
mance on a variety of cognitive measures (Bouchard et al. 2007; Reader DEMO). The
phylogenetic distribution of innovation suggests that selection may have favored innova-
tiveness as part of a cognitive suite of traits in particular DEMO (Lefebvre et al. 2004;
Reader and Laland 2002), with DEMO perhaps part of a survival strategy based on
ﬂ exibility to cope with unpredictable, changing socioecological environments and to alter
behavior to outcompete others.
The pioneering work of Lefebvre et al. (1997) has inspired further DEMO in birds
and in primates that explore the relations among innovation, DEMO, and cognition.
There are multiple descriptions of speciﬁ c innovations apparently DEMO survival
in changed circumstances (Sol 2003). Innovation might also be DEMO critical importance
to those endangered or threatened species forced to adjust to impoverished environments
(Greenberg and Mettke-Hofman 2001). To test the idea that innovations may facilitate
survival in novel circumstances, Sol and colleagues (Sol DEMO; Sol and Lefebvre 2000;
Sol, Duncan, et al. 2005; Sol et al. 2002) took advantage of a series of natural experi-
ments where humans have introduced species into new habitats, ﬁ rst in New Zealand
and then in a global analysis. Innovative species were found DEMO likely to survive and
establish themselves when introduced to new locations. If innovativeness is the causal
variable in this relationship, it suggests that innovation can aid survival in changed
environments. Similarly, nonmigratory birds innovate most in the harsher winter months
(Sol, Lefebvre, and Rodríguez-Teijeiro 2005), whereas migratory species are less inno-
vative than nonmigrants, suggesting that migratory birds may be forced to migrate
because of an inability to adjust behaviorally DEMO the changed winter months.
Innovation has been proposed to have a key inﬂ uence on the tempo and course of evolu-
tion. For instance, Wilson’s (1985) “behavioral-drive” hypothesis argues that innovation
combined with cultural transmission DEMO animals to exploit the environment in new ways,
40
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
exposing them to novel DEMO pressures and increasing the rate of genetic evolution
(see also Wyles DEMO al. 1983). Studies of birds and primates support a key assumption of
behavioral drive—that brain size, innovation rate, and social-learning rate are DEMO
(Lefebvre et al. 1997; Reader and Laland 2002). Innovation rate and brain size have
recently been shown to correlate with avian species DEMO subspecies richness, suggesting
that, as the behavioral-drive hypothesis predicts, evolutionary DEMO are accelerated in
large-brained, innovative taxa (Nicolakakis et al. 2003; DEMO 2003; Sol, Stirling, and Lefe-
bvre 2005).
When a DEMO learned behavior spreads through an animal population and as individuals
learn from one another, typically a single individual will have initiated the process. Such
diffusion requires two processes: the initial inception of the behavioral variant, DEMO,
must occur, and the novel trait must spread between individuals, which is social learning.
Many books, conferences, and papers have been DEMO to animal social learning (e.g.,
Box and Gibson 1999; Fragaszy and Perry 2003; Galef and Giraldeau 2001; Heyes and
Galef 1996; Shettleworth 2001; Zentall and Galef 1988). In comparison, the ﬁ DEMO step of
the spread of a novel behavior (innovation) received little attention until recently. Innova-
tion is now increasingly recognized as an important DEMO of animal social-learning
research, particularly in relation to population differences in DEMO that are proposed
to reﬂ ect cultural diversity (e.g., Huffman 1996; Laland and Janik 2006; Leca et al. 2007;
Ramsey et DEMO 2007; van Schaik, van Noordwijk, and Wich 2003; van Schaik, Ancrenaz
et al. 2003; Whiten et al. 1999). Counterintuitively, relatively few innovations appear to
spread through animal groups (Gajdon et al. 2006; Kummer and Goodall 1985; Laland
and Hoppitt 2003)—a phenomenon also DEMO in humans (Rogers 1995).
Innovation is also key to cumulative DEMO evolution, where a careful balance must
be struck between faithful social DEMO (to minimize loss of previous innovations)
and innovation (to minimize stagnation and allow adaptive change). Although clear
evidence of cumulative cultural DEMO is lacking in animals, tool manufacture in New
Caledonian crows has DEMO suggested to be a possible case (Hunt and Gray 2003).
DEMO is mounting that innovation plays an important role in ecology (e.g., range
expansion), in evolution (e.g., subspecies diversiﬁ cation), in DEMO (as the ﬁ rst step of
social learning), and in DEMO diversiﬁ cation. Innovation not only is widespread in non-
humans but is conceptually and functionally important.
Deﬁ
ning Animal Innovation
It was only in DEMO that a detailed deﬁ nition of animal innovation was ﬁ rst proposed,
appearing in the ﬁ rst book on the topic. Reader and DEMO (2003b) proposed two opera-
tional deﬁ nitions. Innovation sensu product is a new or modiﬁ ed learned behavior not
previously found in the DEMO Innovation sensu process is a process that introduces
novel behavioral variants into a population’s repertoire and results in new or modiﬁ ed
learned behavior. DEMO, innovations are learned, and their novelty is deﬁ ned at the popula-
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
41
tion level. Innovations can spread by DEMO learning; however, the introduction of a novel
behavior into a population by social learning is not considered innovation. This contrasts
with some deﬁ DEMO of human innovation, which refer to acquisition of a novel act DEMO
any route as innovation and the initial inception as “invention” (Rogers DEMO).
Ramsey et al. (2007: 397) proposed an individual-level deﬁ DEMO of innovation as “the
process that generates in an individual a novel learned behavior that is not simply a
consequence of social learning or DEMO induction,” the latter being behavior that
“emerges reliably in all or most individuals exposed to the environmental stimulus.”
However, deﬁ ning innovation at the individual level and determining environmental
induction pose problems of operationalization (Giraldeau et al. 2007; Kendal et al. 2007;
Reader 2007)—concerns that lead us to prefer the 2003 deﬁ nition.
Reader and Laland (2003b) proposed deliberately broad deﬁ nitions and made no distinc-
tion between totally novel behavior and modiﬁ cations of existing behavior, as has been
the practice among researchers studying birdsong learning (Slater and Lachlan 2003).
Although some objectors might prefer to reserve the term “innovation” for qualitatively
new DEMO cognitively demanding tasks or processes, a broad deﬁ nition is justiﬁ DEMO given the
primitive state of knowledge of animal innovation. The key characteristic of innovation
is the introduction of a novel behavior pattern into a DEMO repertoire, and it would
be foolhardy to insist that an innovator DEMO express a previously unobserved motor pattern
or unusual cognitive ability. For example, the milk-bottle-opening birds likely used motor
actions already in their repertoire (DEMO and Fisher 1951); thus, the innovation involved
the application of DEMO familiar behavior to a novel food source. Moreover, subjective judg-
ments DEMO cognitive ability are vulnerable to anthropocentric prejudice, and the ecological
and DEMO consequences of innovations need not depend on the cognitive sophisti-
cation of the innovative process. Making premature distinctions potentially jeopardizes
the ability to see DEMO relationships between different kinds of novel behavior.
Experimental Studies of Animal Innovation
How can innovation be studied experimentally? Kummer and Goodall (1985: 213) offered
a suggestion: “Systematic experimentation (such as the introduction of a variety of care-
fully designed ecological and technical ‘problems’) both in free-living and captive groups
would provide a new way of studying the phenomena DEMO innovative behaviors and their
transmission through and between social groups.” In the last decade, this approach has
started to be implemented in animal studies. Innovation can be studied experimentally in
captive animals by presenting them with DEMO challenges such as foraging-puzzle boxes
and exploring the factors inﬂ uencing innovation (e.g., sex, age, and social rank). Described
below are DEMO experimental studies we have been involved in that illustrate some of the
methods and ﬁ ndings of experimental studies of animal innovation.
42
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
Case Study 1: Innovation in Captive Populations of Callitrichid Monkeys
The prevailing assumption in the primate DEMO is that young or juvenile primates are
more innovative than adult individuals. This innovative tendency among the young is
frequently thought to be a DEMO or side effect of their increased rates of exploration
and play. Conversely, Reader and Laland’s (2001) review of the primate-innovation litera-
ture noted a greater reported incidence of innovation in adults than in nonadults, which
they interpreted (in part) as a reﬂ ection of the greater DEMO and competence of older
individuals. Within callitrichids (marmosets, tamarins, and DEMO tamarins) different studies
document different effects of age on responses to DEMO objects, foods, and foraging tasks.
However, these differences across studies DEMO reﬂ ect the small samples used (Kendal
et al. 2005).
DEMO (née Day) and colleagues presented novel extractive foraging tasks to a large
number of family groups of callitrichid monkeys in zoos in order DEMO examine whether
there are positive or negative relationships of age with neophilia, exploration, and
innovation and whether youth or experience most facilitates innovation. DEMO “puzzle-
box” foraging tasks were given to 108 callitrichids in 26 zoo populations ranging in
size from two to eight individuals. Kendal recorded the DEMO rst individual to approach,
contact, and solve each task in DEMO population as well as a variety of other dependent
variables relevant to the subsequent spread of the solution through social learning (Day
2003; DEMO et al. 2005). Her study revealed systematic age differences in callitrichid
innovation, with older monkeys signiﬁ cantly more likely than younger monkeys to be
the ﬁ rst to solve the tasks. Whereas younger monkeys (particularly subadults and
young adults) were disproportionately represented among those ﬁ rst to contact the task,
adults (older than four years of age) DEMO disproportionately ﬁ rst to solve the tasks.
Older individuals were signiﬁ cantly more likely than younger individuals to turn
manipulations into successful manipulations. This DEMO nding is consistent with Reader
and Laland’s (2001) meta-analysis. Statistical analyses provided evidence that at least
some of the innovations subsequently spread throughout DEMO group by social learning
(Day 2003).
When the overall performance DEMO individuals who interacted with the tasks is consid-
ered, the results DEMO Kendal et al.’s experiment suggest that experience and competence
allow older individuals to solve novel problems more effectively than do younger individu-
als. The DEMO relationship between age and task success suggests that the greater life
experience of individuals over four years old may enable them to outperform younger
DEMO However, other developmental factors, such as improvements in manipulative
skills, DEMO strength, and maturity with age, cannot be ruled out.
Individuals over age four produced more successful than unsuccessful task manipulations
than individuals in DEMO younger age categories. This suggests that there may be a develop-
mental watershed (at about four years for callitrichid monkeys) when prior manipulative
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
43
experience generates sufﬁ cient competence in DEMO foraging for individual callitrich-
ids to efﬁ ciently translate unsuccessful manipulations into successful manipulations. In
accordance with such a competence hypothesis, Menzel and Menzel (1979) suggested that
Saguinus fuscicollis (brown-mantled tamarin) adults acquire information DEMO efﬁ ciently
and can recognize and classify objects more quickly than nonadults.
Age was not the only source of variation in innovative performance. The DEMO revealed
consistently shorter response latencies, higher levels of successful and unsuccessful
DEMO, and greater attentiveness to the task and to conspeciﬁ cs in DEMO
(lion tamarins) than in both Saguinus (tamarins) and Callithrix (DEMO; Day et al.
2003). This is consistent with the hypothesis DEMO species dependent on manipulative and
explorative foraging tend to be less neophobic and more innovative than other species
(Gibson 1986). Callithrix is classiﬁ ed as a “specialized extractive forager,” and the
Saguinus species studied DEMO been described as “nonextractive foragers” (Dunbar 1995).
Hence, the experimental results of increasing innovation from Saguinus to Callithrix to
Leontopithecus ﬁ t DEMO hypothesis that extractive foraging may have promoted the evolution
of intelligence in the form of an ability to respond to environmental change (Gibson 1986).
The ﬁ ndings also support Lefebvre’s (2000) hypothesis that there DEMO a positive association
between neophilia and innovation.
Case Study 2: Predictors DEMO Foraging Innovation in Starlings
There are numerous reports of novel learned-behavior patterns in animal populations, yet
the factors inﬂ uencing the invention and spread of these innovations remain poorly under-
stood. Boogert et al. (2008) DEMO to what extent the pattern of spread of innovations
in captive groups of starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) could be predicted by knowledge of
individual DEMO social-group variables, including association patterns, social-rank orders,
measures of neophobia, and asocial-learning performance. Small groups of starlings were
presented with a series of novel extractive foraging tasks, and the latency for each bird to
contact and solve each task as well as the orders of contacting DEMO solving were recorded.
Which variables best predicted the observed diffusion patterns? DEMO neophobia
and social-rank measures characterized which animal was the ﬁ rst of the group to contact
the novel foraging tasks, and the subsequent spread of contacting tasks was associated
with latency to feed in a novel DEMO (a possible indicator of vigilance). However,
asocial-learning performance, measured in isolation, predicted the ﬁ rst solvers of the novel
foraging tasks in the group. In other words, one can predict how innovative a starling will
be on the basis of its previously measured learning performance. DEMO social learning under-
lies the diffusion of innovations, we would expect DEMO acquiring the behavior later
in the diffusion to exhibit shorter learning times, given that they will have more adminis-
trators than individuals that acquire the behavior early. This proved to be the case. Contact
latency and DEMO duration were negatively correlated, consistent with social learning
underlying the spread DEMO solving.
44
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
However, perhaps surprisingly, DEMO patterns did not predict the spread of solving:
Birds were no more likely to learn from close associates than from birds with which DEMO
spent little time. This may reﬂ ect the relatively small size of the groups and enclosures;
innovations may be more likely to spread DEMO networks of association in larger groups
living in more naturalistic environments.
Case Study 3: Experimental Studies of Innovation and Diffusion in Fishes
Laland and Reader (1999a, 1999b) explored individual differences in the propensity to
innovate in ﬁ shes. Small populations of guppies (Poecilia reticulata) were presented DEMO
a novel maze task containing food; the ﬁ rst individual to DEMO the task was characterized
as an innovator. Mazes were composed of one or more partitions with small holes or com-
partments through which the DEMO sh had to swim to ﬁ nd the food. The mazes were designed
so that ﬁ sh were required to swim away from the DEMO of the food in order to get to it so
that the task could not be solved merely by swimming up an odor gradient.
DEMO and Reader (1999a) exposed small groups of guppies, composed of DEMO
varying in sex, hunger level, and body size, to the DEMO mazes and recorded the category
of the ﬁ rst ﬁ sh to reach the novel food source. A subsequent study has found a signiﬁ DEMO
correlation in guppies between time taken to complete a maze for the ﬁ rst time and number
of trials to learn the maze according DEMO a trials-to-criterion measure (Reader and Laland
2000), legitimizing the use DEMO the ﬁ rst individual in a population to swim the maze as a
proxy measure of innovation. Laland and Reader found that females were DEMO likely to
innovate than were males, food-deprived ﬁ sh were more DEMO to innovate than were non-
food-deprived ﬁ sh, and smaller ﬁ DEMO were more likely to innovate than were larger ﬁ sh.
It appears that differences in innovatory tendencies in guppies are best accounted for by
DEMO in motivational state. Innovators were neither the most active ﬁ sh (DEMO) nor
those with the fastest swimming speed (large ﬁ sh). Moreover, the observed patterns disap-
pear when the experiments are repeated with no food in the mazes. Here, the most parsimo-
nious explanation for the observed individual differences in problem solving is that innovators
do not DEMO to be particularly intelligent or creative but are driven to ﬁ nd novel solutions to
foraging problems by hunger or by the metabolic costs DEMO growth or pregnancy.
These ﬁ ndings did not rule out the possibility that over and above these state-dependent
factors there are “personality” differences that DEMO an individual’s propensity to inno-
vate. To investigate this, Laland and DEMO exposed populations of ﬁ sh to three novel
foraging tasks, recording DEMO ﬁ sh that completed the ﬁ rst two tasks fastest performed
faster in the third task than ﬁ sh that had not innovated in DEMO ﬁ rst two tasks. Past innova-
tors were found to be more likely to innovate than past noninnovators. The design took
steps to rule DEMO a number of potentially confounding variables, constituting evidence that
there are DEMO personality differences in innovative tendency in guppies. It is interesting
that there is evidence for innovative individuals in a species not particularly renowned for
DEMO intelligence or problem-solving capabilities.
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
45
To further investigate how motivational state DEMO innovation, Laland and Reader
(1999b) explored the relationship between past DEMO success and foraging innovation.
Weight changes of individuals in two mixed-sex populations of guppies were monitored
over two weeks, and the competitive foraging ability of each individual was measured
by recording the number of food items DEMO These populations were then exposed to
three novel maze tasks, and DEMO time for each ﬁ sh to complete the task was recorded.
The prediction was that poor competitors—ﬁ sh that had gained the least weight DEMO
obtained the least food items during scramble competition—would be more likely to
innovate when presented with the novel foraging tasks. In male guppies, the latency to
complete the foraging tasks was indeed found to correlate with DEMO weight gain and
the number of food items consumed during scramble competition. There was no such
correlation in female guppies, however. Females appeared more motivated to solve the
foraging tasks than males, regardless of how they had fared during the scramble
competition.
What could explain the ﬁ nding DEMO female guppies are more likely to show foraging
innovations than are male guppies, irrespective of past foraging success? Laland and
Reader (1999b) DEMO that parental-investment patterns could account for these sex
differences. In many vertebrate species, female parental investment exceeds that of males,
leading to the suggestion that male reproductive success is most effectively maximized
by prioritizing mating, whereas female reproductive success is limited by access to food
resources (Trivers 1972). This rings true in guppies, where females can store sperm, are
viviparous (thus female parental investment is much greater than that DEMO males), and, unlike
males, have indeterminate growth, with a DEMO correlation between energy intake and
female fecundity (Reznick and Yang 1993; Sargent and Gross 1993). Consequently,
ﬁ nding high-quality food has DEMO marginal ﬁ tness value for females than for males,
which may explain why females should be more investigative than males and are con-
DEMO searching for new food sources.
Having established that individual guppies vary in their propensity to innovate, Reader
and Laland (2000) turned to the ways in which innovations spread through animal popula-
tions. Mixed-sex populations of DEMO were presented with three novel foraging tasks,
and time to complete the task was recorded for each individual over 15 trials. In a DEMO rst
experiment the populations were made up of equal numbers of food-deprived and non-
food-deprived individuals, whereas in a second experiment small, young DEMO sh were com-
pared with large, older ﬁ sh. Food-deprived ﬁ DEMO were faster than non-food-deprived ﬁ sh at
completing the tasks over repeated trials. Although there was no overall effect of size,
there was DEMO signiﬁ cant interaction between sex and size. Adult females completed the tasks
much faster than adult males, but no sex difference was found in younger adults.
In both experiments there was a signiﬁ cant sex difference, with novel foraging informa-
tion spreading faster through female subgroups than through DEMO subgroups. Females
also were found to learn at a faster rate than males. These ﬁ ndings are most likely a result
46
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
of motivational differences between DEMO sexes, corroborating the earlier ﬁ ndings of Laland
and Reader (1999a, 1999b). The absence of a sex difference in younger ﬁ sh is also con-
sistent with the above-mentioned parental-investment explanation, given that younger ﬁ sh
are not expected to show investment asymmetries.
These observations are DEMO with the ﬁ ndings of Reader and Laland’s (2001)
meta-analysis DEMO primate innovation (see also van Bergen 2004). They observed more
DEMO incidences of innovation in low-status individuals than expected and fewer reports
of innovation in high-status individuals than expected, given their representations in the
population. Van Bergen (2004) reports greater innovation in male primates than expected
DEMO fewer reports of female innovation than expected, given their representation. This DEMO
difference was particularly strong in relation to sexual and courtship behavior and aggres-
sion. The latter ﬁ nding can be explained in a similar DEMO to the sex difference in guppy
innovation, except that in the DEMO of the primates it is the males for whom the marginal
beneﬁ ts of innovation are greater, given that the innovations allow them to access mates.
Case Study 4: Social Transmission of Foraging Information in Rats
Rats have been reported digging for buried foods or foraging in loose DEMO for food items
(Barnett 1975). Laland and Plotkin (1990, DEMO) carried out a series of experiments in
which they explored the DEMO learning and transmission of foraging information concern-
ing buried food and, DEMO the process, shed light on behavioral innovation. Demonstrator rats
were trained DEMO dig for pieces of carrot buried beneath lightly compressed soil in a small
enclosure. Each experimental subject or observer was then placed in a DEMO enclosure
containing buried food, in the presence of a single demonstrator DEMO separated by a wire
mesh partition, for a 10-minute period. A DEMO experiment established that the
foraging performance of observer rats was enhanced by social learning from a trained
demonstrator conspeciﬁ c, with control groups conﬁ rming that the elevated performance
could not be attributed to social facilitation DEMO motivational factors (Laland and Plotkin
1990). This established, Laland and Plotkin embarked on a series of experiments with an
“animal A demonstrates DEMO animal B, which demonstrates to animal C . . .” transmission-
DEMO design.
In the ﬁ rst experiment the animals were assigned to one of three groups. Two groups
were social-transmission groups in which each animal DEMO rst observed a demonstrator con-
speciﬁ c that had various degrees of experience in foraging by digging. The observer then
became the demonstrator for DEMO next animal in the line of transmission. In the ﬁ rst, DEMO
“standard-transmission,” group, the ﬁ rst demonstrator had been trained to DEMO for carrots
beneath the soil surface of the enclosure. In the second, or “innovator,” group, the initial
demonstrator was untrained, but again each observer became the demonstrator for another
animal. The third group was DEMO control, in that no social transmission could occur and so
there DEMO no transmission chain. Each observer was paired with an untrained demonstrator
that had no carrots buried on its side of the enclosure; thus each animal performed on the
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
47
basis of its own individual learning. DEMO having one such opportunity, the control animals
were removed from the DEMO
Animals in the standard-transmission group exhibited elevated foraging performance
relative to the control group throughout the transmission chain. Animals in this group were
more DEMO, began digging earlier, and dug up more pieces of carrot than did animals in
the control group. It was clear that pertinent foraging DEMO had been transmitted
from the original demonstrators to other animals in the chain. Although this group showed
some decline in performance in the early DEMO of the chain, this appeared to ﬂ atten off at
a DEMO that still was signiﬁ cantly above that of the controls. This pattern is consistent with
the interpretation of an initial loss of information at DEMO transmission step, resulting in
each successive animal being a less effective DEMO for the next animal in the line
of transmission.
The innovator group was so called because, given that the transmission chain began
with an untrained demonstrator, whatever information was being transmitted between
animals was the result of cumulative innovation. Animals in this group also reached per-
formance levels DEMO were signiﬁ cantly above that of the controls. Thus, for this DEMO
there seemed to be an accumulation of information during the ﬁ rst few steps of the
chain, with performance “asymptoting” at a level similar to that found in the standard-
transmission group. The innovator-group data suggest DEMO although there was loss of
information at each transmission step, this DEMO be offset by successive observers’ beneﬁ t-
ing from the sum of the demonstrator’s social and individual learning. Toward the end of
the transmission DEMO, both transmission groups appeared to have reached equal levels
of performance, where equivalent amounts of information were gained and lost.
More qualitative data DEMO further differences in the digging styles of the rats under
different conditions. Control rats dug boisterously by moving their forelegs away from
them and DEMO with their rear legs, and showed little sign of searching for DEMO Con-
versely, rats in the standard-transmission group, like demonstrators, dug DEMO carefully
and in a directed manner, moving their forelegs toward them DEMO with little kicking with
the rear legs, in what much more DEMO resembled foraging behavior. Interestingly,
rats in the innovator group at early steps in the transmission chain dug with the “wanton”
style of the DEMO, but as the transmission chain proceeded, they were observed to dig
increasingly in the more directed foraging style of the trained demonstrators.
The DEMO curves of subjects in the two transmission groups illustrate certain
distinctive properties of social transmission. First, information can be gained as well as
lost throughout transmission. Second, innovation does not necessarily require creative or
clever individuals but can accrue through the accumulated activities of many individuals.
Third, there may be an equal amount of socially transmitted information that can be DEMO
transmitted throughout a population. Where performance levels are higher than the
equilibrium, information is likely to be lost; where performance levels are below DEMO
equilibrium, information may accrue.
48
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
Summary
Numerous animals acquire DEMO skills and information from others, and behavioral inno-
vations frequently diffuse DEMO natural and captive populations by social-learning
processes. It is instructive to refer to the initial inception of such behavioral variants as
innovation and to DEMO the factors that underlie and predict variation in innovation
within and between species. Innovation can be studied experimentally in animals by pre-
senting novel DEMO to captive or natural populations and then carefully monitoring the
spread of the solution. Experimental studies of animal innovation in various vertebrates
including ﬁ DEMO, birds, and primates, together with a meta-analysis of primate innovation
(Reader and Laland 2001), suggest that the adage “necessity is the DEMO of invention”
explains a lot of data. Hungry, small individuals and DEMO of low status dispropor-
tionately engage in innovative behavior. Sex differences in innovation can be interpreted,
and to some extent predicted, using conventional behavioral-ecology theory such as
parental-investment and sexual-selection theory.
Species differences in innovativeness DEMO monkeys suggest that certain life-history
characteristics, particularly a diet reliant on DEMO foraging, may favor enhanced
innovation. Both experimental studies in monkeys and DEMO meta-analysis across primates
in general imply that adults perform a disproportionate amount of innovation, despite the
observation that younger individuals are often quicker to approach novel objects than are
adults (Kummer and Goodall 1985). The greater experience, strength, and maturity of
elder individuals may be necessary DEMO translate exploration into successful exploitation.
In captive birds, asocial-learning performance measured DEMO isolation predicts which indi-
viduals will innovate in a social context. Whereas most innovation is the product of a
single animal, sometimes innovation can accrue through the accumulated activities of
many individuals. Animal innovation is a DEMO that has only recently received recognition,
but one that is starting to command serious attention from behavioral scientists.
Acknowledgments
Research described in this DEMO was supported by grants and/or studentships from the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, the Natural Environment
Research Council, Utrecht University, and The Royal Society.
References
Barnett, S. A. 1975. The Rat: A DEMO in Behavior. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Biro, D., N. DEMO, R. Tonooka, G. Yamakoshi, C. Sousa, and T. Matsuzawa. 2003. Cultural Innova-
tion and Transmission of Tool Use in Wild Chimpanzees: Evidence from Field Experiments. Animal Cognition
6: 213–223.
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
49
Boogert, N. J., S. M. DEMO, W. Hoppitt, and K. N. Laland. 2008. The Origin and Spread of Innovations in
Starlings. Animal Behaviour 75: 1509–1518.
Bouchard, J., W. Goodyer, and L. Lefebvre. 2007. Social Learning and Innovation Are Positively Correlated in
Pigeons (Columba livia). Animal Cognition 10: 259–266.
Box, H. O., and K. R. Gibson (editors). 1999. Mammalian Social Learning: Comparative and Ecological Per-
spectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Byrne, R. DEMO 2003. Novelty in Deceit. In Animal Innovation, edited by S. M. DEMO and K. N. Laland,
pp. 237–259. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
DEMO, J. P. 1981. A Comparative Study of Culturally Transmitted Patterns of DEMO Habits in the Chacma
Baboon Papio ursinus and the Vervet Monkey Cercopithecus aethiops. Folia Primatologica 36: 243–263.
Casanova, C., R. Mondragon-Ceballos, and DEMO C. Lee. 2008. Innovative Social Behavior in Chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes). DEMO Journal of Primatology 70: 54–61.
Cousteau, J. Y. 1958. The Silent World. Penguin, London.
Day, R. L. 2003. Innovation and Social Learning DEMO Monkeys and Fish: Empirical Findings and Their Applica-
tion to Reintroduction DEMO Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge.
Cambridge.
Day, DEMO L., R. L. Coe, J. R. Kendal, and K. N. DEMO 2003. Neophilia, Innovation and Social Learning: A
Study of Intergeneric Differences in Callitrichid Monkeys. Animal Behaviour 65: 559–571.
Dunbar, R. I. M. DEMO Neocortex Size and Group Size in Primates: A Test of the DEMO Journal of Human
Evolution 28: 287–296.
Fisher, J., and R. DEMO Hinde. 1949. The Opening of Milk Bottles by Birds. British Birds 42: 347–357.
Fragaszy, D. M., and S. Perry (editors). 2003. DEMO Biology of Traditions: Models and Evidence. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Gajdon, G. K., N. Fijn, and L. Huber. 2006. Limited Spread of Innovation in a Wild Parrot, the Kea (Nestor
notabilis). Animal DEMO 9: 173–181.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and L. Giraldeau. 2001. Social Inﬂ uences on Foraging in Vertebrates: Causal Mechanisms and
Adaptive Functions. Animal Behaviour 61: 3–15.
Gibson, K. R. 1986. Cognition, Brain Size and the Extraction of Embedded Food Resources. In Primate Ontog-
eny, Cognition and Social Behaviour, edited by J. G. Else and P. C. Lee, pp. 93–103. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Giraldeau, L.-A., L. Lefebvre, and J. Morand-Ferron. 2007. Can a Restrictive Deﬁ nition Lead to Biases DEMO
Tautologies? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30: 411–412.
Greenberg, R., and C. Mettke-Hofman. 2001. Ecological Aspects of Neophobia and Exploration in Birds. Current
DEMO 16: 119–178.
Heyes, C. M., and B. G. Galef, Jr. (editors). 1996. Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture. DEMO
Press, San Diego.
Hinde, R. A., and J. Fisher. 1951. DEMO Observations on the Opening of Milk Bottles by Birds. British Birds
44: 393–396.
Hinde, R. A., and J. Fisher. 1972. Some Comments on the Republication of Two Papers on the Opening of Milk
Bottles by DEMO In Function and Evolution of Behavior: An Historical Sample from the DEMO of Ethologists,
edited by P. H. Klopfer and J. P. Hailman, pp. 377–378. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.
Huffman, M. A. 1996. Acquisition DEMO Innovative Cultural Behaviours in Nonhuman Primates: A Case Study of
Stone DEMO, a Socially Transmitted Behaviour in Japanese Macaques. In Social Learning in DEMO: The
Roots of Culture, edited by C. M. Heyes and B. G. Galef, Jr., pp. 267–290. Academic Press, San Diego.
Hunt, DEMO R., and R. D. Gray. 2003. Diversiﬁ cation and Cumulative Evolution DEMO New Caledonian Crow Tool
Manufacture. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 270: 867–874.
Ingram, J. 1998. The Barmaid’s Brain. Viking, New York.
Kendal, R. L., R. L. Coe, and K. N. Laland. 2005. Age Differences in Neophilia, Exploration, and Innovation
in Family Groups DEMO Callitrichid Monkeys. American Journal of Primatology 66: 167–188.
50
K. N. Laland and S. M. Reader
Kendal, R. L., DEMO Dean, and K. N. Laland. 2007. Objectivism Should Not Be a DEMO of Innovation’s Opera-
tionalization. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30: 413–414.
Kothbauer-Hellman, R. 1990. On the Origin of a Tradition: Milk Bottle Opening by Titmice. Zoologischer
Anzeiger 225: 353–361.
Kummer, H., and J. Goodall. 1985. Conditions of Innovative Behaviour in Primates. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society DEMO London B 308: 203–214.
Laland, K. N. 2004. Social Learning Strategies. Learning and Behavior 32: 4–14.
Laland, K. N., and W. Hoppitt. 2003. Do Animals Have Culture? Evolutionary Anthropology 12: 150–159.
Laland, K. N., and V. M. Janik. 2006. The Animal Cultures Debate. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 21:
542–547.
Laland, K. N., and H. DEMO Plotkin. 1990. Social Learning and Social Transmission of Digging for Buried Food
in Norway Rats. Animal Learning and Behavior 18: 246–251.
Laland, K. DEMO, and H. C. Plotkin. 1992. Further Experimental Analysis of the Social DEMO and Transmission
of Foraging Information amongst Norway Rats. Behavioural Processes 27: DEMO
Laland, K. N., and S. M. Reader. 1999a. Foraging Innovation in the Guppy. Animal Behaviour 57: 331–
340.
Laland, K. N., and S. M. Reader. 1999b. Foraging Innovation Is Inversely Related to Competitive Ability DEMO
Male but Not in Female Guppies. Behavioral Ecology 10: 270–274.
Leca, J. B., N. Gunst, and M. A. Huffman. 2007. Age-Related Differences DEMO the Performance, Diffusion, and
Maintenance of Stone Handling, a Behavioral DEMO in Japanese Macaques. Journal of Human Evolution 53:
691–708.
Lefebvre, DEMO 1995. The Opening of Milk-Bottles by Birds: Evidence for Accelerating Learning DEMO, but against
the Wave-of-Advance Model of Cultural Transmission. Behavioural Processes 34: 43–53.
Lefebvre, L. 2000. Feeding Innovations and Their Cultural Transmission in Bird Populations. In The Evolution
of Cognition, edited by C. Heyes and L. Huber, pp. 311–328. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Lefebvre, L., S. M. Reader, and D. Sol. 2004. Brains, Innovations and Evolution in DEMO and Primates. Brain,
Behavior and Evolution 63: 233–246.
Lefebvre, L., P. Whittle, E. Lascaris, and A. Finkelstein. 1997. Feeding Innovations and Forebrain Size in Birds.
Animal Behaviour 53: 549–560.
Martinez del Rio, DEMO 1993. Do British Tits Drink Milk or Just Skim the Cream? DEMO Birds 86: 321–322.
Menzel, E. W., and C. R. Menzel. DEMO Cognitive, Developmental and Social Aspects of Responsiveness to
Novel Objects in DEMO Family Group of Marmosets (Saguinus fusicollis). Behaviour 70: 251–279.
Morgan, C. L. 1912. Instinct and Experience. Methuen, London.
Nicolakakis, N., DEMO Sol, and L. Lefebvre. 2003. Behavioural Flexibility Predicts Species Richness in DEMO, but
Not Extinction Risk. Animal Behaviour 65: 445–452.
Ramsey, G., M. L. Bastian, and C. van Schaik. 2007. Animal Innovation Deﬁ ned and Operationalized. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 30: 393–437.
Reader, S. M. DEMO Innovation and Social Learning: Individual Variation and Brain Evolution. Animal Biology
DEMO: 147–158.
Reader, S. M. 2007. Environmentally Invoked Innovation and Cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30:
420–421.
Reader, S. M., and K. DEMO Laland. 2000. Diffusion of Foraging Innovations in the Guppy. Animal Behaviour 60:
175–180.
Reader, S. M., and K. N. Laland. 2001. Primate DEMO: Sex, Age and Social Rank Differences. International
Journal of Primatology 22: 787–805.
Reader, S. M., and K. N. Laland. 2002. Social Intelligence, Innovation and Enhanced Brain Size in Primates.
National Academy of Sciences, DEMO 99: 4436–4441.
Reader, S. M., and K. N. Laland (editors). 2003a. Animal Innovation. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Comparative Perspectives on Human Innovation
51
Reader, S. M., and K. DEMO Laland. 2003b. Animal Innovation: An Introduction. In Animal Innovation, edited by
S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland, pp. 3–35. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Reznick, D., and A. P. Yang. 1993. The Inﬂ uence of Fluctuating Resources on Life-History Patterns of
Allocation and Plasticity in Female DEMO Ecology 74: 2011–2019.
Rogers, E. M. 1995. Diffusion of Innovations (DEMO ed.). Free Press, New York.
Sargent, R. C., and DEMO R. Gross. 1993. Williams’ Principle: An Explanation of Parental Care in DEMO Fishes.
In Behaviour of Teleost Fishes (second ed.), edited by DEMO J. Pitcher, pp. 333–361. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Sherry, DEMO F., and B. G. Galef, Jr. 1984. Cultural Transmission without Imitation: Milk Bottle Opening by Birds.
Animal Behaviour 32: 937–938.
Sherry, D. F., and B. G. Galef, Jr. 1990. Social Learning without Imitation: More about Milk Bottle Opening
by Birds. Animal Behaviour 40: 987–989.
Shettleworth, S. J. 2001. Animal Cognition and Animal Behaviour. Animal Behaviour 61: DEMO
Slater, P. J. B., and R. F. Lachlan. 2003. Is Innovation in Bird Song Adaptive? In Animal Innovation, edited by
S. M. DEMO and K. N. Laland, pp. 117–135. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Sol, D. 2003. Behavioural Flexibility: A Neglected Issue in the Ecological and DEMO Literature? In
Animal Innovation, edited by S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland, pp. 63–82. Oxford University Press, New York.
Sol, D., R. P. Duncan, T. M. Blackburn, P. Cassey, and L. DEMO 2005. Big Brains, Enhanced Cognition and
Response of Birds to Novel DEMO National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 102: 5460–5465.
Sol, D., and L. Lefebvre. 2000. Behavioural Flexibility Predicts Invasion Success in Birds Introduced to DEMO
Zealand. Oikos 90: 599–605.
Sol, D., L. Lefebvre, and J. D. Rodríguez-Teijeiro. 2005. Brain Size, Innovative Propensity and Migratory
Behaviour in Temperate Palaearctic Birds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 272: 1433–1441.
Sol, D., L. Lefebvre, and S. Timmermans. 2002. Behavioural Flexibility and Invasion Success in Birds. Animal
Behaviour 63: 495–502.
Sol, D., D. G. Stirling, and L. Lefebvre. 2005. Behavioral Drive or Behavioral Inhibition in Evolution: Sub-
speciﬁ c Diversiﬁ cation in Holarctic Passerines. Evolution 59: DEMO
Thorpe, W. H. 1956. Learning and Instinct in Animals. Methuen, London.
Trivers, R. L. 1972. Parent Investment and Sexual Selection. In Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man, edited
by B. Campbell, pp. 136–179. DEMO, Chicago.
van Bergen, Y. 2004. An Investigation into the Adaptive Use of Social and Asocial Information. Ph.D. Disserta-
tion, Department of Zoology, DEMO of Cambridge. Cambridge.
van Schaik, C. P., M. Ancrenaz, G. DEMO, B. Galdikas, C. D. Knott, I. Singleton, A. Suzuki, DEMO S. Utami, and
M. Merrill. 2003. Orangutan Cultures and the Evolution DEMO Material Culture. Science 299: 102–105.
van Schaik, C. P., M. DEMO van Noordwijk, and S. A. Wich. 2003. Innovation in Wild Bornean DEMO (Pongo
pygmaeus wurmbii). Behaviour 143: 839–876.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, C. E. G. Tutin, R. W. Wrangham,
and C. Boesch. 1999. Cultures in Chimpanzees. Nature 399: 682–685.
Wilson, A. C. 1985. The DEMO Basis of Evolution. Scientiﬁ c American 253: 148–157.
Wyles, J. S., J. G. Kunkel, and A. C. Wilson. 1983. Birds, Behaviour, DEMO Anatomical Evolution. National
Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 80: 4394–4397.
Zentall, DEMO R., and B. G. Galef, Jr. (editors). 1988. Social DEMO: Psychological and Biological Perspectives.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.

4 Organismal Innovation
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
The theme of this volume—innovation in DEMO systems—is certainly in need of serious
discussion. The subtitle of the workshop—contributions from evolutionary anthropol-
ogy—provokes the question, does the word “evolutionary” have the same meaning in
cultural and biological contexts? More speciﬁ cally, can DEMO intellectual construct that
underlies the theme of this workshop—namely, economist Joseph DEMO (1942)
distinction between “invention” (the creation and establishment of something new) and
“innovation” (an invention that becomes economically successful and earns DEMO proﬁ t)—be
successfully applied to both cultural and biological systems? DEMO so, how? If not, why? In
attempting to address these questions, it might be informative ﬁ rst to outline what I think
are the relevant elements of biological change and then to see if, and/or how, they map
on or relate to the notions of “invention” and “innovation.”
A Brief Historical Prelude to the Question
With Darwin’s (1859) ﬁ rst edition of the Origin, a debate previously pursued DEMO in
the form of private conversation and correspondence became public, namely, the topic of
evolution, its reality, and its elements. Indeed, in addition to public and religious outcry,
Darwin’s venture into evolutionary discourse DEMO prompted a long, and not alto-
gether positive, critique by his supposed bulldog, Thomas Huxley (1860). In that review,
Huxley DEMO Darwin to task on most aspects of the Origin, especially his DEMO ed claim
that organismal change generally occurs smoothly and gradually (and DEMO “natura non
facit saltum” [“nature does not make leaps”]), his unsystematic and disorganized presenta-
tion of “data” in support of his claims, and his theoretical and methodological shortcom-
ings in arguing for natural selection.
A DEMO major blow to Darwin’s theory of evolutionary change as a process involving
long-term adaptation mediated by something called “natural selection” came in 1867 with
DEMO publication of Jenkin’s review of the Origin. Jenkin pointed out that, DEMO to
Darwin’s claims, not only was there no evidence whatsoever of DEMO forms in the
54
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
fossil record—only the picture of the abrupt appearance DEMO organisms with fully developed
features—or between living species but also Darwin’s conception of natural selection was
incapable of producing change. Rather, Jenkin argued, DEMO that the theory of natural
selection does not preclude the interbreeding of individuals with less advantageous
variants of a trait, the greater number of offspring these presumably less well-adapted
individuals produce will overwhelmingly swamp any contribution DEMO future generations
that the one or two supposedly better adapted individuals could make.
More so than Huxley’s, Jenkin’s review had such a profound effect on Darwin that he
not only wrote in anguish to the former DEMO as well as to other colleagues about this
egregious oversight on his part but then, in the ﬁ fth and sixth editions of the Origin as
well as in other monographs (Darwin 1868, 1871), DEMO proceeded to diminish the role of
natural selection in producing signiﬁ cant organismal change. Although in the ﬁ rst through
fourth editions of the DEMO Darwin had invoked use–disuse arguments as potential
sources of variation, Jenkin’s DEMO provoked him to situate them much more centrally
in his model of evolution. Indeed, in his theory of heredity—pangenesis—Darwin (1868)
went so DEMO as to propose a scenario as to how the effects of use–disuse could be passed
on from an impacted parent to offspring and then DEMO generations beyond. Yet, despite
reducing the importance of natural selection, both in producing variation and in selecting
the most advantageous variations, Darwin remained intellectually mired in the conse-
quences of his assumptions, which included postulating the existence of enormous amounts
of variation as a requisite for organismal DEMO
For the most part, Darwin perceived the tempo of organismal change DEMO slow, even
ploddingly so. Consequently, although on rare occasion in the Origin as well as in the
Descent Darwin allowed that change might DEMO some cases occur rapidly, he was committed
to the notion that DEMO change—that is, the origin of new species—was essentially
the process of DEMO protracted over an incredibly long period of time. Whether it
was gradual or rapid, however, Darwin was so convinced that change was the DEMO of a
smoothly continuous process of transformation by means of a string of transitional forms
that he rejected all evidence to the contrary. This DEMO a lack of conﬁ rmation from the
fossil record and the fact that in virtually all recorded cases of the establishment of a new
DEMO of domesticated animal or plant, the progenitor had emerged “per saltum,DEMO with its
novel feature or features fully formed, and was subsequently DEMO with “normal” mates to
produce more of its kind (Huxley 1860; Mivart 1871).
These observations were not, however, lost on all DEMO of Darwin’s day. Huxley
(1860) and Mivart (1871) used some of the same examples of the establishment of new
domesticates to which DEMO denied any evolutionary signiﬁ cance to argue for the
saltational appearance of novel features and thus of new species. Jenkin (1867) cited
both DEMO sudden appearance in the fossil record of organisms with novel yet fully formed
features and the absence among living forms of transitional forms as DEMO against
Darwin’s claim that evolutionary change is smoothly transitional and predominantly
Organismal Innovation
55
gradual. Mivart (1871) reiterated Jenkin’s refutation and additionally DEMO that the
emergence of anatomical novelty, and thus of new species, results from a reorganization
that occurs very early in an individual’s development, when all elements of this reorgani-
zation achieve a new state of DEMO equilibrium.
Although Darwin occasionally remarked that selection could not act on a feature unless
it already existed, his perception of evolution as the process of adaptation extended over
vast amounts of time meant that he conﬂ DEMO two different processes, namely, the survival
of species (or the DEMO of novelty) and the origin of species (or the emergence of
novelty). Nevertheless, the distinction between the two processes did not escape other
evolutionists. Inherent in Mivart’s (1871) and subsequently Bateson’s (1894) DEMO
tally based formulations about the emergence of evolutionary signiﬁ cant change was the
recognition that one should dissociate adaptation or the survival of a DEMO from any
process that led to its appearance. Indeed, this distinction DEMO the origin and survival
of species was central to the botanist de Vries’s (1910a, 1910b) theories of mutation and
intracellular pangenesis and subsequently to Morgan’s (1903), Goldschmidt’s (1940), and
Schindewolf’s (1950) DEMO and rejection of Darwinism.
In light of the various counterarguments to Darwin’s conception of evolution, one might
reasonably wonder how Darwinism came to be the dominant evolutionary theory of the
later twentieth century. This shift can DEMO traced to the very same Morgan who had initially
been one of Darwin’s harshest critics (Schwartz 1999). It is a curious twist of history that,
after rejecting all biological endeavors with the sole exception DEMO genetics as being relevant
to the study of evolution (Morgan 1910), Morgan went on to establish the ﬁ rst fruit-ﬂ y
population-genetics laboratory. Experiments initially conﬁ gured to demonstrate the
validity of the “chromosome theory,DEMO and consequently to map “genes” on chromosomes,
eventually led Morgan to propose a scenario in which Mendelism—which was seen by
Mendelians as supporting DEMO notion that traits, the individuals that bore them, and the
species these individuals constituted were distinct and discontinuous entities—could be
melded with Darwinism—in DEMO variation was seen as continuous and, although absent
from the fossil DEMO and between extant species, the emergence of novel features and
of DEMO species was a smoothly continuous process of transformation (see the review DEMO
Schwartz 1999).
To his credit, however, in the course of arriving at this presumed epiphany, Morgan
(e.g., 1916) introduced into DEMO discussion of evolution some missing yet important ele-
ments: Mutation is DEMO; mutations underlie the variations upon which selection acts;
the basis DEMO any mutation, large or small, is the same; and observations DEMO from
laboratory experiments on heredity are relevant to understanding these processes in nature
(Schwartz 1999). Nevertheless, Morgan succumbed to his predispositions. For DEMO,
while rightly asserting that if mutation was random, the probability DEMO subsequent muta-
tions’ continuing a course of transformation that was seemingly foreshadowed by the ﬁ rst
mutation was like a coin toss—each toss or DEMO reset the probability to ﬁ fty-ﬁ fty—
56
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
Morgan contradicted himself by claiming that a mutation DEMO a certain direction actually
predisposed subsequent mutations to proceed in that direction.
But Morgan went even further. Like Darwin, he ended up embracing as biologically
relevant only a certain kind of observation derived from his fruit-ﬂ DEMO breeding colonies.
That is, although he and his coworkers recorded numerous DEMO of the sudden appear-
ance in one generation of individuals with large-scale morphological changes as well as
individuals with minor changes, and they successfully bred both “kinds” of these individ-
uals with normal or “wild”-type individuals DEMO produce more of the different individuals,
Morgan (e.g., Morgan et al. 1926) declared that the only evolutionary signiﬁ cant mutations
were those that produced minor variations.
Morgan’s reason for discarding the evidence of large-scale DEMO as provoking
marked morphological change and yet not interfering with reproductive viability was,
however, pure conjecture: Large-scale mutations and their effects would, he declared, be
too disruptive to the biology of organisms to be viable in nature. Consequently, despite
having argued that large- and small-scale mutation derived from the same mechanism, and
that observations in the laboratory reﬂ ected natural processes, Morgan consciously chose
to disregard a major source of information as having any bearing whatsoever on evolution-
ary questions (Schwartz 2006a).
Having eliminated large-scale mutation and morphological change from the realm of
DEMO reality, Morgan could then argue that, although Mendelism was based on a
model of “discrete hereditary units,” the mutational changes and the DEMO
changes they provoked were so slight that, in effect, genetic and morphological variations
were continuous. As such, the decades-long intellectual schism between Mendelians and
Darwinians was unnecessary and imaginary, for, in truth, the two “isms” were completely
compatible (Schwartz 1999). In turn, this conﬂ DEMO permitted the recentralization of
Darwin’s earlier presumption that the process that leads to what would be considered
evolutionary change is simply the process of DEMO extended over a vast period of
time.
The Synthesis and Its Aftermath
Morgan’s legacy to what became known as the “modern evolutionary synthesis” (Jepsen
et al. 1963) is obvious and in part explains the resistance of its founders to nonselec-
tionist if not also nongradualistic theories of evolutionary DEMO, especially those of
Goldschmidt (1940) and Schindewolf (1950; Schwartz DEMO). Indeed, although not ini-
tially fully committed to gradualism or DEMO arguments (Dobzhansky 1937), Dob-
zhansky (1941) subsequently championed both DEMO reaction to Goldschmidt’s (1940) theory
of systemic mutation, which made DEMO the former scholar’s work on chromosomal
rearrangement in a genetically based theory of developmental reorganization that could
Organismal Innovation
57
lead to large-scale—that is, evolutionary—change. With Mayr’s (1942) emphasis on the
population, individual variation within populations due to micromutation, DEMO selection
pressures and the slowly emerging and ever-changing adaptations they induced as the basis
of evolutionary change, a picture of evolution solidiﬁ ed in which it was impossible to
deﬁ ne an evolutionary novelty except by DEMO to the claimed artiﬁ ce of discontinuity
between closely related taxa, DEMO fossil and living.
Indeed, in his contribution to the Synthesis, Simpson (1944) used the presence of dis-
continuities, or “gaps,” in the fossil record not as evidence of the abrupt appearance of
novel DEMO (and thus of species) but as the basis of his theory of quantum evolu-
tion. Given the unlikely event of an individual’s remains DEMO fossilized and sub-
sequently persisting in the fossil record, these “gaps” DEMO periods when a small
number of individuals were rapidly changing as they adapted under different selection
pressures to different ecological niches. Once they made DEMO rapid but smoothly continu-
ous transformation from one ecological zone or plateau to another, however, individuals
of this new species would continue to DEMO, but now slowly and gradually, as they
adapted to the slowly and gradually changing environment around them.
Although a paleontologist and therefore someone DEMO, from Morgan (1910) on, was
essentially deﬁ ned as being unable to contribute to a discussion on the origin of species,
DEMO (1944) nonetheless attempted to embrace Mayr and Dobzhansky’s emphasis on
populations and the presumed genetics of intrapopulational variation. He even represented
his theory DEMO quantum evolution diagrammatically in a manner similar to the mathematical
population geneticist Sewall Wright’s (e.g., 1931) shifting-balance theory, with organis-
mal change DEMO mediated and expedited by selection as a species traversed from one
adaptive peak through a valley to get to new adaptive peak (see chapter 11, this volume).
When in a review of Simpson’s monograph Wright (1945) took the paleontologist to task
for misunderstanding the genetics underlying DEMO model of the adaptive landscape, Simpson
(e.g., 1953) became more committed to gradualism as the predominant tempo of evolution-
ary change.
Is DEMO Evolution Biological?
Given that the 1940s were not too far removed in time from the clash between the ﬁ rst
evolutionists and the DEMO, it is not surprising to ﬁ nd in the writings of DEMO founders
of the Synthesis passages that sought to address the nonscientiﬁ c elements of creationism.
However, perhaps more interestingly, as Burkhardt (1977) DEMO, the founders of the
Synthesis and their scions sought to clean DEMO Darwin and Darwinism by seemingly
expunging use–disuse argumentation from evolutionary discussion. Yet while speciﬁ c
reference to the words “use” and “disuse” may have DEMO excised from the language of
twentieth-century Darwinism, the underlying intent remained DEMO same (Schwartz 2005b,
58
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
2008). Indeed, phrases that typify Darwinian arguments, such as “a feature was selected
and evolved in order to . . . . ,” underscore the persistence of use–disuse thinking despite
the fact that, in their quest to sanitize and rewrite the history of Darwin, the neo-Darwinians
purposefully promoted Lamarck as the sole author of the untenable claim that acquired
characteristics can be passed on from one generation DEMO the next (Burkhardt 1977). Witness
the recent assertion that standing DEMO on branches with locked knees predisposed the
hominid ancestor to bipedalism, DEMO which speciﬁ c signal-transduction pathways were
subsequently selected in order to complete the evolutionary deed (Thorpe et al. 2007).
Further, it is DEMO to understand that any formulation—Darwin’s or the
Synthesis’s—of Darwinism relies on a force or forces external to the individual in shaping
the “born” individual DEMO its “born” descendants (Schwartz 2005a). This focus becomes
obvious upon DEMO that in order for use–disuse and selection to play a role in
molding an organism and its features, the individual and its traits must already be formed
to some extent (Schwartz 2008). Even the concept of “sperm competition” (e.g., Birkhead
and Møller 1998), while initially DEMO the impression of a focus on a preembryonic
phase, makes sense DEMO in the context of an adult (or at least reproductively mature)DEMO
individual producing sperm that, if truly the case, “compete” to fertilize an ovum or ova,
themselves the cellular product of a nonembryonic DEMO
Equally situated in the “born” or at least somewhat formed individual is the notion of
“selﬁ sh genes” (Dawkins 1976), which use the organism they create in order to replicate
and extend their existence into DEMO generations. Inherent in the conception of “selﬁ sh
genes,” which derives directly from the focus of population genetics, is the supposed
existence of “genes for” traits. Thus, if a mutation changes a gene slightly, DEMO trait it
underlies will change accordingly. Indeed, beginning with Morgan, because of the empha-
sis in population genetics on a direct one-to-one relationship DEMO a trait and a gene,
evolutionists such as Williams (1966) could resort to the abstract, in which a gene is
anything that is heritable and, under the direction of selection, can be molded DEMO allow its
bearers to adapt to their surroundings. A gene that confers a slight advantage to its bearer
over its counterpart in another individual DEMO be selected by means of selection acting on
the trait itself.
But is this really how organisms develop and how novel features may arise? It seems
not. True, there are differences, for example, between fruit ﬂ ies and mice in number of
orthologous homeobox genes that affect DEMO and the spatial positioning of
appendages (Duboule and Dollé 1989). DEMO, abundant evidence now demonstrates
that differences between invertebrates and vertebrates result DEMO from speciﬁ c gene dif-
ferences between diverse taxa than from different manners, in time and space, in which
the same developmental molecules DEMO recruited and subsequently interact to produce
disparately conﬁ gured organisms (e.g., Duboule and Dollé 1989; Stern et al. 2006). Con-
sequently, DEMO is not appropriate or even biologically real to think in terms of “genes for”
any particular trait or structure.
Organismal Innovation
59
This is not to say that one cannot identify DEMO may be called genes in metazoans by
way of recognizing start and stop codons. However, in contrast to bacteria, in which there
is DEMO predominant relationship between the linearity of nucleotide sequences and the coding
of metabolically active proteins, in metazoans a “gene” can produce myriad proteins
depending on how introns are alternatively spliced and whether transcription occurs in
“sense,DEMO “nonsense,” or combined “sense–nonsense” directions (Ast 2005).
Of further DEMO regarding multicellular organisms, which subsume plants as well as
metazoans, is the importance of epigenetic events (e.g., maternally induced DNA methyla-
tion, the role of RNA in “reintroducing” DNA nucleotide sequences not present in DEMO
P1 generation but present in earlier generations) in inﬂ uencing development (Lolle et al.
2005; Rassoulzadegan et al. 2006; Stotz 2006). DEMO clearly muddles any attempt to speak
intelligibly about the reality of “genes for” any trait or behavior (Pearson 2006). In fact,
accumulating evidence on the effect of molecular signaling from potential predators (ver-
tebrates and invertebrates) on the development of size and shape, as well DEMO on mode of
reproduction (asexual or cloning versus reproductive), of DEMO larvae of potential prey (e.g.,
Gilbert 2003; Vaughn and Strathman 2008) blurs further distinction between the organism,
its genotype, and DEMO environment. This realization makes it that much more wonderful, as
Darwin, Huxley, and other Victorian evolutionists often remarked, that like tends to DEMO
like. But it also helps focus attention on the real aspects of cells and “genes” and returns
the discussion to the necessity of distinguishing DEMO and disentangling notions of
“evolution” and “adaptation” before embarking on a discussion of innovation.
Evolution versus Adaptation
Examples of invertebrate, amphibian, and ﬁ DEMO larvae or embryos changing size, shape,
and even mode of DEMO in response to chemical cues from potential predators in
their “environment” would at ﬁ rst glance seem to validate the long-held belief that organ-
DEMO change is nothing more than a process of adaptation extended across generations of
individuals. After all, are these organisms not “adapting” to their environments?
Indeed, in the latter part of the twentieth century, the DEMO of an organism’s features
being so potentially malleable (embodied in the DEMO “phenotypic plasticity”) that study-
ing and comparing them for purposes of DEMO reconstruction was seen as an
exercise in futility (e.g., Gibbs et al. 2000; Sarich 1971) gained such status that it led to
DEMO virtual abandonment of morphologically based systematics and its replacement by an
endeavor that became known as molecular systematics (see review in Schwartz 2005b).
Curiously, and despite the fact that any molecular change that would affect, for example,
protein folding or the efﬁ cacy of DNA repair would have enormous consequences for the
integrity and reproducibility of an individual’s DEMO (Schwartz and Maresca 2006),
molecular systematics rested on the assumption that molecular change had absolutely no
effect on the organism, even though it was viewed as an ongoing phenomenon.
60
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
Clearly lost from this conception is the history DEMO preceded it, namely, that initial
hypotheses about the relevance of DNA sequences and gene products of metazoans were
based on bacteria, in which responses to “environmental conditions” appeared to generate
a response in the individual (Jacob and Monod 1959). It is now known, however, that
DEMO 98 percent of a bacterium’s genome is coding (encodes metabolically active
DEMO; Eisen 2000). In metazoans, it is approximately the reverse. Even in plants such
as rice, the vast majority of the genome is noncoding (Goff et al. 2002). Nevertheless,
once the realization that bacterial genomic change was correlated with adaptive change
(as seen in Jacob and Monod’s [1959] lac operan experiments) was naively applied to
multicellular organisms, the molecular underpinnings of adaptation and thus also of evolu-
tion appeared veriﬁ ed. Consequently, it seemed entirely justiﬁ ed to refer interchangeably
to changes in bacterial genomes as adaptive as well as evolutionary (Lenski and Travisano
1994) because the two concepts had been historically so conﬂ ated.
However, is molecular—nucleotide sequence—change in bacteria the same as molecu-
lar change in multicellular organisms? It is not. When bacterial nucleotide sequences
change, DEMO not because of lateral transmission, it is because the bacteria are DEMO
to their surrounding circumstances. Jacob and Monod’s (1959) early experiments with
lactose-rich versus depauperate environments were a clear demonstration of bacterial
adaptation. But DEMO, as seems true, mutation in nucleotide sequences is random, then DEMO
multicellular organisms such change would have a much higher probability of affecting
promoter and control regions, or introns, than coding regions (Schwartz and Maresca
2006).
Consequently, given that coordination of the interplay between transcription factors and
other regulatory molecules and promoter and control regions is crucial DEMO the development
of a viable organism, were it true that unconstrained DEMO affecting nucleotide sequence
did occur, we would expect to see evidence DEMO of rampant extinction or of unbridled
morphological novelty emerging with virtually every generation. Yet, again as Victorian
evolutionists well knew, like tends to DEMO like.
The skeptic, however, might ask why instances in which the larvae or embryos of
metazoans alter development, and thus adult size and/or shape, in response to chemical or
other stimuli from potential predators are not evidence of evolution. After all, are these
not examples of the emergence of morphological novelty resulting from an adaptive
response to a DEMO or stimulus in the organism’s environment? At ﬁ rst glance, this might
appear to be so. However, these examples are similar to earlier described cases of progen-
esis in amphibians and Arctic insects. Here, acceleration of sexual maturation in response
to changing environmental conditions truncates normal metamorphosis DEMO somatic adult-
hood to create larval forms that can reproduce (de DEMO 1930; Gould 1977). That is, the
“ability” to adjust to differing environmental conditions—whether by becoming smaller
in size, producing or increasing “armature,” or switching from sexual to asexual reproduc-
tion in response to DEMO from predators—while certainly presenting phenotypic plastic-
Organismal Innovation
61
ity and appearing to be adaptive, more accurately reﬂ ects genomic plasticity. This can
reasonably also include sex determination in various DEMO sh and reptiles in response to tem-
perature or crowding (see DEMO review in Streelman et al. 2007).
Yet, similar to the DEMO of a feature’s being present before selection can “act” on
it, DEMO basis of or potential for genomic plasticity (or reactivity, sensu Gilbert 2003) must
already be present in a gamete’s genome for elements of intra- and intercellular signaling
to be affected by external stimuli. That this DEMO be true at least to some extent comes
from observing that larvae or embryos of generations that are not subjected to such external
cues DEMO stressors develop into the typical adult size and/or form (e.g., as in the axolotl [de
Beer 1930; Gould 1977] and Alaskan sticklebacks [Cresko et al. 2004]). Consequently,
these examples of morphological difference DEMO one generation to the next, rather than
being Darwinian in demonstrating DEMO the gradual appearance of structural change or
the synonymy of adaptation and evolution, more reasonably reﬂ ect these organisms’
sphere of possible adaptation, DEMO molecular basis of which might have itself been the
evolutionary novelty.
The Origin of Organismal Novelty
On the presumption that there is sufﬁ cient DEMO information to pursue a research
program in which processes underlying adaptation are decoupled from those underlying
the origin of novelty, it might seem that cultural “invention” could correspond to biological
innovation (the emergence or origination of organismal novelty) and cultural “innovation”
to biological adaptation. However, before we DEMO explore this potential correspondence,
it is necessary to understand how organismal novelty might arise.
For example, the emergence of multicellular organisms probably resulted from gene
duplication and a massive increase in DNA, followed by the functional divergence of
new genes (see the discussion in Maresca and Schwartz 2006). New morphologies likely
result from the diversiﬁ cation and modiﬁ DEMO of regulatory signaling pathways (Gerhart
and Kirschner 1997) as well as from changes in the expression of developmentally regu-
lated genes via mutations DEMO promoter regions and/or transcription factors (Grz-
eschik 2002). Nevertheless, because individuals of the same species are basically similar
and differ from DEMO species because they all possess the feature or features that make
their species distinct, a biological hurdle must be overcome, namely, how to disrupt
DNA homeostasis and tightly constrained developmental signaling pathways mediated
by stress (heat-shock) proteins that act to prevent change from occurring (Maresca and
DEMO 2006). Given that the only constant physical source of (point) mutation is
ultraviolet radiation, and spontaneous mutation rates are incredibly low (DEMO to 10−9),
one must seek a mechanism that could increase DEMO effective mutation rate (Maresca and
Schwartz 2006).
62
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
First, let us use the term “mutation” in the broadest sense, to refer not only to changes
in DNA sequence, chromosomal arrangement, or gene duplication, but also to changes in,
for example, protein folding, input–output “switches,” “plug-ins,” intron splicing, diffu-
sion of morphogenetic gradients, and timing and location of expression of developmentally
regulated genes. In this context, emphasis shifts from DNA alone to elements that affect
the regulation of development. However, with myriad molecular safeguards, primarily
heat-shock or stress proteins, in the cell to prevent derailment DEMO a particular signaling
pathway and thus of a particular course of development, one way in which the potential
for organismal change can be introduced is to overtax the ability of molecular “house-
keepers” to maintain homeostasis (Maresca and Schwartz 2006). Because all organisms
with a heat-shock response DEMO adjust their response “window” to adapt to changes in the
intensity of stressors as long as the stress is not too sudden and intense, a possible provo-
cateur of change would be a stress spike that DEMO the cell’s capacity to produce suf-
ﬁ cient heat-shock proteins to perform all the housekeeping duties that would prevent or
weed out the potential DEMO change (Maresca and Schwartz 2006).
Given that different tissues have DEMO heat-shock responses, the potential effects
of a stress spike will be DEMO throughout an individual, as it also will be between
individuals, who would thus not respond molecularly in the same way. Further, whatever
potential for novel regulatory networks a stressor may introduce, the only cells in which
this has potential evolutionary signiﬁ cance are the sex cells (Maresca and Schwartz 2006;
Schwartz 1999). Effects on somatic cells die DEMO their bearers. But if each individual can
have a slightly different response to overstress, how do many individuals end up with the
potential for and, if not lethal, the expression of, organismal novelty?
As Bateson (1913) recognized decades ago, most nonlethal mutations must arise in
the recessive (inactive, unexpressed) state because most mutations in the dominant state
are lethal. In the inactive state, a “mutation” can spread silently throughout a population
(Fisher 1930; Haldane 1932; Wright 1932). If the population is small and/or there is a
certain amount of DEMO, a “mutation” will spread more quickly (Haldane 1932;
Wright 1932). At some point, many individuals will have inherited the “mutation” in its
inactive state, that is, will be heterozygous for it. Perhaps, during this period, the popula-
tion is again overstressed and other potentials for change in the regulation of development
are introduced. With heterozygote saturation, the likelihood of homozygotes for the “muta-
tion” emerging increases (Schwartz 1999). If the reconﬁ gured signaling pathway does not
interfere with the DEMO of the zygote, embryo, or larva, or a later developmental DEMO,
multiple individuals with the resultant novelty will emerge. In turn, DEMO abetted by
some form of species mate recognition, the bearers of DEMO novelty will interbreed and
produce more of their kind. Eventually, as DEMO know must occur, the recessive becomes
dominant (active, expressed), DEMO heterozygosity emerges.
An interesting consequence of this model of organismal change is that while the “envi-
ronment,” in the form of a stressor, is the provocateur of potential change, the impetus for
Organismal Innovation
63
the novelty and thus the novelty itself are divorced DEMO the circumstances in which its
bearers ﬁ nd themselves. In other words, the persistence of a novelty is more a function of
its not interfering with the survivability of organisms than it is of the feature’s DEMO
necessary for the survival of the individuals that possess it (Schwartz DEMO).
Once a “signiﬁ cant” (signiﬁ cant being, of course, DEMO mostly in the eye of the
beholder) evolutionary novelty such as DEMO arthropod body plan or the vertebrate tooth-
bearing jaw has been established, modiﬁ cation of the signaling pathway underlying it is
commonplace, giving DEMO to different versions of that particular Bauplan (Hulsey et al.
2006; Ronshaugen et al. 2002). I do not use the term “variation” DEMO mean intraspeciﬁ c
or individual variation but rather, as Bateson (1894) used the term, to refer to taxically
relevant difference. That is, whereas the former reﬂ ects differences in degree of expres-
sion or DEMO of a particular morphology, such as larger or smaller appendages
of DEMO same conﬁ guration, the latter reﬂ ects taxonomically distinctive conﬁ gurations, or
kinds, of morphologies such as differently conﬁ gured or different numbers of appendages
(Schwartz 2006b). Developmentally, there is a hierarchy of DEMO information that
spans from gene-regulatory networks (GRNs) that underlie basic body plans to gene
batteries (DGBs) involved in the terminal differentiation of DEMO and structures (David-
son and Erwin 2006). In the context DEMO the discussion here, different levels of diversiﬁ ca-
tion of GRNs DEMO underlie taxic diversity, from the establishment of major clades to
the DEMO and species that form them, which would require various alterations of
DEMO pathways. The ﬁ nal DGBs would provide the between-individual variability
that typiﬁ es any species and would result from differential expression of extant signaling
DEMO
Organismal Innovation and Phylogenetic Reconstruction
In terms of phylogenetic reconstruction, the DEMO of features is cladistically equivalent to
the origination of these features because both phenomena reﬂ ect deviation from an ances-
tral or theoretically more DEMO condition. For example, the development of ﬁ sh with
tooth-bearing jaws DEMO derived relative to the jawless agnathan conﬁ guration, but the sub-
DEMO loss of pharyngeal teeth in some teleosts would be considered another level of
derivedness because this would be a relatively rare condition among the DEMO of
pharyngeally toothed taxa.
However, whereas determination of the phylogenetic valence DEMO derivedness may be
based on relative uniqueness, the developmental context of DEMO emergence of morphologi-
cal innovation is not equivalent to its subsequent alteration, especially in reduction in or
loss altogether of structure. For example, DEMO origination of limbs with terminal digits
required a tightly constrained Hox gene-regulated signaling pathway (Tarchini et al. 2006),
whereas synpolydactyly can result DEMO mutations in the Hox-D13 gene alone (Muragaki
64
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
et al. 1996). Although in ﬁ sh DEMO details of the signaling pathways underlying the forma-
tion of pelvic ﬁ ns, eyes, pigmentation, armor, and teeth are still incompletely known, the
speciﬁ c gene or transcription factor whose inactivation or change in DEMO can cause
the loss of each of these structures has been identiﬁ ed (Streelman et al. 2007). Conse-
quently, one might be DEMO ed theoretically and for purposes of phylogenetic reconstruc-
tion in referring to structural “gain” and “loss” as cladistic equivalents, but developmentally
they are not. Indeed, “gain” clearly lies in the domain of GRNs, whereas “loss” DEMO dis-
ruption in an element of a GRN.
Conclusion
From the foregoing it is evident that neither a conception of cultural invention nor one
DEMO cultural innovation can be synonymized with organismal innovation (see chapter 2,DEMO
this volume). From a biological perspective, the processes that precede DEMO emergence of
organismal novelty, while initially stochastic and affected by physical DEMO, must
be integrated or the organism will not survive. Further, if the model of stress as a pro-
vocateur of regulatory and thus DEMO change is in any way correct, there is no
correlation between DEMO emergent novel feature or structure and the environmental cir-
cumstances in which its bearers ﬁ nd themselves. In other words, while cultural inventions
often result from necessity, structures do not emerge in order to serve a purpose or func-
tion or to solve some evolutionary problem. Simply put, if a novelty does not kill its
bearer, it has it.
Acknowledgments
I thank the organizers of this workshop, Mike O’Brien and Stephen Shennan, for inviting
me to participate in this exciting learning experience and for providing the challenge of
converting an oral presentation to the written page. DEMO ideas grew from collaborations
with Bruno Maresca and crystallized during discussions with Gerd Müller and fellows of
the Konrad Lorenz Institute.
References
Ast, G. 2005. The Alternative Genome. Scientiﬁ c American 292(4): 59–65.
Bateson, W. 1894. Materials for the Study of Variation, Treated with Especial Regard to Discontinuity in the
Origin of Species. Macmillan, New York.
Bateson, DEMO 1913. Problems of Genetics. Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.
Birkhead, T. R., and A. P. Møller. 1998. Sperm Competition, Sexual Selection and Different Routes to Fitness.
In Sperm Competition and Sexual Selection, edited by T. R. Birkhead and A. P. Møller, pp. 757–782. Academic
Press, New York.
Organismal Innovation
65
Burkhardt, R. W., Jr. 1977. The Spirit of DEMO: Lamarck and Evolutionary Biology. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Cresko, W. A., A. Amores, C. Wilson, J. Murphy, M. Currey, P. Phillips, M. A. Bell, C. B. Kimmel, and J. DEMO
Postlethwait. 2004. Parallel Genetic Basis for Repeated Evolution of Armor Loss in Alaskan Threespine
Stickleback Populations. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 101: 6050–6055.
DEMO, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural DEMO; or the Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life. DEMO, London.
Darwin, C. 1868. The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication. Murray, London.
Darwin, C. 1871. The Descent of Man and DEMO in Relation to Sex. Murray, London.
Davidson, E. H., and DEMO H. Erwin. 2006. Gene Regulatory Networks and the Evolution of Animal Body Plans.
Science 311: 796–800.
Dawkins, R. 1976. The Selﬁ sh Gene. DEMO University Press, New York.
de Beer, G. R. 1930. Embryology and Evolution. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
de Vries, H. 1910a. Intracellular Pangenesis. Translated DEMO C. S. Gager. Open Court, Chicago.
de Vries, H. 1910b. The Mutation Theory. Translated by J. B. Farmer and A. D. Dardbishire. Open DEMO,
Chicago.
Dobzhansky, T. 1937. Genetics and the Origin of Species. DEMO University Press, New York.
Dobzhansky, T. 1941. Genetics and the Origin of Species (second ed.). Columbia University Press, New York.
Duboule, D., and P. Dollé. 1989. The Structural and Functional Organization of the Murine HOX Gene Family
Resembles That of Drosophila Homeotic Genes. EMBO Journal DEMO: 1497–1505.
Eisen, J. A. 2000. Assessing Evolutionary Relationships among Microbes from Whole-Genome Analysis.
Current Opinion in Microbiology 3: 475–480.
Fisher, R. A. DEMO The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Gerhart, J., and M. Kirschner. 1997. Cells, Embryos, and Evolution: Toward DEMO Cellular and Developmental
Understanding of Phenotypic Variation and Evolutionary Adaptability. Blackwell, DEMO, Mass.
Gibbs, S., M. Collard, and B. Wood. 2000. Soft-Tissue Characters in Higher Primate Phylogenetics. National
Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 97: DEMO
Gilbert, S. 2003. The Reactive Genome. In Origination of Organismal Form, edited by G. Müller and
S. Newman, pp. 86–101. MIT Press, DEMO, Mass.
Goff, S. A., et al. 2002. A Draft Sequence DEMO the Rice Genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp. japonica). Science 296:DEMO
92–100.
Goldschmidt, R. B. 1940. The Material Basis of Evolution. Yale DEMO Press, New Haven, Conn.
Gould, S. J. 1977. Ontogeny and DEMO Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Grzeschik, K. H. 2002. Human DEMO Malformations: An Approach to the Molecular Basis of Development.
International Journal DEMO Developmental Biology 40: 983–991.
Haldane, J. B. S. 1932. The Causes of Evolution. Harper, New York.
Hulsey, C. D., G. J. Fraser, and J. T. Streelman. 2006. Evolution and Development of Complex Biomechanical
Systems: 300 Million Years of Fish Jaws. Zebraﬁ sh 2: 243–257.
Huxley, T. H. 1860. Review of “The Origin of Species.” The Westminster Review DEMO: 22–79.
Jacob, F., and J. Monod. 1959. Genes of Structure DEMO Genes of Regulation in the Biosynthesis of Proteins.
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Séances de l’Académie des Sciences 249: 1282–1284.
Jenkin, F. 1867. Review DEMO “The Origin of Species.” North British Review 46: 149–171.
Jepsen, G. L., G. G. Simpson, and E. Mayr (editors). 1963. Genetics, Paleontology, and Evolution. Atheneum,
New York.
Lenski, R. E., DEMO M. Travisano. 1994. Dynamics of Adaptation and Diversiﬁ cation: A 10,DEMO
Experiment with Bacterial Populations. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 91: 6808–6814.
Lolle, S. J., J. L. Victor, J. M. Young, and DEMO E. Pruitt. 2005. Genome-Wide Non-Mendelian Inheritance of
Extra-genomic Information in Arabidopsis. Nature 434: 505–509.
66
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
Maresca, B., and J. H. Schwartz. 2006. DEMO Origins: A General Mechanism of Evolution Based on Stress
Protein Concentration DEMO Rapid Environmental Change. The Anatomical Record (Part B: The New Anatomist)
289B: 38–46.
Mayr, E. 1942. Systematics and the Origin of DEMO Columbia University Press, New York.
Mivart, S. G. 1871. On the Genesis of Species. Murray, London.
Morgan, T. H. 1903. Evolution and DEMO MacMillan, New York.
Morgan, T. H. 1910. Chance or Purpose in the Origin and Evolution of Adaptation. Science 31: 201–
210.
Morgan, DEMO H. 1916. A Critique of the Theory of Evolution. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Morgan, T. H., A. H. Sturtevant, H. J. Muller, and C. B. Bridges. 1926. The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity.
Holt, New York.
Muragaki, Y., S. Mundlos, J. Upton, and B. R. Olsen. 1996. Altered Growth and Branching Patterns in Syn-
polydactyly Caused DEMO Mutations in HOXD13. Science 272: 548–551.
Pearson, H. 2006. What Is a Gene? Nature 441: 399–401.
Rassoulzadegan, M., V. Grandjean, P. Gounon, S. Vincent, I. Gillot, and F. Cuzin. 2006. RNA-Mediated Non-
Mendelian Inheritance of an Epigenetic Change in the Mouse. Nature 441: 469–474.
Ronshaugen, M., N. McGinnis, and S. W. McGinnis. 2002. Hox Protein Mutation and Macroevolution of the
Insect Body Plan. Nature 415: 914–917.
Rosenblatt, K. P., Z. P. Sun, S. Heller, and A. J. DEMO 1997. Distribution of Ca2+-Activated K+-Channel
Isoforms along the Tonotopic Gradient of the Chicken’s Cochlea. Neuron 19: 1061–1075.
Sarich, V. 1971. A Molecular Approach DEMO the Question of Human Origins. In Background for Man, edited by
DEMO Dolhinow and V. Sarich, pp. 60–81. Little, Brown, Boston.
Schindewolf, O. 1950. Basic Questions in Paleontology: Geologic Time, Organic Evolution, and Biological
Systematics. Translated by J. Schaefer. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper, New York.
DEMO, J. H. 1999. Sudden Origins: Fossils, Genes, and the Emergence of Species. Wiley, New
York.
Schwartz, J. H. 2005a. Darwinism versus DEMO: A Late 19th c. Debate. In A Cultural History of Heredity
DEMO: 19th and early 20th Centuries, edited by S. Mueller-Wille and H.-J. Reinberger, pp. 67–84. Max Planck
Institute for the History of Science, DEMO
Schwartz, J. H. 2005b. The Red Ape: Orangutans and Human Origins. Westview, Boulder, Colo.
Schwartz, J. H. 2006a. Decisions, Decisions: Why Thomas Hunt Morgan Was Not the Father of “Evo-Devo.”
Philosophy of Science DEMO: 918–929.
Schwartz, J. H. 2006b. “Race” and the Odd History of Paleoanthropology. The Anatomical Record (Part B: The
New Anatomist) 289B: DEMO
Schwartz, J. H. 2008. When Does Human Life Begin? An Evolutionary Perspective. In Controversies on the
Beginning of Human Life, edited by A. Kurjak and F. A. Chervenak, pp. 31–46. Jaypee, New Delhi.
Schwartz, J. H., and B. Maresca. 2006. Do Molecular Clocks Run at All? A Critique of Molecular Systematics.
Biological Theory 1: 1–15.
Simpson, G. G. 1944. Tempo and Mode in Evolution. Columbia University Press, New York.
Simpson, G. G. 1953. The Major Features of Evolution. Simon and Schuster, New York.
Stern, C. D., J. Charité, J. Deschamps, D. Duboule, A. J. Durston, M. Kmita, J.-F. Nicolas, I. Palmeirem, J. C.
Smith, and L. Wolpert. 2006. Head-Tail Patterning of the Vertebrate Embryo: One, Two or Many Unresolved
Problems? International Journal of Developmental Biology 50: 3–15.
Stotz, K. 2006. With “Genes” Like That, Who Needs an Environment? Postgenomics’s Argument for the
“Ontogeny of Information.” Philosophy of Science 73: 905–917.
Streelman, J. T., C. L. Peichel, and DEMO M. Parichy. 2007. Developmental Genetics of Adaptation in Fishes: The
Case DEMO Novelty. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 38: 651–681.
Organismal Innovation
67
Tarchini, B., D. Duboule, and M. Kmita. 2006. Regulatory Constraints in the Evolution of the Tetrapod Limb
Anterior–Posterior Polarity. Nature DEMO: 985–988.
Thorpe, S. K. S., R. L. Holder, and R. H. Crompton. 2007. The Origins of Bipedalism: Response. Science 318:
1065.
Vaughn, D., and R. R. Strathman. 2008. Predators Induce Cloning in DEMO Larvae. Science 319:
1503.
Williams, G. C. 1966. Adaptation and DEMO Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary Thought.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Wright, S. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian Populations. Genetics 16: 97–159.
Wright, S. 1932. The Roles of Mutation, Inbreeding, Crossbreeding and Selection in Evolution. Proceedings of
the Sixth International Congress of Genetics 1: 356–366.
Wright, S. 1945. Tempo and Mode in Evolution: A Critical DEMO Ecology 26: 415–419.

Innovation, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability: Contributions
5 from Neuroscience and Human Decision-Making Theory
Daniel O. Larson
When faced with having to explain how DEMO why innovations spread, we could adopt any
number of explanatory stances. DEMO could, for example, argue that the choice of adopting
an innovation is tied to an individual’s perception of how that innovation will become
DEMO table under particular natural and social environmental circumstances. Conversely,
we could argue that consideration of cost and proﬁ t is irrelevant and that DEMO are
predisposed as psychological conformists to copy, imitate, or mimic the behavior of others.
Motivational factors that may inﬂ uence replicative behavior include DEMO rewards such
as increased mating opportunities and the favor of elites (DEMO chapter 7, this volume). I
suggest that cultural rewards coevolved DEMO neurological rewards that stem from the
midbrain, which contains reward-related neural DEMO In other words, there are both
cultural incentives and neurobiological propensities DEMO individuals to be creative and to
adopt innovations.
I argue that human cognitive processes and brain functions have evolved from a shared
common history DEMO natural selection under varying social and natural pressures. The human
brain is a unique organ that is a by-product of dual-inheritance processes—the interplay
of DEMO and genes. I suggest that although neuroscience is a relatively new ﬁ eld, its
potential to contribute to our understanding of human behavior and evolution is immense.
It is a research domain that is inherently interdisciplinary DEMO is grounded in the pursuit
of empirical data using cutting-edge technologies. Ultimately, I want to understand the
cultural and neurological processes that guide humans to accept or reject innovations. Do
we, in fact, have propensities DEMO conformist and replicative behaviors such as copying,
mimicry, and imitation?DEMO
Invention and Innovation
Research associated with novelty, innovation, and acceptance or rejection of alternatives
should involve the study of human decision-making heuristics, but the topic of how
humans make cognitive decisions and take particular actions DEMO a matter of debate (Bowles
70 Daniel O. Larson
2004; Gintis 2000). The prevailing belief is that much of human behavior is the product
of calculated alternatives that DEMO one’s economic and biological success. It is pre-
sumed that humans are rational in their decision making and that, given a set of alterna-
tives, the one that beneﬁ ts the individual most will prevail.
Several researchers have challenged this traditional notion from an array of ﬁ elds
DEMO economics, psychology, political science, and philosophy (Gintis et al. 2005).
Herbert Simon, a pioneer in the challenge, posed an alternative DEMO grounded in
a conceptual framework he called bounded rationality (Simon 1982, 1990, 1996). He
realized that human decision making is always restricted by human cognitive abilities,
incomplete access to information, and environmental constraints, and, as such, rational or
optimal decision making is a false premise. He argued that decision making and problem
solving are not optimal DEMO rather are near-optimal or adequate under the rubric of satisﬁ c-
ing. Satisﬁ cing models dispense
with the ﬁ ction of optimization, which in many real-world situations demands unrealistic assump-
tions about the knowledge, time, DEMO, and other resources available to humans. Note that dis-
pensing with DEMO (as a model cognitive process) does not imply that the outcome of a
nonoptimizing strategy is bad. For instance, optimization is often based upon uncertain assumptions,
which are themselves guesswork, and as a consequence, there may be about as many different
outcomes of optimizing strategies as there are sets of assumptions. In these real-world cases, it is
possible that simple and robust heuristics can match or even outperform a speciﬁ DEMO optimizing strat-
egy. (Gigerenzer and Selten 2002: 4)
Models of bounded rationality are still in their developmental phase, although a number
of researchers have enumerated the principles that guide this contemporary view (Callebaut
and Laubichler 2007; Gigerenzer 2000; Gigerenzer and Selten 2002). Perhaps most DEMO
to discussions of innovation are alternative heuristics used in decision making related to
change in technologies and engineering design. Recently, Goldstein et al. (DEMO) identiﬁ ed
several heuristics that humans employ in their deliberation of DEMO, including imitation,
equal weighting, take the best, take the DEMO rst, and small-sample inference. Under each heu-
ristic, individuals are replicating the behavioral characteristics observed within the context
of their speciﬁ c social DEMO
Clearly, each category is pertinent to the study of human behavior, but for the
spread of innovation, I believe that imitation should ﬁ gure most importantly. Imitation
is beneﬁ cial because “it is a fast DEMO frugal strategy that saves an organism from
having to extract information from the environment anew, or from calculating from
scratch” (Goldstein et al. DEMO: 174). It also maximizes historic efﬁ ciency and success
of DEMO individuals or groups (Brass and Heyes 2005; Schlag 1998). However,
although imitation is typically a successful strategy, it is not without its limitations.
For example, if physical or social conditions are highly variable, the previously ben-
eﬁ cial strategy may become a liability, even DEMO, under new conditions (Goldstein
et al. 2001).
Innovation, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability
71
Conformist Behavior
Boyd and Richerson (2005; Richerson and Boyd 2005) suggest that through the coevolu-
tion DEMO genes and culture we have evolved a predisposition for conformist behaviors. Thus,
evolution preadapted us to living in larger groups and replicative behaviors DEMO rein-
forced, which led to greater complexity in human relationships and DEMO organization
(Richerson and Boyd 2008). Mimicry, imitation, and copying DEMO strong selective advan-
tages (Henrich and Gil-White 2001), and according DEMO Henrich and McElreath (2003: 126),
“when information is costly, natural selection will favor cognitive mechanisms that allow
individuals to extract adaptive DEMO, strategies, practices, heuristics and beliefs
from other members of their DEMO group at a lower cost than through alternative individual
mechanisms.”
Richerson and Boyd (2005) discuss a list of cultural evolutionary forces that they DEMO
have had a strong inﬂ uence on the spread of innovations throughout prehistory and history.
Random forces include cultural mutation and cultural drift, and decision-making forces
(nonrandom forces) include guided variation, direct- and indirect-bias transmission, and
frequency-dependent transmission. Guided variation involves individual trial-and-error
learning and the selective retention of behaviors found to be successful. Direct-bias trans-
mission is the DEMO, imitation, or mimicry of preexisting behaviors considered success-
ful. Indirect-bias transmission refers to the selective copying, imitation, and mimicry of
behaviors of DEMO considered to have prestige or other characteristics that an indi-
vidual emulates regardless of that behavior’s cost and success. Frequency-dependent
transmission refers to replicative DEMO that are chosen because of their commonness
or rarity without consideration of cost or success.
Boyd and Richerson (1985, 2005) and colleagues (DEMO, McElreath and Boyd 2007) have
developed mathematical models of how such behavior would become ﬁ xed in the human
evolutionary trajectory. As they DEMO others (e.g., Henrich et al. 2004, 2006; chapter 7, DEMO
volume) have shown, the theory and mathematical modeling of conformist and replicative
behaviors have a strong ethnographic empirical referent. My objective below is DEMO present
a research framework that incorporates evolutionary theory and techniques grounded
in the neurosciences that will hopefully complement previous work on replicative
behavior.
Theoretical DEMO
Principles derived from bounded rationality and dual-inheritance theory predict that rep-
licative behavior of technologies, labor structures, and communication strategies will
explain the DEMO of many innovations evidenced by the archaeological record in multiple
regions throughout the world (O’Brien 2008; various chapters in this volume). Indeed,DEMO
scholars argue that our evolution as a species involved cognitive mechanisms that enhance
72
Daniel O. Larson
our ability to learn and copy conspeciﬁ cs. DEMO was the ultimate tool used for copying
(Nowak 2006). The DEMO to mimic parents begins at the earliest developmental stages,
and this infantile propensity is evidence for our evolved cognitive structures and associated
phenotypic DEMO (Cacioppo et al. 2006; Falck-Ytter et al. 2006; Gergely and DEMO
2005; Gergely et al. 2002).
What rules govern the cognitive DEMO process under conditions of multiple goals?
I presume that human decision-making processes are grounded in the idea that “human
rational behavior . . DEMO is shaped by a scissors whose two blades are the structure of task
environments and the computational capabilities of the actor” (Simon 1990: DEMO). Simon,
among others, stresses that human decision making can DEMO understood only from an inter-
disciplinary perspective and that human decision making is linked in multifaceted ways
to evolutionary developments in human neural cognition, biochemical process, and evo-
lutionary history. I argue here that decision-making heuristics—including imitation,
copying, and mimicry—are all evolved forms of conformist and replicative behaviors that
have, on average, outperformed other cognitive and behavioral strategies.
DEMO mathematical models of Hauert et al. (2007) support the argument that humans
have a propensity for conformist and replicative behaviors as a result DEMO natural selection
and complex evolutional processes at the group level. An opportunity now exists to couple
bounded rationality, dual-inheritance theory, and human decision-making DEMO with the
theoretical perspectives and advanced methods of neuroscience—a relatively young ﬁ eld
that examines brain anatomy, biochemistry, molecular neurology, neurogenetics, and
DEMO behavior, including cognitive functions and emotions (Kandel and Squire 2000;
Kandel et al. 2000). An important unifying principle of neuroscience is DEMO
that the human brain is an evolved organ that has been subject to both natural and cultural
selective pressures.
Recent advances in the neurosciences DEMO attributable in part to the development of new
technologies such as functional magnetic resonance imaging. Real-time neurological pro-
cesses can be visualized and measured DEMO great accuracy, providing a basis for decoding
how the brain functions, formulates memory, and experiences emotion (e.g., Cabeza and
Kingstone 2001; DEMO et al. 2000; Lin et al. 2006, 2007). Rather than presupposing how
the brain, mind, and cognition work, neuroscience produces observable, measurable evi-
dence. For example, Fedulov and colleagues (e.g., Fedulov DEMO al. 2007; Lin et al. 2007)
focused on neurological processes DEMO with how we learn and store memories. This
work has signiﬁ cant implications for evolutionary anthropology in that it sheds light on
the neurological DEMO in which we learn our culture, create novelty, decide to accept
or reject innovations, and store information for future recall. It turns out that, neurologi-
cally, there are bits of information that are stored DEMO synapses in the brain by neuron-to-
neuron connectivity, referred to as DEMO potentiation. Clear instrumentally derived
evidence shows both a synaptic growth and a reshaping associated with learning and
memory acquisition (see also Costa-Mattioli et al. 2005).
Innovation, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability
73
One question raised by some DEMO this work is whether we have identiﬁ ed memes or meme
complexes (Aunger 2000; Dawkins 1999). Molecular studies of the constituents of DEMO
growth material will be important for future research. It is too early to conﬁ rm or reject
the possibility of the presence of meme DEMO or some other, as-yet-to-be-named,
memory property (more likely), but it is evident that mapping coded neurological proper-
ties or systems–networks–modules may DEMO on the horizon (Kandel et al. 2000).
Indeed, neurological experiments demonstrate that the potential now exists to allow the
generation of binary DEMO structures of speciﬁ c kinds of experiences. Experi-
ments by Lin et al. (2007) have yielded 99 percent accuracy in predicting three types DEMO
trauma experienced by mice under prior laboratory conditions. The limited scope of this
chapter precludes a detailed description of this research, but several important conclusions
are pertinent to our consideration of human propensity for innovation, novelty, and prob-
ability reasoning:
1. The idea that the mammalian brain forms neural networks or modules seems to have
empirical support, including abstract, general information and speciﬁ c experience struc-
tures dubbed neural cliques. It would appear that the brain reﬂ ects a hierarchical structure
that maximizes DEMO of information and possible variability of alternative behaviors.
2. Information “is coded in a manner similar to the way that the four letters or DEMO
that make up DNA molecules can be combined in a virtually unlimited number of patterns
to produce the seemingly inﬁ nite variety of organisms DEMO earth” (Tsien 2007: 58; see also
Gilbert 1996).
3. DEMO structures provide the basis for perception, knowledge, and subsequent
behavior.
4. Experiments are supported by laboratory instruments that deliver reliable measure-
ments, produce mathematically described neurological data, and allow directly visualized
neurological processes.
5. Perhaps most important to anthropologists, neural cliques, or brain codes, are not inherit-
able but are acquired only through experiences, unlike genetically inherited codes for
breathing, heartbeat, control of thermal physiology, and other reﬂ exes. Lin et al. (2006: 55)
put it this way: “genetic codes act as predetermined scaffolds for behavior, providing blue-
prints for the development and basic functionality of the organism; brain codes are dynamic
and self-organizing, arising out of internal structures and connectivity of neural networks
upon behavioral experiences.” This leads me to conclude that humans are structurally
designed DEMO natural selection for culture, including related propensities to replicate behav-
iors DEMO conspeciﬁ cs. These inferences, coupled with epigenetic studies (e.g., Müller DEMO
Newman 2003), hold promise for explaining human cognitive evolution and function.
Neurological research associated with education and learning has increased dramatically
over the DEMO decade and is intellectually rich concerning cognitive factors that generate
74
Daniel O. Larson
novelty and control human decision making (Kandel et al. 2000; chapter 11, this volume).
I include here studies DEMO patients with damaged brains who experience a ﬂ uorescence of
creativity and extraordinary memory capabilities; patients who lose all capability for cre-
ativity and remembering; people with extremely high scores on intelligence tests who
exhibit only limited creative ability; and savants who excel in creative abilities and
memory demonstrations (Dowling 2004; Ramachandran 2004).
Neuroscientiﬁ
c Evidence of Conformist DEMO Replicative Behaviors
Combining neurosciences with well-designed psychological experiments has recently gen-
erated extraordinary results. In fact, scientists have detected neuroanatomical, neurobio-
logical, and behavioral mechanisms that drive attitudes of conformity and replicative
behavioral tendencies. Experiments DEMO neuroeconomics and neuroimaging research have
revealed speciﬁ c mechanisms that control cognitive processes associated with how people
construct and transmit cultural information regarding replicative DEMO normative behavior.
The lesson learned from this research is that any study of human decision making must
take into account both cultural and neurological DEMO and propensities.
Copying, imitation, mimicry, and related neurological processes of DEMO may
well relate to evolutionary events embedded in our primate lineage. Recent work with
mirror neurons in monkeys suggests there is a neurological basis DEMO recognizing what
actions might be taken by another individual—the concept of mind reading (Dehaene
et al. 2005; Johnson-Frey et al. 2005; Stamenov and Gallese 2002; Umiltà et al. 2001).
Furthermore, human infants show DEMO propensities for mimicking behavior of a parent
or siblings at a very early age (6 to 10 months). Cognitive–psychological and neurological
research demonstrates that children in their very early developmental stages process infor-
mation and DEMO memory for appropriate and inappropriate behaviors—what anthropolo-
gists term “cultural norms.” Toddlers are willing to accept rules and guidelines as a part
of their DEMO value structure. In effect, displays of normative and replicative behaviors
reﬂ DEMO past actions that were copied, mimicked, or imitated and subsequently rewarded.
Interestingly, there is also a strong propensity in children to punish norm violators.
The neurosciences have produced evidence that human propensities for conformist and
DEMO behaviors are reinforced by both cultural and neurological–biochemical reward
systems. Speciﬁ cally, Fehr and colleagues (Fehr et al. 2005; Kosfeld et al. 2005) demon-
strated that neurological structures, biological chemistry, economic decision making, DEMO
human behavior are strongly linked. They argue that humans establish social norms and
that violators of such norms risk the revenge of a community DEMO reciprocators. This con-
nectivity is evident in situations of experimental games involving prosocial and antisocial
behaviors (Singer and Fehr 2005), which provide a basis for understanding replicative
behavior and related brain activities and neurochemical processes. DEMO cally, players
Innovation, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability
75
who detect replicative fair behaviors DEMO other game participants experience both neu-
rological (activation in the dorsal DEMO) and neurochemical rewards (Delgado et al.
2003; Kosfeld et al. DEMO). Particularly interesting is the evidence of a positive relationship
between the neuropeptide oxytocin and human trusting and trustworthy behavior. I posit
that oxytocin DEMO the hormone that induces both cooperative and replicative behaviors (see
Zak DEMO).
De Quervain et al. (2004) found that under conditions of experimental games, humans
have a strong predisposition to seek revenge when a social cheater has victimized them.
The emotional dynamic (schadenfreude) expressed by DEMO human subjects was captured
using neuroimaging equipment at a point in the game when a player’s opponent would
elect to not reciprocate and/or DEMO defect. De Quervain and colleagues found that the stria-
tum increased its consumption of oxygen, which evidences the activation of neural net-
works (DEMO also de Quervain and Papassotiropoulos 2006; Singer et al. 2006). DEMO striatum
becomes charged under pleasurable conditions, and thus there is a DEMO reward to
individuals when they personally punish norm violators (Sanfey et DEMO 2003). Rules for
“fair play,” or norms, clearly incorporate DEMO that each player will reciprocate or
replicate behaviors of other fair players. Natural selection must have favored both cultural
and neurobiological mechanisms which reinforced DEMO rewarded individuals who repli-
cated the behaviors of conspeciﬁ cs. I argue that replicative behaviors, in effect, contributed
to the avoidance of norm DEMO with family and extended family members. Further-
more, I believe this DEMO propensity is rooted in our cognitive structures associated
with adaptive child and parent relationships.
Importantly, neuroeconomics has successfully demonstrated that preferences in eco-
nomic decisions are not self-regarding, which supports alternative arguments presented by
proponents of bounded rationality and gene-culture coevolution over mainstream eco-
nomic theory (Fehr et al. 2005; Sanfey et al. 2003). Fehr et al. (2005) provide evidence
that humans care about fairness, equity, and reciprocity as DEMO as their own self-interest.
This is an evolved component and an important part of our phenotypic plasticity.
Finally, I argue that the above-referenced studies offer indisputable neurological and
biochemical evidence to support the arguments of Hauert DEMO al. (2007) regarding the evo-
lutionary beneﬁ ts of conformist and replicative behaviors. Evolution would favor those
societies that cooperated in a manner DEMO beneﬁ ted the group as a whole. If a group
accepted the practice of punishing norm violators, and if individuals voluntarily commit
to following group-sanctioned rules, then cooperative behavior emerges and cheaters are
eliminated or greatly reduced. Group membership is in part deﬁ ned by characteristics that
are DEMO by a majority of the members who copy, mimic, and imitate normative behavior.
Hauert et al. (2007: 1907) advance the following proposition: “Once established, group
selection, conformism, and reputation effects may maintain DEMO norms and promote
their spreading. Eventually, institutions for punishing free-riders may DEMO, or genetic
predispositions to punish dissidents.”
76
Daniel O. Larson
The theoretical arguments and mathematical modeling discussed in DEMO section support
Nowak’s (2006) claim that numbers and behavioral experiments can generate clarity and
beauty of scientiﬁ c thought. Neurological evidence for “hardwired” DEMO of con-
formists and replicative behavior is, in my mind, compelling, but I would also opine that
an individual’s expressed behavior is mediated by both epigenetic and cultural factors that
are historical (life experiences and culture histories) and individualistic.
Conclusions
Neuroscience research related to human propensities for replicating behaviors of conspe-
ciﬁ cs, coupled with theoretical and mathematical arguments, will go a long way toward
explaining the spread of innovations in technology, labor organization, language, and a
host of other behavioral characteristics evidenced archaeologically and ethnographically.
An evolutionary process such as the one I DEMO argued for here and elsewhere (Larson
2005) is compatible with complex evolutionary dynamics (Nowak 2006), cognitive evo-
lutionary theory (Heyes and DEMO 2000), and processes associated with phenotypic
plasticity and the evolution of human behavior (Müller and Newman 2003).
I would be the ﬁ rst to concede that progress in the scientiﬁ c explanation of human
DEMO and cultural change remains rudimentary. I would assert, however, that archae-
ologists and anthropologists, especially those new to the ﬁ eld, should DEMO skeptical of those
who claim evolutionary theory is useful only as a “metaphor” or “just so story” in the
social sciences (e.g., Bamforth DEMO; see chapter 2, this volume).
Progress in the neurosciences and advances in numerous kinds of biochemical and
neuroimaging instrumentation offer unprecedented opportunities DEMO observe human sub-
jects at various levels of investigation (e.g., neurologically, biochemically, behaviorally)
when subjected to laboratory and ﬁ eld experiments DEMO as fairness games. If we as
anthropologists and archaeologists elect to employ the powers of modern science in the
study of human behavior, we need to restructure and reinvent our research approach to
incorporate theoretical and DEMO advances in evolutionary theory, experimental
psychology, and the neurosciences. Using the methods of neuroimaging in archaeological
research associated with technology is not new, but the theoretical and methodological
approaches that I advocate here may be DEMO novel.
How can we further demonstrate scientiﬁ cally that humans have a neurological propen-
sity for replicative behavior, including copying, imitating, and mimicry? An appropriate
strategy may be similar to that of neuroscientiﬁ c research conducted to detect normative
behavior and propensity for conformism. Under well-designed experimental DEMO,
we could give individuals and select groups opportunities to accept or reject innovations
in technology, new ways of organizing labor, linguistic expression, or a host of other
behaviors. This would entail the creation of DEMO experiments, including psychological
Innovation, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability 77
tests not unlike the work DEMO Mesoudi (2007a, 2007b, 2008; chapter 11, this volume),
Mesoudi and O’Brien (2008a, 2008b, 2008c), and Henrich et al. (2006).
During the process of interviews or laboratory experiments associated with acts of
copying, mimicry, and imitation, brain scans and other types of neurological imaging
(when possible) could be conducted to locate the DEMO regions that are activated under
such experimental conditions. I predict that areas associated with both emotions and prob-
ability reasoning (the midbrain, striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and prefrontal cortex) will
signal strong neurological activity associated DEMO human decisions to either accept or
reject innovations. When individuals are experimentally placed in competing cooperative
groups, replicating behavioral experiments should reveal strong evidence for copying
conspeciﬁ cs rather than members in other groups. These behavioral DEMO emotional tenden-
cies and related cognitive processes should be detectable using both experimental neuro-
logical imaging and biochemical testing (e.g., for oxytocin levels)DEMO
In the future, I believe psychological experiments and advances in the DEMO
will be invaluable to research associated with innovation and human decision-making
processes. I expect that future scholars will generate indisputable evidence for both the
DEMO and proximate causes behind the spread of technologies and other cultural char-
acteristics. Should this proposal be accused of the scientiﬁ cation of human DEMO, then
so be it.
Acknowledgments
I thank Mike O’Brien and Stephen DEMO for the opportunity to be part of the Konrad
Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research (KLI) workshop on innovation. I
have admired DEMO research and organizational efforts for over two decades, and it was DEMO
pleasure to be a part of that effort. I also thank Gerd Müller, Werner Callebaut, and the
staff of the KLI for supporting DEMO effort to participate in the workshop. Several of the
issues addressed in my chapter are derived from the efforts of scholars in evolutionary
and DEMO biology, anthropology, neurosciences, game theory, and mathematical
modeling. I apologize in advance for any misrepresentations. Finally, I would like to thank
the participants of the workshop for comments and suggestions offered.
References
Aunger, R. 2000. Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bamforth, D. 2002. Evidence and Metaphor in Evolutionary Archeology. DEMO Antiquity 67: 435–452.
Bowles, S. 2004. Microeconomics: Behavior, Institutions, DEMO Evolution. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
N.J.
Boyd, R., and DEMO J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 2005. The Origin and Evolution of Cultures. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
78
Daniel O. Larson
Brass, M., and C. Heyes. 2005. Imitation: Is Cognitive Neuroscience Solving the Correspondence Problem?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences DEMO: 489–495.
Cabeza, R., and A. Kingstone (editors). 2001. Handbook of Functional Neuroimaging of Cognition. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Cacioppo, DEMO T., P. S. Visser, and C. L. Pickett. 2006. Social Neuroscience: People Thinking about Thinking
People. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Callebaut, DEMO, and M. D. Laubichler. 2007. Biocomplexity as a Challenge for Biological DEMO Biological
Theory 2: 1–2.
Costa-Mattioli, M., D. Gobert, H. Harding, B. Herdy, M. Azzi, M. Bruno, M. Bidinosti, C. Ben Mamou,
E. Marcinkiewicz, and M. Yoshida. 2005. Translational Control of Hippocampal Synaptic Plasticity and Memory
by the eIF2alpha Kinase GCN2. Nature 436: 1166–1173.
Dawkins, R. 1999. The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the DEMO Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dehaene, S., J.-R. Duhamel, M. D. Hauser, and G. Rizzolatti. 2005. From Monkey Brain to Human Brain: DEMO
Fyssen Foundation Symposium. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Delgado, M. R., H. M. Locke, V. A. Stenger, J. A. Fiez. 2003. Dorsal DEMO Responses to Reward and Pun-
ishment: Effects of Valence and Magnitude DEMO Manipulations. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience
3: 27–38.
de Quervain, D. J. F., U. Fischbacher, V. Treyer, M. Schellhammer, U. DEMO, A. Buck, and E. Fehr. 2004.
The Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment. Science 305: 1254–1258.
de Quervain, D. J. F., and A. Papassotiropoulos. 2006. Identiﬁ cation of a Genetic Cluster Inﬂ uencing Memory
Performance DEMO Hippocampal Activity in Humans. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 103:
DEMO
Dowling, J. E. 2004. The Great Brain Debate: Nature or Nurture? Joseph Henry Press, Washington, D.C.
Falck-Ytter, T., G. Gredebäck, DEMO C. von Hofsten. 2006. Infants Predict Other People’s Action Goals. Nature
Neuroscience 9: 878–879.
Fedulov, V., S. R. Christopher, D. A. Simmons, L. Palmer, C. M. Gall, and G. Lynch. 2007. Evidence That
DEMO Potentiation Occurs within Individual Hippocampal Synapses during Learning. Journal of Neuro-
science 27: 8031–8039.
Fehr, E., U. Fischbacher, and M. Kosfeld. 2005. DEMO Foundations of Trust and Social Preferences.
Centre for Economic Policy Research, DEMO
Gergely, G., H. Bekkering, and I. Király. 2002. Rational Imitation DEMO Preverbal Infants. Nature 415: 755.
Gergely, G., and G. Csibra. DEMO The Social Construction of the Cultural Mind. Interaction Studies 6: 463–481.
DEMO, G. 2000. Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the Real World. Oxford University Press, New York.
Gigerenzer, G., and R. Selten. 2002. Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Gilbert, C. D. DEMO Learning and Receptive Field Plasticity. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 93:DEMO
10546–10547.
Gintis, H. 2000. Game Theory Evolving: A Problem-Centered Introduction to Modeling Strategic Interaction.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Gintis, H., DEMO Bowles, R. Boyd, and E. Fehr. 2005. Moral Sentiments and Material Interests: Origins, Evidence,
and Consequences. In Moral Sentiments and Material DEMO: The Foundations of Cooperation in Economic
Life, edited by H. Gintis, S. Bowles, R. Boyd, and E. Fehr, pp. 3–39. MIT DEMO, Cambridge, Mass.
Goldstein, D. G., G. Gigerenzer, R. M. DEMO, A. Kacelnik, Y. Kareev, G. Klein, L. Martignon, J. DEMO Payne,
and K. Schlag. 2001. Why and How Do Simple Heuristics Work? In Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox,
edited by G. DEMO and R. Selten, pp. 173–190. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Hauert, C., A. Traulsen, H. Brandt, M. A. Nowak, and K. DEMO 2007. Via Freedom to Coercion: The Emer-
gence of Costly Punishment. DEMO 316: 1905–1907.
Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. DEMO, E. Fehr, and H. Gintis (editors). 2004. Foundations of DEMO
Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies. Oxford DEMO
versity Press, New York.
Innovation, Replicative Behavior, and Evolvability
79
Henrich, J., and F. DEMO 2001. The Evolution of Prestige: Freely Conferred Deference as a Mechanism DEMO
Enhancing the Beneﬁ ts of Cultural Transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 22: 165–196.
Henrich, J., and R. McElreath. 2003. The Evolution of Cultural Evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:
123–135.
Henrich, J., et al. 2006. DEMO Punishment across Human Societies. Science 312: 1767–1770.
Heyes, C. M., DEMO L. Huber. 2000. The Evolution of Cognition. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Johnson-Frey, S. H., R. Newman-Norlund, and S. T. Grafton. 2005. A Distributed Left Hemisphere Network
Active during Planning of Everyday Tool Use Skills. DEMO Cortex 15: 681–695.
Kandel, E. R., J. H. Schwartz, and T. M. Jessell. 2000. Principles of Neural Science. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kandel, E. R., and L. R. Squire. 2000. Neuroscience: Breaking Down Scientiﬁ c Barriers to the Study of Brain
and Mind. Science 290: 1113–1120.
Kosfeld, M., M. Heinrichs, P. J. Zak, U. Fischbacher, and E. Fehr. 2005. Oxytocin Increases Trust in Humans.
Nature 435: 673–676.
Larson, D. O. 2005. Evolutionary Archaeology and Modularity: An Alternative Perspective in DEMO
Science. Paper presented in the Altenberg Seminars in Theoretical Biology, Konrad DEMO Institute, Altenberg,
Austria.
Lin, L., G. Chen, H. Kuang, D. Wang, and J. Z. Tsien. 2007. Neural Encoding of the DEMO of Nest in the
Mouse Brain. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings DEMO: 6066–6071.
Lin, L., R. Osan, and J. Z. Tsien. 2006. Organizing Principles of Real-Time Memory Encoding: Neural Clique
Assemblies and Universal Neural Codes. Trends in Neurosciences 29: 48–57.
McElreath, R., and R. Boyd. 2007. Mathematical Models of Social Evolution: A Guide for the Perplexed. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mesoudi, A. 2007a. Biological and Cultural DEMO: Similar but Different. Biological Theory 2: 119–123.
Mesoudi, A. 2007b. DEMO the Methods of Social Psychology to Study Cultural Evolution. Journal of Social,
Evolutionary and Cultural Evolution 1: 35–58.
Mesoudi, A. 2008. An DEMO Simulation of the “Copy-Successful-Individuals” Cultural Learning Strat-
egy: Adaptive Landscapes, Producer–Scrounger Dynamics, and Informational Access Costs. Evolution and
Human Behavior 29: 350–363.
DEMO, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008a. The Cultural Transmission of Great Basin Projectile Point Technology.
I. An Experimental Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 3–28.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008b. The Cultural Transmission of DEMO Basin Projectile Point Technology.
II. An Agent-Based Computer Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 627–644.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008c. The Learning and Transmission of Hierarchical Cultural Recipes. Bio-
logical Theory 3: 63–72.
Müller, DEMO B., and S. A. Newman. 2003. Origination of Organismal Form: The Forgotten Cause in Evolutionary
Theory. In Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene in Developmental and Evolutionary Biology,
edited by G. B. Müller DEMO S. A. Newman, pp. 3–10. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Nowak, M. A. 2006. Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring the Equations of Life. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
O’Brien, M. J. (editor). 2008. Cultural Transmission and Archaeology: Issues and Case Studies. Society for
American Archaeology Press, Washington, D.C.
Ramachandran, V. S. 2004. A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness: From Impostor Poodles to Purple Numbers.
Pi Press, New York.
DEMO, P. J., and R. Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: DEMO Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 2008. The Evolution of Free Enterprise Values. In Moral Markets: The Critical
Role of Values in the Economy, DEMO by P. J. Zak, pp. 107–141. Princeton University Press, Princeton, DEMO
Sanfey, A. G., J. K. Rilling, J. A. Aaronson, L. E. Nystrom, and J. D. Cohen. 2003. Probing the Neural Basis
of Economic Decision Making: An fMRI Investigation of the Ultimatum Game. Science 300: 1755–1758.
80
Daniel O. Larson
Schlag, K. H. 1998. Why Imitate, and DEMO So, How? A Boundedly Rational Approach to Multi-armed Bandits.
Journal of Economic Theory 78: 130–156.
Simon, H. A. 1982. Models of Bounded DEMO (vol. 2). MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Simon, H. A. 1990. Invariant of Human Behavior. Annual Review of Psychology 41: 1–19.
Simon, H. A. 1996. The Sciences of the Artiﬁ cial. MIT Press, DEMO, Mass.
Singer, T., and E. Fehr. 2005. The Neuroeconomics of DEMO Reading and Empathy. Institute for Empirical
Research in Economics, University of DEMO Zurich.
Singer, T., B. Seymour, J. P. O’Doherty, K. E. Stephan, R. J. Dolan, and C. D. Frith. 2006. Empathic Neural
DEMO Are Modulated by the Perceived Fairness of Others. Nature 439: 466–469.
DEMO, M., and V. Gallese. 2002. Mirror Neurons and the Evolution of Brain and Language. Benjamins,
Philadelphia.
Tsien, J. Z. 2007. Memory. Scientiﬁ c American 297(1): 52–59.
Umiltà, M. A., E. Kohler, V. Gallese, L. Fogassi, L. Fadiga, C. Keysers, and G. DEMO 2001. I Know What
You Are Doing: A Neurophysiological Study. Neuron DEMO: 155–165.
Zak, P. J. 2008. Moral Markets: The Critical Role DEMO Values in the Economy. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J.
6 Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
Werner Callebaut
Most chapters in DEMO volume deal with innovation as an empirical or theoretical topic in
evolutionary anthropology or in studies of cultural inheritance in general. However, inno-
vation also features prominently in other social sciences, in particular economics and
science and technology (policy) studies—so much so that some researchers have recently
DEMO to ﬁ nd out “to what extent [there] now exists a uniﬁ ed community of innovation
scholars [who] identify themselves with innovation studies as DEMO ﬁ eld rather than particular
sub-ﬁ elds within other, more traditional DEMO (Fagerberg and Verspagen 2006: 1).
Moreover, the origin of DEMO innovations, a problem in comparative evolutionary
embryology (Love 2003), is a hot area in evolutionary developmental biology (EvoDevo),
which contributes DEMO our understanding of evolution by focusing on the contributions of
development to the origin of phenotypic novelties (Müller 2007; Müller and Newman
2005)DEMO
The three scientiﬁ c communities loosely referred to here1—anthropologists, economists,
DEMO biologists with an interest in innovation—have barely interacted hitherto, but aware-
DEMO that their closer interaction could beneﬁ t all parties involved is growing (Erwin and
Krakauer 2004). This chapter aims to modestly contribute to the long-term project of a
general theory of innovation in a rather DEMO way, through a comparative analysis of
the reasons for the neglect DEMO much of the twentieth century of innovation and
novelty in diverse ﬁ elds and through a reﬂ ection on the various ways in which DEMO bias
is being overcome. I do not consider innovation in anthropology per se, which is covered
elsewhere in this volume, but will focus DEMO three cases that, at least prima facie, are com-
pletely disparate: the synthetic theory in evolutionary biology, neoclassical economics,
and logical-empiricist DEMO of science. My view is that an adequate understanding
of cultural evolution, human or animal, requires us to seriously take into account ontogeny
DEMO that, more generally, EvoDevo offers some resources that may help us correct the
selectionist and adaptationist biases that characterize not only much of DEMO psy-
chology (Richardson 2007) but also much, if not most, work in animal-behavior studies
(Callebaut 2007; see also Grifﬁ ths 2007; Wimsatt 2006; Wimsatt and Griesemer 2007).
82 Werner Callebaut
Toward a General Theory of Innovation?
Reporting on DEMO workshop on Innovation in Natural, Experimental and Applied Evolu-
tion held DEMO the Santa Fe Institute in 2004, Erwin and Krakauer (2004: DEMO) suggested
going beyond occasional reciprocal exchanges of “principles” between researchers
working DEMO biological and technological innovation and called for “a general theory of
innovation within which to organize existing case studies and models.” They went on
DEMO suggest that a theory uniting biology with technology would require “some new
combination of the dynamics of development (or construction more generally) and
DEMO and probably also “nontraditional models of computation coupled to a better
understanding of the complex feedback present between individuals and their environ-
ments” (p. 1119).
Regarding dynamics, evolution can be regarded as the exploration of morphospace by
populations (Mitteröcker and Huttegger 2009). State space typically is represented as a
conﬁ guration space with concepts of neighborhood and distance DEMO ned by variable opera-
tors such as mutation and/or recombination. However, not all variation-generating pro-
cesses induce well-deﬁ ned topological structures. Shpak and Wagner (2000: 41) suspect
that “notions of proximity and distance are not deﬁ ned for a process of unequal crossover,”
an example DEMO innovation in which the number of elements can change as a result of the
action of an operator, thus leading to more or fewer copies of the gene. Unequal crossover
“deﬁ nes a directionality to evolution DEMO is independent of selection.” Other innovation
processes may likewise lead to unconventional topologies.2
Regarding the feedback between individual and environment, two obvious avenues to
explore are biological niche construction (Odling-Smee et al. 2003) and its DEMO and
cultural equivalents (e.g., Anderson 1991) and the hierarchical organization DEMO life, which
implies the breakdown of the traditional equation of selection DEMO a causal process and
sorting, the differential birth and death among DEMO organisms within a population.
Sorting can arise from selection at the focal level itself and as a consequence either of
downward causation from processes DEMO on individuals at higher levels or upward
causation from lower levels (DEMO and Gould 1986).
The call for the Altenberg Workshop on Innovation in Cultural Systems: Contributions
from Evolutionary Anthropology (2007), which produced DEMO present volume, echoed
Erwin and Krakauer’s reference to economist Joseph Schumpeter’s (1934) celebrated
distinction between invention—the creation and establishment of something new—and
innovation—an invention that becomes economically successful and earns proﬁ ts. This
distinction, in turn, resonates with the one commonly made in evolutionary biology
between the sources of genetic and phenotypic variability among organisms and the factors
leading DEMO the ﬁ xation of a favored variant within a population (e.g., Müller and Newman
2005). Both distinctions highlight “the elusive nature of DEMO with its connotation
of inﬂ uence and success” (Erwin and Krakauer DEMO: 1117). A positive bias (Kimberly
1981) thus pervades the DEMO of human-made innovations, including scientiﬁ c
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
83
discoveries. Innovation is typically viewed DEMO a “good thing” because the new idea must
be useful—proﬁ table, DEMO, solving a problem that is perceived as such. (A new
idea that is not perceived as useful is usually called a “mistake.”) Likewise, in-depth
appraisals of the role of the entrepreneur are rare, and DEMO cation is usual (Evans 1949).
Is a general theory of DEMO as called for by Erwin and Krakauer (2004) desirable,
and if so, is it in the cards? We will ﬁ nd DEMO only by trying to develop it! My strategy in
this chapter is to probe the solidity of various attempts to “evolutionize” the social sciences
DEMO the last three decades or so and to compare them with some of the recent developments
in developmental and evolutionary biology that culminated in DEMO advent of EvoDevo. I
include the philosophy of science in this enterprise because I am convinced that a consis-
tently “naturalized” philosophy (Callebaut 1993; Giere 1988), of which evolutionary
epistemology is an integral part (DEMO and Pinxten 1987; Callebaut and Stotz 1998;
Hull 1988), DEMO crucially include economic, psychological, sociological, and other social-
scientiﬁ c DEMO in addition to being thoroughly informed by the history of science
and other human cognitive enterprises. For our purposes here, “naturalism” can be deﬁ ned
as the view that “theories come to be accepted (or not) through a natural process involving
both individual judgment and social interaction,” without any appeal to supposed rational
principles of theory choice (“rationalism”; DEMO 1988: 7). Evolutionary epistemology thus
becomes a chapter in the DEMO of cultural evolution (Hull 1988). Innovation as understood
in these DEMO ﬁ elds will be the test case for my probing.
A Comparative Case Study
A comparison of innovation as understood in biology, economics, DEMO philosophy may
seem far-fetched, but it seems to me to make DEMO sense if we take into account the
rather advanced state of the art in evolutionary modeling and theorizing in various ﬁ elds
and the DEMO cross-fertilization between ﬁ elds that is currently taking place (Boschma
and DEMO 2005; Carrier 2005; Frey and Stutzer 2007; Martens 2004). DEMO cally,
Mesoudi et al.’s (2006) attempt to create a uniﬁ ed science of cultural evolution by “outlin-
ing the methods and approaches DEMO by the principal subdisciplines of evolutionary
biology and assessing whether there is an existing or potential corresponding approach to
the study of cultural evolution” (p. 329) can be a methodological anchoring point for my
endeavor. As they point out,
Existing approaches within anthropology and archaeology demonstrate a DEMO match with the
macroevolutionary methods of systematics, paleobiology, and biogeography, DEMO mathemati-
cal models derived from population genetics have been successfully developed to study cultural
microevolution. Much potential exists for experimental simulations and ﬁ eld DEMO of cultural
microevolution, where there are opportunities to borrow further methods DEMO hypotheses from
biology. Potential also exists for the cultural equivalent of molecular genetics in “social cogni-
tive neuroscience,” although many fundamental issues have DEMO to be resolved. (Mesoudi et al.
2006: 329)
84 Werner Callebaut
The organismic systems approach proposed by Callebaut et al. (2007) as a framework
for extending Modern Synthesis evolutionary theory (see DEMO Müller 2007) differs from
Mesoudi et al.’s proposal mainly in that DEMO puts more emphasis on epigenetic issues—a
need that Mesoudi and O’Brien (DEMO: 63) recognize when they describe several parallels
between the hierarchically structured, “recipe-like organization of behavioral knowledge”
and the manner in which biological organisms develop. As a philosophical naturalist, I
also want to be more critical when it comes to embracing game-theoretical modeling tools,
which may smack DEMO aprioristic rationalism (Callebaut 2007). I am also more impressed
than DEMO et al. (2006) seem to be by arguments to the effect that there is a profound
functional discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds DEMO cultures that results
from our unique capability to symbolize (Penn et DEMO 2007) and from different mechanisms
of cultural propagation (Sperber and Claidière 2006). However, these differences need not
further concern us here.
Evolutionary Biology
In biology, where, contrary to the social sciences, it has long been accepted that “nothing
makes sense except in the light of DEMO (Dobzhansky 1970: 5–6), there is a growing
consensus that origination, in the sense of the ﬁ rst formation of biological structures
(DEMO and Müller 2005), and innovation, the evolutionary modes and mechanisms
DEMO novelty generation (Müller 2002, 2003), are underrepresented in the standard
theory with its focus on variation and adaptation (Müller and Newman 2005). This neglect
is a consequence of the “black-boxing” of development in DEMO Modern Synthesis. Whereas
the initiating causes of innovation, acting at the DEMO level, are held to be unspeciﬁ c,
the conditions for DEMO physical realization of speciﬁ c novelties must be sought in develop-
ment. EvoDevo points the way to a balanced integration of the “innovation triad” DEMO origi-
nation, innovation, and novelty (Müller and Newman 2005), DEMO well as related topics such
as homology, phenotypic plasticity, and modularity, into an extended synthesis (Callebaut
et al. 2007).
Neoclassical Economics
DEMO economics, Schumpeter’s (1934) innovating entrepreneur has long been recognized as
DEMO apex of the hierarchy that determines the behavior of the ﬁ rm and thereby bears a
heavy responsibility for the vitality of the free DEMO society” (Baumol 1968: 64). And
yet neoclassical economics, which DEMO to dominate the ﬁ eld despite increasing
discontent, has failed for DEMO than a century to develop an adequate formal analysis
of entrepreneurship and innovation and of technical and institutional change (Freeman
1988, 1991). DEMO recent decades, evolutionary economics (e.g., Dopfer 2005; Hodgson
1993a; DEMO and Winter 1982; Witt 2003) and the new institutional economics
(DEMO, Brette 2006) have set out to correct this bias by viewing economic change (as the
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
85
classical “political economists” did) as just one aspect of the general question of evolution
and understanding economies DEMO evolutionary terms rather than those of traditional equi-
librium assumptions.
Philosophy of Science
In line with the older antipsychologism of Frege and Wittgenstein, which remains inﬂ u-
ential to this day (Kitcher 1992), philosophers of science in the 1930s aligned to exclude
the context of discovery from DEMO scrutiny. Their “logic of science” now focused
exclusively on the so-called rational reconstruction of the context of justiﬁ cation—a move
that made Popper (1959) deny the very existence of the subject matter that the title of his
publication The Logic of Scientiﬁ c Discovery announced (Simon 1977). As a result, with
few exceptions, discovery and invention were relegated DEMO investigation by cognitive
psychologists, artiﬁ cial intelligencers, and historians and sociologists of science and tech-
nology (e.g., Brannigan 1981; Cozzens 1989; DEMO et al. 2005; Merton 1973; Mulkay
1972)—so much so that when Thomas Nickles, the editor of a double volume on scientiﬁ c
discovery, proudly announced in his introductory essay that his collection “open[ed] up a
new period in philosophy of science, one in which discovery, DEMO, and problem
solving will take their places as a legitimate area DEMO study” (Nickles 1980: 2), he had to
admit that “philosophers of science themselves are just now ﬁ nding their sea legs in DEMO
hitherto unnavigable waters of scientiﬁ c discovery” (p. 1).
The DEMO Neglect of Innovation: Three Different Etiologies
We can now examine three DEMO in which long-term neglect of innovation has been the
rule rather than the exception. The contextual speciﬁ cs of the neglect differ, but the intel-
lectual parallels are informative.
Evolutionary Biology and the Hardening of the DEMO Synthesis
Complaints about the long-term neglect of the emergence of evolutionary novelties have
frequently been voiced in evolutionary biology, beginning with Mayr, whose DEMO is
invoked by EvoDevo proponents (e.g., Love 2003) as well DEMO by behavioral biologists.
Reader (2003) and Reader and Laland (2003; see also Ramsey et al. 2007) deal with the
sources of new learned variations, the mechanisms underlying their generation, and the
evolutionary effects DEMO generated variations may have on animal behavioral develop-
ment and evolution. They regret that although as a component of behavioral ﬂ exibility
animal innovation DEMO important to the survival of many animals, animal innovation has
been DEMO by behavioral biologists, psychologists, social learning researchers, and
conservation-minded biologists. DEMO (2002), noting that the issue of innovation gains
importance as DEMO incongruences between molecular evolution and higher levels of
86 Werner Callebaut
organismal organization become more evident, suggests that innovation may have been
given less attention than variation because the latter is much DEMO frequent. Yet “innova-
tions and novelties are found at all levels of organization and are fundamental for the
process of phenotypic evolution” (Müller 2002: 829).
The root of this disregard is, in Gould’s (1983) apt expression, the “hardening” of the
Modern Synthesis, which did not lead to a literal “expulsion” of development (as well as
of anthropology, ecology, and other ﬁ elds) but rather to their “black-boxing,” concomitant
with an increasing fascination with population genetics (Smocovitis 1996). Population
genetics still rules today. And yet,
It is not within the DEMO of population geneticists to discover the basic biological phenomena
that govern evolutionary change, as it was for nuclear physics to discover universal forces between
nuclear particles. The basic phenomena are already provided to population genetics by DEMO
discoveries in classical and molecular genetics, cell biology, developmental biology, DEMO ecology.
Nor is it within the problematic of observational population genetics to discover the ways in which
the operation of these causal phenomena can DEMO to produce effects. The elucidation of the
structure of the network of causal pathways, and of the relation between the magnitudes of these
elementary forces and their effects on evolution, is an entirely analytic problem. (DEMO 2000:
193–194)
Such was the power of the genecentric perspective of the Modern Synthesis that it
allowed one to gloss over the DEMO problem by tacitly assuming that genes, acting
in linear fashion, were the sole variable determinants of structure: “It was sufﬁ cient to
focus on the dynamics of alleles in populations, assuming the prior existence of the phe-
notypic entities to which they correspond. No feedback between genes, gene products, the
material properties of developmental systems and their environments was taken into
account” (Müller 2008: 18). And yet, the capacities for the emergence of evolutionary
novelty lie precisely in these interactions (Müller 2007; Müller and Newman 2005).
The late 1970s and early 1980s witnessed an increasing awareness of explanatory deﬁ -
cits in the prevailing DEMO If neo-Darwinism seemed to work well for the population-
genetic phenomena on which it concentrated, concern accumulated about its difﬁ culty in
accounting for characteristics of phenotypic evolution such as biased variation, rapid
changes of form, the occurrence of nonadaptive traits, and the origination of higher level
DEMO organization such as homology and body plans (see Love [2003] and DEMO
[2008] and references therein). Most of the criticisms attributed the explanatory deﬁ cits
of neo-Darwinism to its neglect of the generative processes that DEMO genotype to pheno-
type and to the exclusion of developmental theory from the evolutionary synthesis (Cal-
lebaut et al. 2007; Müller 2008).
DEMO, progress toward a general theory of invention and innovation is hindered
DEMO semantic inﬂ ation (“‘innovation’ and ‘novelty’ are two of the most DEMO and
misunderstood words in evolutionary biology” [Erwin and Krakauer 2004: 1117]),
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
87
problems of scale (e.g., DEMO in homeobox genes and associated morphological
changes that excite the epigeneticist may be dismissed as unimportant by, say, paleobiolo-
gists interested in larger-scale DEMO), and the conﬂ ation of “invention as origin and ﬁ xa-
tion and innovation as consequence and success” (Erwin and Krakauer 2004: DEMO).
Neoclassical Economics: “It’s Exogenous, Stupid!”
Whereas classical political economists such as Smith, Ricardo, Mill, and Marx considered
technological and institutional change (as well as demographical and other factors) as an
integral part DEMO their general theories of economic growth, they were expunged by the
DEMO fathers of the Marginalist Revolution of 1870–1874 (Walras in Switzerland,
DEMO in Great Britain, and Menger in Austria). The Marginalist Revolution DEMO often cited
as a classic example of the phenomenon of multiple discovery (Lamb and Easton 1984;
but see Ekelund and Hébert 2002).
The work of Schumpeter, the so-called father of innovation studies, must DEMO placed and
appreciated against the background of this tradition and, to DEMO lesser extent, the classical
tradition (Seligman 1971). For Schumpeter (DEMO), the root problem of any economic
system is the attainment and maintenance of equilibrium. In his original model, economic
activity was simply repetitive, so that the theory described a kind of circular ﬂ ow. Into this
model was injected a new production function—a new relation between input DEMO output.
This was generally realized by an innovator who was searching for greater proﬁ t than was
available through normal channels. Schumpeter’s deﬁ nition DEMO innovation included the
introduction of a new good—one with which consumers are not yet familiar—or a new
quality of a good and of a DEMO method of production, which needs by no means be founded
upon DEMO “scientiﬁ cally” new discovery but can also exist in a new way of handling a com-
modity commercially. His deﬁ nition also comprised the DEMO up of a new market into
which the particular branch of manufacture of the country in question has not previously
entered, whether or not this market has existed before (niche construction); the conquest
of a new source of supply of raw materials or half-manufactured goods, again irrespective
of whether this source already existed or has to be created ﬁ DEMO; and carrying out the new
organization of any industry, such as creating a monopoly position.
Schumpeter’s linking of organizational, managerial, and social DEMO with techni-
cal innovations has been rightly called revolutionary. However, for DEMO contemporary under-
standing of (economic) innovation, “Schumpeter is not enough” (Freeman 1988; see also
Fagerberg 2004): He paid little attention to the periphery of the world economy (what we
have come to refer to as the “Third World”); he did not extend his analysis DEMO international
trade and the international diffusion of technology; he never formalized DEMO models; and
he compromised, we might say with hindsight, in DEMO he had to reconcile his view of
innovation, economic dynamism, and partial monopolistic appropriation of technological
advances with his other view that equilibrium DEMO still be deﬁ ned in Walrasian terms.
88 Werner Callebaut
Ubiquitous references to Schumpeter notwithstanding, a gulf has long separated his
work from the neoclassical view. Freeman (1988) recalled that DEMO Jewkes et al. (1958)
wrote The Sources of Invention, they suggested three reasons for the general neglect of
technical change by the DEMO profession: Economists were generally ignorant of
science and technology and felt DEMO to venture into this unknown territory, they
had few statistics at DEMO disposal to guide them, and ever since the Great Depression of
DEMO 1930s they had been preoccupied mainly with cyclical ﬂ uctuations in the economy
and the unemployment associated with them. The third explanation is particularly DEMO
ing: For Schumpeter, as for us, technical innovation is not DEMO separate phenomenon but
rather a crucial factor in the explanation of business cycles and the dynamics of economic
growth generally.
While nominally accepting the DEMO of technical and institutional change, main-
stream theory and most modeling DEMO in practice divorced economics from these crucially
important processes of change,
relegating them to the status of “residual factors” or “exogenous shocks.” . DEMO . The various “growth
accounting” exercises, even after allowing for an DEMO Kamasutra of variables, generally remain
with a big unexplained “residual” . DEMO . and fail to deal with the complementarities and interactions
of these variables. . . . In general they are only a pale shadow DEMO the growth theories of classical
economics. (Freeman 1988: 2)
Concomitant with the neglect of technological change, neoclassical economic theory has
failed to develop an illuminating formal analysis of entrepreneurship in the sense of the
DEMO innovator:
The entrepreneur is at the same time one of the most intriguing and one of the most elusive characters
in the cast DEMO constitutes the subject of economic analysis. He has long been recognized as the
apex of the hierarchy that determines the behavior of the ﬁ DEMO and thereby bears a heavy responsibil-
ity for the vitality of the free enterprise society. In the writings of the classical economist his appear-
DEMO was frequent, though he remained a shadowy entity without clearly deﬁ DEMO form and function.
Only Schumpeter and, to some degree, Professor [Frank H.] Knight succeeded in infusing him with
life and in assigning to DEMO a speciﬁ c area of activity to any extent commensurate with his acknowl-
edged importance. (Baumol 1968: 64)
Baumol (1968: 66) famously concluded that “the theoretical ﬁ rm is entrepreneurless—
the Prince of DEMO has been expunged from the discussion of Hamlet.” In both simple
and more sophisticated models of ﬁ rm behavior, the ﬁ rm must choose among alternative
values for some well-deﬁ ned variables such as price, output, and advertising outlay. Man-
agement is taken to consider the costs and revenues associated with each candidate set of
values and to perform a DEMO that yields maximum proﬁ t. “There matters rest,
forever or until exogenous forces lead to an autonomous change in the environment”
(Baumol 1968: 67). As an instrument of optimality analysis of well-deﬁ ned problems, the
extant theory of the ﬁ rm is a theory of management—overseeing the ongoing efﬁ ciency
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
89
of continuing processes—not entrepreneurship—locating new DEMO and putting them in
effect.
At the most fundamental level, neoclassical DEMO cannot come to grips with inno-
vation and entrepreneurship because of the way it deals with information. The apex of
neoclassical theorizing, the Arrow–Debreu formalization of competitive general equilib-
rium, is based on the hypothesis of perfect information—complete, perfect, and freely
available knowledge of all prices and DEMO characteristics of all goods and services traded
on markets, now and DEMO the future (Callebaut [2007] reviews Simon’s “bounded rational-
ity” alternative). DEMO state of affairs explains why some economists have found it neces-
sary to proclaim what for noneconomists is a truism—that agents cannot act on DEMO
they do not have. Simon has spent the best part of his polymath career pointing to “the
discrepancy between the perfect human rationality that DEMO assumed in classical and neoclas-
sical economic theory and the reality of human life” and arguing that neither people’s
“knowledge nor their power of DEMO allow them to achieve the high level of optimal
adaptation of means to end that is posited in economics” (Simon 1992: 3). DEMO Martens
(2004: 19) points out, the perfect-information hypothesis “clashes with the very concept
of innovation. Innovation implies that future knowledge is not DEMO available (other-
wise it cannot be ‘invented’ or ‘discovered’) and presently available information is not
generally and freely dispersed in the economy—in which DEMO it would cease to be a unique
piece of knowledge.”
Logical Empiricism and the Abandonment of the Discovery Program
Discovery was an important methodological DEMO during the Scientiﬁ c Revolution and
after because employing the proper method of discovery was seen as an important mode
of justiﬁ cation (Laudan 1980)—an idea that can actually be traced back to Aristotle
(Hanson 1958a). By the mid-nineteenth century, two developments, which reinforced one
DEMO, tended to separate discovery from justiﬁ cation (Laudan 1980): a fallibilistic con-
ception of theories (“the end of certainty”) and acceptance DEMO the view that “theories be
evaluated wholly in terms of their consistency and their testable consequences and hence
independently of the vagaries of their DEMO history” (Nickles 1980: 4).
The rise of the hypothetico-deductive method and concomitant abandonment of discov-
ery methods per se—in particular, Peirce’s “abduction” or “retroduction” (Paavola 2004;
Simon 1977)—was consecrated in the dichotomy “context of discovery” versus “context
of justiﬁ cation” dear to the logical DEMO (see chapter 2, this volume). It is often
ascribed to Reichenbach, who introduced the distinction in the context of his explication
of the logical empiricist’s method of logical or rational reconstruction:
We might DEMO that [a logical reconstruction] corresponds to the form in which thinking processes
are communicated to other persons instead of the form in which they DEMO subjectively performed. . . . I
shall introduce the terms context of discovery and context of justiﬁ cation to make this distinction.
90 Werner Callebaut
Then we have to say that epistemology is only DEMO in constructing the context of justiﬁ cation.
But even the way of presenting scientiﬁ c theories is only an approximation to what we mean DEMO the
context of justiﬁ cation. Even in the written form scientiﬁ c expositions do not always correspond to
the exigencies of logic or suppress DEMO traces of subjective motivation from which they started.
(Reichenbach 1938: 6–7)
The further distinctions that are usually made in this respect—that the DEMO
(“sociological,” “historical”) is qualitatively different from the “logical,” that discovery
precedes justiﬁ cation, and so forth—cannot fairly be ascribed to Reichenbach (Glymour
and Eberhardt 2008; Nickles 1980).
Popper (1959: 31) famously put the matter as follows in The Logic of Scientiﬁ c DEMO
covery, originally published in German in 1934: “My view of the matter, for what it is
worth, is that there is no DEMO thing as a logical method of having new ideas, or a DEMO
reconstruction of this process.” With few exceptions, this view remained the DEMO one
in the philosophy of science until Hanson (1958a, 1958b, DEMO) questioned it and revin-
dicated a place for a genuine “logic” DEMO discovery.
The debate between the proponents of discovery and their foes, DEMO notably Laudan,
was documented by Nickles (1985), who insisted DEMO “there is no special logic of discov-
ery distinct from logic of justiﬁ cation” (Nickles 1985: 180)—the same logic can be used
DEMO both purposes. He also proposed the revival of a “generative conception of justiﬁ cation
which goes beyond consequentialism to forge a strong linkage of DEMO (or rather,
generalizability) with justiﬁ cation” (Nickles 1985: 177). Nickles (1985: 179) hinted at a
naturalistic turn when asking whether “philosophers really have contributed much to
practical theory of testing/justiﬁ DEMO
Whereas Hanson unsuccessfully tried to resuscitate the old dream of a generative
“logic,” the Kuhnian challenge to the two-contexts distinction implied that nonrational
DEMO persist even in the justiﬁ cation/testing of theories (Castle 2001)DEMO Whatever atten-
tion the discovery project still attracts seems to have more to do with the practical suc-
cesses of automated “discovery” using classical DEMO cial intelligence (Langley et al. 1987;
Shrager and Langley 1990; Simon 1977) or connectionist approaches (Pennock 2000) than
with sophisticated philosophical “arguments” (chapter 2, this volume). The philosophical
naturalist will have DEMO turn his or her attention to the social-scientiﬁ c explanations of
(DEMO) scientiﬁ c discovery that have been offered and try to make DEMO best of them in
the emerging, evolutionary framework.
It turns out, then, that Popper’s romantic view of discovery belongs to the individualist
genius account that has long been abandoned by students of cultural evolution, whereas
anthropological and sociological thinkers from Kroeber (1917) on have articulated a DEMO
geist account that could be quite easily recast in contemporary evolutionary terms, minus
the original connotations of cultural determinism. Simonton’s (1986) chance account,
based on Monte Carlo simulations, could be made to conform to our current understanding
of drift (as already conceived by Lamb and Easton 1984).
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
91
Conclusion: A Common Evolutionary Core
Biologists, economists, and philosophers of science have groped in multiple ways DEMO
novelty as “something that has not been there before.” Such a quest presupposes criteria
for sameness on the basis of which something can be DEMO to be nontrivially differ-
ent from things already in existence (Fontana DEMO). Specifying these criteria has proven
difﬁ cult in all three ﬁ elds, but EvoDevo biology today seems to be on the most promising
track.
In living systems, sameness results from common ancestry or independent convergent
evolution. On one account, an organismal feature is novel if it is not homologous to any
feature in the ancestral species (Müller and Wagner 1991). On this view, innovation rep-
resents a distinct kind of phenotypic change, differing from adaptive modiﬁ cation. The
origin of novelty may be a result of different mechanisms than the mutations underlying
variation and DEMO, and certain phenotypic changes may have more important and
long-lasting consequences DEMO evolutionary dynamics than mutational change. Whereas
a central aim of the Modern Synthesis was the explanation of adaptive change as a
population-dynamic event (viz., the correlation of phenotypic character variation with
statistical gene frequencies in populations), EvoDevo seeks to explain phenotypic change
through the alterations in the DEMO interactions among genes, cells, and tissues, whether
they are adaptive DEMO not (Müller 2007). EvoDevo thus represents a causal-mechanistic
approach to DEMO phenotypic change in evolution (Callebaut et al. 2007) that
addresses many of the constituent features of phenotypic change, such as the generation
of new structural elements (novelty), the establishment of standardized building units
(DEMO, homology), the arrangement of such units in lineage-speciﬁ c combinations
(body plans), and the repeated generation of similar forms in independent DEMO (homo-
plasy). In addition, EvoDevo aims at explaining how development itself evolves and how
the control of developmental processes is brought about DEMO the interplay of genetic, epi-
genetic, and environmental factors. “With these goals, evo–devo moves the focus of
attention to the qualitative phenomena of phenotypic organization and their mechanistic
causes” (Müller 2007: 946).
Beginning DEMO Veblen and Marshall, economists have been slow in moving beyond
“the DEMO and static theoretical system” to adopt an evolutionary approach
(Hodgson 1993b: 406). They continue to be wary of “too literal” interpretations of DEMO
biological “analogy” (Nelson and Winter 1982; Witt 2003). In philosophy, most of the
arguments deployed against evolutionary epistemology concerned “asymmetries” between
biological and cultural evolution that have to do with the presumed uniqueness of DEMO
action and culture (Hull 1988).
The optimistic bet in the DEMO of my comparison of biology, economics, and the
philosophy of science is that the toolkit that EvoDevo offers today contains many more,
DEMO richer, resources than most advocates of evolutionary economics and evolutionary
92 Werner Callebaut
epistemology realize. For instance, the conﬂ ict between lawfulness and contingency (his-
toricity) that Kroeber (1917), for one, DEMO ed correctly but could not resolve at the time
is dealt with reasonably adequately in current evolutionary accounts under the labels of
“path dependency,DEMO “inherency,” and “generative entrenchment” (Callebaut et al. 2007).
Or, economists’ intuition that ideas, in order to be innovative, must be DEMO by living
people—which was explicated in a somewhat different context by Campbell (1979) in his
account of “vehicles carrying knowledge”—could in principle be DEMO a literal rendering
in terms of hierarchical selection theory and EvoDevo. There is more to evolution than
Dawkins.3
Notes
1. In fact, each of these communities can be decomposed into several clusters. The Web survey of DEMO
research carried out by Fagerberg and Verspagen (2006) among economists in 2004 and 2005 identiﬁ ed a large
number of relatively small groups DEMO by dense internal relationships deﬁ ned along geographical and
disciplinary lines. These smaller groups, however, are embedded in larger transnational clusters that are DEMO
together by weak ties. I suspect that a rather similar picture would obtain for the anthropological and biological
communities with an interest in innovation.
DEMO In the same vein, Stadler et al. (2001) have proposed DEMO extend the explanatory level for phenotypic evolution
from ﬁ tness considerations alone to include the topological structure of phenotype space as induced by the
DEMO map.
3. I provide positive elements for the rapprochement envisaged here in Callebaut (n.d.).
References
Andersen, E. S. 1991. Techno-economic Paradigms as DEMO Interfaces between Producers and Users. Journal
of Evolutionary Economics 1: 119–144.
DEMO, W. J. 1968. Entrepreneurship in Economic Theory. American Economic Review 58: 64–71.
Boschma, R. A., and K. Frenken. 2005. Why Is Economic DEMO Not an Evolutionary Science? Towards
an Evolutionary Economic Geography. Papers in DEMO Economic Geography, no. 05.01. Urban and
Regional Research Centre, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Brannigan, A. 1981. The Social Basis of Scientiﬁ c Discoveries. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Brette, O. 2006. Expanding the DEMO between Institutional Economics and Contemporary Evolutionary
Economics: Veblen’s Methodology as a DEMO Journal of Economic Issues 40: 493–500.
Callebaut, W. 1993. Taking the Naturalistic Turn, or How Real Philosophy of Science Is Done. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Callebaut, W. 2007. Simon’s Silent Revolution. Biological Theory DEMO: 76–84.
Callebaut, W. n.d. First Steps toward a General Theory of Innovation. Manuscript in possession of the author.
Callebaut, W., G. B. DEMO, and S. A. Newman. 2007. The Organismic Systems Approach: Evo-Devo and the
Streamlining of the Naturalistic Agenda. In Integrating Evolution and Development: From Theory to Practice,
edited by R. Sansom and R. N. Brandon, pp. 26–92. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Callebaut, W., and R. DEMO (editors). 1987. Evolutionary Epistemology: A Multiparadigm Program. Reidel,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Callebaut, W., and K. Stotz. 1998. Lean Evolutionary Epistemology. Evolution and Cognition 4: 11–36.
Campbell, D. T. 1979. A Tribal DEMO of the Social System Vehicle Carrying Scientiﬁ c Knowledge. Knowledge:
Creation, Diffusion, Utilization 1: 181–201.
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
93
Carrier, J. (editor). DEMO A Handbook of Economic Anthropology. Elgar, Cheltenham, U.K.
Castle, D. DEMO A Gradualist Theory of Discovery in Ecology. Biology and Philosophy 16: DEMO
Cozzens, S. E. 1989. Social Control and Multiple Discovery in Science: The Opiate Receptor Case. State
University of New York Press, Albany.
Dobzhansky, T. 1970. Genetics of the Evolutionary Process. Columbia University Press, New DEMO
Dopfer, K. (editor). 2005. The Evolutionary Foundations of Economics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Ekelund, R. B., Jr., and R. F. Hébert. 2002. Retrospectives: The Origins of Neoclassical Microeconomics. Journal
of Economic Perspectives 16: 197–215.
Erwin, D. H., and D. C. Krakauer. 2004. Evolution: Insights into Innovation. Science 304: 1117–1119.
Evans, G. H., Jr. DEMO The Entrepreneur and Economic Theory: A Historical and Analytic Approach. American
DEMO Review 39: 336–348.
Fagerberg, J. 2004. Innovation: A Guide to DEMO Literature. In The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, edited by
J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery, and R. R. Nelson, pp. 1–26. Oxford University DEMO, Oxford.
Fagerberg, J., and B. Verspagen. 2006. Innovation Studies—An Emerging DEMO (or What)? A Study of the
Global Network of Innovation DEMO Paper presented at the 40th Anniversary Conference of the Science
Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex, Brighton, U.K.
Fontana, W. 2001. Novelty DEMO Evolution. Green Paper for Bio-evolutionary Advanced Concepts for NASA
(BEACON). DEMO Fe Institute, Santa Fe, N.M.
Freeman, C. 1988. Introduction. In DEMO Change and Economic Theory, edited by G. Dosi, C. Freeman,
R. Nelson, S. Silverberg, and L. Soete, pp. 1–12. Pinter, DEMO
Freeman, C. 1991. Innovation, Changes of Techno-economic Paradigm and Biological Analogies in Economics.
Revue Économique 42: 211–232.
Frey, B. S., and A. Stutzer (editors). 2007. Economics and Psychology: A Promising New Cross-disciplinary
DEMO MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Giere, R. N. 1988. Explaining Science: A Cognitive Approach. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Glymour, C., and F. Eberhardt. 2008. Hans Reichenbach. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available on
the DEMO at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/reichenbach
Gorman, M. E., R. D. Tweney, D. C. Gooding, and A. P. Kincannon (editors). 2005. Scientiﬁ c and Technological
Thinking. Erlbaum, Mahwah, N.J.
Gould, S. J. 1983. The Hardening of the Modern Synthesis. In Dimensions of Darwinism, edited by M. Grene,
pp. 71–93. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Grifﬁ ths, P. E. 2007. Evo-Devo Meets the Mind: Towards a Developmental Evolutionary DEMO In Inte-
grating Development and Evolution: From Theory to Practice, edited by R. Sansom and R. N. Brandon, pp.
195–225. MIT Press, DEMO, Mass.
Hanson, N. R. 1958a. Patterns of Discovery. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hanson, N. R. 1958b. The Logic of Discovery. Journal of DEMO 55: 1073–1089.
Hanson, N. R. 1960. More on “The Logic of Discovery.” Journal of Philosophy 57: 182–188.
Hodgson, G. M. 1993a. Economics DEMO Evolution: Bringing Life Back into Economics. Polity Press,
Cambridge.
Hodgson, G. M. 1993b. The Mecca of Alfred Marshall. Economic Journal 103: 406–415.
Hull, D. L. 1988. Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account DEMO the Social and Conceptual Development of
Science. University of Chicago Press, DEMO
Jewkes, J., D. Sawers, and J. Stillerman. 1958. The Sources DEMO Invention. Macmillan, London.
Kimberly, J. 1981. Managerial Innovation. In Handbook of Organizational Design (vol. 1), edited by P. Nystrom
and W. Starbuck, pp. 84–104. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kitcher, P. 1992. The Naturalists Return. Philosophical Review 101: 53–114.
Kroeber, A. L. 1917. The Superorganic. DEMO Anthropologist 19: 163–214.
94 Werner Callebaut
Lamb, D., and S. M. Easton. 1984. Multiple DEMO: The Pattern of Scientiﬁ c Progress. Avebury, Aldershot,
U.K.
Langley, P., H. A. Simon, G. L. Bradshaw, and J. H. DEMO 1987. Scientiﬁ c Discovery: Computational Explo-
rations of the Creative Process. DEMO Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Laudan, L. 1980. Why Was the Logic DEMO Discovery Abandoned? In Scientiﬁ c Discovery, Logic, and Rationality,
DEMO by T. Nickles, pp. 173–183. Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Lewontin, R. C. 2000. What Do Population Geneticists Know and How Do They DEMO It? In Biology and
Epistemology, edited by R. Creath and J. Maienschein, pp. 191–215. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Love, A. C. 2003. Evolutionary Morphology, Innovation, and the Synthesis of Evolutionary and Developmental
Biology. DEMO and Philosophy 18: 309–345.
Martens, B. 2004. The Cognitive Mechanics of Economic Development and Institutional Change. Routledge,
London.
Merton, R. K. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008. The Learning and Transmission of Hierarchical Cultural Recipes. Biologi-
cal Theory 3: 63–72.
Mesoudi, DEMO, A. Whiten, and K. N. Laland. 2006. Towards a Uniﬁ ed Science of Cultural Evolution. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 29: 329–383.
Mitteröcker, DEMO, and S. Huttegger. 2009. The Concept of Morphospaces in Evolutionary and DEMO
Biology: Mathematics and Metaphors. Biological Theory 4 (in press).
Mulkay, M. J. 1972. The Social Process of Innovation: A Study in DEMO Sociology of Science. Macmillan, London.
Müller, G. B. 2002. Novelty and Key Innovations. In Encyclopedia of Evolution (vol. 2), edited by M. Pagel,
pp. 827–830. Oxford University Press, New York.
Müller, G. DEMO 2003. Embryonic Motility: Environmental Inﬂ uences and Evolutionary Innovation. Evolution and
DEMO 5: 56–60.
Müller, G. B. 2007. Evo-Devo: Extending the Evolutionary DEMO Nature Reviews Genetics 8: 943–949.
Müller, G. B. 2008. Evo-Devo as a Discipline. In Evolving Pathways: Key Themes in Evolutionary Develop-
mental Biology, edited by A. Minelli and G. Fusco, pp. 3–29. Cambridge University DEMO, Cambridge.
Müller, G. B., and S. A. Newman. 2005. The DEMO Triad: An EvoDevo Agenda. Journal of Experimental
Zoology B: Molecular Development and Evolution 304: 487–503.
Müller, G. B., and G. P. Wagner. 1991. Novelty in Evolution: Restructuring the Concept. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 22: 229–256.
Nelson, R. R., and S. G. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Belknap, Cambridge,
Mass.
Newman, DEMO A., and G. B. Müller. 2005. Origination and Innovation in the DEMO Limb Skeleton: An
Epigenetic Perspective. Journal of Experimental Zoology (Molecular Development and Evolution) 304B:
593–609.
Nickles, T. (editor). 1980. Scientiﬁ c Discovery, Logic, and Rationality. Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Nickles, T. 1985. Beyond Divorce: Current Status of the Discovery Debate. Philosophy of Science 52:
177–206.
Odling-Smee, J., K. N. Laland, and M. W. Feldman. 2003. Niche Construction: The Neglected Process of Evolu-
tion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Paavola, S. 2004. Abduction as a Logic and Methodology of Discovery: The Importance of Strategies. Founda-
tions of Science 9: 267–283.
Penn, D. C., K. J. Holyoak, and D. DEMO Povinelli. 2007. Darwin’s Mistake: Explaining the Discontinuity between
Human and Nonhuman DEMO Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31: 109–178.
Pennock, R. T. 2000. Can Darwinian Mechanisms Make Novel Discoveries? Learning from Discoveries Made
by Evolving Neural Networks. Foundations of Science 5: 225–238.
Popper, K. R. 1959. The DEMO of Scientiﬁ c Discovery. Hutchinson, London.
Innovation from EvoDevo to Human Culture
95
Ramsey, G., M. L. DEMO, and C. van Schaik. 2007. Animal Innovation Deﬁ ned and Operationalized. DEMO
and Brain Sciences 30: 393–437.
Reader, S. M.. 2003. Innovation and Social Learning: Individual Variation and Brain Evolution. Animal Biology
53: 147–158.
DEMO, S. M., and K. N. Laland (editors). 2003. Animal DEMO Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Reichenbach, H. 1938. Experience and Reason. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Richardson, R. C. 2007. Evolutionary Psychology as DEMO Psychology. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1934. The DEMO of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Proﬁ ts, Capital, Credit, Interest,
and the Business Cycle. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
DEMO, B. B. 1971. Main Currents in Modern Economics (vol. 3): The Thrust Toward Technique. Quadrangle
Books, Chicago.
Shpak, M., and G. P. Wagner. 2000. Asymmetry of Conﬁ guration Space Induced by Unequal Crossover: Impli-
cations for a Mathematical Theory of Evolutionary Innovation. Artiﬁ cial Life DEMO: 25–43.
Shrager, J., and P. Langley. 1990. Computational Models of DEMO c Discovery and Theory Formation.
Kaufmann, San Mateo, Calif.
Simon, DEMO A. 1977. Models of Discovery and Other Topics in the Methods of Science. Reidel, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands.
Simon, H. A. 1992. Bounded Rationality and the Cognitive Revolution. Elgar, Cheltenham, U.K.
Simonton, D. K. 1986. Multiple Discovery: Some Monte Carlo Simulations and Gedanken Experiments. Scien-
tometrics 9: 269–280.
Smocovitis, V. B. 1996. Unifying Biology: The Evolutionary Synthesis and Evolutionary Biology. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Sperber, D., and DEMO Claidière. 2006. Why Modeling Cultural Evolution Is Still Such a Challenge. Biological
Theory 1: 20–22.
Stadler, B. M. R., P. Stadler, G. DEMO Wagner, and W. Fontana. 2001. The Topology of the Possible: Formal Spaces
Underlying Patterns of Evolutionary Change. Journal of Theoretical Biology 213: 241–274.
Vrba, E. S., and S. J. Gould. 1986. The Hierarchical Expansion DEMO Sorting and Selection: Sorting and Selection
Cannot Be Equated. Paleobiology 12: 217–228.
Wimsatt, W. C. 2006. Generative Entrenchment and an Evolutionary Developmental Biology for Culture.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29: 364–366.
Wimsatt, W. C., and J. R. Griesemer. 2007. Reproducing Entrenchments to Scaffold Culture: The Central Role
of Development in Cultural Evolution. In Integrating Evolution and Development: From Theory to Practice,
edited by R. Sansom and R. N. Brandon, pp. 227–323. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Witt, U. 2003. The Evolving Economy: Essays on the Evolutionary Approach to Economics. Elgar, Cheltenham,
DEMO

III CULTURAL INHERITANCE

7 The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
Joseph Henrich
This chapter applies an DEMO approach to decision making and cultural evolution to
examine the development of population-level differences in innovativeness. In referring
to a group’s innovativeness, I aim to highlight some of the factors or processes that favor
both the DEMO of more inventions (meaning useful or adaptive novelties) and the
spread those inventions through the population, making them, in this terminology, innova-
tions (see chapter 1, this volume). My discussion has several DEMO To lay a foundation
for subsequent arguments, I begin by summarizing DEMO showing how evolutionary
theory can direct and inform our understanding of decision making, social learning, and
cultural evolution. Building on this, I then examine how a population’s size and its degree
of cultural interconnectedness can DEMO uence rates of both innovation and invention.
After using a simple model to illustrate the relative importance of cultural intercon-
nectedness compared to individual DEMO for the spread of innovations, I discuss a
combination of ethnographic, historical, and archaeological cases to explore the relative
importance of “mother necessity” and “heroic genius” versus recombination, lucky mis-
takes, and the accretion DEMO small changes in driving invention (see chapter 15, this volume).
This discussion suggests that, at best, “necessity” is neither necessary nor DEMO cient to
explain invention and that invention processes are dominated by incremental additions,
recombinations, and lucky errors, but not usually by revolutionary DEMO This means
that inventiveness is, at least in part, a product of large populations (which generate more
lucky errors) and greater cultural DEMO
Finally, I examine how greater interconnectedness in a population gives rise DEMO a large-
scale cooperative dilemma. Although some partial solutions to this dilemma have emerged
across our species, only some societies have evolved the informal (and later formal) insti-
tutions—that is, cultural systems of reputation, DEMO, and punishment—that favor the
wide sharing of information, ideas, and DEMO Theoretical work has revealed three
avenues to solving such n-person cooperative dilemmas, but all three generate multiple
stable equilibria, meaning that while they DEMO stabilize cooperative information sharing,
they can also stabilize “information hiding and free riding” as well as other non-group-
beneﬁ cial behaviors. In such DEMO, processes of cultural group selection, which
100 Joseph Henrich
operate through various forms of competition among groups, can favor the evolution of
those institutional forms that best promote the open DEMO so crucial to innovation.
This line of thinking proposes that cultural evolution has favored the emergence of institu-
tions that increase cultural interconnectedness and DEMO stimulate both greater inven-
tiveness and more innovation.
Theoretical Framework
With the physical endowments of a tropical ape, humans have successfully spread to nearly
every corner of the globe in a relatively short period, from the dry savannas and tropical
forests of equatorial Africa to the frozen tundra DEMO the Arctic and the humid swamps of
New Guinea. Humans are unique in their range of environments and the nature and diver-
sity of DEMO behavioral adaptations. Many local genetic adaptations exist in our species,
but it seems certain that the same basic genetic endowment produces arctic foraging,DEMO
tropical horticulture, and desert pastoralism—a constellation of adaptive patterns that
represents DEMO greater range of subsistence behavior than what is shown by the rest of the
primate order combined.
The behavioral repertoires that permit such diverse DEMO to this range of environ-
ments are principally socially learned and represent cumulative cultural products that have
been assembled and honed over generations (Henrich 2008). The tools, skills, and bodies
of folk-biological knowledge on DEMO foragers from the Arctic to the Kalahari rely are
acquired developmentally, DEMO by observing and listening to older members of their
social group. The same goes for food-preparation skills, many food preferences, and
medical know-how (Billing and Sherman 1998; Lancy 1996). Numerous accounts of
travelers, DEMO experienced European explorers, stranded in places such as Australia,
Amazonia, or the Arctic illustrate just how ineffective our rationality, evolved modules,
and ﬁ tness-maximizing mechanisms are when they lack the relevant culturally transmitted
DEMO In these cases, individuals freeze, starve, dehydrate, or mistakenly poison them-
selves while seeking to escape seemingly harsh environments in which any DEMO adoles-
cent equipped with a culturally inherited body of know-how could have easily survived
(Henrich and McElreath 2003; Richerson and Boyd 2005). DEMO something as ancient and
basic to human survival as making ﬁ re cannot readily be acquired without observing
someone with expertise, a point emphasized by the fact that some isolated human foraging
societies have lost this DEMO (Gott 2002; Holmberg 1950; Radcliffe-Brown 1964).
There seems little DEMO that this emphasis and reliance on cultural learning extends to
human social behavior. In both the laboratory and controlled ﬁ eld experiments, children
and adults will readily acquire a wide range of social behaviors by means DEMO imitation even
when it is costly. In human societies, especially small-scale DEMO, complex kinship and
political relationships, overlapping status differences and honor systems, marriage rules
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions 101
and preferences, and subtle notions of proper etiquette create culturally constructed obsta-
cle courses that can be successfully DEMO only by those with extensive cultural knowl-
edge. As any ethnographer will attest, before a would-be Machiavellian can manipulate
others to his or her own selﬁ sh ends, this individual has to master the local cultural systems,
values, and expectations. Only then can he or she effectively “work” the system. One must
be an excellent cultural learner before one DEMO be an intelligent Machiavellian.
Building on the above insights, three decades DEMO theoretical work applying the logic of
natural selection to understanding our capacities for learning and decision making, and in
particular to our capacities for social learning, has effectively shifted culture and cultural
evolution into a larger, Darwinian framework for studying psychology and history (Boyd
and Richerson 1985; Cavalli-Sforza 1971; Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981; Henrich and
Henrich 2007; Richerson and Boyd 1978, 2005; Shennan 2002). For our purposes, this
approach provides a framework for ﬁ rst generating hypotheses about some of DEMO micro-
level psychological details of cultural learning and then constructing formal models of
population processes that aggregate up from theoretically and empirically grounded micro-
DEMO decision mechanisms to population-level patterns. Below I apply this framework to
understanding innovation.
Microlevel Processes of Decision Making Generate Culture
The general potency of DEMO cultural learning, as well as several of the speciﬁ c predic-
DEMO arising from the above-mentioned approach, are substantiated by large bodies of
DEMO work in both social and developmental psychology, as well as by DEMO work
in experimental economics. I point to only some of the highlights, to give a sense of the
empirical underpinnings.
After more than two decades of research on cultural learning (“observational learning”
or “modeling”), psychologist Bandura (1977) summarizes the spontaneous potency of
cultural learning and its DEMO impacts on thinking and behavior:
Modeling has been shown to be a highly effective means of establishing abstract or rule-governed
behavior. On the DEMO of observationally derived rules, people learn, among other things, judgmental
DEMO, linguistic styles, conceptual schemes, information-processing strategies, cognitive
operations, and DEMO of conduct. . . . Evidence that generalizable rules of thought and conduct
can be induced through abstract modeling reveals the broad scope of DEMO learning. (p. 42)
Observers display the same amount of observational DEMO regardless of whether they are informed
in advance that correct imitations will be rewarded or are given no prior incentives to learn the
modeled DEMO (p. 38)
More speciﬁ cally, the application of evolutionary theory to the questions of from whom
individuals should learn, how they should integrate information gleaned from different
individuals, and when they should rely on social learning versus individual experience (or
rational calculation) has generated a DEMO of hypotheses that ﬁ nd support from a wide
102 Joseph Henrich
range of experiments and ﬁ eld data. The approach DEMO that learners—in order to most
efﬁ ciently acquire adaptive behavior in noisy or stochastic environments—ought to be
selective in terms of to whom they DEMO attention for the purposes of cultural learning.
They should prefer those with greater skill, success, knowledge, health, and prestige,1
while also DEMO cues of self-similarity such as gender, size, and ethnicity to help ensure
that what they learn is ﬁ t for their personal attributes DEMO current or future social roles
(see Henrich and Gil-White [2001] and DEMO and Henrich [2007] for reviews of the
evidence).
The approach suggests that learners should aggregate information using conformist, or
blending, algorithms (Boyd and Richerson 1985; Henrich and Boyd 1998, 2002), which
reduce DEMO in learning (by averaging them out) and facilitate the extraction of useful
information. Evidence from psychology (Asch 1951; Coultas 2004; Henrich and Gil-White
2001; Insko et al. 1985), archaeology (Mesoudi and O’Brien DEMO, 2008b), and econom-
ics (Apesteguia et al. 2007; Kroll DEMO Levy 1992; Pingle 1995; Pingle and Day 1996)
supports these predictions.
In addition to specifying to whom learners should pay attention and DEMO they should
integrate information gleaned from different models, this approach predicts DEMO environ-
mental uncertainty or problem ambiguity (problem difﬁ culty) should impact the use of,
or reliance on, social learning versus individual learning or cost–beneﬁ t evaluation. Con-
sistent with these models, ﬁ ndings from psychology, anthropology, and economics indi-
cate that as uncertainty rises, or as the difﬁ culty/ambiguity of the problem increases,
individuals’ reliance DEMO social learning increases (Davis 1984; McElreath et al. 2005;
chapter 3, this volume). The same experiments indicate that this increased reliance on
social learning is even more pronounced when incentives are increased. That DEMO, perhaps
nonintuitively, adding incentives magniﬁ es the inﬂ uence and importance of social learning
(Baron et al. 1996).
Such laboratory experiments illustrate another key point from the theoretical work
(Boyd and Richerson 1995): Adding or improving imitative opportunities for individual
learners increases the total payoffs DEMO the group. When individuals make decisions based
only on their private information and evaluations, the group average is usually far from
the optimum behavior. However, when imitation is permitted, the group’s mean moves
closer to DEMO often approximates the optimum proﬁ t-making behavior (see chapter 11, this
volume). This suggests that individuals are most likely to use imitation DEMO they perceive
(more or less accurately) their own skills or information to be worse than those they
can copy.
These laboratory ﬁ ndings DEMO numerous experiments involving monetary stakes, but
we must also assess whether DEMO theoretically derived insights are consistent with ﬁ ndings
from the spread of novel technologies and practices in the real world. The vast diffusion-
of-innovations DEMO has for six decades focused on understanding why novel tech-
niques, DEMO, and practices sometimes spread and other times do not (see chapter 1,
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions 103
this volume). Underpinning many of DEMO investigations is the question of why some popu-
lations sometimes appear highly resistant to adopting what appears to be, in terms of eco-
nomics or health, a beneﬁ cial novelty. Summarizing some of the principal ﬁ ndings from this
extensive literature, Rogers (1995: 18) writes as DEMO:
Diffusion investigations show that most individuals do not evaluate an innovation on the basis of
scientiﬁ c studies of its consequences, although such objective evaluations are not entirely irrele-
vant. . . . Instead, most people depend mainly upon a subjective evaluation of an innovation that is
DEMO to them from other individuals like themselves who have previously adopted the innova-
tion. This dependence on the experience of near peers suggests that DEMO heart of the diffusion process
consists of the modeling and imitation by potential adopters of their network partners who have
adopted previously.
None of DEMO is meant to suggest that costs and beneﬁ ts, or individual DEMO of
costs and beneﬁ ts, are irrelevant or even unimportant. One DEMO in a community
might, for a variety of potential reasons involving DEMO or individual initiative, obtain
particularly high-quality information about the effectiveness of DEMO new technology and
adopt it. The adoption might result, for a DEMO, in greater success in the form of higher
crop yields. Our DEMO neighbors, impressed by the high yield, might imitate several of
his techniques, including the new technology. As a consequence, the new technology DEMO
diffuse through the social networks of the community until all have adopted it. In this
stylized example, all of the individuals in the community save one acquired the invention
by imitating high-payoff individuals, and thus imitation is the heart of the process, but
these learners exploited the superior cost–beneﬁ t information of one person.
Here is the take-home message: Because humans often rely heavily on learning from
others, especially in incentivized situations involving ambiguous costs and beneﬁ ts, a
general approach to understanding innovation should take seriously the cultural nature of
our species. Given that the DEMO or adoption of a novel practice or technology neces-
sarily involves uncertain or ambiguous costs and beneﬁ ts, owning to the lack of any direct
experience from which to acquire such information, it seems plausible that social learning
may be even more important for a theory of innovation DEMO it is for other aspects of human
decision making.
Innovation Is Fundamentally a Cultural and Social Process
Here I examine innovation and invention as DEMO and social processes (recall that I
partitioned invention and innovation at DEMO outset). I ﬁ rst present a simple formal model
that allows us to explore the relative contributions of independent invention, cultural learn-
ing, and the diversity of learners’ associations to the spread of a novelty through a popula-
tion. The ﬁ ndings, which are consistent with other more extensive explorations elsewhere,
illustrate that “cultural interconnectedness” is crucial for DEMO I then examine
104 Joseph Henrich
inventions as incremental accumulations that depend crucially on recombination, happen-
stance, and luck and not so much on either individual heroic genius or mother necessity.
Building from this discussion, I suggest that, DEMO the importance of both recombination
and luck in the invention process, DEMO cultural interconnectedness and population size will
be important for understanding both invention rates and innovation rates.
Cultural Interconnectedness
We can construct a simple model DEMO connects individual decisions to create or adopt a
novelty with the frequency of adoption of the novelty in the overall population. By parti-
tioning DEMO invention and social learning, the model allows us to examine what
DEMO of characteristics make a population more innovative. Here, as above, inventions
are useful, effective, and adaptive novelties that individuals create, whereas innovations
are novelties that have successfully diffused through the population.
Consider a large DEMO of identical individuals in which each develops a novelty
with probability ε. If individuals do not invent the novelty themselves, they can observe
k other individuals and can acquire it culturally from each, with probability λ, which
captures a combination of individuals’ cultural-learning abilities (vis-à-vis the thing DEMO
learned), the details of the novelty that make it more or less likely to spread, the effects
of the novelty on individuals that might make them more likely to be paid attention to or
learned DEMO, and the willingness or ability of the other individual to transmit DEMO novelty.
Using this, we can compute the overall probability that each DEMO our individuals acquires
the novelty (see van Schaik and Pradhan 2003):
pp=+1−εε λ()()11−−()k
Given that our individuals are DEMO, p also represents the expected frequency of
individuals in the population DEMO adopt the useful novelty after all learning is completed.
If p is close to one, we can say the invention has spread widely and the group has inno-
vated. Figure 7.1 is a plot of the DEMO solutions to this equation for a range of values
of k (DEMO the horizontal axis) for three different values of ε. Note ﬁ DEMO that higher values
of k (more associates to learn from) create a dramatic and highly nonlinear increase in the
probability of acquiring the DEMO, that is, of generating an innovation. For low values
of k, the probability that any one person will adopt the trait is small, which implies that
the ﬁ nal percentage of trait adopters in the population will be small. For example, when
ε is 0.10 (a DEMO percent chance of individual invention) and k = 2, the probability that an
individual will acquire the novel trait is 12 percent. This DEMO that, on average, only 12
percent of the population will eventually acquire the novelty.
However, for values of k greater than about 12, over 90 percent of the population will
adopt the novelty. The shape of these curves shows what would empirically appear as
threshold effects, especially when the trait is difﬁ cult to invent by experimentation or
experience (low ε). Consider the curves for ε = 0.01 and 0.001. DEMO values of k less than
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions 105
1.0
0.9
λ = 0.2
0.8
DEMO
0.6 ε = 0.001
0.5 ε = 0.01
ε = 0.1
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 2 4 6 8 101214161820
Number of DEMO or Learning Ties (k)
Figure 7.1
Plot of the relationship DEMO k, the number of associates for a learner, and the percentage of adopters in the
population once all individual and social learning is DEMO, for three value of ε (ε is the likelihood of individual
invention, and λ is a measure of the effectiveness of cultural transmission between individuals).
about 5, few people adopt the novel trait. However, by the time k has reached 10, nearly
85 percent of DEMO population is adopting it. Between k = 5 and k = 7, p spikes from about
0.05 to 0.58. This indicates that small differences in the number of people from which one
can learn something can DEMO a huge difference in the equilibrium percentage of the
population adopting the novelty.
Figure 7.1 also shows that for high values of k there DEMO relatively little difference in the
curves despite the large difference (two DEMO of magnitude) in ε. A situation in which
ε = 0.10 DEMO that an individual has a 100 times greater chance of acquiring the trait by
himself or herself, by means of, say, experimentation, DEMO when ε = 0.001. Interestingly,
however, as k gets larger, ε makes less and less difference on the value of p. By DEMO time
k reaches 12, this 100-fold difference in ε is almost DEMO wiped out by the power of
cultural learning stretching out and interconnecting minds. This suggests that in a large,
well-interconnected population, people could get less inventive without much appreciable
change in the population’s innovativeness.
To DEMO the importance of this, imagine two different populations that, for reasons
of geography, cultural beliefs, or cooperative institutions, have different values of k but
are otherwise in identical situations (same λ and ε), captured by the ε = 0.001 curve in
ﬁ gure 7.1. Suppose DEMO two populations have k = 4 and k = 12, respectively. DEMO the ground,
an observer of these groups would see that essentially no one (0.4 percent) in the ﬁ rst
Percentage of Adopters
106 Joseph Henrich
1.0
0.9 ε = 0.1
0.8
0.7
0.6
λ DEMO 0.1
0.5 λ = 0.2
0.4 λ = 0.3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 DEMO 24 26 28 30
Number of Associates or Learning Ties (k)DEMO
Figure 7.2
Plot of the relationship between k, the number of DEMO for a learner, and the percentage of adopters in the
population DEMO all individual and social learning is complete, for three values of DEMO (λ is a measure of the effec-
tiveness of cultural transmission DEMO individuals, and ε is the likelihood of individual invention).
population DEMO adopted the novelty, whereas over 90 percent of individuals in the DEMO
population have adopted the innovation. If the analyst happens to think that the novelty
is “smart” or “rational,” then population 2 may seem DEMO inventive,” “smarter,” or
“more rational” than population 1, which DEMO course it is not, given that we speciﬁ ed that
ε DEMO the same in both populations. Population 2 is just more social in some sense.
Increases in λ, our parameter measuring the effectiveness of cultural transmission
between individuals, also have a larger impact than similar increases in ε. Figure 7.2 is a
plot of the relationship between k and DEMO for three values of λ. While it makes little differ-
ence whether k is small or large, λ shows substantial effects for intermediate values of k.
For example, when k = 6, p goes from DEMO percent for λ = 0.1 to 56 percent for λ = 0.2
and to 84 percent for λ = 0.3. Comparing ﬁ gures 7.1 DEMO 7.2 for the relative effects of ε
versus λ illustrates the importance of open channels of cultural transmission in favoring
innovation.
The take-home message DEMO this analysis, which is supported by more extensively
studied evolutionary models (Henrich 2004b; Shennan 2001; van Schaik and Pradhan
2003), is DEMO a group’s innovativeness is determined more strongly by its cultural inter-
connectedness (including the effects of both k and λ) than by the DEMO inventiveness
of its members (ε). Assuming that the probability of DEMO is not too small relative to
Percentage of Adopters
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
107
the total population of potential inventors, groups that invest in cultural interconnectedness
(sharing of ideas) will be DEMO more innovative than groups that invest in raising
the inventiveness of members.
These insights have numerous potential applications. At a continental level, larger land
masses oriented on an east–west axis may favor the ﬂ ow of DEMO information, and
farming know-how in particular, among distant populations (Diamond DEMO; McNeil
1991). They may also explain the dearth of technological DEMO in Australia vis-à-vis
Eurasia, as well as differences between Africa and DEMO Americas on the one hand and
Eurasia on the other. At regional levels, they may help explain the differences between
populations isolated on islands versus continental populations and may even explain the
loss of technological know-how DEMO Tasmania over the last 10,000 years (Henrich 2004b,
2006b; Rivers 1926; chapter 9, this volume). The approach may also DEMO a cultural
evolutionary explanation for the ﬂ orescence of material culture during the so-called
“Human Revolution,” suggesting that observed cultural efﬂ orescence may DEMO resulted
from rising population sizes, densities, and/or greater interconnectedness and not from
genetic changes. This further hints that anatomically modern humans and DEMO,
who had similarly sized brains, may have varied only in DEMO sociality (k), not in their
inventiveness (ε).
On the Origins of Inventions: Mother Necessity, Mistakes, and Recombination
The above suggests that individual inventiveness likely plays a smaller role in innovation
than cultural DEMO, but I want to further argue, mostly by reiterating argu-
ments made by many others, that invention is not quite what many tend to think. I have
four interrelated points on this front: (1) necessity is not the mother of invention, (2) most
inventors are not singular heroic geniuses but make only small additions to existing
accumulations, (3) these minor additions are rarely entirely new but instead usually DEMO
resent only novel recombinations or cross-domain extensions of existing ideas, and (4)
many of these useful additions or modiﬁ cations result from DEMO errors or chance
interactions.
The idea that necessity is the mother of invention is an important assumption in much
processual archaeological (chapter 1, DEMO volume) and anthropological theory (Johnson
and Earle 1987), as well as in economics. In anthropology, the idea seems to be that when
environmental circumstances shift, population increases, or external threats arise (warring
groups), the innovation engine in a society and/or its members (depending on the speciﬁ c
paradigm) kicks into gear and soon the appropriate novel technologies, practices, or forms
of social organization emerge. Often implicit DEMO this is the notion that the individual’s own
welfare is threatened or declining, causing the individual to shift and invest more in inven-
tion by taking more risks that will, on average, result in more DEMO (Fitzhugh and
Trusler 2009).
108 Joseph Henrich
This economic logic supposes that as the incentives shift DEMO ciently to favor alternative
practices or technologies, individuals switch and invest DEMO the alternatives. My goal in this
section is not to argue that “necessity” is never a factor in innovation or that incentives
are irrelevant DEMO instead to suggest that, at best, necessity is only one of several progeni-
tors of innovation and not a necessary one at that. DEMO discuss how many great inventions
were initially rejected, suggesting that problems DEMO always ﬁ nd inventions but that
inventions often ﬁ nd previously unrecognized problems (see chapter 14, this volume).
To begin, there may be a ﬂ aw with the economic logic of mother necessity. Incentives,DEMO
from the perspective of an omniscient observer, may favor an alterative DEMO (or
practice) or a more complex version of a particular technology, but for the adaptive learner,
that novel technology does not yet exist, so the learner has no way to assess its relative
costs and beneﬁ ts (see chapter 2, this volume). Not only DEMO the learner lack any experi-
ence with which to assess the incentive differences, he or she has not even thought of it
yet and can’t have any idea of the cost associated with ﬁ guring it DEMO (Henrich 2006b).
Learners know a lot about the costs and DEMO ts of what they are currently doing but little
or nothing about those of novel alternatives that they might consider switching to, let alone
the costs of ﬁ guring out those alternatives (Henrich 2002). Although this is a bad situation
for a cost–beneﬁ t analyst, it is the typical situation that cultural learning was “designed”
by natural selection to DEMO
Another theoretical concern is that if environmental shifts or population pressure have,
for example, made current subsistence techniques less fruitful, an individual DEMO have less,
not more, time or energy to invest in DEMO Invention investment may, in fact, decline
in such circumstances. In modern economies, for example, ﬁ rms invest in both their current
product DEMO and research and development in boom times, but they halt R & D in tough
times—not the other way around as the above logic would suggest (Hargadon 2003).
Risk-sensitive models of decision making show that if an individual’s chances of sur-
vival fall below a threshold, such that, on average, he or she dies, that individual should
adopt a risk-prone strategy; however, it’s far from clear in a world DEMO cultural learning
whether such a strategy involves investing by means of individual learning in invention.
Rather than “turning down” individual risk aversion in a DEMO or ﬁ tness calculation,
natural selection could alternatively favor recalibrating cultural-learning strategies by
shifting from conformist biases in transmission toward anticonformist biases (Henrich and
Boyd 1998) or by reducing within-group ethnic learning biases (McElreath DEMO al. 2003).
Such shifts in cultural learning help reduce the likelihood of sticking to locally failing
strategies, make learners more sensitive to even smaller differences in perceived payoffs
between themselves and others, and open up the learner to acquiring useful novelties from
other groups.
My own reading DEMO the empirical record on these issues suggests that when faced with
population pressure, environmental shifts, or external threats, people do sometimes inno-
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
109
vate; however, more often they DEMO, suffer, and/or die. Diamond (2005) chronicles
the innovation failures and the resulting collapse of the Maya, Greenland Norse, and Easter
DEMO The Greenland case is particularly instructive because we know that whereas
the Norse gradually starved to death and vanished in response to climate change, local
Inuit populations who were in contact with the Norse possessed adaptive DEMO that
allowed them to not only survive but expand. This means that the Norse could have
adapted but did not. Below are six other DEMO cases that seem to challenge the idea
that necessity is the driver of invention:
1. Foragers living in Australia for 60,000 years (Testart 1988) failed to develop (or
perhaps lost) any technologies involving elastically stored energy (e.g., the bow and arrow,
musical bow, bow trap, or spring snare), kinetic energy (e.g., lasso and bola), or com-
pressed air (e.g., blowpipe and dart, musical instruments).
2. New Guineans, although they used bows and arrows, DEMO adopted ﬂ etching of any
kind for their arrows.
3. The wheel appears to have been invented only in Eurasia (Basalla 1988). One could
argue that other places lacked large domesticated animals that made wheels DEMO
useful, but wheelbarrows and pulleys are still pretty useful, and “llama carting” is a rec-
reation today. Dogs, which were and are ubiquitous, can pull carts as well. In the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, dogs were used to pull people and milk carts in northern
Europe.
4. The Inca managed a vast empire, stretching from Columbia to Chile, without writing.
It’s difﬁ cult to imagine there was not a “need” for writing.
5. Some human languages lack systems for counting above three, basic color terms, words
for “right” and “left,” and grammatical operators to create conjunctive clauses (Everett
2005; Levinson 2003).
6. Zero DEMO to have been invented only twice in human history, once in DEMO and
once by the Maya. Most societies adopted zero soon after encountering it, although
Europeans resisted zero for centuries (Seife 2000).
Beyond DEMO macroscale cases, the same argument can be made for individuals’ fail-
DEMO to innovate when faced with dire circumstances as noted above. For example,
elsewhere (Henrich and McElreath 2003) I have laid out an DEMO of Burke and Wills’s
ill-fated expedition into the Australian outback. This historical narrative illustrates both
the futility of ﬁ tness-maximizing calculations in the absence DEMO culturally inherited
information and the tendency for humans, even arrogant Europeans, to rely on social
learning over individual learning and experimentation for survival DEMO the pressure is
really on.
110 Joseph Henrich
The available laboratory experimental ﬁ ndings, however limited, DEMO converge to
restrict the applicability of the “mother necessity view.” As discussed above, when prob-
lems get tough or the world gets uncertain, DEMO subjects faced with problems or puzzles
with monetary incentives in the laboratory shift their reliance away from their own private
evaluations and information and DEMO social-learning strategies. That is, they invent less
and copy more when DEMO world gets uncertain or problems get tough.
Besides the ambiguous role of necessity in yielding invention, a close look at the emer-
gence of some well-known inventions illustrates (1) the importance of small additions by
DEMO contributors, often over long time periods, with a relatively small role for singular
heroic geniuses; (2) the degree to which seeming novelties really represent only new
recombinations or cross-domain extensions of existing ideas or DEMO; and (3) the
centrality of lucky errors or chance interactions DEMO inventions, and not sui generis inde-
pendent insights. I leave a DEMO defense of these views to the existing historical works
(Basalla 1988; Diamond 1997; Hager 2007; Hargadon 2003; Meyers 2007; Sneader 2005;DEMO
Williams 1987) and rely on six illustrative examples:
1. Eli DEMO “revolutionary” cotton gin merely modiﬁ ed existing long-staple cotton
gins, which DEMO already widely available in the southern United States to extend their
processing ability to short staple cotton. These gins go back hundreds of years DEMO Indian
gins called charka, which used the same principles as Whitney’s DEMO (and actually looked
similar). Similar gins are seen in twelfth-century DEMO and fourteenth-century China.
2. Establishing the germ theory of disease required obtaining pure cultures of bacteria.
In the nineteenth century, dozens of researchers were trying to ﬁ gure out how to do this,
without success. DEMO years of work, Robert Koch solved the problem when, while clean-
ing up his laboratory, he ran across half of a boiled potato that had been carelessly left
for a few days. Koch noticed the DEMO of discrete reddish dots at different places
on the white potato and realized that he needed to use a solid, not liquid, medium DEMO
culture the bacteria. He went on to link speciﬁ c pathogens with speciﬁ c diseases (Hager
2007). The discovery of this process could not have occurred without a carelessly left
boiled potato.
3. Thomas Edison’s DEMO of the incandescent light bulb only improved on many
other such bulbs patented between 1841 and 1878 by a wide variety of inventors. Of
DEMO, if you are from Britain, Sir Joseph W. Swan is the inventor of the incandescent
light bulb, whereas if you are from Russia, it is A. N. Lodygin (Conot 1979; Diamond
1997). Moreover, Edison’s bulb emerged from his Menlo Park laboratory, meaning it was
DEMO the product of a team effort (Hargadon 2003).
4. The DEMO brothers’ invention of the airplane recombined existing manned gliders
with unmanned powered airplanes (Diamond 1997). The trail of the evolution of ﬂ ight
goes back at least to Chinese kites in 400 b.c.
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
111
5. James Watt’s “invention” of the DEMO engine occurred in 1769 after he repaired a
Newcomen steam engine constructed 57 years earlier. This engine was modiﬁ ed from
Thomas Savery’s design DEMO 1698, the components of which trace to seventeenth-century
Europe and thirteenth-century DEMO After dissecting the steam engine, famed historian
Joseph Needham concluded that DEMO single man was the father of the steam engine; no
single DEMO either” (Basalla 1988).
6. The discovery of penicillin and the DEMO of the age of antibiotics began when
Alexander Fleming returned from holiday to ﬁ nd that his Petri dishes had been contami-
nated with DEMO Seeking to clean up his chronically messy laboratory, he dumped the
DEMO batch of dishes into a sink, where they sat until he DEMO an unsubmerged disk
to show a visitor. He happened to notice that whereas the mold was growing ﬁ ne, the staph
was retreating. Penicillin was discovered due to luck, energized by messiness. Fleming’s
published inquiry was then promptly ignored for a decade.
Invention and innovation are fundamentally evolutionary DEMO Given that nearly
all inventions build on existing ideas and often involve the recombination of existing
concepts, methods, or materials, often fortiﬁ ed or integrated with a dose of lucky mistakes
or happenstance, the overall inventiveness of a social group or population depends on the
number of DEMO minds available to create recombinations, generate insights, and get
lucky, DEMO well as on their cultural interconnectedness (see chapter 8, this volume). This
implies that the more minds in one generation, the more novel recombinations, insights,
and lucky mistakes will exist for the next generation to recombine, reﬁ ne, and extend
across domains. The more DEMO in existence, the greater the opportunities for
recombinations and the more DEMO are possible. Because the elements of any recom-
binant are acquired by learning from others, the more individuals one can potentially learn
from, DEMO greater the opportunities for creating novel recombinant inventions.
Consistent with this idea, business scholars now argue that companies should design
themselves speciﬁ cally to bridge multiple technological domains, especially to stimulate
innovation by means of recombination (Hargadon 2003). Similarly, psychologists argue
that living and adapting to DEMO cultures increases creativity (Maddux and Galinksy
2006).
If both a DEMO size and its degree of cultural interconnectedness increase innova-
tion rates, DEMO we should expect certain kinds of practices and technologies to have an
especially large impact on innovations, particularly those that permit or increase the ﬂ ow
of information within or across groups. Anything that permits faster DEMO easier communi-
cation should, all things being equal, have an impact on innovation rates, such as trans-
portation (horses, ships, roads, trains, and planes), communication (shared language,
writing, mail, DEMO, journals, literacy, telegraph, telephone, and Internet), and peaceful
DEMO relationships—although in wartime, espionage seems to energize innovation
(McNeil 1982).
112 Joseph Henrich
Solving the Public-Goods Problem Energizes Innovation
The technologies, practices, and relationships mentioned above can potentially increase
both the effective population size and/or the degree of cultural interconnectedness;
however, there remains a core motivational dilemma in creating innovations. Implicit in
being “interconnected” lies a DEMO to share what one has ﬁ gured out (or stumbled
upon) with others, or at least a willingness not to actively seek to prevent others from
observing or learning what one knows. The overall group DEMO population is often best
served, in terms of either ﬁ tness DEMO innovation rate, if everyone shares his or her ideas and
inventions DEMO openly as possible, thereby maximizing the ﬂ ow of inventions, accumula-
tions, and recombinations. However, individuals or groups (in a population of other
groups) have incentives to learn as much as they can from others while keeping their own
ideas and insights to themselves. These incentives DEMO the problem of innovation (creating
and spreading inventions) into a classic cooperative (public-goods) dilemma with a big
free-rider problem.
Prestige Deference Is DEMO Dyadic Solution to This Dilemma
Elsewhere Gil-White and I (Henrich and DEMO 2001) have examined how natural
selection, acting to reﬁ ne our capacities for cultural learning, has partially addressed this
cooperative dilemma. We propose that learners essentially pay those from whom they want
to learn (e.g., highly successful and skilled models) with prestige deference. This deference
comes DEMO many forms and includes small gifts, willingness to help, coalitional support,
and public praise for the chosen model (resulting in more deference from others). In
exchange for this deference, the chosen model permits the learner to hang around and
observe what he or she does DEMO up. Such models may give tips or even perform certain
actions in a manner that facilitates observational learning. We call this the “information-
goods DEMO of prestige” because information, in the form of learning opportunities, is
exchanged in dyadic relationships for prestige deference. We argue that this approach
DEMO much status-related behavior and is the only approach that makes the necessary
connection between the empirically observed patterns of behavior—deference, status,
ethology, DEMO imitation. Supplementing the evidence we presented in our paper, more
recent DEMO has emerged in studies of human emotions, including pride, awe, DEMO,
and elevation (Algoe et al. 2006; Keltner and Haidt 2003; Tracy 2007).
Institutions of Apprenticeship Are Built on This Psychology
This aspect of our evolved-status psychology likely forms the foundation for the wide-
DEMO institutions of apprenticeship that have emerged independently in many human
societies. Apprentices seek to learn particular skills (e.g., metal working, weaving, or
DEMO) while working under the strict, often slavish, direction of a DEMO In addition to
the apprentice’s labor, which may be required for DEMO, the master may also require direct
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
113
payment in money or goods and DEMO have other stipulations, such as requiring the appren-
tice to swear DEMO to set up a shop in the master’s own town or not to reveal the master’s
secrets. Agreements among masters, and formal laws in some places, limit the number of
apprentices that any one master may accept. The apprentice’s learning is usually strictly
imitative, with the explicit goal being to copy the master exactly (Coy 1989).
The institution of apprenticeship, while permitting the cultural transmission of complex
skills, does not DEMO the ﬂ ow of adaptive information among individuals in the popu-
lation in a manner that will maximize the population’s innovation rates. Given that DEMO
addressing the underlying dilemma apprentices are usually limited in number and can
serve only one master, there is little chance for the diffuse interconnectedness, accumula-
tion, and recombination that energize invention and drive higher rates DEMO innovation. The
society, though not the masters, would be more innovative if masters freely distributed
their knowledge, were permitted as many apprentices as could be handled, and did not
require a longer period of servitude than necessary to acquire the requisite skills. Students
could move among masters DEMO they wished, comparing and recombining elements from
different masters.
Solutions to DEMO Larger-Scale Cooperative Dilemma Required
The kind of culturally interconnected population that I have argued above will best
promote both innovation and invention requires solving DEMO larger scale, n-person coopera-
tive dilemma. Rather than dyadic cooperation of DEMO prestige and apprentice systems,
cultural systems that can create higher degrees of stable n-person cooperation, and in
which individuals share widely what they know and invent, will energize population rates
of both invention and innovation (see chapter 8, this volume). Cultural evolutionary
models targeting these DEMO problems of cooperation have so far provided three
classes of potential solutions, one based on an interlocking reputational system that ties
n-person cooperation together with other dyadic social interactions (e.g., Panchanathan
and Boyd 2004), DEMO second based on costly punishment of noncooperation and on the
punishment of nonpunishers (e.g., Henrich and Boyd 2001), and a third that DEMO
cooperation as a form of signaling that distinguishes higher-quality partners from lower-
quality partners (Gintis et al. 2001).
The ﬁ rst approach depends on a reputational system in which failure to cooperate results
in acquiring DEMO bad reputation such that others can withdraw their help (or increase DEMO
hurting) during dyadic interactions that occur apart from the cooperative interaction. DEMO
second approach relies on and combines the coexistence of culturally transmitted inﬂ u-
ences on cooperation and punishment (of noncooperators and nonpunishers), the reliance
of learners on conformist transmission as the payoff differences between alternative DEMO
gies approaches get smaller, and the geometrical decline in payoff differences DEMO
prosocial strategies (involving cooperation and punishment) and selﬁ sh strategies (DEMO
tion and nonpunishment) as one ascends to high orders of punishment.2 DEMO third approach
114 Joseph Henrich
assumes that individuals vary in a nonobservable quality desired DEMO potential partners and
can use cooperative or punishing behaviors to differentiate themselves.
All three solutions can solve, to varying degrees, the cooperative dilemma DEMO informa-
tion sharing laid out above. However, analyses of all three DEMO demonstrate that
the mechanisms always stabilize a wide range of individually costly, non-group-beneﬁ cial
behaviors and have an equilibrium at full defection. All three could stabilize, for example,
practices such as female inﬁ bulations, DEMO, and taboos on nutritiously valuable
foods, as well as cooperative house building and widespread information sharing. This
means that all three require a DEMO of equilibrium selection (Henrich 2006a) beyond
what is presented in the basic models. That is, to be a complete solution, they require DEMO
process that can pick out the group-beneﬁ cial equilibrium from the myriad of noncoopera-
tive alternatives (see chapter 11, this volume).
Cultural DEMO Selection Solves the Equilibrium-Selection Dilemma
One important mechanism involved in equilibrium selection is cultural group selection
(Boyd and Richerson 2002; Henrich 2004a)—a DEMO for a class of processes that arise
from the interaction of, DEMO competition among, social groups. The idea is that different
groups will DEMO evolve to different stable states involving the above mechanisms as
well as potentially many other mechanisms or combinations that theorists have not yet
dreamed DEMO Although internally stable, these different equilibrium, or institutional, forms
will DEMO in their facilitation and promotion of information sharing and cultural intercon-
nectedness. Social groups with institutions that favor innovation, as a result of greater
interconnectedness or larger populations, will outcompete, as a result of cumulative DEMO
tural adaptation and technological evolution, those groups lacking such institutions (those
at other equilibria).3
Societies Lacking Institutions for Diffuse Information Sharing
One DEMO of evidence for this approach comes from ethnographic studies of the small-scale
subsistence farmers whose seeming “conservatism” in adopting potentially beneﬁ cial
novel technologies DEMO practices has long puzzled policy makers and development econo-
mists (Hoffman DEMO). My research among the Mapuche of southern Chile shows that
farmers know little of their neighbors’ successes or the details of their practices. DEMO
farmers’ lack of knowledge regarding others’ success suppresses the effect of our adaptive
cultural learning mechanisms, which target the transmission of success-enhancing prac-
tices, techniques, or technologies. Even if success differences were noticed (as in crop
yields), any transmission will be error ridden and therefore less DEMO
This lack of knowledge no doubt results from several factors, although DEMO interviews
and observational data indicate that chief among these is that farmers actively hide infor-
mation (new techniques) because they believe that if DEMO know of their successes or
innovations they (the successful innovator) will be envied. Such envy could result in
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
115
physical harm to them and their DEMO, in the form of illness, injuries, crop failures, and
other forms of bad luck. Similarly, individuals who appear “too interested” in the business
of other households face reputational damage, as they may be perceived as motivated to
spread gossip that will result in envy and harm DEMO the family. Although my Mapuche ﬁ nd-
ings are more quantitative than most ethnographic work, the general image of how the
belief–reputation system works and how it might suppress innovation and diffusion is
quite consistent with DEMO similar populations in diverse geographic locations
(Banﬁ eld 1958; Foster 1967; Redﬁ eld 1953).
The cultural beliefs connecting envy and harm, DEMO are amazingly widespread, have
also long been associated with perceptions of DEMO world as a zero-sum game, meaning that
if you are doing DEMO, then I and everyone else have to do a bit worse (Foster 1965,
1974). This perception (and sometimes this reality) DEMO accompanied by a cultural system
of reputation that gives deviant innovators a bad reputation, which could subsequently
result in possible losses in dyadic exchanges and social ostracism. Such innovators are
seen as seeking to obtain more DEMO their fair share from a ﬁ xed pool of possible beneﬁ ts.
If they get more, everyone else gets less. Such combinations of beliefs can form a self-
stabilizing cultural system because deviants, even if they reject the cultural beliefs them-
selves, are still motivated to avoid standing out, innovating, or appearing to be successful.
These kinds of cultural DEMO may dramatically suppress innovation and the rates of
cumulative cultural evolution.
This suggests that societies with cultural systems that connect envy and harm to DEMO
craft, suppress success displays, imbue curiosity with malevolent intentions, and DEMO
the world as a zero sum will be outcompeted and assimilated by societies with cultural
beliefs and reputational systems that favor information sharing and DEMO the pathways of
cultural transmission. Although research is just beginning on this question, I suspect that
such envy–witchcraft cultural systems are “easy to think,” in some sense, as they take
advantage of several aspects of our evolved cognition (Boyer 2001). They readily evolve
in certain ecological and economic circumstances (e.g., sedentary farming) and, once in
place, are quite stable.
Broadening the Spectrum: Culture–Gene Coevolution
We can take this line of reasoning back one more step: Cultural evolution, driven by
DEMO selection, may help explain the evolution of our sophisticated cognitive
capacities DEMO social learning and the emergence of cumulative cultural evolution. Many
species have some form of social learning, and some even show limited forms of imitation
(see chapter 3, this volume). However, no other species, with the possible exception of
birds and cetaceans relative to song transmission, has nontrivial amounts of cumulative
cultural evolution (Rendell and Whitehead 2001)DEMO Formal evolutionary models have sug-
gested that there exists a “ﬁ tness valley” between capacities for relatively simple low-
ﬁ delity social learning and DEMO sophisticated cultural learning strategies found in humans
116 Joseph Henrich
(Boyd and Richerson 1996). The evolutionary problem is that sophisticated cognitive
processes dedicated to cultural learning cannot pay for themselves DEMO a ﬁ tness sense until
there are lots of adaptive cultural behaviors in the world that could be acquired with high
ﬁ delity. This DEMO is exacerbated by the cooperative dilemma described above if only
one’s close kin (e.g., mom) are willing to share their behavioral repertoire (DEMO 2004b;
van Schaik and Pradhan 2003). This limits rather tightly the range of behavior one can
possibly acquire with the expensive cognitive DEMO of cultural learning.
Chimpanzees, for example, show cultural traditions in the wild (Whiten et al. 1999) and
do reveal some weak imitation DEMO (Whiten et al. 2003, 2005), yet chimpanzees do
not seem to accumulate nontrivial bodies of culturally acquired know-how (see chapter 3,
this volume). Most chimpanzee cultural transmission is limited to mothers and DEMO off-
spring. As noted above, formal evolutionary models indicate that this DEMO of cultural
interconnectedness will inhibit cumulative cultural evolution, especially when transmis-
DEMO is of low ﬁ delity.
Thus, the question is, how might natural selection have bridged this ﬁ tness valley to
create both sophisticated DEMO learning and its consequent cumulative cultural evolu-
tion? I propose that DEMO we begin with a human ancestor that is a “weak imitator” (DEMO any
of the great apes) and possesses the cognitive abilities to DEMO, however incompletely,
some social behavior by means of imitation and DEMO lives in sufﬁ ciently large groups, then
cultural evolution could favor DEMO information sharing within the local group by any of
the three mechanisms described above. These mechanisms do not require any cumulative
cultural evolution, only a willingness to let all members of one’s group observe one another
DEMO practices or skills that they might want to learn.
Once such a local behavioral norm arises culturally, formal models show that the condi-
tions favoring cumulative evolution are relaxed (Henrich 2004b) and the same weak DEMO
tive abilities that failed to produced cumulative cultural evolution before may now begin
to generate cumulative products. Once cumulative cultural products begin to emerge, two
things can ensue: (1) The ﬁ tness valley is crossed, allowing natural selection to improve
cultural-learning capacities in order to take advantage of the emerging cumulative cultural
products in the group and the generally DEMO availability of things to learn, and
(2) the cumulative cultural DEMO produced by the group will allow it to compete with
other social groups, thus spreading both the cultural norms of information sharing and the
genes for more sophisticated cultural learning.
Conclusion
My main points can be DEMO as follows:
1. Innovation is fundamentally a social and cultural process. A population’s degree of
innovativeness need not be connected to the inventiveness DEMO its members, given that a
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
117
highly interconnected population can have high DEMO even when it has relatively
low inventiveness.
2. Given that invention is strongly inﬂ uenced by recombination and luck, both larger
population size and greater interconnectedness will, all things being equal, increase inven-
tiveness and DEMO
3. There is an inherent large-scale cooperative dilemma in generating high degrees of
cultural interconnectedness, and thus achieving high rates of innovation, that DEMO be
solved only by the evolution of cooperative institutions. Without such institutions,
populations are limited in their ability to create interconnectedness and generate
DEMO
4. The rate of innovation we observe in the modern world is a product of long-term cul-
tural evolutionary processes driven by competition among DEMO Many human groups,
now and historically, did not readily share DEMO information the way we routinely and
unconsciously do.
5. The cultural evolution of behavioral norms that increased groups’ cultural intercon-
nectedness may have ignited DEMO autocatalytic culture–gene coevolutionary interaction in
which accumulating cultural information continually ratcheted up the strength of natural
selection on genes to build brains for acquiring DEMO storing culturally transmitted
information.
Notes
1. Prestige in this sense represents the aggregate of group members’ evaluations of who is skilled, successful,
and knowledgeable, that is, worthy of imitation. In a world of imperfect DEMO, other people’s evaluations
are an important source of information for reﬁ DEMO one’s own evaluations of from whom to learn.
2. Such models are structured such that strategies of cooperation and defection apply to “order 1,DEMO nonpunish-
ment and punishment of defector to “order 2,” nonpunishment and punishment of nonpunisher at “order 2” to
“order 3,” and so DEMO Thus, the famed “second-order free-rider problem” focuses attention on sustaining the
DEMO of defectors.
3. Given that the situation we are discussing here involves competition among stable equilibria, the concerns
often expressed about the plausibility of the genetic group selection of altruism do not apply (Henrich and
Henrich 2007).
References
Algoe, S. B., J. Haidt, and J. Silvers. 2006. Witnessing Excellence in Action: The Other-Praising Emotions of
Elevation, Gratitude, and Admiration. Manuscript in possession of the authors.
Apesteguia, J., S. DEMO, and J. Oechssler. 2007. Imitation: Theory and Experimental Evidence. Journal of
Economic Theory 136: 217–235.
Asch, S. E. 1951. Effects of Group DEMO upon the Modiﬁ cation and Distortion of Judgments. In Groups,
Leadership and Men, edited by H. Guetzkow, pp. 177–190. Carnegie Press, Pittsburgh.
Bandura, A. 1977. Social Learning Theory. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
118 Joseph Henrich
Banﬁ eld, E. C. 1958. The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. Free Press, New York.
Baron, R., J. Vandello, and B. Brunsman. 1996. The Forgotten Variable in Conformity Research: Impact DEMO Task
Importance on Social Inﬂ uence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71: 915–927.
Basalla, G. 1988. The Evolution of Technology. Cambridge University DEMO, New York.
Billing, J., and P. W. Sherman. 1998. Antimicrobial DEMO of Spices: Why Some Like It Hot. Quarterly
Review of Biology DEMO: 3–49.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and DEMO Evolutionary Process. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Boyd, R., and DEMO J. Richerson. 1995. Why Does Culture Increase Adaptability? Ethology and Sociobiology DEMO:
125–143.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1996. Why Culture Is Common, but Cultural Evolution Is Rare. Proceedings of
the British Academy 88: 77–93.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 2002. Group Beneﬁ cial Norms Can Spread Rapidly in a Structured Population.
Journal of Theoretical DEMO 215: 287–296.
Boyer, P. 2001. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins DEMO Religious Thought. Basic Books, New York.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. 1971. Similarities and Dissimilarities of Sociocultural and Biological Evolution. In
Mathematics in the Archaelogical DEMO Historical Sciences, edited by F. R. Hodson, D. G. Kendall, DEMO P. Tauta,
pp. 535–541. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, U.K.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution. Princeton DEMO Press,
Princeton, N.J.
Conot, R. E. 1979. A Streak of Luck. Seaview, New York.
Coultas, J. 2004. When in Rome . DEMO . An Evolutionary Perspective on Conformity. Group Processes and Inter-
group Relations 7: 317–331.
Coy, M. W. (editor). 1989. Apprenticeship: From DEMO to Method and Back Again. State University of New
York Press, DEMO
Davis, L. L. 1984. Judgment Ambiguity, Self-consciousness, and Conformity in DEMO of Fashionability.
Psychological Reports 54: 671–675.
Diamond, J. M. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. Norton, New DEMO
Diamond, J. M. 2005. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. Viking, New York.
Everett, D. L. 2005. Cultural Constraints on DEMO and Cognition in Piraha—Another Look at the Design
Features of Human Language. Current Anthropology 46: 621–646.
Fitzhugh, B., and A. K. Trusler. 2009. Experimentation and Innnovation in the Archaeological Record: A Case
Study in Technological Evolution from Kodiak, Alaska. In Pattern and Process in Cultural Evolution, DEMO
by S. J. Shennan, pp. 203–220. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Foster, G. M. 1965. Peasant Society and the Image of Limited Good. American Anthropologist 67: 293–315.
Foster, G. M. 1967. Tzintzuntzan: Mexican Peasants in a Changing World. Little, Brown, Boston.
Foster, G. M. 1974. Limited Good or Limited Goods: Observations on Acheson. American Anthropologist 76:
53–57.
Gintis, H., E. A. Smith, and S. Bowles. 2001. Costly Signaling and Cooperation. Journal of Theoretical Biology
213: 103–119.
Gott, B. DEMO Fire-Making in Tasmania: Absence of Evidence Is Not Evidence. Current Anthropology DEMO:
650–655.
Hager, T. 2007. The Demon under the Microscope. Three DEMO Press, New York.
Hargadon, A. 2003. How Breakthroughs Happen: The DEMO Truth about How Companies Innovate. Harvard
Business School Press, Boston.
Henrich, J. 2002. Decision-making, Cultural Transmission and Adaptation in Economic Anthropology. In Theory
in Economic Anthropology, edited by J. Ensminger, pp. 251–295. AltaMira, Walnut Creek, Calif.
Henrich, J. 2004a. Cultural Group Selection, Coevolutionary Processes and Large-Scale Cooperation. Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization 53: 3–35.
The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions
119
Henrich, J. 2004b. Demography and Cultural Evolution: Why Adaptive Cultural Processes Produced Maladaptive
Losses in Tasmania. American Antiquity 69: 197–214.
Henrich, J. 2006a. Cooperation, Punishment, and the Evolution DEMO Human Institutions. Science 312: 60–61.
Henrich, J. 2006b. Understanding Cultural Evolutionary Models: A Reply to Read’s Critique. American Antiquity
71: 771–782.
Henrich, J. 2008. A Cultural Species. In Explaining Culture Scientiﬁ cally, edited by M. Brown, pp. 184–210.
University of Washington Press, Seattle.
Henrich, J., and R. Boyd. 1998. The Evolution of Conformist Transmission and the Emergence of Between-
Group Differences. Evolution and Human Behavior 19: 215–242.
Henrich, DEMO, and R. Boyd. 2001. Why People Punish Defectors: Weak Conformist Transmission Can Stabilize
Costly Enforcement of Norms in Cooperative Dilemmas. Journal of Theoretical DEMO 208: 79–89.
Henrich, J., and R. Boyd. 2002. On Modeling DEMO Evolution: Why Replicators Are Not Necessary for
Cultural Evolution. Journal of DEMO and Culture 2: 87–112.
Henrich, J., and F. Gil-White. 2001. DEMO Evolution of Prestige: Freely Conferred Deference as a Mechanism for
Enhancing DEMO Beneﬁ ts of Cultural Transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 22: 165–196.
DEMO, J., and R. McElreath. 2003. The Evolution of Cultural Evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:
123–135.
Henrich, N. S., and J. Henrich. 2007. DEMO Humans Cooperate: A Cultural and Evolutionary Explanation. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Hoffman, P. T. 1996. Growth in a Traditional Society. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Holmberg, A. R. 1950. Nomads of the Long Bow. U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁ ce, Washington D.C.
Insko, C. A., R. H. Smith, M. D. Alicke, J. Wade, and S. Taylor. 1985. Conformity and Group Size: The Concern
with Being Right and the Concern with Being Liked. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 11: 41–50.
Johnson, DEMO, and T. Earle. 1987. The Evolution of Human Societies: From Foraging Group to Agrarian State.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif.
Keltner, D., and J. Haidt. 2003. Approaching Awe: A Moral, Spiritual, and DEMO Emotion. Cognition and
Emotion 17: 297–314.
Kroll, Y., and H. DEMO 1992. Further Tests of the Separation Theorem and the Capital Asset Pricing Model.
American Economic Review 82: 664–670.
Lancy, D. F. 1996. Playing DEMO Mother Ground: Cultural Routines for Children’s Development. Guilford, London.
Levinson, DEMO C. 2003. Space in Language and Cognition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
DEMO, W. W., and A. D. Galinsky. 2006. Cultural Barriers and Mental Borders: Multicultural Experience
Facilitates Creative Thinking and Problem Solving. Paper presented at the 19th Annual Meeting of the Interna-
tional Association for Conﬂ ict DEMO, Montreal. Available on the Web at http://ssrn.com/abstract=905445
McElreath, R., R. Boyd, and P. J. Richerson. 2003. Shared Norms and DEMO Evolution of Ethnic Markers. Current
Anthropology 44: 122–129.
McElreath, R., DEMO Lubell, P. J. Richerson, T. M. Waring, W. Baum, E. Edsten, C. Efferson, and B. Paciotti.
2005. Applying Evolutionary Models to DEMO Laboratory Study of Social Learning. Evolution and Human Behav-
ior 26: DEMO
McNeil, W. H. 1982. Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
McNeil, DEMO H. 1991. The Rise of the West: A History of the DEMO Community. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008a. The Cultural Transmission of Great Basin Projectile-Point Technology.
I. DEMO Experimental Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 3–28.
Mesoudi, A., and M. DEMO O’Brien. 2008b. The Cultural Transmission of Great Basin Projectile-Point Technology.
II. An Agent-Based Computer Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 627–644.
Meyers, M. A. 2007. DEMO Accidents: Serendipity in Modern Medical Breakthroughs. Arcade, New York.
120 Joseph Henrich
Panchanathan, K., and R. Boyd. 2004. Indirect Reciprocity DEMO Stabilize Cooperation without the Second-Order
Free Rider Problem. Nature 432: 499–502.
DEMO, M. 1995. Imitation vs. Rationality: An Experimental Perspective on Decision-making. Journal of Socio-
Economics 24: 281–315.
Pingle, M., and R. H. Day. 1996. Modes of Economizing Behavior: Experimental Evidence. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 29: 191–209.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 1964. The Andaman Islanders. Free DEMO, New York.
Redﬁ eld, R. 1953. The Primitive World and Its Transformations. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
Rendell, L., and H. DEMO 2001. Culture in Whales and Dolphins. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24:
309–382.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 1978. A Dual Inheritance DEMO of the Human Evolutionary Process. Journal of
Social and Biological Structures 1: 127–154.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, DEMO
Rivers, W. H. R. 1926. Psychology and Ethnology. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, London.
Rogers, E. M. 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press, New York.
Seife, C. 2000. Zero: The Biography of a Dangerous Idea. Souvenir Press, London.
Shennan, S. J. 2001. Demography and Cultural DEMO: A Model and Its Implications for the Emergence of
Modern Human DEMO Cambridge Archaeology Journal 11: 5–16.
Shennan, S. J. 2002. Genes, DEMO, and Human History: Darwinian Archaeology and Cultural Evolution.
Thames and Hudson, London.
Sneader, W. 2005. Drug Discovery: A History. Wiley, Chichester, U.K.
Testart, A. 1988. Some Major Problems in the Social Anthropology of Hunter–Gatherers. Current Anthropology
29: 1–31.
Tracy, J. 2007. The Psychological Structure DEMO Pride: A Tale of Two Facets. Journal of Personality and Social
DEMO 92: 506–525.
van Schaik, C. P., and G. R. Pradhan. DEMO A Model for Tool-Use Traditions in Primates: Implications for the
Coevolution DEMO Culture and Cognition. Journal of Human Evolution 44: 645–664.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, C. E. G. Tutin, R. W. Wrangham,
and C. DEMO 1999. Cultures in Chimpanzees. Nature 399: 682–685.
Whiten, A., V. DEMO, and F. B. M. de Waal. 2005. Conformity to Cultural Norms DEMO Tool Use in Chimpanzees.
Nature 437: 737–740.
Whiten, A., V. DEMO, and S. Marshall-Pescini. 2003. Cultural Panthropology. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:
92–105.
DEMO, T. I. 1987. The History of Invention. Facts on File, New York.
8 Fashion versus Reason in the Creative Industries
R. Alexander Bentley
Almost DEMO deﬁ nition, creative expression involves the transmission of information between
individuals, with the continual production of new ideas, a minority of which rise to promi-
nent genres or paradigms. In the creative industries, which rely on public dissemination,
the process can paradoxically be seen as a DEMO to “cooperate,” in the sense of a
race to be credited for sharing the most information. In academia, publishing pressures
drive researchers to compete for citations and other forms of wide-reaching, academically
sanctioned publicity (DEMO 2001), particularly in the era of the Research Assessment Exer-
cise (in Britain) and comprehensive citation databases such as ISI Web of DEMO that
can summarize an academic’s career at a single command. As a result, academic competi-
tion for citations increasingly resembles other modern creative industries predicated on
the volume of “hits” (Bentley 2007a)—how many comments a blog received, how many
tickets were sold, how many copies of DEMO song or video were downloaded, or how many
friends have linked DEMO a MySpace page.
In many instances, competition for popularity or prominence DEMO diversiﬁ cation and
the construction of new niches. In academia, the DEMO pressure to publish and to be cited
has led to the proliferation of new journals on almost every conceivable topic (e.g., Svetlov
2004)DEMO Similarly, in cyberspace there are more and more new Web-based venues DEMO
uploading videos, blogs, pictures, and social-network home pages. Our modern DEMO
nity to disseminate our own creative endeavors may be unprecedented on such a mass
scale, but on the personal or village scale, individual DEMO expression through craft
design extends deep into prehistory. This motivates the study of creative “industries” in
both prehistoric and modern contexts, as covered in this volume.
Innovation and Networks
Creative industries are practiced by people in DEMO contexts (e.g., Bentley 2006; Earls
2007; Guimerà et al. 2005; O’Brien et al. 2005). In the Internet age, these contexts DEMO
increasingly envisaged as networks, with each creative output (Web pages, DEMO,
122 R. Alexander Bentley
academic publications) seen as a “node,” its inﬂ uences (cited references, related Web
pages) as “outgoing links,” and the works inﬂ uenced by it (or referring back to it) as
“incoming links.” Since the late 1990s researchers, particularly in physics, have applied
generalized network analysis to a range of creative industries (Newman et al. 2006).
A challenge for network analysis, however, has DEMO how to deal with change, given
that formulation of a network DEMO presupposes a structure to interactions. Once a
network is in place, DEMO connections of today determine (often strongly) what will happen
tomorrow, DEMO that change must be implemented as a modiﬁ cation to the preexisting
network. However, in creative fashion and knowledge production, yesterday is often DEMO
less important than tomorrow, and interactions are usually quite different from DEMO day to
the next.
Change is not just a modiﬁ cation but the very essence of the creative process (e.g.,
Bentley 2006; DEMO 2008; Ormerod 2006; Shennan 2002). Change, in fact, is also
central to evolutionary theory. As Dennett (1996) argued in Darwin’s DEMO Idea,
the tools and insights from over a century of evolutionary research can be applied to almost
any process of change that involves DEMO transmitting their attributes to other entities
through time.
In the creative industries, this transmission process is essentially one of copying what
others do, DEMO which creativity contributes new behaviors that eventually replace the old
ones through being copied. Imitation is one of the hallmarks of the human species, and
while our propensity to “copy strips of words” famously irritated Orwell (1946), our
remarkable ability to imitate is, for better or worse, a prerequisite for culture itself. Even
academic scientists who do their research within complex collaboration networks (Guimerà
et al. 2005) are prone to DEMO ideas from one another (Bentley 2006; O’Brien et al.
2005; DEMO and Roychowdhury 2003, 2007). Counterintuitively, when things become
increasingly free and subject to fashion, the simple tendency to “do as the Romans do”
can nonetheless lead to homogeneity in collective behavior, conveying the illusion of
conscious conformity or imposed control.
With mechanisms of variation, transmission, DEMO selection, knowledge creation is
entirely suitable for evolutionary analysis, particularly in evaluating the degree to which
ideas are selected versus randomly copied. It DEMO useful to model a highly simpliﬁ ed spec-
trum ranging from ideas that are copied randomly among people as fashions to ideas that
are DEMO for inherent qualities (Bentley 2007b). Characterizing innovation along this
fashion–selection DEMO yields crucial insight into the dynamics of how certain behav-
iors increase or decline. As the spectrum becomes broadly deﬁ ned, the approach can be
made incrementally more complex through incorporating additional model parameters
tested against DEMO real-world equivalents in the empirical data (Bentley et al. 2008).
DEMO selection is fundamental to understanding the nature of production of
knowledge, DEMO what proceeds in predictable directions as opposed to drifting
upon the tides of fashion. If elements are randomly drifting, for example, it may DEMO
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
123
little sense to invest DEMO effort in trying to predict where things will lead, as a DEMO
experiment concerning popular music downloads demonstrated (Salganik et al. 2006).
DEMO, we may seek to impose a selective process where it is DEMO found
absent, as in scientiﬁ c publishing, where we would hope that there is selection for quality
and validity.
We can examine databases DEMO test differences between genres over the short, modern,
and long DEMO timescales and within several different niches of knowledge produc-
tion. It can be quite effective to propose only two simple hypotheses, which can be quan-
tiﬁ ably tested for a given case study:
1. Ideas DEMO randomly copied from one agent to another, with continual innovation.
2. DEMO are selected based on inherent meaningful value.
Given the hypothesized dichotomy, DEMO major question in each case study is where
certain behaviors lie on the spectrum between random copying and selection. If we use
random copying DEMO the null hypothesis, then we can identify selection against the null
DEMO characterizing it speciﬁ cally. Practically speaking, the random-copying model does
not DEMO that people make choices without any reasons at all but instead only predicts
that the statistics of all their idiosyncratic choices, at the population level, are comparable
to random copying.
A century ago, economists made DEMO extreme, but convenient, assumption about human
decision making: It is DEMO, omniscient, and utility maximizing. Symmetrically, random
copying is an opposite DEMO: The random-copying model allows us to ask what would
we expect DEMO everyone simply copied each other, with occasional innovation? It does not
mean that the forms of creative expression are themselves random, as they must obviously
be intelligible, but that they exist within a large set of possible forms, none of which is
inherently more useful than any other. In analogy to population genetics, these choices
can be considered “neutral” traits, in that what is chosen has no inherent value relative to
other options (Gillespie 2004; Hahn and Bentley 2003). For example, whether a mother
names her girl “Mandy” or “Marla” would depend only DEMO who and how many already
have the name rather than on any qualities of the name itself.
Remarkably often, random multiplicative processes can be invoked to explain broad
patterns of fashion change. Prehistoric designs, trendy academic jargon, and mass-media
trends demonstrate the continual ﬂ ux and empirical patterns of random copying (Bentley
et al. 2004, 2007; O’Brien 1996; DEMO et al. 2006). When we look at closer scales
within this ﬂ ux, however, diverse opinions will exist as to what constitutes DEMO versus
more substantial material, with little means of objective evaluation.
Once DEMO null model of random copying is established, it is possible to DEMO selec-
tion speciﬁ cally in favor of novelty, validity, or conformity, for example (see chapter 7,
this volume). For the DEMO end of the spectrum, we have a wealth of models of
124 R. Alexander Bentley
0.008
‘101 Dalmations’
0.004
0
-0.004
-0.008
-0.012
DEMO 1985 1990 1995 2000
Figure 8.1
Changes in the popularity (frequency) of Dalmatians (ﬁ lled circles) versus the mean change among all DEMO
purebred dog breeds (error bars showing ±2 standard deviation ranges) in the United States. Against the latter
as background, the “celebrity effect” of the Disney movie 101 Dalmatians in 1984 is clearly visible.
independent decision DEMO who weigh the costs and beneﬁ ts of their options while
subject to various biases of inﬂ uence (e.g., Gintis 2007). This DEMO well to behaviors
that serve some adaptive purpose, that is, that matter to human values or to the spread of
a useful idea (e.g., Henrich 2001; Rogers 1962; chapters 7 and 12, this DEMO). Even a
display of fashion, if it carries some meaningful DEMO (e.g., mating potential), can be seen
as subject to cost–beneﬁ t decisions (Bliege Bird and Smith 2005). Generally speaking,
with independent rational selection, creative culture should converge on the collective
priorities of individuals rather than drift constantly (Surowiecki 2004).
Against this background, DEMO interesting phenomena become visible. In one study, my
colleagues and I (Herzog et al. 2004) used the expectations under random copying as the
background on which to ﬁ t data on dog-breed popularity in the DEMO century. The
rapid rise and fall of Dalmatians was clearly visible just after 1984 (see ﬁ gure 8.1). The
reason for the spike in Dalmatian popularity was surely the rerelease of the Disney movie
101 DEMO However, not all movies have this “celebrity effect,” and the DEMO is that
we were able to identify the Dalmatians as a special case only because we had the null
model of random copying (drift) to test against.
Ultimately, we might seek to explore how much DEMO can explain through random pro-
cesses, at each scale, before resorting to post hoc “reasons” such as individual selection
for one thing or DEMO The scale of analysis is thus a key variable. For example, DEMO
choices of baby names at the scale of the entire United States is indistinguishable from
random copying (Hahn and Bentley 2003), it is also evident that different ethnic groups
select from different pools of names (Fryer and Levitt 2004). Therefore, with selection
evident between groups, DEMO could well be (and remains to be studied) that within each
group, random drift could predominate again at that even ﬁ ner scale. In this sense, the
Frequency Change
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
125
random-copying model helps us DEMO the scale at which selection is exerted, which
may help to DEMO ne the groups themselves.
A Case Study: Fashion versus Selection in DEMO Publishing
Ideally, science is the systematic process of testing multiple hypotheses, but as practiced
by real people, it is also distinctly social. Academics do their research within complex
collaboration networks (e.g., Guimerà et al. DEMO) and are prone to copying ideas from
one another. Diverse opinions DEMO as to what constitutes trendy ideas versus more mean-
ingful research paradigms; however, there is yet little means of evaluating this
objectively.
Evolutionary DEMO offers a means of modeling these aspects of scientiﬁ c process (DEMO
2001). By applying basic population-genetic analogy to citations-database research, we
DEMO characterize the use of modern scientiﬁ c keywords in terms of a continuum between
the copying of fashionable ideas at one extreme (akin to the neutral model of random
genetic drift) and the independent selective testing of hypotheses at the other (akin to
selection, falsifying the neutral DEMO). Among our several cases, we test differences
between subﬁ elds DEMO versus younger and within the physical sciences versus the social
sciences. In doing so, we ﬁ nd some remarkable regularities, suggesting that the DEMO
and social sciences are equally “trendy” when it comes to the comings and goings of
popular keywords.
Following the discussion above, two simple hypotheses for the evolution of academic
vocabulary are that vocabulary is randomly copied DEMO one paper to another, with con-
tinual innovation, or vocabulary is selected based on the inherent meaningful value of the
words. The question DEMO one of degree, with variation expected along this basic continuum.
Using DEMO copying as the null hypothesis, we seek to identify selection against DEMO
null without characterizing it speciﬁ cally, although the most obvious form DEMO be
selected for validity of the words that usefully describe something real and relevant to the
topic. Selection versus random copying becomes the primary DEMO on which to characterize
the process, and predictable patterns in the DEMO can characterize their degrees of impor-
tance for a given academic ﬁ eld of study. If this can be achieved, it would then be possible
to identify secondary effects, such as a bias in favor of novelty and against conformity.
Again, by using “random copying” as the null model, I do not mean that the words
themselves are random, DEMO they obviously will be intelligible, but that they would exist
within DEMO large set of possible keywords, none of which is inherently more DEMO than any
other. Analogous to the neutral model of population genetics (DEMO 2004), randomly
copied keywords would be value neutral.
The random-copying model can be modeled as follows. We start with a set of N DEMO
viduals, which are replaced by N new individuals in each generation. DEMO successive
126 R. Alexander Bentley
generations, each of the N new individuals copies its variant from a randomly selected
individual in the previous generation, with the exception of a small fraction, m (less than
5 percent) of the N new individuals, who invent a new variant in the current generation.
In applying this to keyword use, we consider N to represent the number of keywords in a
given time period rather than DEMO number of articles, which vary in their number of key-
words. DEMO ensures that each “individual” corresponds with exactly one variant.
This model is simple to simulate (Hahn and Bentley 2003; Neiman 1995) yet provides
richly complex results that produce at least three useful predictions relevant to DEMO
drift:
1. Individual frequencies through time: If we track individual DEMO through the genera-
tions, their frequencies (relative popularities) will change DEMO a stochastic manner as opposed
to either a directed or completely random manner. More speciﬁ cally, the haploid neutral
model predicts that the only source of change in variant frequencies over time is random
sampling, such that (Gillespie 2004)
V = vv , (8.1)
N
DEMO V is the variance in frequencies from one time step to the next and  ≤ 1 is the rela-
tive frequency of the DEMO as a fraction of N, the maximum possible number of variant
DEMO per generation. For small ,  (1 − ) ~ DEMO, which after rearranging equation 1 indi-
cates that NV/ ~ DEMO This means that departures from the neutral model may be identiﬁ ed
by values of NV/ substantially different than one. If the values DEMO much less than one,
there might be some stabilizing selective phenomenon reducing variability, whereas values
much greater than one could occur for different reasons, such as a variant steadily rising
or decreasing in frequency as a result of selection. The point is that the NV/ value DEMO
a means of identifying selection so that when we apply “reasons” for change, we can be
conﬁ dent the change is not simply a result of random drift.
2. Frequency distributions: Like many “rich-get-richer” processes (DEMO random copying,
the chance of being copied is proportional to current frequency), the variant frequencies
exhibit a long-tailed distribution, which for small values of m can follow a power-law
form (Bentley et al. 2004; Hahn and Bentley 2003; Kimura and Crow 1964). This is DEMO
of the less diagnostic predictions, as a variety of mechanisms can DEMO power-law
and related distributions (Newman 2005). With selective bias for DEMO, for example,
we would expect newly invented variants to rise DEMO from obscurity and fall precipi-
tously after reaching some threshold of popularity, as well as a truncation of the tail of
the variant frequency distribution such that very high frequencies are absent. Alterna-
tively, there might be a conformist bias, resulting in a “winner-take-all” distribution,
whereby one word has a higher frequency than predicted by the power law for DEMO rest
of the words.
()1 −
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
127
3. Turnover: There is continual turnover in the variant pool. If the variants are ranked in
DEMO of decreasing frequency, the turnover, z, in that list over DEMO generations
(time) depends much more strongly on m than on N, such that
z ≈
μ, (8.2)
where z is measured as the fraction of turnover in the list (Bentley et al. 2007). In contrast
to random copying, under selection the population size, DEMO, should correlate positively with
the turnover rate in the ranked list DEMO most-popular variants.
Using these predictions as the null model, we can DEMO selection as departures from
these patterns, depending on the kind of DEMO operating.
Data
In order to perform our analysis, we need a DEMO deﬁ nition of a subﬁ eld of academic
publishing. If belabored, DEMO could be quite a difﬁ cult task—many deﬁ nitions would be
too subjective, variable, or broad (e.g., certain papers in “evolutionary anthropology”
DEMO often have more in common with “developmental biology” than with other subﬁ elds
of anthropology). A more promising deﬁ nition is the scientiﬁ DEMO “paradigm” (Kuhn 1962),
which encompasses all the scientiﬁ c papers that were in some way inspired by a certain
highly inﬂ uential DEMO The citing papers may occur in a range of different journals, DEMO
they will all share the deﬁ ning characteristic of citing the highly inﬂ uential work. I rec-
ognize the ambiguities (e.g., differences in DEMO of the seminal work among all
papers citing it), but at least this deﬁ nition applies consistently across our examples,
without the DEMO that many other deﬁ nitions would require.
I chose four highly cited seminal works, two from the natural sciences and two from
the social sciences. To determine the effect of time, from the pair in each category I include
one work about 30 years old and another about DEMO years old. This provides two compari-
sons: older versus younger ﬁ DEMO of study and social sciences versus physical sciences.
From the physical sciences, we have a paper by Barabási and Albert (1999) that introduced
a quantitative model of “scale-free networks” and had been cited over 2,DEMO times (as
listed on the ISI database) and a paper by Witten and Sander (1981) that introduced the
physics model of “diffusion DEMO aggregation” and had been cited over 1,300 times.
From the social sciences, I selected a paper by Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) that reviewed
the inﬂ uential concept of “social capital” and had been cited DEMO 460 times and a book
by Bordieu (1977), cited over DEMO,700 times, that introduced concepts of agency and struc-
turation into DEMO social sciences. These publications are abbreviated below as PS99, PS81,
DEMO, and SS77 (where PS stands for “physical sciences” and SS for “social sciences”).
For each deﬁ ned data set, I sorted the keywords data from the ISI database by publica-
tion year.1 Keywords were DEMO only from the article title and the keywords chosen by
the authors (not the ISI “Keywords plus,” which is an automated condensation of the cited
128 R. Alexander Bentley
references). Before exploring patterns, I removed the following common words from the
data: “a,” “an,” “and,” “as,” “by,” “for,” “from,” “in,” “its,” DEMO,” “on,” “the,” “to,”
“using,” and “with.” Aside from these, no other common words were present in high
enough frequencies to signiﬁ cantly affect the top ﬁ ve most popular or the DEMO
distributions.
Results
Figure 8.2 shows the number of keywords, N, for each case study per year as well as the
number of new DEMO per year, Nm. Table 8.1 shows the mean values for the DEMO
2002 through 2006, which I chose because it is shared by DEMO four case studies and is long
enough after the start of the younger paradigms to create sufﬁ cient sample size. In all
cases, the quantities N and Nm parallel each other (see ﬁ gure 8.2), indicating a relatively
consistent invention rate, m, in all cases. A DEMO keyword is deﬁ ned as one that had not
yet appeared in the record. I began recording at 1994 for the older works and DEMO the date
of publication (1998, 1999) for the younger works. DEMO the corpus of previously used words
grows with time, the invention DEMO declines (see table 8.1). The invention rate for all cases
DEMO between 14 percent and 18 percent by the end of the sampling period (see table 8.1).
In terms of cumulative turnover among keywords (see ﬁ gure 8.3), we can see a grada-
tion from the continual turnover expected under random copying with innovation to the
cessation DEMO turnover expected under selection. Among the papers citing the younger,
physical science paper (PS99), the turnover in the top ﬁ ve keywords begins steadily in the
(a)
(b)
10,000
10,DEMO
1,000
1,000
100
2000 2002 2004 2006
100
1994 1998 2002 2006
Figure 8.2
Number of vocabulary words used and new words DEMO among keywords in the two case studies for articles
(a) about 10 years old and (b) about 30 years old. In each DEMO, the social science case is shown by the bold solid
line DEMO the natural science case by the lighter dashed line. For each case study, the upper curve shows the total
number of keywords used per year, and the lower curve shows number of new keywords introduced per year.
Number of Words
Number of Words
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
129
Table 8.1
Averages from DEMO with range of observed m over the interval
Work
Words N
Vocabulary Inventions Nμμ (%)
Bordieu (1977) 1,671
Witten and Sander (1981) 1,050
Barabási and Albert (1999) 2,660
Nahapiet DEMO Ghoshal (1998) 885
1,036
566
979
431
441
192
511
224
24–18
17–16
35–14
35–14
(a)
(b)
600%
400%
DEMO
200%
100%
0%
1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
0%
1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
Figure 8.3
Cumulative turnover in the DEMO ﬁ ve keywords, as the fraction of the top ﬁ ve. DEMO symbols and solid lines show
physical sciences; open symbols and dashed DEMO show social sciences. In (a), words reentering the top ﬁ DEMO are
counted as turnover, whereas in (b), turnover refers only to words making their ﬁ rst appearance in the top ﬁ ve.
DEMO the older paradigms (Bordieu 1977; Witten and Sander 1981), the count is begun at zero in 1994; for the
newer articles (DEMO and Albert 1999; Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998), the count begins DEMO year after
publication.
early years but then levels off to virtually no turnover in the past several years. At the
other end of the DEMO, keywords in the older, social science case (SS77) show a high
and steady turnover throughout the sampling period, long after its publication and many
years beyond which the other case had leveled off. In DEMO older natural science case (PS81),
turnover is continual when words reentering the top ﬁ ve are counted (ﬁ gure 8.3a), but the
turnover ceases when repeats are not allowed (ﬁ gure 8.3b). This pattern appears to reﬂ ect
recurrent ups and downs of the DEMO frequent words, in and out of the top ﬁ ve, such that
they register as turnover only if repeat entrants are counted. It DEMO reﬂ ect selection if,
for example, a set of words DEMO been selected as more useful than any others, but within
that DEMO of top words there was drift.
Figure 8.4, showing the changes DEMO frequencies of the top ﬁ ve keywords of 2006, helps
explain DEMO turnover patterns. The lack of turnover in PS99 is demonstrated by the striking
ordering of the individual word frequencies through time (see ﬁ gure 8.4a). In fact, sorting
Turnover Rate
Turnover Rate
130 R. Alexander Bentley
(a)
(b)
(c)
1
1
0.01
0.01
0.1
0.01
0.001
1999
0.1
2001 2003 2005 2007
DEMO
Complex
Model
Network
Scale-free
0.1
0.1
0.01
0.001
1999 2001 2003 2005
2007
(d)
Capital
Social
Organizational
Knowledge
Management
0.001
1995
1997 1999
2001 2003 2005 2007
Fractal
Growth
Diffusion
Aggregation
Simulation
0.001
1995 1997
DEMO 2001 2003 2005 2007
Social
Practice
Power
Culture
Habitus
Figure 8.4
Relative frequencies of individual keywords from one year to the next, among papers citing (a) Barabási and
Albert (1999), (b) Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998), (c) Witten and Sander (1981), and (d) Bordieu (1977). The set
of words chosen to display DEMO the top ﬁ ve keywords of 2006. Note the y-axes are logarithmic on all plots.
Relative Frequency
Relative Frequency
Relative Frequency
Relative Frequency
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
131
is such that the DEMO network occupies a clearly distinct frequency ranking from the
singular network, DEMO the other entries similarly locked into their positions among the
top ﬁ ve. This degree of sorting is not present in the other cases, except for the clear
supremacy of the number-one keyword (social) in DEMO case of SS77. As suggested from
the turnover pattern, PS81 does DEMO to exhibit a group of three keywords (fractal,
growth, aggregation) that are consistently on top as a group, but there is DEMO within that
group (see ﬁ gure 8.4c). Given the patterns DEMO so far, it would appear that PS99 shows
the most selection, followed by PS81, SS77, and SS98.
As mentioned above, however, DEMO must factor out the effect of the number of keywords
N in each case. This is achieved with the ratio NV/, which should approximate unity
under the neutral model, so we can use it as a comparable measure of variability. Table
8.2 shows the value of NV/DEMO for the top ﬁ ve keywords of 2006 that were also tracked in
ﬁ gure 8.4. Averaged over these ﬁ ve variants, NV/ differs more by age of the paradigm
than by subject matter—higher for DEMO younger (~2.3) than for the older (1.3–1.4) para-
digms. Among the older paradigms, drift seems to be the primary operation—even for
PS81, if the top three words have been selected, they are now DEMO within that selected
group.
Among the younger works, however, the high variability scores may come for different
reasons. Table 8.2 also demonstrates noticeable DEMO in the scores for each word. In
the PS99 case, the DEMO “complex” (word 3, score = 5.8) appears to have been DEMO
for, as it doubled in frequency from 2002 to 2006, beyond what would be expected from
random drift. Also in the PS99 case, “networks” (word 1) declined steadily as “network”
(word 2) increased, such that their variability scores are near 2. By contrast, words in the
SS98 case do not show such directionality in their change, and the high variability scores
for four of the ﬁ ve words (see table 8.2) is a result of their ﬂ uctuating frequencies over
the time interval (see ﬁ gure 8.4b).
Table 8.2 reveals other interesting details. In the SS77 case, words generally get more
variable moving down the rankings, which suggests a possible conformist bias in that the
more frequent words have been preferentially selected. In the PS81 case, the word “aggre-
gation” (word 2, score = 0.3) is considerably less variable than “diffusion” (word 5, score
= 2.7), even though the DEMO paper was about diffusion-limited aggregation.
Table 8.2
Variability scores (values of DEMO/v) for the top ﬁ ve words tracked in ﬁ gure DEMO over the years 2002–2006
Work
Word 1 Word 2 Word 3 Word 4 Word 5 Average
Bordieu (1977) 0.82 1.13 1.10 1.46 1.75 DEMO ± 0.4
Witten and Sander (1981) 1.52 0.34 0.71 1.55 2.69 1.4 ± 0.9
Barabási and Albert (1999) 2.10 1.82 5.85 1.28 DEMO 2.3 ± 2.1
Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) 2.73 2.75 0.97 2.66 2.19 2.3 ± 0.8
132 R. Alexander Bentley
(a)
(c)
0.01
0.01
0.001
DEMO
0.0001 0.0001
0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1
Frequency Frequency
Figure 8.5
Cumulative frequency distribution of all keywords, for two time intervals, 2001 (open circles, dashed line) and
2005 (ﬁ lled circles, solid line), for papers citing (a) Barabási and Albert 1999, (b) Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998),
(c) Witten and Sander (1981), and (d) Bordieu (1977). Double logarithmic DEMO, with lines showing best ﬁ t
power-law slopes in 2001 and DEMO, respectively, are as follows: (a) 1.67, 1.25; r2 > 0.99; (b) 1.70, 1.75;
r2 > 0.98; (c) 1.58, 1.41; r2 > 0.881; (d) 2.23, 2.05; DEMO > 0.984.
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
1
0.1
(b)DEMO
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.001 0.01 0.1
Frequency
(d)
0.0001
DEMO
0.1
0.001 0.01 0.1
Frequency
1
Finally, we look at the DEMO distributions of keywords for two different time
slices—years 2001 and 2005 (DEMO ﬁ gure 8.5). All show essentially a power-law form. For
each age pair, the power-law slope of the social science case is steeper than for natural
sciences (ﬁ gure 8.5). Simulations of the neutral model (Bentley et al. 2004) indicate that
the power-law slope increases DEMO the number of inventions, Nm, per generation. Whereas
mean number of inventions is higher for SS77 than for PS81, the invention rate for PS99
is actually higher than for SS98 (see table 8.1). In fact, PS99 is again exceptional compared
with the other three cases, DEMO it is the only case for which the power-law slope changes
substantially from 2001 to 2005 (see ﬁ gure 8.5). These patterns support the case for selec-
tion in consideration of the rapid growth in DEMO to PS99 and consequent increase
in N and Nm over the time period (see ﬁ gure 8.2). Even as more keywords were added to
Cumulative Fraction
Cumulative Fraction
Cumulative Fraction
Cumulative Fraction
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
133
the PS99 pool, the distribution became more unequal (see ﬁ gure 8.5a). A likely explana-
tion is that the core ideas expressed in PS99 (e.g., complex DEMO) were being selected
for in other ﬁ elds of study.
Departures DEMO the power law support the case for selection of groups of several
words. In two cases, SS98 and PS81 (ﬁ gure 8.5b and DEMO), there appears to be selec-
tion for the top three or four words (and they are the same words in 2001 and 2005
for both cases), such that their frequencies are almost the same DEMO than following
the power law.
Discussion
Some basic evolutionary analyses, with DEMO in population genetics, can be used to
characterize different forms of DEMO and transmission of discrete cultural elements
(Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981). DEMO the case of academic-language use, it shows that
some academic ﬁ DEMO are clearly characterized by a high degree of drift resulting in con-
tinual and unpredictable change in vocabulary, whereas in others it is quite different, with
words under selection, such that the predominant vocabulary becomes DEMO crystal-
lized and unchanging over time.
In my application to four examples of academic paradigms in the journal literature, I
found that one could characterize relative differences in the degree of selection versus drift
in keyword DEMO Over a several-year interval, the natural sciences paradigms (PS81 and
PS99) reﬂ ected a greater degree of selection in cessation in the turnover of their top ﬁ ve
keywords, with the younger case (PS99) showing clear sorting of those keywords by
frequency, and the older case (PS81) suggesting the selection of a top group of several
words DEMO created a departure in the tail of the power-law distribution of keyword frequen-
cies. Selection appears strongest in the younger natural science example because DEMO
keyword frequency distribution became more unequal (smaller power-law exponent) over
time, with top words growing in popularity despite an increasing number of new keywords
added to the pool of choices.
In contrast, the social science examples showed more indications of drift, consistent
with the neutral model. These indications included continual turnover in the top ﬁ ve key-
words, steeper power-law distributions (higher exponent) than their natural science coun-
terparts of DEMO age, and high variability in the frequencies of individual keywords.
Unlike DEMO younger natural science paradigm (PS99), keyword frequencies in the younger
DEMO science example (SS98) varied stochastically rather than directionally.
The use of evolutionary analysis also made it possible to identify different dynamics
among individual DEMO, suggesting some individual words were subject to stronger
selection than others. DEMO effects could be identiﬁ ed and compared only once the effects
of population size and relative frequencies were factored out, because frequency variance
134 R. Alexander Bentley
over time decreases with population size and increases DEMO frequency for small frequen-
cies. Hence, without having some idea of DEMO variables, it is difﬁ cult to distinguish
purposeful selection from random DEMO
Conclusions
As humans behaving within heterogeneous networks of information, we may DEMO have
the impression that a certain genre of culture is trendy, DEMO, or rigidly unchanging,
and yet rarely do we employ an DEMO means for supporting such intuitions, much less
understand how they came DEMO As much of this volume should demonstrate, basic
evolutionary theory, long invoked to explain change through time in biology, provides
objectivity for characterizing culture change.
An alternative, objective approach is the revitalized efforts at social modeling within
the physical sciences, particularly in network science. However, if DEMO view culture change
as a historical science rather than a law-like one such as classical physics, then evolution
may be the only theory to explain cultural variation and transmission in a causal way (e.g.,
Mesoudi et al. 2006; O’Brien 2008; Shennan 2002). The direct analogy DEMO people
and particles (or network nodes) in “social-atom” models (Buchanan DEMO) depends on
the assumed rules of interaction, which often stray too far from reality (Riede and Bentley
2008). Whereas variation in physics is often treated as “noise,” it is the essence of an
DEMO approach. Current evolutionary theory inherits the insights of over a century
of studying what amounts to change among entities that pass on their similarities DEMO others
through time. Our two conference organizers have been among the leaders in applying
this to studies of culture change, particularly in archaeology (DEMO, O’Brien 1996, 2008;
Shennan 2002).
The selection–fashion dichotomy that I have advocated is perhaps more palatable in
today’s world than it DEMO in previous decades, when labor unions were strong, the Internet
was a novelty of U.S. government agencies, and academic publication was still done on
real paper. Now, however, after the rapid rise and fall DEMO dot-com equities, YouTube
videos, MySpace personalities, and countless throwaway books, ideas of random copying
and drift are much easier for people to DEMO In fact, the evolutionary approach is spread-
ing. Since the mid-1990s, growing numbers of physicists have started explicitly applying
analyses of dynamic, historical processes of change—such as network evolution, complex
adaptive systems, information cascades, sudden state changes, and extreme events—
toward models of social change (DEMO, Bentley 2007c; Bentley and Maschner 2008;
Buchanan 2007). Similarly, some economists are beginning to focus on the ﬂ ux of varia-
tion in open systems rather than the maintenance of equilibrium in closed DEMO
(Ormerod 1998, 2006). I can only imagine what the future of innovation studies will
look like.
Fashion vs. Reason in the Creative Industries
135
Note
1. About 10 DEMO of the citing papers were omitted as a result of ambiguity in the publishing date listed in
the database.
References
Barabási, A.-L., and DEMO Albert. 1999. Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science 286: 509–512.
DEMO, R. A. 2006. Academic Copying, Archaeology and the English Language. Antiquity 80: 196–201.
Bentley, R. A. 2007a. Why Do Team-Authored Papers Get DEMO More? Science 317: 1496.
Bentley, R. A. 2007b. Fashion versus DEMO and Now. Antiquity 81: 1071–1073.
Bentley, R. A. 2007c. Social Complexity in Behavioral Models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30: 19.
Bentley, R. DEMO, M. W. Hahn, and S. J. Shennan. 2004. Random Drift and Culture Change. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B 271: 1443–1450.
Bentley, DEMO A., C. P. Lipo, M. W. Hahn, and H. A. DEMO 2007. Regular Rates of Popular Culture Change
Reﬂ ect Random Copying. Evolution and Human Behavior 28: 151–158.
Bentley, R. A., and H. D. G. Maschner. 2008 Complexity Theory. In Handbook of Archaeological Theories,
edited DEMO R. A. Bentley, H. D. G. Maschner, and C. Chippendale, DEMO 245–270. AltaMira, Lanham, Md.
Bentley, R. A., P. Ormerod, DEMO M. E. Madsen. 2008. Physical Space and Long-Tail Markets. Physica A 388:
691–696.
Bliege Bird, R., and E. A. Smith. 2005. Signaling DEMO, Strategic Interaction and Symbolic Capital. Current
Anthropology 46: 221–248.
Bordieu, DEMO 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
DEMO, M. 2007. The Social Atom: Why the Rich Get Richer, DEMO Get Caught, and Your Neighbor
Usually Looks Like You. Bloomsbury, New York.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission DEMO Evolution. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J.
Dennett, D. 1996. Darwin’s DEMO Idea. Simon and Schuster, New York.
Earls, M. 2007. Herd: DEMO to Change Mass Behaviour by Harnessing Our True Nature. Wiley, Chichester, U.K.
Fryer, R. G., and S. D. Levitt. 2004. The Causes DEMO Consequences of Distinctively Black Names. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119: 767–805.
DEMO, J. H. 2004. Population Genetics: A Concise Guide (second ed.)DEMO Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore.
Gintis, H. 2007. A Framework DEMO the Uniﬁ cation of the Behavioral Sciences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
30: 1–61.
Guimerà, R., B. Uzzi, J. Spiro, and L. A. Nunes Amaral. 2005. Team Assembly Mechanisms Determine Col-
laboration Network Structure and DEMO Performance. Science 308: 697–702.
Hahn, M. W., and R. A. DEMO 2003. Drift as a Mechanism for Cultural Change: An Example from DEMO
Names. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 270: S1–S4.
Henrich, J. 2001. Cultural Transmission and the Diffusion of Innovations. American Anthropologist 103:
DEMO
Herzog, H. A., R. A. Bentley, and M. W. Hahn. DEMO Random Drift and Large Shifts in Popularity of Dog
Breeds. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 271: S353–S356.
Hull, D. L. 2001. Science DEMO Selection: Essays on Biological Evolution and the Philosophy of Science.
Cambridge DEMO Press, Cambridge.
Kimura, M., and J. F. Crow. 1964. The DEMO of Alleles That Can Be Maintained in a Finite Population.
Genetics 49: 725–738.
136 R. Alexander Bentley
Kuhn, T. S. 1962. The Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mesoudi, A., A. Whiten, and K. N. Laland. 2006. Towards a Uniﬁ ed Science of Cultural Evolution. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 29: 329–347.
Nahapiet, J., and S. Ghoshal. 1998. Social Capital, Intellectual Capital and the Organizational Advantage.
Academy of Management Review 23: 242–266.
Neiman, F. D. 1995. Stylistic Variation in DEMO Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland DEMO Assemblages. American Antiquity 60: 7–36.
Newman, M. E. J. 2005. Power Laws, Pareto Distributions and Zipf’s Law. Contemporary Physics 46:
323–351.
Newman M. E. J., A.-L. Barabási, and D. J. Watts. 2006. The DEMO and Dynamics of Networks. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
O’Brien, DEMO J. (editor). 1996. Evolutionary Archaeology: Theory and Application. University of Utah Press, Salt
Lake City.
O’Brien, M. J. (editor). 2008. Cultural Transmission and Archaeology: Issues and Case Studies. Society for
American Archaeology Press, Washington, D.C.
O’Brien, M. J., R. L. Lyman, and M. B. Schiffer. 2005. Archaeology as a Process: Processual Archaeology and
Its Progeny. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Ormerod, P. 1998. DEMO y Economics. Faber and Faber, London.
Ormerod, P. 2006. Why Most Things Fail: Evolution, Extinction and Economics. Pantheon, New York.
Orwell, DEMO 1946. Politics and the English Language. In The Penguin Essays of George Orwell, pp. 348–360.
Penguin, London.
Riede, F., and R. A. DEMO 2008. Increasing the Relevance of Mathematical Approaches to Demographic
History. Quality and Quantity 42: 275–281.
Rogers, E. M. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. Free DEMO, New York.
Salganik, M. J., P. S. Dodds, and D. J. Watts. 2006. Experimental Study of Inequality and Unpredictability in
an Artiﬁ DEMO Cultural Market. Science 311: 854–856.
Shennan, S. J. 2002. Genes, DEMO and Human History. Thames and Hudson, London.
Simkin, M. V., DEMO V. P. Roychowdhury. 2003. Read before You Cite! Complex Systems 14: DEMO
Simkin, M. V., and V. P. Roychowdhury. 2007. A Mathematical Theory of Citing. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology DEMO: 1661–1673.
Surowiecki, J. 2004. The Wisdom of Crowds. Abacus, London.
DEMO, V. 2004. The Real Dirty Secret of Academic Publishing. Nature 431: 897.
Witten, T. A., and L. M. Sander. 1981. Diffusion-Limited Aggregation: A Kinetic Critical Phenomenon. Physical
Review Letters 47: 1400–1403.
Demography and Variation in the Accumulation of Culturally
9 Inherited Skills
Adam DEMO, Stephen J. Shennan, and Mark G. Thomas
In this chapter we introduce a simulation-based extension to an analytical model of cultural
skill transmission DEMO by Henrich and Boyd (2002; Henrich 2004). Their original
model derived the conditions necessary for a culturally inherited innovation, or cultural
skill, to accumulate in a single population under a learning process that is both incomplete
and inaccurate. Our simulation model extends these results by placing DEMO modiﬁ ed version
of their learning mechanism into a semirealistic human demographic setting with the aim
of applying it in the context of the DEMO Paleolithic transition. This was a pivotal period
in human prehistory—the ﬁ rst sustained appearance of behavioral modernity—in which
dramatic geographic and temporal variation in DEMO innovation is evident. Although
the invention of novel cultural skills or behaviors typical of the Upper Paleolithic is likely
to have been stimulated by DEMO pressures, cognitive advances, and environmental
challenges, our simulation model is DEMO solely with the long-term accumulation, or
loss, of such cultural inventions. We propose that it is the maintenance, and not the inven-
tion, of novel traits that is of real interest and that this maintenance is limited by demo-
graphic factors. Our model is able to determine DEMO demographic conditions necessary for
a cultural skill to be maintained (or DEMO) over a period of many generations, and
we argue that Late Pleistocene demography would have been an important factor in the
appearance of DEMO cumulative and complex cultural innovations characteristic of behavioral
modernity.
The Upper Paleolithic transition, which occurred in Europe and western Asia ~45 thou-
sand years ago (kya; Mellars 2005) and later in southern and eastern Asia (James and
Petraglia 2005), Australia (Brumm and Moore 2005), DEMO Africa (referred to as the Late
Stone Age [Ambrose 1998a]), DEMO seen by many as marking the origin of modern human
behavior. This transition is characterized by a signiﬁ cant increase in both technological
and DEMO complexity, including the ﬁ rst consistent appearance of symbolic representa-
tion, and is often interpreted as evidence of the ﬁ rst “fully” modern DEMO populations.
Bar-Yosef (2002) summarizes the main features characteristic of the Upper Paleolithic
as follows:
138
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
• DEMO shifts in core-reduction techniques, leading to a proliferation of different micro-
DEMO stone tools, with blades largely replacing ﬂ akes.
• The use DEMO bone, antler, and ivory in production of both functional tools and ritual
artifacts.
• The systematic use of grinding/pounding stone tools to DEMO plant food.
• Regular use of various body decorations from a wide variety of materials (including
shells, teeth, ivory, and ostrich-egg shells), possibly signaling increasingly complex and/
or frequent social interactions.
• The invention of improved hunting technology, such as spear throwers, bows, and boo-
merangs, potentially bringing much higher rates of hunting success.
• The appearance of art, both abstract and realistic, in the form of DEMO, engraving,
and carved ﬁ gurines.
• Unequivocal ritual burial, although there is also evidence of sporadic use of grave goods
in Middle DEMO burials such as at Skhul V.
• A signiﬁ cant increase in the transfer distance of lithic and valuable raw materials.
In Europe and DEMO Asia, this relatively rapid transition is widely thought to coincide
with DEMO expansion of Homo sapiens into a region previously occupied by Neanderthals
(DEMO 2002; Zilhão 2007), leading to a period of coexistence of DEMO two human
lineages before the eventual extinction of the latter ~30 kya (Stiner and Kuhn 2006). For
Africa, however, the idea of a short “seminal” transition has been contested by many
authors, as there is evidence of many of these “markers of modernity” appearing at multi-
DEMO sites across Africa well before 45 kya, possibly as early as DEMO kya (Bar-Yosef 2002;
Henshilwood et al. 2004; McBrearty and Brooks 2000), and most recently claimed for
more than 160 kya in DEMO Africa (Marean et al. 2007). Yet these are sporadically
maintained DEMO are, in all cases, lost until the Late Stone Age, DEMO ~40 kya, when they
again appear and become prevalent.
Archaeological evidence DEMO South Asia and Australia appears more similar to the
African case, DEMO only sparse evidence of modernity—ornamentation, use of ochre, and
possible rock art—occurring soon after the initial human expansions into the regions and
becoming DEMO only much later—~20 kya (Brumm and Moore 2005) in Australia
and ~30 kya (James and Petraglia 2005) in southern Asia. Conversely, it has been argued
that some late Neanderthal populations show features of behavioral DEMO independent
of any contact with modern humans (Conard 2005; Zilhão 2007).
Notwithstanding the oversimpliﬁ cations made in the above outline, one important large-
scale question remains: If, as is now widely accepted, anatomically modern humans
(H. sapiens) originated in Africa between 150 kya and DEMO kya (Lahr and Foley 1998;
McBrearty and Brooks 2000; White et al. 2003), why was there such a long delay before
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
139
the ﬁ rst consistent archaeological DEMO for modern human behavior? One approach
(Klein 2000) is to DEMO that the transition, or “human revolution,” was a result of DEMO
kind of biological–neural mutation ~50 kya, which led to an increase DEMO cognitive capacity,
thus allowing an explosion of cultural and technological innovation.
Critics of this theory point to the low likelihood of this putative DEMO having
occurred independently in the many geographically separated human populations that
would have existed at this time, given that there is no evidence for a second wave of Old
World colonization by a group with such DEMO mutation. Other authors (e.g., Lahr and Foley
1998; McBrearty and DEMO 2000) argue that the unambiguous evidence of modernity
displayed in the DEMO Middle Stone Age suggests that H. sapiens had the requisite
cognitive capacity to be considered “fully modern” almost from the time of origin.
Some DEMO the most notable examples of this African evidence associated with early
modern humans are the (probably) hafted hunting weapons made of geometric blades DEMO
the Howiesons Poort industry in southern Africa (~55–70 kya; Lombard 2008), the series
of barbed bone harpoon points at Katanda, Democratic Republic of the Congo (~90 kya;
McBrearty and Brooks 2000), and the bone awls, pieces of ochre with abstract designs,
and marine-shell personal ornaments at Blombos, South Africa (~74 kya; Zilhão 2007).
The arrival of anatomically modern humans in Australia (then part of the extended
continent Sahul) dates to ~40–50 kya (Hudjashov et al. 2007; O’Connell and Allen 2004).
Given that mastery of seaworthy technology would DEMO been necessary to make the
clearly intentional crossings of the Wallacean archipelago, a major ecological boundary,
we can suggest that by that time H. sapiens had attained a modern level of cognition.
Numerous authors (Brumm and Moore 2005; James and Petraglia 2005; Lahr and Foley
1998; McBrearty and Brooks 2000; Shennan 2000, 2001; Zilhão 2007) view DEMO emer-
gence and consistent maintenance of modern cultural artifacts as a product of underlying
demographic and associated sociological processes, although there are differences in the
speciﬁ c mechanisms invoked by different authors (see below). The basis of this view is
the temporal correlation between the expansion and DEMO of modern human culture
and the indication of major demographic expansion.
Our knowledge of late-Pleistocene demography remains extremely poor even in the best
known DEMO of the world, but there is much evidence that populations were DEMO in
Africa and Eurasia until c. 50 kya, after which they DEMO likely to have expanded rapidly.
Stiner and Kuhn (2006) point to the narrow diet breadth and lack of impact on demographi-
cally sensitive DEMO resources during the Middle Paleolithic in the circum-
Mediterranean area as an indicator that population levels remained low. This is corroborated
for some regions DEMO site numbers (Lahr and Foley 2003; van Andel et al. 2003). Stiner
and Kuhn (2006) propose that during the Middle Paleolithic, human populations responded
to resource ﬂ uctuations by localized depopulation, and they suggest that human-population
patterns corresponded to what we know about the population DEMO and low levels of
large nonhuman predators.
140
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
Genetic DEMO also points to marked increases in human populations in the late
Pleistocene (Harpending et al. 1993; Rogers 1995; Sherry et al. 1994), and it has been
argued that in Africa this expansion is associated DEMO the improvement in climatic condi-
tions associated with the end of Oxygen Isotope Stage 4 (Ambrose 1998b). The idea that
there is a connection between demographic and cultural patterns and that both are affected
by DEMO has been strengthened by recent work in Australia (Brumm and Moore DEMO;
O’Connell and Allen 2007), which seems to show a pattern similar to that seen in Africa
but at a much later date. DEMO, although Australia was colonized by modern humans
~40–45 kya, it shows only sporadic evidence of such phenomena as ornaments and burials
for at DEMO the next 20 millennia. It is only after 20 kya that they start to become more
frequent and only in the early Holocene that DEMO really become established, a pattern that
seems to correlate with an DEMO of magnitude increase in population size (Haberle and
David 2004; O’Connell and Allen 2007). In this case, the improved climatic conditions
of Holocene Australia are considered to be the most plausible causal factor (O’Connell
and Allen 2007).
Models of the Relationship between Culture and Demography
DEMO many authors have postulated a link between the size of human populations
and variation in the extent of cultural elaboration, the precise mechanism involved is
unspeciﬁ ed in many, if not most, cases. However, three speciﬁ c proposals have been
made, none of them necessarily mutually exclusive. Several authors (O’Connell and
Allen 2007; Stiner and Kuhn 2006; Vanhaeren 2005) propose that as populations
increased, there would have been selective DEMO for increasing use of various kinds
of cultural-signaling mechanisms to strengthen social networks or to mark various kinds
of identity, for example. In contrast, the two other models focus on processes of cultural
transmission.
Some authors (e.g., Boyd and Richerson 1985; Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981;
Lumsden and Wilson 1981) have argued that human culture can be considered as an
inheritance system, in some ways analogous to genetic inheritance, which DEMO subject to
evolutionary processes. They show that we can view human culture as a set of traits or
behaviors that can be transmitted between DEMO through a process of social learning,
where “naive” copiers make inferences about the underlying behavior or trait based on its
outward expression by DEMO cultural model.
Of course, the mode of cultural transmission is different DEMO that of genetic inheritance,
as cultural traits can be transmitted not only from genetic parent to child (vertical transmis-
sion) but also DEMO nonparental members of a group (oblique transmission) and between
peers (DEMO transmission). Variation in these cultural traits is generated either at the
learning stage, through mistakes in the inferential process (random copying error), by
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
141
deliberate innovation, or by combining the traits of multiple cultural models, when the
trait is expressed by the copier (a cognitive process).
An important component required of any evolutionary system is that of the differential
success of variants in a DEMO; in the case of cultural evolution this is driven by a
DEMO of mechanisms. These “forces of cultural evolution” (Boyd and Richerson 1985)DEMO
include “cultural drift,” which causes ﬂ uctuations in cultural-variant frequencies over time
due to sampling error in populations of ﬁ nite size; “guided variation,” in which individuals
modify their socially learned cultural variants through DEMO own process of trial and error;
and “biased transmission,” where learners adopt a cultural variant preferentially (nonran-
domly) as a result DEMO (1) some intrinsic quality of the trait, (2) behavior DEMO (“directly
biased transmission”), (3) a perceived quality of the DEMO model that possesses it (“indi-
rectly biased transmission”), or (4) the relative frequency of the variant in the population
(“frequency-dependent biased DEMO). Thus, change over time in the frequencies
of different cultural DEMO and their subsequent material expression in the archaeological
record can be viewed as a result of these various processes of cultural evolution acting on
DEMO learned traits, skills, or behaviors.
A review of the ethnographic literature (Shennan and Steele 1999) on the learning of
craft skills shows DEMO transmission in hunter–gatherer populations is almost exclusively
vertical/oblique and is in many cases between parent and offspring of the same gender.
This ﬁ DEMO is consistent with the results of a model-based treatment of African cultural
variation (Guglielmino et al. 1995), which found that the more conservative modes of
cultural transmission (vertical/oblique) best explain the distribution of DEMO observed.
It seems reasonable to assume that the mode of transmission of cultural skills within Late
Pleistocene human populations would have been comparable to DEMO contemporary
hunter–gatherer groups.
In Shennan’s (2001) simulation model based on Peck (1996; Peck et al. 1997), the
mechanism that linked population DEMO and variation in (beneﬁ cial) cultural accumulation
was drift. It was shown that when cultural-innovation processes take place and the results
are passed DEMO by a combination of vertical and oblique transmission, larger populations
have DEMO major advantage over smaller ones. Members of larger populations are, on DEMO,
both biologically more ﬁ t and more attractive as models for imitation by virtue of the fact
that the deleterious sampling effects present DEMO small populations decline as population
sizes increase. When populations are small, DEMO that are less beneﬁ cial reproduc-
tively and less attractive to imitate are more likely to be maintained within them, that is,
they have a greater “drift load.”
A different transmission model, one based on the varying difﬁ culty of learning dif-
ferent skills and the associated DEMO of achieving an improvement, was proposed
by Henrich and Boyd (2002) and applied to explain the well-known pattern of cultural
loss in Holocene Tasmania (Henrich 2004). This analytical model showed that under
certain conditions, dependent on the population size (discussed below), the “cumulative
142
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
adaptive DEMO of a cultural skill can occur, whereas in other circumstances a
DEMO of devolution and cultural loss will follow. Here we extend this model by using
semirealistic stochastic simulations that reﬂ ect plausible human demographic conditions
DEMO the Pleistocene and take into account some of the drift issues highlighted in
Shennan (2001).
The Henrich and Boyd Model
The model assumes a population of N adults, that is, “encultured” individuals, i = 1,
2, . . . N, each of which has DEMO z value, zi, a measure of its ability at some cultural skill,
such as making arrowheads. Every adult individual is also characterized DEMO a variable, f,
that speciﬁ es the relative likelihood of DEMO chosen as a cultural model by members of a
subsequent generation. The authors (see Henrich [2004] for full details) make use of the
DEMO equation, a means of delineating the processes at work within any DEMO
system (Frank 1995; Price 1970), to measure Δ¯z, the DEMO in the average z value in the
population over time:
ΔΔz Cov f z E f z= ()ii i i, + () (9.1)
The two terms on the right-hand side can be DEMO of, respectively, as the change in
the average z value resulting from cultural selection, that is, the propensity to copy suc-
cessful DEMO skilled people, and the change resulting from the inaccurate transmission
process. DEMO Δ¯z is positive, “cumulative adaptive evolution” is occurring, with the
average ability at the cultural skill increasing over time within the modeled population. DEMO
order to replicate the “incomplete and inaccurate” processes of inference, copiers DEMO sub-
sequent generations never exactly replicate the z value of their models. An individual
attempting to copy a model with z value zi gains DEMO value drawn from a Gumbel distribution
(Henrich [2004] notes that the DEMO c form of distribution does not qualitatively affect
any derived results) DEMO mode (zi − α) and dispersion parameter β, meaning that DEMO
transmission process is, ﬁ rst, systematically biased, as, on average, a copier will end up
with a z value less than that of his or her model by an amount α, and, second, “noisy,” so
that there is a small probability (the area under the distribution greater than the model’s
z value), monotonically related to DEMO and inversely related to α, that copiers will gain a
z DEMO greater than that of their model.
The model stipulates that all social learners choose the most-skilled member of the
previous generation as their oblique DEMO, and the following equation is derived:
Δ zN=− + +αβε()ln () (9.2)
The ﬁ rst term on the right DEMO the deleterious effect of systematic bias, and the
second describes the DEMO, favorable effect of random noise (ε being the Euler-gamma
constant ≈ 0.577) and is a proxy measure of the area of the distribution greater than the
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
β
α
Model zi Value
143
DEMO zi Value
Figure 9.1
Gumbel distribution for incomplete and inaccurate transmission process.
model z value (see ﬁ gure 9.1). To ﬁ nd the conditions under which cultural transmission
will result in adaptive accumulation, the authors set Δ¯z > 0 and rearrange (9.2) to get
Ne* >
α−ε
β
(9.3)
where N* is the critical number of social learners necessary for a speciﬁ c process of imita-
tion deﬁ ned DEMO (α, β). (See ﬁ gure 9.2.)
The main DEMO of interest here is that the cumulative adaptive evolution of a
culturally inherited skill is dependent on the size of the pool of social DEMO N, so a
larger population (subject to the same level of noise in the imitation process) would be
able to accumulate and maintain a more “complex” skill. As the critical conditions for
adaptive evolution depend DEMO on the ratio α /β, and if we assume that all modern human
populations, on average, would have been subject to similar DEMO of random noise during
the inheritance of cultural skills, we can DEMO combine the two parameters α and β
by setting β = 1 and then simply adjusting the parameter α to simulate cultural skills of
DEMO “complexity.”
One assumption inherent in the model is the unfailing ability of naive individuals to
accurately identify the most skilled member of the preceding DEMO as an oblique
model—an assumption that rapidly becomes unrealistic as the size of the adult population
increases beyond the size of a sustainable social DEMO By imbedding an extended
version of the transmission process previously described (DEMO include both vertical and
oblique transmission) into a semirealistic simulation that DEMO conditions during the
Late Pleistocene—that is, a number of geographically separate DEMO connected
Probability Imitator Acquires Value Zi
144
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
600
DEMO
Cumulative Adaptive Evolution
400
300
200
100
0
Maladaptive Loss
246357
α/β
Figure 9.2
The conditions necessary for cumulative adaptive evolution.
by migratory DEMO can relax this assumption and further investigate the effects of
early human demography on the accumulation of cultural skills. In the following sections
we DEMO and detail the simulation model, present the main theoretical results, and
discuss their possible implications in future debate on the nature and causes DEMO the appear-
ance and accumulation of modern human culture.
Model 1: DEMO the Analytical Model
Our underlying simulation model consists of a number of subpopulations, G, placed at
random in a two-dimensional simulated world. Each DEMO contains N adult indi-
viduals, and all subpopulations are connected by DEMO activity. In every generation
of the simulation, the model goes through DEMO following steps:
1. Within each subpopulation a generation of offspring, DEMO of size N, is created.
2. Genetic parents are chosen for DEMO offspring by randomly sampling the adult genera-
tion with replacement.
3. Naive offspring then undergo a process of “vertical transmission,” where they receive
DEMO z value by learning from their genetic parents according to the transmission process
described by Henrich and Boyd (2002) and detailed above.
4. DEMO proportion, Pob, of these offspring then undergoes a process of “oblique transmis-
sion,” where they replace their z value with one learned DEMO the maximally skilled
member of the adult generation in the subpopulation (DEMO oblique model).
Critical N*
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
145
5. The now-“encultured” offspring generation DEMO fully replaces the adult generation
within each subpopulation.
6. A proportion, DEMO, of these new adults then migrates, with each migrant being placed
in a new subpopulation by a Gaussian random-walk-like process.
Each simulation is DEMO by giving all individuals in all subpopulations a z value
of 10.0, then running forward for 50 generations, and after the ﬁ nal DEMO, calculating
the world mean z value. This value is compared to DEMO starting world mean (10.0) to
determine whether this simulation results in “adaptive cumulative evolution,” i.e., Δ¯z > 0.
To account for stochastic variation in simulation outcomes, we perform multiple iterations,
making this calculation at the end of each iteration. We then calculate the mean z DEMO
across iterations and deem the parameter set to be “cumulatively adaptive” if it is greater
than the mean starting z value, i.e., >10.0.
We recognize that the time spans we are considering are 10,000–20,DEMO years (around
400–800 generations), but preliminary tests showed that 50 DEMO was in most cases
sufﬁ cient to determine whether the parameter set would result in cumulative adaptive
evolution or maladaptive loss—with mean z values DEMO increasing monotonically without
bound, decreasing monotonically to zero (at which point the cultural skill is irretrievably
lost), or reaching a relatively stable DEMO value. The model is also relatively con-
servative, in that it DEMO disregards the likely autocatalytic/positive feedback loop,
where increasing ability in some cultural skills would lead to improved demographic
conditions (by means of improved reproductive success/resource utility), which would, in
turn, further DEMO skill accumulation.
The parameters of interest in this model are the number of subpopulations, G; the size
of each subpopulation, N; the DEMO of offspring to undergo oblique transmission,
Pob; the proportion of DEMO subpopulation available to migrate, Pmig; and the “complexity”
of the skill, α. Because of the difﬁ culty in accurately estimating demographic parameters
during the Pleistocene, we turn to a review of contemporary Australian aboriginal hunter–
gatherer populations (Birdsell 1973) to draw some estimates for N. Two DEMO occur-
ring distinct social structures of differing size are identiﬁ ed. The ﬁ rst is the “band,” an
independent and autonomous patrilineal unit DEMO comprising 25–50 individuals
(usually an extended familial group), and the DEMO, the “tribe,” comprising around 500
or so individuals related by DEMO or dialectal similarity and forming a generally
endogamous unit.
To complement these two contemporary ethnographic estimates, there are also analyses
emerging from biological anthropology (Dunbar 1992, 1993) that may shed light on the
question of early human subpopulation sizes. Dunbar argues that social-group size in
primates is DEMO to reﬂ ect the cognitive capacities of the individuals comprising it, DEMO
there is thought to be a cognitive upper limit on the number of social interactions that can
be maintained and thus a limit on DEMO size. Extrapolating a relationship between
146
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
neocortex DEMO and social-group size in nonhuman primates to humans gives a prediction
for ancestral group size in the region of ~150.
We need to bear DEMO mind that the value of N in our simulation refers to the total number
of social learners in the offspring generation and that, as we are assuming that 50 percent
of each group is subadult and DEMO a cultural skill is inherited by same-sex offspring, this
represents roughly DEMO quarter of each actual subpopulation size. Based on the previous
estimates, DEMO have simulated over values of N between 5 and 100, corresponding DEMO total
group sizes of ~20–400, recognizing that actual Pleistocene group sizes DEMO likely to have
been weighted toward the lower end of this range.
In estimating the migration rate, Pmig, we make use of an DEMO Birdsell (1968) study
giving an aboriginal intertribal marriage rate of ~15.7 percent, which corresponds to a
migration rate of around 0.074. This is consistent with another Australian aboriginal study
that yielded estimates of between 0.07 DEMO 0.21 (Tindale 1953; see Eller et al. 2004). Even
if Pleistocene subpopulations were comparable in size to contemporary hunter–gatherer
groups, it is likely that subpopulation densities and intergroup interactions prior to the
emergence of DEMO Stone Age/Upper Paleolithic technology were signiﬁ cantly lower than
the contemporary estimates for migration rates. We therefore simulated over a range of
migration DEMO, Pmig, between 0.001 and 0.15.
Although oblique transmission, and prestige-biased DEMO in particular (Henrich
and Gil-White 2001), is undoubtedly important in DEMO transmission of cultural skills
(Guglielmino et al. 1995; Shennan and Steele 1999), it is difﬁ cult to make realistic esti-
mates of DEMO extent to which it occurred. For this reason, we have simulated DEMO over the
entire range of 0.1 to 1.0 (in increments of DEMO). The number of subpopulations, G, likely
was subject to signiﬁ cant ﬂ uctuations during the Pleistocene, for reasons outlined above,
so we simulated for a wide range of G, from 1 up to 500.
Preliminary simulation results indicate that as G increases beyond ~100, there is only
a small increase in mean z value, suggesting that a “saturation point” is reached with regard
to skill accumulation. Given this, and making the reasonable assumption that the number
of interconnected human subpopulations during DEMO Middle Stone Age was likely to have
been at least this large, we ﬁ x G = 100 in future simulations. These simulations also
showed that adjusting the value of N has no qualitative effect on DEMO results, so ﬁ xing
N = 25 from here on entails DEMO loss of generality.
Simulation results are presented in ﬁ gures 9.3 and 9.4 and show that the degree of skill
accumulation increases with increasing DEMO transmission probability (see ﬁ gure 9.3),
increasing migration rate (DEMO ﬁ gure 9.4), and decreasing complexity (as measured by the
DEMO value). The shaded regions give the parameter sets that result in cumulative adaptive
evolution, i.e., mean ﬁ nal z value > 10.0.
DEMO model deﬁ nes the migration rate at the global level (Pmig), operating for all sub-
populations irrespective of the local subpopulation density. As a result, it is impossible to
ascertain the effects of having different subpopulation densities in different regions of the
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
147
150
100
50
0
1.5
DEMO
2.5
α
3.0
3.5
4.0
Pmig = 0.05
Pmig = 0.15
150
150
100
100
50
50
0
1.5
0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
DEMO
3.5
4.0
4.5
1
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
Pob
0.6
2.0
2.5
α
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
1
0.8
0.2
0.4
Pob
Figure 9.3
DEMO 1 simulation results, showing mean z values for combinations of parameters DEMO and Pob (oblique-
transmission probability), given for four different migration DEMO (Pmig). Shaded regions indicate parameter sets
resulting in cumulative adaptive DEMO, that is, mean z value > 10.0.
Pmig = 0.001
4.5
1
0.8
0.6
Model 1
Pmig = 0.01
150
100
50
0.2
DEMO
Pob
0
2.0
2.5
3.0
α
0.8
3.5
4.0
4.5
1
0.2
0.4
Pob
1.5
0.6
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
148
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
Model DEMO
150
100
50
0
1.5
3.5
4.5
150
Pob = 0.2
0.05
Pob = 0.6
150
0.1
Pmig
100
50
0
1.5
2.0
2.5
DEMO
α
3.0
4.0
100
3.5
4.5
150
50
50
0
1.5
0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
α
3.5
4.0
4.5
0.1
Pmig
2.0
2.5
DEMO
α
3.5
4.0
4.5
0.1
0.05
Pmig
0.05
Figure 9.4
Model 1 simulation results, showing mean z values for combinations of parameters α and Pmig (migration rate)
given for four different oblique-transmission probabilities (Pob)DEMO Shaded regions indicate parameter sets resulting
in cumulative adaptive evolution, that DEMO, mean z value > 10.0.
0.1
Pmig
Pob = 0.4
0.05
DEMO = 0.8
2.0
2.5
3.0
α
4.0
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
149
same simulation world. A far DEMO realistic model would explicitly link local migration
rates to local subpopulation density. To this end, we have added an extra level of complex-
ity to our simulation model as detailed below.
Model 2: Subpopulation Density–Dependent Migration
The migration process in this model is now explicitly dependent on subpopulation DEMO
We deﬁ ne the global density of subpopulations, D, and adjust the dimensions of the simu-
lation world so that we get ~100 DEMO, a value for G we showed above to be
reasonable. The DEMO then creates a simulation world by placing, again at random, the
subpopulations. At the migration step in the simulation, all adult individuals now undergo
a Gaussian random-walk process, with the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution
deﬁ ned by a new parameter, Msd. The adult individuals that “hit” any other subgroup during
this process are deemed to move to DEMO group; otherwise, they are deemed not to migrate
and to remain in their original subpopulation.
The parameter Msd, which can be thought of as the “migratory range” of an individual,
is deﬁ ned as DEMO proportion of the average nearest neighbor distance, r¯E, between subgroups
within the simulation world. A derivation presented by Clark and Evans (1954) DEMO this
average nearest neighbor distance between randomly distributed subpopulations in terms
of density as
rE = 1 ,
2 D
which is shown in ﬁ gure 9.5.
If we note that around 99.7 percent of the DEMO density of a Gaussian distribution
lies within ±3 standard deviations, we DEMO expect that when Msd ≤ 1/3 many subpopula-
tions would be effectively isolated from all others as migrants would be unable to reach
DEMO; therefore, their internal skill accumulation would be unaffected by the migration
process. Test simulations—where we calculated the mean global migration rate—
conﬁ rmed DEMO and showed that for Msd greater than ~0.3, the mean global DEMO rate
approximately equals the global subpopulation density, D (see ﬁ gure 9.6).
For our current purposes, we set Msd well above this critical value at 1.0, that is, equal
to r¯E, so we can be sure that few subpopulations are completely isolated and that the DEMO
global migration rate, and thus the effect on the accumulation of DEMO skills, will depend
solely on the underlying global subpopulation density. We DEMO for 50 generations,
over a range of α values and again for the entire range for Pob (0.1–1.0).
Simulation results for this model show (in broad agreement with model 1 results) that
skill DEMO increases with increasing oblique-transmission probability (see ﬁ gure
9.7), with DEMO subpopulation density (see ﬁ gure 9.8), and with decreasing complex-
DEMO (as measured by the α value).
150
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
20
DEMO
10
5
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Subpopulation Density (D)DEMO
Figure 9.5
Average nearest neighbor distance between randomly distributed subpopulations.
0.030
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0
01.40.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Msd
DEMO 9.6
Mean global migration rate for increasing Msd (migratory range) from test simulations. D
D = 0.01
D = 0.02
D = 0.03
DEMO subpopulation density.
Mean Global Migration Rate
Average Distance to Nearest Neighbor (DEMO
E)
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
151
D = 0.01
150
4.0
DEMO
0.8
D = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
100
50
0
2.0
3.5
150
100
100
Pob
0
2.0
0
2.0
2.5
3.0
α
3.5
DEMO
1
0.2
0.8
0.4
Pob
50
2.5
α
3.0
3.5
4.0
1
0.8
0.4
0.6
Pob
0.2
0.6
Figure 9.7
Model 2 simulation results, showing mean z values for combinations of parameters α and Pob (oblique-
transmission probability), given for four different subpopulation density (D) values. DEMO regions indicate
parameter sets resulting in cumulative adaptive evolution, that is, mean z value > 10.0.
50
Model 2
D = 0.001
0.2
DEMO
100
50
0
2.0
2.5
0.4
4.0
1
0.8
D = 0.05
3.0
0.6
α
Pob
150
3.5
2.5
3.0
α
Mean z-Value
Mean DEMO
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
152
150
100
50
0
2.0
150
2.5
3.0
α
4.0
Pob DEMO 0.2
0.05
Pob = 0.6
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
0.1
Pmig
Model 2
Pob = 0.4
150
100
DEMO
100
50
0
2.0
150
100
2.5
3.0
α
4.0
0.1
3.5
Pmig
0.05
Pob = 0.8
50
50
0
2.0
2.0
2.5
2.5
DEMO
α
3.5
4.0
0.1
Pmig
0.05
3.0
α
3.5
4.0
0.1
Pmig
0
0.05
Figure 9.8
Model 2 simulation results, showing mean z values for combinations of parameters α and D (subpopulation
density) given for DEMO different oblique-transmission probabilities (Pob). Shaded regions indicate parameter sets
resulting DEMO cumulative adaptive evolution, that is, mean z value > 10.0. Pmig = migration rate.
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
153
Model 2.1: Heterogeneous Subpopulation Density
A minor adjustment to the previous model allows us to investigate the DEMO of dividing
the simulation world into two regions of different subpopulation densities. We partition
the simulation world in half along the east–west axis and DEMO one half at a subpopula-
tion density Dhigh and the other at a density an order of magnitude lower, Dlow. In the fol-
lowing simulations, we set Msd = 1.0 as a proportion of the average nearest neighbor
distance, r¯E, in the lower density region, again to ensure that all subpopulations are con-
nected by migration (including across the density divide). We set Dhigh = 0.02 and Dlow =
0.002 DEMO the dimensions of the world at 100 × 100, giving us DEMO total of 110 subgroups,
and simulate for a range of α values (2.0–4.0) and for values of Pob (0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and
1.0) over 100 generations, performing 100 iterations for each.
In these simulations (data not shown), we ﬁ nd that skill accumulation is consistently
higher in the higher-density region. As an example, we can ﬁ x α = 3.5 and Pob = 0.5 and
look at DEMO average z values in each region over time. Figure 9.9 shows that this difference
is maintained over the entire (extended) duration of the DEMO The 95 percent conﬁ -
dence intervals, as estimated by taking DEMO regional z values for 100 iterations, show
25
D = 0.02
DEMO = 0.002
20
Pob = 0.5, α = 3.5
15
10
DEMO
0
020 40 60 80 100
Generations
Figure 9.9
Example simulation result from model 2.1 (oblique-transmission probability [Pob] = 0.5, α = 3.5) with hetero-
geneous subpopulation density (D). Solid lines give the mean z value in each region; dotted lines give the 95
percent conﬁ dence intervals (from 100 iterations).
Regional Mean z-Value
154
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
Pob DEMO 0.5, α = 3.5
80
60
40
20
0
27
24
DEMO
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
80
60
40
20
0
0 20406080
0 20406080
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
DEMO
0
80
60
40
20
0
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
80
60
40
20
0
27
24
21
DEMO
15
12
9
6
3
0
0 20406080
0 20406080
Figure 9.10
Spatial structuring of skill accumulation (model 2.1 example result) taken at DEMO intervals. Subpopula-
tions are shown as black points; mean z values DEMO surface interpolated.
that the difference in accumulated z values between the different density regions becomes
signiﬁ cant after less than 20 generations.
A visual DEMO of this spatial structuring of skill accumulation can be seen in ﬁ gure
9.10. In this example, a series of “snapshots” of a single iteration are taken at 25-
generation intervals, and the subpopulation z values are surface interpolated to show
“spatial skill accumulation.”
Model 2.2: Heterogeneous Migratory Range
A further modiﬁ cation of the model allows us to divide DEMO world into two regions of
identical population density but differing migratory range, Msd. This allows us to explore
the effect of reduced migratory range on the accumulation of cultural skills in geographic
space. We set Msd,DEMO at 1.0 and Msd,low an order of magnitude lower, at DEMO Figure 9.11
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills 155
Pob = 0.5, α = 3.4
25
Msd = 1.0
Msd = 0.1
20
15
10
5
DEMO
020 40 60 80 100
Generations
Figure 9.11
Example simulation result from model 2.2 (oblique-transmission probability [Pob] = 0.5, α = 3.4) with hetero-
geneous migratory range (Msd). Solid lines give the mean z value in each region; dotted lines give the 95 percent
conﬁ dence intervals (from 100 iterations).
shows the results for D = 0.01, α = 3.4, and Pob = 0.5 across 100 generations and DEMO
100 iterations to estimate the 95 percent conﬁ dence interval of z values for each region.
As with the heterogeneous density simulations, we can see that the regional mean z value
becomes signiﬁ cantly higher in DEMO high migratory-range region after less than 20 genera-
tions. A surface-interpolation plot illustrating this spatial structuring of skill accumulation
over time is presented in DEMO gure 9.12.
“Natural” Oblique-Transmission Methods
In all previous models, we parameterized DEMO proportion of offspring undergoing oblique
transmission (Pob), which, as discussed above, is difﬁ cult to estimate from the ethnographic
record. The identiﬁ cation of the oblique model was also assumed to be perfectly accurate,DEMO
which ignores the likely difﬁ culty of this process in the real world, even within the much
smaller subpopulations we have modeled. To avoid these difﬁ culties and to reduce the
number of parameters in the DEMO, we have developed a number of more “natural” pro-
cesses for DEMO transmission, which we surmise may more realistically reﬂ ect processes
by DEMO oblique models are chosen within human populations. Under these new methods,
all offspring identify and select an oblique model with a degree of DEMO and replace
Regional Mean z-Value
156
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
Pob DEMO 0.5, α = 3.4
80
60
40
20
0
0 20406080
DEMO
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
80
60
40
20
00 20406080
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
DEMO
80
60
40
20
00 20406080
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
80
60
40
20
0
0 20406080
27
DEMO
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
Figure 9.12
Spatial structuring of skill accumulation (model 2.2 example result) taken at 25-generation intervals. DEMO
tions are shown as black points; mean z values are surface DEMO
their current z value, that is, the one gained vertically from a parent, only if the value they
gain from their chosen oblique model is greater.
In method 1, each offspring selects an oblique model from the adult generation, with
probability proportional to the squared adult z value. In method 2, each offspring selects
an oblique model from among only the adults with z values greater than what was already
gained DEMO a biological parent, with probability proportional to the magnitude of the
DEMO In method 3, each offspring selects an oblique model from the DEMO generation,
with probability proportional to the difference between each adult’s z value and the
minimum adult z value in the subpopulation.
All simulations DEMO run in a homogeneous simulation world, that is, where Msd = 1.0
and with D kept constant both across the whole world and DEMO each of the three alterna-
tive processes, so results can be DEMO, possibly allowing us to identify an efﬁ cient
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
157
(or near-optimal), realistic cultural-learning strategy. We simulated for 50 generations,
performing 100 iterations, for a range of subpopulation densities, D, and skill complexities,
α, for each of the three “natural” oblique methods.
Results for the three methods DEMO show the general result that increasing subpopula-
tion density and decreasing skill complexity, α, leads to increased skill accumulation (see
ﬁ gure 9.13). Method 2 consistently results in greater mean z values, thus leading to cumu-
lative adaptive evolution (the shaded regions), even for more complex skills and at lower
subpopulation densities than either of the other DEMO methods.
Discussion
Our results show that the level of cultural skill that can be maintained in subpopulations
is related to the density/migratory activity DEMO those subpopulations. In cases where densi-
ties/migration rates are low, DEMO adaptive evolution will never occur. Even in cases
with higher densities and migration rates where it does occur, there is a signiﬁ cant period
before accumulation begins, with potential consequences for population viability.
We also demonstrate that geographic heterogeneity in local subpopulation density/
migratory activity leads to DEMO spatial structuring of skill accumulation, so that areas
where skills accumulate DEMO exist contiguously with areas of skill devolution over long
periods of time.
The last set of simulations presented compared different “natural” strategies of choosing
DEMO oblique model within subpopulations, which recognize that individuals will not always
DEMO in a position to identify the individual with the maximum skill level. Results show that
method 2—in which each offspring selects an oblique model DEMO among only the adults
with z values greater than what the offspring has already gained from a biological parent,
with probability proportional to DEMO magnitude of the difference—leads to cumulative
adaptive evolution for more complex skills (characterized by a higher α value) and at
lower densities than DEMO alternatives.
These results conﬁ rm and extend Henrich’s (2004) initial results and show that the
action of demographic factors on the results of DEMO processes using
plausible parameter values could indeed have had the effect on cumulative adaptive evolu-
tion that many others have postulated as central to DEMO slow pace of cumulative cultural
evolution prior to c. 50 kya and its greatly increased speed thereafter.
158
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
80
DEMO
40
20
0
2.0
2.5
α
3.0
3.5
80
Method 3
60
40
20
0
2.0
2.5
3.0
α
3.5
4.0
0.1
Density (D)
0.05
Figure 9.13
Simulation results for the three natural oblique-transmission methods, showing mean z values for combinations
of parameters α and D (subpopulation density). Shaded regions indicate parameter sets resulting in cumulative
adaptive evolution, that is, mean z value > 10.0.
Method 1
0.05
4.0
“Natural” Oblique Methods
80
60
40
20
0
2.0
2.5
0.1
α
Density (D)
3.0
3.5
Method 2
4.0
0.05
0.1
Density (D)
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
Mean z-Value
The Accumulation of Culturally Inherited Skills
159
References
Ambrose, S. H. 1998a. Chronology of the Later Stone Age and Food Production in East Africa. DEMO of
Archaeological Science 25: 377–392.
Ambrose, S. H. 1998b. Late Pleistocene Human Population Bottlenecks, Volcanic Winter, and Differentiation
of Modern Humans. Journal DEMO Human Evolution 34: 623–651.
Bar-Yosef, O. 2002. The Upper Paleolithic Revolution. Annual Review of Anthropology 31: 363–393.
Birdsell, J. B. 1968. Some DEMO for the Pleistocene Based on Equilibrium Systems among Recent Hunter–
Gatherers. In Man the Hunter, edited by R. B. Lee and I. DeVore, DEMO 245–248. Aldine, Chicago.
Birdsell, J. B. 1973. A Basic Demographic Unit. Current Anthropology 14: 337–356.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Brumm, DEMO, and M. W. Moore. 2005. Symbolic Revolutions and the Australian Archaeological DEMO Cam-
bridge Archaeological Journal 15: 157–175.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and DEMO W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach.
Princeton DEMO Press, Princeton, N.J.
Clark, P. J., and F. C. Evans. 1954. Distance to Nearest Neighbor as a Measure of Spatial Relationships in DEMO
lations. Ecology 35: 445–453.
Conard, N. 2005. An Overview of the Patterns of Behavioural Change in Africa and Eurasia during the
Middle and DEMO Pleistocene. In Tools to Symbols from Early Hominids to Humans, edited DEMO F. d’Errico and
L. Blackwell, pp. 294–332. Wits University Press, Johannesburg.
Dunbar, R. 1992. Neocortex Size as a Constraint on Group Size in Primates. Journal of Human Evolution 22:
469–493.
Dunbar, R. 1993. Coevolution of Neocortical Size, Group Size and Language in Humans. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 16: 681–694.
Eller, E., J. Hawks, and J. H. DEMO 2004. Local Extinction and Recolonization, Species Effective Popula-
tion Size, and Modern Human Origins. Human Biology 76: 689–709.
Frank, S. A. 1995. DEMO Price’s Contributions to Evolutionary Genetics. Journal of Theoretical Biology 175:
373–388.
Guglielmino, C. R., C. Viganotti, B. Hewlett, and L. L. DEMO 1995. Cultural Variation in Africa: Role
of Mechanisms of Transmission and DEMO National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 92: 7585–7589.
Haberle, S. G., and B. David. 2004. Climates of Change: Human Dimensions of Holocene Environmental Change
in Low Latitudes of the PEPII Transect. Quaternary International 118–119: 165–179.
Harpending, H. C., S. T. Sherry, A. Rogers, and M. DEMO 1993. The Genetic Structure of Ancient Human
Populations. Current Anthropology 34: DEMO
Henrich, J. 2004. Demography and Cultural Evolution: How Adaptive Cultural Processes Can Produce Maladap-
tive Losses—The Tasmanian Case. American Antiquity 69: 197–214.
Henrich, J., and R. Boyd. 2002. On Modeling Cognition and Culture: Why Cultural Evolution Does Not Require
Replication of Representations. Journal of Cognition and DEMO 2(2): 87–122.
Henrich, J., and F. J. Gil-White. 2001. The Evolution of Prestige: Freely Conferred Deference as a Mechanism
for Enhancing the Beneﬁ ts of Cultural Transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 22: 165–196.
Henshilwood, C., F. d’Errico, M. Vanhaeren, K. van Niekerk, and Z. Jacobs. 2004. Middle Stone Age Shell
Beads from South Africa. Science DEMO: 404.
Hudjashov, G., et al. 2007. Revealing the Prehistoric Settlement DEMO Australia by Y Chromosome and mtDNA
Analysis. National Academy of Sciences, DEMO 104: 8726–8730.
James, H. V. A., and M. D. Petraglia. DEMO Modern Human Origins and the Evolution of Behavior in the Later
Pleistocene Record of South Asia. Current Anthropology 46: S3–S27.
Klein, R. G. DEMO Archaeology and the Evolution of Human Behavior. Evolutionary Anthropology 9: 17–36.
DEMO, M. M., and R. A. Foley. 1998. Towards a Theory of Modern Human Origins: Geography, Demography,
and Diversity in Recent Human DEMO Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 41: 137–176.
160
A. Powell, S. J. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas
Lahr, M. M., and R. A. Foley. 2003. Demography, Dispersal and Human DEMO in the Last Glacial Period.
In Neanderthals and Modern Humans in the European Landscape during the Last Glaciation, edited by T. H.
van Andel and W. Davies, pp. 241–256. McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge.
DEMO, M. 2008. Finding Resolution for the Howiesons Poort through the Microscope: Micro-residue Analysis
of Segments from Sibudu Cave, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 35: 26–41.
Lumsden, C. J., and E. O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, Minds and Culture. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Marean, DEMO W., et al. 2007. Early Human Use of Marine Resources and DEMO in South Africa during the
Middle Pleistocene. Nature 449: 905–908.
McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. The Revolution That Wasn’t: A DEMO Interpretation of the Origin of
Modern Human Behavior. Journal of Human Evolution 39: 453–563.
Mellars, P. 2005. The Impossible Coincidence: A Single-Species Model for the Origins of Modern Human
Behavior in Europe. Evolutionary Anthropology 14: 12–27.
O’Connell, J. F., and J. Allen. 2004. Dating the Colonization DEMO Sahul (Pleistocene Australia–New Guinea): A
Review of Recent Research. Journal DEMO Archaeological Science 31: 835–853.
O’Connell, J. F., and J. Allen. DEMO Pre-LGM Sahul (Pleistocene Australia–New Guinea) and the Archaeology
of Early Modern Humans. In Rethinking the Human Revolution, edited by P. Mellars, K. DEMO, O. Bar-Yosef,
and C. Stringer, pp. 395–410. McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge.
Peck, J. R. 1996. Limited Dispersal, Deleterious Mutations and the Evolution of Sex. Genetics 142:
1053–1060.
Peck, J. R., G. Barreau, and S. C. Heath. 1997. Imperfect Genes, Fisherian Mutation and the Evolution of Sex.
Genetics 145: 1171–1199.
Price, G. R. DEMO Selection and Covariance. Nature 227: 520–521.
Rogers, A. R. 1995. Genetic Evidence for a Pleistocene Population Explosion. Evolution 49: 608–615.
Shennan, S. DEMO 2000. Population, Culture History, and the Dynamics of Culture Change. Current Anthropology
41: 811–835.
Shennan, S. J. 2001. Demography and Cultural Innovation: A Model and Its Implications for the Emergence of
Modern Human Culture. DEMO Archaeological Journal 11: 5–16.
Shennan, S. J., and J. Steele. DEMO Cultural Learning in Hominids: A Behavioral Ecological Approach. In Mam-
malian DEMO Learning: Comparative and Ecological Perspectives, edited by H. Box and K. Gibson, pp.
367–388. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Sherry, S. T., DEMO R. Rogers, H. Harpending, H. Soodyall, T. Jenkins, and M. Stoneking. 1994. Mismatch Dis-
tributions of mtDNA Reveal Recent Human Population Expansions. DEMO Biology 66: 761–775.
Stiner, M. C., and S. L. Kuhn. DEMO Changes in the “Connectedness” and Resilience of Paleolithic Societies in
Mediterranean Ecosystems. Human Ecology 34: 693–712.
Tindale, N. B. 1953. Tribal and Intertribal DEMO among the Australian Aborigines. Human Biology 25:
169–190.
van Andel, DEMO H., W. Davies, B. Weinger, and O. Jöris. 2003. Archaeological DEMO as Proxies for the Spatial
and Temporal Human Presence in Europe: DEMO Discourse on the Method. In Neanderthals and Modern Humans
in the European Landscape during the Last Glaciation, edited by T. H. van Andel and W. Davies, pp. 21–29.
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of DEMO, Cambridge.
Vanhaeren, M. 2005. Speaking with Beads: The Evolutionary Signiﬁ DEMO of Personal Ornaments. In From
Tools to Symbols from Early Hominids to Humans, edited by F. d’Errico and L. Blackwell, pp. 525–553. Wits
DEMO Press, Johannesburg.
White, T. D., B. Asfaw, D. DeGusta, DEMO Gilbert, G. D. Richards, G. Suwa, and F. C. Howell. DEMO Pleistocene
Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 423: 742–747.
Zilhão, J. 2007. The Emergence of Ornaments and Art: An Archaeological Perspective DEMO the Origins of “Behav-
ioral Modernity.” Journal of Archaeological Research 15: DEMO
Cultural Traditions and the Evolutionary Advantages of
10 Noninnovation
Craig T. Palmer
DEMO old is the best, and the new is of the devil!
DEMO saying
White man got no dreaming.
—Australian Aboriginal saying
My message is a plea to recognize some adaptive value in tradition-perpetuating mechanisms and
in DEMO traditions they perpetuate.
—D. T. Campbell (1975: 1108)
People living in modern societies tend to value innovation highly. Diamond (2001: 28)DEMO
has even called innovation “that most human of characteristics” and referred to the rapid
increase in innovation seen around 35,000 years ago as DEMO “Great Leap Forward.” He
views the creation of innovations not only as what makes us human but as what makes us
distinct from other DEMO of life: “Had a visitor from outer space come to Earth DEMO the
Great Leap Forward, humans would not have stood out as DEMO among the world’s
species” (Diamond 2001: 33). Harris (1989: 64) goes even further, claiming that the
increase in the rate DEMO cultural innovation around 35,000 years ago was “a breakthrough
as fateful as the transition from energy to matter or from amino acids to DEMO protein”
(see also chapter 9, this volume).
If so, DEMO the Amish are a puzzle. This North American Anabaptist group, whose DEMO
can be traced back to sixteenth-century Switzerland, spurns many forms of DEMO
innovations. Instead of valuing innovation, the Amish place an extremely high DEMO
on preserving the patterns of behavior they have copied from their parents or other
ancestors—their cultural traditions. The high value the Amish place on DEMO their
traditions and their willingness to reject even economically advantageous technology in
order to do so have earned them the name “People of Preservation” (Ruth 1991). This
moniker serves to distinguish them from the people DEMO them who, according to
Diamond and Harris, are representative of our species and deserve the name “People of
Innovation.”
162 Craig T. Palmer
If the Amish are unique with respect to DEMO effort they put into reducing cultural change,
they would be the poorest of choices to use in exploring innovation in cultural systems. I
DEMO, however, that the Amish are actually more representative of our species with respect
to the effort they put into preserving their cultural traditions DEMO are the “People of Inno-
vation” that make up the “modern” world. I will make this point by describing similarities
between the Amish and DEMO cultures in general, illustrated primarily by Australian
Aboriginal peoples.
If the DEMO are representative of the human attitude toward innovation during recent
human evolution, our view of rapid cultural and technological innovation as the deﬁ ning
attribute of our species may need to be modiﬁ ed. This modiﬁ DEMO will necessitate incor-
porating mechanisms that preserve cultural traditions into evolutionary explanations of
human cultural transmission. Current evolutionary explanations of culture tend to see
DEMO change as an active process involving activities such as “the hard work of inven-
tion” (Schiffer 2005: 485), the operation of various DEMO transmission biases (e.g.,
Henrich 2001; chapters 1, 7, 9, 11, and 12, this volume), and random copying errors (DEMO,
Lipo and Eerkins 2005; chapter 8, this volume). The modiﬁ cation I am suggesting involves
viewing the absence of cultural change DEMO also being the result of an active process instead
of merely a passive state that exists when the active processes of change are not DEMO
place.
With reference to the active processes of change, Henrich (2001: 992) observes that
“efforts to understand human behavioral change have produced DEMO multiplicity of different
approaches.” The same cannot be said for efforts to understand the absence of behavioral
change when cultural patterns of behavior are DEMO Richerson and Boyd (2000: 22)
state that “among modern humans, the maintenance of complex traditions is not unprob-
lematic,” but they are referring only to the difﬁ culties in maintaining traditions when very
DEMO populations become isolated. I suggest that the maintenance of traditions is always
problematic because the preservation of traditional behaviors always requires hard work.
If DEMO is true, then a signiﬁ cant part of explaining innovation is DEMO when innova-
tion does not happen.
The goal of this reconsideration of the role of innovation in human evolution is not to
replace current DEMO of technological innovation and culture change but to supplement
them by proposing testable answers to two questions about cultural preservation:
1. How can DEMO of cultural behavior remain essentially unchanged over many genera-
tions? That DEMO, what are the proximate mechanisms preserving cultural traditions?
2. What DEMO the evolutionary advantage, or advantages, of preserving cultural traditions
over many generations?
My answer to the ﬁ rst question involves what VanPool (chapter 15, this volume) refers
to as “metatraditions.” I use the DEMO “tradition” to refer to cultural (socially learned or
The Evolutionary Advantages of Noninnovation
163
“copied”) behaviors “transmitted from ancestor to descendant, generally parent to child,
[often] over many generations” (Coe DEMO: 5), or simply “behaviors copied from ances-
tors.” I use DEMO term “metatradition” in the sense that Campbell (1975: 1108) did—as
DEMO mechanisms.” That is, metatraditions are traditional behaviors that
enhance the faithful DEMO of other traditional behaviors from one generation to the next.
In exploring how patterns of cultural behavior remain unchanged, I look at similarities
between the metatraditions that produce a relatively high degree of cultural preservation
among DEMO Amish and the Australian Aborigines. I then ask if metatraditions are, DEMO at
least were, universal. Failure to ﬁ nd metatraditions described in DEMO ethnographic record,
especially in descriptions of societies that have been relatively unchanged by modern
technological societies, would indicate that metatraditions are not universal.
In answering the second question, I suggest that metatraditions present two distinct
evolutionary beneﬁ ts. First, they facilitate the replication of behaviors that were evolu-
tionarily successful in past generations. This minimizes the occurrence of the DEMO nite
potential deviations from those traditional behaviors that are evolutionarily unsuccessful,
while promoting the preservation of traits necessary for the gradual accumulation of DEMO
vations in succeeding generations. That is, metatraditions contribute to cultural evolution
DEMO helping to promote the “descent” part of the concept “descent with modiﬁ cation.”
Second, the preservation of certain cultural behaviors is probably necessary for the
formation of the extended networks of cooperating kin, including those typically referred
to by anthropologists as “lineages” and “clans,” that were crucial DEMO the recent evolutionary
success of our species. Preserving certain cultural behaviors, DEMO as descent names or
clan markings, is necessary for the formation DEMO lineages and clans by deﬁ nition because
these are deﬁ ned as a set of people who recognize each other as kin because they DEMO
inherited the same descent name (and/or emblem) from a common ancestor.
The essential role of tracing descent from a common ancestor in DEMO identiﬁ cation of
kin is emphasized by Evans-Pritchard (1940: 200), who observed kin are identiﬁ ed as
individuals linked by one or DEMO birth links through a common ancestor who forms “the
apex of a triangle of descent.” Large networks of kin can come to be identiﬁ DEMO only when
something, such as a descent name or clan marker, is passed at birth from ancestor to
descendant over many generations. Fox (1967: 122) describes this process by saying that
when such multigenerational DEMO of cultural behaviors takes place, “large lineages
of clans . . DEMO grow up over time as the descendants of the original ancestor/ancestress”
accumulate. Further, as Palmer and Steadman (1997: 44) point out, wherever descent
names occur in the world, they identify as kin not only everyone with the same descent
name but also anyone able to DEMO birth links to individuals with a given clan name. This
is what enables Keen (2004: 174) to state that in Aboriginal Australia, DEMO below,
“kinship and society were co-extensive.”
The necessity of cultural traditions in order to identify large sets of kin descended from
distant common DEMO has implications for models of cultural transmission. Such
164 Craig T. Palmer
models of possible correlations between forms of cultural DEMO and the size of
social groups are making signiﬁ cant advances in our understanding of recent human evolu-
tion (see chapter 9, this DEMO). Further reﬁ nements of these models could be made by
incorporating the crucial role of tracing descent via cultural traditions in creating the
DEMO relationships between individuals that typically form the basis of the social rela-
tionships that constitute traditional human “groups.” Failure to ﬁ nd such large DEMO
of kin, and the mechanisms that I propose account for their DEMO, would negate my
proposal.
Amish Metatraditions: The Ordnung
Amish rejection of many forms of technological innovation is not the result of a general
DEMO or lack of interest in technology. Nor do the Amish regard technology per se as
evil or even undesirable. Rather, they take deliberate and elaborate steps to decide whether
to adopt or reject any given technological DEMO These decisions are guided by a set
of rules, usually unwritten, known as the Ordnung.
The Amish themselves view the Ordnung as a DEMO because it is “meant to
convey the traditions of the community” (DEMO 2007: 13). They see such a strong
connection between the DEMO of traditions and the preservation of valuable social
relationships among kin that they say the primary goal of the Ordnung is to “pass down
DEMO, and build strong ties with one another” (Wetmore 2007: 13)DEMO This extreme value
placed on social relationships and the traditional patterns of behavior that create and pre-
serve them is the key reason behind DEMO rejection of many technological innovations: “If
they fear that a particular DEMO might disrupt their religion, tradition, community or
families, they are DEMO to prohibit it” (Wetmore 2007: 14).
Although metatraditions do not have to involve religious behavior, religion often plays
a prominent role. One reason for this may be that religious behavior is often distinguished
by DEMO individual’s accepting another’s inﬂ uence by communicating acceptance of unveriﬁ -
able supernatural claims (Steadman and Palmer 2008). Offspring who communicate accep-
tance of the supernatural claims made by their parents communicate to the parents DEMO
willingness to accept parental inﬂ uence. The acceptance of parental inﬂ uence, in turn,
promotes the copying of traditions. The connection between tradition and religious behav-
ior, that is, the communicated acceptance of supernatural DEMO, is so strong among the
Amish that “to the participant, religion and custom [i.e., tradition] are inseparable”
(Hostetler 1993: 11).
Myths and rituals among the Amish regularly include supernatural claims. Drawing on
Malinowski’s DEMO about the universal functions of myth, Hostetler (1993: 23)
DEMO that in Amish society, “Myth institutionalizes the behavior of a society DEMO enforcing
traditions and norms.” Traditional Amish stories also take the form of songs that “are
The Evolutionary Advantages of Noninnovation
165
based on the story of their DEMO, who the world hated” (p. 23) and tell how Amish
DEMO chose to die instead of deviating from their traditions. This illustrates how acts
of sacriﬁ ce not only serve as a means of communicating DEMO to social relation-
ships when they occur, as suggested by costly DEMO theory, but also continue to
promote cooperative social relationships in subsequent DEMO when the tales of sac-
riﬁ ce become traditional (Palmer et DEMO 2006).
Amish behavior in general is highly ritualized. When the enduring ritual behavior pat-
terns of parents are copied and repeated by offspring, the ritual behavior becomes tradi-
tional by deﬁ nition. Referring to certain DEMO these patterns of behavior as “sacred” also
plays a signiﬁ cant role in the metatraditions of the Amish because “changes that threaten
sacred ritual DEMO less acceptable than those unrelated to worship” (Kraybill 1989: 86). As
a result, “custom tends to become sacred” (Hostetler 1993: 9).
The concept of the “sacred” may be inherently conducive to the DEMO of tradi-
tions because, as Durkheim (1912) pointed out, sacred things are often set apart and for-
bidden, and being set apart and forbidden is likely to reduce the chances of change.
Hostetler (1993: 90) concludes that Amish traditional culture “is strongly supported by
the DEMO and beliefs of the society. . . . [and] the beliefs perform a conservative function
in maintaining the social order.”
Respect for living elders DEMO another important Amish metatradition. The traditional
encouragement of respect for Amish elders takes place within a network of kinship rela-
tionships. Within this kinship DEMO, respect given to elders is paramount: “Wisdom
accumulates with age, DEMO with age comes respect. Old people retain the respect of chil-
dren and grandchildren. Obedience to parents is one of the most common themes DEMO Amish
preaching. . . . Since the wisdom of the aged carries more weight than the advice of
younger men, the conservation of the entire community is assured and the religious ideals
are protected from too DEMO change” (Hostetler 1993: 14–15). To the Amish, “too much
DEMO is change that disrupts traditional patterns of behavior in a way that damages
social relationships among kin. Thus, the “Amish have made some adaptations to mod-
ernization, but . . . [have not allowed] technology and convenience to run away with their
family and community” (Hostetler 1993: DEMO).
The technological innovation that best illustrates the hard work involved in maintaining
the Ordnung is the telephone. Umble (1996) points out that DEMO Amish have been engaged
in a debate about telephone use since the nineteenth century. The debate is puzzling to
outsiders who do not highly DEMO traditions because the Amish “were not blind to the
practical applications of the telephone” that made it “an instrument of progress” that would
increase DEMO proﬁ t and pleasure” (Umble 1996: 112).
Despite a clear understanding of the tremendous advantages of telephone use, tele-
phones were resisted by many Amish because they were seen as especially threatening to
traditions DEMO social relationships. Umble (1996) argues that this is because telephones
threatened the fundamental pattern of face-to-face social interaction that was structured
166 Craig T. Palmer
by rituals of worship, silence, work, and visiting and was anchored in the home. This threat
to the very DEMO mechanism most responsible for the copying of traditional
behaviors was a threat to all traditions.
As a result of the effectiveness of the Ordnung, youngsters do what the old people did
when they were young (Hostetler 1993). Hostetler states that among the Amish, “continu-
ity of conformity and custom is assured” (p. 11), but this is clearly an exaggeration. Not
only is the perfect preservation of a traditional pattern of DEMO impossible, even a high
degree of continuity can never be “assured.” DEMO and social institutions may work to
inhibit changes, but innovations inevitably DEMO There is also always the possibility
of metatraditions losing their effectiveness and the rate of innovation increasing
proportionately.
Umble (1996: 115) makes the insightful statement that instead of only reﬂ ecting the
unique aspects of DEMO peculiar religious group, the conscious effort the Amish put into avoid-
DEMO many forms of innovation provides “a window into the dynamics of cultural change.”
The view from this window opposes the common assumption that cultural DEMO is
merely a consequence of the difﬁ cult process of innovation failing to be successful. It
replaces that assumption with the view that cultural DEMO may be a consequence of the
difﬁ cult process of cultural preservation failing to be successful. This view is compatible
with Campbell’s (1975: DEMO) observation that in cultural evolution, deviation from tradi-
tion “seems unproblematic” because “there has no doubt always been a sufﬁ cient raw
dross DEMO both haphazard and ‘intelligent’ variations on the social tradition to provide the
‘mutations’ or ‘trials’ the process requires, imperfect transmissions of tradition being only
one source,” whereas it is “retention and duplication” that is “more DEMO
The Amish illustrate how cultural patterns of behavior can be preserved through meta-
traditions, but this sheds only limited light on evolutionary questions about culture and
technological innovations because Amish traditions have had only a relatively DEMO exis-
tence. If the Amish really are no more than a peculiar exception, in the sense of being the
only culture with metatraditions designed to preserve their traditional way of life, the
argument I have put forth fails. The prediction of metatraditions once being a species-
typical trait DEMO humans, and currently more intact and effective in those societies
referred DEMO as traditional, is what makes my explanation a testable hypothesis instead DEMO a
“just-so” story.
Metatraditions in Aboriginal Australia: Ancestral Law
The set DEMO metatraditions of Aboriginal peoples of Australia analogous to the Ordnung of
the Amish is referred to as “Ancestral Law.” Even in a study emphasizing DEMO diversity
of Aboriginal societies, Keen (2004: 244) states that “We shall see the people of several
of the regions, perhaps all of them, shared a concept that can be translated as ‘ancestral
The Evolutionary Advantages of Noninnovation
167
law’ or the ‘proper way,’ DEMO its origin in the intentions and actions of the totemic
creator ancestors.”
“Ancestral Law” is associated with the concept of “The Dreaming,” a DEMO when the
original ancestors are claimed to have created the traditions that their descendants have
been encouraged to follow ever since. Like the Amish, Aboriginal people themselves often
emphasize the degree to which their culture is DEMO They see “Ancestral Law” as a
metatradition promoting traditional patterns of behavior. The difference is that unlike the
relatively recent existence of the Amish DEMO, the metatraditions constituting the
“Ancestral Law” of Aboriginal peoples may have DEMO maintain traditions for a much
longer period of time. Although some change in behavior from generation to generation
is obviously inevitable, there is no question that the change in Australia during the ﬁ rst
40,000 DEMO of human occupation occurred at a much slower pace than what has been
occurring in most societies during the last several centuries.
As is DEMO case among the Amish, kinship in Aboriginal Australia was of considerable
DEMO Prior to colonization, kin-based relationships governed all aspects of social
life (Keen 2004; Kendon 1988). The network of social relationships among kin that con-
stituted Aboriginal society was the result of offspring copying the DEMO names of one
or both parents, generation after generation (Keen 2004).
Individuals with the same totemic descent name did not constitute local DEMO but
instead formed a geographically dispersed exogamous category of individuals known as
a clan by virtue of having the same totemic name that could DEMO obtained only by descent
from an ancestor with that name. The cooperative forms of behavior among members of
these kinship networks was the direct DEMO of Ancestral Law and its prescriptions for
behavior being copied from one generation to the next.
Ancestral Law, like the Amish Ordnung, is DEMO religious. It involves communicated
acceptance of various supernatural claims about ancestors. In describing the importance
of the religious aspect of Ancestral Law, even among contemporary Aboriginal peoples
who have experienced a long period of colonization, Berndt (1982: 1) stated that “although
aboriginal societies have not ‘come down into the present encapsulated, unchanged, in
their traditional mantle’ [that existed DEMO colonization] change has been limited by
factors, foremost among these is DEMO ”
Traditional myths and other stories played a crucial role within the metatradition of
ancestral totemism as they continue to do among the Amish. DEMO (2003: 16) states,
“Whenever I have asked Aboriginal people DEMO explain the Dreaming they have mostly
responded in the same manner; DEMO is the story of their old ways, how the land was DEMO,
what they used to do and what they learned from their grandparents’ generation about their
Ancestors.” Strehlow (1947) describes the considerable effort DEMO to preserve the myth
in its traditional form through the centuries. Although there are many different types of
Aboriginal myths, many clearly constituted metatraditions because they were charters for
moral behavior, and moral behavior included the faithful copying of traditions (Hiatt 1975).
168 Craig T. Palmer
The telling of traditional stories or myths about DEMO totemic ancestors was often accom-
panied by ritual. Morphy (1991: 285) reports that the Yolunga claim that all art “is an
extension of the Ancestral Past into the present and one of the main ways DEMO which ideas
or information about the Ancestral Past is transmitted from one human generation to the
next.” Before dismissing such claims as mere talk, it is important to note that Mulvaney
and Kamminga (1999) provide DEMO evidence for certain speciﬁ c patterns of art,
such as the Rainbow Serpent design, persisting in Australia for at least 6,000 years.
Castro and Toro (2004) emphasize that inﬂ uencing children to copy DEMO behavior of
parents often requires hard work. This was clearly true among Aboriginal peoples, as
Morphy (1991) describes how learning certain painting techniques may have taken up to
ten years. Copying traditional stories and the DEMO rituals from one generation to the
next also required considerable time and effort.
The association between the speciﬁ c religious concept of the “sacred” DEMO the metatradi-
tions of Australian aborigines is suggested by Stanner’s (1956: 51) observation that the
term Alcheringa, usually translated as “sacred,” DEMO be literally translated as “men of old.”
If, as would seem DEMO, “men of old” refers to ancestors claimed to have lived in DEMO
Dreaming,” then we have another example of the close association between ancestors, the
source of all traditions, and the concept of “sacred.” DEMO this perspective it is not surpris-
ing that Ranzijn and Bin-Sallik (DEMO: 170) claim that “Aboriginal elders previously
enjoyed high respect as the custodians of the culture and were loved and held in high
esteem DEMO younger groups for their expertise and wisdom.”
Were Metatraditions Universal?
The traditionalness of “traditional” cultures, as illustrated by the Aborigines, was obvious
DEMO many early anthropologists. Kroeber (1948: 256–257), for example, noted DEMO “cultures
are . . . inclined to be persistent. . . . Even in times of the most radical change and innova-
tion there DEMO probably several times as many items of culture being transmitted from the
past as there are being newly devised.” Perhaps Boas (1927: 156) was wrong in assigning
an active role to culture as a cause DEMO cultural persistence when he stated that culture acted
as a “restriction of inventiveness,” but the emphasis placed on the maintenance of sacred
traditions DEMO so many cultures makes this role of culture a possibility worth considering.
It is Frazer’s (1922: 47) portrayal of life in traditional societies, however, that has had
the longest lasting effect on how cultural DEMO view traditions:
No human being is so hidebound by custom and tradition as your democratic savage; in no state of
society consequently is progress so slow and difﬁ cult. The old notion that the savage DEMO the freest
of mankind is the reverse of the truth. He is a slave, not indeed to a visible master, but to the DEMO,
to the spirits of his dead forefathers, who haunt his DEMO from birth to death, and rule him with a
rod of DEMO What they did is the pattern of right, the unwritten law DEMO which he yields a blind,
unquestioning obedience. . . . [In such a traditional society] the individual’s lot is cast from the
cradle DEMO the grave in the iron mold of hereditary custom.
The Evolutionary Advantages of Noninnovation
169
It is unfortunate that Frazer combined DEMO description of the pervasiveness of traditional
behavior in some cultures with such a negative judgment of those cultures. Frazer’s dis-
paraging view of traditional DEMO has led to the perception that the word “traditional”
is always derogatory because it implies backward, primitive, and inferior. This stigma has
prevented DEMO appreciation of the likely importance of metatraditions in human culture and
evolution.
One of the strongest forms of evidence for the universality of metatraditions DEMO that
traditional religions universally promote the kinds of kinship cooperation that make
the transmission of traditions possible (Steadman and Palmer 2008). A reexamination
(Steadman et al. 1996) of ethnographic evidence for the supernatural claim DEMO dead
ancestors may inﬂ uence their descendants and be inﬂ uenced by their descendants found
that this view might be universal. Shamans are also DEMO claimed to communicate with
dead ancestors and base their instructions of proper behavior on what they were allegedly
told by the ancestors (Palmer and Steadman 2004). Coe (2003: 44) points out that “sacred
is often the word used to refer to anything associated with ancestors.”
Possible DEMO Beneﬁ ts of Metatraditions
The widespread evidence of metatraditions in the ethnographic literature raises the ques-
tion of why metatraditions may have been part DEMO every known culture until several
thousand years ago. I suggest there are two evolutionary beneﬁ ts to traditions and the
metatraditions that promote them, one beginning much earlier in human existence than
the other. The earlier DEMO have originated as our ancestors evolved into anatomically
modern humans, somewhere DEMO the period between 500,000 and 100,000 years ago. As
the name “anatomically modern” implies, our ancestors must have had brains very much
like our own, thus potentially capable of producing at least much of what Richerson and
Boyd (2000: 2) refer to as the “stunning diversity” of cultural behaviors produced by
people more recently.
Given that only DEMO small fraction of the variety of the behavior patterns the brains of
anatomically modern humans could have potentially produced each generation would have
led DEMO survival and reproduction, selection may have favored individuals who inﬂ uenced
DEMO offspring to copy their behavior, as well as offspring capable of DEMO copying.
Richerson and Boyd (2000: 1) may be correct in DEMO that the brain evolution leading
up to that time may have resulted in a brain “built for speed” in the sense of being capable
DEMO large intergenerational changes in behavior. At some point, however, selection may
have favored individuals who managed to keep that change on track, that is, sufﬁ ciently
similar to what proved to be successful in the previous generation. A general lack of
intergenerational behavioral change characterizes most organisms, including earlier human
ancestors. However, a lack of intergenerational behavior change in an organism capable
170 Craig T. Palmer
of vast intergenerational changes in behavior due to DEMO ability to engage in an immense
amount of social learning required fundamentally different mechanisms. I suggest meta-
traditions may have been such a mechanism DEMO thus contributed to the “descent” aspect
of the Darwinian principle of descent with modiﬁ cation.
The second, and later, evolutionary beneﬁ t of DEMO may have involved the previ-
ously described relationship between traditions and the social environment. Until very
recently, the social environment of all humans consisted of webs of social relationships
between individuals identiﬁ ed as kin. These DEMO cannot be explained by kin selection
because they universally far exceeded the small set of closely related individuals, where
kin selection would play a major role. As previously mentioned, although a great deal has
been written by anthropologists about the nuances and variations of these large webs of
DEMO (lineages, clans, moieties, and the like), only one mechanism for their creation
has been seriously put forth, and this mechanism requires traditional behavior.
Beginning at least several tens of thousands of years ago, the creation of the social
environments of our ancestors required two types DEMO traditions. The identiﬁ cation of large
numbers of kin requires giving offspring some symbol that they are your descendants,
such as a descent DEMO, and inﬂ uencing your offspring to copy your behavior (see Palmer
and Steadman 1997).
Although there are other mechanisms that can produce DEMO, inﬂ uencing these
large numbers of identiﬁ ed descendants to cooperate DEMO each other because of their
kinship relationship to each other required a second tradition also found in all known
traditional cultures. This second tradition DEMO of parents inﬂ uencing their offspring
to cooperate with individuals identiﬁ ed as kin and to copy that behavior (see ﬁ gure 10.1).
The existence of such traditions is succinctly demonstrated by Middleton’s (1960: DEMO)
translation of a saying among the Lugbara of Africa: “the DEMO of social behaviour are
the ‘words of our ancestors.’ ”
The potential consequence of these two types of traditions’ being copied over a consid-
DEMO number of generations is illustrated by Fortes’s (1969: 237) observation DEMO the
axiom of kinship amity “applies to all of the Tiv” and Keesing’s (1975: 32–33) notation
that “the whole population of some 800,000 traces descent by traditional genealogical
links from a single founding ancestor.” DEMO ability of descent names to identify individuals
as kin, and even DEMO distinguish relative degrees of kinship distance between individuals by
identifying a series of common ancestors, can have life-or-death consequences. For
example, Fortes (1969: 237) describes how kinship distance identiﬁ ed through descent
names regulates, among other things, a traditionally prescribed “graduated scale of weap-
onry and violence that is permitted in ﬁ ghting. Close brother segments of a DEMO lineage
may use only clubs and stones in a ﬁ ght; DEMO distantly connected segments may use bows
and arrows but must avoid killing; very distantly connected lineages ﬁ ght with poison
arrows and Dane guns, and aim to kill.” Even much smaller extended networks of kin
would be profoundly beneﬁ cial to survival and reproduction.
The Evolutionary Advantages of Noninnovation
Individual
Tradition 1: descent name
Tradition 2: kinship amity
Kin cooperation
171
Figure 10.1
How traditional descent names identify large networks of codescendants and how traditions of moral codes
inﬂ uence DEMO to cooperate.
The widespread existence of large categories of kin identiﬁ ed through descent names
is almost certainly the result of the transmission of DEMO over a correspondingly large
number of generations. The alternative notion that such categories of cooperating indi-
viduals could be instantaneously created during a single DEMO is so preposterous that
it became the basis of Kurt Vonnegut’s 1976 ﬁ ctional novel Slapstick: Or Lonesome No
More! As Cronk (1999: 129) explains, the character “Dr. Swain” runs for president on
the DEMO to use “the computers of the federal government to recreate kinship networks
like those of our ancestors . . . [including] 190,000 cousins, all obligated to help fellow
clan members.” Given the absence of a DEMO plausible alternative explanation of how
the kinship-based social environments of humans could have come into existence,
the role of traditions maintained by metatraditions DEMO at least receive serious
consideration.
Conclusions
The goal of this chapter has been to expand the evolutionary view of culture so that it is
DEMO as not just a powerful force in human behavioral change but also as a powerful force
in the preservation of patterns of human behavior. DEMO this emphasis on cultural
preservation may appear to be incongruous with much of the current thinking about
172 Craig T. Palmer
innovation and cultural evolution, it actually is compatible (if not synonymous) with
Darwin’s original views on natural selection. Importantly, Darwin viewed that term as a
substitute for what he actually envisioned DEMO the cause of evolution—the principle of
preservation. The importance of “preservation” to Darwin’s theory about the mechanism
of evolution is, of course, evident DEMO its use in the subtitle of his 1859 book.
The power of Darwin’s explanation of evolution has been greatly increased by advances
in knowledge DEMO how traits are preserved from one generation to the next. It seems
reasonable to assume that advances in knowledge about how traditional cultural behaviors
DEMO preserved from one generation to the next would make a similar contribution to the
study of cultural systems and the adoption of technological innovations. DEMO the “principle
of preservation,” perhaps phrased for the sake of brevity as “natural preservation,” had
been the phrase that continued to be DEMO with Darwin’s theory, the study of evolu-
tion today might be DEMO the study of “natural preservation.”
If this were the case, a DEMO concept in the study of cultural evolution might be “cultural
preservation.” Given that “tradition” is the word most commonly used to refer to patterns
DEMO cultural behavior preserved from one generation to the next, the study DEMO cultural evolu-
tion might focus more speciﬁ cally on the study of “cultural traditions” than is currently
the case. In this ﬁ ctional scenario, the title of this volume might change from “Innovation
in Cultural Systems: Contributions from Evolutionary Anthropology” to “Innovation in
Cultural Systems: Contributions from the Anthropological Study of Traditions.” In such
a volume, the appropriateness of a chapter titled “Cultural Traditions and the Evolutionary
Advantages of Noninnovation” might be DEMO readily apparent than is currently the case.
Such a title would be particularly appropriate for a volume emanating from a workshop
at the Konrad DEMO Institute, because Lorenz (1975: 366) observed that “without cultural
tradition,” many structures of the human brain “would be as devoid of DEMO as the
wings of an ostrich, only more so.”
References
Berndt, R. M. 1982. Traditional Concepts of Aboriginal Land. In Aboriginal Sites, Rights and Resource Develop-
ment, edited by R. M. Berndt, pp. 1–23. DEMO of Western Australia Press, Perth.
Boas, F. 1927. Primitive Art. Norton, New York.
Campbell, D. T. 1975. On the Conﬂ ict between DEMO and Social Evolution and between Psychology and
Moral Tradition. American Psychologist 30: 1103–1126.
Castro, L., and M. A. Toro. 2004. The Evolution of Culture: From Primate Social Learning to Human Culture.
National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 101: 10235–10240.
Clarke, P. A. 2003. Where the Ancestors Walked: Australia as an Aboriginal Landscape. Allen and Unwin,
Crows Nest, DEMO, Australia.
Coe, K. 2003. The Ancestress Hypothesis. Rutgers University Press, DEMO, N.J.
Cronk, L. 1999. That Complex Whole. Westview Press, Boulder, Colo.
Darwin, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection; or the Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life. Murray, London.
The Evolutionary Advantages of Noninnovation
173
Diamond, J. 2001. The Great Leap Forward. In Anthropology: Contemporary Perspectives (eighth ed.), edited
by P. DEMO, pp. 24–33. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Durkheim, E. 1912. The DEMO Forms of the Religious Life. Collier, New York.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and Political Institutions of a
Nilotic People. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Fortes, M. 1969. DEMO and Social Order. Aldine, Chicago.
Fox, R. 1967. Kinship and Marriage. Penguin, Middlesex, England.
Frazer, J. G. 1922. The Golden Bough: DEMO Study in Magic and Religion. McMillan, New York.
Harris, M. 1989. Our Kind. Harper Collins, New York.
Henrich, J. 2001. Cultural Transmission DEMO the Diffusion of Innovations: Adoption Dynamics Indicate that
Biased Cultural Transmission DEMO the Predominate Force in Behavioral Change. American Anthropologist 103:
992–1013.
Hiatt, L. R. 1975. Introduction. In Australian Aboriginal Mythology, edited by L. DEMO Hiatt, pp. 1–23. Excelsis
Press, Carlton, N.S.W., Australia.
Hostetler, DEMO A. 1993. Amish Society (fourth ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Keen, I. 2004. Aboriginal Economy and Society. Oxford University Press, DEMO Melbourne.
Keesing, R. 1975. Kin Groups and Social Structure. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Kendon, A. 1988. Sign Language of Aboriginal DEMO: Cultural, Semiotic and Communicative Perspectives.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kraybill, D. 1989. The Riddle of Amish Culture. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Kroeber, A. L. 1948. Anthropology (revised ed.). Harcourt, Brace, DEMO York.
Lipo, C. P., and J. W. Eerkens. 2005. Cultural Transmission, Copying Errors, and the Generation of Variation
in Material Culture and DEMO Archaeological Record. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 24: 316–
334.
Lorenz, K. 1975. The Enmity between Generations and Its Probable Ethological Causes. Psychoanalytic Review
DEMO: 333–377.
Middleton, J. 1960. Lugbara Religion. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
DEMO, H. 1991. Ancestral Connections: Art and an Aboriginal System of Knowledge. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Mulvaney, J., and J. Kamminga. 1999. Prehistory of Australia. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.
Palmer, C. DEMO, and L. B. Steadman. 1997. Human Kinship as a Descendant-Leaving Strategy: A Solution to an
Evolutionary Puzzle. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems DEMO: 39–51.
Palmer, C. T., and L. B. Steadman. 2004. With DEMO without Belief: A New Approach to the Deﬁ nition and Expla-
DEMO of Religion. Evolution and Cognition 10: 138–147.
Palmer, C. T., DEMO B. Steadman, and C. Cassidy. 2006. Traditional Religious Ritual Sacriﬁ ce: Cultural Material-
ism, Costly Signaling, or Descendant-Leaving Strategy? Journal of Ritual. Studies 20: 33–42.
Ranzijn, R., and M. A. Bin-Sallik. 2001. The Health and Well-being of Aboriginal Elders. Available on the Web
at http://www.unisanet.unisa.edu.au/staff/homepage.asp?Name=Rob.Ranzijn.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 2000. Built for Speed: Pleistocene Climate Variation and the Origin of Human
Culture. Perspectives in Ethology 13: 1–45.
Ruth, J. 1991. The Amish: A People of Preservation (PBS Documentary). Vision Video, Worcester, Pa.
Schiffer, M. B. 2005. The Devil Is in the Details: The Cascade DEMO of Invention Processes. American Antiquity
70: 485–502.
Stanner, W. E. H. 1956. The Dreaming. In Australian Signpost, edited by T. A. G. Hungerford, pp. 51–65.
Cheshire, Melbourne.
Steadman, L. B., and C. T. DEMO 2008. The Supernatural and Natural Selection: The Evolution of Religion.
Paradigm, Boulder, Colo.
174 Craig T. Palmer
Steadman, L. B., C. T. Palmer, and C. Tilley. 1996. The Universality of Ancestor Worship. Ethnology 35: 63–
76.
Strehlow, T. G. H. 1947. Aranda Traditions. Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.
DEMO, D. Z. 1996. Holding the Line: The Telephone in Old Order Mennonite and Amish Life. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore.
Vonnegut, K. DEMO Slapstick: Or Lonesome No More! Delacorte Press, New York.
Wetmore, DEMO M. 2007. Amish Technology: Reinforcing Values and Building Community. Technology and DEMO
26: 10–21.
11 The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
Alex Mesoudi
Cultural innovation, like cultural evolution in general, can be proﬁ tably studied experi-
mentally in the psychology laboratory. To illustrate this, I present two case studies in
which experimental simulations of cultural transmission have provided insights into the
processes DEMO cultural innovation. First, Rose and Felton (1955) examined the effect DEMO
migration on the spread of different interpretations of inkblots within small groups, ﬁ nding
that invention was more frequent in closed societies, with DEMO group membership, than
in open societies, where participants migrated between groups.
Second, Mesoudi and O’Brien (2008a, 2008b) simulated the cultural transmission DEMO
projectile-point designs in groups of participants, under the assumption that ﬁ DEMO was
determined by an underlying adaptive landscape, where different inventions constitute
DEMO of different heights and successful innovation occurs when members of a population
converge on the same peak. Participants used simple reinforcement learning to ﬁ DEMO locally
adaptive point designs, but these designs rarely persisted once participants DEMO allowed
to engage in biased horizontal cultural transmission. After that, most DEMO con-
verged on the point design of the most successful player (DEMO highest peak in the adaptive
landscape). In summary, experimental simulations DEMO be used, in conjunction with other
social science methods, to provide an interdisciplinary approach to the study of cultural
innovation, as part of a uniﬁ ed science of cultural evolution.
How to Study Cultural Innovation
DEMO describes the processes by which a novel trait (an “invention”) emerges and
becomes ﬁ xed in a population (Erwin and Krakauer 2004). It has long been recognized
that innovation plays a key role in DEMO evolution (Mayr 1960; Nitecki 1990), where
it describes the emergence of novel phenotypic traits and their ﬁ xation within a species
(see chapters 3 and 4, this volume). The recent proliferation of work that takes an evolu-
tionary approach to human culture (e.g., Aunger DEMO; Brighton et al. 2005; Henrich and
McElreath 2003; Lipo et DEMO 2006; Mesoudi, Whiten, and Laland 2004, 2006; O’Brien and
176
Alex Mesoudi
Lyman 2002; Pagel and Mace 2004; Plotkin 2002; Richerson and Boyd 2005; Runciman
2005; Shennan 2002; Wheeler et al. 2002) suggests the need for a similar concept of
“cultural innovation”—the processes by which a novel cultural trait emerges and spreads
within a society.
DEMO innovation has long been studied to some degree within economics
(Schumpeter DEMO, 1942), anthropology (Barnett 1953), and sociology (Rogers 1995), but
rarely in an objective, quantiﬁ able manner. This changed in DEMO 1980s with the introduc-
tion into anthropology of the population-genetics-inspired mathematical models of Cavalli-
Sforza and Feldman (1981) and Boyd and Richerson (1985). Those studies demonstrated
that the manner in which a cultural trait DEMO though a population (and hence becomes
an innovation) depends on the cultural-transmission mechanisms by which it is propa-
gated, including vertical, oblique, and horizontal transmission (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman
1981); one-to-many or many-to-one transmission (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981);
conformist, anticonformist, and prestige biases (Boyd and Richerson 1985); and discrete
or blending cultural inheritance (Boyd and Richerson 1985).
Different transmission rules will often generate distinct patterns DEMO cultural change, such
as stable intergenerational traditions (vertical transmission), rapidly changing fashions or
fads (horizontal transmission), stable intergroup differences (conformity), or exaggerated
cultural traits resulting from runaway selection (prestige bias). DEMO of cultural evolu-
tion therefore suggest that an understanding of cultural transmission—who copies what
from whom, and how—will provide important insights into the spread of cultural innova-
tions (see chapters 7, 9, and 12, DEMO volume).
Although mathematical models are important tools for understanding cultural change,
they are only as good as their assumptions. In this case, the assumptions concern cognitive
biases that determine when people copy others (as opposed to learning individually),
whom they learn from (e.g., high-status models or the group majority), how they learn
(e.g., using DEMO or imitation), and what they learn. This is very much the domain of
psychology, and I suggest that laboratory experiments that draw on the methods of social
psychology can be used to study these cognitive DEMO In doing so, they provide important
insights into the processes of DEMO innovation and cultural evolution in general (Mesoudi
2007; Mesoudi and Whiten 2008).
Although experimental studies that simulate cultural transmission and cultural evolu-
DEMO have been relatively rare in the past (but see Bartlett 1932; Insko et al. 1980;
Jacobs and Campbell 1961; Rose and Felton 1955), there has been a resurgence of such
studies in recent DEMO (e.g., Baum et al. 2004; Efferson et al. 2007, 2008; Kameda and
Nakanishi 2002, 2003; Kashima 2000; McElreath et al. DEMO; Mesoudi 2008; Mesoudi
and O’Brien 2008a, 2008b; Mesoudi and Whiten 2004; Mesoudi, Whiten, and Dunbar
2006). In a typical cultural-evolution experiment, participants in small groups (often
called “microsocieties”) engage in a predeﬁ ned task or game designed to capture some
simpliﬁ ed aspect DEMO real-life cultural change. Over repeated experimental trials (or
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation 177
“generations”), the participants can, where desired by the experimenter, learn from one
another, that is, engage in cultural transmission. Crucially, the experimenter can system-
atically control who learns what, and from whom and how, in order to examine DEMO effects
the various cultural-transmission biases described above have on broader patterns of
cultural change.
There are several beneﬁ ts that experimental methods can bring DEMO the study of culture.
Experimentalists can “rerun” history, allowing for the DEMO of ﬁ ndings; they have
access to complete, uninterrupted, and DEMO data sets; they can manipulate variables;
and they can randomly DEMO participants to different experimental and control groups
(Mesoudi 2007). Of DEMO, what experiments gain in control and manipulation (their high
internal validity) they lose in their low external validity, that is, the degree to which they
capture the actual cultural change that we wish to DEMO about. We can never be sure
whether the artiﬁ cial laboratory setting will properly capture the environments in which
actual societies live; whether the simple experimental task will properly capture the chal-
lenges that actual societies DEMO; whether experiments that last a maximum of a few hours
can DEMO capture cultural change that occurs over years, decades, or centuries; DEMO
whether the often-biased participant pool (usually Western psychology undergraduates)
will DEMO in the same manner as the people who were originally responsible for a par-
ticular aspect of cultural change.
These problems can be overcome DEMO using experimental methods in conjunction with
other methods rather than in place of them. By integrating ethnographic, archaeological,
and experimental methods, together DEMO other tools such as mathematical models and
computer simulations, we can DEMO a more complete understanding of cultural change
than is afforded by any one method alone. Indeed, the low external validity and high
internal validity of both experimental simulations and mathematical models complement
the high external validity DEMO low internal validity of ethnographic and archaeological
methods. I will return to this point later. Here, I turn attention to two case studies that
highlight how innovation can be studied in laboratory settings.
Case Study: The Effect of Migration on Rates of Cultural Innovation and
Invention
An early DEMO simulation of cultural innovation was conducted by the sociologists
Rose and Felton (1955) and provides several pointers as to how cultural innovation can
DEMO studied in the lab. Rose and Felton presented two Rorschach inkblots to three separate
three-person groups of participants. During each trial, group members privately and sepa-
rately wrote down what they thought they could see in DEMO inkblot. Each group member,
in turn, presented his or her DEMO to the other members of the group, who then
rated the DEMO for plausibility both out loud and privately on paper. This process
178
Alex Mesoudi
Epoch
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
DEMO
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
Society
X Y Z
Experiment 1. Cultural Diffusion Illustrated:
The Idea of a White DEMO
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d e f DEMO h i
a d g b e i c f h
a e h b f g c d i
a f i b DEMO h c e g
a b c d e f g h i
– – – – – – – – –
– – DEMO – – – – – –
Experiment 3. Cultural Diffusion Illustrated:
The Idea of a Brassiere
a b c d e f g DEMO i
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d e DEMO g h i
a d g b e h c f i
a d g b e h c f i
a d g DEMO e h c f i
a d g b e h c f i
a b c d e f g h i
Society
DEMO Y Z
Experiment 2. Cultural Diffusion Illustrated:
The Idea of a Spur
a b c d e f g h i
a b DEMO d e f g h i
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d e f g h i
DEMO b c d e f g h i
a d g b e h c f i
a e i b f g c DEMO h
a f h b d i c e g
a b c d e f g h i
Experiment 4. Cultural Diffusion Illustrated:DEMO
The Idea of a Map of Chile
a b c d e f g h i
a d g b e h c f DEMO
a e i b f g c d h
a f h b d i c e g
a b c d e f DEMO h i
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d e f g h i
a b c d DEMO f g h i
a b c d e f g h i
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
179
of private interpretation and public DEMO was repeated nine times (giving nine generations,
or what Rose DEMO Felton called “epochs”).
The key question concerned not the content of the interpretations but how different
interpretations spread through the groups and, speciﬁ cally, how intergroup migration
inﬂ uenced cultural diffusion. Different phases of the experiment simulated two different
group conditions: “open” and “closed.” During closed phases, participants stayed in the
same groups over successive epochs and repeatedly interacted with the same group
members. During open phases, participants moved across groups. During each epoch of
the open phases, participants moved from their parent group to a new group with different
participants. Figure 11.1 shows how DEMO social mobility was organized and how four
exemplar interpretations (a white DEMO, a spur, a brassiere, and a map of Chile) diffused
through the groups during successive epochs.
In their analysis, Rose and Felton classiﬁ ed each interpretation into one of four catego-
ries: (1) an invention—a novel interpretation generated by a single participant; (2) a
habit—the repetition of an interpretation by its inventor in successive epochs; (DEMO) a culture
borrowing—an interpretation that has been copied from another participant; and (4) a
culbit—the repetition of a borrowed/copied interpretation by DEMO borrower in successive
rounds (after Tylor 1871). Hence, Rose and Felton distinguished between the introduction
of a novel form into a group, either through individual learning (“inventions”) or cultural
transmission (“culture borrowings”), and the subsequent persistence of those novel intro-
ductions (“habits” and “culbits,” respectively), mirroring the modern distinction between
invention and innovation.
Informal DEMO of ﬁ gure 11.1 underscores several points. First, we can see DEMO
modes of diffusion: (1) direct cultural transmission between participants within DEMO same
groups and (2) the diffusion of interpretations resulting from people moving between
groups. This can be seen in the white-angel diffusion (Rose and Felton’s experiment 1,
top left panel of ﬁ gure 11.1), which ﬁ rst spreads within society Y during the closed epochs
I–III by within-group cultural transmission, before spreading with participants d, e, and f
to the other groups during the open epochs IV–VII.
This contrast DEMO debates in the anthropological literature (e.g., Ammerman and
Cavalli-Sforza 1984; DEMO et al. 2007) over whether agriculture spread across
Figure 11.1
Rose DEMO Felton’s experimental design, with example traditions (from Rose and Felton, DEMO). Epochs proceed
down the vertical axis of each panel; letters (a–i) represent participants, who are divided into three groups, societ-
ies X–Z. The four panels show the diffusion of four different interpretations (white angel, spur, brassiere, or
map of Chile) in four different DEMO designs. Shapes indicate how each interpretation was classiﬁ ed, as
either DEMO invention (circle), culture borrowing (square), habit (hexagon), DEMO culbit (triangle). Each panel shows
a different form of migration: Experiment 1 has three closed epochs followed by four open epochs, experiment
2 has ﬁ ve closed epochs followed by four open epochs, experiment 3 has four closed epochs followed by another
four closed epochs with DEMO group membership (then a ﬁ nal return to the original groups), and experiment
4 has four open epochs followed by ﬁ ve closed epochs.
▲
180
Alex Mesoudi
Neolithic Europe by cultural diffusion (the movement of ideas/technologies by means of
cultural transmission) or demic diffusion (the movement DEMO people, who bring novel ideas/
technologies with them). Although DEMO and genetic data will provide the best,
most direct evidence regarding this issue, such data are always fraught with difﬁ culties of
interpretation. Perhaps experimental simulations of cultural and demic diffusion, along the
lines of Rose and Felton’s study, might offer additional insight into this and similar
debates.
A second informal observation obtained from inspection of ﬁ gure 11.1 DEMO that open
societies facilitate the spread of interpretations across groups. As already noted, this can
be seen in the top left panel of ﬁ gure 11.1, where the white-angel interpretation appears
in all of the groups during the open epochs IV–VII, as well as in the top right panel of
ﬁ gure 11.1, where the spur interpretation spreads across groups during only the open
epochs VI–IX. One might consider this to be DEMO could the same interpreta-
tion be found in more than one group if there is no communication or movement of people
between those groups? But this ignores the possibility of independent invention in two
unconnected societies. DEMO did not occur in the diagrams shown in ﬁ gure 11.1, DEMO Rose
and Felton do not mention it occurring in other trials, DEMO it is possible that two people
might see the same object in an inkblot, given the similarities in people’s perceptual
systems and semantic knowledge.
This issue—how to distinguish between traits that are shared because of descent DEMO
a common source versus traits that are shared because of independent invention (con-
vergent evolution)—is explicitly dealt with by phylogenetic methods, which DEMO increas-
ingly being applied to cultural data sets (Lipo et al. DEMO; Mace et al. 2006; O’Brien
and Lyman 2003; O’Brien et DEMO 2008). Experimental simulations might provide insights
into the reliability of phylogenetic methods by applying them to data generated in
experiments in which it DEMO known exactly who copied what from whom. Indeed, this
has been DEMO recently by Spencer et al. (2004), who applied phylogenetic analyses DEMO
lineages of manuscripts generated by participants in the lab in order to test the reli-
ability of such analyses when applied to actual historical DEMO (e.g., Howe
et al. 2001).
A third observation from ﬁ gure 11.1 is that interpretations sometimes went dormant,
during which time DEMO were not presented to the group but must have been remembered
by the participants, given that they reappear during a later epoch. This can be seen in
experiment 2 (top right panel of ﬁ gure 11.1), where the spur interpretation disappeared
during epochs III, IV, and DEMO before reappearing in epoch VI and then spreading across
the groups. This bears some resemblance to the manner in which recessive alleles can
remain DEMO a population of biological organisms with no observable phenotypic effects. It
also highlights the fact that ideas can persist with no observable record of DEMO persistence,
which may present difﬁ culties for historians or archaeologists when reconstructing lin-
eages of cultural traits.
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
181
Following statistical analysis of their DEMO data, Rose and Felton’s somewhat
surprising main ﬁ nding was that DEMO isolation of closed societies fostered invention (see
chapter 8, this volume). As participants moved from group to group in the open societies,DEMO
they tended to borrow from existing group members rather than invent novel interpreta-
tions. In the words of Rose and Felton (1955: 391), “in general, as mobility follows isola-
tion, borrowing displaces invention.” As they also note, this ﬁ nding that closed societies
foster invention counters the intuitive notion of “mobile and cosmopolitan urban popula-
tions having made DEMO most cultural change” (p. 392), that is, that populations that encour-
age immigration and diversity (e.g., cosmopolitan cities such as New DEMO or London)
are culturally more inventive and creative than populations that remain isolated (e.g., the
Amish [see chapter 10, this volume]), which are seen as culturally conservative and
uncreative.
Perhaps, though, Rose DEMO Felton’s result is not too surprising in that being in the same
closed group over successive epochs meant that participants could not simply repeat DEMO
ously presented ideas. Instead, they had to come up with novel DEMO, whereas participants
who found themselves in new groups could forgo the DEMO culty of coming up with a new
idea and instead copy the idea of a member of their previous group. This explanation has
the DEMO t of hindsight, however, and highlights the potential value of laboratory experi-
ments that simulate cultural processes such as innovation and transmission in DEMO
our intuitions and presumptions regarding cultural change, in this case the DEMO presump-
tion that social mobility leads inevitably to cultural creativity” (Rose DEMO Felton 1955:
392).
It has to be pointed out that this was a highly simpliﬁ ed experiment with small numbers
of participants DEMO groups, and a form of culture—inkblot interpretation—that is by deﬁ ni-
DEMO functionless, arbitrary, and subjective. It may well be that if this experimental design
were repeated with functional cultural traits, we would see more creativity in open groups,
as different functional components generated by different DEMO are combined, allowing
cumulative cultural evolution (although whether this kind of recombination is classed as
“invention” or not is another matter). Alternatively, much of culture can be classed as
neutral and has been shown DEMO change randomly (see chapter 8, this volume), so perhaps
inkblots are not too inappropriate for simulating actual cultural change.
Finally, Rose and Felton found that habits and culbits showed different patterns of
change: Habits tended to increase more in open societies than in closed societies, whereas
culbits increased uniformly irrespective of the society type. This ﬁ nding highlights DEMO
importance of a particular cultural form’s origin, individual or social learning, for its
subsequent persistence, although it is unclear what is causing this particular difference.
In summary, the pioneering study conducted by Rose and Felton (1955) illustrates how
experimental laboratory simulations can provide valuable insights into DEMO processes that
govern cultural invention and innovation. These researchers showed how to distinguish
methodologically between invention (the emergence of a novel cultural form) DEMO innovation
182 Alex Mesoudi
(the persistence of that cultural form), and they highlighted the importance of distinguishing
between the origin of these kinds of DEMO traits by showing that traits that originated in
individual learning exhibited different patterns of change from those that originated in social
learning. Consequently, their conceptual distinctions between inventions, culture borrow-
ings, habits, and culbits may be useful in future studies of cultural innovation—not just
experimental studies but DEMO analytical, observational, and historical studies.
Rose and Felton’s counterintuitive ﬁ nding that invention was favored in closed societies
and curbed in open societies DEMO the importance of empirically testing what may
appear to be obvious assumptions regarding human culture (e.g., closed societies are less
creative than open DEMO). Further experimental studies might test the effect of social
mobility on nonarbitrary cultural traits that allow functional improvement or cumulative
cultural evolution, or test the effect that variables other than social mobility have on pat-
DEMO of invention and innovation, such as task difﬁ culty or ethnic DEMO
Case Study: Innovations Can Spread as a Result of Biased Cultural DEMO
in Multimodal Adaptive Landscapes
Rose and Felton’s (1955) study demonstrates how to simulate the spread of largely arbi-
trary cultural traits in the DEMO of inkblot interpretations. It seems likely, however, that
many cultural innovations, particularly technological innovations, are not entirely arbi-
trary, such that their spread and persistence will depend to some extent on their cultural
ﬁ DEMO By “cultural ﬁ tness,” I mean the properties of a culturally transmitted artifact, such
as its functional efﬁ cacy, cost, durability, DEMO social signiﬁ cance, that affect the artifact’s
probability of subsequent persistence DEMO transmission relative to other similar artifacts.
In an experimental study conducted in collaboration with Mike O’Brien (Mesoudi and
O’Brien 2008a, 2008b), we DEMO out to explore experimentally this relationship between an
artifact’s ﬁ tness and its invention and innovation. Speciﬁ cally, we simulated the cultural
transmission of projectile-point technology, drawing on an archaeological study of
prehistoric Great Basin projectile-point cultural transmission conducted by Bettinger
and Eerkens (1999).
In our study, groups of participants played a simple computer game in which they
designed their own “virtual arrowheads” and tested them in a “virtual hunting environ-
DEMO Participants entered the attributes of their arrowheads—length, width, thickness,
color, and shape—and then received feedback on the success of their designs, DEMO terms of
calories obtained during a hunt, equivalent to an arrowhead’s DEMO tness. The closer the arrow-
head design was to a prespeciﬁ ed optimal design, the higher the feedback score. The aim
for the participant was to achieve as high a score as possible by ﬁ nding DEMO optimal design
in the environment. This could be done in two ways (see ﬁ gure 11.2)—by individual
learning or by biased cultural transmission.
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
183
Hunt:
1
23456789 10 DEMO 12 13 14 15161718192021222324252627282930
Individual
Learning
Biased Cultural
Transmission
Figure 11.2
Experimental design of Mesoudi and O’Brien (2008a), showing the 30 trials (DEMO “hunts”) comprising one session.
Following an initial trial (during which the participant could copy the ﬁ nal point design
of a previous participant, although this is not relevant to the present discussion), partici-
pants DEMO in 24 trials (or “hunts”) of individual learning, where they DEMO use trial
and error to ﬁ nd the optimal arrowhead design. Each hunt represented one opportunity to
modify and test the arrowhead design. Then, during the ﬁ nal ﬁ ve hunts, participants could
additionally engage in biased cultural transmission. They were shown the cumulative
scores of other members DEMO their six-person group, each of whom was playing the same
game DEMO the same environment, and the participant could choose to view and DEMO the
arrowhead design of one of those other group members. Thus, DEMO could engage
in biased cultural transmission by preferentially copying the player with the highest score
(resembling Boyd and Richerson’s [1985] “indirect bias” or Henrich and Gil-White’s
[2001] “prestige bias” [see chapter 7, this volume]).
One goal of our study was to explore how the nature of the DEMO ﬁ tness
functions, which were used to calculate the feedback scores DEMO to the participants,
affected arrowhead designs during different phases of the experiment. Speciﬁ cally, we
wanted to test the idea that the spread of technological artifacts will be governed by
the shape of an underlying DEMO adaptive landscape. The concept of an adaptive
landscape is commonly used in evolutionary biology (Arnold et al. 2001; Simpson 1944;
Wright 1932) to represent the design space of all possible combinations of multiple
phenotypic DEMO, where the height of the landscape represents ﬁ tness. If a DEMO
scape is multimodal, then there are multiple “peaks” of different heights, each represent-
ing a locally optimal phenotype of different ﬁ tness. Any DEMO away from any of
these locally optimal peaks would result in lower ﬁ tness. There may, however, be higher
peaks elsewhere in the DEMO that can be reached only by traversing low-ﬁ tness
valleys. Hence, DEMO of organisms can get stuck on locally optimal but globally
suboptimal peaks.
Applied to cultural evolution, the ﬁ tness of a cultural artifact would be determined by
its location in an equivalent adaptive landscape. This landscape DEMO represent all
possible designs within a design space, with different peaks DEMO different locally
optimal artifact designs (similar to Lake and Venti’s [2009] DEMO of bicycle
design space, although adding a consideration of ﬁ tness)DEMO
184
Alex Mesoudi
With respect to the topic of this volume, I suggest that different locally optimal peaks in
an artifact’s adaptive landscape can DEMO seen as different potential inventions. Innovations,
on the other hand, DEMO be seen as peaks at which the majority of actual artifacts in a popula-
tion can be found, which may or may not represent the highest, globally optimal peak. In
terms of learning processes, individual DEMO would constitute the exploration of this
adaptive landscape by means of a random walk, leading to the discovery of one or more
locally optimal peaks, or inventions. Biased cultural transmission, however, would allow
people to jump across low-ﬁ tness valleys, from their locally adaptive peak to a higher peak
found by a more successful individual, making this peak/design the innovation.
In our experiment (Mesoudi and O’Brien 2008a), we implemented a simple multimodal
adaptive landscape to determine the ﬁ tness of the DEMO arrowheads. The overall ﬁ tness
of an arrowhead was the sum of the ﬁ tness contributions from four independent attributes:
length, width, DEMO, and shape as shown in ﬁ gure 11.3 (the ﬁ fth attribute, color, had
no effect on ﬁ tness). Shape was DEMO, taking one of four values of different ﬁ tness. The
others DEMO continuous, ranging from one to 100 arbitrary units, and their associated ﬁ t-
nesses were given by bimodal ﬁ tness functions.
1
0.8
DEMO
0.4
0.2
0
Global
Optimum
Local
Optimum
020 40 60 80 100
Length
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Local
Optimum
Global
Optimum
020 DEMO 60 80 100
Width
1
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Global
Optimum
Local
Optimum
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0
020 40 60 80 DEMO Shape 1 Shape 2 Shape 3 Shape 4
Thickness
Figure 11.3
Fitness functions for the four functional point attributes used in Mesoudi and O’Brien (2008a). The overall score
received by a participant was the sum DEMO these four ﬁ tnesses. The three bimodal functions for length, width, and
thickness combined to create a multimodal adaptive landscape.
Fitness
Fitness
Fitness
DEMO
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
185
Combining these three bimodal ﬁ DEMO functions speciﬁ ed a multimodal adaptive land-
scape that our participants could explore. For example, the highest peak in this adaptive
landscape can be found where length, width, and thickness are all at their global DEMO
A slightly lower peak can be found where length and width are at their globally optimal
values but thickness is at its local optimum. DEMO lowest peak can be found where length,
width, and thickness DEMO all at their local optima. Any deviation away from each of these
peaks (there are eight in total) results in a decrease in DEMO tness and a lower score for the
participant. Participants were not told anything about the underlying ﬁ tness functions,
just as real hunters DEMO not informed about presumed real-life technological-ﬁ tness
functions.
We wanted to test the key prediction that during the 24 individual learning hunts, dif-
ferent participants will by chance diverge onto different peaks in the landscape and,DEMO
because they are local optima, get stuck on these peaks. These DEMO thus different “inven-
tions” generated by our participants. Then, in the DEMO nal ﬁ ve hunts, during which biased
cultural transmission is allowed, we will see participants copying the most successful
player, who has, DEMO by chance, found the highest globally optimal peak (or the highest
peak found by anyone in that group). This is group “innovation.” DEMO scenario would
therefore predict greater variation in the different participants’ arrowhead designs follow-
ing the individual-learning phase, because different participants will ﬁ nd different peaks
compared to the biased-cultural-transmission phase, when the participants converge on the
same peak. It would also predict lower mean ﬁ tness during the DEMO phase
because the different peaks will have varying ﬁ tness compared to the biased-cultural-
transmission phase, when players can copy a more successful fellow player and all con-
verge on that player’s higher ﬁ tness peak.
DEMO predictions were largely conﬁ rmed (for details, see Mesoudi and O’Brien
[2008a]). Figure 11.4a shows that within-group variation dropped sharply once partici-
DEMO could engage in biased cultural transmission and copy other group members (DEMO
last ﬁ ve hunts), and ﬁ gure 11.4b shows that mean ﬁ tness increased during this period.
Further analyses supported the claim that DEMO multimodal adaptive landscape was critical
to the ﬁ tness advantage provided by cultural transmission relative to individual learning.
Statistical analyses showed that the number DEMO participants with point designs at the
global optimum for each attribute was signiﬁ cantly higher immediately following the
onset of biased cultural transmission than DEMO before. Agent-based computer
simulations of the same experimental task (Mesoudi and DEMO 2008b) as well as
subsequent experiments (Mesoudi 2008) conﬁ rmed DEMO in a unimodal adaptive land-
scape, where there is a single DEMO peak, biased cultural transmission does no better
than individual learning. In DEMO, the shape of the underlying adaptive landscape was
instrumental in, ﬁ rst, generating different inventions (representing different locally
optimal peaks) and, DEMO, favoring the emergence of an innovation (representing the
globally optimal peak).
186
Alex Mesoudi
(a)
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
IL Only
IL + CT
1 3 5 DEMO 9 111315171921232527
Hunt
29
(b)
1000
Individuals
Groups
900
800
DEMO
600
IL Only IL + CT
13579 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
Hunt
Figure 11.4
(a) Mean coefﬁ DEMO of variation (CV) for participants in Mesoudi and O’Brien (2008a)DEMO Data shown are the
mean CVs for the continuous attributes (length, width, and thickness) for participants in groups of up to six.
DEMO hunts 2–25, to the left of the vertical dashed line, only individual learning was permitted (“IL ONLY”).
During the ﬁ nal ﬁ ve hunts (26–30), to the right of the vertical dashed line, participants could additionally engage
in biased cultural transmission (“IL + CT”)DEMO A sharp decrease in CV can be seen once cultural transmission is
permitted. (b) Mean score per participant in the same experiment, separately for individual controls and partici-
pants in groups. Individual controls could not DEMO in cultural transmission during any hunt. The ﬁ nal ﬁ ve
hunts feature a signiﬁ cant increase in mean score in the groups compared DEMO the individual controls (F(1,43) =
4.76, p < DEMO).
500
400
Mean Score
CV
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
187
How realistic is this assumption DEMO a multimodal adaptive landscape underlying cultural
innovation? With respect to projectile DEMO speciﬁ cally, Cheshier and Kelly (2006)
recently summarized experimental evidence for trade-offs in point designs among such
factors as accuracy, range, DEMO power, and durability, stating, for example, that “thin,
narrow points have greater penetrating power, but wide, thick points create a DEMO wound
that bleeds more easily” (Cheshier and Kelly 2006: 353). Functional trade-offs such as
these would potentially produce multiple locally optimal point DEMO, with, for example,
one optimal design maximizing penetrating power and another maximizing bleeding. As
Boyd and Richerson (1992) suggest, many technological artifacts are likely governed by
similar trade-offs between competing demands that may DEMO in multimodal adaptive
landscapes. Much work remains to be done to test this claim adequately, although experi-
mental simulations might be useful in identifying the kind of data that is indicative
of different cultural-ﬁ tness functions, which can then be compared with actual cultural
data sets.
In general, viewing (a) different inventions as different ﬁ tness peaks and (b) biased
cultural transmission as a means of traversing adaptive valleys that allows individuals to
converge on higher peaks (much as Fisher [1930] viewed sexual reproduction) may
provide important insights into long-term cultural innovation. For example, DEMO might
predict that the more peaks there are in an adaptive landscape, that is, the more alterna-
tive stable designs exist, the more difﬁ cult it should be to ﬁ nd the peak/invention that
DEMO the highest ﬁ tness. Similarly, the greater the ﬁ tness difference DEMO alternative designs,
that is, the differences in height of the DEMO ﬁ tness peaks, the easier it should be
to identify the DEMO peak/best design by means of biased cultural transmission and
the more adaptive that biased cultural transmission should be relative to individual
learning.
Population DEMO would also be important: The larger the effective population size, the
more likely it is that someone will ﬁ nd the highest ﬁ DEMO peak by way of individual learn-
ing, resulting in higher ﬁ DEMO in the entire population following biased cultural transmis-
sion (see Mesoudi DEMO O’Brien [2008b] for computer simulations that conﬁ rm this effect
of group size). We (Mesoudi and O’Brien 2008a) also found that when DEMO had
to pay a cost to modify their point designs, that DEMO, when individual learning was costly,
cultural transmission was relatively more DEMO, consistent with the results of previous
theoretical models (e.g., Boyd DEMO Richerson 1995). Hence, we can predict that successful
innovations are DEMO likely to spread by cultural transmission when individual learning
is costly.
Future experiments might simulate cultural evolution on differently shaped adaptive
landscapes or where DEMO characters are linked in more complex ways, that is, cultural
epistasis, as in Kauffman’s (1993) Nk model of adaptive landscapes, as DEMO as the higher-
level combination of more distinct inventions, such as DEMO combination of point designs
and bow designs into a bow-and-arrow cultural complex. This introduces notions of
188
Alex Mesoudi
modularity, which has been a recent topic of interest in biological innovation: “invention
and innovation are about developing . . . new rules for combining biological and techno-
logical modules” (Erwin and Krakauer 2004: 1118; see also Callebaut and Rasskin-
Gutman 2005), suggesting DEMO principles from EvoDevo may be useful for the study of
cultural innovation and cultural evolution (Mesoudi and O’Brien 2008c).
Conclusions
The preceding case studies hopefully have demonstrated that it is possible to simulate
cultural processes DEMO the psychology laboratory in a manner that can provide potentially
useful insights into the mechanisms that underlie speciﬁ c aspects of cultural change,
DEMO cultural innovation. Rose and Felton (1955) showed how to distinguish meth-
odologically between invention (the emergence of a novel cultural form) and DEMO
(the persistence of that cultural form), and they tested the DEMO that migration
increases the frequency of invention, ﬁ nding the contrary DEMO that closed societies
with no migration foster invention. Mesoudi and O’Brien (DEMO, 2008b) showed that
when the ﬁ tness of an artifact is determined by a multimodal adaptive landscape, then
individual learning can cause artifacts to diverge to different locally adaptive states,
that is, generate multiple stable inventions, whereas biased cultural transmission can
cause artifacts to converge on a single globally adaptive form, that is, produce an
innovation.
In DEMO, I reemphasize that experimental simulations of cultural innovation, or
cultural evolution in general, are not intended to replace observational, ethnographic,
historical, or archaeological methods. As noted at the outset, and echoing Larson’s (DEMO
chapter 5, this volume) call for interdisciplinary research, all of DEMO methods should be
used together to tackle the same problems, such DEMO they complement one another’s
strengths and shore up weaknesses. Experimental studies can provide tests of speciﬁ c
hypotheses under controlled laboratory conditions; ethnographic studies can provide natu-
ralistic observational data; historical and archaeological studies can provide information
regarding long-term patterns and trends; mathematical models can provide rigorous analy-
ses of speciﬁ c problems; and so on.
Although different branches of the social sciences have traditionally been isolated
from one another, cultural-evolutionary theory provides an overarching theoretical
framework that promises to integrate and unify the DEMO sciences (Mesoudi, Whiten,
and Laland 2006), just as Darwinian evolutionary theory integrated the biological sci-
ences during the 1930s and 1940s (Mayr and Provine 1980). Indeed, the diverse contri-
butions to this volume from anthropologists, archaeologists, biologists, philosophers, and
psychologists provide encouraging DEMO that such a synthesis for the social sciences is
not far off.
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
189
References
Ammerman A., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1984. The Neolithic Transition and the Genetics of Populations in
DEMO Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Arnold, S. J., M. E. Pfrender, and A. G. Jones. 2001. The Adaptive Landscape as a Conceptual Bridge between
Micro- and Macroevolution. Genetica 112–113: 9–32.
Aunger, R. 2000. DEMO Culture. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Barnett, H. 1953. Innovation: The DEMO of Cultural Change. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Bartlett, F. C. 1932. Remembering. Macmillan, Oxford.
Baum, W. M., P. J. Richerson, C. M. DEMO, and B. M. Paciotti. 2004. Cultural Evolution in Laboratory
Microsocieties Including DEMO of Rule Giving and Rule Following. Evolution and Human Behavior 25:
305–326.
Bettinger, R. L., and J. Eerkens. 1999. Point Typologies, Cultural Transmission, and the Spread of Bow-and-
Arrow Technology in the Prehistoric Great Basin. American Antiquity 64: 231–242.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1992. How Microevolutionary Processes Give Rise DEMO History. In History and
Evolution, edited by M. H. Nitecki and DEMO V. Nitecki, pp. 179–209. State University of New York Press, Albany.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1995. Why Does Culture Increase DEMO Adaptability? Ethology and Socio-
biology 16: 125–143.
Brighton, H., K. Smith, and S. Kirby. 2005. Language as an Evolutionary System. Physics of Life Reviews 2:
177–226.
Callebaut, W., and D. Rasskin-Gutman. 2005. DEMO: Understanding the Development and Evolution of
Natural Complex Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J.
Cheshier, J., DEMO R. L. Kelly. 2006. Projectile Point Shape and Durability: The Effect DEMO Thickness: Length.
American Antiquity 71: 353–363.
Efferson, C., R. Lalive, P. J. Richerson, R. McElreath, and M. Lubell. 2008. Conformists and Mavericks: The
Empirics of Frequency-Dependent Cultural Transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 29: 56–64.
Efferson, C., P. Richerson, R. McElreath, M. Lubell, DEMO Edsten, T. Waring, B. Paciotti, and W. Baum. 2007.
Learning, Productivity, and Noise: An Experimental Study of Cultural Transmission on the DEMO Altiplano.
Evolution and Human Behavior 28: 11–17.
Erwin, D. H., DEMO D. C. Krakauer. 2004. Insights into Innovation. Science 304: 1117–1119.
Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Henrich, J., and F. Gil-White. 2001. The Evolution of Prestige: Freely Conferred Deference as a Mechanism for
Enhancing the Beneﬁ ts of Cultural DEMO Evolution and Human Behavior 22: 165–196.
Henrich, J., and R. DEMO 2003. The Evolution of Cultural Evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:
123–135.
Howe, C. J., A. C. Barbrook, M. Spencer, P. Robinson, B. Bordalejo, and L. R. Mooney. 2001. Manuscript
Evolution. Trends in Genetics 17: 147–152.
Insko, C. A., J. W. Thibaut, D. Moehle, M. Wilson, W. D. Diamond, R. Gilmore, M. R. Solomon, and DEMO Lipsitz.
1980. Social Evolution and the Emergence of Leadership. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39:
431–448.
Jacobs, R. C., and D. DEMO Campbell. 1961. The Perpetuation of an Arbitrary Tradition through Several Generations
of a Laboratory Microculture. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 62: 649–658.
Kameda, T., and D. Nakanishi. 2002. Cost–Beneﬁ t Analysis of Social/Cultural DEMO in a Nonstationary
Uncertain Environment. Evolution and Human Behavior 23: 373–393.
DEMO, T., and D. Nakanishi. 2003. Does Social/Cultural Learning Increase Human Adaptability? Rogers’
Question Revisited. Evolution and Human Behavior 24: 242–260.
190 Alex Mesoudi
Kashima, Y. 2000. Recovering Bartlett’s Social Psychology of Cultural Dynamics. European Journal of Social
Psychology 30: 383–403.
Kauffman, S. 1993. DEMO Origins of Order. Oxford University Press, New York.
Lake, M. W., and J. Venti. 2009. Quantitative Analysis of Macroevolutionary Patterning in Technological Evolu-
tion: Bicycle Design from 1800 to 2000. In Pattern and Process in Cultural Evolution, edited by S. J. Shennan,
pp. 147–161. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Lipo, C. P., M. J. O’Brien, M. DEMO, and S. J. Shennan (editors). 2006. Mapping Our Ancestors: DEMO
Approaches in Anthropology and Prehistory. Aldine, New York.
Mace R., C. Holden, and S. J. Shennan (editors). 2006. The Evolution of DEMO Diversity: A Phylogenetic
Approach. University College London Press, London.
Mayr, DEMO 1960. The Emergence of Evolutionary Novelties. In Evolution after Darwin, edited DEMO S. Tax, pp.
349–380. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mayr, DEMO, and W. Provine (editors). 1980. The Evolutionary Synthesis. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass.
McElreath, R., M. Lubell, P. J. DEMO, T. M. Waring, W. Baum, E. Edsten, C. Efferson, DEMO B. Paciotti.
2005. Applying Evolutionary Models to the Laboratory Study of Social Learning. Evolution and Human
Behavior 26: 483–508.
Mesoudi, A. 2007. Using DEMO Methods of Social Psychology to Study Cultural Evolution. Journal of Social,
Evolutionary and Cultural Psychology 1: 35–58.
Mesoudi, A. 2008. An Experimental DEMO of the “Copy-Successful-Individuals” Cultural Learning Strat-
egy: Adaptive Landscapes, Producer–Scrounger Dynamics, and Informational Access Costs. Evolution and
Human and Behavior 29: 350–363.
DEMO, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008a. The Cultural Transmission of Great Basin Projectile-Point Technology.
I. An Experimental Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 3–28.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008b. The Cultural Transmission of Great DEMO Projectile-Point Technology.
II. An Agent-Based Computer Simulation. American Antiquity 73: 627–644.
DEMO, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008c. The Learning and Transmission of Hierarchical Cultural Recipes. Bio-
logical Theory 3: 63–72.
Mesoudi, A., and A. Whiten. 2004. The Hierarchical Transformation of Event Knowledge in Human Cultural
DEMO Journal of Cognition and Culture 4: 1–24.
Mesoudi, A., and DEMO Whiten. 2008. The Multiple Uses of Cultural Transmission Experiments in Understanding
Cultural Evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 363: 3489–3501.
Mesoudi A., A. Whiten, and R. I. M. Dunbar. 2006. A Bias for DEMO Information in Human Cultural Trans-
mission. British Journal of Psychology 97: DEMO
Mesoudi, A., A. Whiten, and K. N. Laland. 2004. Is DEMO Cultural Evolution Darwinian? Evidence Reviewed
from the Perspective of The Origin DEMO Species. Evolution 58: 1–11.
Mesoudi, A., A. Whiten, and K. N. Laland. 2006. Towards a Uniﬁ ed Science of Cultural Evolution. Behavioral
DEMO Brain Sciences 29: 329–383.
Nitecki, M. H. 1990. Evolutionary Innovations. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
O’Brien, M. J., and R. L. Lyman. 2002. Evolutionary Archeology: Current Status and Future Prospects. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology 11: 26–36.
O’Brien, M. J., and R. L. Lyman. 2003. Cladistics and Archaeology. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
O’Brien, M. J., R. L. Lyman, M. Collard, C. J. Holden, R. D. Gray, and S. Shennan. 2008. Transmission, Phy-
logenetics, and the Evolution of Cultural Diversity. In Cultural Transmission and Archaeology: Issues and Case
Studies, DEMO by M. J. O’Brien, pp. 77–90. Society for American Archaeology Press, Washington, D.C.
Pagel, M., and R. Mace. 2004. The Cultural Wealth of Nations. Nature 428: 275–278.
Plotkin, H. 2002. The Imagined World DEMO Real. Penguin, London.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 2005. DEMO by Genes Alone. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Rogers, E. 1995. The Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press, New York.
The Experimental Study of Cultural Innovation
191
Rose, E., and W. DEMO 1955. Experimental Histories of Culture. American Sociological Review 20:
383–392.
Runciman, W. G. 2005. Culture Does Evolve. History and Theory 44: 1–13.
DEMO, M. L., O. Lao, D. Caramelli, M. Lari, R. DEMO, M. Marti, J. Bertranpetit, and C. Lalueza-Fox. 2007.
Palaeogenetic Evidence DEMO a Dual Model of Neolithic Spreading into Europe. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B 274: 2161–2168.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1934. Theory DEMO Economic Development. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Schumpeter, J. A. DEMO Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper, New York.
Shennan, S. J. 2002. Genes, Memes and Human History. Thames and Hudson, London.
Simpson, G. G. 1944. Tempo and Mode in Evolution. Columbia University Press, New York.
Spencer, M., E. A. Davidson, A. C. Barbrook, and DEMO J. Howe. 2004. Phylogenetics of Artiﬁ cial Manuscripts.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 227: 503–511.
Tylor, E. B. 1871. Primitive Culture. Murray, London.
Wheeler M., J. Ziman, and M. A. Boden. 2002. The Evolution of DEMO Entities. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Wright, S. 1932. The Roles DEMO Mutation, Inbreeding, Crossbreeding and Selection in Evolution. Sixth Interna-
tional Congress of Genetics, Proceedings 1: 356–366.

12 Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
Anne Kandler and DEMO Steele
Evolutionary models of innovation processes should address not just the origination phase
but also the diffusion phase. Such models must be sensitive to DEMO context,
where that context clearly affects the diffusion dynamics. Here we study the adoption
dynamics of successful innovations, using as a model the sales of new consumer durables
(televisions, washing machines, microwaves, and DEMO like). Figure 12.1 shows the typical
S-shaped adoption curve for such innovations. We consider the possible role of social-
inﬂ uence processes and DEMO economic inequalities in determining the rate of growth in sales
of new products of this kind and propose a new model that includes both DEMO uence
processes and economic-inequality effects.
We start our consideration by contrasting two models of social-inﬂ uence processes in
innovation diffusion, one from marketing science (Bass 1969) and the other from dual-
inheritance (DI) theory DEMO anthropology (Henrich 2001). The Bass model of new product
sales DEMO and the DI model of innovation diffusion both assume a homogeneous popu-
lation of adopters, and both assume that the ﬁ nite diffusion rate for learned awareness of
the beneﬁ cial nature of the innovation is DEMO prevents everyone from adopting it imme-
diately. In both models, basic DEMO uence effects on levels of awareness are modeled
as the rate term of a logistic growth process. The models diverge in their consideration of
DEMO effects. Bass assumes that takeoff may be accelerated by an additional constant
likelihood that an individual will choose to adopt independent of social inﬂ DEMO
(“innovativeness”). Henrich’s DI model also assumes that takeoff may be DEMO by
an independent-learning effect but introduces an additional frequency-dependent social-
inﬂ uence effect (“conformist bias”) that actually delays takeoff.
For new products with DEMO cant cost, it is likely that adoption decisions are also inﬂ DEMO
by price. In a community with money allocated unequally among individuals, DEMO will
have different reservation price thresholds for adoption. We therefore deﬁ ne an alternative
approach, the “threshold heterogeneity” model. We demonstrate that where the price of a new
product declines at the rate typically seen in DEMO product life cycles, a population distribution
of reservation prices based on DEMO income distributions can produce the observed
S-shaped diffusion patterns equally as well as the Bass and DI social-inﬂ uence models.
194
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
01520 15
Time since Introduction
Figure DEMO
Typical adoption rate and cumulative adoption curves for new products.
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
0
To DEMO which of the considered models provides the most accurate explanation of
the dynamics of adoption decisions, we need to consider additional information as well
as sales growth. In his implementation of a DI approach, Henrich (DEMO) argued that
biased-transmission processes must have predominated in the adoption decisions DEMO popu-
lations of homogeneous agents in all empirical cases that show a sigmoid diffusion curve.
Independent-learning processes cannot produce an adoption curve of this DEMO
The assumption of agent homogeneity, however, is too restrictive and clearly inappro-
priate when studying adoption of costly goods in populations with high DEMO of economic
inequality. A number of recent studies in the marketing literature have considered this
problem (Golder and Tellis 1998; Van den Bulte DEMO Stremersch 2004). They indicate that
affordability is indeed an important criterion in individual decisions about when to adopt.
For costly new products such DEMO consumer durables, people are often aware of the product
and its DEMO long before they purchase it because they have had to wait for its price
to come down to their own reservation price threshold.
To DEMO both social inﬂ uences and affordability, we also propose a combined
DEMO The key ﬁ nding of this model is that although the adoption pattern will be deter-
mined primarily by social-inﬂ uence processes where initial DEMO is low and/or the subse-
quent price decline is rapid, DEMO pattern will be determined primarily by affordability
constraints when the initial price is high and the subsequent price decline is slow.
The Bass Model DEMO Innovation Diffusion
Typically in the innovation-adoption literature from marketing science, diffusion DEMO an
advantageous new product by independent assessment of efﬁ cacy is expected to produce
an r-shaped cumulative growth curve, whereas diffusion by imitation of prior adopters
is expected to produce an S-shaped curve (Bass 1969). Bass’s inﬂ uential model
A. Kandler and J. Steele
Cumulative Adoption
Adoption DEMO
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion 195
proposes that the DEMO of adopters can be divided into innovators and imitators
and that the shape of the cumulative adoption curve will vary as a function of DEMO
relative importance. The Bass model includes an innovation coefﬁ cient, p, representing
the fraction of the population that will adopt the innovation, regardless of the avail-
ability of demonstrators, and an imitation coefﬁ cient, DEMO, representing the fraction of the
population whose choice is determined by DEMO number of previous adopters. The basic
model states that
Pt p qY t() =+ (),
where P is the probability of adoption by those who have not yet adopted at time t, and
Y(t) is the frequency of existing adopters at time t. This can then be expressed as a popula-
tion rate of increase
∂ () =+()() ()− () (12.1)
∂t
In cases DEMO q > p, adoption will increase to reach an internal peak DEMO declining,
leading to an S-shaped cumulative adoption curve. In cases where q ≤ p, adoption rates
will be at their maximum initially and then tail off, leading to an r-shaped cumulative
adoption curve. The empirical ratio q/p gives an index of the relative importance of inno-
DEMO and of imitation in the diffusion of a particular new cultural trait and is a shape
parameter for the cumulative adoption curve.
The Dual-Inheritance DEMO
A similar model of innovation diffusion is provided by DI theory. In this approach, it is
assumed that the majority of human behavior is acquired through social learning (Boyd
and Richerson 1985; Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman DEMO; Henrich 2001). Following Boyd
and Richerson (1985), we can distinguish among several different decision mechanisms
affecting the adoption of traits:
DEMO Guided variation—the selective retention of variants (including novel variants) found
to be efﬁ cacious by individual trial-and-error learning.
• Direct-biased transmission—the selective copying DEMO preexisting variants found to be
efﬁ cacious by individual assessment.
• Indirect-biased transmission—the selective copying of variants from individuals with
speciﬁ c qualities and DEMO deemed to make them ﬁ t models without assessing directly
the efﬁ cacy of the copied variant.
• Frequency-dependent transmission—the selective copying of variants DEMO individuals
on the basis of their commonness or rarity without assessing directly the efﬁ cacy of the
copied variant.
Yt
p qYt Yt
1.
196 A. Kandler and J. Steele
In the DI model (Henrich 2001), the temporal social dynamic of the spread of cultural
variants by DEMO transmission can be modeled by the following differential equation:
∂ () =−ξη()() +−()()()
∂t PPYt B Yt DEMO 1, (12.2)
where Y(t) describes the proportion of DEMO population that has already adopted the variant
at time t. The constants x and h represent the fractions of individuals in a population that
DEMO on guided variation and biased transmission, respectively. The parameter P1 is DEMO
probability of adopting the innovation through guided variation (Henrich 2001), DEMO the
parameter B represents the effects of the different forms of biased transmission on
the spread of the variant. Given that we are interested DEMO the adoption process of costly
goods, we modify Henrich’s treatment of DEMO variation so that the individuals are not
allowed to revoke their adoption decisions if they cannot work out how to use the product
effectively; that is, if they have purchased a good, they cannot return DEMO
In this context we have to distinguish between cases in which B is a constant and those
in which B depends on the frequency, Y. In the ﬁ rst case, equation 12.2 includes the effects
of direct and indirect transmission only, and the proportion of the population that has
adopted at time t can be expressed explicitly by
Yt() DEMO 1 − e () .
ηB e−+ + 1
ξ 1
DEMO, conformist-biased transmission, where the rate has a positive frequency
dependence, DEMO be included by setting
BBY b a a Yt= ()=−()DEMO 1+ ()()−
(Boyd and Richerson 1985). The constant DEMO b(1 − a) models the inﬂ uence of
direct- and DEMO transmission, whereas a(2Y(t) − 1) describes the inﬂ DEMO of
conformist-biased transmission. The parameter a is a measure of the strength of that con-
formist bias. As mentioned in Henrich (2001), a should be chosen to be rather small;
otherwise conformist bias makes DEMO spread of an initially rare variant impossible. In this
case, equation DEMO can be written as
∂ () =−ξη()PPYt b a a Yt Yt Yt() +−[]()1 211 . (12.3)+ ()()− ()()− ()
∂t 11
To illustrate the general spread dynamic given by equation 12.3, ﬁ gure 12.2 shows
cumulative adoption curves for different parameter constellations. The fraction of the
population that relies DEMO guided variation is assumed to be very small—P1 has a value
of 0.001, and the coefﬁ cients determining the rates of individual and of social learning,
Yt
Yt
−+ξη
PBt1
()ξη
PBt1
P
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
197
1
a=0.07, b=0.2
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
a=0.07, b=0.15
0.4
a=0, b=0.15
0.3
DEMO
0.1
0
a=0.2, b=0.1
020 40 60 80 100 120 140
DEMO 12.2
Cumulative adoption curves for different parameter constellations.
x and h, DEMO both chosen to be 0.5. We can derive that a variant diffuses successfully by
all the different transmission mechanisms if B > 0.
Figure DEMO shows the course of the frequency-dependent transmission coefﬁ cient B in
dependence of the frequency Y, and we see that the coefﬁ cients B(Y) are always positive
for the parameter constellations a = 0, DEMO = 0.15; a = 0.07, b = 0.2; a = DEMO, b = 0.15,
and in these cases the variant is DEMO by the whole population. However, in contrast,
if B < DEMO, the innovation is not supported by the whole of the social-transmission DEMO
nism. The negative effect of conformist-bias transmission due to the rareness of the
innovation at the beginning cannot be compensated by direct and indirect DEMO
biases, and the innovation will increase its frequency only by independent DEMO (see
the cumulative adoption curve for the parameters a = 0.2, b = 0.1 in ﬁ gure 12.2). Even
a higher initial DEMO Y(0) = 0.05 is insufﬁ cient to maintain the variant DEMO the
population.
Further, comparison of the cumulative adoption curves with the DEMO a = 0, b =
0.15 and a = 0.07, b = 0.15, which obviously differ only in the respective absence (a DEMO 0)
and presence (a = 0.07) of the conformist-biased component, shows that such frequency-
dependent biases are able to produce long tails at the beginning. Conformist bias supports
the spread of common variables but DEMO the spread of rare variants. Consequently, it
takes longer for a DEMO variable to spread if conformity is present as is reﬂ ected in the long
tails at the beginning. In contrast, parameter b inﬂ uences the steepness of the curve. The
198
0.3
0.25
a=0.07, b=0.2
0.2
a=0, b=0.15
0.15
0.1
0.05
DEMO, b=0.15
0
-0.05
a=0.2, b=0.1
-0.1
020 40 60 80 100 120 140
Time
Figure 12.3
Transmission coefﬁ cient, B, for the DEMO parameter constellations.
larger this coefﬁ cient, that is, the larger the effect of direct- and indirect-biased transmis-
sion, the steeper the cumulative adoption curve and the faster the variant spreads through
the whole population.
Comparison DEMO the Dual-Inheritance Model with the Bass Model
Both the Bass model and the DI model provide possibilities to describe the diffusion of
an advantageous DEMO in a population. In this section we explore how different or
how similar the models are in terms of the adoption dynamics. If we DEMO the models
without considering conformist bias, the cumulative adoption curves for DEMO spread of
costly goods obtained by the Bass model and the DI model coincide exactly. The Bass
model deﬁ nes the spread dynamic by DEMO 12.1, whereas the DI model without con-
formist bias determines the DEMO by equation 12.2. By setting
pP q B==ξη1 and , (12.4)DEMO
it is obvious that both equations are the same. This means that the fraction xP1 is equiva-
lent to the parameter p in the DEMO model—the fraction of the population that adopts
the innovation independently and not as a result of any imitation process—and hB is
A. Kandler and DEMO Steele
Coefﬁcient B(Y)
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
A
DEMO
C
020 40 60 80 100 120 140
199
Social-learning Approach a=0, b=0.15
Bass Model p=0.0005, q=0.075
Social-learning Approach a=0.07, b=0.2
Bass Model p=0.0001, q=0.09
Social-learning Approach a=0.05, b=0.15
Bass Model p=0.0002, q=0.07
Figure 12.4
Comparison of adoption curves from the dual-inheritance and Bass models.
equivalent DEMO the parameter q, which determines the strength of the imitation process.
DEMO 12.4 (curves labeled A) shows an example of this coincidence. With the param-
eters P1 = 0.001, x = h = 0.5, DEMO = 0, and b = 0.15, we obtain p = xP1 = 0.0005 and q =
hB = 0.075.
The situation changes if DEMO include conformist bias, which is responsible for a long tail
of DEMO cumulative adoption curve at the beginning. Figure 12.4 (curves labeled B DEMO C)
shows the divergence of the DI model from the Bass model, which cannot reproduce
this long-tailed pattern at the beginning. For these examples, however, the deviation
between cumulative adoption curves remains less signiﬁ DEMO than the overall close
correspondence.
Because of this coincidence, we consider DEMO the further numerical examples only the
DI model, given that the DEMO model is equivalent to the DI model without conformist
bias. From this point forward, we shall refer to the DI model as “the social-learning
model.”
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
200
A. Kandler and J. Steele
Alternative Explanation: Threshold Heterogeneity
The two previous models have the common assumption that the spread of an innovation
DEMO determined by a mixture of individual exploration and social learning. It is assumed
implicitly that all individuals who want to adopt an innovation can DEMO do so. Having
the spread of costly goods in mind, we DEMO that this is not always the case. Rather,
only wealthy individuals will initially be able to afford an expensive innovation, whereas
the others will have to wait until the price of the innovation drops below DEMO individual
thresholds for adopting it. Such “moving-equilibrium” effects are analyzed in probit
models in the economics literature (David 2005; Geroski 2000) and are not accounted for
in the social-learning model.
Based on the work of DEMO den Bulte and Stremersch (2004), we can examine this het-
DEMO approach based on economic factors and show that both explanations—the
social-learning model and the threshold-heterogeneity hypothesis—can lead to nearly the
same S-shaped cumulative adoption DEMO
In the following we assume that income is the factor that determines the adoption deci-
sion and timing and that income is unequally distributed DEMO the population. The
heterogeneity approach presumes that an individual, i, will adopt an innovation if its price
is smaller than the individual’s threshold, qi, the reservation price depending on the indi-
vidual’s income. We note that an unequal income distribution leads naturally to an unequal
distribution of DEMO thresholds. In this context, initial innovators are not the
venturesome and DEMO individuals of the Bass model. Rather, they are the people who
DEMO initially afford the innovation.
Different considerations (Salem and Mount 1974) have shown that one means of
approximating the income of a population, and consequently the price-threshold dis-
tribution, is by using a two-parameter right-skewed gamma distribution given by the
function
λα
feΘ αλθ−−1
α
(12.5)
()θ =>θα,, .with λ θ00and ≥
The two parameters, a and l, can be interpreted as measures of inequality and scale of
the distribution.1
Different sets of these distribution parameters lead to different degrees DEMO inequality, as
shown in ﬁ gure 12.5, where theoretical distributions of adoption thresholds for a new
product of the form (5) with DEMO parameters l = 6 and a = 2, 3, 4 are illustrated. The levels
of income inequality can be quantiﬁ ed by the DEMO income concentration coefﬁ cients2 of
0.375, 0.313, and 0.273. It is obvious that the population’s income is distributed most
evenly for the smallest DEMO coefﬁ cient, 0.273.
Assuming the income distributions shown in ﬁ gure DEMO as proxies for the adoption-
threshold distributions, and with an exponential DEMO decline for the new product over time,
0.07
0.06
A
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
B
C
Gini Coefficient DEMO 0.375
Gini Coefficient = 0.313
Gini Coefficient = 0.273
0
0210
030 40 50
Reservation Price
60
70
Figure 12.5
Price-threshold distribution for different DEMO of income inequality.
80
201
the cumulative adoption curves (solid lines) in ﬁ gure 12.6 are obtained. They are S-shaped,
but here DEMO shape reﬂ ects income heterogeneity and not contagion/diffusion. The interpre-
tation of S-shaped curves in the social-learning model applies only in cases where DEMO is
population homogeneity in the economic factors determining the threshold for adoption
subsequent to exposure. Figure 12.6 (solid lines) shows that different price-threshold DEMO
tributions result in different adoption processes in a threshold-heterogeneity model. A more
unequal income distribution implies that a larger proportion of the income will DEMO earned
by fewer individuals. This means that for a new product with high initial cost and a steady
pattern of price decline, diffusion of the innovation through the population will take longer,
given that the DEMO threshold of the majority of the population will be lower.
In order to derive an analytical expression for the spread dynamic shown in ﬁ DEMO 12.6
similar to equations 12.1 or 12.3 for, respectively, the Bass and the DI model, we use the
cumulative-distribution function, FΘ(q), of the price threshold, Θ, which can be interpreted
as the proportion of the population with a threshold less than or equal to DEMO Then,
Ft F t() = Θ()ρ() ,
where the price, r(t), of the innovation is a decreasing function in time. As a further con-
sideration, we assume an exponential price decline of the form r(t) = r0e−bt, where the
DEMO has an initial price of r0. In this case, we can DEMO the change, dF(t)/dt,
in the proportion that has already adopted at time t by
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and DEMO Diffusion
202
A. Kandler and J. Steele
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
DEMO
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
05
CBA
Heterogeneity Approach
Gini = 0.375
Social-learning Approach
B = 0.38, P1 = 0.02
Heterogeneity Approach
Gini = 0.321
Social-learning Approach
B = 0.442, P1 = 0.42
Heterogeneity Approach
Gini = 0.273
Social-learning Approach
B = 0.422, P1 = 0.098
10 15
20 3025
Time
35
40
45 50
Figure 12.6
Cumulative adoption curves corresponding DEMO data shown in ﬁ gure 12.5.
()α
We have formulated the analytical expressions for the time course of the adoption
process based on DEMO contrasting social-learning (equation 12.3) and threshold-
heterogeneity hypotheses (equation 12.6), and now we compare the resulting cumulative
adoption curves. Figure 12.6 shows that the shapes of the adoption curves can be similar.
The solid DEMO represent the curves obtained by the heterogeneity approach with different
degrees of inequality, whereas the dashed lines illustrate the spread dynamic produced by
the social-learning approach under different transmission biases.
This raises the question of which DEMO for the measure of income inequality and which
transmission parameters, P1 DEMO B, lead to the same cumulative adoption curves. To answer
this, we assume different gamma-distributed price thresholds with corresponding Gini
coefﬁ cients of DEMO, 0.313, and 0.375 (as shown in ﬁ gure 12.5) and a price decline for
the innovation given by r(t) = 45e−0.1t; that is, the initial price of the innovation is 45 and
DEMO then decreases exponentially. In the next step we determine the parameters that minimize
(in a quadratic sense) distances between the function Y(t) in the social-learning model and
the function F(t) in the threshold-heterogeneity approach. In mathematical terms, we look
for the unique solution of the optimization problem
min
()−
() 2
Ft Y t
λα
() = ft F t t beΘ 0
dt Γ
− bt . (12.6)
dF t
() =−
′()
ρρ
()
′() =
ρ
αα λ−−
bt e
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
Table 12.1
Considered parameter DEMO
Heterogeneity Approach
Gini Coefﬁ
cient
0.375
0.313
0.273
Social-Learning Model
q˜ =
Bp˜
= P1
0.010
0.021
0.049
0.191
0.221
0.211
203
q˜/p˜ DEMO
19.19
10.32
4.34
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
0.27
0.28
0.290.30.31
0.32
0.33
0.34
0.35
0.36
0.37
Gini Coefﬁcient
Figure DEMO
Proportionality relation between the shape (q˜/p˜) ratio and the Gini coefﬁ cient.
for all possible model parameters.
Table 12.1 shows the corresponding DEMO of the parameters of the social-learning
curves (with x = h DEMO 0.5), which are the best quadratic approximations of the function
F(t). We ﬁ nd that a = 0 for all three DEMO, so the transmission parameter B reﬂ ects
only the effects of DEMO and indirect-biased transmission.
This analysis shows that curve forms in the threshold-heterogeneity model—forms
that vary with income inequality, which we take as a measure of inequality of the
reservation-price distribution—and in the social-learning model—forms that vary DEMO
the relative importance of guided variation and biased transmission—are directly pro-
portional. This fact is illustrated in ﬁ gure 12.7, where the shape ratios, q˜/p˜, and the
Shape Ratio
204
A. Kandler and J. Steele
Gini coefﬁ cients are contrasted. The DEMO between these two parameters is almost
linear.
A Combined Model
As shown in the previous sections, both models—one based on the social-learning hypoth-
esis and the other on the threshold-heterogeneity hypothesis—provide good ﬁ ts for
S-shaped DEMO curves. The social-learning model assumes that the spread of an inno-
vation is determined by cultural-transmission biases in the population. The innovation
favored by DEMO transmission mechanisms will spread across the whole population. This
approach assumes that every individual who wants to adopt is able to do so and DEMO there
are no external constraints on the adoption decision. In contrast, DEMO heterogeneity model
is based on such an external constraint and assumes that the adoption process is determined
only by an individual’s price threshold—the ability DEMO afford the innovation. However, in
this case it is assumed that DEMO individuals in the population want to adopt the innovation
as soon as possible.
For modeling the spread of costly goods, it might seem more appropriate to combine
both hypotheses by developing a model in which the DEMO to adopt is inﬂ uenced by social
biases but where the timing of adoption is constrained by affordability. This leads to the
following approach,DEMO
X t Yt F t Yt F t() = () () = ()()1 − Θ()ρ() , (12.7)DEMO
where F(t) is the cumulative adoption curve obtained by the DEMO approach
and Y(t) is the cumulative adoption curve of the DEMO model given by equation
12.3. This model assumes that acquiring a preference to adopt the innovation is independent
of income. People are heterogeneous with DEMO to price thresholds for adoption but homo-
geneous with respect to mechanisms for acquiring the preference to adopt.
What about the spread dynamic of DEMO combined model and the inﬂ uences of different
patterns of price decline? As stated before, the cumulative adoption curve of the social-
learning DEMO is by deﬁ nition unaffected by changes in economic factors and stays the same
in the following examples, where we compare the adoption curves of the social-learning
model, the threshold-heterogeneity model, and the proposed combined DEMO for different
patterns of price decline. At ﬁ rst we assume that the price is constant over the entire time
period. Figure 12.8 illustrates DEMO situation, with a constant price, r = 10, an unequal DEMO
distribution indexed by a Gini coefﬁ cient of 0.375, and social-transmission DEMO a =
0.05 and b = 0.15. The cumulative adoption curve of the threshold-heterogeneity approach
is simply a constant, given that the price does not change from the initial value.
The cumulative adoption curve of the DEMO model shows an S-shaped pattern. It is
dominated in the ﬁ rst time period by the social-learning model, but the economic constraints
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion 205
1
Heterogeneity Approach
DEMO Combined Model
0.8 Social-learning Model
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
050 100 150
Figure 12.8
Comparison of the cumulative adoption curves DEMO a constant price r = 10 with income inequality given by the
Gini coefﬁ cient of 0.375, and transmission parameters P1 = 0.001, DEMO = h = 0.5, a = 0.05, and b = 0.15.
delay the spread of the innovation through the population. Given that the DEMO is constant,
only the part of the population whose reservation price is greater than or equal to 10 will ever
adopt, and, DEMO a result, the innovation will not spread successfully through the whole DEMO
tion, despite the fact that the whole population is aware of DEMO innovation. This can be seen
in ﬁ gure 12.8, where the DEMO adoption curve of the combined model coincides with
the cumulative adoption curve from the threshold-heterogeneity approach at the time where
Y(t) = 1. By then, all individuals have been inﬂ uenced to want to adopt the innovation, which
means that the assumption of the heterogeneity approach is fulﬁ lled, and the combined model
is identical to the threshold-heterogeneity approach (compare equation 12.7 with Y(t) = 1).
In contrast, ﬁ gure 12.9 shows the cumulative adoption curves if the price decreases
DEMO from 45 to 10 and then stays constant. All other parameters are the same as
in the previous example. Again, in a short time period at the beginning, the shape of the
cumulative adoption curve of the combined model is dominated by the social-learning
dynamic, but it coincides with the cumulative adoption curve from the heterogeneity
approach at the time DEMO Y(t) = 1. Because of economic constraints (the price will never
fall below 10), the proportion of the population that will DEMO the innovation is the same
as in ﬁ gure 12.8. However, DEMO that the price has to decrease to reach the value of 10,
the adoption process takes slightly longer.
The last example (see ﬁ gure 12.10) assumes that the price decreases exponentially
with no restriction; DEMO other parameters are the same as in the preceding examples.
206 A. Kandler and J. Steele
1
Heterogeneity Approach
0.9 Combined Model
DEMO Social-learning Model
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
050 100 150
Time
Figure 12.9
Comparison of the cumulative adoption curves for an DEMO price decline from 45 to 10 with income
inequality given by the Gini coefﬁ cient of 0.375 and transmission parameters P1 = 0.001, x = h = 0.5, a = 0.05,
and b = 0.15.
Figure 12.10a is obtained with price decline of the form r(t) = 45e−0.05t. Notice that the
income inequality has little inﬂ uence on DEMO spread of the innovation. The shape of the
cumulative adoption curve of the combined model is dominated by the social-learning
components. This is not DEMO, given that the chosen initial price and the price decline
will DEMO produce a sufﬁ ciently long delay between the time where the richest individuals
and the poorest individuals can afford the innovation. However, with more-costly goods,
we consider a price decline of the form r(t) = 100e−0.03t (see ﬁ gure 12.10b). Now, the initial
price DEMO nearly doubled, and the decline is slower. In this case “willingness” DEMO adopt an
innovation spreads faster than the individuals can actually afford it, and the shape of the
cumulative adoption curve of the combined model is dominated by the threshold-hetero-
geneity components of the model, that is, the affordability constraints.
These examples demonstrate that economic factors have to be included where they would
counteract or delay the spread predicted when only DEMO mechanisms are considered. To
increase the realism of the model, we DEMO relax the implicit assumption of the threshold-
heterogeneity approach (see note DEMO), namely, that all individuals will have the same propen-
sity DEMO spending their income on an innovation. This means that we now incorporate the
fact that the ratio between discretionary income and income is higher DEMO wealthier indivi-
duals and tends to zero out for individuals with a small income. Figure 12.11 illustrates
the approach. The dashed line shows the DEMO assumption of a constant propensity for
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
207
(a)
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Heterogeneity Approach
DEMO Model
Social-learning Model
0150
Time
00
150
(b)
1
0.9
DEMO
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Heterogeneity Approach
Combined Model
Social-learning Model
0
0150
Time
00
150
Figure 12.10
Comparison of the cumulative DEMO curves for exponential price declines r(t) = 45e−0.05t (a) DEMO r(t) =
100e−0.03t (b) with income inequality given by DEMO Gini coefﬁ cient of 0.375 and transmission parameters P1 =
0.001, DEMO = h = 0.5, a = 0.05, and b = 0.15.
208
A. Kandler and J. Steele
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
DEMO
0.05
0
02468 10 12 14 16 18 20
Income (in DEMO)
Figure 12.11
Proportion of income spent on the innovation.
spending, DEMO of income. Now we assume a quadratic dependence between income
and the propensity for spending (solid line). This leads to a higher number of adopters at the
beginning but also decreases the proportion of the DEMO that will adopt at late time
points, compared with the situation DEMO a constant propensity.
Figure 12.12 makes that effect obvious. The chained line represents the cumulative
adoption curve for a heterogeneity approach with a constant DEMO for spending, and
the solid line shows the cumulative adoption curve DEMO by the income-dependent
propensity given in ﬁ gure 12.11. At the time period from t = 0 to roughly t = 50, the
adoption curve of the “variable”-heterogeneity approach (solid line) is above the curve DEMO
the “constant”-heterogeneity approach (chained line) because the wealthier individuals
tend to spend a higher proportion of their incomes on an innovation. As time DEMO by, the
price of the innovation decreases so that more individuals DEMO afford it. The “variable”-
heterogeneity approach, however, assumes that the poorer the individuals, the smaller the
proportion of their incomes they spend on the innovation. Therefore, the solid line is below
the chained line for later times. This causes a long tail at the end.
The Case DEMO Black-and-White Television Adoption in the United States
In the case of the adoption of black-and-white television sets in the United States, Wang
(2003) argues that the observed delay reﬂ ects income inequality. When the new DEMO
Propensity of Spending on the Innovation
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
209
1
0.9
0.8
DEMO
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Heterogeneity Approach
Heterogeneity Approach –
Variable Proportion of Spending
0
0150
00
150
Time
200
250 300
Figure DEMO
Cumulative adoption curves of the different approaches.
was introduced in 1946, DEMO consumers tended to adopt it ﬁ rst. The price then
fell with cumulative output, and demand grew as the product penetrated into lower income
groups. Based on the considerations of Bayus (1993) for the time DEMO from 1946 to
1960, we assume an exponential price decline for DEMO sets of the form
ρ()te= 1283 −0.087t.
This implies that DEMO initial price of a set at market launch was $1,283 and that afterwards
a relatively steep price decline was observable. We adjust this DEMO take into account the
simultaneous growth in nominal per capita gross domestic product in the United States,
which we take as a proxy DEMO average nominal per capita income. Based on data for the
period 1946–1971 in Johnston and Williamson (2007), we estimate the exponential rate
of economic growth as e0.045, which means that the price decline for black-and-white sets
(as a fraction of average income) can be approximated as
DEMO()te= 1283 −0.1322t.
The family-income distribution is approximated by a gamma DEMO, and we use
the parameter a = 2.49 and l = DEMO ⋅ 10−4, estimated in McDonald and Ramson (1979) for
the DEMO 1960. The corresponding Gini coefﬁ cient is 0.34, which shows that DEMO income
in 1960 was relatively unequally distributed. Evidence suggests that the Gini coefﬁ cient
was fairly stable and constant during the period of diffusion DEMO this innovation.
210
A. Kandler and J. Steele
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
DEMO
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Bass Model (Bayus)
Bass Model (Bass)
Gini Coefficient 0.34
Combined Model
01520 15
Time
0
25 30
DEMO 12.13
Cumulative black-and-white-television-set adoption curves for the Bass, threshold, and combined models. The
Bass curves were ﬁ tted to actual sales data, whereas the threshold curves are based on income distribution and
on the exogenous DEMO price trend. Threshold was set as a constant fraction of income.
Bass (1969) estimated his model from sales data and obtained the coefﬁ DEMO of innova-
tion, p, as 0.0279 and the coefﬁ cient of imitation, q, as 0.25. Bayus (1993) ﬁ tted the Bass
DEMO to the actual sales data and estimated the coefﬁ cient of innovation at 0.0159 and
the coefﬁ cient of imitation at 0.39. We can DEMO these data to model the diffusion rate for
black-and-white sets using the threshold-heterogeneity model and employing the two
Bass-curve ﬁ ts as our targets DEMO comparison. We note in passing that in contrast to the
threshold-based curves, these best ﬁ t Bass curves are not constrained by any independent
empirical data on the strength of imitative bias among adopters.
In ﬁ DEMO 12.13, the dashed line represents the curves obtained by the threshold-
DEMO approach, with c = 1/11 as the constant propensity of DEMO on television
sets. This means that the individuals or families would spend up to about 10 percent of
their annual income on their ﬁ DEMO set. Comparison with the two ﬁ tted Bass curves shows
that the general behavior is similar, although it does not ﬁ t exactly. In contrast, the black
solid line represents the cumulative adoption curve obtained by the combined model with
the income distribution of the year 1960 for DEMO threshold-heterogeneity approach and Bass
parameters p = 0.06, q = 0.3. DEMO means that compared with the pure Bass model as
estimated by Bass (1969) or by Bayus (1993), the probability is slightly increased that an
individual will decide to adopt the innovation independently of social DEMO uence.
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
211
1
0.9
0.8
DEMO
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Bass Model (Bayus)
DEMO Model (Bass)
Gini Coefficient 0.34
Combined Model
01520 15
Time
DEMO
25 30
Figure 12.14
Cumulative black-and-white-television-set adoption curves for the Bass, DEMO, and combined models. The
Bass curves were ﬁ tted to actual DEMO data, whereas the threshold curves are based on income distribution and
DEMO the exogenous growth-adjusted price trend. Threshold was set as a variable fraction of income.
Figure 12.14 differs in that we assume a variable proportion DEMO income as discretionary
in the combined model, which now has Bass DEMO p = 0.035, q = 0.35. It is evident
that the DEMO distribution predicts the correct timescale for the diffusion process and
that the social-contagion component of the combined model improves the ﬁ t to the DEMO
curves by delaying takeoff in the higher income groups.
Summarizing, our DEMO threshold distribution gives a good ﬁ t to the Bass sales
curves for this case study, and the combined model improves that ﬁ t by introducing a
social-learning element to explain the observed delay in takeoff. DEMO, we infer that
inequality in a population’s income distribution is indeed DEMO to be an important factor
in explaining the time course of new product diffusion.
The Diffusion of Hybrid Corn in the United States
Agricultural DEMO might not be thought of as being subject to the same affordability
constraints and price dynamics as consumer durable goods. Henrich (2001), however, has
applied the social-learning model in such cases, suggesting that the DEMO long forward
tail to the adoption curve for hybrid corn among Iowa farmers in the late 1920s and
1930s was a result of conformist DEMO If we combine the social-learning dynamic with a
100
80
60
Iowa
Wisconsin
Kentucky
A. Kandler and J. Steele
40
DEMO
20
Texas
0
1932 ’34 ’36 ’38 ’40 ’42 ’44 ’46 ’48 ’50 ’52 ’54 ’56
Years
Figure 12.15
Percentage of total corn acreage DEMO with the hybrid strain by state (after Griliches 1957).
heterogeneous, variable-c adoption-threshold distribution, we obtain a cumulative adop-
tion curve (combined DEMO in ﬁ gure 12.12) showing an S-shaped pattern with longer tails
DEMO the beginning (caused by the social-learning dynamic) and end (caused DEMO the variable-c
adoption-threshold dynamic). This characteristic of the adoption curve is also known from
data on the spread of hybrid corn in the DEMO States (see ﬁ gure 12.15, especially the
curves for Wisconsin and Kentucky).
Regarding these large-scale lag patterns, Griliches (1957, 1960) DEMO an explana-
tion in terms of unequal supplier effort, with commercial DEMO suppliers initially
targeting regions with large farm units and high corn acreage (and contiguous areas with
similar climate, soil, and pest characteristics). However, there also may have been a con-
tribution that resulted from heterogeneity in decision thresholds among farmers. For a
business such as a DEMO, immediate-acquisition cost has to be measured not against dispos-
able income DEMO against future proﬁ t from the gain in yield. In the 1930s, commercially
acquired hybrid seed corn cost almost ten times as much to adopters as homegrown seed
corn (Griliches 1958), and the extra yield also imposed potential additional input costs
(fertilizer, water, and extra labor for harvesting). The extra cost of hybrid seed represented
a ﬁ DEMO cost per unit area, whereas yield varied (Dowell and Jesness 1939). It is plausible
that late adopters included farms with lower typical DEMO yields, for which the high relative
cost of the new strain DEMO a signiﬁ cant factor delaying the adoption decision.
The same point is made by David (2005), by analogy with his analysis of threshold-
heterogeneity effects on adoption timing for the mechanized reaper in the antebellum
DEMO Midwest (David 1966). The most recent and thorough examination of DEMO
hybrid-corn diffusion data is Young’s (2005) acceleration analysis, which indicates DEMO rela-
tively poor ﬁ t of the data with the logistic adoption curve predicted by the Bass model.
To our knowledge, an empirically derived threshold model has yet to be ﬁ tted to the
detailed corn-diffusion DEMO, although clearly this would be desirable.
212
Percentage
Social Learning, Economic Inequality, and Innovation Diffusion
213
Conclusions
In conclusion, we make some brief remarks on the implications of the above for DEMO
ary anthropology. If we discount any propensity for consumers to reject advantageous new
products after adoption because they have misunderstood their use, then other than its
optional conformist-bias element, the DI model (Henrich 2001) is identical to the Bass
model (Bass 1969), which has been used extensively to analyze sales growth and life
cycles of many well-documented new DEMO The Bass model is the subject of a massive
amount of literature going back nearly 40 years, which includes many discussions of
alternative drivers of the typical S-shaped sales pattern (including affordability). Anthro-
pologists seeking such an empirical testing ground for the predictions of DI theory may
DEMO nd that much of the work has already been done by their colleagues in economic fore-
casting and marketing science (Chandrasekaran and Tellis 2007).
However, both the Bass and the DI models assume that agents are homogeneous with
respect to the economic capacity to adopt. This is DEMO oversimplifying assumption that does
not recognize the evolutionary dynamics of complex societies with large economic sur-
pluses in which wealth inequalities are characteristic and DEMO can be modeled by quite
simple mechanisms (e.g., the Law of Proportionate Effect [Gibrat 1931]). An evolutionary
approach to innovation adoption in DEMO market economies, therefore, has to consider
the evolutionary dynamics of economic inequality as well as those of social-learning
processes.
Notes
1. The Gini DEMO cient is a statistical measure of the inequality of an income distribution introduced by Gini
(1955). It is deﬁ ned as a ratio with values between 0 and 1. The closer the coefﬁ cient is DEMO 1, the more unequal
is the distribution. In the considered case DEMO a gamma-distributed income, the Gini coefﬁ cient is deﬁ ned by
DEMO(a, a + 1) − 1, where B0.5 stands for DEMO incomplete beta function (Salem and Mount 1974).
2. Given that DEMO an individual’s price threshold is more difﬁ cult compared with determining an indi-
vidual’s income, it is common practice to model the price threshold, q, by
θ= cI with 0 1≤ ≤c ,
where I is the individual’s income and c describes the propensity for spending money DEMO the innovation (Wang
2003). For a constant, c, the DEMO threshold resembles the observed income distribution, which means that it is
DEMO distributed and possesses the same degree of inequality (as expressed by DEMO Gini coefﬁ cient). A constant
propensity of spending for all levels of income is a very simplistic assumption and one that we relax DEMO a later
discussion.
References
Bass, F. M. 1969. A New Product DEMO Model for Consumer Durables. Management Science 15: 215–227.
Bayus, B. L. 1993. High-Deﬁ nition Television: Assessing Demand Forecasts for a Next Generation Consumer
Durable. Management Science 39: 1319–1333.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University Of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
214
A. Kandler and J. Steele
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. DEMO Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach.
Princeton University DEMO, Princeton, N.J.
Chandrasekaran, D., and G. J. Tellis. 2007. A Critical Review of Marketing Research on Diffusion of New
Products. Review of DEMO Research 3: 39–80.
David, P. A. 1966. The Mechanization of Reaping in the Ante-bellum Midwest. In Industrialization in Two
Systems: Essays in Honor of Alexander Gerschenkron, edited by H. Rosovsky, pp. 3–28. Wiley, New York.
David, P. A. 2005. Zvi Griliches on Diffusion, Lags and DEMO Growth . . . Connecting the Dots. Labor
and Demography 0502002, DEMO Available on the Web at http://ideas repec.org/p/wpa/wuwpla/0502002.
html.
Dowell, A., and O. Jesness. 1939. Economic Aspects of DEMO Corn. Journal of Farm Economics 21:
479–488.
Geroski, P. 2000. DEMO of Technology Diffusion. Research Policy 29: 603–625.
Gibrat, R. 1931. Les Inégalités Économiques. Sirey, Paris.
Gini, C. 1955. Variabilitá e Mutabilita (1912). Reprinted in Memorie di Metodologia Statistica, edited by
E. Pizetti and T. Salvemini, pp. 211–382. Libreria Eredi Virgilio Veschi, Rome.
Golder, P. N., and G. J. Tellis. 1998. Beyond Diffusion: An Affordability Model DEMO the Growth of New Consumer
Durables. Journal of Forecasting 17: 259–280.
DEMO, Z. 1957. Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change. Econometrica 25:
501–522.
Griliches, Z. 1958. Research Costs and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn and Related Innovations. Journal of Political
Economy 66: DEMO
Griliches, Z. 1960. Hybrid Corn and the Economics of Innovation. Science DEMO: 275–280.
Henrich, J. 2001. Cultural Transmission and the Diffusion of Innovations: Adoption Dynamics Indicate That
Biased Cultural Transmission Is the Predominant Force in Behavioral Change. American Anthropologist 104:
992–1013.
Johnston, L. D., and DEMO H. Williamson. 2007. The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the United States, 1790–
Present. Economic History Services, July 27, 2007. Available on the Web at http://eh.net/hmit/gdp.
McDonald, J. B., DEMO M. R. Ramson. 1979. Functional Forms, Estimation Techniques and the Distribution DEMO
Income. Econometrica 47: 1513–1525.
Salem, A. B. Z., and T. DEMO Mount. 1974. A Convenient Descriptive Model of Income Distribution: The Gamma
DEMO Econometrica 42: 1115–1127.
Van den Bulte, C., and S. Stremersch. DEMO Social Contagion and Income Heterogeneity in New Product
Diffusion: A Meta-analytic DEMO Marketing Science 23: 530–544.
Wang, Z. 2003. New Product Diffusion and Industry Life Cycle. Paper on ﬁ le, Department of Economics,
University of Chicago. Chicago.
Young, H. P. 2005. The Spread of Innovations through Social Learning. Brookings Institution, Center for Social
and Economic Dynamics, Working DEMO No. 43. Washington, D.C.
IV PATTERNS IN THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL RECORD

Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories: Social
13 Factors as Evolutionary Forces
Valentine Roux
Historical (e.g., Duby 1962), anthropological (e.g., Creswell 1996), sociological (e.g.,
Mendras 1984; Ogburn 1957 [quoted in Akrich 1994]), and materials (e.g., Gille 1978)
research has shown how DEMO change can unbalance a cultural system, causing
its total reorganization and DEMO it into a new system following its own dynamics.
However, even DEMO these studies sometimes explicitly show the relations between technical
transformations and transformations of socioeconomic, legal, political, ideological, and
demographic systems, the mechanisms by which technological changes are introduced are
still poorly understood and continue DEMO be the subject of debate (e.g., Akrich 1994). Here
I discuss ways in which technological innovations are introduced and spread, that is, the
mechanisms underlying the emergence and ﬁ xation of new technological traits, in order
to better understand the impact of innovations on cultural systems.
The ﬁ eld of technology distinguishes among technological change, which is considered
an emergent historical phenomenon and thus an unrepeatable scenario; the conditions for
portraying these scenarios, which correspond to the production context of technological
tasks; and the conditions for ﬁ xing the new features, which correspond DEMO the transmission
context (Roux 2003). These conditions are assumed to DEMO as evolutionary forces, and
studying them should give us insights into DEMO evolutionary mechanisms of ancient
cultures.
Study of the emergence and ﬁ xation of new technological features implies two levels
of analysis: individual and collective. Invention occurs on the scale of the individual as
opposed to innovation, which is the adoption of an invention on a collective scale (a current
distinction generally adopted by technologists; see, e.g., Gille [1978] and van der Leeuw
and Torrence [1989]). In other words, invention can be considered a cognitive activity on
an individual scale, whereas innovation corresponds to a historical event. Below, I ﬁ rst
deal with technological inventions and their order and mode of development as well as
the possible DEMO of the individual in the differential occurrences of inventions. Next, I
DEMO the mechanisms underlying innovation and ﬁ xation processes.
218 Valentine Roux
Technological Evolution
Technological evolution is assessed by examining the DEMO of individual technologies
and determining the modes that produce them. Is the passage from one technology to
another characterized by incremental additions, or does it proceed by jumps? Accordingly,
I distinguish between continuous and discontinuous inventions. The hypothesis is that if
both kinds of invention can participate DEMO technological evolution, the mechanisms under-
lying their emergence and ﬁ xation DEMO vary.
Trend of Evolution: Cumulative Character and Order of Development
Studies DEMO the history of technology show that techniques are cumulative in the sense that
any transformation of a technique always incorporates previous knowledge (e.g., DEMO
1996; Deforge 1989; Gille 1978). In this respect, invention DEMO often considered as an
incremental modiﬁ cation or a combination of preexisting elements (e.g., Lemonnier 1993;
Schiffer 2005; chapters 7 and 14, this volume).
Because techniques are cumulative, their evolution follows a DEMO order of develop-
ment. The ﬁ rst stone tools were not created by indirect percussion but by direct percussion,
the ﬁ rst pottery DEMO made not with the help of rotary kinetic energy (RKE) but with mus-
cular energy, pyrotechnologies did not begin with high-temperature technologies but with
low temperatures, and so on. In other words, inventions always DEMO place within the
logical suite of historically detectable antecedents (Gallay 1986)DEMO However, the fact that
techniques necessitate a certain order of development DEMO not mean that this order is
the same everywhere (Creswell 1996)DEMO Some groups can ignore certain stages and jump
straight to more complex stages, given certain environmental or cultural factors.
This order of technological development, observed at a macroscale and independent of
the historical trajectories of the inventions, can be characterized in evolutionary terms.
The hypothesis is that the general trend is toward less expenditure of human energy
(Creswell 1996; DEMO 1989; Gille 1978; Simondon 1958). Such a trend would corre-
spond to “laws of evolution” (Deforge 1989; Simondon 1958), according DEMO which tech-
niques evolve logically from a state (“abstract”) where the elementary operations underlying
the manufacture of an object are ﬁ rst juxtaposed DEMO a state (“concrete”) where these opera-
tions are related and cannot be separated from each other, given their interaction in a
synergistic fashion.
The analysis is based on well-documented lineages of objects that evolve from DEMO stable
technical principle and are established after an analysis of the genesis of the objects. In
other words, they can be considered as a genealogy of physical principles (Creswell 1993,
1996). The corollary to the passage from the “abstract” to the “concrete” object is that,
DEMO things being equal, objects will evolve toward less volume, less weight, a lesser number
of pieces, less response time, and a lesser price (Deforge 1989). This theory of the evolu-
tion of objects has been applied in archaeology by Boëda (2005) in order to DEMO describe
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
219
lineages of ancient lithic industries, to understand their evolution in structural terms, and
to explain convergences as well as, for example, the emergence of blade technology.
As far as DEMO techniques are concerned, in the Southern Levant one
can trace an DEMO of the coiling technique into the wheel-coiling technique (use of
RKE DEMO thinning and shaping coiled roughouts) into the wheel-throwing technique (use
of RKE on a mass of clay). This latter technique, which appears as an entirely mechanized
manufacturing process, can be considered an ultimate stage in the development of ceramic
techniques using RKE in accordance with the DEMO of evolution” proposed by Simondon
(1958). Indeed, the different operations are exerted in synergy through the use of RKE.
Such synergy is DEMO among pottery-production techniques, which are usually a series
of independent operations, such as the wheel-coiling technique. Hence, there is a consider-
able gain of time (Roux and Courty 1998).
The necessity of establishing lineages of objects based on technological process for
an appropriate understanding of their DEMO therefore of the evolution of
objects—has been well argued by Creswell (DEMO, 1996), who, in analyzing the evolution
of mills, shows DEMO the relationships based only on morphological features are inappropri-
ate and misleading, whereas those based on technological process enable us to consider
all the different variants that have occurred over the centuries. Before Creswell, Haudri-
court (1987) argued that the genealogy of tools should take into account DEMO physical
properties. He suggested that the ancestor of the plow was not the spade or the stick but
the rake, given its handling system that characterizes the plow as an instrument dragged
and not hit. In DEMO of this hypothesis, he pointed out that the ﬁ rst plows DEMO Egypt and
Mesopotamia were used at sowing time for work similar to that of the rake or the harrow
(see chapter 1, this DEMO).
As far as pottery is concerned, if only morphological types DEMO considered, the relation-
ships mix morphological vessels that are formed using DEMO techniques. Such relation-
ships do not permit an analysis of the evolution of objects, which necessarily implies an
analysis of the relationships between forms and techniques. On the other hand, if one takes
into account the technological process, then the relationship diagrams will highlight, for
example, relationships between objects with variations of forms but made according to
the same DEMO or the lack of relationship between objects with comparable shapes.
In archaeology, lineages of objects based on technological process are still to be created
and represent one of the most compelling agendas in the study of DEMO technology
(O’Brien and Lyman 2003).
Mode of Evolution: Gradual versus Rapid
On the basis of numerous technological studies, Creswell (1994, 1996) suggested that
innovation appears in two ways: (1) as an DEMO and progressive development not
motivated by any speciﬁ c social factors and responding mainly to technological rules and
(2) as a development by DEMO between stages determined by social mutations. In the ﬁ rst,
220 Valentine Roux
innovations can be considered as progressive and continuous. They DEMO in response
to their own technological tendency up to a certain extent, which is ﬁ xed by limits. In the
latter case, the DEMO from one stage to another appears to follow a logarithmic function
and not a linear one. Innovations can be considered discontinuous, going beyond the limits
imposed by the internal logic of the techniques. They are not DEMO the combination or
addition of preexisting elements but introduce new technological lineages (see chapter 1,
this volume). The technological jump produced by these techniques can be assessed quan-
titatively and qualitatively.
Creswell (1993, DEMO, 1996), in a study of mills used in the Middle DEMO to extract olive
oil, demonstrates that the evolution of techniques can DEMO by jumps. He shows that
there are two main thresholds in the evolution of milling techniques. The ﬁ rst consists
of using traditional mills, which extract around two-thirds of the oil that is theoretically
possible to DEMO These traditional mills, which present morphological variants, develop
pressures between 1 and 5 kilograms per cubic centimeter, with an output of between 20
and 25 kilograms. The second threshold corresponds to the complete extraction of DEMO oil
using modern mills. These mills are hydraulic presses that develop, DEMO average, 50 kilo-
grams per cubic centimeter of pressure, with an output of around 30 kilograms. This output
represents the upper limit of DEMO quantity of oil contained in the fruit (around 25 percent
of DEMO weight).
As shown in ﬁ gure 13.1, when one considers DEMO pressures and the output of the tradi-
tional and modern mills, DEMO group of traditional mills is far from showing a linear trend
between zero and the group of modern mills. The passage from the ﬁ DEMO threshold to the
second follows a logarithmic function. Hence, the general DEMO proposed by Creswell is
that technological evolution proceeds according to thresholds, DEMO only by incremental
40
30
20
Group I
Traditional Mills
10
0210
0
40
Kg/cm3
Figure 13.1
Jump from traditional to modern mills (after Creswell 1996).
Group II
Modern Mills
60
70
Oil kg/DEMO kg Olives
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
Wheel Coiling
Wheel Throwing Coiling
221
Figure DEMO
Historical development of pottery-fashioning techniques.
additions. By deﬁ nition, each threshold DEMO to an invention, here called “discon-
tinuous,” which is characterized DEMO the introduction of new physical principles in the
technological process, that DEMO, new principles of propulsion, and is limited in number, cor-
DEMO not to inﬁ nite recombinations of preexisting elements but to new starting points
in the evolution of objects reaching the end of their evolution (Deforge 1989). Each
threshold or discontinuous invention gives rise to new DEMO of objects characterized
by new physical principles. These new lineages coexist, DEMO least for a while, with the
ancestral lineages.
It follows that DEMO diagrams obtained when searching to represent, for example, the
evolution of ceramic-vessel lineages produced from the ﬁ fth through ﬁ rst millennia b.c.
DEMO the Southern Levant, are cladogenetic (see chapter 1, this volume), as shown in
ﬁ gure 13.2. There, each new fashioning technique DEMO rise to a new lineage alongside
the ancestral one. Each corresponds to new physical principles: The wheel-coiling tech-
nique is characterized by the use of RKE (the new trait) for transforming clay walls made
from DEMO elements (the ancestral trait), and the wheel-throwing technique is char-
DEMO by the use of RKE (the ancestral trait) to transform a clay mass (the new trait)
into a vessel.
Passage to the wheel-coiling technique is a ﬁ rst jump when assessed in terms of DEMO
of energy. The clay walls are now deformed under the combined energy of ﬁ nger-to-palm
pressures and RKE. RKE requires the wheel to revolve DEMO an axis with a sufﬁ cient
kinetic energy to resist the strength of the pressures. It has to reach a speed of around 80
DEMO per minute. The manufacturing time is divided by half. The jump is even larger
for the passage to the wheel-throwing technique. The quantity of DEMO kinetic energy
222 Valentine Roux
% of Wheel-coiled Vessels
Number of Functional Categories
Late DEMO 1 EB III EB IV MB II
Chalcolithic
Figure 13.3
The developmental trajectory of the wheel-coiling technique in the Southern Levant, from the ﬁ fth to the second
millennia B.C. EB = Early Bronze; MB = Middle Bronze.
for transforming a mass of clay into a vessel is DEMO higher in order to resist the strength
of the pressures on the clay mass. The wheel has to reach a speed of 150 revolutions DEMO
minute. The manufacturing time is divided by 20.
When considering the lineage of wheel-coiled vessels in the Southern Levant, techno-
stylistic variants are observed. Different fashioning methods were invented, and new
morphological types were wheel coiled in the course of centuries. The different fashioning
methods correspond to modiﬁ DEMO of the stage at which RKE was used (preforms or
roughouts DEMO and Courty 1998]). In other words, they correspond to gradual DEMO
following the same physical principle—the use of RKE on assembled elements
(DEMO gure 13.3). Methods can be plotted linearly when one is considering strength of pressures
and manufacturing time. Thus, there is no jump between these methods. They represent
continuous inventions on the basis of the threshold DEMO by the wheel-coiling tech-
nique. The spatial extension of continuous variants most often indicates frontiers between
social groups—the groups where they developed (e.g., DEMO 2007; Lemonnier 1993;
Stark 1998; Stark et al. 2008).
To sum up, empirical data suggest that technological evolution is made up of both
continuous and discontinuous innovations—inventions by small-scale cumulative modiﬁ -
cations DEMO excluding radical jumps from time to time. The tempo of discontinuous inno-
vations can be quite rapid. In the case of the wheel-coiling technique DEMO the Southern
Levant, this new technical feature is clearly identiﬁ ed DEMO strata of numerous sites dating
from the second half of the ﬁ fth millennium b.c., whereas the use of RKE for smoothing
the surface of clay walls appears for the ﬁ rst time on a few DEMO belonging to sites
dating from the ﬁ rst half of the ﬁ fth millennium b.c. (Roux et al. n.d.).
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
223
Cognitive Activity and Inventions
I now DEMO the cognitive activity involved in discontinuous inventions in order to
examine the possible role of the individual in technological evolution. The hypothesis is
that DEMO individual and his or her cognitive activity could act as a random factor in an
evolution that otherwise follows, at a macroscale, a DEMO order of development.
Following the ecological approach, coupled with referencing studies DEMO the learning
process of complex skills (e.g., Bril 2002; Gibson DEMO; Reed 1988), invention can be
considered as the result of DEMO exploratory activity in the body–matter–energy system and
the discovery, in the DEMO of action, of the possibilities offered by the environment. Thus,
DEMO of the wheel-coiling technique has been interpreted as the result of a dynamic
interaction among the task (discovery of the use of RKE for making bowls), the body
(discovery of the skills for forming a bowl with RKE), and the instrument (discovery of
the properties of the wheel for producing RKE; Roux 2003).
As for the skills involved in discontinuous craft inventions, such as the ones involved
in wheel fashioning, they can be viewed as phenomena that break with tradition. Indeed,
recall that the difﬁ culty in learning skills involved in any DEMO lies mainly in mastering
the technique itself (physical modalities according to DEMO raw material is processed),
which implies controlling elementary movements, which vary depending on the ﬁ nished
products (Roux and David 2005). Learning and developing new elementary movements
will imply a different tuning of DEMO previously learned elementary movements. This will
require rehearsal thousands of times (DEMO et al. 2005).
From this point of view, the emergence DEMO new techniques, characterizing discontinuous
inventions, signals the presence of individuals who modiﬁ ed their elementary movements and
developed new skills apart from those DEMO learned previously. Thus, the wheel-coiling tech-
nique signals new skills different DEMO the ones involved in the coiling technique; the wheel-
throwing technique DEMO skills different from the ones involved in the wheel-coiling technique
(Gelbert DEMO; Roux and Corbetta 1990). Years of apprenticeship separate these techniques.
DEMO is another discontinuous innovation that signals the development of new
skills radically different from the ones involved in cracking open nuts—the possible
ancestral lineage DEMO which stoneknapping evolved—even though both tasks correspond
to thrown percussion. They require, in particular, a level of movement tuning for control-
ling the DEMO fracture (Pelegrin 2005; Roche 2005). These movements combine
precision and force and are exerted according to a ﬁ ne bimanual coordination. No DEMO or
monkey seems to achieve such a combination (see chapter 3, this volume). They reveal
capacities that are uniquely hominin (Roux and Bril 2005).
Who, then, were the inventors who were able DEMO break with tradition and develop new
skills? The learning process itself DEMO carried out according to a model (the way of doing by
DEMO group for the purpose of obtaining a given ﬁ nished product), which is the transmitter’s
224 Valentine Roux
way of doing something (Bril and Roux 2002). In this respect, there never is invention while
one learns motor skills. At the end of the apprenticeship, skills necessary for reproducing
the tradition, and only these skills, are literally “embedded.” The skills then participate
DEMO in the maintenance of the tradition, in the sense that it DEMO difﬁ cult for subjects
to conceive of making things in other ways, given the cognitive and motor skills they have
developed, which act DEMO “ﬁ xers” of worldviews (Roux 2007).
However, recall that subjects can develop different levels of expertise (Bril et al. 2005).
The expert is one who, when confronted with the constraints of the task, is able to achieve
the technological process through a constant dynamic ﬁ t between the state of the object
and the next step. In DEMO words, the expert has an extensive capacity to detect
the appropriate DEMO resulting from the ongoing course of action coupled with the
ability to incorporate the new information into his or her actions.
Moreover, expertise does not consist only of tuning as well as possible the properties
of DEMO system (the task–environment–organism system). The expert also is one who DEMO able
to force the system in one direction or another to adjust to new features (Bril et al. 2005).
These new features can be “emergent performance problems” (see chapters 1 and 14, this
volume), new situations (e.g., new raw material), or “disturbances” in the system (e.g.,
ﬂ aws in the material).
We would expect to ﬁ nd the invention process among experts who are most familiar
DEMO the task’s constraints (Ericsson and Lehman 1996), that is, experts who are able to
explore body–material–energy properties, in this case going beyond the cultural represen-
tations that have formed their way of seeing and DEMO These individuals are exceptional
as much for their skills as for their rarity, as anthropological studies have shown.
In India, inventions in pyrotechnology DEMO saw were made by the most skillful craftsmen,
attested as such by their products and reputation. This could explain why, all other things
being equal, some techniques appeared in certain areas of the world and not in others.
Such is the case of the wheel-fashioning technique, which was never invented either in
America or in sub-Saharan Africa, despite the knowledge of the rotary movement for
ﬁ nishing operations. I suggest that DEMO these areas no individual developed the cognitive
activity that led to the discovery and the mastery of RKE for transforming clay volumes—
hence the DEMO that individuals and their cognitive activities might be a random
factor in the evolution of techniques. This random factor also could well explain phenom-
DEMO of technological convergences.
The Dynamic of Discontinuous Technological Innovations
The question raised now is how technological innovation occurs—how an invention made
at an individual DEMO becomes an innovation at a collective scale. It is the temporal course
of these two interacting variables—the individual and the collective—that gives the
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
225
technological system its faculty to adapt DEMO bring about technological change (Roux
2003). More precisely, the phenomenon of innovation is the result of a dynamic process
emerging from complex DEMO among its constitutive components: (1) the technical
task, here deﬁ ned in terms of chaînes opératoires (e.g., Lemonnier 1993; Sellet 1993);
(2) the environment, which provides the materials used in DEMO technical task; and (3) the
subject, who carries out the technical task and whose intention(s) are rooted in the group’s
sociocultural representations.
Properties of these various components possess constraints (whether physical–chemical,
biomechanical, environmental, or cultural). Innovations play on these constraints and are
DEMO according to terms dependent on political, economic, social, and/or DEMO
situations in which the demand for new objects plays a part. From this point of view,
innovations invariably refer to particular historical scenarios. DEMO scenarios, even though
particular, should enable us to examine Creswell’s general hypothesis that jumps in tech-
nological evolution are determined by social mutations. DEMO they should also allow us to
assess relationships between historical scenarios and their conditions of actualization,
deﬁ ned here as the context of DEMO production.
Discontinuous Innovations and Social Factors
As an example of a historical scenario, consider the emergence of the wheel-coiling tech-
nique. In the Southern Levant, wheel coiling appeared during the second half of the ﬁ fth
millennium b.c., during the period called “late Chalcolithic,” among farmer–pastoralist
cultures whose material culture is especially remarkable for its innovations (in particular,
new ceramic and metallurgic techniques). Throughout this period of about 300 DEMO,
wheel coiling was used for only a single morpho-functional category—small, DEMO vessels
with rectilinear walls, called “V-shaped bowls.” These bowls are found DEMO much on settle-
ment sites as in sanctuaries or in mortuary contexts, where they are found systematically
in primary and secondary tombs. A detailed study of the wheel-coiled bowls found on the
site of Abu Hamid (Dollfus and Kafaﬁ  1988), in the middle Jordan Valley, suggests DEMO
these bowls had a ceremonial function (Roux 2003).
The innovation DEMO wheel coiling has been interpreted as having emerged from a complex
interaction among an invention made on an individual scale, a favorable geological envi-
ronment, and a demand at a collective level for objects of ceremonial value—a demand
initiated by politico-religious changes and marked in particular by the DEMO of chief-
doms (Levy and Holl 1988). Such a demand DEMO been interpreted as emanating from an
elite, given the function of DEMO objects and the politico-religious context. In other words,
in the Southern Levant the innovation of wheel coiling appears rooted in a demand initi-
DEMO by an elite at a period when new sociopolitical structures were emerging.
This scenario has numerous analogues in various chrono-cultural periods in the sense
DEMO the main technical inventions known from the preindustrial era apply to objects that
are related most often to an elite context. For example, the emergence of iron- and
226 Valentine Roux
steel-related activities in the north of the Parisian Basin DEMO the second Iron Age (ﬁ fth
century b.c.), as with DEMO wheel-coiling technique, appears as rooted in a demand initiated
by an DEMO, as shown by Bauvais (2008), who argues that the ﬁ rst iron objects were mainly
prestige goods placed in tombs (ornaments, DEMO, cart wheels) at sites containing
elite residences and made sporadically by itinerant blacksmiths responding to the demands
of the elite.
Another example can DEMO seen in the domain of agriculture, with the “traction complex”—
yoke, plow, travois, and cart—which appeared in western European Neolithic cultures
during DEMO third millennium b.c. This innovation had a decisive economic impact, as DEMO
allowed a growing population to be better managed through increased productivity. At
ﬁ rst, this innovation may have been the monopoly of only a part of the population, which
seems to have used it to further strategies for control of political power. This hypothesis
is based on the DEMO of the traction complex in symbolic rock art, which shows
that DEMO plow and wheel were ﬁ rst ideological and social phenomena related to the elites
before being incorporated as common tools into a society’s economic DEMO (Gallay
2006).
A similar phenomenon has been observed among peasants DEMO historical periods (from
the Middle Ages to modern times), known DEMO history for their resistance to inno-
vation. It appears that innovations were always made by elites, who then transmitted them
to the peasantry (DEMO 1984). The elite were open to experimentation, and only they
DEMO enough economic margin to face the risk every trial entails (Mendras DEMO).
These different historical scenarios suggest that (1) in traditional societies, discontinu-
ous innovations are initiated by individuals having some form of power—religious, politi-
cal, and/or ﬁ nancial; and (2) these innovations are actualized not for their techno-economic
advantages but for symbolic and/or DEMO reasons. This argues in favor of Creswell’s
(1996) hypothesis that continuous transformations in techniques can be more or less
autonomous as part of DEMO evolution, whereas discontinuous changes follow changes in
society.
The concept of DEMO is controversial, given that social groups are always changing.
In Creswell’s DEMO, social mutations at the origin of innovations correspond to those
moments DEMO there are close interactions between society and techniques. Close interac-
tions can also be at the origin of absence of change and preservation of DEMO features
(see chapter 10, this volume). In both cases, DEMO interactions determine to a large extent
the mode of evolution of technological systems. Thus, the emergence of discontinuous
innovations supposes both elites originating new demands to meet social or symbolic
needs and social components able to DEMO the new demand. Such a mechanism can
be explained by cognitive constraints weighing on traditional cultures, favoring cultural
preservation.
Periods of close interaction can alternate with periods of looser interaction. Creswell
(1994) talks about the DEMO nature of relations between technique and social processes.
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
227
In archaeology, the rate and nature of innovations testify to such a cycle. Indeed, some
historical periods are characterized by numerous technological discontinuous innovations,
such as the late Chalcolithic DEMO in the Southern Levant, whereas others are charac-
terized mainly by DEMO innovations, such as the Early Bronze I (fourth millennium
b.c.) DEMO the Southern Levant. Given the importance of the demands of the elite in the
innovation process, the alternation between these periods could well be explained in
sociopolitical terms.
The Spread of Discontinuous Innovations
It sometimes can DEMO a few millennia for discontinuous innovations to become predomi-
nant. This is the case of the wheel-fashioning technique in the Southern Levant (Roux
2008). As we shall see, the rhythm of ﬁ xation of discontinuous techniques can be explained
by the transmission context, the properties of which are determined by the environment
of production, that is, the conditions DEMO actualizing inventions.
In the Southern Levant, the wheel-fashioning technique was invented DEMO the
Chalcolithic period for the manufacture of ceremonial bowls. The Chalcolithic cultures
collapsed in Early Bronze I (fourth millennium b.c.), and 75 percent of the settlements
disappeared. The ceramic-material culture became characterized by strong regionalism
DEMO the appearance of new techno-stylistic traits (Miroschedji 1989). As for DEMO coiling,
it practically disappeared from the Southern Levant. In Early Bronze IB, the rotary instru-
ment was present, but contrary to the DEMO periods, RKE was used only for ﬁ nishing
operations, not for thinning or shaping clay walls (Charloux 2002, 2006). Wheel coiling
DEMO again present in Early Bronze II and III.
The latter period, DEMO from the ﬁ rst half of the third millennium b.c., is DEMO by
the presence of fortiﬁ ed cities with monumental construction. At Tel Yarmouth, a fortiﬁ ed
town about 30 kilometers southwest of Jerusalem and principal site of the southern region
of Southern Levant, two basalt tournettes have been found in the palace enclosure
(Miroschedji 2000a, 2000b). DEMO to expectations, only 3 percent of ceramic objects
were made with DEMO, suggesting that few craftsmen used the tournettes. This low number
of DEMO persisted steadily throughout the period of the Early Bronze III, covering
DEMO 500 years. There was no borrowing of the wheel-fashioning technique, which DEMO
have helped to raise the proportion of vessels formed on the wheel (Roux n.d.). In Early
Bronze IV (end of the third DEMO b.c.)—a period of dramatic historical changes
marked by the collapse of cities—wheel coiling disappeared again. The technique reap-
peared during the second millennium DEMO, becoming predominant in the middle of the
period (Middle Bronze Age II).
Thus, it took three millennia for the wheel-coiling technique to become widely adopted.
It disappeared twice, once after the Chalcolithic period and once after Early Bronze III.
This developmental trajectory and its nonlinearity can DEMO explained by examining the
craft-transmission context, which can be inferred from DEMO context of production. For the
228 Valentine Roux
Chalcolithic period, a techno-petrographic study carried out on the scale of the Southern
Levant showed that the craftsmen who formed bowls DEMO the wheel were small in number,
itinerant, and attached to DEMO elite (Roux and Courty 2005). Wheel coiling was handed
down DEMO a restricted circle of craftsmen whose status was distinct from the other, more
numerous potters at various sites in the region and who were responsible for the utilitarian
pottery. In Early Bronze III, wheel coiling seems to again have been the prerogative of an
elite—exclusive to some specialized DEMO who, given the presence of tournettes in
the palace, must have been attached to it.
In summary, craftsmen who used wheel coiling in the ﬁ fth and third millennia b.c. were
a few specialist craftsmen DEMO were attached to an elite and who reserved the technique
for making objects for this elite. Most production did not beneﬁ t from the DEMO,
which resulted in a technological system characterized as fragile and closed and explains
why wheel coiling disappeared twice and was so slow to DEMO
Fragile versus Robust Systems
The fragility of a technological system can be deﬁ ned according to the size of the network
by which it DEMO transmitted. If the network is too limited, the system is fragile DEMO cannot
resist strong historical events such as those that transform a society’s socioeconomic
structure. During the ﬁ fth and third millennia b.c., potters using wheel coiling were few
in number. Consequently, the transmission network was limited in size, and when con-
fronted with the various historic upheavals that ended the Chalcolithic and Early Bronze
Age cultures, the network was broken and the technique disappeared.
In contrast, robust systems are characterized by transmission networks large enough
for the technological feature to have sufﬁ cient redundancy DEMO resist historical events (see
chapters 7 and 8, this volume). Thus, when wheel coiling became prevalent and was
transmitted by a large network, it resisted various events that agitated the Southern Levant
throughout history. The importance of a transmission network’s size for ﬁ xing technical
innovations DEMO been underlined by various authors (e.g., Henrich 2001; chapter 7, this
volume), including primatologists who have shown that, among the different groups of
nonhuman primates, the ones who develop and ﬁ x technical skills are those with the
highest level of social tolerance between individuals, which ensures transmission networks
solid enough to guarantee the skill’s survival (van Shaik and Pradhan 2003; chapter 3, this
volume).
Closed versus DEMO Systems
Closed systems make no exchanges with other systems. They are kept closed by a one-
to-one relationship between producers and the technological task. DEMO relationship acts
as a nonexchange mechanism between the closed system and other systems. The result is
an absence of technological-task transfers or borrowings between DEMO (the ones who
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
229
make and the ones who might DEMO) with noncompatible status and, consequently,
rhythms of development that are very slow.
This was the case with wheel coiling during the ﬁ DEMO and third millennia. The technique
was in the hands of a small number of specialized craftsmen and was not subject to any
transfer (by the potters) or borrowing (by other craftsmen), remaining a fragile DEMO
cal system for more than two millennia. This was also the case for metallurgy of the
lost-wax technique. Invented during the Chalcolithic period exclusively DEMO the fabrication
of prestige metal objects—scepters, maces, and crowns (Shalev DEMO)—the technique
disappeared with the collapse of the Chalcolithic cultures, only DEMO resurface during the
second millennium b.c. A recent study by Y. Goren (unpublished) shows that the lost-wax
technique must have been in the DEMO of priests, who worked in secret places and who
reserved this DEMO for objects of a politico-religious nature. The lost-wax technique
was invented and made a system in the same way as wheel coiling—innovation tied to DEMO
elite’s politico-religious needs, one-to-one relationship between status of craftsmen and
technical DEMO, and a small transmission network. Its disappearance along with the end DEMO
the Chalcolithic politico-religious structure thus was to be expected.
Given the mechanisms explaining their emergence, discontinuous innovations generally
are actualized into a closed fragile system—when emerging, they are in the hands of a
few individuals aimed at making a restricted range of objects. It follows that, even though
they present techno-economic advantages, discontinuous innovations can be subject to
nonlinear developmental trajectories and a long ﬁ xation process.
Transformation of Fragile Systems into DEMO Systems
There are two ways for systems to become robust: Either DEMO closed system transforms
itself into an open system, or the closed DEMO develops at the expense of the technical
tasks used by open systems on the same objects. As opposed to closed systems, open
systems exchange on both the object level and the task level and therefore are DEMO restricted
in their development.
Transformation of Closed into Open Systems
Transformation of closed systems into open systems supposes that those involved in the
innovations DEMO a point of integrating them into usage by the majority. Changes in
peasant societies are an excellent illustration of this mechanism (Mendras 1984). In these
societies agricultural innovations were promoted by the elite (who were landowners and
farmers), many of whom took interest in the progress DEMO their estates and had far-reaching
contacts that enabled them to introduce novelties into their region. The process of integrat-
ing innovations into the existing DEMO generally included a test phase, a phase of proof
of the DEMO success repeated year after year, and ﬁ nally a phase of DEMO into
common experience, which would then be transmitted from one generation DEMO the next.
230 Valentine Roux
This progressive integration by the elite into common practice DEMO be the mechanism
by which, for instance, ceramic craft used at ﬁ rst in closed systems (e.g., in the Greek
Neolithic [Vitelli DEMO) subsequently was used in open systems.
Expansion of Closed Systems
For DEMO systems to develop, innovative technical practices have to be applied to DEMO
wide range of objects used by the majority. In the Southern Levant, ceramic production
made with RKE increased during the Middle Bronze Age II, along with expansion of the
Canaanite cities and, probably, development of a market economy. Workshops using the
wheel-coiling technique and making a large DEMO of vessels progressively expanded, to
the detriment of domestic production, which was then restricted to the making of cooking
pots (Maeir and Yellin 2007).
More generally, from the recent periods forward, I suggest DEMO all discontinuous inno-
vations requiring lengthy apprenticeship tended to emerge, develop, and expand in closed
systems. In multiple techno-economic-task societies, innovations characterized by a long
learning period can expand within closed systems only as a DEMO of the biobehavioral
inability of individuals in the same sex or age grade to master a large number of tasks
requiring several years to DEMO learned. One of the immediate consequences of bringing
innovations to technical tasks characterized by long learning times would be an escalation
in the number DEMO tasks carried out in closed systems and eventually, given their techno-
DEMO advantages, their development in place of the open-system tasks, which were
generally distributed among individuals belonging to different grades.
Conclusion
Technological evolution appears DEMO be the result of both continuous and discontinuous
innovations. The latter allow social groups to jump from one stage to another and to go
DEMO previous technological limits. They occur when there is a strong interdependency
between techniques and societies. In this regard, the rate of discontinuous innovations
cannot be reduced to the sole question of both a population’s size and DEMO degree of cultural
interconnectedness. Organization of societies is another important social factor that appears
determinant, notwithstanding the role of the individual, which can DEMO as a random factor.
In ancient times, it appears that technical DEMO met needs that at ﬁ rst were not
economic but rather social or symbolic as suggested by authors such as Cauvin (1994).
They emerged in fragile, closed technological systems and developed slowly, according
to DEMO trajectories. They were ﬁ xed through their development into a robust system,
whether closed or open. I suggest that in farmer–pastoralist cultures, when length of learn-
ing times imposed restrictions, new technical tasks developed in closed systems instead
of open systems, thereby directly contributing to societies’ growing complexity.
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
231
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Stephen DEMO and Mike O’Brien for inviting me to the Konrad Lorenz
Institute workshop. Discussions were highly stimulating, and I gained greatly from this
experience. The research on the evolution of ceramic techniques in the Southern Levant
took DEMO within the framework of a research project supported by the Centre de
Recherche Français à Jérusalem. Drawings were made by Gérard Monthel.
References
Akrich, M. 1994. Comment Sortir de la Dichotomie Technique/Société. Présentation des Diverses DEMO
de la Technique. In De la Préhistoire aux Missiles Balistiques: L’Intelligence DEMO des Techniques, edited by
B. Latour and P. Lemonnier, pp. 105–131. Editions La Découverte, Paris.
Bauvais, S. 2008. From Prestige to Proto-industrial DEMO: Evolution of Iron and Steel Activities during the
Second Iron Age DEMO the Parisian Basin. Arkeotek Journal 2: 4 (www.thearkeotekjournal.org).
Boëda, DEMO 2005. Paléo-technologie ou Anthropologie des Techniques? Arob@se 1: 46–64 (www.univ-rouen.fr/DEMO
arobase).
Bril, B. 2002. L’Apprentissage des Gestes Techniques: Ordre de Contraintes et Variations Culturelles. In Le
Geste Technique: Réﬂ exions Théoriques et Méthodologiques, edited by B. Bril and V. Roux, pp. 113–150. Édition
DEMO, Ramonville-Saint-Agne, France.
Bril, B., and V. Roux (editors). DEMO Le Geste Technique: Réﬂ exions Théoriques et Méthodologiques. Édition
Érès, Ramonville- Saint-Agne, France.
Bril, B., V. Roux, and G. Dietrich. 2005. DEMO Knapping: Khambhat (India), A Unique Opportunity? In Stone
Knapping: The Necessary Conditions for a Uniquely Hominin Behavior, edited by V. Roux and B. Bril, pp.
53–72. McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge.
DEMO, J. 1994. Naissance des Divinités, Naissance de l’Agriculture. La Révolution des Symboles au
Néolithique. CNRS Editions, Paris.
Charloux, G. 2002. Etude Technologique DEMO Poteries de l’Âge du Bronze Ancien. I. Provenant de Tell el-Farâh’,
près Naplouse: La Nécropole. Mémoire de l’Ecole Biblique et Archéologique Française de Jérusalem.
Jerusalem.
Charloux, G. 2006. Artisanat et Urbanisation de la Palestine à l’Âge du Bronze Ancien: Apport de l’Étude
des Céramiques à la Structure Sociale. Thèse de Doctorat d’Archéologie Orientale, Université Paris I.
Paris.
Creswell, DEMO 1993. Of Mills and Waterwheels: The Hidden Parameters of Technological Choice. DEMO Technologi-
cal Choices, edited by P. Lemonnier, pp. 181–213. Routledge, DEMO York.
Creswell, R. 1994. La Nature Cyclique des Relations entre le DEMO et le Social: Approche Technologique
de la Chaîne Opératoire. In De DEMO Préhistoire aux Missiles Balistiques, edited by B. Latour and P. Lemonnier,DEMO
pp. 275–289. Découverte, Paris.
Creswell, R. 1996. Prométhée ou Pandore? DEMO de Technologie Culturelle. Kimé, Paris.
Deforge, Y. 1989. Simondon et les Questions Vives de l’Actualité. Postface. In Du Mode d’Existence des Objets
Techniques, edited by G. Simondon, pp. 269–331. Éditions Aubier, Paris.
Dollfus, G., and Z. Kafaﬁ . 1988. Abu Hamid, un Jalon dans le DEMO et dans l’Espace. In Abu Hamid, Village
du 4e Millénaire de DEMO Vallée du Jourdain, pp. 51–52. Economic Press, Amman, Jordan.
Duby, G. 1962. L’Économie Rurale et la Vie dans les Campagnes. Aubier, Paris.
Ericsson, K. A., and A. C. Lehman. 1996. Expert and Exceptional DEMO: Evidence from Maximal Adapta-
tion to Task Constraints. Annual Review of DEMO 47: 273–305.
Gallay, A. 1986. L’Archéologie Demain. Belfond, Paris.
232 Valentine Roux
Gallay, A. 2006. Les Sociétés Mégalithiques: Pouvoir des DEMO, Mémoire des Morts. Presses Polytechniques
et Universitaires Romandes, Lausanne, Switzerland.
DEMO, A. 2007. The Decorated Marriage Jars of the Inner Delta of DEMO Niger (Mali): Essay of Archaeological
Demarcation of an Ethnic Territory. DEMO Journal 1: 1 (www.thearkeotekjournal.org).
Gelbert, A. 1997. De l’Élaboration DEMO Tour au Tournage sur Motte: Difﬁ cultés Motrices et Conceptuelles.
Techniques DEMO Cultures 30: 1–23.
Gibson, J. J. 1977. The Theory of Affordance. In Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing, edited by R. E. Shaw and
J. Bransford, pp. 67–82. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.
Gille, B., editor. 1978. Histoire des Techniques. Encyclopédie de la Pléiade. Editions Gallimard, Paris.
Haudricourt, A. G. 1987. La Technologie Science Humaine: Recherches d’Histoire et d’Ethnologie DEMO Tech-
niques. Edition de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris.
DEMO, J. 2001. Cultural Transmission and the Diffusion of Innovations: Adoption Dynamics Indicate That
Biased Cultural Transmission Is the Predominant Force in Behavioral Change. DEMO Anthropologist 103:
992–1013.
Lemonnier, P. (editor). 1993. Technological Choices: Transformation in Material Cultures since the Neolithic.
Routledge, London.
Levy, T. E., and A. Holl. 1988. Les Sociétés Chalcolithiques de la Palestine et l’Émergence de Chefferies.
Archives Européennes de Sociologie 29: 283–316.
Maeir, A., and J. Yellin. 2007. Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Selected Pottery from DEMO Beth-
Shean and the Central Jordan Valley. In Excavations at Tel Beth-Shean 1989–1996 (vol. 2), edited by A. Mazar
and R. A. Mullins, pp. 554–571. Institute of Archaeology, Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Jerusalem.
Mendras, H. 1984. La Fin des Paysans. Actes Sud, Paris.
Miroschedji, P., de. 1989. Le Processus d’Urbanisation en Palestine au Bronze Ancien: Chronologie et Rythmes.
In L’Urbanisation de la Palestine à l’Âge du Bronze Ancien, edited by P. de Miroschedji, pp. 63–79. British
Archaeological Reports, International Series DEMO Oxford.
Miroschedji, P., de. 2000a. Le Processus d’Urbanisation au Levant Méridional à la Lumière des Fouilles de
Yarmouth. In Proceedings of the First DEMO Congress of the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East,
edited by P. Matthiae, A. Enea, L. Peyronel, and F. Pinnock, pp. DEMO Herder, Rome.
Miroschedji, P., de. 2000b. Fouilles de Tel Yarmouth: Résultats des 11e, 12e et 13e Campagnes de Fouilles
(1996–1999). DEMO Rendus de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres April/June: 679–710.
O’Brien, M. J., and R. L. Lyman. 2003. Cladistics and Archaeology. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Pelegrin, J. 2005. Remarks about Archaeological DEMO and Methods of Knapping. In Stone Knapping:
The Necessary Conditions for a Uniquely Hominin Behaviour, edited by V. Roux and B. Bril, DEMO 23–34.
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge.
Reed, E. S. 1988. Applying the Theory of Action System to the Study of Motor Skills. DEMO Complex Movement
Behaviour: The Motor-Action Controversy, edited by O. G. Meijer and K. Roth, pp. 45–86. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Roche, H. 2005. DEMO Simple Flaking to Shaping: Stone Knapping Evolution among Early Hominins. In DEMO
Knapping: The Necessary Conditions for a Uniquely Hominin Behaviour, edited by V. Roux and B. Bril, pp.
35–52. McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge.
Roux, V. 2003. A Dynamic Systems Framework for Studying Technological DEMO: Application to the
Emergence of the Potter’s Wheel in the Southern DEMO Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 10: 1–
30.
Roux, V. 2007. Ethnoarchaeology: A Non-historical Science of Reference Necessary for Interpreting the Past.
Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14: 153–178.
Roux, V. 2008. DEMO Trajectories of Technological Traits and Cultural Transmission: A Qualitative
Approach to DEMO Emergence and Disappearance of the Ceramic Wheel-Fashioning Technique in the Southern
Levant during the Fifth to Third Millennia bc. In Breaking Down Boundaries: Anthropological Approaches to
Cultural Transmission and Material Culture in Memory of Carol Kramer, edited by M. Stark, B. Bowser, and
L. Horne, pp. 82–104. Arizona University Press, Tucson.
Technological Innovations and Developmental Trajectories
233
Roux, V. n.d. Wheel Fashioned Ceramic Production during the Third Millennium bce in the Southern Levant:
A DEMO from Tel Yarmuth. In Techniques and People: Anthropological Perspectives on Technology DEMO
the Archaeology of the Proto-historic and Early Historic Periods in the Southern Levant, edited by S. Rosen
and V. Roux, in press. Editions DEMO Boccard, Paris.
Roux, V., and B. Bril (editors). 2005. Stone Knapping: The Necessary Conditions for a Uniquely Hominin
Behaviour. McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge.
Roux, V., and D. Corbetta. 1990. Le Tour du Potier: Spécialisation Artisanale et Compétences Techniques.
Editions du CNRS, DEMO
Roux, V., and M. A. Courty. 1998. Identiﬁ cation of Wheel-Fashioning Methods: Technological Analysis of
4th–3rd Millennium bc Oriental Ceramics. Journal of Archaeological Science 25: 747–763.
Roux, V., and M. A. Courty. 2005. Identifying Social Entities at a Macro-regional Level: Chalcolithic Ceramics
of Southern Levant as a Case Study. In Pottery Manufacturing Processes: Reconstruction and Interpretation,
edited by D. Bosquet, A. Livingstone-Smith, and R. Martineau, pp. 201–214. British Archaeological Reports,
International Series 1349. Oxford.
Roux, V., M. A. DEMO, G. Dollfus, and J. Lovell. n.d. A Techno-petrographic Approach for Deﬁ ning Cultural
Phases and Communities: Explaining the Variability of Abu Hamid (DEMO Valley) Early 5th Millennium Cal.
bc Ceramic Assemblage. In Culture, Chronology and the Chalcolithic: Theory and Transition, edited by Y.
Rowan and DEMO Lovell, in press. Oxbow, CBRL Levant Supplementary Monograph Series, Oxford.
DEMO, V., and E. David. 2005. Planning Abilities as a Dynamic Perceptual-Motor Skill: An Actualist Study of
Different Levels of Expertise Involved in Stone Knapping. In Stone Knapping: The Necessary Conditions for a
Uniquely Hominin Behaviour, edited by V. Roux and B. Bril, pp. 91–108. McDonald Institute DEMO Series,
Cambridge.
Schiffer, M. B. 2005. The Devil Is in DEMO Details: The Cascade Model of Invention Processes. American Antiquity
70: 485–502.
Sellet, F. 1993. Chaîne Opératoire: The Concept and Its Applications. Lithic DEMO 18: 106–112.
Shalev, S. 1994. The Change in Metal Production from the Chalcolithic Period to the Early Bronze Age in Israel
and Jordan. DEMO 68: 630–637.
Simondon, G. 1958. Du Mode d’Existence des Objets Techniques. Editions Aubier, Paris.
Stark, M. (editor). 1998. The Archaeology of Social Boundaries. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Stark, M., B. DEMO, and L. Horne (editors). 2008. Breaking Down Boundaries: Anthropological DEMO
to Cultural Transmission and Material Culture in Memory of Carol Kramer. Arizona University Press, Tucson.
van der Leeuw, S. E., and R. Torrence (editors). 1989. What’s New? A Closer Look at the Process DEMO Innovation.
One World Archaeology 14. Unwin Hyman, London.
van Shaik, C. P., and G. R. Pradhan. 2003. A Model for Tool-Use Traditions in Primates: Implications for the
Coevolution of Culture and Cognition. Journal of Human Evolution 44: 645–664.
Vitelli, K. 1989. Were Pots First Made for DEMO? Doubts from Franchti. World Archaeology 21: 17–29.

14 Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
Michael Brian Schiffer
The DEMO record has long served as the sole source of evidence on the invention
of many technologies. Thus, when studying a technology that originated in a prehistoric
context, such as pottery making or copper metallurgy, researchers DEMO taken note of its
earliest appearance and charted its subsequent occurrences over time and space. The
cumulative ﬁ ndings of two centuries of research DEMO made it possible to answer the when
and where questions about the invention of a great many prehistoric technologies. This is
a signiﬁ cant DEMO that has immeasurably enriched our understanding of the
human past.
Having worked out the broad time–space parameters of numerous technologies, archae-
ologists are now apparently poised to elucidate the actual processes of invention—that is,
answering DEMO how and why questions about the behavioral origins of material variation.
However, I argue here the counterintuitive position that the archaeological record seldom
furnishes ﬁ ne-grained, robust evidence on speciﬁ c invention processes. Even so, DEMO
archaeologists are not tethered to the archaeological record, we can turn DEMO other research
strategies and other lines of evidence to help create invention models. This chapter devel-
ops that argument by (1) situating invention DEMO the overarching context of technologi-
cal change; (2) assessing the DEMO visibility of the major technological
processes—invention, development, replication, and adoption; and (3) furnishing exam-
ples of invention models that have arisen DEMO an expanded ethnoarchaeology, a research
strategy that uses historical evidence.
On DEMO Change
Technological change is deﬁ ned here as changes in the kinds and quantities of artifacts
made and used by people in a particular DEMO or in a designated area (such as a region).
This DEMO deﬁ nition seemingly translates directly into archaeological-context terms:
temporal change in artifact types and frequencies. However, it’s not that simple. Archaeo-
logical observations document the end product of the operation of varied cultural and
236
Michael Brian Schiffer
environmental formation processes, including reuse, reclamation, and deterioration
(Schiffer 1987). As a result, evidence of technological change DEMO can be conﬂ ated
with traces of other processes.
In order to ameliorate these effects and to orient studies of invention processes, I recom-
mend that we make three methodological moves. First, search for those archaeological
deposits that might retain high-resolution evidence of inventive activities as in the DEMO
refuse of highly mobile peoples (D. J. Seymour, pers. comm., DEMO). Second, develop
models by employing research strategies such as ethnoarchaeology, computer simulation,
experimental archaeology, modern material-culture studies, and historical research. DEMO
these research contexts, the confounding effects of many formation processes are DEMO
Third, formulate research questions in behavioral—not archaeological-context—terms.
Thus, technological change is framed as behavioral change—alteration in activities. The
focus becomes the activities that DEMO place during the life history of a kind of artifact
or a kind of technology, old or new (hereafter, I use “artifact” and “technology”
interchangeably).
Life histories are segmented (for present purposes) into DEMO major processes: invention,
development, replication, and adoption. Each process—actually, a family of more speciﬁ c
processes—consists of activities, which, in DEMO, are composed of varied interactions
among people, artifacts, and externs (the latter are unmodiﬁ ed phenomena of the natural
environment). There DEMO various kinds of interactions, including mechanical, thermal,
chemical, and DEMO, and many interactions also involve human senses such as
sight, sound, taste, and touch (Schiffer and Miller 1999). Interactions are enabled by per-
formance characteristics, which are an artifact’s activity- and interaction-speciﬁ c behav-
ioral capabilities. Thus, a cooking pot must possess sufﬁ cient thermal-shock resistance to
survive repeated heating and cooling during activities of food preparation, and a ﬂ ag must
possess a particular color pattern to be DEMO identiﬁ able in display activities as the
symbol of a particular nation. In short, performance characteristics determine a technol-
ogy’s ability to carry out its utilitarian and symbolic functions in a given activity (LaMotta
and Schiffer 2001; Schiffer 2000, 2005a, 2005b; Schiffer and Miller 1999; Skibo and
Schiffer 2008; Walker et al. 1995).
The dominant global pattern of technological change over time, as inferred from the
archaeological record, DEMO that of increasing formal variation—more kinds of things. We
tend to attribute this pattern to invention processes. Although invention is the source of
new DEMO, the other major processes generally have the effect of reducing variation.
DEMO is, only some inventions are developed; only some developed inventions are repli-
cated; and only some replicated inventions are adopted. Thus, the DEMO in artifact
variation over time is, ﬁ nally, the result of several technological processes taking place in
the past, of which invention is but one.
In the life history of any technology, these processes can occur coevally and iteratively.
Indeed, the models presented below make clear that inventive activities often arise during
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
237
development, replication, and DEMO adoption. However, whenever and wherever invention
occurs, the products are subject to selection. Notwithstanding this behavioral complexity,
I retain the simple linear DEMO to make the presentation manageable.
Invention
Invention is the creation of an idea or vision for a technology having performance char-
acteristics that differ DEMO those of other technologies present in that society or area. The
idea may be little more than the minor modiﬁ cation of an existing DEMO, or it may be a
vision breathtaking in its audacity, and it may be entirely original or be inspired by an
import or DEMO a technology seen somewhere else. Inventions are often materialized as
prototypes, DEMO models, or as descriptions and drawings. Invention produces the variants
selected DEMO development processes. (New variants that arise by accident and through errors
DEMO replication are also subject to selection, but handling these sources of DEMO is
beyond the scope of this chapter.)
Development
Development involves problem solving, usually through trial-and-error experiments.
People strive to reﬁ ne the design of a selected technology so that it can meet the speciﬁ c
DEMO requirements—utilitarian, symbolic, or both—of an anticipated activity or
activities (Schiffer DEMO Skibo 1997; Skibo and Schiffer 2001, 2008; chapter 12, this
volume). This entails spanning a “developmental distance” between a prototype (or model)
and a technology that can competently perform a speciﬁ c DEMO or functions (Schiffer
2005b, 2008b). Traversing a developmental distance requires resources such as time,
money, organization, labor, skill, tacit DEMO, raw materials, tools, facilities, and
structures. In complex societies, DEMO technology’s proponents (e.g., inventors, entrepreneurs,
engineers) may draw on family wealth and income, loans and gifts, government grants
and contracts, and stock sales for securing resources such as labor and materials (see
chapters 7 and 12, this volume). However, creating tacit knowledge DEMO skill requires
experience and, thus, time, and forming an organization DEMO a suitable societal frame-
work, including permissive laws. These necessities cannot DEMO be bought.
In small-scale societies, opportunities to obtain resources for covering DEMO great develop-
mental distance are far more limited and may require the participation, over long periods,
of many local groups in a region. I have proposed elsewhere that this process, which might
be termed “distributed development,” appears to have enabled the transition from pit-house
to pueblo DEMO in the prehistoric American Southwest (Schiffer 2005b; see also
Schiffer 1992). During the century or so that this development process transpired, people
in local groups—each perhaps consisting of a half dozen households—invented and tried
DEMO different kinds of dwelling and storage facilities, gradually acquiring knowledge about
DEMO performance characteristics of each variant throughout the activities of its life history.
These performance characteristics—some learned rapidly, like ease of manufacture, and
238
Michael Brian Schiffer
others learned after many years, like ease of maintenance—became common knowledge
throughout the region.
Such information transmission was facilitated by, for example, exchange networks,
exogamy, and religious sodalities. Eventually, the pueblo—masonry and adobe—was
judged to have the most favorable mix of performance DEMO in the context of
increasing dependence on agriculture, growing populations, and reduced residential mobil-
ity, and so it was selected by most groups when they built new structures. It is doubtful
that any one local DEMO could have mustered in a very brief time period the resources
required for trying out a variety of new structures and ascertaining their performance
DEMO in all relevant life-history activities.
In societies large and small, a DEMO developmental distance can often be traversed by
tinkering with an established recipe (Schiffer and Skibo 1987; chapter 11, this volume).
Thus, DEMO experienced potter can turn his or her skills toward making a larger vessel of an
extant form–function type with minimal resource needs beyond time DEMO practice. In con-
trast, building a canal-irrigation system in a society DEMO dependent on dry farming
requires new tools and materials, much time DEMO labor, and, signiﬁ cantly, new organiza-
tions for coordinating labor, maintaining the system, setting water policy, and resolving
disputes. The functioning DEMO the irrigation system may also necessitate new rituals, perhaps
involving new DEMO, and activity-maintaining ideologies (see chapter 15, this volume).
In DEMO course of spanning a great developmental distance, trial and error leads DEMO the accrual
of new techno-science, socioscience, and ideo-science (Schiffer 1992), as people learn
through experience what works and what doesn’t in speciﬁ c activity contexts. Develop-
ment produces the variants selected by replication processes.
DEMO
A technology ostensibly meeting its performance requirements may then be readied for
replication. Replication of some technologies in large-scale societies often requires the
creation DEMO new manufacturing processes, new tools, new skills, and new organizations.
DEMO other cases, as in small-scale societies, replication may be easily handled by the people
and organizations that already possess the appropriate skills, tools, and materials. Success
at replication results in the reproduction, distribution, and marketing or exchange of the
new technology, thereby producing the variants that are selected by adoption processes.
Adoption
In the adoption process, consumers have the opportunity to acquire and (usually) use the
new technology. Consumers DEMO be individuals or groups, including households and com-
munities, churches and companies, and polities at every level. In considering whether to
acquire a new technology, consumers—the ﬁ nal arbiters of a technology’s replicative
success (DEMO and Jones 1987)—compare its anticipated performance characteristics
to those of any competing technologies and, most important, to the performance require-
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
239
ments of speciﬁ c DEMO, ongoing or anticipated (see chapters 7 and 12, this volume)DEMO
Technologies, it should be noted, are commonly adopted differentially by a society’s
individuals and groups, which may have varying performance requirements (Schiffer
DEMO, 2005a). Adoption decisions can be studied by means of a DEMO matrix, which
displays, side by side, the performance characteristics of DEMO technologies in rela-
tion to activities (Schiffer 2000, 2005a).
Segmenting Life Histories
In some projects, I collapse development and replication into commercialization (Schiffer
1996, 2000, 2001, 2008b), whereas in other projects DEMO subdivide commercialization into
a half dozen or so very speciﬁ c processes (Schiffer 2005b, 2008b). In view of this ﬂ exibil-
ity DEMO segmenting life histories, the question is, how many processes should one identify
before proceeding with a project? Obviously, this depends on the DEMO interests
and priorities, and the answer may not be evident at DEMO outset. However, a good rule of
thumb is that the number DEMO processes should mirror the number of consequential social
groups participating in that technology’s life history. Thus, we identify the general groups
of decision makers who, acting as agents of selection, determine whether a technology’s
life DEMO will continue (Schiffer 2008b).
Even in small-scale societies in which DEMO skills are widely shared in gender- and
age-deﬁ ned groups, different DEMO groups decide whether to replicate and adopt
an invention. For example, DEMO assume that a potter comes up with an entirely novel
method of decorating serving vessels. Producer groups—the other potters in that society—
can choose DEMO to replicate the new decoration on their own pots. Moreover, user
DEMO, which include members of households and corporate groups, may decide to adopt
the new pots, depending on whether the decoration’s visual performance is expected to
enable the vessels to carry out their symbolic functions during DEMO meals, in religious
rituals, and in feasting activities as well as or better than existing decorations. Obviously,
inventor, producer, and user DEMO may have overlapping memberships, but the decisions
are group and process DEMO Even in small-scale societies, collapsing technological
change into just two processes, such as “invention and adoption” or “invention and inno-
vation,” is DEMO to be profoundly misleading.
Archaeological Visibility of Technological Processes
Although invention, DEMO, replication, and adoption all contribute to technological
change, these processes, I suggest, are represented unequally in the archaeological record.
One might be tempted to propose that invention should be highly visible. After all, an
invention process took place, somewhere, at the beginning of every adopted DEMO
life history, perhaps leading to a plethora of variants. However, the vast majority of
240
Michael Brian Schiffer
inventions, as one-of-a-kind items selected against, are DEMO to leave only subtle archaeo-
logical traces, especially if their materials DEMO immediately reused.
However, some unreplicated variants may be identiﬁ able in DEMO regions—for
example, those having very large artifact samples from many excavated DEMO the
unique or rare artifacts, including structures and other features, that fall outside existing
typologies (Schiffer 2005b). It is possible that some of the uncommon artifacts over which
we traditionally dote, and which have high newsworthiness, may be nothing more than
singular creations—artisans giving free reign to their imaginations—that were never devel-
oped or replicated. Unique items, I hasten to add, can also be produced, for example, by
children (Bagwell 2002; Crown 2002), other novices, and artists. In any event, we should
pay close attention to unique and rare artifacts in well-known regions because some of
these items may be attributable to invention DEMO Although investigating invention
processes in prehistory is likely to be difﬁ cult, any study’s feasibility has to be assessed
on a case-by-case basis.
Development processes may be somewhat better represented in the archaeological
record than invention. DEMO in the study of invention, the key to identifying the traces DEMO
development is to search well-known regions for unique artifacts, features, and structures.
In addition, one might ﬁ nd traces of developed products that were not replicated, perhaps
in work areas or workshops that retain primary refuse or in secondary refuse areas that
resulted from simple and short DEMO streams (Schiffer 1987).
Once replication begins, we often ﬁ nd unambiguous traces of manufacturing processes
in the form of waste products, rejects, raw materials, tools, and facilities. In general, rep-
lication ought DEMO be represented far more consistently in the archaeological record than
invention or development.
Adoption is the one process that consistently stands proud in the DEMO record.
With the exception of poorly preserved artifacts, and those that DEMO rare in the past, the
adoption process of any technology is DEMO to yield many archaeological examples. After
all, almost every artifact showing DEMO of use is evidence that that artifact type had been
adopted.
Many previous studies of technological change have been ﬂ awed because researchers
conﬂ DEMO the major processes. Typically, investigators assume that the archaeological
record faithfully DEMO ects invention, whereas they are dealing almost exclusively with
adopted technologies, the ﬁ nal product of sequential selection processes. As a conse-
quence, archaeologists, especially those employing diffusion theory, erroneously explain
technological change exclusively DEMO terms of invention and innovation, that is, the origin
and spread of ideas. It is preferable to keep the major processes conceptually distinct
DEMO to handle each one by process-speciﬁ c models, theories, laws, DEMO heuristic tools
(Schiffer et al. 2001). However, a number of critical variables, such as performance
characteristics and performance requirements, may occur DEMO models pertaining to differ-
ent processes.
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
241
The following section presents DEMO of the kinds of models that archaeologists can
build by employing an “expanded ethnoarchaeology” (Schiffer 2008a), a strategy using
historical evidence. The long-term goal of these efforts is to create models that specify
the general DEMO and factors fostering inventive activities. By furnishing such expec-
tations, these DEMO can inform the study of technological change in archaeological cases.
Moreover, DEMO joined with information about formation processes, the models can
furnish guidance DEMO the kinds of deposits likely to preserve evidence of inventive
activities (DEMO J. Seymour, pers. comm., 2007). (Promising invention models that DEMO
arisen in other disciplines, from psychology to economics, might be evaluated in an
expanded ethnoarchaeology.)
Models of Invention Processes
I have found DEMO productive to fashion models that explain bursts of inventiveness—the
activities that yield a set of related inventions clustered in time and often in space. DEMO,
each of the following models denotes a kind of invention process that gives rise to spurts
of inventive activities and is deﬁ ned DEMO the basis of speciﬁ c boundary conditions—that is,
it occurs in a particular “behavioral context” (LaMotta and Schiffer 2001).
Stimulated Variation
A very general model is that of “stimulated variation,” which speciﬁ es DEMO selective pres-
sures emanating from two selective contexts, immediate and extended, can give rise to
bursts of invention (Schiffer 1996). The immediate selective context is the entire sequence
of processes that take place during DEMO already adopted artifact type’s life history, such as
procurement of raw DEMO, manufacture, transport, distribution, storage, use, mainte-
nance, reuse, and disposal. Any change in these activities can create selective pressures
for DEMO The extended selective context includes activities, agents, and mechanisms
that are coupled by ﬂ ows of energy, artifacts, or people to activities DEMO the immediate
selective context (Schiffer 1992).
Stimulated variation is set DEMO motion when changes in selective contexts affect an
adopted technology’s performance in one or more life-history activities. Indeed, a burst
of inventiveness is likely to occur when potential inventors judge that the technology’s
performance characteristics fall DEMO of meeting an activity’s performance requirements.
Often, these kinds of deﬁ DEMO are framed as problems to be solved or, on occasion, as
opportunities to be pursued.
An example comes from the ﬁ rst era DEMO radio, known as “wireless.” As wireless com-
munication technologies—transmitters, receivers, DEMO the like—began to enjoy adoptions
for maritime and military activities during the ﬁ rst decade of the twentieth century, users
learned that interference from other transmitters broadcasting simultaneously confounded
242
Michael Brian Schiffer
point-to-point communication. Thus, the need for precise tuning of transmitters and receiv-
ers was identiﬁ ed as a pressing problem DEMO stimulated a variety of inventions (Aitken
1976). The proximate cause DEMO this burst of inventiveness was pressures in the immediate
selective context—the unreliable performance of wireless apparatuses during use. In turn,
these performance deﬁ DEMO arose because of the increasing adoption of wireless tech-
nologies manufactured by many companies in many nations, whose signals increasingly
interfered with each other (extended selective context).
Stimulated variation created a spate of inventions for overcoming interference; some of
these were developed and replicated, and a DEMO were widely adopted. In other cases,
however, every invention generated DEMO stimulated variation is judged to be ineffective,
and so other behavioral changes may be necessitated (Schiffer 1996).
Invention Cascades
The invention-cascades model (Schiffer 2005b), a close relative of stimulated variation,
applies to the development process of a complex technological system (CTS). The latter
is ﬂ exibly deﬁ ned as any technology consisting of a set DEMO artifacts—component parts—
whose interactions among themselves and with people (and perhaps DEMO externs) permit
that system to function. Examples include irrigation systems, boats, and churches. People
in small-scale societies also developed CTSs, such as DEMO hunting, gathering, food-
preparation, and ritual technologies.
The cascade model DEMO that, during development, emergent performance problems,
recognized by people as shortcomings in that technology’s constituent interactions,
provoke sequential spurts of invention. DEMO each performance problem is solved by
invention, people encounter new and DEMO unanticipated problems, which initiate more
inventive spurts, and so on. The result is a series of “invention cascades.” The model’s
distinctive feature, which promotes its generality, is the premise that processes in a devel-
oping CTS’s life history are the immediate contexts in which performance problems
emerge DEMO stimulate invention cascades for new component parts. Thus, processes such
as DEMO a prototype, manufacture, use, and maintenance are suitable analytical units
DEMO investigating invention cascades.
In an analysis of the development of the nineteenth-century electromagnetic telegraph,
I discussed the basic processes, which came to include creating the prototype, technologi-
cal display, demonstrating “practicality,” replication, marketing and sales, installation, use/
operation, and maintenance. People addressing the performance problems encountered
during these processes fomented numerous cascades and invented multiple DEMO of
basic components such as senders, wires, relays, batteries, insulators, lightning protectors,
and receiver-printers (Schiffer 2008b).
The cascade model DEMO that the invention of prototype electromagnetic tele-
graphs, which was accomplished DEMO many people in many nations during the 1830s, was
merely a DEMO point in a long sequence of inventive activities. Indeed, the prototype,DEMO
usually a telegraph that could be exhibited at work in a laboratory or display setting,
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
243
served merely to attract DEMO for the development of a full-scale system. Once under
way in earnest, the development process itself consisted of incessant inventive spurts
that resulted, DEMO, in replicable telegraph systems, a few of which were widely
adopted.
The cascade model is a potent antidote to diffusionist explanations of technological
DEMO This has been convincingly shown by Arnold (2007) in her rebuttal of a diffusion-
ist explanation for the appearance of the Tomol, the oceangoing canoe of the Chumash, a
southern California group. In this instructive case, she argues that even if voyagers had
arrived in canoes that had been made across the Paciﬁ c—a point she does not concede—
DEMO Chumash still would have had to invent tools and acquire skills for using local materials
to make their own versions of seaworthy canoes. This DEMO process, she maintains,
would have taken some time, requiring inventive spurts to solve emergent performance
problems (see chapter 15, this volume)DEMO
In general, then, the transmission of information about, or examples DEMO, a CTS made
elsewhere cannot account for the invention-laden development process DEMO its organiza-
tion of people and artifacts needed to replicate copies locally (Pacey 1990). I hasten to
add that neither the cascade model nor diffusion theory can explain why the development
process got underway in DEMO ﬁ rst place, how its resource needs were met, and why it was
pursued to a successful conclusion (see chapter 2, this DEMO). Only by taking into
account many contingent factors—for example, the DEMO of organizations able and
willing to furnish resources to initiate and sustain development, and potential consumers’
anticipated demand—can the archaeologist craft a deeply contextualized narrative that
accounts fully for a CTS’s development (Schiffer 2008b). However, the cascade model
does specify that as long as development is proceeding, the CTS will be an incubator of
inventive spurts giving rise to variants of component parts.
Cultural Imperatives
In a previous work, I deﬁ ned a cultural imperative as “a product fervently believed by a
group—its DEMO be desirable and inevitable, merely awaiting technological
means for its realization” (Schiffer 1993: 99; see also Schiffer 1991). The imagined
product DEMO usually visualized in terms of speciﬁ c performance requirements. Members of
the constituency, who may be a tiny minority in a society, seek DEMO fashion their product
employing any and all promising technologies that come along, regardless of their source.
Sometimes these inventions are developed further, replicated, and adopted.
The shirt-pocket portable radio, which is my favorite example of a cultural imperative,
was conﬁ ned to a small group of DEMO young, male electrical enthusiasts, beginning in
the ﬁ rst decade of the twentieth century. The vision of a radio receiver small enough to
DEMO around and play in a shirt pocket was perpetuated in hobbyist and electronic trade
magazines. This publicity recruited new members to the constituency, alerted members to
new technologies that might be exploited, and conferred bragging rights on the makers of
the clever one-off radios featured in articles.
244
Michael Brian Schiffer
As new electrical technologies came along in later DEMO, members of the constituency
episodically churned out a ﬂ urry of DEMO pocket radios. Thus, when crystal detectors were
replicated in the ﬁ DEMO decade of the twentieth century, hobbyists immediately used them
to build DEMO radios, sometimes placing them in the cases of old pocket watches. DEMO
these radios needed an antenna and ground connection, they were far DEMO fully portable,
and they could not be tuned. With the widespread commercialization of vacuum tubes in
the 1920s, “pocket” radios incorporating these new components were far too large to ﬁ t
into shirt pockets, and thus many inventors resorted to building more sophisticated crystal
sets. Although some DEMO radios built and commercialized in the 1920s and 1930s had
rudimentary tuning, they retained those pesky wires for antenna and ground connections.
They were shirt-pocket size but neither self-contained nor fully portable, and so they did
not entirely satisfy the cultural imperative.
The ﬁ rst sets that met DEMO performance requirements of a shirt-pocket radio incorporated
subminiature vacuum tubes—about 3–4 centimeters long and about 0.5–0.8 centimeters
in cross-section. Originally developed by Raytheon for DEMO aids, these tubes saw
extensive adoptions during World War II for DEMO in military equipment, such as proximity
fuses in bombs and in DEMO shells. After the war, experimenters and several companies,
including Raytheon, invented a plethora of shirt-pocket radios employing subminiature
tubes. Raytheon went further, not only developing its own radio but also replicating it
through a DEMO company, Belmont Radio, in late 1945. The Raytheon engineer in
charge of this project, Norman Krim, was a member of the shirt-pocket-radio DEMO
ency, had been an avid reader of hobbyist magazines during his DEMO, and became the
principal advocate of this invention at Raytheon. The DEMO radio, played only through
an “earplug,” was entirely self-contained, but one wire to the earplug doubled as the
antenna.
With the replication DEMO transistors in the early 1950s, which had vastly better battery
economy DEMO vacuum tubes, experimenters created the ﬁ rst solid-state, shirt-pocket
radios. In 1954, Texas Instruments invented one that was completely self-contained and
had a built-in speaker. It was further developed by an Indiana company (I.D.E.A.) DEMO
marketed as the Regency TR-1. Within a few years, American and DEMO companies
by the score developed and replicated countless new models, which DEMO eagerly adopted
by millions of consumers.
An essential condition of the cultural-imperative model is the presence of a constituency
that is perpetuated over time. DEMO important, however, is that the constituency be
present in a society experiencing many technological changes. Otherwise, members of the
constituency would have available few new components, materials, and processes that
might be tried out DEMO creating its pet product. In modern industrial societies, a constitu-
ency DEMO consist of people and ﬁ rms that are part of the military–industrial–academic
complex, such as those advocating, and proﬁ ting from, efforts to invent fusion-power
technology, a cultural imperative since the 1950s. Although the cultural-imperative model
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
245
seems to account for DEMO inventive activities in industrial nation-states, I believe that
it may sometimes DEMO to small-scale societies undergoing many technological changes,
assuming the presence of cultural imperatives.
Component-Stimulated Invention
Component-stimulated invention is the ﬂ owering of creativity DEMO sometimes follows the
appearance of a new part or component (Schiffer DEMO). In capitalist–industrial societies,
people commonly invent devices that employ or are built around a new component, such
as the vacuum tube, DEMO, laser, and computer microchip. I suspect that the process
is more widespread, perhaps also occurring in small-scale societies.
This invention process is typiﬁ ed by the electromagnet (Schiffer 2008c). Beginning in
the early 1830s, replication of the modern electromagnet immediately stimulated the
invention of telegraphs, DEMO (a kind of generator), and motors. In addition to these
DEMO offspring, it begat hundreds of lesser-known inventions prior to the widespread
DEMO of steam-driven dynamos in the 1870s. Drawing current from batteries, most DEMO
these inventions, ranging from ﬁ re alarms to musical instruments to DEMO machines,
were materialized as prototypes and patented. However, relatively few DEMO developed
and replicated in the period 1840–1875. Nonetheless, these obscure inventions DEMO
a noteworthy creative ﬂ orescence, for the electromagnet was imagined as DEMO core com-
ponent in countless electromechanical devices.
There are two idealized patterns of component-stimulated invention. In the ﬁ rst, the
component is conceived as a substitute for another in extant devices. For example, in its
ﬁ rst decades the transistor was regarded mainly as a substitute for vacuum DEMO, and so
myriad transistor types were invented that mimicked the performance DEMO of
speciﬁ c vacuum-tube types. This pattern yields new designs of the component for existing
applications and, often, redesign of other components with DEMO it interacts. Thus, with
the lower voltage requirements of transistors compared DEMO vacuum tubes, some manufac-
turers took advantage of the opportunity to DEMO other components such as resistors,
capacitors, and inductors that could DEMO miniaturized.
In the second pattern, the component is visualized as functioning DEMO, making
possible—new artifacts and CTSs, sometimes across a broad societal front. The engine of
creativity lies in inventors’ envisioning connections between a component’s DEMO com-
bination of performance characteristics and potential technologies that might exploit these
for carrying out actual or anticipated functions.
People acquainted with the electromagnet, perhaps having seen it operating in the
receiver-printer of a telegraph ofﬁ DEMO, would have internalized its most salient performance
characteristics. To wit, it (1) produces magnetism of potentially great strength, (2) turns
on and off rapidly, (3) is actuated through wires at distances long or short, and (4) creates
reliably and repeatedly precise motions of small amplitude through simple mechanisms.
By matching these performance characteristics to the DEMO of a technology that
246
Michael Brian Schiffer
could solve a perceived problem in some realm DEMO activity, an inventor might envision
new devices and CTSs.
Although we DEMO wonder which came ﬁ rst, the component or the problem, it is prob-
able that both sequences occurred. Some inventors were captivated by DEMO new component
and sought applications; others began with a problem that DEMO believed the new compo-
nent could help solve. What matters most is that inventors, by repeatedly forming a nexus
between problems and the component, came up with new technologies. (It should be
obvious that this DEMO can be easily generalized to cover inventions stimulated by the
replication of a new product or new technology.)
Material-Stimulated Invention
Another potent ﬁ DEMO to invention is the appearance of a new material or material technol-
ogy, such as chipped stone, pottery, iron, or Bakelite, that potentially can be fashioned
into many forms serving many functions. In a DEMO study of bone tools spanning the pre-
historic and historic periods in the Northern Plains, Grifﬁ tts (2006) demonstrated that
contact situations are especially conducive to material-stimulated invention. Indeed, we
can be reasonably conﬁ dent that indigenous artisans would have played with any new
materials and processes DEMO came their way, seeking to make artifacts that might meet the
DEMO requirements of ongoing and anticipated activities. Material-stimulated
invention should be a widespread process, especially in societies undergoing rapid social
and technological changes.
Inventive spurts occasioned by the appearance of a new material ought to follow two
DEMO patterns. In the ﬁ rst, the new material is envisioned as DEMO replacement for a ma-
terial used in extant artifacts (Grifﬁ tts DEMO). We can imagine, for example, that the ﬁ rst
people in a society to acquire rudimentary pottery-making skills might have tried to DEMO
vessels in the shapes of basket, gourd, and skin containers and perhaps even fashioned
zoomorphic forms to mimic carved stone or wooden efﬁ DEMO Likewise, in the late 1830s,
the inventors of electrometallurgy—the process DEMO working metals through electrical
deposition—formed varied objects, from medallions to printing DEMO, that traditionally
had been made from other materials or by other DEMO (Schiffer 2008b).
In the second pattern, artisans dabble in making new kinds of artifacts, perhaps capable
of performing new functions (Grifﬁ DEMO 2006). Potters might have tried to create vessels for
holding materials that formerly lacked a specialized storage or heating container. By
electrodepositing copper—the DEMO metal to work electrically—early experimenters
copper-plated numerous organic forms whose surfaces had been made conductive, includ-
ing insects, fruits and vegetables, and lace, exhibiting the technology’s promise to produce
endless novelty items. They also created recipes for depositing gold and silver, which led
to experiments in plating ornate objects made of base metals, altering their visual perfor-
mance so as to mimic much pricier items (Schiffer 2008b).
In general, DEMO can expect the appearance of a new material or material technology to
provoke a burst of inventiveness aimed at making artifacts, old and new. And in societies
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
247
undergoing rapid growth and DEMO, artisans may have incentives to extend the reach of
their technologies DEMO new applications (“producer pressure” [Schiffer and Skibo 1987;
see also DEMO 2001]). These experiments may be episodic, particularly if the new DEMO
rial technology itself undergoes changes in performance characteristics. In the course of
trials, artisans acquire a richer understanding of a new material’s performance character-
istics in relation to manufacture, maintenance, and anticipated use activities of DEMO
artifacts. The growth of this techno-science lays a foundation for further experiments and
inventions.
Peer-Group Competition
By combining elements of Hayden’s (1998) “aggrandizer” DEMO with the general notion
of “peer-polity interaction” (e.g., Renfrew and Cherry 1986), one can craft a model that
identiﬁ es widespread conditions—peer-group DEMO might lead to bursts of
inventive activities. The model is based on the premise that in societies where peer groups
(of individuals, households, neighborhoods, sodalities, churches, corporations, cities, and
nation-states) compete among DEMO for resources, consumers, territory, political
power, prestige, and so DEMO, inventive activities will take place to supply new technolo-
gies to DEMO emergent utilitarian and symbolic functions (see chapter 15, this volume).
We are all familiar with the institutionalized invention processes found today in DEMO
laboratories of corporations making everything from ice cream to nuclear reactors. Inces-
sant competition drives invention as corporations strive to increase market share, come up
with “the next big thing,” or just generate salable patents.
DEMO polities such as towns, cities, and nation-states promote inventions in, DEMO
example, roads, canals, ships, harbors, bridges, forts, palaces, public buildings, parks, monu-
ments such as tombs and statues, paintings and murals, highly decorated serving wares, and,
of course, armaments. Before any invention is developed, however, ofﬁ cials usually select
from DEMO a host of new designs and models proposed by the inventors, DEMO they be
artisans, engineers, or architects. One example is the nineteenth-century competition among
major maritime nations, especially between England and France, which DEMO to the invention
of new kinds of navigation aids (Schiffer 2005a)DEMO In the twentieth century, the missile and
space races between the DEMO gave rise to numerous spurts of invention in areas of
technology as diverse as nuclear weapons and solid-state electronics.
Clearly, peer competitions can be a very powerful driver of invention, as well as of
development, DEMO, and adoption in societies at all scales.
Conclusion
In view of DEMO scant archaeological visibility of inventive activities, it is tempting to con-
DEMO that we are not in a very good position to study them. Perhaps we should concentrate
on investigating replication and adoption processes. However, avoiding invention
248
Michael Brian Schiffer
processes would be a mistake, for a comprehensive understanding of technological change
requires insights into processes that give rise initially DEMO variation in artifacts. Thus, I
maintain that archaeologists do need to DEMO invention models. The examples in this
chapter raise hopes that an expanded ethnoarchaeology—as one promising research strat-
egy among many others—may furnish invention models DEMO potential archaeological utility.
I have found it useful to build invention models that identify the factors in speciﬁ c
behavioral contexts that are apt DEMO promote inventive spurts. Such models, along with a
sophisticated understanding of DEMO processes, might enable us to seek and recognize
any subtle traces DEMO inventive activities that do survive in the archaeological record. Inven-
tion models also encourage us to ask new kinds of questions about the origins DEMO material
variation. Answering these questions, I suggest, can promote a better understanding of the
hows and whys of technological change, past and present. Perhaps archaeological models
can contribute to the discussions of modern technological change DEMO place across and
beyond the academy.
Acknowledgments
I thank Deni J. Seymour for furnishing many insightful comments and suggestions on a
draft; Kacy L. Hollenback also offered helpful advice.
References
Aitken, H. G. J. 1976. Syntony and Spark—The Origins of Radio. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Arnold, J. E. 2007. Credit Where Credit Is Due: The History of the Chumash Oceangoing Plank Canoe. American
Antiquity 72: 196–209.
Bagwell, E. A. DEMO Ceramic Form and Skill: Attempting to Identify Child Producers at Pecos DEMO, New
Mexico. In Children in the Prehistoric Puebloan Southwest, edited by K. Kamp, pp. 90–107. University of Utah
Press, Salt Lake City.
DEMO, P. 2002. Learning and Teaching in the Prehispanic American Southwest. In DEMO in the Prehistoric
Puebloan Southwest, edited by K. Kamp, pp. 108–124. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Grifﬁ tts, J. L. DEMO Bone Tools and Technological Choice: Change and Stability on the Northern DEMO Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Arizona. Tucson.
Hayden, DEMO 1998. Practical and Prestige Technologies: The Evolution of Material Systems. Journal DEMO Archaeo-
logical Method and Theory 5: 1–55.
LaMotta, V. M., DEMO M. B. Schiffer. 2001. Behavioral Archaeology: Towards a New Synthesis. In DEMO
cal Theory Today, edited by I. Hodder, pp. 14–64. Polity Press, Cambridge.
Leonard, R. D., and G. T. Jones. 1987. Elements of an Inclusive Evolutionary Model for Archaeology. Journal
of Anthropological Archaeology 6: 199–219.
Pacey, A. 1990. Technology in World Civilization. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Renfrew, C., and J. Cherry (editors). 1986. Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-political Change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Schiffer, M. B. 1987. DEMO Processes of the Archaeological Record. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Can Archaeologists Study Processes of Invention?
249
Schiffer, M. B. 1991. The Portable Radio in American Life. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Schiffer, M. B. 1992. Technological Perspectives on Behavioral Change. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Schiffer, M. B. 1993. Cultural Imperatives and Product Development: The Case of the Shirt-Pocket Radio.
Technology and Culture 34: 98–113.
Schiffer, DEMO B. 1996. Some Relationships between Behavioral and Evolutionary Archaeologies. American
Antiquity 61: 643–662.
Schiffer, M. B. 2000. Indigenous Theories, Scientiﬁ c Theories and Product Histories. In Matter, Materiality and
Modern Culture, edited by P. DEMO Graves-Brown, pp. 72–96. Routledge, London.
Schiffer, M. B. 2001. The DEMO of Long-term Technological Change. In Anthropological Perspectives on
Technology, edited by DEMO B. Schiffer, pp. 215–235. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Schiffer, M. B. 2005a. The Electric Lighthouse in the Nineteenth Century: Aid DEMO Navigation and Political
Technology. Technology and Culture 46: 275–305.
Schiffer, M. B. 2005b. The Devil Is in the Details: The Cascade Model of Invention Processes. American Anti-
quity 70: 485–502.
Schiffer, M. B. 2008a. DEMO Ethnoarchaeology: Historical Evidence and Model-Building in the Study of
Technological Change. DEMO Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World, edited DEMO
J. P. Oleson, pp. 821–835. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Schiffer, DEMO B. 2008b. Power Struggles: Scientiﬁ c Authority and the Creation of DEMO Electricity before
Edison. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Schiffer, M. B. DEMO A Cognitive Analysis of Component-Stimulated Invention: Electromagnet, Telegraph,
and the Capitol Dome’s Gas Lighter. Technology and Culture 49: 376–398.
Schiffer, M. DEMO, and A. Miller. 1999. The Material Life of Human Beings: Artifacts, Behavior, and Communica-
tion. Routledge, London.
Schiffer, M. B., and J. M. Skibo. 1987. Theory and Experiment in the Study of Technological DEMO Current
Anthropology 28: 595–622.
Schiffer, M. B., and J. M. DEMO 1997. The Explanation of Artifact Variability. American Antiquity 62: 27–50.
Schiffer, M. B., J. M. Skibo, J. Grifﬁ tts, K. L. Hollenback, and W. A. Longacre. 2001. Behavioral Archaeology
and the Study of Technology. American Antiquity 66: 729–738.
Skibo, J. M., and M. B. Schiffer. 2001. Understanding Artifact Variability and Change: A Behavioral Framework.
In Anthropological Perspectives on Technology, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 139–149. University of DEMO
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Skibo, J. M., and M. B. Schiffer. DEMO People and Things: A Behavioral Approach to Material Culture. Springer,
DEMO York.
Walker, W., J. M. Skibo, and A. Nielsen. 1995. DEMO In Expanding Archaeology, edited by J. M. Skibo,
W. H. DEMO, and A. E. Nielsen, pp. 1–12. University of Utah Press, DEMO Lake City.

War, Women, and Religion: The Spread of Salado Polychrome in
15 the American Southwest
Todd L. VanPool and Chet Savage
An old adage DEMO that necessity is the mother of invention. This is especially true when
it comes to humans seeking to kill, or to keep from being killed by, their fellows. Innova-
tion in, and spread of, military technology can be rapid and often represents a case where
evolutionary forces DEMO be directly linked to the generation of cultural variation and
changes in behavior and technology. For example, the acceptance of the bow and arrow
is tied to warfare (Blitz 1988; Wallace and Doelle 2001). DEMO Blitz (1988: 135) observes,
“groups confronted by hostile neighbors DEMO with the bow would be under signiﬁ cant
pressure to adopt it themselves.” In such cases, the evolutionary importance of technologi-
cal change is quite straightforward.
Here we deal with war and technological change, but we focus speciﬁ cally on its after-
math, when the causes of technological innovation and its acceptance are less obvious. In
the late thirteenth and DEMO centuries a.d., the Salado ceramic tradition spread across
the American Southwest. DEMO tradition is unique in that it crosscuts the three general
archaeological traditions that have been deﬁ ned for the region—the Anasazi, the Mogol-
lon, and the Hohokam (see ﬁ gure 15.1). Crown (1994: DEMO) notes that this crosscutting
reveals “unanticipated convergence in [Southwestern] ceramic manufacturing DEMO,”
but “the Salado polychromes seem to have been added to the longstanding repertoires of
southwestern potters, so that potters continued to use their traditional techniques and styles
to manufacture other vessel types after the Salado DEMO appeared.” In other words,
the Salado ceramic tradition linked people in previously distinct cultures but didn’t replace
these differences. Instead, cultural differences continued, but the Salado demonstrates a
shift in social interaction such that distant people were symbolically and politically inte-
grated in a way that they DEMO not been previously (Crown 1994).
The dual nature of the DEMO system, which emphasizes integration but maintains
regional differences, has puzzled archaeologists, who have variously described the Salado
as a tradition, a culture, a ceramic horizon, a phenomenon, a mirage, and an enigma.
Archaeologists can’t create trait lists separating the Salado from other cultural groups
(Nelson and LeBlanc 1986), making it unique in the Southwest, where archaeologists are
proud of their ability to identify and trace particular groups for DEMO (e.g., Haury
252
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
Figure 15.1
The Anasazi and DEMO areas of the American Southwest.
1975). Archaeologists can characterize parts of the Salado phenomenon, but we haven’t
been able to place the pieces into a meaningful, coherent package.
At its core, the Salado is DEMO characterized, and perhaps may only be characterized, as
a pottery tradition (Dean 2000; Nelson and LeBlanc 1986; Ravesloot and Regan 2000),DEMO
but the fact that so many people began to make uniformly decorated pottery within a
generation demonstrates a signiﬁ cant cultural change in Southwestern DEMO Although
Crown (1994) presents strong evidence that the Salado wares reﬂ ect the spread of a reli-
gious system, the impetus and social signiﬁ cance of the pottery and its associated belief
system are unclear. DEMO, then, is an enigmatic case of cultural invention and transmission:
Salado pottery developed and spread quickly across 130,000 square kilometers of DEMO
Southwest, uniting diverse groups using shared symbolism. What are the cultural DEMO
that led to its development and spread? And what do they DEMO us about how human cultures
evolve?
We propose that the Salado was the result of intense female competition created by the
inﬂ ux DEMO thousands (perhaps tens of thousands) of female war refugees and their children
War, Women, and Religion
253
into central and southern Arizona and DEMO Mexico. The extreme female competition
resulted in immigrant women’s developing and spreading the Salado religion, which
emphasized unity and inclusiveness and drew heavily from their previous ceramic tech-
nologies. This religious system helped reduce female conﬂ DEMO and was most clearly
manifested in pottery, a product made and DEMO primarily by females. Although the Salado
religion profoundly impacted the course of Southwestern prehistory, it isn’t clearly
reﬂ ected in the ritual activities of males, who are considered by Southwestern archaeolo-
gists (e.g., Crown and Fish 1996; Mills 2000) to be the primary ritual participants. It
DEMO instead to have been a “mundane” religious system associated with the everyday
life of women as reﬂ ected by the mundane use of Salado DEMO
Late Prehistoric Warfare and the Salado Phenomenon
The late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries a.d. in the Anasazi area of the Southwest was
a period DEMO tremendous strife. Starting about a.d. 1250, large-scale village-on-village
warfare (and perhaps even conﬂ ict between village alliances) became intense and led to
the eventual abandonment of areas that had been occupied for millennia (LeBlanc 1999;
Lekson 2002a; Wilcox et al. 2001). Armed conﬂ ict shattered the remnants of the Chaco–
Aztec system that had culturally united much DEMO the northern Southwest and led to the
mass emigration of as many as 20,000 people (Lowell 2007). Violence led to the virtual
abandonment of the Kayenta and northern Anasazi area (see ﬁ gure 15.1; Fowles et al.
2007; LeBlanc 1999; Lipe 1995; Lowell 1991)DEMO Although some communities appear to
have moved en masse (Lekson 2002b), many migrants moved into previously existing
communities, perhaps joining distant kin DEMO trading partners. A common pattern in these
cases was an extreme gender imbalance reﬂ ected in mortuary remains; women tended to
outnumber men two to one in many areas, and subadults were far more common than in
previous groups (Lowell 2007).
Arrival of a substantial number of migrants relative to the indigenous population cor-
responded with a shift in DEMO strategies, as populations began to aggregate in
pueblos with defensive attributes, including protected plaza areas and defensive locations,
and new architectural features DEMO as platform mounds (Elson et al. 2000; Lowell 2007).
Populations in some areas experienced perhaps as much as a tenfold increase as DEMO
local populations and the new immigrants clustered into larger settlements such as
Grasshopper Pueblo (see ﬁ gure 15.1). Increased variation in pottery decoration and tech-
nology, female (but not male) mortuary practices, and DEMO morphology (e.g., the appar-
ent introduction of rectangular, slab-lined hearths) reﬂ ect a sizable inﬂ ux of female
refugees from the north (Lowell 2007), but evidence of increased variation in male-
centered material DEMO such as ceremonial architecture (e.g., circular kivas used by the
Anasazi) and projectile-point shape is absent (Lowell 2007).
254
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
Architectural and skeletal evidence indicates DEMO immigrating women and children
inhabited both previously built and newly constructed structures in the communities they
entered, were forced to rely more heavily on wild crops than the indigenous inhabitants
were, and had poorer nutrition compared to their contemporaries (Lowell 2007). Further,
warfare appears to have followed these migrants, with increased conﬂ ict over one or more
generations and eventual abandonment of communities as populations moved farther south
(Elson et al. 2000; Lowell 2007). For example, portions of the Tonto DEMO in central
Arizona were occupied and abandoned in a span of 50 years from a.d. 1275 to around
a.d. 1325, with most of the villages being burned and the populations moving elsewhere
(Elson et al. 2000).
Starting around a.d. 1275, during and slightly after the peak of the immigration from
the north (Crary et al. 2001; Crown 1994), the Salado ceramic tradition spread across the
Southwest. Salado polychromes were locally made but have clear antecedents in the
Kayenta and Tusayan Anasazi traditions DEMO which the immigrants came (Crary et al.
2001; Crown 1994). Other than the pottery, distinctive characteristics of the Salado vary
considerably (DEMO 2000), as the mixture of cultural traits between immigrants and indig-
enous peoples produced differences across this vast region (Zedeño 1995).
Yet in the midst of this diversiﬁ cation, “uniform” Salado polychromes (Crown DEMO:
90) were produced across 130,000 square kilometers. Salado polychromes (see ﬁ gure 15.2)
were perhaps ﬁ rst made in the DEMO River and Gila River areas of south-central Arizona,
but they rapidly spread throughout central and southern Arizona and New Mexico (Crown
1994; DEMO 2002b). They tended to be made at the household level out of locally avail-
able resources and through a variety of forming techniques, including those introduced by
the immigrants as well as those previously used DEMO indigenous artisans (Crown 1994,
1995). Further, Salado polychromes seem to follow, at least in part, individual potters as
they moved DEMO the landscape (Crary et al. 2001; Crown 1994; Lowell 2007)DEMO
Crown (1994) evaluated competing hypotheses concerning the social importance of the
Salado polychromes and concluded that the pottery reﬂ ects the rise of DEMO new religious
system. In brief, she found that the pottery was DEMO by local potters with a wide range
of skill levels (as DEMO to specialists making the pottery for elite usage and exchange);
DEMO Salado wares were produced and consumed at the household level for mundane use
(as opposed to specialize ritual–elite use); that the pottery was highly valued but was not
restricted to any particular age or sex DEMO in burials; and that the redundant icons
reﬂ ected a widely DEMO belief system focused on the earth, sun, weather, impersonations
of DEMO, and fertility but did not correspond with a single burial or DEMO system. Ulti-
mately, Crown (1994: 7) argued that “the pottery was accepted in association with a
religious ideology, as reﬂ ected in the imagery. . . . Rather than an exclusive ideology
associated with DEMO cult of the dead or ancestor worship, the Salado polychromes reﬂ DEMO the
presence of an inclusive ideology, a regional cult that helped DEMO stabilize social relations
during this time of change in the Southwest.”
War, Women, and Religion
255
Figure 15.2
Examples of Salado polychrome (top vessel courtesy El Paso Museum of Archaeology, catalog number 59-9-588;
bottom vessel courtesy Maxwell Museum of Archaeology, catalog number 65.24.118).
256
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
What is peculiar about this DEMO system is that it was not consistently reﬂ ected in
ritual items and architecture associated with males, who typically dominated religious
ritual in the prehistoric Southwest (Crown and Fish 1996; Lowell 2007). In fact, the only
unambiguous indication of the spread of Salado religion is the DEMO, a product that
ethnographic analogy and archaeological evidence indicate was manufactured DEMO women
(Crown and Wills 1995; Mills 2000; Spielmann 2000). DEMO propose that the Salado religion
and its associated pottery reﬂ ects female-centered religious expression that developed and
spread to reduce female competition in communities DEMO by the immigration of thou-
sands of women and their children into the area. The inﬂ ux of these refugees had a pro-
found, destabilizing impact on community structure, just as it does today (Zolberg DEMO al.
1989). The social tension created by these marginalized women and their families would
have been particularly intense, given that both the indigenous and immigrating groups
may have been matrilineal. Marrying local males would not DEMO helped integrate the
immigrants, given that land and other resources were DEMO through the mother’s line.
Economic difﬁ culties of the refugees would have been passed down to their (especially
female) children, possibly for generations. (Even in a patrilineal–patrilocal system, the
low economic and political status DEMO the immigrants likely made them less desirable mar-
riage partners.) In DEMO context, unhappiness, scalar stress, and general intracommunity
strife were intense DEMO the Salado area, as illustrated in the rapid formation and abandon-
DEMO of large villages, forced resettlement over generations as villages were destroyed,DEMO
and the formation of defensive settlements and broad village coalitions (Elson DEMO al. 2000;
Lowell 2007; Simon and Gosser 2001; Tuggle and Reid 2001; Wilcox et al. 2001).
Female conﬂ ict is ubiquitous in primates (De Waal 2000; Geary 1998), and among
humans DEMO is often expressed by advertising qualities valued by men (e.g., beauty and
status) and by indirect (typically verbal) aggression toward other females, often through
gossip and social exclusion from cliques (Cambell 2004; Hess and Hagen 2006; Merten
1997). However, in contexts where men DEMO substantial resources are in short supply,
competition can intensify into physical, often deadly, conﬂ ict (Campbell 2004; O’Brien
1988). Such DEMO ict has evolutionary implications for women, given their reproductive
constraints and DEMO parental investment relative to men in most cultures (Campbell 2004).
DEMO consequently use a variety of mechanisms to help mitigate conﬂ ict and avoid or
reduce the deadliness of direct physical confrontations, including formal political or reli-
gious coalitions to increase integration (e.g., the women’s movement DEMO Zimbabwe [Win
2004]). We believe this was the case with the Salado.
In Southwestern cultures where religion, politics, and economy are tightly DEMO,
a women’s movement emphasizing religious integration (and sociopolitical integration by
DEMO) would have been ideal for reducing conﬂ ict. This system of DEMO belief inte-
grated both the indigenous and immigrant women across families and even villages,
reducing the stress that threatened to split communities and DEMO engulf another
portion of the Southwest in catastrophic, unrelenting open war. DEMO the rise of the Salado
War, Women, and Religion
257
tradition, village life became more stable as aggregated communities lasted for longer
periods of time (Lowell 2007).
The hypothesis that the Salado system reﬂ ects a female-based religious system DEMO
in response to war refugees accounts for the empirical record associated with the Salado.
First, male ritual did not change substantially, given that DEMO and their relationships
were the focus of the Salado religion. Second, DEMO polychromes demonstrate a strong
emphasis on Kayenta and other Anasazi imagery because immigrant women from those
economically and politically marginal regions would have been DEMO ﬁ rst to develop and
adopt a system that helped them integrate within and among communities. Third, the
integration of women reﬂ ected by the Salado would not necessarily be reﬂ ected in other
aspects of DEMO material culture, which, in turn, accounts for the large cultural DEMO and
lack of deﬁ ning characteristics other than pottery associated with the inﬂ ux of refugees
and the subsequent spread of the Salado. Fourth, the earliest Salado corresponds with the
arrival of the immigrants. Fifth, the development of the Salado religion corresponds with
increased evidence of social strife DEMO warfare.
Additionally, the hypothesis accounts for aspects of Crown’s analysis that DEMO
the Salado reﬂ ected a religious cult. Crown (1994: 5–6) DEMO six predictions corre-
sponding with the hypothesis that the Salado reﬂ ected a religion: (1) There should be
evidence beyond pottery for the rise of a religious system; (2) the pottery should be
restricted to ceremonial contexts; (3) the pottery should be associated with a single mortu-
ary ritual; (4) pottery in burials should not reﬂ ect prior use for secular activities; (5) pottery
designs should reﬂ ect a belief system using ubiquitous and redundant icons, which may
also be reﬂ ected in other religious contexts such as kiva murals; and (6) vessel forms
should be limited to those used for ritual DEMO
Surprisingly, given her conclusion that the Salado reﬂ ects a religious DEMO, Crown (1994)
found little support for most of these predictions. Predictions 2, 3, 4, and 6 are not sup-
ported because the Salado wares take a variety of utilitarian vessel forms, are not restricted
to mortuary contexts, are used prior to their inclusion in burials, and are associated with
different mortuary patterns (Crown 1994; see also Ravesloot and Regan 2000). The only
Salado pots in her study DEMO are exclusively associated with ritual contexts are a single
vessel from a kiva and two from a cache that might have a primary ritual DEMO (Crown
1994: 108).
Crown (1994: 6) notes, though, that if the pottery was not restricted to ritual or mortuary
contexts, which are likely male-dominated religious expressions (Crown and Fish 1996),
then only expectations 1 and 5 are likely to be met, which is in fact the case in her analysis.
Crown (1994: 223) concludes that the pottery’s use in mundane contexts, as opposed to
ritual contexts, indicates that the Salado religion was open to all who chose to participate.
Such openness is concordant with the proposal that the Salado DEMO associated with a
women’s movement to reduce conﬂ ict, as is DEMO fact that some high-status burials have
little or no Salado pottery, DEMO other burials, including low-ranked burials, can have
258
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
Salado polychrome in abundance (Ravesloot and Regan 2000). Hence, the Salado religion
was not focused on elites but was instead “a poor woman’s religion.”
The Invention and Spread DEMO Cultural Traits
We opened this chapter with the adage that necessity is the mother of invention. In the
case of the innovation and adoption DEMO the Salado system, this does indeed appear to be
the case. DEMO might the evolutionary mechanisms have been that resulted in the genera-
tion of variation, including a religion-based women’s movement and its rapid diffusion
across 130,000 square kilometers in the form of the Salado tradition? Schiffer (1996,
chapter 14, this volume) has described “stimulated variation,” in which the invention of
technological traits is completed through the initial DEMO of considerable variation and
the subsequent winnowing of those variants that have the requisite performance charac-
teristics that make them superior to other variants. DEMO model is applicable to the origin
of the Salado religion. The “necessity” that required the “invention” was the need to create
and stabilize communities DEMO a period of massive population upheaval and unprece-
dented violence resulting in signiﬁ cant immigration. As predicted by Schiffer’s model,
tremendous cultural variation DEMO (Zedeño 1995), with the Salado religion being one
of the DEMO variants with outstanding replicative success (Leonard and Jones 1987)
resulting DEMO its performance characteristics, which helped integrate populations by miti-
gating strife, especially among females.
It is also clear that the Salado religion did DEMO spring fully formed into the Southwestern
scene because it was “required.” The cliché linking necessity and invention implies that
humans will ﬁ nd solutions DEMO problems they face, using their ingenuity and/or their inborn
cognitive DEMO and abilities. If this were so, then the explanation for both DEMO
variation and its acceptance is simply the presence of a need to which humans intentionally
adapt (see chapters 2 and 7, this volume)DEMO Yet such an adaptationist perspective is belied
by the warfare that created the refugees in the ﬁ rst place. Attempts to decrease conﬂ ict
DEMO tried in the northern Southwest without success. Lekson (1999, 2002a), for example,
argues that the Aztec system that succeeded the Chacoan DEMO (and was also reﬂ ected
in religious iconography) was a failed attempt to politically unite the northern Anasazi.
Such failures do not mesh DEMO adaptationist perspectives, in which selective forces
directly dictate successful cultural responses. DEMO fact brings two related issues into sharp
focus: (1) Intentionality DEMO agency are insufﬁ cient for explaining the structure and con-
tinuation of cultural variation, and (2) a Darwinian evolutionary system structures cultural
transmission.
Archaeologists and other social scientists frequently emphasize intentionality to explain
cultural variation (e.g., Cowgill 2000; Dobres and Robb 2000). Proponents of “agency-
DEMO explanations hold that humans are socially embedded actors who optimize their
War, Women, and Religion
259
resources as they feel appropriate, seek to form social networks and gain social power,
frequently plan for DEMO future, and otherwise try to intentionally adapt to their social and
DEMO surroundings—facts that are undeniable to all who study humans. The implica-
tion, then, is that the proper explanation for the generation and continuation DEMO behavioral
variation must reside in the socially embedded intentionality of the actors themselves
(Cowgill 2000). Although humans are “imperfect, and often impractical DEMO (Dobres
and Robb 2000: 4), it is undoubtedly true that some cultural variation is attributable to the
intentional modiﬁ cation–production of behavioral DEMO resulting from human agency (see
chapter 7, this volume), although “copying error” caused by incomplete and imperfect
transmission of cultural traits also DEMO variation (Eerkens and Lipo 2005).
However, human intentions do not constitute an adequate explanation for the structure
of behavioral variation (VanPool and VanPool 2003). Humans may, or may not, recognize
inadequacy in DEMO technology and other cultural traits, but they don’t know what behav-
DEMO variants will provide solutions, if solutions are possible at all. Even DEMO operating
in the same social and ecological context, people will frequently DEMO different responses
to the same problem, none of which may be DEMO, as illustrated by the failure of the
thirteenth-century Anasazi to abate DEMO intense warfare. People’s motives and subsequent
intentionality may superﬁ cially explain why variation is introduced, but it does not explain
why speciﬁ c solutions are effective and therefore why speciﬁ c cultural traits continue to
be DEMO (VanPool and VanPool 2003). Further, unintended consequences of cultural
variation can have far-reaching impacts beyond any individual’s intentions (e.g., the
increase DEMO anemia associated with increased reliance on maize).
The open warfare of the northern Southwest spread to the Salado area, but the presence
of cultural variation (the Salado religion) that helped integrate communities across the
DEMO decreased its disruptiveness and intensity. Yet a satisfactory explanation for the
Salado cannot have as its major component the concept of intentionality, given that it is
neither explanatorily necessary nor sufﬁ cient. Undoubtedly, people involved in the reli-
gious system “meant to” participate in it and perhaps they DEMO “intended” to unify the
community and reduce scalar stress through the shared religion (although this is impossible
to establish archaeologically), but neither the success of the Salado nor the failure of the
other efforts to DEMO inter- and intracommunity integration reﬂ ects primarily the actors’
intentions. Salado religion was an adaptation for decreasing community conﬂ ict because
it possessed performance DEMO that led to its continuation in the selective context
of intense female competition and extreme scalar stress.
The lack of a connection between the DEMO environment in which people ﬁ nd them-
selves and the usefulness of cultural variation has profound implications for cultural evolu-
tion. Darwinian evolution operates DEMO heritable variation that impacts the probability
of survival and reproduction is generated independent of the selective environment
(Leonard and Reed 1993; Lewontin 1970; Lyman and O’Brien 1998; Rindos 1989;
VanPool and VanPool 2003). Given that cultural traits clearly are heritable and frequently
260
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
impact an individual’s survival and DEMO (as illustrated by warfare in the American
Southwest), the independence DEMO creation of cultural variation and selective pres-
sures necessitates that Darwinian evolution is applicable to cultural traits. It follows that
natural selection, drift, DEMO other evolutionary mechanisms are the processes through
which the generation and continuation of cultural traits can be satisfactorily explained
(O’Brien and Lyman 2000; DEMO 2002).
Previous research indicates variation in some cultural traits reﬂ ects the strength of the
selective forces, with strong selective forces resulting in limited variation compared to
traits under weaker selective pressures (O’Brien and Holland 1992, 1995; VanPool 2001,
2003). The generalization can be DEMO, however, to include considerations of the
nature of the selective environment and the time that selection has had to operate. To begin
with, variation in traits is expected simply because of the transmission process in DEMO
biological and cultural contexts (Eerkens and Lipo 2005). Transmission “errors” DEMO
tently generate variation in cultural traits. Some variation will be selected against because
it creates performance characteristics inconsistent with the selective environment, which
is the product of both social and ecological factors. The frequency of variation DEMO isn’t
selected against—that is “favored”—will increase, creating adaptations through the process
DEMO natural selection (O’Brien and Holland 1995; VanPool 2002).
In stable selective environments, the generation of variation and its archaeological
manifestation will be limited with respect to selectively important traits because changes
are unlikely to DEMO beneﬁ cial, given that variation in an adaptation is unlikely to DEMO
it. However, in either a changing or erratic selective environment, such strong selective
pressures will often be inconsistent or eliminated, allowing for the transmission of a com-
paratively greater amount of variation. In culture, a signiﬁ cant factor modifying selective
environments will be changes elsewhere in a DEMO system as illustrated by
Palmer’s (chapter 10, this volume) discussion DEMO the Amish and the telephone.
This likely underlies Schiffer’s (2005; chapter 14, this volume) cascade events, in that
minor changes, whether DEMO are the result of ecological variation, social changes, or the
introduction of new technological variation, shift the selective environment, which, in turn,
initiates structural changes in traits that may not have even been DEMO as related to
the original source of variation and the selective pressures operating on it. Such unintended
consequences further illustrate that human intentionality is DEMO limited explanatory utility
when discussing the generation and spread of cultural variants (VanPool and VanPool
2003). We consequently suspect that the process of selection and the structure of variation
in cultural evolution will follow exactly DEMO pattern outlined by Lake and Venti (2009),
Lyman and O’Brien (2000), and Lyman et al. (2008): Variation will initially DEMO great and
will be winnowed over time as an adaptation is created.
Creating adaptations—descent with modiﬁ cation—necessitates intergenerational cul-
tural transmission. In preindustrial societies, children typically are trained within family
units, causing vertical transmission to be paramount (Guglielmino et al. 1995; Palmer
War, Women, and Religion
261
et al. 2005; Shennan and Steele 1999; VanPool et al. 2008; chapters 1, 10, and 13, this
volume). Continuation of the Salado religion for roughly 200 years DEMO inter-
generational transmission, but its spread within a generation was a DEMO of horizontal
transmission. The rapidity of the spread was a product of the cascade effect caused by a
shift in the selective environment. Whether DEMO or vertical transmission is dominant
in a particular case of cultural transmission is an empirical question whose answer will
vary (e.g., variation in DEMO pottery-forming techniques reﬂ ects vertical transmission as
reﬂ ected by continuation of the previously existing forming techniques, but design varia-
tion was at least initially transmitted horizontally).
Further, we propose that the dominance of vertical or horizontal transmission is some-
what dependent on the selective environment. In DEMO stable environment, metatraditions, as
discussed by VanPool et al. (2008) and Palmer (chapter 10, this volume), may form as
adaptations DEMO encourage faithful vertical transmission and thus decrease behavioral varia-
tion that is likely harmful. These traditions will necessarily act as barriers to a cascade DEMO
technological innovation.
In contrast, drastic modiﬁ cation of the selective environment DEMO likely weaken or
eliminate metatraditions because it will lead to increased behavioral variation. This varia-
tion may result in the absence of consistent behavioral DEMO within a generation, which,
in turn, will make cultural transmission of consistent behavioral traits between genera-
tions difﬁ cult and thereby change DEMO relations such that the metatraditions no longer
effectively facilitate vertical transmission. Natural selection may also work against tra-
ditional behavior and consequently select against DEMO of the metatradition
through the process of hitchhiking (Hurt et al. DEMO). Thus, increased horizontal transmis-
sion and the (re)combination of traits that were part of separate cultural lineages will be
signiﬁ cant DEMO of stimulated variation in nonindustrial societies. Such recombination
is certainly evident among the Salado, as previously distinct cultures began to share a
variety of traits.
Conclusions
We have outlined a historical narrative underlying the generation and DEMO of cultural
variation that fundamentally altered Southwestern prehistory. Our argument is presented
in more detail in VanPool and VanPool (2008) but can be DEMO as follows: The rise
of intense warfare characterized by the massacre DEMO entire communities led to the spread
of female refugees and their families throughout much of what is now central and southern
Arizona and western DEMO Mexico. This created a new selective environment that impacted
those living in the communities, as intense female–female conﬂ ict was created by immi-
grants vying with each other and with native women for mates and resources. DEMO result
was intense intra- and intercommunity conﬂ ict. The arrival of the immigrants initiated
262
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
what Schiffer (2005; chapter DEMO, this volume) characterizes as a “burst of variation” associ-
ated with a cascade of innovation. The increased behavioral variation was especially
pronounced in DEMO associated with women and led to the formation of a uniform
pottery style, Salado polychromes, that spread across a vast area containing previously
DEMO cultures.
We propose that the Salado pottery tradition reﬂ ects strong selective pressures operating
on the expansive cultural variation. In this context, a women’s religious system that
emphasized integration had performance characteristics well suited to the DEMO envi-
ronment and as a result had tremendous replicative success as it spread across much of
the Southwest in a very short time (between a.d. 1275 and a.d. 1300) through the process
of horizontal transmission and migration. The selective pressures limited variation in the
ceramic tradition such that DEMO was relative uniformity in icons and other aspects of
decoration across the region, despite the fact that the Salado wares were locally produced
and reﬂ ected previously existing and diverse morphological forms. Participation in the
Salado DEMO decreased intracommunity stress, which helped mitigate but certainly did
not eliminate DEMO stress, such that large, stable communities formed across
the Salado region.
We propose that the patterns illustrated in the Salado case study are DEMO of the gen-
eration and transmission of cultural variation, and even DEMO genetic evolution, as bursts of
variation are associated with the opening DEMO previously unavailable adaptive space. Cul-
tural variation does occur in “bursts” and “cascade events” associated with changes in the
selective environment, yet, as DEMO by the very fact that there are “bursts of varia-
tion,” the generation of variation is not dictated directly by the selective environment. DEMO
a result, natural selection will reduce the range of initial variation DEMO form adaptations,
despite the fact that experimentation and copying errors will continually generate variation.
In the case of the Salado, strong selective pressures led to the formation and spread of a
cultural adaptation over an DEMO area while greatly limiting variation within the
cultural trait. Less severe selective environments may allow more variation than present
in the Salado, but we suggest that this same pattern is typical of cultural evolution.
Acknowledgments
The DEMO are grateful to Werner Callebaut, Gerd Müller, Astrid Juette, Eva DEMO, and
the other staff and fellows of the Konrad Lorenz Institute DEMO sponsoring the original
workshop where this research was presented. We also thank Stephen Shennan and Mike
O’Brien for inviting the senior author to participate DEMO the workshop and our fellow con-
tributors who provided useful comments during and after the workshop that strengthened
our conclusions. Craig Palmer, Christine VanPool, Lee Lyman, and Gordon Rakita also
provided helpful comments.
War, Women, and Religion
263
References
Blitz, J. H. 1988. Adoption of the Bow in Prehistoric North America. North American Archaeologist 9:
DEMO
Cambell, A. 2004. Female Competition: Causes, Constraints, Content, and DEMO Journal of Sex Research
41: 16–26.
Cowgill, G. L. 2000. “Rationality” and Contexts in Agency Theory. In Agency in Archaeology, edited by M.
Dobres and J. Robb, pp. 51–60. Routledge, New York.
Crary, J. S., S. Germick, and D. E. Doyel. 2001. Exploring the Gila DEMO Kiva 66: 407–445.
Crown, P. L. 1994. Ceramics and Ideology: DEMO Polychrome Pottery. Albuquerque, University of New
Mexico Press.
Crown, P. L. 1995. The Production of Salado Polychromes in the American Southwest. In Ceramic DEMO
in the American Southwest, edited by B. J. Mills and P. DEMO Crown, pp. 142–166. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.
Crown, P. L., and S. K. Fish. 1996. Gender and Status in the Hohokam Pre-Classic to Classic Transition. Ameri-
can Anthropologist 98: 803–817.
Crown, P. DEMO, and W. H. Wills. 1995. Origins of Southwestern Ceramic Containers. Journal DEMO Anthropological
Research 51: 173–186.
Dean, J. S. 2000. Introduction: The DEMO Phenomenon. In Salado, edited by J. S. Dean, pp. 3–16. University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
De Waal, F. B. M. 2000. DEMO Natural Heritage of Conﬂ ict Resolution. Science 289: 586–590.
Dobres, M., and J. Robb (editors). 2000. Agency in Archaeology. Routledge, London.
Eerkens, J. W., and C. P. Lipo. 2005. Cultural Transmission, Copying Errors, and the Generation of Variation
in Material Culture and the Archaeological Record. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 24: 316–334.
Elson, M. D., M. T. Stark, and D. A. Gregory. 2000. Tonto Basin Local Systems: DEMO for Cultural
Afﬁ liation and Migration. In Salado, edited by J. DEMO Dean, pp. 167–218. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Fowles, S. M., L. Minc, S. Duwe, and D. V. Hill. 2007. Clay, Conﬂ ict, and Village Aggregation: Compositional
Analyses of Pre-Classic Pottery from Taos, New Mexico. American Antiquity 72: 125–152.
Geary, D. C. 1998. Male, Female: The Evolution of Human Sex Differences. American Psychological DEMO
tion, Washington, D.C.
Guglielmino, C. R., C. Viganotti, B. DEMO, and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1995. Cultural Variation in Africa: Role
of Mechanisms of Transmission and Adaptation. National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings 92: DEMO
Haury, E. W. 1975. The Stratigraphy and Archaeology of Ventana Cave. DEMO of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Hess, N. H., and E. H. DEMO 2006. Sex Differences in Indirect Aggression: Psychological Evidence from Young
Adults. DEMO and Human Behavior 27: 231–245.
Hurt, T., T. L. VanPool, R. D. Leonard, and G. F. M. Rakita. 2001. Explaining the Co-occurrence of Attributes
in the Archaeological Record: A Further Consideration of Replicative Success. In Style and Function: Conceptual
Issues in Evolutionary Archaeology, edited by DEMO D. Hurt and G. F. M. Rakita, pp. 51–68. Bergin and DEMO,
Westport, Conn.
Lake, M. W., and J. Venti. 2009. DEMO Analysis of Macroevolutionary Patterning in Technological Evolu-
tion: Bicycle Design from DEMO to 2000. In Pattern and Process in Cultural Evolution, edited by DEMO J. Shennan,
pp. 147–161. University of California Press, Berkeley.
LeBlanc, S. A. 1999. Prehistoric Warfare in the American Southwest. University of Utah DEMO, Salt Lake City.
Lekson, S. H. 1999. The Chacoan Meridian: DEMO of Political Power in the American Southwest. Altamira,
Walnut Creek, DEMO
Lekson, S. H. 2002a. War in the Southwest, War in the World. American Antiquity 67: 607–624.
Lekson, S. H. 2002b. Salado Archaeology DEMO the Upper Gila, New Mexico. University of Arizona, Anthropologi-
cal Papers, no. 67. Tucson.
264
T. L. VanPool and C. Savage
Leonard, R. D., and DEMO T. Jones. 1987. Elements of an Inclusive Evolutionary Model for Archaeology. Journal
of Anthropological Archaeology 6: 199–219.
Leonard, R. D., and H. E. Reed. 1993. Population Aggregation in the Prehistoric American Southwest: A Selec-
tionist Model. American Antiquity 58: 648–661.
Lewontin, R. C. 1970. The Units DEMO Selection. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 11: 1–18.
Lipe, W. D. 1995. The Depopulation of the Northern San Juan: Conditions in the Turbulent 1200s. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 14: 143–169.
Lowell, J. C. DEMO Prehistoric Households at Turkey Creek Pueblo, Arizona. University of Arizona, Anthropo-
logical Papers, no. 54. Tucson.
Lowell, J. C. 2007. Women and DEMO in Warfare and Migration: Implications of Gender Imbalance in the
Grasshopper DEMO of Arizona. American Antiquity 72: 95–123.
Lyman, R. L., and DEMO J. O’Brien. 1998. The Goals of Evolutionary Archaeology: History and Explanation.
DEMO Anthropology 39: 615–652.
Lyman, R. L., and M. J. O’Brien. DEMO Measuring and Explaining Change in Artifact Variation with Clade-
Diversity Diagrams. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 19: 39–74.
Lyman, R. L., T. L. VanPool, and M. J. O’Brien. 2008. Variation in North American Dart Points and Arrow
Points When One or Both Are Present. Journal of Archaeological Science DEMO: 2805–2812.
Merten, D. E. 1997. The Meaning of Meanness: Popularity, Competition, and Conﬂ ict among Junior High School
Girls. Sociology of Education 70: 175–191.
Mills, B. J. 2000. Gender, Craft Production, and DEMO In Women and Men in the Prehispanic Southwest,
edited by P. L. Crown, pp. 301–344. School of American Research Press, Santa Fe, N.M.
Nelson, B. A., and S. A. LeBlanc. 1986. Short-term Sedentism DEMO the American Southwest: The Mimbres Valley
Salado. University of New Mexico DEMO, Albuquerque.
O’Brien, M. J., and T. D. Holland. 1992. The DEMO of Adaptation in Archaeological Explanation. American
Antiquity 57: 3–59.
O’Brien, M. J., and T. D. Holland. 1995. The Nature and Premise of a Selection-Based Archaeology. In Evolu-
tionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues, edited by P. DEMO Teltser, pp. 175–200. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.
O’Brien, M. J., and R. L. Lyman. 2000. Applying Evolutionary Archaeology. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New
York.
O’Brien, R. 1988. Exploring the Intersexual Nature of Violent DEMO Criminology 26: 151–170.
Palmer, C. T., K. Coe, and R. Wadley. 2005. On Tools and Traditions. Current Anthropology 46: 459–
460.
Ravesloot, J. C., and M. H. Regan. 2000. Demographic, Health, Genetic, and Mortuary: Characteristics of Late
Prehistoric Central Arizona Populations. In Salado, DEMO by J. S. Dean, pp. 57–79. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.
Rindos, D. 1989. Undirected Variation and the Darwinian Explanation of Cultural Change. In Archaeological
Method and Theory (vol. 1), edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 1–45. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Schiffer, M. B. 1996. Some Relationships between Behavioral and Evolutionary Archaeologies. American
Antiquity 61: 643–662.
Schiffer, M. B. 2005. The Devil Is in the Details: DEMO Cascade Model of Invention Processes. American Antiquity
70: 485–502.
Shennan, S. J. 2002. Genes, Memes and Human History. Thames and Hudson, London.
DEMO, S. J., and J. Steele. 1999. Cultural Learning in Hominids: DEMO Behavioural Ecological Approach. In
Mammalian Social Learning: Comparative and Ecological Perspectives, edited by H. O. Box and K. R. Gibson,
pp. 367–388. DEMO University Press, Cambridge.
Simon, A. W., and D. C. Gosser. DEMO Conﬂ ict and Exchange among the Salado of Tonto Basin: Warfare
DEMO or Alleviation? In Deadly Landscapes: Case Studies in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare, edited by
G. E. Rice and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 239–288. DEMO of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
War, Women, and Religion
265
Spielmann, K. A. 2000. Gender and Exchange. In Women and Men in the Prehispanic Southwest, edited by
P. L. Crown, pp. 345–377. School of American Research Press, Santa Fe, N.M.
Tuggle, H. D., and J. J. Reid. 2001. Conﬂ ict DEMO Defense in the Grasshopper Region of East-Central Arizona.
In Deadly Landscapes: DEMO Studies in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare, edited by G. E. Rice and DEMO A.
LeBlanc, pp. 85–107. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
VanPool, T. L. 2001. Style, Function, and Variation: Identifying the DEMO Importance of Traits in
the Archaeological Record. In Style and Function: DEMO Issues in Evolutionary Archaeology, edited by
T. D. Hurt and G. DEMO M. Rakita, pp. 119–140. Bergin and Garvey, Westport, Conn.
VanPool, T. L. 2002. Adaptation. In Darwin and Archaeology: A Handbook of Key Concepts, edited by
J. P. Hart and J. E. Terrell, pp. DEMO Bergin and Garvey, Westport, Conn.
VanPool, T. L. 2003. Explaining DEMO in Projectile Point Morphology: A Case Study from Ventana Cave,
DEMO Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico. Albuquerque.
VanPool, T. L., C. T. Palmer, and C. S. VanPool. 2008. Horned Serpents, Tradition, and the Tapestry of Culture.
In Cultural Transmission and DEMO: Issues and Case Studies, edited by M. J. O’Brien, pp. DEMO Society
for American Archaeology, Washington D.C.
VanPool, T. L., and DEMO S. VanPool. 2003. Agency and Evolution: The Role of Intended and DEMO Con-
sequences of Action. In Essential Tensions in Archaeological Method and Theory, edited by T. L. VanPool and
C. S. VanPool, pp. 89–114. DEMO of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
VanPool, T. L., and DEMO S. VanPool. 2008. War, Women, and Religion: The Spread of DEMO Southwestern Cult in
the U.S. Southwest. Paper presented at the 73rd Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
Vancouver, B.C.
Wallace, DEMO D, and W. H. Doelle. 2001. Classic Period Warfare in Southern DEMO In Deadly Landscapes:
Case Studies in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare, edited DEMO G. E. Rice and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 239–287. Uni-
versity DEMO Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Wilcox, D. R., G. Robertson, Jr., and J. S. Wood. 2001. Antecedents to Perry Mesa: Early DEMO III Defensive
Refuge Systems in West-Central Arizona. In Deadly Landscapes: Case DEMO in Prehistoric Southwestern
Warfare, edited by G. E. Rice and S. DEMO LeBlanc, pp. 109–140. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Win, E. J. 2004. When Sharing Female Identity Is Not Enough: Coalition DEMO in the Midst of Political
Polarisation in Zimbabwe. Gender and Development 12: 19–27.
Zedeño, M. N. 1995. The Role of Population Movement and DEMO Transfer in the Manufacture of Pre-
historic Southwestern Ceramics. In Ceramic Production in the American Southwest, edited by B. M. Mills and
P. L. Crown, pp. 115–141. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Zolberg, A. R., A. Suhrke, and S. Aguayo. 1989. Escape from Violence: Conﬂ ict and the Refugee Crisis in the
Developing World. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Contributors
André Ariew
Department of Philosophy
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
R. Alexander Bentley
Department of Anthropology
Durham University
Durham, UK
Werner Callebaut
Konrad Lorenz Institute
Altenberg, Austria
Joseph Henrich
Departments of Economics and
Psychology
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Anne Kandler
Institute of DEMO
University College London
London, UK
Kevin N. Laland
Centre for Social DEMO & Cognitive
Evolution
University of St. Andrews
St. Andrews, UK
Daniel DEMO Larson
Department of Anthropology
California State University, Long Beach
Long Beach, California
Alex Mesoudi
School of Biological and Chemical
Sciences
Queen Mary, University of London
London, UK
Michael J. O’Brien
Department of Anthropology
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
Craig T. Palmer
Department of Anthropology
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
Adam Powell
Department of Biology
University College London
London, DEMO
Simon M. Reader
Department of Behavioral Biology
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The DEMO
Valentine Roux
Maison René Ginouvès d’Archélogie et
d’Ethnologie
Paris, France
Chet DEMO
Department of Anthropology
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
268
Michael Brian Schiffer
Department of Anthropology
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona
Jeffrey H. Schwartz
Department of Anthropology
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Stephen J. Shennan
Institute of Archaeology
University College London
London, UK
James Steele
Institute of Archaeology
University College London
London, UK
Mark G. Thomas
Department of Biology
University College London
London, UK
Todd L. VanPool
Department of Anthropology
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
Contributors
Index
Aboriginal metatraditions, 166–168
Academic publishing, fashion versus selection in,
DEMO
Academic vocabulary
frequencies of through time, 126, 129–131
frequency distributions of, 126, 132–133
random copying of, 125–126
turnover of, 127, 128–129
Adaptation. See also Cumulative adaptive evolution
arrival of ﬁ ttest and, 33–34
creation of, 260–261
versus evolution, 59–61
in evolutionary biology, 84
mutations underlying, 91
origins of, 29
patterns of in diverse environments, 100–101
Adaptive landscape
concept of, 183
multimodal
cultural transmission in, 11
innovation DEMO in, 182–188
Adoption
in archaeological record, 240
cultural interconnectedness in, DEMO
deﬁ nition of, 238–239
of new products, social-inﬂ uence models of,
193–213
Africa
early modern humans in, 139
Upper Paleolithic transition in, 138
Agency-based cultural variation model, 258–259
Aggrandizer model, 247
Agricultural diffusion, in United States, 211–212
Aitken, H. G. J., 242
Akrich, M., 217
Albert, R., 127
Alcheringa, 168
Algoe, S. B., 112
Allen, J., 139, 140
Altruism, group selection of, DEMO
Ambrose, S. H., 140
American archaeology, innovation in, 5
American Southwest, spread of Salado ceramic
tradition across, 251–262
Amish
metatraditions of, 164–166
as “People of Preservation,” 161–162
Ammerman, A., 179–180
Anagenesis, 12
Analogy, argument by, 22–24
Anasazi
attempt to unite, 257
region of, 252
Salado ceramic tradition in, 251
Anatomical novelty, emergence of, 54–55
Ancestral Law, Australian Aboriginal, 166–168
Ancrenaz, 40
Animal innovation, 37–38, 48
case studies of, 42–47
deﬁ ning, 40–41
ecological and evolutionary signiﬁ cance of, 38–40
experimental studies of, 41
Anthropology, units of culture in, 5–6
Antibiotics, discovery of, 111
Antipsychologism, 85
DEMO, J., 102
Apprenticeship institution, 112–113
Archaeological studies, of invention processes,
235–248
Ariew, A., 24
Aristotle, 21
Arnold, S. J., 11, 183, 243
Arrow-Debreu formalization of competitive
equilibrium, 89
Art, DEMO rst appearance of, 138
Artifacts
change in types and frequencies of, 235–236
designs of, 183
properties of, 182
typologies of, 240
unique or rare, 240
Asch, S. E., 102
270
Asocial learning
in captive birds, 48
in foraging innovation, 43
DEMO patterns, in spread of solving, 43–44
Ast, G., 59
Atran, S., 7
Aunger, R., 7, 73, 175–176
Australia
aboriginal, metatraditions of, 166–168
cultural patterns of early modern humans in, 140
DEMO of technological complexity in, 107
early modern humans in, 139
foragers in, 109
Upper Paleolithic transition in, 138
Aztec system, 258
Bacterial cultures, 110
Bagwell, E. A., 240
Bamforth, D., 21, DEMO, 25, 30–31, 76
Bandura, A., 101
Banﬁ eld, E. C., 115
Bar-Yosef, O., 137–138
Barabási, A.-L., 127
Barnett, DEMO G., 3, 176
Barnett, S. A., 46
Baron, R. DEMO, 102
Basalla, G., 6, 109, 110, 111
Bass, DEMO M., 193, 194–195, 210, 213
Bass diffusion model, 193, 210–213
combined with dual-inheritance model, 204–208
versus dual-inheritance model, 198–199
Bass DEMO of innovation diffusion, 194–195
Bastian, Adolf, 5
Bateson, W., DEMO, 62
Baum, W. M., 176
Baumol, W. J., 84, 88–89
Bauvais, S., 226
Bayus, B. L., 209, 210
Behavior change
versus novel behavior, 41
technological change as, 236
Behavioral-drive hypothesis, 39–40
Behavioral ﬂ exibility
in animals, 37–38
ecological and evolutionary implications of, 39
Behavioral norms, cultural evolution of, 116–117
Belmont Radio, 244
DEMO, R. A., 9, 10–11, 121–124, 126, 127, 132,DEMO
134
Berndt, R. M., 167
Bettinger, R. L., 9, DEMO, 182
Biased cultural transmission, 141
in multimodal adaptive landscapes, 182–188
DEMO variation, 86
Bicycle design, development of, 183
Billing, J., DEMO
Bin-Sallik, M. A., 168
Index
Biological anthropology, transmission analyses of,DEMO
145–146
Biology-culture relationship, 6–7
Birds
asocial-learning performance in, 48
foraging innovations in, 38–39, 43–44
milk-bottle opening, 41
spread of bottle-opening behavior among, 37
Birdsell, J. B., 145, 146
Birkhead, T. R., DEMO
Biro, D., 37
Blackmore, S., 7
Blending algorithms, 102
DEMO Bird, R., 124
Blitz, J. H., 251
Blum, H. DEMO, 7
Boas, F., 168
Body decorations, 138
Body plans, DEMO
genetic regulation of, 63
origination of, 86
Boëda, E., 218
Boogert, N. J., 43
Bordieu, P., 127
Boschma, R. A., 83
Bouchard, J., 39
Bonded rationality
models, 70
theory, 71–72
Bow-and-arrow technology, spread of, 10
Bowl making techniques, 223, 225
DEMO, S., 69–70
Box, H. O., 40
Boyd, R., 6, 7, 9–11, 71, 100–102, 108, 113–116,
137, 140–144, 162, 169, 176, 183, 187, 195, 196
Boyer, DEMO, 115
Brain
decoding functions of, 72
evolution of, 69
copying DEMO in, 169–170
Brain codes, 73
Brannigan, A., 85
Brass, DEMO, 70
Brette, O., 84–85
Brighton, H., 175–176
Bril, B., 223–224
Brooks, A. S., 138–139
Brumm, A., 137, 138, 139, 140
Buchanan, M., 134
Burke and Wills’s expedition, 109
DEMO, R. W., Jr., 57–58
Burst of variation, 262
Byrne, DEMO W., 37
Cabeza, R., 72
Cacioppo, J. T., 72
DEMO monkeys, innovation in, 42–43
Index
271
Callebaut, W., 70, 81, 83, 84, 86, 89, 91, 92, 188
Cambefort, J. P., 38
Cambell, DEMO, 256
Campbell, D. T., 6–7, 92, 161, 163, DEMO
Carrier, J., 83
Carroll, S., 32
Casanova, C., 37
Case study
of innovation spread in multimodal adaptive
landscapes, 182–188
of migration effect on innovation and invention
rates, 177–182
Castle, D., 90
Castro, L., 168
Causal-mechanistic approach, 91
Cauvin, J., 230
Cavalli-Sforza, DEMO L., 7, 9, 101, 133, 140, 176, 179–
DEMO, 195
Celebrity effect, 124
Ceramics
development of techniques in, 225
DEMO traditional system of, 251–262
Chaco-Aztec system, 253
Chacoan system, 258
DEMO cultures, 227–228, 229
Chance, in cultural evolution, 90
Chandrasekaran, DEMO, 213
Change
deﬁ nition of, 235–237
in evolution, 122
random DEMO selected, 122–124
Charka, 110
Charlesworth, Brian, 27–28
Charloux, G., 227
Cherry, J., 247
Cheshier, J., 187
Chimpanzees, cultural transmission in, 116
Chromosomal rearrangement, 62
Chrono-cultural periods, 225–226
Churnash, appearance DEMO Tomol canoe of, 243
Cladistic equivalents, 64
Cladogenesis, 12
Claidière, N., 84
Clans, 163
Clarke, P. A., 167
Cloak, F. T., Jr., 7
Closed societies, invention in, 181
Closed systems, 230
versus open systems, 228–229
transformation into open systems, 229–230
Coe, K., 163, 169
Cognitive capacities
in cultural transmission, 145–146
in evolution, 71–72
Cognitive processes
evolution of, 69
generating novelty, 73–74
inventions and, 223–224
in selection, 72
Communication technologies, wireless, 241–242
Complex skills, 145
accumulation of, 143
cultural transmission of, 143, 146–149
Complex technological system (CTS)
cascade model of development of, 242–243
components functioning DEMO, 245–246
Component-stimulated invention, 245–246
Conard, N., 138
Conformist behaviors, DEMO, 176
hardwiring for, 76
neuroscientiﬁ c evidence of, 74–76
predisposition DEMO, 69
propensity for, 72
Conformist bias, 193, 213
Conformist-biased transmission, 196, 197–198
Conot, R. E., 110
Constant-heterogeneity approach, 208
Consumers, technology adoption by, 238–239
Continental-level innovation, cultural information
ﬂ ow in, 107
Convergent evolution, 180
Cooperation
competition in, 121
as form of signaling, 113–114
kinship relationships and, 170
neurological processes in, 74
oxytocin in, 75
Cooperative dilemma
cultural interconnectedness and, 99–100
larger scale, 113–114, 117
natural selection and, 112
reputational system in solving, 113–114
solving, 112–114
Cooperative strategies, 117n.2
Copying
in brain evolution, 169–170
brain scans during, 77
in direct-bias transmission, 71
kinship relationships and, 170
neurological processes in, 74
random, 122–123
selective, 195
in indirect-bias transmission, DEMO
Corbetta, D., 223
Core-reduction techniques, 138
Costa-Mattioli, M., 72
DEMO gin, 110
Coultas, J., 102
Courty, M. A., 219, 228
Cousteau, J. Y., 38
Cowgill, G. L., 258–259
Coy, M. W., 113
Cozzens, S. E., 85
Craft inventions, discontinuous, 223, 224–228
272
Craft skills, transmission of, 141
Craftsmanship, levels of, 224
DEMO, J. S., 254
Creative expression, random versus selected,
122–124
DEMO industries, fashion versus reason in,
121–134
Cresko, W. A., DEMO
Creswell, R., 217–220, 225, 226–227
Cronk, L., 171
Crow, J. F., 126
Crown, P. L., 240, 251–254, 256–257
DEMO, tool making in, 40
Csibra, G., 72
Culbits, 179, 181
Cultural behavior patterns, unchanged, 163
Cultural complexity, evolutionary forces in, 4
Cultural drift, 71, 141
Cultural evolution
cumulative, 40
forces DEMO, 71, 141
genius versus chance in, 90
metatraditions in, 163
simulation models of, 176–177
Cultural evolutionists, 4–5
Cultural ﬁ tness, 182
low, 183–184
Cultural group selection, solving equilibrium-
selection dilemma, 114
Cultural imperatives, 243–245
in technology development, 243–245
Cultural inheritance unit, 7–8
Cultural innovation
experimental study of, 175–188
how to study, 175–177
migration effect DEMO rate of, 177–182
Cultural interconnectedness, 99
in adopting innovation, 103, 104–107
cooperative dilemmas and, 99–100
in invention, 117
public-good dilemma and, 112
Cultural learning, 104
impact of, 101–102
in social behavior, 100–101
strategies of, 108
Cultural loss pattern, 141–142
Cultural norms, learning in children, 74, 75
Cultural skills, demography and variation in
accumulation of, 137–158
Cultural tradition
in Amish, 161–162
evolutionary advantages of, 161–172
Cultural traits
invention and spread of, 258–261
recipe concept and, 8–9
reconstructing DEMO of, 180
variation in, 140–141
Index
Cultural transmission, 6–8. See DEMO Horizontal
transmission; Vertical transmission
in animals, 39–40
in archaeological context, DEMO
incomplete and inaccurate, 142–143
intergenerational, 260–261
mechanisms of, 176
modes DEMO, 12, 140–141
in multimodal adaptive landscape, 11
random noise during, 143
simulation models of, 176–177
tempo of, 11–12
Culture
borrowing of, 179, 181
demographics and patterns of, 140–158
diffusion of, 180
microlevel decision making, 101–103
mutation of, 71
units of in twentieth-century anthropology, 5–6
Culture drift, 122–124
Culture ﬁ tness peaks, 183–187
Culture-gene coevolution, 115–116, 117
Culturgen, 7
Cumulative adaptive evolution, 115–116
conditions necessary for, 144
of cultural skills, 141–142
in culturally inherited skills, 138
Henrich and Boyd model of, 142–144
simulation models of, 145
Cumulative adoption, 117
with combined threshold-heterogeneity and social-
learning models, 202–205
social learning inﬂ uences on rates of, 196–198
technological development order and, 218–219
Custom, sacred, 165
Cyberspace, social network in, 121
Dalton, R., 8
Darwin, Charles
Descent, 54
gradualism in theory of, 12
natural selection theory of, 27–28, 28–29, 33
versus “use and disuse” theories, DEMO
Natural Theology, 21
Origin of Species, 53–54
speciation and extinction explanation of, 29–30
Darwinian evolution
arguments of, 57–59
legitimacy of in archaeology, 21–22
preservation in, 172
Darwin’s paradox, 32
David, B., 140
DEMO, E., 223
David, P. A., 200, 212
Davis, L. L., 102
Dawkins, Richard, 7, 27, 58, 73, 92
Day, R. H., 102
Index
Day, R. L., 42
de Beer, G. R., 60, 61
De Quervain, D. J. F., 75
de Vries, H., DEMO
De Waal, F. B. M., 256
Dean, J. S., 252
Decision making
cognitive activity controlling, 73–74
conformist behavior and, 71
microlevel DEMO of, 101–103
theoretical framework for, 71–74
Decision-making heuristics, 69–70
Deforge, Y., 218, 221
Dehaene, S., 74
Demic diffusion, 180
Demographics
in accumulating culturally inherited skills, 137–158
and cultural patterns, 140–158
Late DEMO, 137, 139
Dennett, D., 122
Descent
kin identiﬁ cation through, 170–171
with modiﬁ cation, 163, 170, 260–261
Development
in archaeological DEMO, 240
deﬁ nition of, 237–238
Developmental distance, 238
from prototype DEMO technology, 237
DGBs, 63
Diamond, J. M., 107, 109, 110, 161
Diffusion dynamics, 193–213
Direct-bias transmission, 71, 141, 195, 196, 198
Discontinuities, 57
Discontinuous innovations (DI)
dynamics of, 224–225
social factors and, 225–227
spread of, 227–228
theory of, 213
Discovery, context of, 85, 89–90
Discovery program, abandonment of, 89–90
Distributed development, 237–238
Diversity, 30
DNA homeostasis
disrupting of, 61
maintaining, 62
DNA sequences
changes in, 62
of metazoans, 60
Dobres, DEMO, 258–259
Dobzhansky, T., 56, 57, 84
Doelle, W. H., 251
Dog-breed popularity, random copying versus
selection in, 124
Dollé, DEMO, 58
Dollfus, G., 225
Dopfer, K., 84–85
Dormant interpretations, 180
273
Dowell, A., 212
Dowling, J. E., 74
Dreaming, in Aboriginal culture, 167, 168
Drift, 71, 141
versus selection, 122–124
Dual-inheritance model, 193, 195–196
versus Bass model, 198–199
combined with Bass model, 204–208
Dual-inheritance theory, 9–11, 71, 72
Duboule, D., 58
Duby, G., 217
Dunbar, R. I. M., 145–146, DEMO
Duncan, R. P., 39
Dunford, C., 7
Dunnell, R. DEMO, 6–7
Durham, W. H., 6–7
Durkheim, E., 165
Dwellings, technological development of, 237–238
Earle, T., 107
Earls, M., 121–122
Early Bronze Age societies, 227–228
Easton, S. M., 87, 90
DEMO, F., 90
Ecology, innovation in, 40
Economic inequalities, 213
DEMO innovation diffusion, 200–204, 206–208
Economics
evolutionary, 84–85
innovation in, 81
neglect of technical change in, 87–88
neoclassical, 84–85, 87–89
in prehistoric American Southwest culture, 256
Edison, Thomas, 110
Eerkens, J. W., 7, 9, 10, 12, 162, 182, 259, 260
Efferson, C., 176
Eisen, J. A., 60
Ekelund, R. B., DEMO, 87
Eldredge, N., 12
Electromagnetic telegraphs, 242–243
component-stimulated invention, DEMO
Eller, E., 146
Elson, M. D., 253, 254, 256
Elster, J., 4
Emergent performance problems, 224
Emotion, brain experience DEMO, 72
Entrepreneurship, 88–89
Environment
animal innovation in exploitation of, 39–40
DEMO evolutionary change, 60–61, 62–63
Environmental shifts, in invention, 108–109
Envy-witchcraft cultural systems, 115
Epigenetic events, 59
Equilibrium selection, 114
Ericsson, DEMO A., 224
Erwin, D. H., 21–22, 24, 31, 34, 81–83, 86–87, 175,
188
274
Ethnic learning biases, within-group, 108
Ethnologists, innovation in theories of, 4
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 163
Everett, D. L., 109
EvoDevo theory, 33
in cultural innovation studies, 188
explaining innovation, 81–82, DEMO
innovation triad in, 84
Evolution. See also Cultural evolution; Cumulative
adaptive evolution; Darwinian evolution;
EvoDevo theory
versus adaptation, 59–61
animal innovation DEMO, 38–40
beneﬁ ts of metatraditions in, 169–171
cognitive abilities in, DEMO
in cultural complexity and innovation, 4–5
favoring cooperative behavior, 75
innovation in, 162–163
laws of, 218
populational explanations of, 29–31
social factors in, 217–230
Evolutionary analysis, of academic publications,
127–134
Evolutionary biology, 84
genetic and phenotypic variability in, 82–83
innovation in, 85–87
Evolutionary DEMO
environment in, 62–63
tempo of, 54
transitional versus sudden, 54–55
DEMO developmental biology. See EvoDevo
Evolutionary theory
in archaeology, 23–24
in cultural DEMO, 6–7
gradualism in, 12
legitimacy of in archaeology, 21–22
public DEMO over, 53–56
Exchange networks, in information transmission, 238
Exogamy, 238
Expanded ethnoarchaeology, 241–248
Experimental methods, beneﬁ ts of, 177
Expertise, DEMO of, 224
Explorative foragers, innovation in, 42–43
External threats, in invention, 108–109
Extinction
explanations of, 29–30
patterns of, 28–29
Extractive foraging, in evolution of intelligence, 43
Fagerberg, J., 3, 4, DEMO, 87, 92n.1
Fair-play rules, 75
Falck-Ytter, T., 72
Fashion
DEMO creative industries, 121–134
versus selection in academic publishing, 125–133
Fedulov, DEMO, 72
Fehr, E., 74–75
Feldman, M. W., 7, 9, 101, 133, 140, 176, 195
Felton, W., 175, DEMO, 177–182, 188
Female competition
in primates, 256
in spread of DEMO ceramic system, 252–253
Filtering explanation, 31–32
Fish
innovation and diffusion in, 44–46
jaw evolution in, 63
Fish, S. K., 253, 256, 257
Fisher, J., 37, 41
Fisher, R. A., 62, 187
Fitness valley, 115–116
Fittest, arrival of, 33–35
Fitzhugh, B., 107
Fleming, Alexander, 111
Flight, evolution of, 110
Fogelin, R., 23, 25
Foley, R. A., 138–139, 139
Fontana, W., 91
Foraging innovation
in birds, 38–39
motivational state in, 44–45
predictors DEMO, 43–44
in rats, 46–47
sex differences in, 45–46
Ford, J. A., 5
Form, rapid changes of, 86
Fortes, M., 170
Fossil record
gaps in, 57
natural selection hypothesis and, 53–54
sudden DEMO of new organisms in,
54–55
Foster, G. M., 114–115, DEMO
Fox, R., 163
Fragaszy, D. M., 40
Frazer, J. DEMO, 168–169
Freeman, C., 84–85, 87, 88
Frenken, K., DEMO
Frequency-dependent transmission, 71, 195,
197
biased, 141
Frey, B. S., 83
Fryer, R. G., 124
Functional magnetic resonance imaging, DEMO
Gajdon, G. K., 38, 40
Galef, B. G., 37, 40
Galinsky, A. D., 111
Gallay, A., 222, 226
Gallese, V., 74
Gandolﬁ , A. E., 84–85
Geary, D. C., 256
Gelbert, A., 223
Gene duplication, 61, 62
Gene-regulatory networks (GRNs), 63–64
Index
Index
Genes
cultural inheritance and, 9–11
for traits, 58–59
Genetic evidence, of late Pleistocene human
populations, 140
Genetic inheritance, of culture, 140–141
Genius, in cultural evolution, 90
Gergely, G., 72
Gerhart, J., 61
Germ theory, discovery of, 110
Geroski, P., 200
Ghoshal, S., 127
Gibbs, S. M., 59
Gibrat, R., 213
DEMO, J. J., 223
Gibson, K. R., 40, 43
Giere, R. N., 83
Gigerenzer, G., 70
Gil-White, F., 71, DEMO, 112, 146, 183
Gilbert, C. D., 73
Gilbert, S., 59, 61
Gille, B., 217, 218
Gillespie, J. H., 123, 125, 126
Gini, C., 209, 213n.1
Gini coefﬁ cient, 209, 213n.1
Gintis, H., 69–70, 113
Giraldeau, L., 40, 41
Glymour, C., 90
God, existence of, 21
Goff, DEMO A., 60
Golbeck, A. L., 5
Golder, P. N., DEMO
Goldschmidt, R. B., 55, 56–57
Goldstein, D. G., 70
DEMO, Jane, 37, 38, 40, 41, 48
Goren, Y., 229
Gorman, M. E., 85
Gosser, D. C., 256
Gott, B., 100
Gould, Stephen Jay, 12, 27–28, 60, 61, 82, 86
Gradualism, 12
Grasshopper Pueblo, 253
Gray, R. D., 40
Great Basin projectile-point cultural transmission,
182
Great Leap Forward, 161
Griesemer, J. R., 81
Grifﬁ ths, P. E., 81
Grifﬁ DEMO, J. L., 246
Grilliches, Z., 212
Grinding-pounding stone tools, DEMO
Gross, M. R., 45
Grzeschik, K. H., 61
Guglielmino, DEMO R. C., 6, 8, 141, 146, 260–261
Guided variation, 10, 71, 195
Guimerà, R., 121–122, 125
Guppies, innovator DEMO noninnovator, 44
275
Haberle, S. G., 140
Habits, 179, DEMO
Hagen, E. H., 256
Hager, T., 110
Hahn, M. DEMO, 123, 124, 126
Haidt, J., 112
Haldane, J. B. S., 62
Hanson, N. R., 89, 90
Hargadon, A., DEMO, 110, 111
Harpending, H. C., 140
Harris, M., 161
Haudricourt, A. G., 219
Hauert, C., 72, 75
Haury, DEMO W., 251–252
Hayden, B., 247
Heat-shock response, 62
Hébert, DEMO F., 87
Henrich, J., 6, 7, 9, 10, DEMO, 71, 76–77, 100–102,
106–109, 112, 113, 114, DEMO, 117n.3, 124, 137,
141–144, 146, 157, 162, DEMO, 183, 193–199,
211–213, 228
Henrich, N. S., 101, 102, 117n.3
Henrich and Boyd model, 142–144
Henshilwood, C., 138
DEMO geniuses, versus many small contributions,
110
Herzog, H. A., DEMO
Hess, N. H., 256
Heyes, C. M., 40, 70, 76
Hiatt, L. R., 167
Hierarchical selection theory, 92
Hinde, DEMO A., 37, 41
Hodgson, G. M., 84–85, 91
Hoffman, P. T., 114
Hohokam, 252
Salado ceramic tradition in, 251
Holl, A., 225
Holland, T. D., 9, 260
Holmberg, A. DEMO, 100
Holocene
cultural loss in, 141–142
human population in, 140
DEMO sapiens, expansion of, 138
Homology, 86, 91
Hoppitt, W., 40
Horizontal transmission, 140–141, 176
selective environment and, 261
Hostetler, DEMO A., 164–165, 166
Howe, C. J., 180
Hox-D13 gene mutations, 63–64
Hox gene-regulated signaling pathway, 63–64
Huber, L., 76
Hudjashov, G., 139
Huffman, M. A., 40
Hull, D. L., 121, 125
Hulsey, C. D., 63
Human decision-making theory, 72
276
Human Revolution, 107, 139
Hume, D., 24
Dialogues Concerning DEMO Religion, 23
Hunt, G. R., 40
Hunter-gatherer populations, craft skills transmission
in, 141
Hunting technology, of Upper Paleolithic transition,
138
DEMO, T. D., 261
Huttegger, S., 82
Huxley, Thomas, 53, 54–55
Hybrid corn, diffusion of in United States, 211–212
Hydraulic presses, development of, 220
Ideas, randomly copied versus selected, 122–123
Imitation, 102
brain scans during, 77
in direct-bias transmission, 71
of high-payoff DEMO, 103
in networks, 122
neurological processes in, 74
prestige and, 117n.1
Inca, lack of writing among, 109
Income inequalities, 213
in innovation diffusion, 200–204, 206–208
Indirect-bias transmission, 10, 71, 141, DEMO, 195,
196, 198
Individual-environment feedback, 82
Inductive-argument forms, 22–27
Inductive inference, 22
Inference to best explanation, 24–27
Information
brain coding DEMO, 72–73
sharing, 114
lack of institutions for, 114–115
transmission of
DEMO complex technological system, 243
in creative expression, 121
factors facilitating, DEMO
Information-goods theory of prestige, 112
Ingram, J., 37
Innovation. See DEMO Animal innovation; Cultural
innovation; Invention; Population-level
innovation; Technological innovation
age difference in, 42–43
anthropological issues in, 3–13
argument by analogy for, 22–24
in biology, economics, and philosophy, 83–84
in captive monkey populations, 42–43
comparative perspectives on, 37–48, 83–84
as cultural and social process, 103–104
cultural interconnectedness in adopting, 103,
104–107
cultures valuing, 161–162
decision-making and, 69–70
deﬁ nitions of, 3–4, 217
individual-level, 41
DEMO
diffusion of, 6–8, 102–103
Bass model of, 194–195
of black-and-white DEMO, 208–211
combined model of, 204–208
comparing dual-inheritance and Bass models of,
198–199
dual-inheritance model of, 195–196
of hybrid corn in United States, 211–212
by social learning, 41
social learning and economic inequality in,DEMO
193–213
threshold heterogeneity in, 200–204
through biased cultural transmission, 182–188
dual-inheritance theory of, 9–11
economic, 87–89
evolutionary role of, 81, 162–163
DEMO theory explaining, 21–22
failures of, 109
ﬁ ltering explanation of, DEMO
in ﬁ shes, 44–46
general theory of, 81–92
group, 185
DEMO to best explanation of, 24–27
versus invention, 53, 82–83
from DEMO viewpoint, 21–35
modes of, 10, 11–12
as monolithic, 8
natural selection in, 27–28
networks and, 121–125
in non-human animals, 37–38
organismal, 53–64
overuse of, 86–87
peaks of, 184
phylogenetic reconstruction and, DEMO
populational explanations of, 29–31
public-goods dilemma and, 112
“recipes” of, DEMO
resistance to, lack of knowledge in, 114–115
as social and cultural process, 116–117
species differences in, 48
technical dimension of, 4
tempo of, 9–10
three etiologies of, 85–90
Innovation cascade, 262
Innovation-enhancing institutions, evolution of,
99–117
Innovation sensu process, 40–41
Innovation studies
comparative, 83–84
experimental, 175–188
father of, 87
Web survey of, 92n.1
Innovation triad, 84
Innovativeness, population-level differences in,
99–117
Input-output switches, changes in, 62
Insko, C. A., 102, 176
Index
Instruction, 7
Intelligence, evolution of, 43
Intelligent designer, 24–27
DEMO, innovation in age of, 121–125
Intron splicing, changes in, 62
Invention
archaeological study of, 235–248
in closed societies, 181
cognitive activity DEMO, 223–224
component-stimulated, 245–246
continuous and discontinuous, 218
decision-making and, 69–70
deﬁ nition of, 217, 237
explaining, 32
ﬁ tness peaks of, 187
versus innovation, 53, 82–83
innovation and, 3–4
luck and DEMO in, 117
migration effect on rate of, 177–182
models of, DEMO
natural selection explaining, 24
necessity, mistakes, and recombination in origin DEMO,
107–111
as novel interpretation, 179
social learning of, 41
Invention-cascades model, 242–243
Inventiveness, cultural interconnectedness and, 99
Inventors, 239
Irrigation DEMO
cascade model of development of, 242
rituals in functioning of, 238
ISI Web of Knowledge, 121
Jacob, F., 6, 60
James, H. V. A., 137, 138, 139
Janik, V. M., 40
Jenkin, F., 53–55
Jepsen, G. L., 56
Jesness, O., DEMO
Jewkes, J. D., 88
Johnson, A., 107
Johnson-Frey, S. DEMO, 74
Johnston, L. D., 209
Jones, G. T., 238–239, 258
Justiﬁ cation, context of, 85, 89–90
Kafaﬁ , Z., DEMO
Kameda, T., 176
Kamminga, J., 168
Kandel, E. R., 72, 73, 74
Kashima, Y., 176
Kauffman, S., 187
DEMO, I., 163, 166–167
Keesing, R., 170
Kelly, R. L., 187
Keltner, D., 112
Kendal, R. L., 41
277
Kendon, A., 167
Kimberly, J., 82–83
Kimura, M., 126
Kingstone, A., 72
Kinships
Amish networks of, 165
cooperation of in traditional DEMO, 169
identiﬁ cation of, 170
identifying large sets of, 163–164
DEMO, M., 61
Kitcher, P., 85
Klein, R. G., 139
Knight, Frank H., 88
Knowledge
lack of, 114–115
variation, transmission, and selection in creation of,
122
Koch, Robert, 110
Kosfeld, M., 74, 75
Kothbauer-Hellman, R., 37
Krakauer, D. C., DEMO, 24, 31, 34, 81, 82, 83,
86–87, DEMO, 188
Krause, R. A., 8
Kraybill, D., 165
Krim, Norman, 244
Kroeber, A. L., 90, 92, 168
Kroll, DEMO, 102
Kuhn, S. L., 138, 139, 140
Kuhn, T. S., 127
Kummer, H., 37, 38, 40, 41, 48
Lachlan, R. F., 41
Lahr, M. M., 138–139, 139
Lake, M. W., 183, 260
Laland, K. N., 37–42, 44–46, 85, 175–176, 188
Lamb, D., 87, 90
LaMotta, V. DEMO, 236, 241
Lancy, D. F., 100
Lande, R., 11
Langley, P., 90
Language(s)
in evolution, 72
lacks in, 109
Late Chalcolithic societies, 227
innovations in, 225
Late Stone Age, 138
Laubichler, M. D., 70
Laudan, L., 89
Learning, DEMO research on, 72–74
LeBlanc, S. A., 251–252, 252, 253
DEMO, J. B., 40
Lefebvre, L., 37, 38–39, 40, DEMO
Lehman, A. C., 224
Lekson, S. H., 253, 254, 258
Lemonnier, P., 218, 222
Lenski, R. E., 60
Leonard, R. D., 238–239, 258, 259–260
278
Levinson, S. C., 109
Levitt, S. D., 124
Levy, H., 102
Levy, T. E., 225
Lewontin, R. C., 259–260
Life histories, segmented, 236–237, 239
Light bulb, invention of, 110
Likelihood Principle, 25
Lin, L., 72, 73
Lineages, 163
Lipe, W. D., 253
Lipo, C. P., 7, 10, 12, 162, 175–176, 180, 259, 260
Llama carting, 109
Lodygin, DEMO N., 110
Logic
of discovery, 90
of science, 85
Logical DEMO, of innovation and invention,
21–34
Logical empiricism, 89–90
Lolle, DEMO J., 59
Lombard, M., 139
Lorenz, Konrad, 172
Love, A. C., 81, 85, 86
Low-ﬁ tness valleys, 183–184
Lowell, J. C., 253, 254, 256, 257
Lowie, R. H., DEMO
Luck, in invention, 110–111, 117
Lumsden, C. J., 7, 140
Lyman, R. L., 5, 7, 8–9, 12, 24, 27, 28–29, 175–176,
180, 219, 259–260
MacDonald, D., DEMO
Mace, R., 176, 180
Macroevolution, 28–29
Maddux, W. W., 111
Maeir, A., 230
Malthusian condition, 29
Mammalian brain, neural DEMO of, 73
Management, theory of, 88–89
Manipulative species, innovation in, 42–43
Mapuche farmers, lack of knowledge of, 114–115
Marean, C. DEMO, 138
Maresca, B., 59, 60, 61, 62
Marginalist Revolution, 87
Marketing science, 213
Martens, B., 83, 89
Martinez del Rio, C., 37
Maschner, H. D. G., 134
Material-stimulated invention, 246–247
Mathematical models, 176
Maynard Smith, J., 6
Mayr, E., 57, 85, 175, 188
McBrearty, S., 138–139
McDonald, J. DEMO, 209
McElreath, R., 6, 71, 100, 108, 109, 175–176
McKern, W. C., 5
Index
McNeil, W. H., 107, 111
Meggers, B. J., 5
Mellars, P., 137
Meme, 7
complexes of, 73
Memory, formulation of, 72
Mendras, H., 217, 226, 229
Menomotype, 7
Menzel, C. R., 43
Menzel, DEMO W., 43
Merton, R. K., 85
Mesoudi, A., 8, 10–11, 76–77, 83, 84, 102, 134,
175–176, 177, 182, 183, 184–187, 188
Metallurgic techniques, development of, 225
Metatraditions, 162–163, 172
evolutionary beneﬁ ts of, 169–171
universality of, 168–169
DEMO
DNA sequences in, 60
genes in, 59
Meyers, M. A., 110
Microevolution, 28–29
Microsocieties, 176–177
Middle Bronze Age II, 227, DEMO
Middle Paleolithic, 139
Middleton, J., 170
Migration
cultural innovation/invention DEMO and,
177–182
to prehistoric American Southwest, 253, 254
rate of
in cultural transmission, 143–144, 146
subpopulation densities and, 146–149, 150
DEMO spread of Salado ceramic tradition, 257,
261–262
subpopulation density-dependent, 149–152
Migratory range, 149
heterogeneous, 154–155
Miller, A., 236
Mills, B. J., 253, 256
technological evolution in, 220–221
Mimicry
brain scans during, 77
in direct-bias transmission, 71
in evolution, 72
neurological processes in, 74
Miroschedji, P. de, 227
Mitteröcker, P., 82
Mivart, DEMO G., 54–55
Mode, 10
Modeling, 101
Modern evolutionary synthesis theory, 56–59, 84–85,
91
hardening of, 85–87
Modernity, markers of, DEMO
Modiﬁ cation, of network, 122
Modularity, 91, 187–188
Index
Mogollon
region of, 252
Salado ceramic tradition in, 251
Molecular DEMO, 59
Moller, A. P., 58
Monkeys, species differences in innovativeness in,
48
Monod, J., 60
Moore, M. W., 137, 138, 139, 140
Morgan, T. H., 4, 38, 55–58
DEMO gradients, diffusion of, 62
Morphy, H., 168
Motivation
in foraging innovation, 44–45
for replicative behaviors, 69
Mount, T. D., 200, 213n.1
Moving-equilibrium effects, 200
Mulkay, M. J., 85
Müller, G., 33, 76, 81–86, 91
Multicellular organisms
emergence of, 61–63
evolution DEMO, 60
Mulvaney, J., 168
Muragaki, Y. S., 63–64
Mutation
DEMO nition of, 62
in evolution, 91
increasing rate of, 61
DEMO of, 62
large-scale, 56, 57
random, 55–56
MySpace, 121
DEMO
of Aboriginal Australians, 167–168
Amish, 164–165
NA repair, efﬁ cacy DEMO, 59
Nahapiet, J., 127
Naive copiers, 140
Nakanishi, D., 176
Natural oblique-transmission methods, 138
Natural selection, 172
arrival of ﬁ DEMO and, 33–34
cooperative dilemma, 112
criticism of, 53–54
explaining innovation DEMO invention, 22, 24, 27–28
as ﬁ ltering process, 32–33
for replicative behavior, 75
in speciation and extinctions, 29–30
Naturalism, 83
Neanderthals, coexistence of with Homo sapiens,
138
Necessity, as mother of DEMO, 107–111, 258
Needham, Joseph, 111
Neff, H., 8
Neiman, F. D., 126
Nelson, B. A., 251–252
279
Nelson, R. R., 84–85, 91
Neoclassical economics, 84–85
Neophilia, 43
Neophobia, 43
Networks
innovation and, 121–125
modiﬁ cation of, 122
Neural cliques, 73
Neurological imaging, in replication behavior
experiments, 77
Neurological process, visualization of, 72–73
Neuron-to-neuron connectivity, 72
Neurosciences, advances in, 72
New Guinea, bow and arrow use in, 109
New products
life cycles of, DEMO
sales growth of, 193–195, 198–199, 204–208
social-inﬂ uence adoption models DEMO, 193–213
Newman, M. E. J., 122, 126
Newman, S. DEMO, 76, 81, 82–83, 84, 86
Niche construction, 82
Nickles, Thomas, 85, 89, 90
Nicolakakis, N. D., 40
Nitecki, M. H., 175
Noncooperation, costly punishment of, 113–114
Noninnovation, evolutionary DEMO of,
161–172
Norm violators, predisposition to punish, 75
Novel behavior, social learning of, 41
Novelty, 91
cognitive activity generating, 73–74
DEMO of, 86–87
persistence versus emergence of, 55
population resistance to, DEMO
Nowak, M. A., 76
Nucleotide sequence, 60
Object, evolution of, 218–219
Oblique transmission, 140–141, 142,
143–144
heterogeneous migratory range and, 155
“natural,” 155–157, 158
skill accumulation rate in, 146–149
subpopulation density in, 151–152
in subpopulations, 144, 145–146
O’Brien, M. J., 5, 7, 8–12, 21, 24, 25, 27–31, 76–77,
84, 102, 121–123, 134, 175–176, 180, 182, 183,
184–187, 188, 219, 256, 259–260
Observational learning, 101
Ochre
abstract designs on, 139
use of, 138
O’Connell, J. F., 139, 140
Odling-Smee, J., 82
Open societies
habits in, 181
spread of interpretations in, 180
280
Open systems
versus closed systems, 228–229
transformation of closed systems into, 229–230
Optimum proﬁ t-making behavior, 102
Ordnung, 164–166
Organismal novelty
origin of, 61–63
phylogenetic reconstruction and, 63–64
Organismic systems approach, 84
Ormerod, P., 122, 134
Ornamentation
introduction of, 138
marine-shell, 139
Orwell, George, 122
Osgood, C., 5
Oxygen Isotope Stage 4, end of, 140
Oxytocin
testing levels of, 77
in trust and trustworthy DEMO, 75
Paavola, S., 89
Pacey, A., 243
Pagel, M., 176
Paley, William, 21, 24–25, 25–27, 31
Palmer, C. T., 163, 164, 165, 169, 170, 260–261
Pangenesis, 54
Papassotiropoulos, A., 75
Peak-invention, 185–187
Pearson, H., 59
Peck, DEMO R., 141
Peer-group competition, 247
Peer-polity interaction, 247
Pelegrin, J., 223
Penicillin, discovery of, 111
Penn, D. C., 84
Pennock, R. T., 90
Perry, S., 40
Personality differences, in innovation in ﬁ sh,
44–45
Petraglia, M. D., 137, 138, DEMO
Phenotypic evolution, 92n.2
approaches to, 91
characteristics of, 86
Phenotypic DEMO, 86
Phenotypic plasticity, 59, 60–61
Phillips, P., 5
Phylogenetic DEMO, 59, 63–64
Pingle, M., 102
Pinxten, R., 83
Pleistocene, genetic evidence from, 140
Plotkin, H. C., 46, 176
Pocklington, R., 6, 7
Point mutations, source of, 61
Popper, DEMO R., 85, 90
Population-dynamic events, adaptation to,
91
Population DEMO, 57–58, 86
Index
Population-level innovation, 28–31
cultural interconnectedness in, 104–107
theoretical basis of, 100–101
Population pressure, 108–109
Population size
cultural innovation DEMO, 138–139, 141
culture ﬁ tness and, 187
Positive bias, 82–83
Potentiation, long-term, 72
Pottery manufacturing
innovation rates in decorating, 11–12
material-stimulated invention model for, 246
Salado tradition of, 251–262
techniques of
development DEMO, 218–219, 221–222
evolution of, 225–226
expertise in, 224
Pradhan, DEMO R., 106–107, 116, 228
Prehistoric technologies, archaeological study of,
235–248
Prestige
in cultural learning, 102
in innovation, 117n.1
Prestige bias, 176
Prestige deference, 112
apprenticeship institution and, 112–113
Primates
female conﬂ DEMO among, 256
innovations in, 38–39
neocortex ratio and social-group size in, 145–146
Problem difﬁ culty-ambiguity, 102
Problem solving
in ﬁ sh, 44
satisﬁ cing models of, 70
Producer groups, 239
Proportionate Effect, Law of, 213
Protein folding, changes in, 62
Prototype
developmental distance from technology, 237
of electromagnetic telegraphs, 242–243
Provine, W., 188
Public-goods DEMO
prestige deference and, 112
solving, 112
Pueblo dwelling, transition from DEMO to,
237–238
Pulliam, H. R., 7
Punctuated equilibrium, 12
DEMO, cooperation and, 113–114
Pyrotechnology, inventions in, 224
Radcliffe-Brown, A. DEMO, 100
Radio
shirt-pocket portable, 243–244
wireless era of, 241–242
Ramachandran, V. S., 74
Ramsey, G., 40, 41
Index
Ramson, R., 209
Random-copying errors, 140–141, 162
Random-copying model, 122–125
of academic vocabulary, 125–126, 127–129
Ranzijn, R., 168
Rasskin-Gutman, D., 188
Rassoulzadegan, M., 59
Rationalism, 83
Rats, social transmission of foraging information in,
46–47
Ravesloot, J. C., 252, 257
Raytheon, inventions of, 244
Reader, S. M., 37, 38–39, DEMO, 41, 42, 44–45, 45–46,
85
Reason, in creative DEMO, 121–134
Recombinations, in invention, 110–111, 117
Redﬁ eld, R., 115
Reed, E. S., 223, 259–260
Regan, M. H., 252, 257
Regency TR-1, 244
Regulatory signaling pathways, diversiﬁ cation and
modiﬁ cation of, 61
Reichenbach, H., 89–90
Reid, J. J., 256
Reid, R. G. B., 6
Religious sodalities, in information transmission, DEMO
Religious systems
female-based, 256–257
Salado, 256–258
Salado ceramic tradition and ideology of, 252,
254–256
Rendell, L., 115–116
Renfrew, C., 247
Replication, 238
deﬁ nition of, 238
of new technologies, 240
success of, 30–31
Replicative behaviors
in frequency-dependent transmission, 71
hardwiring for, 76
neuroscientiﬁ c evidence of, 74–76
oxytocin in, 75
propensities for, 69
propensity for, 72
Reputational system, 113–114, 115
Research Assessment Exercise, DEMO
Revenge, predisposition to seek, 75
Reznick, D., 45
Richardson, DEMO C., 81
Richerson, P. J., 7, 9–10, 11, 71, 100, 101, 102, 114,
115–116, 140, 141, 162, 169, 176, 183, 187, 195,
196
Ridley, M., 8
Riede, F., 134
Rindos, D., 6–7, 259–260
Risk-sensitive decision making models, 108
Ritual artifacts, Upper Paleolithic transition, 138
281
Ritual burial, 138
Rituals
among Amish, 164–165
Salado ceramic tradition in, 254–256
Rivers, W. H. R., 107
Robb, J., 258–259
Roche, H., 223
Rock art, introduction of, 138
Rodríguez-Teijeiro, J. D., 38, 39
Rogers, A. R., 149
Rogers, E. M., 40, DEMO, 103, 124, 176
Ronshaugen, M., 63
Rose, E., DEMO, 176, 177–182, 188
Rotary kinetic energy (RKE), 227, DEMO
mastery of, 224
in pottery making, 218, 219, 221–222, DEMO
Roux, V., 217, 219, 222, 223–224, 225, 227, 228
Roychowdhury, V. P., 122
Runciman, W. G., 176
Ruth, J., 161
Sacred, concept of, 165
in Aboriginal culture, 168
DEMO of, 169
Salado ceramic tradition
areas of, 252
dual nature of, 251–252
warfare in spread of, 253–258
Salado polychrome
examples of, 255
imagery in, 257
social importance of, 254
spread of in American DEMO, 251–262
Salem, A. B. Z., 200, 213n.1
Salganik, M. DEMO, 122–123
Sampietro, M. L., 179–180
Sander, L. M., 127
DEMO, A. G., 75
Sargent, R. C., 45
Sarich, V., 59
Satisﬁ cing models, 70
Savery, Thomas, 111
Sawyer, R. DEMO, 6
Scale-free networks model, 127
Schadenfreude, 75
Schiffer, M. B., 6, 8, 162, 218, 236–240, 242, 243,
245, 246, 247, 258, 260
Schindewolf, O., 55, 56
Schlag, K. H., 70
Schumpeter, Joseph, 4, 21, 29–31, 53, 82–83, 84–88,
87–88, 176
Schwartz, J. H., 55–56, DEMO, 58–63
Science
innovation in, 81
philosophy of, 85
Scientiﬁ c DEMO, social aspects of, 125
Scramble competition, solving foraging tasks in, 45
282
Seife, C., 109
Selection. See also Natural selection
of academic DEMO, 125
cascading effect of, 6
identifying, 122–123
of novel ideas, 123–124
Selection-fashion dichotomy, 134
Selective environment
cultural transmission and, 261
cultural DEMO and, 259–260
Self-stabilizing cultural system, 115
Selﬁ sh genes, 58
DEMO sh strategies, 113–114
Seligman, B. B., 87
Sellet, F., DEMO
Selten, R., 70
Sex cells, evolutionary potential of, 62
Seymour, D. J., 236, 241
Shalev, S., 229
Shennan, S. DEMO, 6–11, 13, 101, 106–107, 122, 134,
139, DEMO, 142, 176, 260–261
Sherman, P. W., 100
Sherry, D. F., 37
Sherry, S. T., 140
Shettleworth, S. J., 40
Shpak, M., 82
Shrager, J., 90
Signaling pathways, alterations in, 63
Simkin, M. V., 122
Simon, A. W., 256
Simon, H. A., 70, 72, 85, 89, 90
Simondon, G., 218, 219
Simonton, D. K., 90
Simpson, G. G., DEMO, 12, 57, 183
Simulation models
of cultural transmission and evolution, 176–177
in early modern humans, 142–144
in multimodal adaptive landscapes, 187–188
DEMO in, 144–149
Singer, T. B., 74–75, 75
Sinnott-Armstrong, W., 23, 25
Skibo, J. M., 8, 236, 237, 238, 247
Skill accumulation
reproductive success and, 157
saturation point in, 146
DEMO: Or Lonesome No More!, 171
Slater, P. J. B., 41
Small-scale societies
segmented life histories in, 239
technology development in, 237–238
DEMO, E. A., 124
Smocovitis, V. B., 86
Sneader, W., 110
Sober, E., 23, 25, 27, 33
Social-atom models, DEMO
Social behavior, cultural learning in, 100–101
Social cognitive neuroscience, 83
DEMO
Social group size, 145–146
Social inﬂ uence
in discontinuous innovations, 225–227
discontinuous innovations and, 226–227
as evolutionary forces, 217–230
in innovation diffusion, 193–213
in transmitting foraging information in rats, 46–47
Social learners
choosing most-skilled members, 142–143
critical number of, 142–143
Social learning, 40, 41
DEMO acquiring human behaviors, 195–199
in adopting innovation, 104
in cultural transmission, 140
economic inequality and, 213
evolution of, 115–116
in innovation diffusion, 212
in spread of solving, 43
strategies of, 110
Social mobility, 179–182
Social modeling, of scientiﬁ c evolution, 134
Social mutation, DEMO jumps and, 219–220
Social networking, in cyberspace, 121
Social relationship DEMO, traditional behavior and,
170
Sociogene, 7
Sol, D., 38, 39, 40
Solving behavior, spread of in birds, 43–44
Sorting DEMO, 82
South Asia, Upper Paleolithic transition in, 138
Southern Levant
DEMO in, 227–228
pottery making innovations in, 225–227
Spatial skill accumulation, DEMO
Specialized extractive foragers, 43
Speciation
explanations of, 29–30
patterns of, DEMO
Sperber, D., 7, 84
Sperm-competition concept, 58
Spielmann, K. DEMO, 256
Squire, L. R., 72
Stadler, B. M. R., DEMO
Stamenov, M., 74
Stanner, W. E. H., 168
Stark, DEMO, 222
Starlings, predictors of foraging innovation in, 43–44
State space, 82
Steadman, L. B., 163, 164, 169, 170
Steam-engine invention, 111
Steele, J., 6, 8, 141, 260–261
Stern, C. D., 58
Stewart, J. H., 4–5
Stimulated variation model, 241–242
DEMO spread of Salado tradition, 258
Stiner, M. C., 138, 139, 140
Stirling, D. G., 40
Index
Stone projectile points, spread of, 9–10
Stone tools, development of, 218
Stotz, K., 59, 83
Strathman, R. R., 59
DEMO, J. T., 61, 64
Strehlow, T. G. H., 167
DEMO, S., 194, 200
Stressors, in environmental change, 62–63
Stutzer, A., 83
Subpopulations
density of
heterogeneous, 153–154
migration rate and, 146–152
oblique transmission probability and,
151–152
isolation condition of, 30
migratory activity of, 143–144
simulation models of cultural transmission in,
144–149
Subsistence farmers, ethnographic studies of,
114–115
Surowiecki, J., 124
Survival, kinship DEMO in, 170–171
Swan, Sir Joseph W., 110
Swanson, C. P., 7
Synthesis theory. See Modern evolutionary synthesis
theory
Szathmary, E., 6
Tasmania, Holocene cultural loss in, 141–142
Technical innovations, 87–88
Technological change
constituency for, 244–245
deﬁ nition of, 235–237
neglect of in economics, 87–89
Technological evolution, 218
discontinuous, 224–230
gradual versus rapid mode of, 219–223
thresholds in, 220–221
trend of, 218–219
Technological innovations
Amish tradition DEMO, 165–166
discontinuous, 224–225
social factors and, 225–227
spread of, 227–228
social factors and, 217–230
Technological jumps, 219–220, 221–222
Technological processes, DEMO
archaeological visibility of, 239–241
Technological systems
closed
expansion of, 230
versus open, 228–229
fragile versus robust, 228
transformations of
closed into open, 229–230
fragile into robust, 229
283
Technology
adoption of, 238–239
cognitive DEMO and, 223–224
developmental trajectories of, 217–223
replication of, 238
Telephones, threatening Amish tradition, 165–166
Television, adoption of in United States, 208–211
Tellis, G. J., 194, 213
Tempo, 9–10
of organismal change, 54
Testart, A., 109
Texas Instruments, 244
Theological argument, 21
DEMO, S. K., 58
Thorpe, W. H., 38
Threshold-heterogeneity model, DEMO, 200–204,
210–211
Tindale, N. B., 146
Tomol canoe, 243
Tools
genealogy of, 219
of Upper Paleolithic transition, 138
Toro, M. A., 168
Torrence, R., 217
Tracing descent, via cultural traditions, 163–164
Tracy, J., 112
Trade, late prehistoric warfare and, 253
DEMO mechanisms, 163
Traditional societies
life in, 168–169
Traditions
in cultural transmission, 6
difﬁ culties of preserving, 162
evolutionary beneﬁ t of, 169–171
Trait complexes, 5–6
Traits. See also Cultural traits
culturally transmitted, 30–31
DEMO spread of, 28
genes “for,” 58–59
nonadaptive, 86
novel
ﬁ ltering of, 31
successful, 34–35
Transistors, replication of, 244
Transmission DEMO, 260
Transmission rules, 176
Travisano, M., 60
Trigger, B. DEMO, 6, 8
Trivers, R. L., 45
Trusler, K., 107
Trustworthy behavior, oxytocin in, 75
Tsien, J. Z., 73
Tuggle, H. D., 256
Tylor, E. B., 4, 179
Umble, D. Z., 165–166
Umiltà, M. A., 74
284
Unequal crossover process, 82
Unobservables, postulating, 25
Upper Paleolithic transition, 137–138
features of, 137–138
Use-disuse theories, 31, 57–58
variation and, 54
User groups, in technology adoption, 239
van Andel, T. H., 139
van Bergen, Y., 46
Van den Bulte, C., 194, 200
van der Leeuw, S. E., 217
van Noordwijk, M. DEMO, 40
van Shaik, C. P., 40, 106–107, 116, 228
Vanhaeren, M., 140
VanPool, C. S., 259, 260–261
VanPool, DEMO L., 162–163, 259, 260–261
Variable-heterogeneity approach, 208
Variation
in accumulating culturally inherited skills, 137–158
in evolutionary biology, 84
in knowledge creation, 122
mutations underlying, 91
within populations, 57
use-disuse sources of, 54
Vaughn, D., 59
Veblen, T., 91
Venti, J., 183, 260
Verspagen, B., 81, 92n.1
Vertical transmission, 140–141, 143–144, DEMO
of naive offspring, 144
selective environment and, 261
Virtual hunting environments, in cultural
transmission analysis, 11
Vitelli, K., 230
Vonnegut, Kurt, 171
Vrba, E. S., 82
Wagner, G. P., 82, DEMO
Walker, W., 236
Wallace, H. D., 251
Wallacean Archipelago, DEMO of, 139
Wang, Z., 208–209, 213n.1
War
in prehistoric American Southwest culture, 256–257
in spread of Salado ceramic system, 253–260
technological DEMO and, 251
Watchmaker, postulating existence of, 25–27
Watt, James, DEMO
Weak imitator, 116
Weber, R. J., 8
Wetmore, J. M., 164
Wheel, invention of, 109
Wheel-coiling technique, 221–222, 223, DEMO
emergence of, 225–226
Wheel-throwing technique, 221
Wheeler, M., 176
Index
White, L. A., 4–5
White, T. D., 138–139
Whitehead, H., 115–116
Whiten, A., 40, 116, 175–176, 188
Whitney, Eli, cotton gin invention of, 110
Wich, S. A., 40
Wilcox, D. R., 253, 256
Wilkinson, J. R., 9
Willey, G. R., 5
Williams, G. C., 58
Williams, T. I., 110
Williamson, S. H., 209
Wills, W. H., 256
Wilson, A. C., 39–40
Wilson, E. O., 7, 140
Wimsatt, W. C., 81
Winter, S. G., 84–85, 91
Witchcraft, 115
Witt, DEMO, 84–85, 91
Witten, T. A., 127
Women
in evolutionary change, 256
in spread of Salado ceramic tradition, 256–258, 262
Wright, DEMO, 57, 62, 183
Wright brothers, airplane invention of, 110
DEMO, J. S., 40
Yang, A. P., 45
Yellin, J., 230
Yolunga, ancestral past of, 168
Young, H. P., 212
DEMO, P. J., 75
Zedeño, M. N., 258
Zentall, T. DEMO, 40
Zero, invention of, 109
Zilhão, J., 138, 139
Zimbabwe, women’s movement in, 256{1g42fwefx}