Interaction Effects in Regression
This handout is designed to provide some background DEMO information on the analysis and
interpretation of interaction effects in Multiple Regression (MR). This is a complex topic and the
handout is necessarily incomplete. In practice, be sure to consult other references on Multiple
Regression (Aiken & West, 1991; Cohen & Cohen, 1983; Pedhazur,1996; Pedhazur &
Schmelkin, 1991) for additional information.
Interaction effects represent DEMO combined effects of variables on the criterion or dependent
measure. When an interaction effect is present, the impact of one variable depends on the level of
the other variable. Part of the power of MR is DEMO ability to estimate and test interaction effects
when the predictor variables are either categorical or continuous. As Pedhazur and Schmelkin
(1991) note, the idea that multiple effects should be studied in research rather than the DEMO
effects of single variables is one of the important contributions of Sir Ronald Fisher. When
interaction effects are present, it means that interpretation of the individual variables may be
incomplete or misleading.
Kinds of Interactions.  For example, imagine a study that tests the effects of a treatment on an
outcome measure. The treatment variable is composed of two groups, treatment and control. The
results are that the mean for the treatment group DEMO higher than the mean for the control group.
But what if the researcher is also
interested in whether the treatment is
5.0 equally effective DEMO females and males.
4.5 That is, is there a difference in DEMO
4.0 depending on gender group? This is a
question of interaction. DEMO the
3.5 results below.  Interaction results whose
3.0 lines do not DEMO (as in the figure at left)
are called “ordinal” interactions. DEMO the
2.5 slope of lines is not parallel in an ordinal
2.0 GENDER interaction, the interaction effect will be
significant, given enough statistical
DEMO Female power. If the lines are exactly parallel,
Male then there is no interaction effect. In this
case, a difference in level between the
TREATMENT two lines would indicate a main effect of
gender; a difference in level for both lines
between treatment and control would indicate DEMO main effect of treatment. However, when an
interaction is significant and DEMO, interpretation of main effects is likely to be misleading.
To determine DEMO which parts of the interaction are significant, the omnibus F test DEMO be
followed by more focused tests or comparisons.
1.0
Treatment
Control
-1-
Mean Outcome
FOCUSED TESTS OF INTERACTIONS
Whenever interactions are significant, the next question that arises is exactly where are the
significant differences? This situation is similar to the issues in post hoc testing of main effects, but
it is also more complex in that interactions represent the combined effects of DEMO forces or
dimensions in the data not just one. The following section describes common approaches to
obtaining more focused, specific information on where differences are in the interaction effect in
tow common situations: 1) the DEMO of one continuous predictor and one categorical
predictor, and 2) the interaction of two continuous predictors.
Method 1. Johnson-Neyman Regions of Significance. This DEMO a common approach to the
interpretation of the interaction between one continuous predictor, one categorical predictor and
the criterion. The topic is covered in detail in Pedhazur (1997), chapter 14. The example used in
Pedhazur in Table 14.3 (p. 588) is presented here. The data are DEMO on the web site in the
data subdirectory for EDPSY 604 named “ped14_3.sav”. A syntax file named “ped14_3.sps” is
also available on the web DEMO If you run the syntax file, you will get the results DEMO the regression
analysis of the two predictors as well as the interaction of the two predictors. The syntax also
produces a plot of the DEMO Editing the plot and requesting “chart-options-fit line-subgroups” will
produce the figure below and the two regression lines fitted for each value of the categorical
DEMO variable.
Plot of Y with X by D
0
10
20
30
Tolerance of Ambuguity
40
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
DEMO
50
60
Teacher Directivenes
0
1
70
One of the issues of greatest interest in interpreting the interaction displayed in the figure above is
DEMO determine at what points the two subgroup regression lines differ significantly from each other.
-2-
Satisfaction Rating
One approach to this question is the Johnson-Neyman procedure for determining regions DEMO
significance. This approach is described in Pedhazur. A syntax file that will calculate the regions
of significance is also available on the web site DEMO is named “regions.sps”.
Method 2. Simple Slopes Tests.  This method is DEMO for the interpretation of the interaction
effect of two continuous predictor variables. The method is not discussed in Pedhazur. Refer to
Aiken and West (1991) or Cohen and Cohen (1983) for further information.
To illustrate some of the calculations, example 2.1 (p. 11) from Aiken and West is used. The data
in matrix format is available on the DEMO site named “aiken2_1.sav”. The regression analysis can be
run using “aiken2_1.sps”. The regression analysis results in the following equation:
Y’ = 2.506 + DEMO(X) + 3.696(Z) + 2.621(XZ) (1)
To illustrate and test the significant interaction effect, separate regression lines are computed,
plotted, and tested for individuals one standard deviation below the mean on predictor Z, at the
mean of predictor Z, and one DEMO deviation below the mean of predictor Z. First the overall
regression equation is rearranged so it can be expressed only in terms of values DEMO X:
Y’ = ((.843 + 2.62(Z))(X) DEMO (3.696(Z) + 2.506) (2)
To calculate an equation for Z one standard deviation above the mean, the standard deviation of Z
(2.2) is substituted for Z in equation 2. This results DEMO:
Y’ = 6.607(X) + 10.6372, for all those 1 SD above the mean on Z (3)
For those at the mean of Z, a value of 0 is substituted for Z in equation 2. This results in:
Y’ = .843(X) + 2.506 (4)
To calculate an equation for Z one standard deviation below the mean, the standard deviation of Z
(-2.2) is substituted for Z and subtracted in equation 2. This results in:
Y’ = DEMO(X) - 5.6252, for all those 1 SD below the mean on Z (5)
Actual values of Y’ can now be calculated by substituting values of predictor X. Commonly,
values are computed for DEMO at the mean, one standard deviation above the mean, and one standard
deviation below the mean. Given that the standard deviation of X DEMO 0.95, this results in:
Equation                       -1 SD on X         Mean X       +1 SD on X
Y’ for DEMO 1 SD Above  4.3606 10.6372  16.9139
Y’ for Mean Z  DEMO   2.5060    3.3069
Y’ for Z 1 SD Below        -0.9503  -5.6252 -10.3002
-3-
These values can be entered into SPSS for plotting. An example of DEMO is in the file
“aiken_lines.sav”. Using SPSS menus or the syntax below, the three regression lines can be
plotted resulting in the figure below.
GRAPH
/LINE(MULTIPLE)=MEAN(above) MEAN(average) MEAN(below) BY DEMO
/MISSING=LISTWISE REPORT.
20.0
10.0
0.0
-10.0
-20.0
-1 SD
Managerial Ability
DEMO
AVERAGE
BELOW
Mean
Time in Position
+1 SD
The last step in this process is to test each line to determine whether there is DEMO significant
relationship to the criterion for each subset of the interaction effect. These tests are called “simple
slopes” tests and are directly analogous to DEMO effects tests of interactions in the analysis of
variance. The following syntax serves as an example:
compute zabove = z - 2.2.
compute DEMO = z - (-2.2).
compute xzabove = x * zabove.
DEMO xzbelow = x * zbelow.
execute.
A regression is then run using predictors X, zbelow, and xzbelow to test whether there is a
DEMO relationship for those below the mean. A second regression analysis is run using
predictors X, zabove, and xzabove to test whether there is DEMO significant relationship for those
above the mean. The t-test for xzbelow and xzabove are the simple slope tests.
-4-
Self-Assurance
References
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). DEMO regression: Testing and interpreting
interactions. Newbury Park:  Sage.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983).  Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis DEMO the
behavioral sciences (2nd Ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pedhazur, E. J. (1997). Multiple regression in behavioral research (3rd Ed.)DEMO Fort Worth,
TX: Harcourt Brace.
Pedhazur, E. J., & DEMO, L. P. (1991). Measurement, design, and analysis: An
DEMO approach. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
© Stevens, 2000
-5-{1g42fwefx}