Studies on the venture capital process
Anders Isaksson
Umeå School of Business
DEMO UNIVERSITY
2006
Umeå School of Business
Umeå University
SE-901 87 Umeå
Sweden
Studies in DEMO administration, Serie B No 59
ISSN 0346-8291
ISBN 91-7264-160-6
© 2006 DEMO Isaksson
anders.isaksson@usbe.umu.se
Print & Media, Umeå University 220:2002302
Abstracts
This thesis consists of an introductory part, including venture capital definitions, the
history of venture capital in Sweden, and an overview of DEMO venture capital process, and four
self-contained papers on venture capital and DEMO venture capital process.
Paper 1 investigates the standardisation of the contractual strategies applied in the
Swedish venture capital industry. The study was based on DEMO questionnaire data regarding the
use of contractual covenants. Our results indicate that the greatest differences occur among
those with different investment preferences.  There would appear to be two distinct venture
capital cultures controlling contractual choices in DEMO groups. Our findings generally
conform to expectations as predicated by institutional theory.
Paper 2 investigate venture capital firms’ valuation practices in two different economic
DEMO, in the economic boom of 1999 and in the downturn market DEMO 2002 by using an
experimental case study design with a case based on a real firm. Contrary to our expectations,
in times of DEMO stringency and economic downturn, venture capital investors employ
fewer valuation models DEMO they do in boom times. The main contribution of our research is
an increase in the knowledge of venture capitalists’ valuation practices under different DEMO
conditions. It can also contribute to researchers developing more relevant theories of
valuation, valuation models and valuation practice.
Paper 3 empirically examines the linkage between governance, trust and performance
based on a questionnaire sent to entrepreneurs in venture capital backed companies in
Sweden. The results suggest that the DEMO of trust between the venture capitalist and the
entrepreneur affects the relationship between VCs governance and the portfolio company’s
performance.
Paper 4 analyse exit DEMO and exit-directed activities among entrepreneurs in venture
capital relationships. The study focuses on the effect of the venture capital organization
(independent, public sector DEMO captive) on strategy and exit-directed activities. The results
indicate that firms DEMO a trade sale strategy tend to have a higher degree of exit activities
compared to other exit strategies. Furthermore, the type of venture capital organization
involved (especially when comparing private independent VCs to public sector VCs) also
affects exit strategies and activities.

Acknowledgements
“A major endeavour such as this thesis would never have been DEMO
without the guidance and support of many people and organisations”1.
First, DEMO have to thank my supervisors (in order of appearance as supervisor):
Hans Landström, Lars Hassel and Barbara Cornelius. One quality they all share
is: A lot of patience - you all have been a great support.
Thank you goes to Markku Virtanen, Tim Wilson, and DEMO Vanyushyn
for reviewing my preliminary manuscript and giving me valuable comments.
Thank you goes to the “SNS Group”: Göran Arvidsson, Magnus Klofsten,
DEMO Vintergaard and Henry Etzkowitz for your contributions to several
chapters in the thesis.
I would also like to express my gratitude to all the DEMO capitalists,
entrepreneurs, policy makers, and public servants who in so many ways have
been contributing to my research. If I were to DEMO you all I would have
produced the thickest dissertation in the history of the business school2; I
mention a couple of you though: DEMO Berggren (Managing Director, Swedish
Private Equity & Venture Capital Association), Magnus Heinstedt (Förvärv och
Fusioner), Tomas Lindström (former Managing Director, Emano), Jan Sundberg
(Executive Director, SEB Företagsinvest), Lars-Olov Söderström (Managing
Director Norrlandsfonden), Lars Öjefors (Former president for Industrifonden
and chairman for CONNECT), and Birgitta Österberg (NUTEK).
Financial support that has been provided by the following organisations is
gratefully acknowledged: ÖhrlingsPriceWaterHouseCoopers, Nordeas
DEMO, and Stiftelsen Sparbanken Norrland.
I would also like to thank all DEMO friends and colleagues at Umeå Business
School, especially Henrik Nilsson, Rickard Olsson, Henrik Linderoth, the rest of
1 Hassel, 1992, p.1
DEMO Yes, even thicker than Åke and Maggans dissertation!
the core of the lunch table crew: Gösta Söderström, Stellan Nilsson, Lars
Lindbergh, Lennart Eriksson and all the members of Umeå Barack School and
huligankollegiet. A big thank you goes to the administrative staff that DEMO things
when I have messed up, thank you Katarina, Inger, DEMO, Elsa, Anna-Lisa
and Widde.
My mother; Elisabeth, has always been supportive of my choices and never
stopped believing that one day I DEMO should finish this work (well at least she
did not tell DEMO otherwise anyway). Thank you for everything. My father, Vigert,
DEMO maybe a bit disappointed in the beginning of my academic career that I did
not choose to become an electrician or a plumber or DEMO else that could
be useful when the summerhouse needed a reconstruction. After facing the fact
that I am all thumbs when it comes to DEMO crafty type project, he seemed proud
over me anyway. Unfortunately he DEMO not here any more, I dedicate this book to
him.
Thank DEMO Björn and Anton for messing my life up, lol.
And finally, Anneli, you are the lo ve of my life. Thank you for being there.
Table of contents
2.
Introduction ........................................................................................1
1.1
1.2
Defining venture capital....................................................................13
2.1 DEMO capital and private equity .........................................14
2.2
Venture capital in the financial landscape for firm
formation and growth .........................................................18
2.3
The structure of venture capital DEMO .........................22
3. A history of the Swedish venture capital market ..............................25
3.1 The first cycle .....................................................................25
3.2 The second cycle .................................................................27
3.3 After the DEMO – the third wave?...........................................28
3.4 A concluding note of measuring venture capital markets ...........35
3.5 The role of the Swedish Government......................................36
4 The DEMO capital process .............................................................42
4.1 Outlining the process ...........................................................43
4.2 Establish a fund ..................................................................45
4.3 Deal flow............................................................................48
4.4 Investment decision.............................................................49
4.5 Value adding.......................................................................56
4.6 Exit DEMO
5.
Summary of the papers and contributions........................................66
Paper 1: Institutional Theory DEMO contracting in venture capital:
the Swedish experience ......................................................66
Paper 2: DEMO do venture capital firms value entrepreneurial
ventures? .........................................................................67
Paper 3: The effects of governance and trust on performance in
a venture capital relationship...............................................68
DEMO 4: Exit strategy and the intensity of exit-directed activities
among venture DEMO entrepreneurs in Sweden .........69
5.5 Contributions.........................................................................70
1.
Purpose of the thesis ............................................................ 9
Outline of the thesis.............................................................11
References .............................................................................................74

Appended papers:
1. Institutional Theory and contracting in venture capital: the Swedish
experience
2. How do venture capital firms value entrepreneurial ventures?
DEMO The effects of governance and trust on performance in a venture
capital relationship
4. Exit strategy and the intensity of exit-directed activities among
venture DEMO entrepreneurs in Sweden

1. Introduction
The formation and growth of small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) is
recognized as one of the most important factors for economic growth (Storey
1994, Davidsson et. al 1996). Access to risk DEMO (equity capital) is often
emphasised as a critical conditions for SMEs and new venture start-ups to be
able to pursue growth opportunities (Ds 1994:52; SOU 1996:69; SOU 1993:70;
European Commission, 1998).
Because of a limited life history and a lack of DEMO cash flows, young firms
that are in the beginning of a DEMO phase often have problems accessing
traditional debt capital. Financing the firm with the capital of the entrepreneur is
generally not an alternative because these DEMO are usually either already
used or too small (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992). Furthermore, fast developing
new firms can seldom compound the capital needed for fast development
themselves (Brophy 1996). Finally, equity financing DEMO a more suitable way of
financing growing young firms’ investments and expansions than is debt,
because the latter has the disadvantage of increasing DEMO firms’ financial risk
(mainly due to amortizations and interest rates) (DEMO and Shapiro 1988). The
difficulties of finding (or inadequate supply DEMO) growth capital for entrepreneurial
firms are often referred to as the DEMO gap (Wetzel, 1983).
Besides the equity gap, small firms DEMO high growth potential also tend to
suffer from a competence gap (DEMO 1999). The development from idea to
mature company increases the complexity of firm management and constantly
raises new demands on the management of DEMO firm (Barth 1999, Klofsten, 1992,
Greiner 1972). It DEMO by meeting the need for capital and competence that the
venture capital market has found its niche. The ability to bridge these
competence gaps DEMO in fact a prerequisite for the existence of the venture capital
market.
1
Venture capital firms are firms that are specialised in co-investing equity with
DEMO entrepreneur to fund an early stage (seed and start-up) or expansion venture
(the term venture capital is more fully discussed in later sections). Doing that
implies that they need not only to contribute with DEMO capital, but also with
the necessary competence to help the entrepreneurial DEMO to grow.
The well-known successes of venture capital supported firms have given the
U.S. venture capital model an international reputation that other countries seek
DEMO emulate. The North American venture capital industry has played a major part
in developing several of the most successful American companies, such as
Microsoft, Apple and Intel (Jörgensen and Levin, 1984).  Bygrave and DEMO
(1992, p. 1) emphasized the importance of the venture capital DEMO: “It
[venture capital] has played a catalytic role in the entrepreneurial DEMO:
fundamental value creation that triggers and sustains economic growth and
renewal. In terms of job creation, innovative products and services, competitive
vibrancy, and the dissemination of the entrepreneurial spirit, its contributions
have been staggering. The new companies and industries spawned by venture
capitalists have changed the DEMO [in] which we live and work.”
Over the last two decades, DEMO capital markets have emerged widely
around the world. The European venture capital market is today not far from
the size of the U.S. venture DEMO market. According to recent statistics from
the European Venture Capital Association (DEMO) nearly €15 billion was
invested by venture capital companies located in DEMO in 2005 (EVCA, 2006)3.
This figure is roughly 86 percent of the size of the U.S. market
(PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association, 2006). The
Swedish venture capital market has followed the European growth trend and is
today one of the leading venture capital markets in DEMO When measuring
3 Buy-out investments are excluded from the European data in order to make it comparable
with the U.S. data.
2
private equity investments in 2005 as a percentage of total GDP, Sweden is the
second largest investor (after Denmark) (EVCA, 2006).
DEMO Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association (SVCA) has today
(DEMO 2006) 114 active corporate members that have made approximately 1 500
DEMO capital investments in total (SVCA, 2006). Examples of successful
venture capital backed firms in Sweden are Altitune, Price Runner, SQS,
DEMO, Axis, Artimplant, and C-technologies.
The growth of the venture capital DEMO has not been without disturbances
however. The bursting of the Internet and dot-com bubble during 2000 also
marked a historical peak in the history DEMO the venture capital industry. During the
“bubble-period” 1998-2000 there was a remarkable increase in valuations and
capital volumes (Ofek and Richardson, 2003). DEMO have interpreted investors’
behaviour during that time as very illogical. Lamont and Thaler (2003, p 231)
even argued that investors were “irrational, woefully uninformed, endowed with
strange preferences, or for some other reason DEMO to hold overpriced assets”.
The market collapse that followed had a huge effect on the venture capital
industry, especially in the U.S. (NVCA, 2002). Mark G. Heesen, president of the
National Venture Capital Association, said in mid 2003 “It will likely take several
years for short-term private equity performance to return back to normal levels”
(NVCA, 2003)DEMO The effect was not only a significant decrease in the number of
venture capital funds and the amount of invested capital but the dot-com DEMO
also affected the behaviour of venture capitalists in the market who became
“entrapped in the psychic prison of the Internet bubble” (Valliere and Peterson,
2004, p. 20). Today the industry even speaks of a “post-bubble strategy”
(NVCA, 2006). The bubble-period and the following recession DEMO the economy
do highlight the need for research on investors’ behaviour on the venture capital
market. Researchers have an important task to transfer experience DEMO
knowledge in order to strengthen the venture capital market for the future.
3
The size and activities of the (US) venture capital market are DEMO back at the
levels they were before the bubble-period (1998) (DEMO
Coopers/National Venture Capital Association, 2006). The peak of the DEMO
dot-com bubble was not as high as in the U.S. but the crash still rendered a
serious blow to Swedish venture capital market.
The DEMO economic role and the significance of the venture capital
markets for creating growth in society is one important argument for performing
venture capital research, or as Mason and Harrison (1999, p 13-14) put it:
“Venture capital is now recognized globally as playing a key role in DEMO,
wealth creation and job generation and is increasingly a key element in
government efforts at both national and sub-national levels to generate
economic DEMO It is therefore important that our knowledge of this form of
finance increases.” However, despite the importance, it is still a rather young
DEMO field, not least in Sweden. As Barry (1994, p. 11) noted: “empirical
research on venture capital was virtually non-existent before the decade of the
1990s”. Another example of the youth of the research field DEMO that the first
academic journal with an explicit venture capital focus (DEMO Capital - An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance) started as late DEMO 19994. The lack of
research in the Swedish context can be exemplified with the following: A search
in peer-reviewed journals on the article database EBSCO Business Source
Premier5 with search terms “venture capital” and “Sweden” resulted DEMO only 23
hits, of these hits only thirteen articles are empirically DEMO the venture
4 There are of course several other journals that started earlier that also frequently publish
venture capital research, for instance Journal of Business Venturing, Small Business Economics,
Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, and the Journal of Small Business Management. To this there are
also several DEMO with a more practitioner-focus (e.g. The Journal of Private Equity).
DEMO EBSCO Business Source Premier is “the industry's most used business research database,
providing the full text for more than 8,800 serials”
(http://ebscohost.com/thisTopic.php?marketID=4&topicID=2 / [Accessed 20 August 2006]
4
capital market in Sweden. As a comparison, a search on only the term “venture
capital” in peer-reviewed journals resulted in 2144 hits6.
An obvious DEMO for the need for more research on the venture capital
market in Sweden is that differences in economic and social structures and legal
and DEMO environments may create an industry different from the U.S.
(role)model DEMO venture capital. Studying an “emerging” venture capital market as
Sweden might also give more general knowledge about how venture capital
markets are created outside DEMO US. Several studies have shown that legal or
cultural differences or the youth of a market can change the way actors in the
market DEMO For instance, Cumming and MacIntosh (2002) demonstrated
that differences in DEMO and institutional factors between the U.S. and Canada
created differences between the venture capital industries in the two countries
(e.g. that U.S. venture capitalists in general are more specialized investors).
Another example was given by DEMO and Gilson (1998) who illustrated how
differences in capital market organisation and regulation affect the development
and behaviour of the venture capital industry. DEMO major proposition was that
bank-centered capital systems (as in Germany and DEMO) might have a negative
effect on the vitality of the venture DEMO industry, compared to the more stock
market-centered system in the US. DEMO and Gilson (1998) also discussed
several other explanations for intercountry variations in venture capital, for
instance differences in pension fund size and regulation, variations in labour
market restrictions and cultural differences in entrepreneurship.
There are many interesting and important aspects that can be chosen when
doing venture DEMO research. Gaps and challenges can be found almost
everywhere.
Venture capital can, for instance, be studied from an industry-market
perspective where the main DEMO is to understand and analyse the venture
6 This should of course not be seen as a total count of all academic papers on DEMO capital
and is only a rough indicator on the lack of research on venture capital in Sweden.
5
capital industry from a macro level, e.g. by trying to find trends in market
behaviour. Bygrave and Timmons (1992) had this perspective in DEMO highly
cited book Venture capital at the crossroads where they discussed how the U.S.
venture capital industry had started to shift away from early DEMO investment
(what they called classic venture capital) towards later stage investment
(“merchant” venture capital). Another area that can be studied is the impact of
venture capital on society. An example of such research is DEMO in Kortum and
Lerner (1998) who studied the impact of venture capital on innovation and
found that the amount of venture capital activity DEMO an industry significantly
increased the rate of patenting in that industry.
Another important research area, one that is the focus in this thesis, DEMO
research that studies the process of venture capital investing. The venture capital
process traditionally includes everything from raising money for investment
funds, managing the investment process to the harvesting of the result (Tyebjee
and Bruno, DEMO; Fried and Hisrich, 1994; Gompers and Lerner, 2002). Hence,
in this research area the focus is more from an inside DEMO on venture
capital rather from the macro (outside) perspective. In their highly cited work,
Gorman and Sahlman (1989) phrased the questions DEMO do venture capitalists do?
in trying to capture the main research question in this area. However, knowledge
about the venture capital process has developed since then and shifted away
from pure descriptive studies of venture DEMO to focusing more on the
relational aspects of the venture capital process. The venture capitalist is a
relational investor as Fried and Hisrich (1995) pointed out.
Research on the venture capital process targets the actions and interactions
between the actors involved in the process. The main actors are DEMO investors,
the venture capitalists and the entrepreneurs. Venture capitalists serve as
intermediaries between investors (fund providers) and entrepreneurial ventures
in need of DEMO capital, i.e. they act both as a supplier of capital and
DEMO
competence to entrepreneurs and a seeker of capital from investors (Amit et al.
1998).
In order to understand many of the challenges in DEMO the venture capital
process it is important to emphasise some of the basic differences between
venture capital financing and traditional corporate finance (e.g. Copeland and
Weston, 2005). It is in these differences that many of the empirical and
theoretical challenges have their roots. Venture capital finance differs DEMO
corporate finance in many ways. Some of the most important differences include
the degree of information asymmetry between outside investors and
management (the entrepreneur), the role of contracting to resolve incentive
problems, the level of involvement by outside investors, the role of
diversification as a way to reduce risk and increase investment value, and the
illiquidity of the market for venture capital investments (Smith and Smith, 2004).
One major DEMO for venture capital firms (and for research in this field)
DEMO how to handle the information asymmetry that an investment in a young
entrepreneurial firm gives rise to (Amit et al., 1998). Venture DEMO investments
in firms with a short history (lack of historical data) and in new industries give
rise to information asymmetries between venture capitalists DEMO entrepreneur of
a much higher magnitude and importance then investments in publicly traded
corporations. The theory of information asymmetry originates from agency
theory (separation of management and control) (Eisenhardt, 1998) and suggests
that the DEMO often has an information advantage over the venture
capitalist. Information asymmetry creates two major problems that need to be
dealt with, the risk for adverse selection and the risk for moral hazard (Amit et
al., DEMO; Cumming, 2006). The risk for adverse selection is basically the risk that
“hidden information” leads to bad investments (in firms with poor
performance). The risk for moral hazard is about the risk that DEMO entrepreneur
acts opportunistically to the venture capitalists’ disadvantage.
7
How information asymmetries are handled has been a major research issue in
DEMO capital research (see for instance Amit et al., 1998; Sahlman, 1990;
Wright and Robbie, 1996; Gompers and Lerner, 1999; DEMO, 2006). Agency
theory and information asymmetry theory is often used DEMO studying
contracting issues in venture capital. Contracts between venture capitalists and
entrepreneurs “address the two fundamental problems of information
asymmetry and moral hazard by DEMO cash flow rights, voting control, and
decision rights” (Denis, 2004, p.311) Contracts can be used as screening devices
to avoid adverse DEMO (Smith and Smith, 2004) and be used to avoid moral
DEMO problems (Elitzur and Gavious, 2003).
Another research issue that also can be derived from the problem with lack
of information and the DEMO uncertainty in venture capital investing is the issue
of the valuation of young entrepreneurial firms. The traditional valuation models
that estimate the value of DEMO firm by discounting forecasted earnings or cash flows
are usually not recommended in these contexts. Yet, venture capitalists are
confronted frequently with companies whose current value must be estimated in
spite of the fact that so DEMO of the reward lies in an insecure future. Despite its
importance for the venture capital process, research on venture capital valuation
has been rather limited. One example of such research is Hering and Olbrich
(2006) DEMO studied how start-up companies in e-business are valued. Their main
conclusion was that the major challenge was the surplus forecast, not the choice
of valuation model. Other examples of such research involve those that try to
DEMO what kinds of valuation methods are used by venture capitalists. For
instance, Wright and Robbie (1996) found that valuation methods based on price
earnings multiples seemed to be the most frequently used venture capital
approach DEMO valuation.
If and how venture capital firms actually create value in the firms they invest
in is another interesting research question. As Mason and DEMO (1999, p. 27)
stated: “Whether and in what ways DEMO capitalists add value continues to be
8
a lively focus for debate, with no consensus on the answers.” It is by their active
role in their portfolio firms (for example by active participation on the board of
directors, acting as a sounding board, monitoring financial performance etc) that
venture capitalists are said to add DEMO However, despite considerable research
on the value adding activities of venture DEMO, few studies have managed to
empirically support the assertion that a DEMO capitalist’s involvement actually
has a positive effect on business performance (Brau DEMO al., 2004; Manigart et al.
2002).
When the venture capitalist exit the investment marks the ending of the
venture capital process. This DEMO can be done in several different ways, for
instance by an DEMO public offering, acquisition, buyback or, in a worst-case
scenario, by a write off (Cumming and MacIntosh, 2002). The potential for
DEMO from a prospective investment is crucial for a venture capitalist’s
investment decision. A prime reason that exits are of such importance in the
venture DEMO industry is that entrepreneurial firms, in the early stages of their
DEMO seldom are in a position to pay dividends to owners. The main
return that venture capitalists get from their investments is the profit realised
DEMO they sell their holdings in the ventures. Hence, this illiquidity of DEMO market
for venture capital investments constitutes a major issue for venture capital
investors. Research into venture capital exits has, however, been very limited
DEMO the apparent importance of the issue. Bygrave et al. (1994), DEMO and
MacIntosh (2002) and Schwienbacher (2002) are some of the exceptions.
1.1 Purpose of the thesis
The overall purpose for undertaking this DEMO was to increase the
understanding of the venture capital process with an emphasis on the
relationship between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs. This was done DEMO
four different papers and in this introduction. The four papers are positioned
along the venture capital process from entry to exit. However, they do not
9
directly follow on one through the other (i.e. the second paper does not start
where the first paper ends). Each paper can be DEMO as a freestanding inquiry into
a certain aspect of the venture capital process (contracting, valuation, value
creation and exit). The papers are also theoretically freestanding from each other,
mainly because I do not DEMO that it is possible to cover the venture capital
process under a single theoretical framework.
Figure 1 illustrates how my papers are related to DEMO venture capital process
(discussed in more detail in chapter 4). DEMO process is broken down to three
main phases, contracting and valuation, value creation and exiting. Two papers
deals with the first phase (contracting and valuation), one paper deals with value
creation, and the final paper deals with exiting.
FIGURE 1.
The venture capital process and the DEMO in the thesis
Establish a fund
Deal flow
Papers
Investment decision
Value Creation
Exit
Contracting &
valuation
Governance &
trust
Exit strategy
Two DEMO deal with problems associated with the venture capitalists
entering the relationship, DEMO and valuation. The research problems in
these two papers are:
How is the venture capital contract structured and why is it so
structured?DEMO
and
How do venture capital firms value entrepreneurial ventures?
10
The third paper deals with the relationship between the venture capitalist and
DEMO entrepreneur during the value adding process and is guided by the following
research question:
How do governance and trust affect the performance of DEMO
capital backed entrepreneurial firms?
The fourth paper is studies venture capital exit strategies with the following
questions:
What kinds of exit strategies DEMO Swedish venture capital firms use?
Is the venture capitalist’s organisational form related to its exit
strategy?
Does exit strategy affect exit-directed activities?DEMO
1.2 Outline of the thesis
As mentioned, this thesis consists of DEMO major parts, first this introduction
to the thesis and secondly a DEMO of four research papers.
However, the introduction part is more than DEMO introduction to the papers. It
also consists of three chapters that contribute to the overall purpose of the
thesis.
Chapter two is a chapter DEMO I examine the concept of venture capital and
discuss terms and definitions. An understanding of the term venture capital is
fundamental for understanding my DEMO Furthermore, misunderstandings
and shifting definitions regarding venture capital terms are quite DEMO,
leading to several problems in the communication between venture capitalists,
entrepreneurs, researchers and policy makers. Hence, the purpose is to set DEMO
language of venture capital. My original paper about venture capital terms and
definitions was in Swedish and first published in the Swedish Venture Capital
DEMO Private Equity Associations (SVCAs) yearbook (Isaksson, 1998a). That
paper was developed by “washing” my (early) theoretical understanding of
11
venture capital with an ongoing discussion with representatives from SVCA. The
paper DEMO since then gone through several revisions. The chapter will also appear
in the forthcoming book, Beyond the Valley of Death: Innovation in Venture DEMO and
entrepreneurship, published by SNS (Isaksson et al. 2006).
Chapter 3 describes the history of the Swedish venture capital market. One
reason DEMO including this chapter in my dissertation is that it places the other
papers in context. The Swedish governments’ influence in the venture capital
market DEMO also important to highlight. In the last paper (Exit strategy and DEMO
intensity of exit-directed activities among venture capital-backed entrepreneurs
in Sweden) I DEMO how public sector venture capitalists differ in behaviour
from private venture capitalists. Hence, the chapter gives more background to
the role of public sector venture capitalists in Sweden. However, the most
important reason to include this historical chapter is probably that a doctoral
thesis on venture capital in DEMO needs to present the background for the
reader to understand the market studied. This chapter is also a slight revision of
a chapter that DEMO appear in Isaksson et al. (2006).
Chapter 4 reviews the DEMO capital process. In this chapter, I try to
summarize what research DEMO taught us so far about the venture capital process. I
have also positioned the four papers that are appended to the dissertation. The
majority DEMO this chapter is also forthcoming in Isaksson et al. (2006).
DEMO chapter 5 the appended papers are summarized and complemented with a
shorter discussion about the contributions.
12
2. Defining venture capital7
The debate regarding financing of SMEs and venture DEMO is
characterised by an extensive confusion regarding the terms risk capital, DEMO
capital, venture capital etc. It is therefore necessary to give a DEMO explanation of
the terms.
A firm can be financed by equity capital (i.e. risk capital), debt capital, or a
combination of both DEMO The major difference between these sources of
financing is that risk capital providers take a higher risk but also have a higher
expected return DEMO other types of capital providers. An exception from this
fundamental difference between equity and debt capital is the soft loans that are
provided by DEMO governmental institutions for instance in Sweden, ALMI,
Industrifonden or Norrlandsfonden. DEMO governmental institutions offer soft
loans that sometimes can be written off if the venture fails. In some cases, soft
loans are also referred to as risk debt (riskvilliga krediter) or Government
Granted Loans. However, soft loans should not be confused with risk capital.
Not the least because DEMO capital involves some kind of active ownership by
the contributor (Klofsten, et al. 1999).
The term risk capital is commonly given two DEMO meanings: One is in a
broad sense including all kinds of DEMO that are invested in risky projects. The
other is a more narrow definition meaning equity capital. The more narrow
definition is the one primarily DEMO by researchers, practitioners, and legislating
bodies (see for instance Wetzel, 1983; European Commission, 1998; SVCA,
1998; EVCA, 2002). In some cases risk capital is defined even more narrowly as:
DEMO financing to companies in their start-up and development phases”
(European Commission, 1998). The definition of risk capital as equity capital
separates it DEMO secured debt financing. Hence, the risk in risk capital demands
7 DEMO chapter will in part be published in the forthcoming book: Isaksson, A., Vintergaard, C.,
Etzkowitz, H., and Klofsten, M, DEMO Beyond the Valley of Death: Innovation in Venture
capital and entrepreneurship. DEMO: SNS.
13
in fact that the equity owners take the genuine risk of the DEMO, as opposed
to debt owners whose capital usually is better secured DEMO case of liquidation.
However, an exact definition is not easy to DEMO and there are several semi
equity capital instruments like convertibles8 etc. that also can be regarded as risk
capital. Grants and subsidies can also DEMO seen as a form of risk capital under
certain circumstances when they are used as seed capital for firm-formation.
Following the narrow definition of DEMO capital as an investment in exchange
for a share in ownership, DEMO can conclude that the alternative to finance a
venture start-up with risk capital is to finance the firm with debt capital. See
figure 2.
DEMO 2
Principal outline of capital sources for SMEs
Sources for
financing a firm
Debt capital
Equity capital
Traditional loans
Soft loans
Semi equity
Risk DEMO
2.1 Venture capital and private equity
Venture capital is a subset of risk capital, in which the risk taken by the
investor is offset by participation in the future success of the firm as part owner.
DEMO concept of venture capital as a source of investment has probably been
around as long as there have been people prepared to put part DEMO their wealth at
risk for a potential gain. Isabella’s financing of Columbus could, for instance, be
8 Convertible debt financing that has a DEMO allowing the debt to be converted to equity,
often at the option of the investor, in the event of a default on repayment terms.
14
seen as a kind of venture capital investment (capital gain through discovery of a
new route to India)9.
The more developed concept of DEMO capital investing, as we know it
today, with subscribers, professional DEMO, and its own terminology, was
however first developed in the U.S. after the Second World War (Gompers,
1994). Since then venture capital investment has become an institutionalised
segment in the general economy.
Venture DEMO is often, especially in Europe, seen as synonymous with
“private equity”. In this connection, venture capital refers to investments (with
private equity) made by institutions, firms and wealthy individuals in the early-
and expansion-stages of the newly established firm. The terminology of private
equity is, however, also covering a range of other stages (Bridge financing,
Replacement DEMO, Rescue/Turnaround, etc.), which goes beyond venture
capital. Nevertheless, DEMO capital firms often participate in these various
investment formats, simply to DEMO money when it seems the best use of their
capital even though it is for purposes other than firm-formation and growth.
Classic venture capital DEMO provision of business expertise and
mentoring to relatively inexperienced firm-founders. Another frequently cited
difference is the fact that venture capital investors are often more DEMO in the
management and control of their portfolio firms compared to later stage
investors (Fried et al. 1998). Among most professional venture capital
organisations, venture capital is defined as a subset of private equity – focusing
on earlier stage investments.
The European Private Equity and Venture Capital DEMO, EVCA,
defines venture capital as “Professional equity co-invested with the DEMO
to fund an early stage (seed and start-up) or expansion venture. Offsetting the
9 Of course, not all such projects have been made entirely, or only, for economic gain,
sometimes these gains have DEMO, and can be, just an added bonus. These were of cause
brought about for a higher goal, but many properly took part also hoping for some financial
benefit from conquered lands, goods, and control DEMO trade routes.
15
high risk the investor takes is the expectation of higher than average DEMO on
the investment.”, and private equity as equity capital provided to DEMO not
quoted on a stock market (EVCA, 200610).
Figure 3, capture the definitions and distinction of the terms risk capital,
venture capital and private equity. As can be seen private equity is divided DEMO
three subgroups, informal venture capital, formal venture capital and other
private equity. Formal venture capital is also sometimes refereed to as “classic
venture DEMO and “other private equity” is sometimes only referred to as
“private equity”. The distinction between venture capital and private equity can
be found in DEMO by, for instance, Wright and Robbie (1998) and Bygrave
and Timmons (1992).
FIGURE 3.
A classification and definition of the terms risk capital, private
equity and venture capital
Risk Capital:
Equity capital invested…
Public equity
in public companies
Private equity:
in private companies.
DEMO Venture capital
Investments made by private
individuals investing their own
money
Formal Venture capital:
Investments made by professional
firms. Active and time limited
DEMO
Focus on early stages.
Other private equity:
e.g. later stage
investments,
MBOs etc
In the Figure 3, private equity is divided into three subgroups, informal
venture capital, formal venture capital and other private DEMO Formal venture
capital is also sometimes refereed to as “classic venture capital” and “other
private equity” is sometimes only referred to as “private equity”. DEMO distinction
between venture capital and private equity can be found in arguments by, for
instance, Wright and Robbie (1998) and Bygrave and DEMO (1992).
10 http://www.evca.com/html/PE_industry/glossary.asp [Accessed 20 DEMO 2006]
16
Informal venture capital is investments that are made by wealthy private
individuals DEMO their own funds (Sörheim and Landström, 2002). These
informal investors are sometimes referred to as business angels (Wetzel, 1983).
The DEMO between an informal investor and a formal venture capital firm is
in practice often diffuse. Especially the distinction between very active business
angels and DEMO capital firms is difficult to draw. Informal investors can for
instance make investments via a company that the investor controls. It has also
become DEMO in recent years in both Europe and U.S. to create formally
organised networks of business angels (BAN´s i.e. business angle networks)
(Gullander DEMO Napier, 2003).
Business angels often invest in earlier stages than DEMO venture capitalists and
also tend to be more involved with the daily operations of the portfolio firms
(Landström, 1993). From a macro DEMO perspective business angels offer
extremely valuable resources for the economy. Instead of using their personal
wealth on consumer goods they use their money and DEMO to develop
new innovative businesses (Wetzel, 1983; Harrison and Mason, 1999).
By combining figures 2 and 3 we gain a fairly DEMO picture of the types of
financing for new entrepreneurial firms.
17
FIGURE 4.
A classification and definition of the different sources of financing
DEMO venture firms.
Sources for
financing a firm
Equity capital
Debt capital
Public equity
in publiccompanies
Private equity:
in privatecompanies.
Soft loans
Informal Venture DEMO Formal Venture capital: Other private equity:
Investmentsmadeby private Investmentsmadebyprofessional e.g. DEMO
individuals investing their own firms.Activeand timelimited investments,
money partnership. MBOsetc
Focus onearly stages.
The classification of companies into the various subgroups allows us DEMO look
closely at what type of investment the company primarily pursues. It is however
crucial to keep in mind that many companies combine venture DEMO and
private equity investments, which in turn makes clear cut classification DEMO
2.2 Venture capital in the financial
landscape for firm formation and
growth
Venture capital is not the only source of finance for start-up firms. DEMO
seen in relation to other financing options and the total amount of capital
invested in all firms, then venture capital as an asset or equity class becomes
marginal. Furthermore, many firms start up without the need for venture capital.
While some firms wish to access venture capital and DEMO unable to, others avoid
it for fear of deleterious consequences such DEMO forced growth overextending the
firm or the investor taking over. The reason why venture capital has attracted
such attention is mainly due to the DEMO impact it has on young firms’ high
growth potential, as evident DEMO many new technology based firms. Venture
18
Risk Capital:
Equity capital invested…
Semi equity
Traditional loans
capital can be the only (and maybe the best) alternative for DEMO of these firms.
For instance, Isaksson (1999) surveyed venture capital DEMO firms in Sweden
and found that 31 percent of these firms perceived that venture capital was the
only available source of finance for their DEMO This figure was even higher
for less mature firms in the survey. The importance of venture capital for the
economy was even more apparent DEMO added the fact that the firms included in
the survey were growing much faster than similar firms. Other similar findings
have been made on DEMO international scale, further stressing the positive micro
and macro economic effects DEMO venture capital (Hellmann and Puri, 2000;
Kortum and Lerner, DEMO).
Besides supplying new start-ups with capital and competence, venture capital
DEMO work as a considerable leverage for other capital sources. Anecdotal evidence
tells that for every unit of venture capital that a start-up receives an DEMO
five can be borrowed from banks and other credit institutions. Evidently venture
capital provides start-ups with more trustworthiness and strengthens the firm’s
position versus DEMO potential financiers. This is due to the validation received
by the project being picked for investment over so many other possible projects.
However, as mentioned earlier private venture capital is not the only source
of risk DEMO for a firm. Figure 5 positions venture capital in a context of other
capital providers, i.e. the financial landscape for a growing firm. The risk capital
chain within the landscape represents many of the actors (entrepreneur, private
investors, private venture capital and public venture capital) who supply the
entrepreneurial firm with equity financing.
19
FIGURE 5.
The capital chain for a growing firm
Government funding
Entrepreneur
DEMO investors
Venture capital
Public capital
Seed Start up
Costs
Revenues
Low
Zero
High
Marginal
Debt capital
Expansion
Very high
High
Typical financial factors related DEMO each stage
Starting up new entrepreneurial firms is a risky business. Needless to say
actors who take this kind of risk also expect high DEMO This is especially the
case for ventures that are built on novel and unproved technologies. Such firms’
often require large amounts of capital to DEMO initial research. It can, for
instance, easily take up to eight years for a life-science firm to develop a product
to sell. Other DEMO of venture companies, such as within the service field or
even DEMO IT solutions, can have a sellable product from day one and DEMO hence
build market share while perfecting the product and even create revenue from
sales.
The risk/reward ratio is sharply different for equity and DEMO capital. The
earlier the phases in an entrepreneurial firm’s development, the DEMO risk the
investor is willing to undertake but only in exchange for the prospect of greater
reward. The equity investor’s upside is typically greater, at least in prospect and
potential but so are their chances of DEMO Hence equity investors often engage in
more risky projects than debt investors. Within each category (debt and equity)
risk profiles also differ e.g. government lending is on average more risky than
bank lending.
20
Level DEMO risk for the investor
Low High
The stages illustrated in Figure 5, is one way of categorising different phases
that a growing firm passes in its life cycle. The issues DEMO problems a firm faces
are often very different from one stage to the next. In the figure these issues and
problems are united in DEMO effects on costs and revenues. For instance, in
the seed stage DEMO firms usually have relatively low costs in developing the
business idea or constructing the first prototype.
At this early stage the initial ownership model DEMO also conceived and
implemented. At the seed stage the risk for total loss is high, and so control and
value become very important parameters for the venture capitalist when
negotiating ownership models in relation to investment DEMO resources. However,
once the ownership issue is settled, implemented, and official, the effect is an
added overall value in the venture. However the venture capitalists equity-share
of the venture is relatively small at this DEMO Later the value of the venture will
grow – for both entrepreneur and investor.
When the firm enters the start-up phase costs start to DEMO dramatically, e.g.
from product development, market research, recruitment of personnel. DEMO this
time the revenue starts coming in, but at a low DEMO When the firm matures it
reaches the expansion phase, sometimes divided DEMO early and late expansion. In
the early expansion stage, production and DEMO increase but the firm does not yet
show any profit. In the later expansion stage the firm is usually starting to make
a profit DEMO needs additional capital for further development, marketing efforts,
or product DEMO
Below is a short definition of the financial stages (according to DEMO European
Private Equity and Venture capital Association, EVCA11):
• Seed stage: Financing provided to research, assess and develop an
initial concept DEMO a business has reached the start-up phase.
• Start up stage: DEMO provided to firms for product development
and initial marketing. Firms may be in the process of being set up or
11 http://www.evca.com/DEMO/PE_industry/glossary.asp  [Accessed 20 August 2006]
21
may have been in business for a short time, but have not sold their
product commercially.
• Expansion stage: Financing provided for the growth and expansion of
a firm, which may or may not break even or trade profitably. Capital
may be used to: finance increased production capacity; market or
product development; provide additional working capital.
The seed and DEMO up stages are often combined and referred to as early
stage.
2.3 The structure of venture capital
organisations
Venture capital companies can be divided DEMO several different categories
based on source of contributed funds or by the ownership structure of the
company.
Private independent venture capital firms invest their DEMO through funds
organized as limited partnerships in which the venture capital firm serves as the
general partner. Independent venture capital firms are the dominant DEMO of
venture capital organization both in the U.S. (Sahlman, 1990) DEMO in Europe. In
Europe was 76.8 percentage of all funds that where raised in 2004 contributed
by independent venture capitalists (EVCA, 2004). DEMO form of venture capital
organization has also become the dominant venture capital firm organization in
Sweden (EVCA, 2006).
If the venture capital DEMO is funded mainly from internal sources by a parent
organization it is often labelled a captive venture capital organization (Jeng and
Wells, 2000)DEMO That is, a captive venture capital firm is a company that DEMO to
an established corporation that is investing its own resources. The parent
organization is often a financial institution, such as a bank or insurance
company, but can sometimes also be a larger non-financial company. The latter
22
form is sometimes also called a corporate venture capital organization and
treated DEMO a separate category (McNally, 1994).
Definitions vary to some extent among researchers and practitioners. For
instance, Cumming and MacIntosh (2002) separate the captive firms with regard
to their parent company’s line of business (corporate industrial and corporate
financial).
Finally, public sector venture capital organizations are organizations that are
financed and controlled by government institutions. The degree DEMO government
influence can vary from being totally owned to partly financed or supported by
the government.
Public sector venture capital organisations differ from the DEMO
organisational forms of venture capital in that they are operating under statutory
constraints, for instance in that they have a higher goal (e.g. DEMO promote small
firm growth) or that they are only allowed to DEMO in a certain region. The
Swedish government has had a long tradition of creating public sector venture
capital organizations. The very first venture capital DEMO in Sweden
(Företagskapital) was for instance partly funded by the government. Most of the
public sector venture capital organisations in Sweden are today DEMO Cumming
and MacIntosh (2002) define as hybrid funds where the government invest
alongside private investors.
The relation to and dependence on fund providers DEMO affect how the
venture capital organisation behave and act. The presence of an external investor
may for instance have several implications on the behaviour DEMO the venture
capitalist.  Investors may for instance influence investment strategies and DEMO
horizons of the venture capital firm (Sahlman, 1990). However, DEMO most
important effect is probably the more pronounced need for reputation and track
record that independent venture capitalists need in order to attract investors’
DEMO For instance, Gompers (1995) argues that this might have caused
DEMO venture capitalists to take companies public to early. Furthermore,
23
Scwienbacher (2002) has found in his survey of European venture capitalists DEMO
there was a widespread belief that successful IPOs would give significant
reputation benefits to the venture capitalist, indicating that independent venture
capitalists might pursue an IPO exit strategy, even if a trade sale strategy is more
expected and rational.
Captive venture capital organizations (and especially the corporate venture
capital type) can differ in their strategic objectives from private independent
companies in that that these firms might have corporate strategic objectives in
mind DEMO the private independents typically have investment return or financial
objectives as their primary goal. Wright and Robbie (1996) found (on U.K. data)
that captive firms differed in several dimensions from independent venture
capitalists. However, several of these differences (for instance the use of
different valuation methods) could probably be related to their finding that
captive firms are more likely than independents to prefer investments in later
stages (management buyouts and buy-ins).
Finally, public sector venture capitalists might differ in their behaviour
relative to their private counterparts for instance in that they are limited DEMO
statutory constraints. The existence of higher long-term goals beyond making
business profits is a notable feature that separates all public sector venture capital
companies DEMO their private counterparts is. For instance, in the charter of
Industrifonden (one of Sweden’s largest public venture capital organisation) it
states that the all-embracing purpose of the foundation is to strengthen the
renewal and growth DEMO small and medium sized enterprises in Sweden. There is
not much empirical evidence on the difference between public and private
venture capital organisations. However, Cumming and MacIntosh (2002) argued
that Canadian public venture capital firms, based on statutory constraints and
other limitations, would make more investments in lower growth firms than
their competitors. Isaksson (2006 – paper 4) DEMO argue that the lack of
appropriate incentive structures among investment managers in (Swedish) public
24
sector venture capitalists also could have an effect on the decisions they DEMO
Ayayi (2004) also found indications that (Canadian) public sector venture
capitalists had lower skill levels than their private counterparts. The lack of DEMO
skills resulted in that they tended neither to be specialized in any particular
industry nor able to focus their investment decisions on specific stages DEMO
development. Due to inexperience they where also insufficient in giving
appropriate business advice to their investees. Ayayi (2004) also found that the
returns DEMO the Canadian public sector venture capitalists were considerable lower
than those of their competitors.
3.  A history of the Swedish venture
capital market12
The Swedish venture capital market has its roots in the 70’s when the DEMO
formal venture capital firms were established. Over the following thirty years the
industry went through two major cycles of growth and contraction. The first
DEMO started in the early 1980ties and ended around 1988-89. The second major
cycle started around 1993 and peaked around 2000-2001.
3.1 The first cycle
DEMO late 70’s were characterised by a general economic downturn and a tax
system that discouraged capital investments. Many different solutions were
discussed to turn DEMO negative trend around. Eyes were beginning to turn to the
U.S. to try to find measures that could improve the entrepreneurial climate
(Jörgensen and Levin, 1984). An investigation (SOU 1981:95) suggested that a
new market for trading shares in new and small firms could be DEMO solution,
leading to the start of the Over-The-Counter market (OTC)DEMO A more liquid
capital market together a with better economic climate in general and new
12 A revised version of this chapter will be DEMO in the forthcoming book: Isaksson, A.,
Vintergaard, C., Etzkowitz, H., and Klofsten, M, 2006. Beyond the Valley of Death:DEMO
Innovation in Venture capital and entrepreneurship. Stockholm: SNS.
25
favourable legislations for the capital market in the early 1980’s initiated the DEMO
venture capital cycle in Sweden (Olofsson and Wahlbin, 1985). The wave was
fuelled by small venture capital firms. Investors in these firms DEMO mostly large
industrial firms and financial institutions (banks, insurance companies). The
Swedish government also got involved in that market by setting up DEMO
development funds that supported small firms with soft loans and advice
(DEMO, 1985, 1986; Herzog, 1987, 1988,1990; Fredriksen, 1997; Landström,
1988).
During this “first wave” of formal venture capital DEMO 30 new venture
capital firms where established together with several government funds
(Fredriksen, 1997). Such private venture capital firms that started during DEMO
time were VenCap, VenTech, Ventura, FourSeasons among others (Olofsson,
1985, 1986; Herzog, 1987, 1988, 1990; Fredriksen, 1997).
However, the market soon came into a halt when the stock market went
down in the late 80’s – together with several other circumstances DEMO interplayed
(increasing attraction in the property market by the investors, high interest rates
etc). Many investors seemed to have under-estimated the time DEMO would take to
build up a properly working venture capital industry (DEMO, skills,
competencies, and patience) and saw the venture funds DEMO a means of investing
profitably with a relatively short investment horizon. Subsequently, when the
funds were exhausted many investors in the small private venture capital funds
were unwilling to supply additional capital (Herzog, 1990). DEMO explanation
for the failure was that the managers of these venture capital firms adopted large
business management model style for developing young and small DEMO, which
afterwards has been seen as counterproductive. It seems an alternative DEMO
was required to better fit the circumstances of organising firms in early
development.
The problem with inexperienced venture capital managers was, however, not
DEMO for Sweden. The U.S. experienced the same problem with the effects of
26
inexperienced venture capital managers. The following quotation from Lerner
(1994, p DEMO) regarding U.S. was equally true for Sweden: ”Many venture
capitalists that received money in the ‘boom’ of the 1980’s had little or no
DEMO industry experience… experienced venture capitalists are and will be in
short supply for some time”.
After a shakeout period, most of the Swedish private venture capital firms
left the industry. By the early 1990’s the Swedish DEMO sector underwent a
serious crisis. As a consequence of this crisis and the diminished interest in
venture capital, many young enterprises with growth potential experienced
severe difficulties in raising external development capital (Fredriksen, 1997;
DEMO and Cornelius, 1998b; Karaömerlioğlu and Jacobsson, 2000).
3.2 The DEMO cycle
Starting around 1995/96 the Swedish venture market underwent a
tremendous growth. The main reasons for the upturn in supply of venture
capital DEMO be found in a booming stock market (again), increases in DEMO
private savings and allocations of capital from pension funds to the venture
capital industry (see discussions in SVCA 1995-2006). Different government
initiatives can also have had an effect on the increasing supply of venture capital.
DEMO of the reason for the growth in the Swedish venture capital market in this
period can probably be contributed to the change of focus DEMO Industrifonden
and the Swedish National Pension Fund to venture capital investments which
happened to coincided with a major shift in the stock market (Gompers and
Lerner, 1998; Jeng and Wells, 2000).
Demand side factors also played a fundamental role for the growth in the
venture capital DEMO in the late 1990’s, as the increase in the supply of DEMO
capital were met by an increase in high technology ideas (e.g. DEMO growing Internet
related industry, spin-offs from older “locomotive firms” like L.M. DEMO,
Volvo, Astra, and biotechnology industries). As pointed out by Baygan (2003, p.
27
12) in a report to OECD: “Sweden’s strong research and development DEMO
and recent shift to a more technology-based economy has gained the country a
particular advantage in attracting international capital”.
In addition, increasingly flexible new markets for trading shares in small and
medium sized enterprises were introduced. DEMO wealth of new venture capital
companies entered the scene, especially private DEMO captive firms. Because of the
increasing amount of private venture capital in the market, the share of
government venture capital firms decreased in relative terms (Isaksson, 1998c).
3.3 After the crash – the third DEMO?
In the late ‘90s, the venture capital market was beginning DEMO show signs of
becoming overheated (Bygrave, 2002, Lashinsky, 2002). This was also very true
for Sweden, where the market had grown from a few, mostly government
managed, venture capital firms in the DEMO ‘90s to around 200 firms managing
more then 120 billion SEK in 2000. The competition among venture capital
firms in Sweden led to higher DEMO and investments in earlier stages than
the market traditionally had done (DEMO & Fusioner, 2001). In 1999 Swedish
venture capitalists were investing DEMO in seed and start-ups then in any other
European country (SVCA, 2000).
The market collapse that followed had a large effect on DEMO Swedish venture
capital industry. Many of the young venture capital firms that were created
during the boom-years disappeared. However, at the same time there was an
inflow of international venture capital to Sweden (SVCA, 2003)DEMO
The years that followed the crash were characterised by a very reluctant and
risk avoiding market. The previously noted high interest to invest in DEMO stages
more or less disappeared. The Swedish private equity analyst Förvärv & Fusioner
summarized their view on the market in 2003 by quoting a DEMO capitalist:
”Yes we have money – but we are scared” (DEMO & Fusioner, 2003, p. 1).
28
At present there are approximately 104 venture capital firms13 in Sweden with
DEMO 80 billion SEK under management, a slight increase from previous years.
DEMO can be compared to the total private equity market in Sweden (DEMO
capital and buyouts) that manages approximately 214 billion SEK (SVCA 2006).
In figure 6 below, I have made an attempt to capture the development of the
Swedish venture capital market from 1980 to the DEMO in terms of number of
venture capital firms and capital under management14.  “Number of venture
capital firms” shows firms that are located in Sweden and with a focus on
investing in early stages (seed, start DEMO and expansion). Hence, firms specialising
in later stages (buy-outs) DEMO not included. The same criterion is used for capital
under management (DEMO venture capital).
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Capital under mangement
250
200
150
100
50
0
FIGURE DEMO
Development of the Swedish venture capital market
Number of VCs
13 Active venture capital firms located in Sweden with a prime focus of investing DEMO early stages
(i.e. buyout firms are not counted)
14 Se DEMO section 3.3 “A concluding note of measuring venture capital markets” where some
of the problems in measuring a venture capital market are discussed.
29
DEMO under management (billion sek)
# of VC firms
1980
1981
DEMO
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Source:  My own compilation based on a number of sources15
As DEMO be seen from figure 6, there was a drastic shift in DEMO market between
2000 and 2001. The number of active venture capital firms continued to
decrease until around 2004 when the number seems to stabilise. DEMO to
note is that the amount of venture capital in the market did not decrease that
dramatically. This can probably be explained by the DEMO of larger actors
for the many small firms that withdrew from the market, to some extent having
been replaced by larger actors that filled the gap (SVCA, 2003). It is also
important to mention DEMO capital under management is more a measure for the
size of the market, than a measure of how active the market is. Hence, DEMO
this period the capital was available, but venture capitalists were reluctant DEMO
invest, as Förvärv & Fusioner (2003) noted.
As an illustration DEMO the investment levels during the last few years, figure 7
summarizes DEMO of initial investments16 made in different stages during 2003
to 2005.
15 Olofsson (1985), Fredriksen (1997) and SIND (1990) for the period 1980 to 1990. Nielsen
(1994), Ds 1994:52 (1994), EVCA (1996) and Karaömerlioğlu and Jacobsson (2000) for the
period 1991 to 1995. From 1996 to present it is mainly based on DEMO from Förvärv &
Fusioners database combined with data from SVCA with DEMO based on my research.
16 An initial investment is the first venture capital investment made in a firm
(http://www.evca.com/html/PE_industry/glossary.asp, accessed 20 August 2006).
30
FIGURE 7.
Number of initial investments, by stage17
60
50
40
30
20
10
54
40
20
48
28
48
38
25
0
2003
DEMO
2004
Start-up
2005
Expansion
Source: Own compilations based on quarterly statistics DEMO SVCA and NUTEK (NUTEK, 2006).
As can be seen in figure 7, the number of initial investments has been fairly
stable during the period 2003-2005. There are neither any dramatic signs of
increase nor DEMO decrease. The same stable results are received when total number
or amount of investments are analysed.
However, data from the first quarter of 2006 indicate a slight increase in the
number and amount of initial investments DEMO seed stages. During Q4 2005 and
Q1 2006 a total of 47 MSEK was invested in 22 firms in the seed stage. This
could DEMO compared with Q4 2004 and Q1 2005, when 36 MSEK was DEMO in
14 firms, or Q1 2003 and Q2 2003 when 17 DEMO was invested in 8 firms.
Counting the total number of investments (DEMO follow-on
investments18) for 2005, there were 52 investments made in the seed stage, 197
17 I have chosen initial investments as I see those numbers as better indicator of current
conditions than total investments (that include follow up investments). Note also that these
numbers is based DEMO survey data with varying response rates and should therefore be seen as a
rough indicator of current trends.
31
Number of initial investments
in the start up stage and 279 in the expansion stage. This DEMO (with caution) be
compared with the numbers for the year 1999 (EVCA, 2000) when 70
investments were made in the seed stage, 410 in start-ups, and 242 in the
expansion stage.
A final DEMO to analyse investment activities is presented in figure 8. In that
chart investments are measured per venture capitalist (both in numbers and in
amount). The quarterly statistics are based on survey data with very varying
DEMO rates (between 59 to 85 percent for the period 2003-2006), DEMO
makes comparisons over time difficult. An alternative way of investigating
changes in investor behaviour might be to break the numbers down to averages
per DEMO This is done on figure 8 where the data from each quarter were
divided with the number of responses from that quarter (buyout investors
excluded).
18 A follow-on investment is an additional investment in a DEMO that has already received
funding from a venture capitalist (http://DEMO/html/PE_industry/glossary.asp,
accessed 20 August 2006).
32
FIGURE 8.
Average quarterly investments (amount and number) per venture
capital DEMO
4,50
14,00
4,00
3,50
3,00
2,50
12,00
10,00
8,00
2,00
1,50
1,00
DEMO,50
6,00
4,00
2,00
0,00
03-
Q1
03-
Q2
03-
Q3
03-
Q4
Number of initial inv.
04-
Q1
04-
DEMO
04-
Q3
04-
Q4
05-
Q1
05-
Q2
Number of total inv.
05-
Q3
05-
Q4
06-
Q1
0,00
Amount of inv.
Source: Own compilations based on quarterly statistics from SVCA and NUTEK (NUTEK, DEMO).
As can be seen in the graph (figure 8) investment behaviour has been fairly
stable over time. The average investment per quarter DEMO the whole period was
7,9 MSEK. It is also obvious that most of the investments that were made were
follow-on investments. An average DEMO made 0,5 initial investments and 2,1
follow-on investments per quarter. Further analysis of the data also showed that
65 percent of all DEMO where made in expansion stages, representing 82
percent of total amount DEMO This can be compared to the seed-stage that
represented 4 percent of all investments and 5 percent of the amount invested.
These numbers were DEMO quite stable over time.
The Swedish venture capital market seems to have started to recover from
the crash. Investment levels seem to be on DEMO rather stable level (see figure 7 and
8). One positive DEMO is the development in the market for initial public offerings
33
Av. number of investments (initial and total)
Av. amount (in MSEK) of total investment   .
(IPOs). According to an analysis from Förvärv & Fusioner (2006) the market for
IPOs is booming in Sweden (May 2006). The market for IPOs is a very good
early indicator of how the DEMO capital market will evolve in the near future.
Booming IPO (and DEMO) markets have historically been one of the strongest
driving forces behind DEMO growth of venture capital markets (Gompers and
Lerner, 1998), and a good market for IPOs is “critical to the existence of a
DEMO venture capital market” (Black and Gilson, 1998, p. 45).
DEMO a contrast, the development on the US venture capital market is DEMO
in figure 9, although the numbers are not really comparable (due to lack of
reliable and comparable data).
FIGURE 9
Total U.S. DEMO by Year 1995 – 2006
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
DEMO
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
0
Amount Invested
# of Deals
Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association, DEMO Report
Figure 9 illustrates the drastic decline in venture capital investing that
occurred after year 2000, both in amount invested and in number of deals.
Statistics from quarter 1 and 2 2006 show a slight increase. DEMO Q2 2006, venture
capitalists invested the highest dollar amount into the DEMO deals since Q1 2002
34
Amount Invested ($Billion)   .
# of Deals
(PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association, Q2 2006
MoneyTree Report).
3.4 DEMO concluding note of measuring
venture capital markets
Trying to measure the size of a venture capital market is a very difficult task.
Especially when DEMO to find comparable historical and current data, and
especially for a DEMO and immature venture capital market such as Sweden’s. The
first major dilemma is the lack of reliable databases. It is only since the mid DEMO
that, for instance, the member directories of the Swedish venture capital
association have become fairly reliable. Statistics from the European Venture
Capital Association DEMO even more unreliable. One reason for the lack of
complete databases has been that the industry (especially the private venture
capital industry) is DEMO by discretion and reticence. The second
dilemma is the speed in which the market changes; this was especially
problematic during 1998 to 2001. A third problem is that counting venture
capital companies and capital is very DEMO a matter of definitions and
judgements (e.g. what is a venture DEMO firm and how is capital under
management counted). It is not unusual in some of the statistics to find that
government lending institutions DEMO ALMI or Norrlandsfonden are counted as
venture capital firms.
Yet another problem in the counting has been the fact that often only
members of DEMO venture capital associations were included in the counts,
even though not all venture capital firms are members of SVCA or the EVCA.
Double DEMO of investments and capital is another bias that is common,
i.e. first counting the capital of fund providers (e.g. Sixth AP Fund) DEMO then
counting the capital again in the venture capital fund that the fund provider
invested in. Nevertheless, figure 6 (Development of the Swedish DEMO capital
market) is an attempt to bring different sources of information DEMO to
35
produce a complete picture of the Swedish venture capital market over more
DEMO 20 years.
To analyse investments in the Swedish venture capital market is even more
difficult than is measuring the size of the market. Available DEMO are of very
poor quality due to measurement errors and response biases. The quarterly
statistics from SVCA and NUTEK (NUTEK, 2001-2006) have improved the
situation but many measurement response problems still exist. The quarterly
statistics DEMO based on survey data, with response rates varying between 59 to DEMO
percent (for the period 2003-2006). Hence, the data is covers only a sample of
the total population. The most severe measurement error DEMO the quarterly
statistics is probably double counting. For example, if three DEMO capital firms
are jointly investing in one firm, this is recorded DEMO three investments. This might
lead to a perceived increase in investments when it actually is a sign if an increase
in syndication19 among venture DEMO
3.5 The role of the Swedish Government
Since the start the Swedish government has played an active role in trying to
create a vital DEMO capital market in Sweden and reduce the equity gap (SOU
1981:DEMO; Ds 1994:52; SOU 1996:69). The Swedish government’s involvement
can also be seen as a long period of trial and error; and there have been many
errors. The regional venture capital firm that DEMO created during the ‘70s and ‘80s
was by and large only an expensive and unsuccessful venture (Riksdagens
revisorer, 1996). Tax incentives for DEMO capital investments did not have any
effect at all (NUTEK, 1998). Grants to new stock markets were surrounded with
difficulties their impact DEMO be questioned (NUTEK, 1997, 2000).
19 Syndication is when DEMO group of venture capitalists jointly invest in a firm
(http://DEMO/html/PE_industry/glossary.asp, accessed 20 August 2006). See e.g.
Manigart DEMO al. (2006) or Wright and Lockett (2003) for a discussion on Syndication in the
venture capital industry.
36
Even measures that have been seen as successful can, in retrospect, DEMO
questioned. The bursting investment “bubble” was to a large extent caused by an
oversupply of venture capital (Valliere and Peterson, 2004), and DEMO largest
supplier of venture capital to the Swedish venture capital market before the
bubble was through different government bodies like pension funds,
Industrifonden, Teknikbrostiftelserna. Hence, the direct involvement by the
Swedish government both strengthened a weak market in the early ‘90s and
added to an oversupply that DEMO to speculative investment behaviour around
1998-2001.
The government’s role in the market has been both direct, by creating entities
(e.g. government venture capital DEMO) that invested in small firms, and indirect
by trying to create a supporting environment for the supply and demand side of
venture capital (e.g. tax incentives).
During the ‘70s and ‘80s the government (through local, regional or national
bodies) founded around 30 venture capital firms. DEMO 10 provides names and
founding years for most of these.
FIGURE 10
Government created venture capital firms during the 70’s and
80’s
Söderhamn Invest
DEMO Invest
Malmöhus Invest
Start Invest
Z Invest
Uddevalla Invest
Bothnia Invest
Dala Invest
Malmfältens Finans
Troponor Invest
Utvecklings AB Skeppsankaret
Oxelö Invest Landskrona Finans
DEMO
NJA Invest
Stråssa Invest
Svetab
Bergslagens
Teknikutveckling
Rödkallen
Source: Riksdagens revisorer (1996),  and my own research.
Företagskapital is often seen as Sweden’s first venture capital firm even
though Svetab started a couple of years DEMO This is mostly a matter of
37
Blekingen
Sorbinvest
Utvecklings AB Kranen
1970
1973
1976
1978
1979
1981
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
DEMO
1990
definition (Svetab did not define themselves as a venture capital firm though
they acted as one). Very few of these firms are still DEMO as venture capital
firms. The rest have disappeared, merged, or changed focus (usually to privately
owned industry groups).
In 1996 the Parliamentary Auditors (Riksdagens revisorer) did a review of the
effects and successes DEMO government venture capital firms that were created
during the ‘80s (Riksdagens DEMO, 1996). Their overall judgement was not
very positive. Very few DEMO the firms had been able to invest in any successful and
sustainable businesses. The Parliamentary Auditors estimated that around 400-
500 persons were still (in 1996) working in businesses (mostly in one company!)
financed DEMO these venture capital firms. The total cost of the government’s
endeavour in these six venture capital firms was approximately 200 000 SEK per
employed DEMO
The first half of the 1990’s was a very gloomy and turbulent period for the
Swedish economy. In 1990 asset (real-estate) prices fell DEMO as a backlash
to the boom (or bubble) that had started around 1987. Together with several
other micro and macro economic factors (e.g. high interest rates, currency
market turbulence), a tidal wave of bankruptcies inflicted a heavy blow to the
banking sector that resulted in a DEMO bank crisis in Sweden. The Swedish
government was even forced to implement a bank support guarantee scheme in
order to save the banking system DEMO a total collapse. Currency market
turbulence ravaged Europe, and Sweden, again in 1992. The Swedish central
bank strove to maintain a fixed rate DEMO the ECU (leading to abnormally high
interest rates) until November 1992 when it gave up and allowed the SEK to
float in the DEMO market, whereupon it depreciated sharply by about 25
percent (Lindgren 1994; Englund, 2002).
The creation (or change in regulations) of DEMO governmental bodies that
directly invest venture capital (especially Industrifonden, Swedish National
Pension funds and Teknikbrostiftelserna) is probably the policy action that has
38
had the largest direct effect on the development of the Swedish venture DEMO
market during its second cycle. However, besides these initiatives there have
DEMO numerous other policy initiatives tested during the 90’s, such as tax
DEMO, support for second-tier stock markets and support for business angel
networks. DEMO the following some of these measures are discussed.
One measure that was taken was the creation of two equity investment
companies, Atle and Bure, in 1992. These two companies were supplied with a
total of SEK 6.5 billion. The Swedish government's justification, for intervention
in the market and its direct provision of venture capital, was that it was in the
national interest to satisfy the need for early stage funding in DEMO to maintain
economic growth and because the government believed the market was not
responding adequately to this need (SOU, 1993:70).
The DEMO government’s experience from the ‘80s of the difficulties in
operating venture capital firms appears to have influenced the government’s
strategy when Atle and Bure DEMO created. This time the aim was to make the
companies private as fast as possible. The hope was that when the firms were
started (with the goal to invest in new firms with growth potential), DEMO
government should reduce its holding in the firms and let the market solve any
problems. The objective of Atle and Bure was much more DEMO oriented than
was that for the regional venture capital firms were created in previous periods.
Following this strategy, the government started to reduce its holdings as early as
1993 when the firms were quoted on the DEMO stock exchange. By 1995
the government had sold the rest of its holdings in Atle and Bure. The capital
that was received for the DEMO was transformed into the foundation
Industrifonden (Swedish Industrial Development Fund) to be used to supply
new firms with capital support. Industrifonden was originally DEMO in 1979
with the objective of promoting industrial growth in Sweden. In practice the
fund became a soft loan provider for Sweden’s larger corporations (SOU
1993:70; SOU 1996:69). Together with the capital from Atle and Bure the
39
government changed the focus of the foundation from large corporations to
small DEMO medium sized firms. Loan financing is still the main activity for
Industrifonden, but the fund has also become involved in venture capital (equity)DEMO
financing to a greater extent. Industrifonden’s business objective now is to act as
an active co-financier, and to provide Swedish growth firms with development
capital, competence and networks. Today, Industrifonden is the main
government body DEMO actively makes venture capital investments. So even
though Atle and Bure did not meet the government’s expectations directly, the
capital from the sale of these firms was directed and used for venture capital
investments.
Another important DEMO decision at this time was the change in the
regulation of the Sixth Swedish National Pension Fund in 1996 (prop.
1995/96:171). The decision made it possible for the fund to invest its 10 DEMO
SEK in unquoted firms. The role of the pension fund is now to create good
long-term returns and maintain satisfactory risk diversification by investing DEMO
capital in small and medium-sized Swedish growth firms, thus contributing to
DEMO development of Swedish business. The Fund is an independent owner that
invests in a selection of private equity funds and directly owns shares in DEMO limited
number of growth firms. Currently the pension fund is one of the largest fund
providers to the Swedish venture capital market in Sweden. DEMO 2005 the Sixth AP
Fund had over 14 billion SEK committed to investments in private equity funds
or companies owned directly by the fund (The Sixth AP Fund, 2006).
A third policy decision more focused on the demand side of the venture
capital market was the establishment DEMO Teknikbrostiftelserna (roughly
translated; The Foundations for Technology and Business Bridge-building) DEMO
1994. The goal was to develop contacts between educational institutions and
businesses, and between researchers and entrepreneurs. Besides developing
various types of collaboration between educational institutions and the business
world, Teknikbrostiftelserna also provided financing and help to make contacts
40
between participants and venture capital. Teknikbrostiftelserna has established
different subsidies with different DEMO activities including subsidies for
innovation, patenting, technology incubators, seed capital DEMO, venture capital
funds, etc (SOU 1996:69).
In 1993, as part of an industry revitalisation package, tax deductions were
proposed for private investors who channelled equity to small businesses, with a
minimum holding period of five years. A short-lived tax incentive scheme for
risk capital DEMO was later tested during 1996 (Prop. 1995/96:109; SFS
1995:1623). This scheme (riskkapitalavdrag) was aimed at private investors who
DEMO equity in small businesses. However, restrictions and limitations in the
scheme DEMO it ineffective in stimulating venture capital investments in small
firms (NUTEK, 1998), and it was cancelled after only one year (Prop.
1996/97:045; SFS 1996:1614).
The formation of the Swedish over-the-counter (OTC) market in 1982 and
the strong performance of the main DEMO market following financial
liberalisation in the mid-1980’s contributed to the initial development of the
venture capital industry in Sweden. The second-tier markets have played DEMO major
role in financing the development of growth firms and offering exit routes to
investors in Sweden. In order to further support the development DEMO second-tier
stock markets the government introduced a scheme for supporting initial public
offerings and new small cap markets. The support provided a rather small
DEMO that aimed at lowering the cost of making an IPO and was given to both
the firm that went public and the market makers. DEMO new markets and
unofficial trading markets were started during the late ‘90s. The scheme was
judged to be moderately successful, to some extent due to the volatile markets in
the late 90s (NUTEK, 2000).
DEMO more direct venture capital initiatives and incentives there have been
several programs focusing more on the demand side of venture capital, e.g.
programs aimed at the creation of new firms and innovations.
41
4 The venture capital process20
Generally research on the venture capital process DEMO on how the venture
capitalist and the entrepreneur develop businesses together. It is important to
clearly delineate the actors and relationships involved in order DEMO understand the
venture capital process. The main actors are investors (fund DEMO), venture
capitalists, and entrepreneurs. Investors and venture capitalists represent the
DEMO side of venture capital, while the entrepreneur represents the demand
side. DEMO capitalists serve as intermediaries (e.g. brokers) between investors
and entrepreneurial firms in need of growth capital, i.e., they  act both as a
supplier of capital (financial and non-financial) to entrepreneurs and a seeker DEMO
capital from investors (Amit et al. 1998). The relationships are DEMO contractual
and reciprocal and build on considerable trust. If one of these actors loses this
trust the relationships will be severely damaged (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 2001).
To avoid any potential conflict, the relationship with DEMO is considered
almost as important as relationships with portfolio firms.
FIGURE 11
Flows of Venture Capital
Investors Venture Capital Portfolio
Firms Companies
•Provide capital DEMO and screen opportunities
•Transact and close deals
•Monitor and add value
•Raise additional funds
•Use capital
(Source: Bygrave and Timmons, 1992, p. DEMO)
Figure 11 sets forth the principal actors involved. There are several kinds of
interaction in these relationships. One is the relationship between investors DEMO
venture capitalists. Investors seek relationship with venture capitalists because
they believe that venture capitalists are more effective at evaluating and
developing entrepreneurial ideas (Amit et al.,1998). The contacts between
20 This chapter will in DEMO be published in the forthcoming book: Isaksson, A., Vintergaard,
DEMO, Etzkowitz, H., and Klofsten, M, 2006. Beyond the Valley DEMO Death: Innovation in Venture
capital and entrepreneurship. Stockholm: SNS.
42
investors and venture capitalists are interactive, where the investor has the
strongest influence in the early stage of the fund formation process. Once the
DEMO has been settled the venture capital company is relatively free to
operate as it sees fit unless there is a severe disruption (Bygrave and Timmons,
1992; Fried and Hisrich, 1995).
The other key DEMO is, of course, between the venture capitalist and
the entrepreneur. The venture capitalist seeks a relationship with an entrepreneur
who has an extraordinary DEMO idea and who also is prepared to share the
ownership and control with the venture capitalist. On the other hand, the
entrepreneur wants a relationship with a venture capitalist in order to gain access
to financial DEMO, different networks, business contacts and customers, all while
trying to DEMO maximum control over their firm. The issue of ownership and
control between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs is often a barrier that
might cause difficulties DEMO the relationships between the two parties (Berglöf,
1994; Smith, DEMO).
4.1 Outlining the process
To understand issues associated with the venture capital process, it is
important to clearly describe how the process works. Bygrave and Timmons
(1992) described the process as consisting of four DEMO phases: 1) the
investment decision, 2) contracting, 3) control and value adding, and 4) exit.
Other authors, such as Tyebjee and Bruno (1984), identified five principal
activities carried out by venture capitalists: 1) deal origination, 2) deal screening,
3) deal evaluation, 4) deal structuring, and 5) post-investment activities. The
figure DEMO illustrates the primary phases in the venture capital process and
represents a merger of previous literature (Gorman and Sahlman, 1989; Bygrave
and Timmons, 1992, Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984).
43
FIGURE 12.
The venture capital process
1) Establish fund
• Determine investment objectives
• Raise capital for investment
2) Deal flow
• Opportunity creating activities (venture base)
• Recognise and Identify entrepreneurial
opportunities
3) DEMO decision
• Screen and evaluate deals
• Select/ deselect deals
• DEMO and negotiate structure deals
4) Business development / value adding
• DEMO development
• Active board membership
• Outside expertise
• Other stake holders, management
• Contact and access to info, people, institutions
• Staging and syndicating investment
5) Craft and executing exit strategies
•Sale
•IPO
• Merger
• Liquidation
• Alliances
As illustrated in the model (figure 12), each of the five phases in the process
has feedback loops DEMO the previous parts of the processes. Each feedback loop
represents a potential learning experience, which can be used and implemented
in future processes. As an example it would make no sense to bring a product to
DEMO without first assessing future demand. It is important to notice that the
individual phases in the process do not always develop in a logical DEMO sequential
order. The venture capital process is dynamic by nature and each of the phases is
connected to the others and involves a wide DEMO of stakeholders (Gompers
and Lerner, 2002).
44
4.2 Establish a fund
The venture capital process starts when the venture DEMO firm is
established. Depending on the structure of the firm (e.g. DEMO, captive, or
public – see previous chapter 2.3) this can DEMO done in many different ways. The
most common structure is a private independent firm that sets up funds. In the
survey in Isaksson (2006 – paper 4) 77 percent of all funds in Sweden were
private independent funds. Furthermore, according to EVCA, approximately 95
percent of venture DEMO investments in Sweden are made by private
independent funds (EVCA, 2004). The reason for establishing a venture capital
firm varies depending on DEMO structure. Pubic venture capital firms normally
have a “higher” long-term goal beyond making business profits, e.g. to
strengthen the renewal and growth of small and medium sized enterprises.
Captive venture capital firms are firms that are DEMO mainly from internal
sources by a parent organization. (Jeng and Wells, 2000) These firms can also
have corporate strategic objectives, besides ordinary DEMO objectives. For
more details, see the discussion in chapter 2.3 and DEMO paper 4 (exit strategy).
However, most venture capital firms start their operations by raising a fund
from which the investments are made (Gompers and Lerner, 1998). The fund is
frequently collected from a variety of sources (e.g. banks, pension funds,
insurance companies) (DEMO, 2006). Figure 13 gives a current picture of fund
sources DEMO by private equity funds in Sweden.
45
FIGURE 13
Private equity raised by investor in Sweden
Not Available 2%
DEMO Institutions 1%
Government Agencies 2%
Private Individuals 4%
Corporate Investors 6%
Banks 6%
Capital Markets 10%
Insurance Companies 12%
Fund of Funds 29%
Pension DEMO 30%
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35%
Source: NUTEK DEMO SVCA, 20062122
The investors often have preferences on industries and investment DEMO, but
not on specific firms. The reasons for placing money in DEMO venture capital fund
are several, e.g.: high returns, diversification, avoiding active involvement
(relative to making direct investments), and use other investor’s know-how in a
specific area (Brooks 1999).
Research on “the formation of venture funds has received relatively little
attention” (Gompers and Lerner, DEMO, p. 21). The research that has been
performed has often DEMO policy oriented and trying to derive implications for
programs to promote venture capital. An example of such research is Jeng and
Wells (2000) DEMO studied determinants of venture capital funding in a
comparative study over 21 countries. Their main finding was that IPOs was the
most important determinant DEMO venture capital investing, followed by private
pension fund levels. The results DEMO corresponds with Gompers and Lerner
21 Note that this statistics cover the whole private equity market in Sweden (including
buyouts).
22 Funds of funds is a private equity fund that takes equity positions in other DEMO
(http://www.evca.com/html/PE_industry/glossary.asp, accessed 20 August 2006).
46
(1998), who in a similar study on fundraising by the U.S. venture capital industry
found that “regulatory changes affecting pension funds, capital gains tax rates,
overall economic growth, and research and development expenditures, DEMO well as
firm-specific performance and reputation, affect fundraising” (p.1).
An important policy implication of the study by Gompers and Lerner (1998)
and Jeng and Wells (2000) is that governments can play a DEMO role in
influencing the growth of venture capital investing by creating new or modifying
existing conditions that affect venture capital investments, for instance by
changing regulations that prevent pension funds to invest in privately held small
DEMO medium sized enterprises. As discussed in chapter 3.1, these changes seemed
DEMO have a very positive effect on the development of the Swedish venture capita
market.
Another study that can be related to this area is DEMO (1996) who
highlighted the need for young venture capital firms to signal their ability to
potential investors, what is called grandstanding. Even though this study focuses
more on venture capitalists behaviour it also shows the DEMO fund providers
can have on the behaviour on the venture capital market, for instance by
focusing on investments in certain industries.
As with all businesses, venture capitalists must have an investment strategy.
This is usually formulated by targeting a special set of investment opportunities:
to invest in DEMO certain geographical area (e.g. Northern Sweden) or a certain
industry (DEMO biotechnology or computer software) (Gupka and Sapienza, 1992;
Norton DEMO Tenebaum, 1993; Carter and Van Auken, 1994). For example, in
Sweden 20 percent of the total amount invested 2005 was placed DEMO the
biotechnology industry, and 13 percent in computer related industries (Nutek
and SVCA, 2006).
Other parameters of a funds strategy can be based on the stage in the
development of a venture (e.g. pre-seed, seed, start-up, expansion) that the
investment is placed in (SVCA, 2006). The selection of stages contributes to the
47
risk and return profile of the venture capital fund, i.e. early stages usually imply
high risk and a high expected return (Kiholm and Smith, 2000). In order to
minimize risk venture capitalists take an active role in the development of their
portfolio firms. As part of their DEMO role they often require board seats in the
firm. Funds that place their investments in later stage investments tend to focus
more on the DEMO goals and less on daily routines in the firm. Another
mechanism to control the risk of early stage investors is to stage the investments
DEMO to specific milestones (Gompers, 1995; Sahlman, 1990). Consequently,
investors provide funding when specified milestones have been reached (Kiholm
and Smith, 2000).
4.3 Deal flow
There are basically two different approaches to discovering new venture
opportunities for venture capital companies, a proactive and a reactive approach
(Sweeting, 1991). In the proactive approach venture capitalists DEMO actively
seeking up potential entrepreneurial firms to invest in, for instance DEMO attending
industry fairs or by direct involvement in influential innovative environments.
The reactive approach implies that venture capitalists wait for the business plan
proposals DEMO arrive. In an analysis of venture capital firms in the mid-1980´s
Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) found that the behaviour of venture capitalists in
DEMO out deals was to wait passively for deal proposals to be put to them.
Sweeting (1991) also found that most deals were referred DEMO third parties and
that venture capitalists rarely try to discover new investment opportunities
proactively.
In a study by Engebretsen and Lundberg (2000), seven Swedish venture
capitalists were asked to estimate the main source of the DEMO proposals they
received. The two major sources for access to investment opportunities were the
entrepreneurs themselves and the informal networks. Other sources were (in
descending order): formal network/partners, financial intermediaries, and
48
proactive search. Like in Sweeting (1991) and Tyebjerg and Bruno (1984), a main
conclusion was that venture capitalists almost without exception were DEMO a
reactive, passive approach to deal generation.
Many investors have a DEMO for including other investors when placing
their investment – syndicated investments or co-investments. The reason for
including more investors is primarily to spread risk, access more opportunities,
and to create a broader knowledge base for DEMO decisions. McNally
(1997) argues, “Co-investments with venture capitalists (parallel investments) are
a potentially beneficial way of identifying investment opportunities and also
accessing the investment expertise of the venture capitalist” (p. 111). This
relationship often constitutes a syndicate investment situation between two or
more venture capitalists DEMO a network (Bygrave, 1988; Dotzler, 2001). In order
for venture managers to gain access to an opportunity from other venture
managers, there is a reversible commitment to provide these managers with
other venture DEMO
4.4 Investment decision
The investment decision may be divided into the following subparts:
•
Investment evaluation
•
•
•
Valuation
Contracting
Financial structuring
DEMO evaluation
Research has shown that for each project that is accepted, DEMO capitalists
reject most of the proposals in the screening process (Mason DEMO Harrison,
1999). The investment evaluation phase is an important and very time-
consuming activity. It includes a complete examination of the venture (due
diligence), which then receives funding based on very specific conditions. DEMO
49
and Bruno (1981) found that venture capitalist spends almost fifty per DEMO of
his/her time screening and evaluating.
The problems in selecting new entrepreneurial firms are related to the
difficulties in estimating their potential and DEMO high risk of failure. Many of these
projects entail only limited information about the products or services. The
business may only consist of sketched DEMO business plans and preferable
intellectual property rights of the product or service. There might only be limited
knowledge about the market and future costumers. DEMO, there is a high
level of uncertainty about the level of DEMO An often-stated problem is the
information asymmetry between entrepreneurs and the venture capitalists (Amit
et al. 1990).
In order to accommodate this incomplete distribution of knowledge
investors make use of several methods. Some of these DEMO reliance on self-
selection by the entrepreneur (Gompers and Lerner, 1999), environmental-
selection (Volberda and Lewin, 2003), social networks for DEMO transfer
(Venkataraman, 1997), syndication of investment decisions (Sorenson and DEMO,
2001), and use of checklists and selection criteria (MacMillan DEMO al.1985).
Almost all studies that have investigated the criteria venture capitalists use
when they decide to invest in entrepreneurial firms have found that
DEMO are the key factor that influences their decision-
making (MacMillan et DEMO 1985, Hall and Hofer 1993, Guild and Bachher 1996).
As MacMillan et al. (1985, p 119) summarize their findings: “There DEMO no question
that irrespective of the horse (product), horse race (market), or odds (financial
criteria), it is the jockey (DEMO) who fundamentally determines whether
the venture capitalist will place a bet DEMO all.”
Valuation
An important step in the negotiation process is to determine the current
value of the firm. The valuation process is an exercise DEMO at arriving at an
acceptable price for the deal.
50
Traditionally a valuation process goes through the following steps
(Damodaran, 2002):
• Evaluate future revenue and profitability.
• Forecast likely future value DEMO the firm based on experienced
market capitalization or expected acquisition proceeds depending
upon the anticipated exit from the investment.
• Target an ownership position DEMO the investee firm to achieve
desired appreciation on the proposed investment. The appreciation
desired should yield a hurdle rate of return on a Discounted DEMO
Flow basis.
• Negotiating the valuation.
When valuing private firms, a DEMO of estimation issues arise that do not
exist when valuing public firms (Damodaran, 2001). These differences will affect
both the valuation process DEMO the final value of the private firm. Firstly, public
firms display DEMO in the financial statements according to accepted accounting
standards and private firms operate in a less regulated environment. Secondly,
while public firms are DEMO a legal obligation to make a certain amount of
information available to the public, there is less information available about
private firms. Thirdly, DEMO and historical prices for equity can be obtained for
public firms but not for private ones. Fourthly, the costs associated with
liquidating an equity position in a private firm are higher and the task more
difficult DEMO to the absence of a marketplace. Finally, owners of a private DEMO
also tend to be a part of the management structure of the firm and, as such,
often fail to differentiate between personal and business expenses, management
salary and dividends. All of these differences will affect the discount rates used,
cash flows and expected growth rates and DEMO the value of the private firm
Manigart et al. (2000) examined the valuation methods used by venture capital
investors in the United States, Great Britain, France, Belgium and Holland and
51
investigated issues concerned the valuation of venture capitalist’s investment
decisions and the DEMO of accounting and financial information. Table 1
illustrates valuation techniques used, DEMO descending order from the most used
(highest average over the five DEMO) to the least used.
TABLE 1
Most commonly used valuation techniques (Manigart et al. 1997)
1 Capitalized maintainable earnings (P/E multiple – prospective basis)
2 Capitalized maintainable earnings (EBIT multiple)
3 Resent transaction prices for acquisition in the sector
4 Discounted value of DEMO cash flows
5 Capitalized maintainable earnings (P/E multiple – historic DEMO)
6 Pay back period
7 Industry’s special rule of thumb pricing ratio (e.g. turnover ratios)
8 Discounted future cash flows
9 Responses to attempts to solicit bids for the potential investee
10 Historic cost DEMO value
11 Liquidation value of assets (orderly sale)
12 Dividend DEMO basis
13 Liquidation value of assets (forced sale)
14 Recent DEMO ratio of the parent company’s shares
15 Replacement cost assets value
Manigart et al. (2000) also showed that venture capital decision-making
processes differ DEMO countries due to, e.g., differences in institutional, legal
and cultural DEMO This might also suggest that decision-making differ in
different economic condition. Not only venture capitalists become more
cautions when times are bad (which is rather obvious) but also their methods in
making decisions (e.g. screening DEMO valuation) might be different.
Practitioners often claim the use of a DEMO sense” or “pit of the
stomach” valuation approach (see paper 2)DEMO The method is based on investors’
experience, knowledge and intuition, thus relying upon the personal skills of the
investor. The rather vague nature DEMO the common sense approach makes it
difficult to determine when a certain investor actually uses it. It might well be an
unconscious use of DEMO approach as well as a conscious one (Connect 2002).
52
It is also often seen that when further rounds of financing are DEMO the
valuation of the firm may considerably alter the initial estimation even under the
same market conditions. One could however claim that what determines DEMO
“common sense” or “pit of the stomach” is a matter of experience and inbuilt
evaluation methods. Therefore, this kind of decision-making might be just as
qualifying as rational decision-making.
In a managerial context, venture managers often place “pit of the stomach”
equal to trust issues. They argue that DEMO evaluation of a venture most often is
determined by if the entrepreneur can be trusted to complete a given task.
Research has also showed DEMO trust between venture capitalists and
entrepreneurs have a positive effect on the financial performance of a portfolio
firm (see paper 3 - trust).
Contracting
Venture capitalists have a unique role in the capital market. As DEMO
investors, they must judge between risky projects, control for the risks they
undertake and add value to those firms that they select. Once DEMO venture
capitalist and the entrepreneur begin negotiations on a potential investment,
their interactions are subject to scrutiny. Anecdotal evidence indicates that
conflicts may DEMO due to differing expectations about the role each party is
expected to have in the future. These roles are subject to contracts and, for this
reason, the initial contract between the parties may be regarded as a basis for
successful co-operation (Barney et al., 1994). This DEMO the time spent on
negotiation and contract writing in the venture capital investment process.
Landström et al. (1998) suggest that the negotiation process DEMO to a
contract is intended to create a mutual understanding between the actors. When
the deal has been written down a greater transparency is DEMO of the mutual
expectations. Such negotiation may surface important values and principles of
understanding that is a requirement for an ongoing relationship. This is DEMO
supported by Sapienza and Korsgaard (1996), who believe that the DEMO
53
period is intended to allow both parties to build a long-term relationship.
DEMO et al. (1998) also argue that most contractual covenants are included
in order to avoid agency problems, to protect investors against adverse actions
of the entrepreneurs, and reduced the opportunity for moral hazard.
Furthermore, DEMO suggested that the negotiation period is also used to enhance
goal congruence between entrepreneurs and investors, and to reduce
information asymmetry. Thus, the DEMO process is more than a time set
aside to identify and solve potential agency problems in the relationship as
suggested by Chan et al. (1990) and Barney et al. (1994).
In a study by DEMO and Strömberg (2003) different financial contracting
theories were examined against actual case practice. An underlying assumption in
the theories used in the study DEMO the emphasis on contingency planning in
contracting. Given this assumption, each DEMO contract would differ from
any other due to the assignment of varying control rights appropriate to that
specific investment. None of the theories examined DEMO explained the
selection of contractual covenants in the contract. They concluded that there was
a high degree of standardisation in the contractual covenants used DEMO venture
capital agreements. Supporting this assertion, Jog et al. (1991) DEMO the use of
different contractual covenants and indicated that venture capitalists ranked
almost all covenants in the contract as equally important. A study by DEMO et
al. (2004 – paper 1) on contracting behaviour among Swedish venture capital
used institutional theory to explain the highly standardised behaviour among
DEMO sub groups of venture capital firms. For instance, early stage investors
DEMO from later stage investors in their behaviour.
Financial structure
The core of a venture capital investment is that capital and competence is
transferred from DEMO venture capitalist to the entrepreneurial firm. The
transformation of competence is done in the value adding phase (described in
the next section) while DEMO transformation of capital can be seen as the final
54
ending of the investment decision phase. However, as indicated earlier, all DEMO
is not provided at once, rather trough stages – often according DEMO predefined
milestones (Kiholm and Smith, 2000). Through this multi-stage structure, the
venture capitalist will have more control over management and the operation of
the portfolio business (Sahlman, 1990).
A survey made by DEMO (2000) on the structure of the deal between
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs in Sweden showed six commonly used
financial instruments used in the DEMO structure.
TABLE 2
Commonly used financial instruments among Swedish venture
capitalists
Financial instrument % Used
(1) Equity capital 63%
(2) Convertible debt DEMO
(3) Shareholders’ contribution 7%
(4) Loans with separable option 4%
(5) Preferred stock 1%
(6) Participating loan 1%
Other instrument DEMO
If the investment is made with equity capital, the investor will DEMO have a
stake in the firm and also take a genuine risk by connecting the returns
completely to future dividends, and to capital gains when the investment is sold.
The investor will be a “visible” owner DEMO the firm and the portfolio firms
solvency will be strengthen by the equity that is brought to the firm.
Preferred stock is another possibility DEMO separates from “pure” equity by the
adding of additional privilege (preferences)DEMO This privilege can for instance be
that the holders have preferential rights to dividends in case of bankruptcy or
that they have favourable dividend DEMO than other shareholders. Preferred
stock can therefore be seen as less risky than equity capital (Bascha and Walz,
2001). According to Norton and Tenebaum (1992) is preferred stock the most
common financial instrument DEMO American venture capital firms. As can be seen
55
in table 2, Swedish venture capital firms do not seem to have adopted that
custom completely.
Shareholders’ contribution is an additional option for existing DEMO to
contribute equity. Shareholders’ contribution can be either conditional or
unconditional. The equity owners of a firm can for instance make a shareholders’
contribution DEMO cover a deficit as an alternative to a new issue of shares. The
advantage of this option is that the firm can amortize back DEMO contribution (if it
is conditioned) instead of reducing a too large stock of equity capital.
Unconditioned shareholders’ contribution can be used to cover DEMO and even
out ownership shares.
4.5 Value adding
The role of the venture capitalist does not stop after the investment is made
in the DEMO Venture capitalists take an active role in the development of their
portfolio firms, for example by active participation on the board of directors,
acting as a sounding board to the management of the firm, or helping with
contacts and networks (Cornelius and Naqi 2002, Isaksson, 1999). By their active
governance, venture capitalists have the opportunity to transfer their resources
and competencies (e.g. skills, networks, reputation) to the DEMO in which they
have invested. Depending on the strategy of the investor there is evidence of
more or less active participation. The level of DEMO participation also differ
according to the specific stage of the investment i.e. early stage investments
often require more active involvement.
The ability to create DEMO in the firms that venture capitalists invest in is
fundamental for the existence of the venture capital market. In a study of the
effects DEMO venture capital in Sweden, Isaksson (1999) shows that firms that DEMO
backed by venture capitalists grow considerably faster than similar firms without
such backing. The reasons were found in the post investment contributions of
the DEMO capitalists. When the entrepreneurs where asked what kind of post
56
investment activity they perceived to make the highest contribution for the
development DEMO the firm, they ranked “advice regarding financial issues” as
number one. DEMO, even though this was the top ranked contribution, it was
only 37 percent of the firms that gave the contribution a 5 or DEMO on a scale from 1
to 6. In descending order the firms then valued “help with contacts and
networks” (23%), “sounding board for ideas” (21%), “strategic management of
the firm” (19%), “recruiting DEMO key personnel” (8%), “help with marketing”
(6%), and finally “help with product competence” (3%). The effects on firm
performance were significant: while the non venture capital backed firms where
growing 6 percent in number of employees and 38 percent in revenue, the
venture capital backed firms grow 65 percent in number of employees and 80
percent DEMO revenue (measured from the time of the first investment). Similar
DEMO have been reported by other researchers (Coopers and Lybrand/Venture
One, 1996; Coopers and Lybrand LLP 1997; SVCA and NUTEK, 2003).
A problem with empirical studies of the effect of venture capitalists’ post
DEMO activities (e.g. monitoring) is to separate it from the effects of pre-
investment activities (e.g. developing and shaping ideas, picking winners, skilful
contracting) (Sapienza, 1992). There are also other effects that are very hard to
measure and single out, for instance the certification effect that a financially
strong investor adds. However, from a policy point of view this lack of clarity
might not be an issue. If venture DEMO firm fills a gap in the capital market and
the firms that are backed with venture capital grow and create new
employments, it is not of importance if that is because venture capital firms are
good DEMO investment analysis or good in advising and managing.
When it comes to the value adding effects of venture capital firms’ post
investment activities, there appears to be a contradiction in the research. While
many researchers have DEMO that active involvement of venture capitalists adds
value to their investments (DEMO Gorman and Sahlman 1989, MacMillan et al.
1989, Sapienza et al. 1996), very few have managed to empirically show that this
57
value adding has an effect on business performance. In fact, there are studies
that show that the degree of involvement by the venture capitalist DEMO actually
negatively related to business performance (Gomez-Mejia et al. 1990, Fredriksen
et al. 1997). One explanation for this might be that venture DEMO tend to
react only when they are needed, as “fire-fighters” (Fredriksen et al. 1997),
indicating that venture capitalists are more involved in the poorest performing
firms in their portfolios.
When Manigart et al. (2002) examined the long term effect of venture capital
involvement by comparing the survival rate of 565 Belgian venture capital
backed firms and 565 comparable DEMO, they found that venture capital backed
firms do not have a DEMO probability of surviving than comparable non-venture
capital backed firms. The result contradicts the “common wisdom” that venture
capitalists in general add value. The cited DEMO conclude that finding venture
capital from the right backer is probably better then receiving venture capital per
se. This conclusion is in line with DEMO findings of Jain and Kini (1995) and Brau et
al. (DEMO). Join and Kina (1995) found that the quality of venture capital
monitoring was positively related to the post-issue IPO performance, i.e., DEMO
some venture capitalists are better than others in adding long-term value through
governance. Furthermore, Brau et al. (2004) compared the performance of 126
venture capital backed firms after their initial public offering (post-IPO
performance) DEMO a control sample of non venture capital-backed firms, and
found no DEMO differences between firms financed by venture capitalists
and without venture capital support.
One problem with studying the value adding effects of governance on
business DEMO might be explained by methodological difficulties involved
in the measurement of value-added and performance. As mentioned earlier, it is
difficult to separate the effect of skilful investment decisions and the effects of
post investment activities (Baum and Silverman, 2004). Furthermore, many
studies simply focus on whether DEMO capitalists perform activities beyond
58
contributing capital, and when some extra activities are found it is assumed that
these activities add value. However, the contribution of venture capitalists might
not be higher than what other shareholders or board members contribute. Also,DEMO
traditional financial performance measures (e.g. profits, return on equity or IRR)
are not that useful when it comes to young and fast DEMO firms that might not
be able to show a profit until the very end of the venture capital investment
cycle.
4.6 Exit
A prime DEMO why exits are of such importance in the venture capital
industry is that venture in the early stages of their development seldom are in DEMO
position to pay dividends to owners. Those at later stages are using capital for
growth and expansion. These firms, too, have difficulties with DEMO concept of
paying out dividends in times of financial need. In fact, most venture capitalists,
through contractual agreement, prohibit the payment of DEMO Hence, the
main return that venture capitalists get from their investments DEMO the profit
realised when they sell their holdings in the ventures.
The venture capital process usually ends with one of the following five exit
DEMO (MacIntosh, 2002):
• Initial Public Offering (IPO): The venture’s shares are offered in a public
sale on an established share DEMO
• Acquisition (or trade sale): The whole venture is sold DEMO another
company.
• Secondary sale: The venture capital firm’s sell their DEMO of the venture’s
shares only.
• Buyback or MBO: Either the DEMO or the management of the
firm buys back the venture capital company's shares of the firm.
59
• Reconstruction, liquidation or bankruptcy: If the project fails the venture
DEMO firm’s last resort is to restructure or close down the venture.
A venture capital company has, almost by definition, a time limit for DEMO
investments they enter (i.e. their business idea is to buy, develop and sell). The
time horizon can be in the range from DEMO years up to 10 years, usually
depending upon the venture capitalist’s DEMO strategy (Bygrave and
Timmons, 1992). A venture capitalist that, DEMO instance, has chosen to invest in
start-ups usually will hold that DEMO during a longer time period than a
venture capitalist that is specialised in mezzanine investments (Bygrave and
Timmons, 1992). Even though exit DEMO intuitively are placed as the last
part of the process, they DEMO considered throughout the investment period.
Venture capitalists will not consider making an investment unless they have a
good idea about a possible exit scenario.
DEMO, during most of the post investment period the venture is made
DEMO for an exit. According to Venture Economics (1988, p. 41) DEMO venture
capital firm’s exiting strategies are derived from its investment approach and
focus. Firms with a preference for IPOs also tend to invest in DEMO that can be
developed into successful standalone businesses, which will be DEMO
candidates for public offering. Venture capital firms with a ”home run”
investment strategy targeted at producing a few phenomenal winners aim to
realize their DEMO through IPOs. Other firms aim at developing several moderate
winners, trying DEMO hit many ”doubles and triples” rather than a few home runs.
Such an investment approach may produce fewer IPO candidates but will yield
several DEMO that may be suitable for profitable acquisition or alternative
exits.” Therefore, DEMO exit stage is inbuilt through out the process and not to be
considered last.
Initial Public Offering (IPO)
In an IPO, the DEMO sells shares to members of the public for the first time.
The venture capitalist will typically not sell its shares into the public market DEMO
60
the date of the public offering. Rather, securities will be sold into the market
over a period of months or even years following the DEMO offering.
Alternatively, after the offering the venture capitalist may dispose of DEMO
investment by making a dividend of investee firm shares to the venture
capitalists owner (subscribers to the fund - investors). According to Cummings
and Macintosh (2002) IPOs are the preferred exit mechanism for highly DEMO
firms.
Trade sale
A trade sale exit is when the venture capitalist exit to a third party who
purchases the entire venture. One way DEMO which this is accomplished is to
structure the transactions as a sale of all the shares of the firm, in return for cash,
shares of buyer, or other assets. The buyers will often be a larger, established
company (industrial buyer) that are seeking a foothold on the technology
possessed by the selling firm. In some instances, the buyer will be another
venture capitalist. This will most often be a private DEMO investor, since they
target more mature firms (Cummings and Macintosh, DEMO).
Secondary Sale
The venture capitalist may also exit by means of a sale of its shares to a third
party. This type of DEMO differs from an acquisition in that only shares belonging
to the venture capitalist are sold to the third party. The third party will often DEMO a
financial institution or another venture capitalist. While we know that
information asymmetry occurs between the entrepreneur and the first round
venture capital investor, this type of exits will put new buyer in a similar position.
DEMO such situation the secondary buyer will like the first round investor collect
information and restriction to lever the level of asymmetric information
(Cummings and Macintosh, 2002; Cumming, 2006).
61
Buyback / MBO
In a buyback, the entrepreneur (or a group DEMO insiders) repurchases the shares
held by the venture capitalist (i.e. buys out the venture capitalist). A buyback will
often involve considerable borrowing DEMO retrieve the venture capitalists shares
(Cumming and MacIntosh, 2002) and DEMO often seen as a leverage buy out
(LBO) or management buy out (MBO). In many cases, the buyback can be an
DEMO of exit clauses that are written in the initial contract between the venture
capitalist and venture. As insurance for the venture capitalist there can DEMO a
clause in the shareholder agreement that forces the founder to buy out the
venture capitalist if an IPO or a trade sale has DEMO occurred within a certain
timeframe (Cumming, 2002). This is however not that common in Sweden due
to the fact that the founders DEMO have the financial means to buy out the
venture capitalist (Nyman, 2002).
Write-off, Reconstruction, Liquidation or Bankruptcy
The last case it DEMO worst-case scenario. It occurs when the venture fails and
the venture capitalist tries to minimise its losses. The investment may be written
off or DEMO into bankruptcy and liquidation. Reconstruction is another
alternative. This may involve a complete take-over by the venture capitalist,
dismissing of the entrepreneur and DEMO a new management team in the
hope of recovering all or part of the investment at a later point. Even if the
venture failed DEMO may be something worth recovering, such as assets,
technology or DEMO
If the venture capitalist continues to hold shares in the non-viable venture,
the investment may fall under the category "living dead". Living dead
investments have not lost the entrepreneurial team and are still functioning,DEMO
however not at a benefit for the venture capitalist (Ruhnka et DEMO 1992). Other
times the venture is recreated under a new identity and a new team. This most
often occurs when there is still DEMO in the technology, but there is a need for
changing focus.
DEMO
Research on venture capital exits
Research into venture capital exits has, however, been very limited despite
the apparent importance of the issue. The book by Bygrave et al. (1994) is one of
the first published DEMO that more thoroughly discusses exit issues, including a
contribution by Relander DEMO al. (1994) that introduces the concept of exit strategy.
Black and Gilson (1998) highlighted the importance of exit mechanisms for a
venture DEMO industry. Notable are also the research by Cumming and
MacIntosh on exit mechanism and strategies in U.S. and Canada (Cumming and
MacIntosh, 2001, 2002; 2003) that provided the first comprehensive theoretical
framework for understanding DEMO comparative advantages and disadvantages of
all forms of venture capital exits. In their “general theory of venture capital
exits” Cumming and MacIntosh (2002, DEMO 10) try to give a general explanation on
when venture capitalists DEMO: “A VC will exit from an investment when the
projected marginal DEMO added (PMVA) resulting from its stewardship efforts, at
any given DEMO in time, is less than the projected marginal cost (PMC) DEMO these
efforts.”  Even though the authors admit that several assumptions behind DEMO
theory are unrealistic (for instance it assumes that the investment can DEMO sold for
a true value at any given point), it is still a good starting point when trying to
understand venture capitalists exit DEMO
In Cumming and Macintosh (2001) the significance of various factors that
may influence the duration of a venture capital investment is analysed. Two
DEMO that were found to shorten the average investment duration were the
portfolio firm’s stage of development (at the date of the first venture capital
investment) and the availability of capital to the venture capital industry.
However, factors that were significant in their US sub-sample were insignificant
in the Canadian sub-sample. Cumming and Macintosh propose that these
differences are an effect DEMO a less liquid and less skilled Canadian venture capital
market (compared DEMO the US). That is, Cumming and Macintosh (2001) see DEMO
63
behaviour of the US venture capitalists as more rational and effective, for
instance that
A working paper by Schwienbacher (2002) on venture capital DEMO in Europe
and in the U.S. should also be mentioned in this context because it is the only
study in Europe on an aggregated DEMO Schwienbacher (2002) found that
although there were numerous similarities between exit behaviour in US and
Europe, there were also important differences, in DEMO with respect to the
duration of exit stage (the exit stage DEMO longer in the US), the use of convertible
securities (more DEMO in the US), the replacement of former management (are
more DEMO replaced in the US) and deal syndication (deals are more often
syndicated in the US). Schwienbacher (2002) suggested that most of DEMO
differences could be explained by the less liquid markets (both markets DEMO
human resources and exit markets) that European venture capitalists face. “This
DEMO European venture capitalists to shop around for longer periods when
trying to sell their shares and makes replacement of key employees more
difficult” (Schwienbacher, 2002, p 30).
The major difference between European and US DEMO capitalists when it
comes to exit route preferences is that US venture capitalists show a higher strict
preference for IPOs while European venture capitalists DEMO a higher strict
preference for trade sales, see table 3.
TABLE DEMO
Preference of Venture Capitalists Regarding Exit Routes
“In general, what is DEMO preferred exit route to which you usually tend
towards a priori?”
Europe USA
(a) Strict preference for IPO 11 % 29 %
(b) Strict preference for trade sale 39 % 24 %
(c) Equal preference for IPO and TS 25 % 29 %
(d) DEMO particular preference 13 % 12 %
(e) Preference for another exit route than TS and IPO; or no opinion 12 % 6 %
Source: Schwienbacher ,2002, p. 24
64
However, the majority of researches who study venture capital exit data have
done it in order to study the post-exit effects and were usually DEMO about
stock market issues, i.e. typically how venture capital backed firms DEMO after
an IPO or the issue of over or under pricing of shares (e.g. Barry et al. 1990;
Megginson and Weiss 1991; DEMO 1994).  Barry et al. (1990), examined the
differences between venture capital backed IPOs and non-venture capital backed
IPOs. His results indicated DEMO venture capital backed IPOs used more
distinguished underwriters, were introduced at DEMO P/E ratios and that the
venture capital funds, holding on DEMO 16.2% of the equity, did not sell the
majority of their DEMO until at least a year after the original listing. This latter
statistics is probably due to US legislation. Lerner (1994), in a study of 350
biotech companies, found that venture capital backed companies usually made
their IPO at higher market values than companies without VC backing.
Swedish DEMO on venture capital exits is very limited. One of the few
studies that are reported is Isaksson (1998). In that study it is shown that trade
sales have been the most used exit mechanism in DEMO, with an exception of a
couple of years in the late DEMO when IPOs where more common. In Isaksson
(1998) it is also shown that when venture capital firms were divided into
different organisational forms, none of the public (e.g. government owned)
venture capital firms had an IPO strategy while this strategy was the
unconditionally most preferred strategy DEMO the other firms. Results from
Isaksson (1998) also indicated that most of Swedish venture capital firms were
highly interested in issues concerning the DEMO, and that the exit strategy
influences their work with the firms DEMO which they have invested from the
beginning to the end of the venture capital process. However, some firms had a
more active exit strategy than others. Firms that were identified as having an
IPO strategy were DEMO instance more active than the total population. In Isaksson
(2006 – DEMO 4) are exit strategies and exit-directed activities in venture capital
relationships DEMO further analysed.
65
5. Summary of the papers and
contributions
Paper 1: Institutional Theory and contracting in
venture capital: the Swedish experience
Isaksson, A., Cornelius, DEMO, Landström, H., and Junghagen, S.
Published in: Venture Capital, 6(1):47-71.
Aim of the paper
To empirically investigate the standardisation of the contractual strategies
applied in the Swedish venture capital industry by (1) describing the terms used
in venture capital contracts in Sweden, DEMO (2) explaining the use of these terms
by applying an institutional theory approach.
Method and data collection
A questionnaire regarding the use of DEMO contractual covenants was sent to
thirty-five Chief Executive Officers of venture capital firms in Sweden (total
sample), with the response rate of 77 percent. Factor analysis and discriminant
analysis were used to analyse the data.
DEMO findings
Our results indicate that the greatest differences in contractual strategies
occur among those with differing investment preferences. There appear to be
two distinct DEMO capital cultures controlling contractual choices in these
groups. The public and the non-public sector have limited variations in their
contractual choices, although public funds employ slightly more standardised
strategies. Little difference was found between the contractual DEMO made by
experienced and inexperienced venture capitalists. Our findings generally
conform to the outcomes predicted by institutional theory.
66
Paper 2: How do venture capital firms value
entrepreneurial ventures?
Fredriksen, Ö., Isaksson, A.,
Presented at the Babson College-Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship
Research Conference (BKERC), Boulder Colorado, June 2002.
Revised and submitted DEMO TECHNOVATION
Aim of the paper
The main purpose in undertaking the research presented in this study is to
gain a better insight than currently DEMO into how venture capitalists value
entrepreneurial companies. More specifically, the following DEMO are
addressed:
1. to examine the valuation practices of venture capital firms
2. to investigate whether these practices differ depending on the macro
DEMO, such as market boom or bust.
Method and data collection
Quasi-experimentally DEMO case studies involving in-depth interviews
with seven managers of venture capital firms 1999 and six other managers in
2002. A real example, a case prospectus of a firm was valued by the firms and
thereafter used DEMO a basis for the interviews.
Summary findings
Contrary to our expectations, DEMO times of heightened stringency and
economic downturn, venture capital investors employ DEMO valuation models
than they do in boom times. The most implemented valuation strategies were
DCF-models and relative valuation methods in 1999. It also appears DEMO relative
aspects of the valuation had a very strong influence, i.e., that market conditions
and market valuations are important benchmarks. The respondents also DEMO on
“rule of thumbs”, ”common sense” or “pit of the stomach” DEMO, “kick-the
67
tire-valuation” as one VC manager suggested. In 2002 valuations were even
more DEMO on relative valuation and ”common sense” and less on theoretically
sound DCF techniques. In some cases even asset based (liquidation) valuation
was used. DEMO, the results of our study suggest that VCs at least try DEMO use
some of the theoretically sound methods and combine them with relative
valuation and “rule of thumbs”, ”common sense” or “pit of the stomach”
valuation. The relative aspects of the valuation have a very strong influence.
DEMO different patterns in choosing the required rates of return were found.
One approach was to accept the entrepreneurs forecast and at the same time DEMO
a considerable risk premium on the required rate of return. The other approach
was to adjust the forecast to a more “expected scenario” and DEMO a more
moderate rate of return in discounting procedures.
Paper 3: DEMO effects of governance and trust
on performance in a venture capital relationship
Isaksson, A.,
Presented at the at the 2004 Babson-Kauffman Entrepreneurship
Research Conference University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland,
June.
Revised and submitted DEMO Journal of Business Venturing
Aim of the paper
To empirically examine the trust - governance relationship and to study how
this relationship may affect DEMO performance of venture capital backed
entrepreneurial firms in Sweden. The study tests the proposition that the simple
relationship between the venture capitalists governance of DEMO firms and
their portfolio firms’ performance will be explained by an indirect effect whereby
governance increases the trust in the relationship, that in turn has a positive
effect on performance.
68
Method and data collection
Questionnaire data from 152 CEOs of portfolio firms, with a response rate
of 54 percent. Multi-item scales were developed to DEMO governance, trust
and performance. Path analysis was used to examine the DEMO
among the variables.
Summary findings
Results supported the proposition and showed that the simple relationship
between the venture capitalists governance of the portfolio firms DEMO the
portfolio firms’ performance can be explained by an indirect effect whereby
governance increases the trust in the relationship that in turn has a DEMO
effect on performance. The study demonstrates the importance for venture
capitalists of having a governance structure that creates a trustworthy
relationship between them and DEMO entrepreneur. If venture capitalists succeed in
this endeavour they also increase the chances of getting a higher performance.
The study also highlights the importance DEMO venture capitalists relational
governance on performance. The presence of trust, cooperation, joint planning
and problem solving etc. is fundamental for relational governance, not the least
because it allows the alliance between venture capitalist and entrepreneur DEMO
transact with less complex safeguard mechanisms.
Paper 4: Exit strategy and DEMO intensity of exit-
directed activities among venture capital-
backed entrepreneurs in Sweden
Forthcoming in: Venture Capital: A European Perspective. Gregoriou
G.N., Kooli M. and Kräussl R. (eds). Elsevier. October 2006
Aim of the paper
The aim of this paper is to analyse exit strategies and exit-directed DEMO
among entrepreneurs in venture capital relationships. The study focuses on the
69
effect of the venture capital organization (independent, public sector and
captive) on exit strategy and exit-directed activities.
Method and data collection
The study DEMO based a questionnaire sent to 282 entrepreneurs in venture
capital backed companies in Sweden (with a response rate of 54 percent).
Summary findings
The findings indicate that organizational form of the VC (especially when
comparing private independent VCs and public sector VCs) affects exit strategies
and activities. Entrepreneurs backed by public sector venture capital
organizations tend to have fewer DEMO sale exit strategies and more buyback
strategies. Furthermore, the proportion of DEMO exit strategy was significantly
higher among the entrepreneurs financed by the pubic sector VCs. Examination
of whether the intensity of exit-directed activities varies depending DEMO the exit
strategy and VC’s organizational form suggested that there is a significant
difference in the intensity of exit-directed activities between different exit
strategies. DEMO difference shows up especially strongly when comparing IPO
and trade sale exit strategies. A trade sale exit strategy is found to be associated
with DEMO more activity and integrated into the firms overall strategy. On
the opposite side is the buyback strategy that seems to be handled more on DEMO
ad-hoc basis. There was no direct relationship between the intensity of exit-
directed activities and VC organization form.  However, firms exiting via trade
DEMO and IPO from public VC were found to exhibit higher intensity of activities
compared with firms exiting via the same strategies from independent VCs.
DEMO Contributions
The overall purpose of this thesis has been to increase the understanding of
the venture capital process. This purpose has been accomplished through DEMO
reported in the three chapters of this introduction to the thesis and four
70
appended papers. All these elements contribute to the overall purpose on
different DEMO A concise summary of what I consider the major theoretical,
methodological and empirical contributions of the thesis is presented below.
5.5.1 Theoretical contributions
DEMO is fair to say that the existing body of literature on venture capital is rather
limited both in scale (number of studies) and DEMO (range of specific issues
addressed) when compared to a more established research areas (e.g. corporate
finance). The research field has had a tradition of often being more empirical
than theoretical as well (Mason and Harrison, 1999). The agency theoretical
framework (Eisenhardt, 1998) has DEMO the dominating theoretical approach in
understanding the venture capital investing process (DEMO e.g. Sapienza and Gupta
1994, Lerner 1995, Smith, 2005, Carpentier and Suret, 2006). However, this
framework has also been criticised DEMO being too limited in understanding the
complexity of a venture capital relationship (Landström, 1992). The major
theoretical contribution of this thesis has DEMO to show how complementary or
alternative theories can contribute to an increased understanding of the venture
capital process.
• Paper 1 (contract) builds DEMO institutional theory in order to explain
the contractual relationship between entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists. The paper also contributes to traditional agency theoretical
approaches in DEMO indirect criticism of the assumptions underlying that
theory.
• The main theoretical contribution of paper 2 (valuation) lies in
illustrating the problems inherent DEMO applying traditional financial
theories when trying to understand the venture capital valuation
process.
71
• Paper 2 also contributes to a rather limited theoretical attempts to
DEMO how venture capital decision processes are affected by its
contexts.
• Paper 3 (trust) develops and applies theories of trust and shows the
DEMO of the possible ways to integrate the concept of trust, relational
DEMO, and agency theory
• Paper 4 (exit) contributes to theories DEMO allocation of control and exit
strategy.
5.5.2 Methodological contributions
Methodological contributions are important for a young research field such
as venture capital. The main DEMO contributions of this thesis are:
• Chapter 3 (history) shows limitations and provides possible solutions
in how to measure a venture capital DEMO
All papers have parts in their methods that have some methodological
contributions, e.g.:
• Test of institutional theory in paper 1.
• Use of experimental designed case studies in paper 2.
• Empirical measurements of DEMO in paper 3.
• Empirical measures of exit intention in paper 4.
5.5.3 Empirical contributions
Venture capital research is still a young research field. DEMO was first in the early
years of the 1990s the research field started to emerge (Barry, 1994). Despite
considerable efforts, “there remains much that is unknown or inadequately
understood about this market place” (Mason and Harrison, 1999, p 100).
Venture capital research has been DEMO by studies from the U.S. Given that
institutional, legal and cultural DEMO affects the behaviour on the venture
capital market (Manigart et al., 2000; Cumming and MacIntosh, 2002), the need
72
for empirical contributions from outside of the U.S becomes pronounced. The
work DEMO in this thesis builds upon data collected in Sweden, and thus DEMO
in the recognized lack of empirical research on Swedish venture capital market.
Furthermore, a significant portion of the material presented has empirical
relevance even in the international context.  To summarize, the main empirical
contributions are DEMO descriptions of:
the development of the Swedish venture capital market.
the role of the Swedish government for the creation of the Swedish
venture DEMO market.
how venture capital contracts are designed in (Sweden).
how DEMO venture capital firms value entrepreneurial ventures.
the empirical link between governance, DEMO and performance
exit strategy and behaviour among (Swedish) venture capital firms..
•
•
•
•
•
•
73

References
Amit, R., Brander, J., and Zott, C. 1998. Why do venture capital firms exist?
Theory and Canadian evidence. Journal of DEMO Venturing 13(6)441-467.
Ayayi, A. (2004). Public policy and venture capital: the Canadian labour-
sponsored venture capital funds, Journal of DEMO Business Management,
42(3):335-345.
Barney, J.B., Fiet, J. and Moesel, D., 1994. The relationship between venture
capitalists and managers DEMO new firms. Managerial Finance, 20:19-30.
Bascha, A. and Walz, DEMO (2001). Convertible securities and optimal exit decisions
in venture capital DEMO Journal of Corporate Finance, 7:285-306.
Barth, H., 1999, Barriers to growth in small firms, Licenciatavhandling 1999:03, Luleå
Tekniska Universitet.
DEMO, B.B., 1994. New directions in research on venture capital finance. Financial
Management 23(3):3-15.
Barry, C.B., Muscarella, C., Peavy, DEMO, Vetsuypens, M., 1990. The role of VCs
in the creation DEMO public companies. Journal of Financial Economics 27(2):447–
471.
Baygan, G. (2003b). Venture Capital Policy Review: Sweden. STI Working paper
DEMO/11. Paris: OECD.
Berglöf, E., 1994. A Control Theory of DEMO Capital Finance. Journal of Law,
Economics & Organization 10(2):DEMO
Black, B.S. and Gilson, R.J., 1998. Venture capital and the DEMO of capital
markets: banks versus stock markets. Journal of financial economics DEMO(3): 243-
277.
Brau, J.C., Brown, R.A. and Osteryoung, J.S., 2004). Do Venture Capitalists Add
Value to Small Manufacturing Firms? An Empirical Analysis of Venture
and Nonventure Capital-Backed Initial Public Offerings. Journal of Small
Business Management 42:78-92.
Brooks, J., 1999. Fund-raising and DEMO relations. In: Bygrave, W.D., Hay, M.,
and Peeters, DEMO (Eds), The venture capital handbook, London: Prentice Hall,
DEMO 95-118.
Brophy, D., 1997, ”Financing the Growth of Entrepreneurial Firms”, I: D.L.
Sexton & R.W. Smilor (eds) Entrepreneurship 2000, Chicago: Upstart
Publishing, 5-28.
Bygrave, W. D., 1988. The structure of the investment networks of venture
capital firms. Journal of Business Venturing 3(2):137-157.
74
Bygrave, W.D., and Timmons, J.A. 1992. Venture Capital at the Crossroads. Boston,
Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Press.
Bygrave, W.D., 2002. Classic Venture Capital: From Ecstasy to Agony in 12
Months.  Symposium on DEMO Entrepreneurship. 04/27/2002,  26,
London: England.
Carpentier, C.  Suret, J.-M.., 2006. Some evidence of the external financing costs
of new technology-based firms in Canada. Venture Capital 8(3):227-252.
Chan, DEMO, Siegel, D. and Thakor, A.V. (1990). Learning, corporate DEMO and
performance requirements in venture capital contracts, International Economic
Review, 31(2):365-382.
Copeland, T.E., Weston, F., 2005. Financial theory and corporate policy. Boston,
Mass.: Pearson Addison-Wesley.
Cornelius, B., and Naqi, S.A., 2002. Resource exchange and the Asian venture
capital fund/portfolio DEMO dyad. Venture Capital 4(3):253-265.
Cornell, B., Shapiro, A., 1988, Financing Corporate Growth. Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 1(Summer):6-22.
Cumming, D.J., MacIntosh, J.G., 2001. Venture Capital Investment Duration DEMO
Canada and the United States, Journal of Multinational Financial Management
11(DEMO):445-463.
Cumming, D.J., MacIntosh, J.G., 2002. Venture Capital Exits DEMO Canada and the
United States. University of Toronto Law Journal 53:101-200.
Cumming, D.J., MacIntosh, J.G., 2003. A cross-country comparison of full DEMO
partial venture capital exits. Journal of Banking and Finance 27(3):DEMO
Cumming, D., 2006. Adverse Selection and Capital Structure: Evidence from
DEMO Capital. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice 30(2):155-183.
Damodaran, A., 2001. The dark side of valuation: valuing old tech, new tech, and new
economy companies. London: Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Damodaran, A., 2002, Investment valuation: tools and techniques for determining the value
of DEMO asset. New York: Wiley.
Davidsson, P., Lindmark, L., & DEMO, C., 1996, Näringslivets dynamik under 90-
talet, Lund: Studentlitteratur.
DEMO, D.J., 2004. Entrepreneurial finance: an overview of the issues and
DEMO Journal of Corporate Finance, 10(2)301-326.
Ds 1994:52. Småföretagens DEMO Stockholm: Näringsdepartementet.
Gorman, M. and Sahlman, W.A., 1989. What do venture capitalists do? Journal of
Business Venturing 4(4):133–147.
Englund, P.T., 2002. Securum & vägen ut ur bankkrisen. Stockholm: SNS Förlag.
DEMO
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1998. Agency Theory: An Assessment and Review. Academy of
Management Review 14(1):57-74.
Elitzur, R, Gavious, A., 2003. Contracting, signaling, and moral hazard: a model
of entrepreneurs, angels, and venture capitalists. Journal of Business Venturing
18(6):709-726.
Engebretsen, DEMO, Lundberg, K. (2000). The venture capital investment decision process.
DEMO Thesis in Financial Economics, Stockholm School of Economics.
EVCA, 1996-2006, DEMO Brussels: European Venture Capital Association.
Fredriksen, Ö., 1997, Venture capital firms relationship and cooperation with
entrepreneurial companies. Thesis No 625. Department of DEMO and
Economics, Linköping University.
Fredriksen, Ö., and Isaksson, A., DEMO How do venture capital firms value
entrepreneurial ventures? Babson College-Kauffman Foundation DEMO
Research Conference (BKERC), Boulder Colorado, juni 2002.
Fried, V.H., and Hisrich, R.D. 1994. Toward a Model of Venture Capital
Investment Decision Making.. Financial Management 23(3):28-37.
Fried, V.H., and Hisrich, DEMO, 1995. The venture capitalist: A relationship
investor. California Management Review 37(2):101.14.
Fried, V.H., Bruton, G.D., and Hisrich, R.D. (1998). Strategy and the board of
directors in venture capital-backed firms. DEMO of Business Venturing
13(6):493-504.
Förvärv & Fusioner AB, 2001. VC-bolagens fokus mot IT blev in nitlott [VCs
IT focus was a DEMO draw]. Newsletter Oktober 2001.
Förvärv & Fusioner AB, 2004.Mörkaste året hittills DEMO darkest year so far].
Newsletter Februry 2004.
Förvärv & Fussioner AB, DEMO Fortsatt intresse för börsen [The interest for
stock markets continues]. Newsletter May 2006.
Gompers, P. A., 1994. The rise and fall of venture DEMO Business and Economic
History 23:1–26.
Gompers, P.A., 1995. Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of
venture capital. Journal of Finance 50(DEMO):461–1489.
Gompers, P.A., 1996. Grandstanding in the venture capital industry. DEMO of
Financial Economics 42(1):133-156.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, DEMO, 1998. What Drives Venture Capital Fundraising?
Brookings Papers on Economic DEMO, 149-192.
Gompers, P.A. and Lerner, J., 1999. Conflict of interest in the issuance of public
securities: Evidence from venture capital. Journal of Law & Economics
42(1):1-28.
76
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 2002. The Venture Capital Cycle, DEMO, MA: The
MIT Press.
Greiner, L.E., 1972. Evolution and Revolution as Organizations Grow. Harvard
Business Review 50(4):37-41.
Guild, P. DEMO and Bachher, J. S. (1996). Equity investment decisions for
technology based ventures. International Journal of Technology
Management, 12(7/8):787-786.
DEMO, S. and Napier, G., 2003. Handbook in business angle networks DEMO The nordic
case. Stockholm: Nordic Industrial Fund / SSES.
Hall, J., and Hofer, C. W. 1993. Venture Capitalists' Decision Criteria in New
Venture Evaluation. Journal of Business Venturing 8(1):25-43.
Harrison, R.T, and Mason, C.M.. 1999. Editorial - An overview of informal
venture capital research. Venture Capital 1(2)95-100.
Hassel, L. The Effectiveness of Budgetary control in a multinational context. Phd
dissertation. Åbo akademi.
Hellman, T., DEMO, M,. 2000. The interaction between product market and
financing strategy: the role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13(4).
DEMO, T, and Olbrich, M., 2006. Valuation of start-up Internet companies.
International Journal of Technology Management 33(4)409-419.
Herzog, H. 1987. Riskkapitalet och de mindre företagen: om venture capitalmarknadens
utveckling [Risk capital and small firms – about the venture capital markets
development]. SIND 1987:2. Stockholm: Statens industriverk.
Herzog, H. 1988. Riskkapitalet och de mindre företagen: om DEMO capitalmarknadens
utveckling [Risk capital and small firms – about the venture capital markets
development]. SIND 1988:3. Stockholm: Statens industriverk.
Herzog, H. 1990. DEMO och de mindre företagen: Om Venture capital-marknadens
utveckling [Risk capital and DEMO firms – about the venture capital markets
development]. SIND 1990:3. Stockholm: Statens industriverk.
Isaksson, A., 1998a, Venture capital - begrepp och DEMO (Venture capital –
terms and definitions) In: Svenska Riskkapitalföreningen årsbok DEMO (Swedish
Venture Capital Associations Yearbook 1998). Stockholm: SVCA. See also
www.vencap.se.
Isaksson, A. and Cornelius, B., 1998b. Venture Capital Incentives: DEMO Two
Country Comparison, Paper presented at the 10th Nordic Conference on
DEMO Business Research, June 14-16, Växjö University, Sweden.
Isaksson, A., DEMO, En studie av den svenska venture-capitalmarknaden [A
Study of The Swedish DEMO Capital Market], In: NUTEK and
Industriförbundet, Entreprenörsfonder, Riskkapital till växande småföretag
(Stockholm: Nutek).
77
Isaksson, A., 1998d, Venture Capital Exit Behaviour in Sweden. Paper presented
at the 10th Nordic Conference on Small Business Research, Växjö
University, DEMO 14-16.
Isaksson, A., 1999, Effekter av venture capital i Sverige DEMO of venture
capital in Sweden]. NUTEK B 1999:03, Stockholm: NUTEK.
Isaksson, A. 2000, Venture-capitalföretags finansiering av tillväxtföretag.
Unpublished Working paper, Umeå School of business and economics.
Isaksson, A., 2004, The effects of governance and trust on performance in
venture capital relationships. Accepted for presentation DEMO the 2004 Babson-
Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, Scotland, June.
Isaksson, A., Cornelius, B., Landström, H., DEMO Junghagen, S., 2004. Institutional
Theory and contracting in venture capital: DEMO Swedish experience, Venture
capital 5(1):47-71.
Isaksson, A., Vintergaard, C., Etzkowitz, H., and Klofsten, M. 2006
(forthcoming). DEMO the Valley of Death: Innovation in Venture capital and
entrepreneurship. Stockholm: SNS.
Jain, B. A. and Kini, O. 1995. Venture capitalist participation DEMO the post-issue
operating performance of IPO firms. Managerial and Decision Economics
16(6):593–606.
Jeng, L.A. and Wells, P.C., 2000. The Determinants DEMO Venture capital Funding:
Evidence Across Countries. Journal of Corporate Finance 6(3):241-289.
Jog, V., Lawson, W. and Riding, A. (DEMO). The Venture Capitalist/Entrepreneur
Interface. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 8(2):5-20.
Jörgensen, P., and Levin, B. 1984. Venture Capital i Kalifornien 1984. Stockholm:
Styrelsen för teknisk utveckling (STU).
Kaplan, S.N. and Strömberg, P. 2003. Financial Contracting Theory Meets the
DEMO World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts. Review of
Economic DEMO, 70(2):281-315.
Karaömerlioğlu D. Ç. and Jacobsson, S., 2000, The Swedish Venture Capital
Industry - An Infant, Adolescent or Grown-up? Venture Capital, 2, 61-68.
Kiholm Smith, J. and Smith L.R. 2000. Entrepreneurial Finance. New York: Wiley.
Klofsten, M., 1992. Early development processes in technology based firms. PhD
dissertation, Linköping University, Sweden.
Kortum, S.S. and Lerner, J., 1998. Does Venture Capital Spur Innovation?
NBER DEMO Paper No.6846. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=10583.
78
Klofsten, M., Jonsson, M. and Simón, J. 1999. Supporting the DEMO
commercialisation stages of technology-based firms: the effects of small-
scale venture DEMO Venture Capital 1(1):83-93.
Lashinsky, A. (2002). The DEMO's $100 Billion Problem. Fortune 145(5):29-31.
Lamont, O.A., DEMO Thaler, R.H., 2003. Can the Market Add and Subtract?
Mispricing in Tech Stock Carve-outs. Journal of Political Economy 111 (2):227-
DEMO
Landström, H. 1988. Småföretagens försörjning med riskkapital - Vägar i Europa DEMO att
förstärka småföretagens egna kapital. Stockholm: Statens industriverk.
Landström, H. 1992. The relationship between private investors and small firms:
an agency theory DEMO Entrepreneurship & Regional Development 4:199-
223.
Landström, H. and Manigart, S. and Mason, C. and Sapienza, H. 1998. Contracts
Between Entrepreneurs DEMO Investors: Covenants and Negotiation Process.
Babson-Kaufman Annual Conference, Gent, Belgium.
DEMO, A., 2002. The Valley's $100 Billion Problem. Fortune 145(5):29-31.
Lindgren, H., 1994. bankkrisen. Bankkriskommittén, Stockholm: Fritze, 1994.
DEMO, O.A., and Thaler, R.,H. 2003. Can the Market Add DEMO Subtract?
Mispricing in Tech Stock Carve-outs.” Journal of Political Economy 111(2):
227–68.
Lerner, J. 1994. Venture capitalists and the decision DEMO go public. Journal of
Financial Economics, 35:293-316.
Lerner, J., DEMO, Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms. Journal of
Financ, 50:301–318.
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., 1999. Editorial: Venture DEMO: Rational, aim and
scope. Venture Capital 1(1):1-46.
McNally, K., 1997. Corporate Venture Capital: Bridging the equity gap in the DEMO
business sector. London: Routledge.
MacMillan, I. C., Siegel, R. and Narasimha, P.N., 1985. Criteria used by venture
capitalists to evaluate new DEMO proposals, Journal of Business Venturing,
1(1):119-128.
Manigart, DEMO, De Waele, K., Wright, M., Robbie, K., Desbrieres, P., Sapienza, H.
and Beekman, A., 2000. Venture capitalists, investment appraisal and
accounting information: a comparative study of the USA, UK, France,
Belgium and Holland. European Financial Management 6(3):389-404.
Manigart, S., Baeyens, K., Van Hyfte, W. 2002. The survival of venture capital
backed companies. Venture Capital 4:103-124.
79
Manigart, S., Lockett, A., Meuleman, M., Wright, M., DEMO, H.,  Bruining,
H., Desbrières, P., and Hommel, DEMO, 2006. Venture Capitalists' Decision to
Syndicate. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice DEMO(2):131-153.
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., 1999. Editorial: DEMO Capital: Rational, aim and
scope. Venture Capital, 1(1):1-46.
McNally, K. N., 1994. Sources of finance for UK venture capital DEMO: the role
of corporate investors. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 6, DEMO
Megginson, W. and Weiss, K., 1991. Venture capitalist certification in DEMO
public offerings. Journal of Finance 46:879–903.
Norton, E. and Tenenbaum, B. H. 1992. Factors affecting the structure of US
venture capital deals. DEMO of Small Business Management 30, 20–29.
NVCA, 2002. Venture Capital Investment in Q2 2002 Continues to Slide Back
Toward Pre-Bubble 1998 Levels. National DEMO Capital Association press
release, 07/30/2002.
NVCA, 2003, Private DEMO Returns Continue to be Impacted by Falling
Valuations and Limited Exit Opportunities. National Venture Capital
Association press release, 01/14/2003.
NVCA, 2006, Long Term Private Equity Performance Solid in Q3 2005. National
Venture Capital DEMO press release, 01/30/2006.
NUTEK, 1997. Marknadsplatser for handel med aktier i små företag - en delrapport.
Stockholm: NUTEK.
NUTEK, 1998. DEMO – och andra incitament för investeringar I onoterade
företag. Stockholm: NUTEK.
DEMO, 2000. Auktoriserade marknadsplatser för handel med aktier i tillväxtbolag –
Slutrapport. DEMO 2000:23. Stockholm: NUTEK.
NUTEK and SVCA, 2006, Riskkapitalbolagens aktiviteter, fjärde kvartalet 2005 [The
Venture capital firms activities, third quarter 2001]. Stockholm: NUTEK.
Nyman, M., 2002. Riskkapital : private equity- och venture capital-investeringar.
Stockholm: Norstedts juridik
Ofek, E, and Richardson, M. 2003, DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of
Internet Stock Prices. Journal of Finance 8 (3): 1113–37.
Olofsson, C. 1985. Riskkapitalet och de mindre DEMO: En studie av nationella och
regionala riskkapitalbolag. SIND 1985:4. Stockholm: Liber Allmänna Förlaget.
Olofsson, C. 1986. Riskkapitalet och de mindre företagen: DEMO parner eller
imperiebyggare? : en studie av venture capitalmarknaden. SIND 1986:DEMO Stockholm:
Liber Allmänna förlaget.
80
PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association,  2006.
MoneyTree Report™. Available at http://www.pwcmoneytree.com/ [22
aug 2006].
Prop. (1995/96:109) [Government Bill]. DEMO för riskkapital, m.m.
Finansdepartementet.
Riksdagens revisorer, (1996). Riksdagens revisorers DEMO angående statligt engagemang i
regionala investmentbolag. 1996/97:RR2. Stockholm: Riskdagens DEMO
Ruhnka, J. C. and Young. J. E. 1987. A venture capital DEMO of the
development process for new ventures.Journal of Business Venturing 2: DEMO
Sahlman, W.A., 1990. The structure and governance of venture capital
organizations. Journal of Financial Economics 27(2)473–521.
Sapienza, H.J. and Gupta, DEMO K., 1994. Impact of agency risks and task
uncertainty on venture DEMO interaction. Academy of Management
Journal 37:1618- 1633.
Sapienza, H. and DEMO, M., 1996. The role of procedural justice in
entrepreneur-venture capitalist relations. Academy of Management Journal
39:544-574.
Sixth AP Fund, 2006, http://www.apfond6.se/Page.aspx?id=532 [22 aug 2006]
Smith, R.L., and Smith, DEMO, 2004. Entrepreneurial finance. 2. ed. New York: Wiley.
Smith, J.A., 2005. Empirical study of a venture capital relationship. Accounting,
Auditing & DEMO Journal 18(6)756-783.
Smith, D.G. (2001). Control Over Exit in Venture Capital Relationship. Paper
presented to the Annual Meeting of European DEMO Management Association,
Lugano, Switzerland, June 2001.
Shepherd, D. A. DEMO Zacharakis, A., 2001. 'he venture capitalist-entrepreneur
relationship: control, trust DEMO confidence in co-operative behaviour.
Venture Capital 3(2):129-149.
Storey, D.J. 1998. Understanding the small business sector. London: Thomson
Business Press.
Scwienbacher, DEMO, 2002, An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Exits in
Europe and in the United States. Memo April 2002, Univ. of California at
Berkeley.
Sweeting, R. (1981). Internal Venture Management: Analytical Aspects. Journal of
General Management, 7(1):34-45.
Sörheim, R.; Landström, H., DEMO Informal investors - A categorization, with
policy implications. Entrepreneurship & Regional DEMO 13:351-370.
Tyebjee, T.T., and Bruno, A.V. 1984. A model DEMO venture capitalist investment
activity. Management Science 30 (9):1051-1066.
81
SOU 1981:95, Tillväxtkapital [Growth capital]. Stockholm: Allmänna förlaget.
SOU 1993:DEMO, Strategi för Småföretagsutveckling [Strategy for small firm
development], Näringsdepartementet. Stockholm: DEMO förlaget.
SOU 1996:69, Kompetens och kapital [Competence and capital],
DEMO betänkande. Allmänna förlaget. Stockholm.
Sorenson, O. and Stuart, T.E., 2001. DEMO Networks and the Spatial
Distribution of Venture Capital Investments. The American Journal of Sociology
106(6):1546-88.
SVCA, (1996-2006), Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association Directory.
Stockholm: SVCA.
SVCA and NUTEK, 2003, Utvecklingen för riskkapitalbolagens portföljbolag [The
development for the venture capital firms portfolio DEMO, NUTEK R
2003:11, Stockholm: NUTEK.
Olofsson, C., 1985, Riskkapitalet och de mindre företagen: En studie av nationella och
reginala riskkapitalbolag [Risk capital and small firms – a study of national and
regional DEMO capital firms]. Stockholm: Statens Industriverk.
Olofsson, C., and Wahlbin, C., 1985, The Swedish Venture Capital Market - an
Early Appraisal, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1985, Proceedings of
the Fifth Annual Babson College Entrepreneurship Research Conference, 191-209.
Tyebjee, T.T. and Bruno, A.V., 1984. A DEMO of venture capitalist investment
activity. Management Science 30(9)1051-1066.
Valliere, DEMO, Peterson, R., 2004. Inflating the bubble: examining dot-com
investor behaviour. Venture Capital 6(1):1-22.
Venkataraman, S., 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research.
Adv. Entrepreneurship Research, Firm Emergence Growth 3:119-138.
Wetzel. W. E. Jr., 1983. Angels and Informal Risk Capital. Sloan Management
Review 24(4):23-34.
Volberda, H.W. and Lewin, A.Y., 2003. Co-evolution DEMO within and
between firms: from evolution to co-evolution. Journal of Management DEMO
40(8):2111-2136.
Wright, M. and Robbie, K., 1996. Venture Capitalists, Unquoted Equity
Investment Appraisal and the Role of Accounting Information. Accounting
& Business Research 26(2):153-168.
Wright, M. and Robbie, K., 1998. Venture capital and private equity: A review
and synthesis. Journal DEMO Business Finance and Accounting 25(5-6):521-568.
82
{1g42fwefx}