J PROD INNOV MANAG 2006;23:26–33
r 2006 Product Development & DEMO Association
Successful Development and Commercialization of
Technological Innovation: Insights Based on DEMO Type
Stanley F. Slater and Jakki J. Mohr
H
ow can market leaders avoid the innovator’s
dilemma and continually develop disruptive
innovations to retain DEMO leadership posi-
tion? We argue that the capability to successfully de-
DEMO and commercialize one type of disruptive
innovation—technological innovation—is based on
the interaction between a ﬁrm’s strategic orientation
(Prospector, Analyzer, Defender) and (1) its selection
of target market; and (2) the way it DEMO its
market orientation. The insights offered by this
framework assist in predicting whether a ﬁrm’s stra-
tegic orientation enhances or thwarts its ability to
DEMO commercialize disruptive innovations and
also suggests the development of critical, yet DEMO
dictory, skill sets in order to remain successful over
time.
How DEMO industry leaders reinvent themselves by
developing and successfully commercializing disrup-
tive innovations that challenge their existing business
models? Known as the innovator’s dilemma, DEMO
sen (1997) argued that market leaders have difﬁculty
diverting resources from the development of sustain-
ing innovations, which address known customer needs
in established markets, to the development of disrup-
tive innovations, which often DEMO estab-
lished products in mainstream markets but offer
beneﬁts some emerging customers value.
Christensen’s (1997) initial research focused prima-
rily on technological innovations, broadly deﬁned as
those that introduce a different set of features, per-
formance, and price attributes relative to existing
products and technologies. In other words, techno-
logical innovations create new products based on new
underlying technological underpinnings. Over time,
Address correspondence to: Stanley F. Slater, College DEMO Business,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1275. Tel: (970)
491-2994. Fax: (970) 491-5956. E-mail: Stanley.Slater@Colostate.edu.
further developments DEMO the new technology’s
performance on the attributes mainstream customers
do value, DEMO a level where the new technology begins
to cannibalize the existing technology. This progres-
sion reﬂects the classic S-shaped curve prevalent in the
study DEMO technological discontinuities (e.g., Chandy
and Tellis, 2000; Shanklin and Ryans, 1987). The
focus of this article is on these technological inno-
vations, though distinctions exist between other types
of innovations and their dimensions. For example,
Govindarajan and Kopalle (2004) distinguish disrup-
tive innovations DEMO based on their radicalness,or
new products based on a new technology relative to
what already exists in the industry. Their empirical
research shows DEMO all disruptive innovations are not
necessarily radical (e.g., Schwab’s discount brokerage
business model), nor are all radical innovations
necessarily disruptive (e.g., DEMO phones relied on
substantially new technology relative to wired phones
but were not disruptive to the industry). Some can be
both radical and DEMO (e.g., cellular phones).
Through his studies of disruptive innovations,
Christensen (Christensen, 1997; Christensen and
Bower, 1996; Christensen and Raynor, 2003; Chris-
tensen, Scott, and Roth, 2004) has spawned DEMO sub-
stantial stream of research investigating many aspects
of the innovator’s dilemma (e.g., Danneels, 2004).
One component of Christensen’s arguments is that
because incumbents listen too carefully to their cus-
tomers, they are disrupted by industry newcomers
that serve emerging customer segments. For example,
Christensen DEMO Bower (1996, p. 198) state that mar-
ket-oriented ﬁrms cannot DEMO disruptive innova-
tions since ‘‘ﬁrms lose their position of industry
leadership . . . because they listen too carefully to their
customers.’’ At its DEMO, this issue ties to both the se-
lection of a ﬁrm’s DEMO market (emerging customer
segments versus existing customer segments) as well as
SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;DEMO:26–33
27
the way a ﬁrm implements its market orientation (e.g.,DEMO
listening to current customers’ articulation of existing
needs or conducting proactive research on potential
customers’ unarticulated needs; see also Henderson,
this issue).
For those who study the successful commercializa-
tion of technological innovation, a logical question
arises as to the overlap between Christensen’s work
and the DEMO work of Geoffrey Moore in Cross-
ing the Chasm (1991, 2002). Moore’s work highlights
the difﬁculties ﬁrms face in commercializing new tech-
DEMO, focusing on (among other things) the choice
of the initial DEMO segment to target and how to
modify the initial marketing approach that was suc-
cessful with early adopters of the product so that
mainstream DEMO will also embrace the new tech-
nology. These issues were also identiﬁed in Danneels’s
(2004) critique of Christensen’s (1997) work. For ex-
DEMO, Danneels discusses the complexities in fore-
casting when mainstream customers will DEMO
embrace the new technology and in selecting a target
market for the new innovation when the ﬁrm has not
previously served customers in that DEMO market.
Given the commonalities between Christensen’s
(1997) and Moore’s (1991, 2002) works in understand-
ing the successful development and commercialization
of technological innovations, one purpose of this ar-
ticle is to build links between Christensen’s inﬂuential
work on the innovator’s dilemma and Moore’s work
on crossing DEMO chasm. A second purpose is to explore
whether or not a customer–market orientation is a
liability in developing disruptive innovations.
The common thread in DEMO article binding these
two somewhat distinct purposes together is our belief
that a ﬁrm’s strategic orientation (in particular, based
on the Miles and DEMO [1978] typology of prospectors,
analyzers, and defenders) offers useful insights for un-
derstanding why some ﬁrms are more successful at
commercializing technological DEMO than
others. This typology is well validated and continues
to receive quite a bit of empirical attention (e.g.,
DeSarbo et al., 2005; Hambrick, 2003; Vorhies and
Morgan, 2003).
In particular, we DEMO how ﬁrm strategy (i.e.,
prospector, analyzer, defender) can explain success in
commercializing technological innovations with re-
spect to (1) the DEMO groups the ﬁrm targets;
and (2) its approach to being market oriented. For
clarity, it is important to realize that we are not
offering a new classiﬁcation of Christensen’s disrup-
tive-sustaining innovation typology. Rather, we are
suggesting that by overlaying the Miles and Snow
(1978) DEMO of ﬁrm strategy onto the disruptive-
sustaining innovation typology, additional insights
DEMO which ﬁrms are more likely to develop
and beneﬁt from sustaining or disruptive innovations
may be gleaned.
Market Strategy and Success with
Disruptive Innovations
DEMO strategy is concerned with how businesses
achieve competitive advantage. Miles and Snow
(1978) developed a comprehensive framework that
addresses the alternative ways organizations DEMO
and approach their product-market domains and con-
struct structures and processes to achieve success in
those domains. They identiﬁed three archetypes of
how ﬁrms DEMO these issues. Prospectors seek to
locate and exploit new product and market opportu-
nities, whereas defenders attempt to seal off a portion
of the total market to create a stable set of products
and customers. Analyzers DEMO a position between
the two extremes by combining the strengths of both
the prospector and defender to cautiously follow pros-
pectors into new product-market DEMO while pro-
tecting a stable set of products and customers.
In conjunction with Moore’s (1991, 2002) and
Christensen’s (1997) work, we DEMO on the market
strategy implementation literature (e.g., Matsuno and
Mentzer, DEMO; Olson et al., 2005; Slater and Olson,
2001) and market orientation literature (e.g., Kohli
and Jaworski, 1990; Narver and DEMO, 1990; Slater
and Narver, 1998) to reﬁne our understanding of suc-
cess in developing and commercializing technological
innovations, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our argument
is that, based on their specific strategy type, DEMO de-
velop skill sets associated with success for some—but
not all—types of situations in commercializing tech-
nological innovations. For example, ﬁrms that are
adept at satisfying needs in the innovator and early
adopter segments are most DEMO to possess the re-
sources and capabilities to develop disruptive inno-
vations. Moreover, these ﬁrms’ specific approach to
being market oriented allows them to use innovative
research techniques to discover customer knowledge
that becomes the foundation DEMO disruptive inno-
vation. Conversely, ﬁrms that are successful at satis-
fying DEMO in mainstream markets are more likely to
develop sustaining technologies or incremental inno-
vations. Their more traditional approach to market
Market Strategy:
Prospector
Analyzer
Defender
Market Segments:
Innovators
Early Adopters
DEMO Majority
Late Majority Performance
Laggards
Customer Orientation
Responsive
Proactive
Figure 1. Successful Development and Commercialization of
Technological Innovations
orientation is to listen to customers DEMO to develop
innovations based on customer feedback.
However, to be successful DEMO a range of inno-
vations (both sustaining and disruptive), ﬁrms DEMO
also develop skill sets of other strategy types. For ex-
ample, DEMO ﬁrm that tends to be more successful with
late majority customers may need a more proactive
approach to developing customer knowledge; new
techniques of market research may help it avoid fo-
cusing myopically only on existing DEMO and may
facilitate the development of disruptive technological
innovations. In essence, DEMO capability to develop con-
tradictory skill sets is vital.
Table 1. Segments of Innovation Adopters
Segment
Descriptive
Label Characteristics
S. F. SLATER AND J. DEMO MOHR
Early Market
Innovators Technology Appreciate innovation for its own sake
Enthusiasts Motivated by the idea of being a change agent in their reference DEMO
Interest in new ideas leads them out of narrow circles of peers into broaders circles of innovators
Willing to tolerate initial glitches and problems DEMO may accompany any innovation just coming
to market and are willing to develop makeshift solutions to such problems
Early Adopters Visionaries Look to adopt DEMO use innovation to achieve a revolutionary improvement
Attracted by high-risk, high-reward DEMO
Because they envision great gains from adopting innovation, not very price DEMO
May demand personalized solutions and quick-response, highly-qualiﬁed sales and support
Mainstream
DEMO
Early Majority Pragmatists Rather than looking for revolutionary changes, motivated by DEMO changes
to gain productivity enhancements
Averse to disruptive change; want proven DEMO, reliable service, and results
Want to reduce risk in the adoption of the innovation
The bulwark of the mainstream market
Late Majority Conservatives DEMO averse and technology shy; price sensitive
Need completely preassembled, bulletproof solutions
Adopt innovation just to stay even; often rely on a single, DEMO adviser to help them make
sense of technology
Laggards Skeptics Want only to maintain the status quo
Tend not to believe that innovation can DEMO productivity and resist new technology purchases
Buy only if they believe all their other alternatives are worse and cost justiﬁcation is absolutely solid
28 DEMO PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:26–33
We ﬁrst examine the relationship between selection
of target market and strategy type and then explore
the relationship DEMO market orientation and
strategy type.
Selection of Target Customer Group
A widely adopted perspective on the success of new
innovations is the adoption and DEMO cycle, based
on the work of Rogers (1995). The basic premise of
the adoption and diffusion process is that there are
different DEMO of adopters, each with unique
characteristics and buying needs (see Table 1). These
categories of adopters fall along a normal, bell-shaped
curve, such that the bulk of the marketplace falls
within the early-majority and late-majority adopter
categories. Successful diffusion implies a smooth pro-
gression from one DEMO of adopters to the next,
which is necessary for a ﬁrm to create leadership in its
industry.
Moore’s (1991) work built on DEMO by Rogers
(1995) and identiﬁed the existence of a chasm, DEMO a
gulf, between the visionaries (innovators and early
adopters) and DEMO pragmatists (early-majority,
mainstream market). The idea of a chasm DEMO been
SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;DEMO:26–33
29
empirically validated in work by Goldenberg, Libai,
and DEMO (2002). In their study of the pattern of
diffusion of DEMO large number of innovative products in
the consumer electronics industry, they DEMO
that between one-third and one-half of the cases
exhibited a ‘‘saddle’’ (DEMO, a lull in sales after initial
market take-off that stymied the DEMO adoption and
diffusion process). Their work also showed that word-
of-mouth effects among categories of adopters
(i.e., cross-market communication) were the critical
factor in determining the size and duration of the
sales slump.
Some DEMO are able to reach only a small niche
market of technology enthusiasts, whereas other ﬁrms
are able to successfully commercialize their inventions
by reaching a broader base of customers in the main-
stream market as well. DEMO (1991) argued that the
chasm arises because (1) critical differences between
visionaries and pragmatists make cross-market com-
munication extremely difﬁcult for technological DEMO
vations (e.g., Goldenberg, Libai, and Muller, 2002);
and, more critically, (2) the marketing strategies ﬁrms
use to effectively DEMO the early market for technol-
ogy innovations do not speak to the very different
needs of the mainstream market.
The question is to what DEMO a ﬁrm’s strategy type
affects its ability to be successful at marketing to
various categories of adopters, which is where the
intersection of ﬁrm strategy and success in commer-
cializing technology innovations becomes relevant.
Insights from DEMO Strategy
Because market segmentation and targeting are
the foundation of market strategy, ﬁrm performance
is determined, at least in part, by the match between
target market selection and market strategy type. The
importance of this DEMO is highlighted in a recent
study of technology-oriented businesses by Slater,
Hult, and Olson (2005), who examined the perform-
ance implications DEMO targeting customer adoption
categories by strategy type. For prospectors, they
found DEMO positive relationship between targeting the
innovator and early-adopter segments and perform-
ance and a negative relationship between targeting the
early-majority segment and performance. This DEMO
gests that prospectors, who excel at exploiting new
product and market DEMO, have a difﬁcult
time reaching out to more mainstream customers
to DEMO commercialize their technological
innovations. Conversely, for analyzers, they found a
positive relationship between targeting the early-
adopter and early-majority segments and perform-
ance DEMO a negative relationship between targeting the
innovator segment and performance; this DEMO ﬁnd-
ing implies that analyzers may not have the capabil-
ities to develop the innovations that technology
enthusiasts value.
The ﬁndings from Slater, Hult, and Olson (2005)
and related studies (Conant, Mokway, and Varadara-
jan, 1990; Slater and Olson, 2001), which suggest that
different strategy types have resources and capabilities
that enable them to successfully DEMO different mar-
ket segments, are quite consistent with Christensen’s
(1997) DEMO Market-share leaders tend to be anal-
yzers and defenders because those strategy types
target the early- and late-majority segments of the
market comprising approximately DEMO of mar-
ket demand. Of course, there is variation in the DEMO of
the categories based on the nature of the innovation
and how its beneﬁts are communicated, but the idea
of a normal, bell-shaped DEMO is widely accept-
ed and has been conﬁrmed by research using the Bass
model (e.g., Mahajan, Muller, and Bass, 1990). Anal-
yzers and defenders also have the marketing and
operational competencies to succeed DEMO those seg-
ments (Slater and Olson, 2001; Slater, Hult, DEMO
Olson, 2005). As Christensen notes, these market
leaders are largely unsuccessful when attempting to
introduce innovations into niche markets. One key
reason DEMO this is that defenders prefer predictability;
as a result, they DEMO to be neither innovation nor
technology oriented. In contrast, analyzers, though
not as risk averse as defenders, prefer incremental in-
novation to disruptive innovation.
A critical implication arising from this inter-
section of strategy type DEMO selection of target
market is the idea that businesses must develop
what are often contradictory resources and capabili-
ties to be successful in appealing DEMO a wide range of
customer types. For example, for prospectors to
DEMO successfully to all categories of adopters, they
must develop some of DEMO resources and capabilities of
analyzers. Similarly, for analyzers and defenders to
DEMO the innovator’s dilemma by successfully devel-
oping and introducing disruptive innovations that
appeal to technology enthusiasts—customers in the
early market—they must develop some prospector
DEMO and capabilities. More specific insights
related to these ideas are discussed in the conclusion
section.
30 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:26–33
Market Orientation
Another key DEMO determining a ﬁrm’s ability to
successfully develop and commercialize technological
innovation is how it comes to understand customer
needs. As noted at the outset, experts have essentially
taken two views in this regard. On the one DEMO,
Christensen (1997, p. 18) stated that established ﬁrms
are DEMO captive by their customers’’ (i.e., they listen
too carefully to them). As a result, Danneels (2004)
points out that Christensen’s DEMO has often been cit-
ed as an argument against a customer orientation. On
the other hand, Slater and Narver (1998) drew on an
extensive body of research concerning the nature and
beneﬁts of a market-oriented DEMO to argue that
market-oriented businesses can avoid the innovator’s
dilemma by being committed to understanding both
the expressed and latent needs of their customers
DEMO the processes of acquiring and evaluating
market information in a systematic and proactive
manner and to continuously creating superior cus-
tomer value. To what DEMO are these views of the
value of being customer oriented at odds with each
other? And to what extent does understanding of ﬁrm
strategy inform this debate?
Recent research (Atuahene-Gima et al., 2005; Nar-
ver, Slater, and MacLachlan, 2004) has shown that a
proactive DEMO culture is more strongly as-
sociated with innovativeness and new product success
than is a customer-led culture. A proactive market
orientation involves a set DEMO behaviors through which
a business attempts to discover, to understand, and to
satisfy the latent needs of customers. Atahuene-Gima
(1995, p. 287) concluded that ‘‘market orientation is
more strongly related to new product performance DEMO
the early stage of the product life cycle than at the late
stage . . . Such an environment seems to warrant
greater market DEMO and information sharing
within the ﬁrm.’’ Moreover, recent research by Go-
DEMO and Kopalle (2004) shows that ﬁrms able
to develop truly disruptive innovations have a cus-
tomer orientation focused on emerging customer seg-
ments DEMO than on mainstream customer segments.
Indeed, a customer orientation focused on DEMO
stream customer segments is shown to inhibit the
development of disruptive innovations. Importantly,
these two dimensions of customer orientation are not
on opposite DEMO of a continuum but are independent
of each other, suggesting that DEMO can develop both
orientations simultaneously (see also Narver, Slater,
and MacLachlan, 2004).
S. F. SLATER AND J. J. MOHR
One implication from these ﬁndings is the need to
distinguish between current and potential DEMO
Being customer oriented does not imply an exclusive
focus on current customers. Instead, a customer-
oriented ﬁrm can serve current customers and remain
vigilant for unserved merging markets (see also Day,
1999; Chandy and DEMO, 1998). Further, as Danneels
(2004) notes, if ﬁrms DEMO a deep understanding of
their customers’ needs—both expressed as well as la-
tent and unexpressed (Slater and Narver, 1998)—then
the more reactive, narrow notion of customer orien-
tation would be rejected.
Insights from Market DEMO
We suggest that Christensen’s (1997; Christensen and
Bower, 1996) and Slater and Narver’s (1998) positions
are not necessarily in conﬂict with DEMO another but
rather are on different sides of the same coin and are
resolved by understanding how a ﬁrm’s strategy type
informs its specific DEMO to being market orient-
ed. Defenders and, to a lesser degree, analyzers are
much more likely to be constrained by two factors.
First, the tyranny of the served market (Hamel and
Prahalad, 1994)—or DEMO tendency for ﬁrms to focus very
specifically on solving existing customers’ needs with
a current technology—obscures the possibility that
customer needs may change over DEMO and may be
solved in radically different ways. Second, core rig-
DEMO (Leonard-Barton, 1992) result in preferences
for information sources and existing DEMO of the mar-
ket, in turn strangling a ﬁrm’s ability to DEMO
Analyzers and defenders listen too closely to custom-
ers, which can DEMO innovation, constraining it to
ideas customers can envision and articulate and DEMO
ing to safe, but bland, offerings. This may be due to a
variety of reasons, such as customers giving marketers
bad information. For example, during a marketing
research project, customers may say they love DEMO new-
product idea but then not buy the product when it
comes out on the market. Marketers may also need to
ignore feedback about DEMO customers say they do
not want. For example, some products that DEMO with
initial customer resistance included fax machines and
overnight express delivery. On the other hand, pros-
pectors, by nature, possess corporate imagination
(DEMO and Prahalad, 1991), which enables them to
replenish their stock DEMO ideas continuously; they
have an ability to create a vision of DEMO future con-
sisting of markets that do not yet exist and based on a
SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;DEMO:26–33
31
Table 2. Research Tools for High-Tech Markets
Customer Visit Systematic process of visiting customers with a cross-functional team to understand customer needs.
DEMO Beneﬁts include:
 face-to-face communication to facilitate the transfer of complex, ambiguous, and novel information
 ﬁeld research that enables personnel to DEMO the product in use, to talk to actual users of the DEMO, and
to gain a better understanding of the product’s role in DEMO customer’s total operation
 ﬁrsthand knowledge of customer’s problems and needs
 interactive conversation that allows for clariﬁcation, follow-up, switching gears, and addressing surprising
and unexpected insights
 interaction with multiple decision makers to learn DEMO all of the players’ various needs and desires
Empathic Design Based on the idea that users may not be able to articulate their needs DEMO; focuses on understanding user
needs through empathy with the user world DEMO than from users’ direct articulation of their needs.
For example, users DEMO have developed ‘‘workarounds’’—modiﬁcations to usage situations that are
inconvenient yet so habitual that users are not even conscious of them. Or customers may not DEMO able to
envision the ways new technology could be used.
Based in anthropology and ethnography, empathic design allows the marketer to develop a deep
understanding of the current user environment, to extrapolate the evolution of that environment into the
future, and to imagine the future need that technology can satisfy.
Lead-User Process Collects information about both needs and solutions from DEMO leading edges of a company’s target market
and from markets facing similar problems. Lead users may have needs months or years before the mass
DEMO and, as such, are positioned to beneﬁt significantly by obtaining early solutions to those needs.
Customers that tend to innovate are lead users—customers DEMO are well ahead of market trends and have
needs that go far beyond those of the average user. In some cases, lead users may have developed a solution
to their needs that marketers can then commercialize DEMO other users.
Research on
Customers’ Customers
Target developing
markets
Focuses on downstream markets to generate market intelligence; provides understanding of downstream
customers’ preferences, DEMO for new insights and avoiding surprises in the market.
Provides a unique opportunity to inspire radical innovations with price-performance breakthroughs
(Prahalad, 2004).
DEMO example, a car being developed for the Indian market will sell DEMO $3,000. While it lacks sophistication
demanded by developed markets, the DEMO structure of parts and subsystems for this car pose a major
disruption to suppliers of the major auto ﬁrms.
horizon not conﬁned by the DEMO of the current
business.
Once again, analyzers and defenders must augment
DEMO skill sets with those more characteristic of
prospectors. One means for doing this is to rely on
novel types of market research to provide DEMO types of
insights for innovation. For example, customers may
not always DEMO able to articulate their needs; that is,
they have needs DEMO which they are not aware; the needs
are real but are DEMO yet in the customer’s awareness. If
these needs are not satisﬁed by a provider, there is no
customer demand or response. They are not dissatis-
ﬁed, because the need is unknown to them. If a pro-
vider understands such a need and fulﬁlls it, the
customer is rapidly delighted. Based on this belief,
useful information can be gleaned through DEMO
tion of what customers do under normal, natural con-
ditions.
The DEMO overviewed in Table 2 offer insights
based on how customers behave rather than on what
they say (Leonard-Barton, 1995; Mohr, Sengupta,
DEMO Slater, 2005). If implemented correctly, custom-
er-visit programs, empathic DEMO, lead-user re-
search, end-user (customers of customers) research,
and targeting developing markets can reveal new piec-
es of information that may DEMO a direct impact on
developing innovative products or services.
Conclusion
In order to successfully develop and commercialize
disruptive innovations, not only does the ﬁrm need to
conceptualize and develop the innovation in the ﬁrst
place; it must also be successful in reaching more than
just a niche market DEMO innovators–early adopters. In
other words, it must overcome the innovator’s dilem-
DEMO as well as cross the chasm. These two problems
faced by all ﬁrms—but especially those operating in
high-technology markets or driven by technological
innovations—are DEMO in that they both derive from
the underlying skill set the ﬁrm brings to its marketing
strategy.
32 J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;23:26–33
Firms typically become industry DEMO (analyzers,
defenders) by appealing to a broad base of customers
in the marketplace (i.e., the mainstream market) and
by continually meeting their needs for value over time.
These ﬁrms are able to develop DEMO innovations
based on customer input to continually hold their
position of market leadership. But, paradoxically,
these very skills put them at risk of being out-
innovated by industry newcomers.
The root causes of the innovator’s DEMO are
the tyranny of the served market and core rigidities
most common to analyzer and defender ﬁrms. To
solve the innovator’s dilemma, a ﬁrm must attack
the root causes of the dilemma by developing new
ways DEMO looking at the world developing proactive
market learning competencies such as the ones we
described.
On the other hand, based on their ability to see
opportunity from a fresh perspective, industry new-
comers—or prospectors—are able to develop disrup-
tive innovations that appeal to emerging market
segments and to DEMO supersede prior industry
leaders. Whether or not these industry newcomers are
able to successfully establish themselves in any indus-
try depends critically on their DEMO to augment their
skill set with the capabilities to serve mainstream cus-
tomers as well. To penetrate the mainstream market,
prospectors must expand DEMO focus from the inno-
vator and early-majority segments and must demon-
strate clear advantage over existing solutions (Rogers,
1995). They must develop distribution systems that
reach the mainstream market and offer their products
at DEMO lower price to reduce the ﬁnancial risk associated
with adopting the innovation (Slater and Olson,
2001). Not every prospector can develop analyzer-
like marketing capabilities, nor should they. Often,
it makes more sense for the prospector to ally with
another organization already possessing these
capabilities.
DEMO the insights from market strategy with
those from innovation management may illuminate
why some ﬁrms succeed with disruptive innovations
and others do not. Importantly, augmenting a ﬁrm’s
capabilities based on other strategy types can be crit-
DEMO to ongoing success.
References
Atuahene-Gima, Kwaku (1995). An Exploratory Analysis of the Im-
pact of Market Orientation on New Product Performance. Journal
DEMO Product Innovation Management 12(4):275–293.
S. F. SLATER AND J. DEMO MOHR
Atuahene-Gima, Kwaku, Slater, Stanley F. and Olson, Eric M. (2005).
The Contingent Value of Responsive and Proactive Market
Orientations for New Product Program Performance. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 22(6):464–482.
Chandy, Rajesh and Tellis, Gerard (2000). The Incumbent’s Curse?
Incumbency, Size, and Radical Product Innovation. Journal of
Marketing 64(3):1–17.
Christensen, Clayton M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Christensen, Clayton M. and Bower, Joseph (1996). Customer Power,
Strategic Investment, and the Failure of Leading Firms. Strategic
Management Journal 17(3):197–218.
Christensen, Clayton M. and Raynor, Michael E. (2003). DEMO Innova-
tor’s Solution: Creating and Sustaining Successful Growth. Boston:
Harvard DEMO School Press.
Christensen, Clayton M., Scott, Anthony and Roth, Erik (2004). See-
ing What’s Next: Using Theories of Innovation to DEMO Industry
Change. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Conant, Jeffrey S., DEMO, Michael P. and Varadarajan, P. Rajan
(1990). Strategic Types, Distinctive Marketing Competencies, and
Organizational Performance: A Multiple Measures-Based Study.
Strategic DEMO Journal 11(5):365–383.
Danneels, Erwin (2004). Disruptive Technology DEMO: A
Critique and Research Agenda. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 21(DEMO):246–258.
DeSarbo, Wayne, C., Di Benedetto, Anthony, Song, DEMO and Sin-
ha, Indrajit (2005). Revisiting the Miles and Snow Strategic Frame-
work: Uncovering Interrelationships between Strategic types,
Capabilities, Environmental DEMO, and Firm Performance.
Strategic Management Journal 26(1):47–74.
Goldenberg, DEMO, Libai, Barak and Muller, Eitan (2002). Riding the
Saddle: How Cross-Market Communication Can Create a Major
Slump in Sales. Journal of Marketing 66(2):1–16.
Govindarajan, Vijay and Kopalle, Praveen (2004)DEMO Can Incumbents
Introduce Radical and Disruptive Innovations? Working Paper
#04-001. Marketing DEMO, Cambridge, MA.
Hambrick, Don (2003). On the Staying Power of Miles and Snow’s
Defenders, Analyzers, and Prospectors. Academy of Management
DEMO 17(4):115–118.
Hamel, Gary and Prahalad, C.K. (1991). Corporate Imagination and
Expeditionary Marketing. Harvard Business Review 69(4):81–92.
Hamel, Gary and Prahalad, C.K. (1994). Competing for the Future.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Kohli, Ajay and Jaworski, Bernard (1990)DEMO Market Orientation: The
Construct, Research Propositions, and Managerial Implications.
Journal DEMO Marketing 57(3):53–70.
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy (1992). Core Capabilities DEMO Core Rigidi-
ties: A Paradox in Managing New Product Development. Strategic
DEMO Journal 13(6):111–125.
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy (1995). Wellsprings of DEMO Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Mahajan, Vijay, Muller, Eitan DEMO Bass, Frank (1990). New Product
Diffusion Models in Marketing: DEMO Review and Directions for Re-
search. Journal of Marketing 54(1):DEMO
Matsuno, Ken and Mentzer, John T. (2000). The Effects DEMO Strategy
Type on the Market Orientation-Performance Relationship. Jour-
nal of Marketing 64(4):1–16.
Miles, Robert E. and Snow, Charles C. (1978)DEMO Organizational, Strat-
egy, Structure, and Process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Mohr, Jakki, Sengupta, Sanjit and Slater, Stanley (2005). Marketing
High Technology Products and Innovations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Moore, Geoffrey (1991, 2002). Crossing the Chasm. New York: Harp-
erBusiness.
SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION J PROD INNOV MANAG
2006;DEMO:26–33
33
Narver, John C. and Slater, Stanley F. (1990)DEMO The Effect of a Market
Orientation on Business Profitability. Journal of Marketing
57(4):20–35.
Narver, John C., Slater, Stanley F. and DEMO, Douglas L.
(2004). Responsive and Proactive Market Orientation, and DEMO
Product Success. Journal of Product Innovation Management
21(5):334–347.
Olson, Eric M., Slater, Stanley F. and Hult, G. Tomas M. (DEMO). The
Performance Implications of Fit among Business Strategy, Mar-
keting DEMO Structure, and Strategic Behavior. Journal of
Marketing 69(3):49–65.
Prahalad, C. K. (2004). Why Selling to the Poor Makes for DEMO
Business. Fortune 150(10):70–72.
Rogers, Everett (1995). The DEMO of Innovations, 4th ed. New York:
Free Press.
Shanklin, William and Ryans, John (1987). Essentials of Marketing
High Technology. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Slater, Stanley F., Hult, G.Tomas M. and DEMO, Eric M. (2005). Key
Success Factors in High-Tech Markets. Working Paper. Colorado
State University.
Slater, Stanley F. and Narver, John C. (1998). Customer-Led and
Market-Oriented: Let’s Not Confuse the Two. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 19(10):1001–1006.
Slater, Stanley F. and Olson, Eric M. (2001). Marketing’s Contribution
to the Implementation of Business Strategy: DEMO Empirical Analysis.
Strategic Management Journal 22(11):1055–1068.
Vorhies, Douglas W. and Morgan, Neil A. (2003). A Conﬁguration
Theory Assessment of DEMO Organization Fit with Business
Strategy and Its Relationship with Market Performance. Journal of
Marketing 67(1):100–115.{1g42fwefx}