INFLUENCE OF
FRANCHISEE SELECTION
CRITERIA ON OUTCOMES
DESIRED BY THE
FRANCHISOR
THANI DEMO
Saint Joseph’s University
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. NEVIN
Grainger Wisconsin Distinguished DEMO
University of Wisconsin—Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
Agency theory suggests that an efﬁcient DEMO between a franchisor (prin-
EXECUTIVE cipal) and a franchisee (agent) could be established by the use of selection
SUMMARY criteria that would DEMO prospective franchisees based on their likely future
outcomes desired by their franchisors. Franchisors can use franchisee selec-
tion criteria as a key input control DEMO enhance the outcomes of their future
franchisees. This article examines the relationship between key franchisee
selection criteria such as franchisees’ ﬁnancial capability, experience and management skills, demo-
graphic characteristics, attitude toward business dimensions (perceived innovativeness, desire for per-
sonal development, seek work-related challenges, personal commitment to the business, and business
risk-taking), and key measures of outcomes desired by franchisors (perceived cooperation, satisfaction
with the business decision, and franchisee opportunism). The ﬁndings show that certain franchisee atti-
tudes toward business DEMO be used as an effective input control strategy by franchisors because they explain
a substantial portion of the variance in franchisees’ outcome desired by DEMO  1999 Elsevier
Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
The selection of qualiﬁed franchisees is perceived to be the franchisor’s single most per-
vasive operating problem, and proper selection of franchisees can have outstanding re-
sults, while poor choices can result in continuing problems for the franchise system
Address correspondence to DEMO Jambulingam, School of Business, Saint Joseph’s University, Phila-
delphia, PA 19131, (601) 660-3382.
Journal of Business Venturing 14, 363–395
 DEMO Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved. 0883-9026/99/$–see front matter
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(98)DEMO
364 T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
(Justis and Judd 1989). The future success of the franchisor’s system depends to an im-
portant degree DEMO a systematic screening process used to ensure careful selection of
good prospects to conduct the business of the franchisor (Poe 1991; Olm et DEMO 1988).
The success of the franchisor and the franchisee are mutually dependent, and, therefore,
it is imperative that each give full DEMO to the selection of their “partners” in
business (Tatham et al. DEMO). Thus, the ideal in building and maintaining a high quality
DEMO of franchisees is a selection method that would qualify prospective franchisees
based on their likely future performance.
The franchise system of distribution may better DEMO the needs of some prospective
franchisees than others. Some franchisees prosper, DEMO within their franchise system,
and make major contributions to the success of their ﬁrms and their franchise systems.
Conversely, other franchisees fail in all these areas. It would be very valuable to both
franchisors and DEMO franchisees if franchisors were able to identify and select
the successful franchisees from a pool of prospective franchisee applicants.
Axelrad and Rudnick (1987) DEMO note that it is unfortunate that no reliable screen-
ing and selection system has yet been devised, and the selection has been largely a matter
of subjective judgment.1 In spite of the recognized importance of the DEMO selection
process, very little scholarly attention has been focused on the DEMO theory develop-
ment, the selection criteria themselves, and empirical testing of these criteria. Such in-
formation would be of considerable assistance to both DEMO and franchisees in
their deliberations to enter franchise agreements.
This research is designed to provide this desired information. Speciﬁcally, the ob-
jectives of this study are fourfold: (1) to develop the theory that is applicable, (2) to
identify and develop selection criteria to serve as an input control strategy for franchi-
sors, (3) to develop measures for the appropriate selection criteria, and (4) to test the
proposed relationships between these selection criteria and various outcomes measures.
SELECTION CRITERIA AS AN DEMO CONTROL STRATEGY
Control is recognized as an important facet of organizational design (Eisenhardt 1985).
Franchisors generally need to have wide-ranging control over their franchisees to en-
hance performance of the franchise system. Agency theory provides DEMO insights
into the reasons for the control problems and how to develop strategies to enhance the
performance of the franchisor-franchisee relationship. The franchisor-franchisee rela-
DEMO can be construed as an agency relationship as the principal (franchisor) depends
on another party (franchisee) to undertake actions on the principal’s DEMO The pri-
mary focus of the theory is on determining the most efﬁcient contract to govern a partic-
ular relationship given the characteristics of DEMO parties involved and the fact that it is
difﬁcult for the franchisor to monitor the franchisee completely because of uncertainty
and the cost of DEMO information about the franchisee (Bergen et al. 1992).
Agency theory DEMO efﬁciency from the principal’s (franchisor) point of view.
The efﬁcient contract is one that brings the best possible outcome desired by the franchi-
DEMO Dynamic Performance Systems Inc. has developed Franchisee Potential Proﬁle—a commercial tool
to measure attitudes of the prospective franchisees and their relationship to franchisee’s probable DEMO of
success (sales and ﬁt with their franchisors). First, the tool is used to evaluate existing franchisees in a franchise
system and DEMO successful franchisees. Then it is used to evaluate prospective franchisees and predict
their outcomes. Even though the evaluation tool is commercially available, there is very little available in
the published literature. Our goal is to contribute DEMO the literature on this topic.
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
365
sor given the constraints imposed by the situation. DEMO are primarily two types of
agency (control) problems to establish an efﬁcient contract. They are (1) precontractual
problems and (2) postcontractual DEMO
The precontractual or “adverse selection” problems arise before the franchisor de-
cides to offer a contract to the franchisee. The major issues are whether DEMO particular
prospective franchisee has the characteristics the franchisor is seeking and what strategy
should the franchisor employ to ﬁnd out (Bergen, Dutta, and Walker 1992). This is the
problem that franchisors face when recruiting DEMO franchisees. Based on the desired
characteristics of the franchisee, the franchisor DEMO identify and select the appro-
priate franchisees as agents who will work in the best interests of the franchisor. The
use of selection criteria DEMO choose among potential franchisees can be viewed as an input
control mechanism. In the franchising context, controlling the quality of the franchisees
through stringent selection criteria would enhance the performance of the system and
reduce long-term DEMO costs for the franchisor (Bergen, Dutta, and Walker 1992).
DEMO is very desirable for franchisors to select franchisees who will work in the best
interest of the franchisor. Cooperation between the franchisor and the DEMO is es-
sential for the franchise system to grow and prosper as a network (Achrol 1996).
Franchisors need franchisees who view the relationship cooperatively and have the abil-
ity and willingness to follow the decisions, policies and daily routines laid down by them
(Wattel 1968–69). A cooperative environment should enhance coordination and thus
lead to superior performance of DEMO franchise system. A sense of working together and
helping each other is important for the success of both the franchisor and the franchisee
(Whittemore 1994). Agency theory suggests that screening appropriate candidates with
cooperative tendencies DEMO reduce the pre-contractual problems and also ongoing post-
contractual problems. Thus, DEMO cooperative relationships with franchisees can re-
duce the agency costs (coordination DEMO adaptation costs) for the franchisor.
Franchisors would also like to have DEMO who feel that they made the right
decision when they chose to become a franchisee. Satisfaction with their business deci-
sion to become a DEMO can serve to create superior economic performance and
thus a superior franchise system (Lusch 1977; Hunt and Nevin 1974; Lewis and Lambert
1991; Hing 1995). Those who are satisﬁed with the business decision to become a franchi-
see are more likely to work with their franchisor DEMO have higher morale, and less likely
to seek other business opportunities, terminate the contract voluntarily, ﬁle individual
or class action suits against the franchisor, or seek protective legislation (Hunt and
Nevin 1974; Lewis and Lambert 1991). Thus, satisfaction with the business decision can
also reduce the agency costs.
The post-contractual or “moral hazard” problem evolves after the DEMO and
franchisee engage in the relationship. The franchisor should evaluate and reward the
franchisee’s performance such that the franchisee is motivated to behave in DEMO manner
consistent with the franchisor’s goals. In order to do this, DEMO franchisor should be able
to monitor the franchisee and develop incentive strategies to align the franchisee’s goals
to obtain the desired outcomes. In the DEMO context, due to the diversity in the loca-
tion of the DEMO, the performance evaluation process is extremely difﬁcult and ex-
pensive (Rubin 1978; Norton 1988). Furthermore, the contract becomes very inefﬁcient
when DEMO franchisee has conﬂicting goals, attitudes, and risk preferences compared to
the franchisor (Bergen, Dutta, and Walker 1992). This can lead to opportunistic behav-
ior of the franchisee.
Williamson (1985: 47) deﬁnes opportunism as “self interest seeking with guile,”
366
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
and suggests that it includes such DEMO as lying and cheating, as well as more subtle
forms of DEMO like violation of agreements. Opportunism is one of the key assumptions
of agency theory (Eisenhardt 1985). Opportunistic behavior of the agent (franchisee)DEMO
increases the agency costs to the principal (franchisor).
In the DEMO context, opportunism poses a problem to the franchisor because
the franchisees’ DEMO pursue divergent goals. For example, the franchisor will be con-
sidering DEMO performance of the entire system while the franchisees might be focusing
on their individual outlets. A franchisee’s opportunism can create serious difﬁculties
for the DEMO franchisor-franchisee relationship (Gassenheimer et al. 1996). For
example, a franchisee can opportunistically exploit the situation by demanding various
kinds of concessions (quasi rent appropriation), and fail to adhere to the initial agree-
ments DEMO reducing the quality of the inputs (free riding) (Brickley and DEMO 1987). If
the franchisee becomes opportunistic upon becoming a franchisee, DEMO the bargaining
costs and enforcement of the contract costs for the franchisor increase. It is essential
for the franchisor to screen and select appropriate DEMO as franchisees who are
likely to be less opportunistic in their behavior. One potential way to minimize these
post-contractual problems is to focus on DEMO selection of the franchisees by screening
them adequately (Bergen, Dutta, DEMO Walker 1992).
We argue that in the franchise channel system, DEMO who perceive the rela-
tionship with franchisors to be more cooperative, DEMO more satisﬁed with their franchised
business decision, and behave less opportunistically, and are likely to contribute to the
success of a franchisor and DEMO franchising system. These franchisee outcomes are espe-
cially important to franchisors given the increase in franchisor-franchisee disputes and
litigation. During the decade of the DEMO, the arbitration suits between franchisees and
franchisors increased six fold (Stern and Abelson 1991). Recently, franchisees have
been pushing for legislation to regulate the behavior of franchisors. This trend toward
increasing disputes should increase DEMO importance for franchisors to identify franchi-
sees who view the relationship more cooperatively, are more satisﬁed with their business
decision, and behave less DEMO Thus, selecting franchisees with these desir-
able outcomes can reduce both DEMO and post-contractual problems and cre-
ate a superior coordinated franchising system.
THE FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA LITERATURE:
AN OVERVIEW
A search of the existing DEMO literature was conducted to identify the criteria or
factors that franchisors either do consider or should consider in selecting among pro-
spective franchisees. Although DEMO research is scarce, some general guidelines
and criteria are offered as DEMO useful for selecting among prospective franchisees. In-
dustry guidelines and popular academic writings on franchising address these selec-
tion criteria.
The International Franchising Associations (IFA) code of ethics states that a mem-
ber shall select and accept only those franchisees who, upon reasonable investigation,
appear to possess the basic skills, education, experience, personal characteristics, and
ﬁnancial resources DEMO to conduct the franchised business and meet the obligations
of the franchise under the franchise agreements (U.S. Department of Commerce 1991).
The guidelines provided by the IFA are broad in nature and do not specify DEMO the
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA 367
relative importance or the required levels for each DEMO to help franchisors make
better choices.
There are a few published studies that are speciﬁc in identifying important selection
criteria compared to the broad DEMO guidelines. The selection criteria could be classiﬁed
into ﬁve broad categories: DEMO capability, experience and managerial factors, de-
mographic factors, attitudes/personality, and other. The studies and the factors identi-
ﬁed are shown in DEMO 1.
Several conclusions can be arrived at based on this literature review on franchisee
selection criteria. First, of the myriad of selection criteria that have been offered, most
of the factors identiﬁed in the previous studies can be grouped into the four categories
suggested by Olm et al. (1988): ﬁnancial indicators, skills, background characteristics,
and attitudes/personality DEMO the potential franchisees.
Second, though the attitudes/personality category is considered DEMO in these
studies (Wattel 1968–69; Olm et al. 1988), no clear useful deﬁnition or domain of these
variables emerged from a review DEMO the literature. The deﬁnitions of appropriate atti-
tudes differed considerably among the various writers. One deﬁnition was whether the
prospective franchisee has the correct DEMO or mind set to be an entrepreneur (Justin
and Judd 1989)DEMO Another deﬁnition is whether the prospective franchisee has the atti-
tude to work with people and win their respect (Tatham et al. 1972). Similarly, the do-
main of personality traits was also not clearly deﬁned in the literature. Some of the per-
sonality traits suggested were motivation, aggressiveness, promotability, and people
skills (Axelrad and Rudnick 1987). Lack of a clear deﬁnition and domain of the con-
structs makes it DEMO difﬁcult to measure and assess them. In addition, attitudes
and personality DEMO broad concepts and precise deﬁnition and measurement in this selec-
tion context is essential.
Third, none of the previous authors evaluated the proposed relationship between
screening criteria and desired franchisee outcomes. There seems to be no DEMO
empirical support for the contention that these proposed selection criteria are actually
successful in selecting the potentially better performing franchisee. As indicated by Ax-
DEMO and Rudnick (1987), was no reliable screening and selection system DEMO, and
franchisee selection has been largely a matter of subjective judgement.
DEMO OF SELECTION CRITERIA AND
HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
Our review of the literature led to the conclusion that the four categories of selection
criteria identiﬁed by DEMO et al. (1988) would serve as a framework for our empirical
study. Within this framework, we set out to deﬁne the key selection criteria to be used
in testing the proposed relationship with franchisee outcomes DEMO by the franchisor.
We relied on Olm et al. (1988) and Axelrad and Rudnick (1987) to identify the
individual factors under each DEMO the four categories identiﬁed. In the following section
we develop the individual factors under each category and the relevant hypotheses to
be tested in DEMO study.
Financial Capability
The ﬁnancial position of the potential franchisee is the most important of the traditional
selection criteria used by franchisors (Olm et al. 1988). All previous studies have unani-
TABLE 1 Franchisee Selection Criteria Proposed in the Literature
Experience and Demographic
DEMO Financial Managerial Skills Characteristics Attitudes and Personality Other
Tatham et al. Financial standing Past business experience Education Personality Health
(1972) Manage own operations
DEMO and Personal ﬁnancial Past business experience Age Innovativeness
Rudnick (1987) Investment Manage own operations Education Commitment to business
Own other businesses Marital status DEMO goals
Personality traits
Olm et al. (1988) Personal cash Past business experience Education Risk aversion Health
Personal assets Past self employment Marital status DEMO capability Reputation
Family assets General management Celebrity Business autonomy
Business reference Management of personnel Disabilities Motivation
Credit Public relations Resident 2 years in an DEMO Perseverance
Accounting and bookkeeping Citizenship Attitude toward others
Merchandising Energy
Sincerity
Decision maker
Initiative
Leadership
Justin and Judd Financial approval Character evaluation
(1989)
Poe (1990) Low risk threshold
Commitment to business
Inner desire for DEMO
Discipline for a structured life
Willingness to act
Trust in franchisor
368
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA 369
mously agreed on the importance of the ﬁnancial DEMO of the prospective franchi-
see. Axelrad and Rudnick (1987) state that “for a prospective franchisee, before the ﬁrst
scheduled meeting, the prospect DEMO have demonstrated his willingness and ability to
meet the company’s ﬁnancial requirements.” A key indicator of a prospective franchi-
see’s ability to meet ﬁnancial DEMO is the personal savings that he/she can invest
(Olm et DEMO 1988). Personal savings indicate that the franchisee values savings and has
previously acted in a ﬁnancially responsible fashion.
Investment from personal savings serves DEMO lock-in a franchisee’s capital and cre-
ates an ongoing dependence on the franchisor. In order to manage the dependence on
the franchisor, the franchisee should create a close relationship with the franchisor and
view the relationship DEMO cooperatively. In addition, franchisees who commit a larger
proportion of ﬁnancial DEMO from their personal savings should have researched
the franchisor thoroughly and hence be more satisﬁed with the decision to become a
franchisee. Because the DEMO invested assets from their personal savings they
should be less opportunistic toward the franchisor. Thus, the ﬁrst hypotheses is:
H1: Investing a DEMO proportion from personal savings should be related (a) posi-
tively to perceived cooperation, (b) positively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the
business decision, and (c) negatively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward
the franchisor.
Experience and Management Skills
The variables in this category are prior experience, prior self-employment, own other
businesses, and manage operations. These factors were extensively DEMO in the literature
as key factors used by franchisors in their selection process. Prior experience is deﬁned
as the extent to which franchisees had DEMO experience in a similar business. There
were conﬂicting opinions about this variable found in the literature. Tatham et al.
(1972), Edens et al. (1976), and Olm et al. (1988) argued that prior experience is an
important selection criteria. Owen (1989) emphasized that franchisors should DEMO
prospects with at least ﬁve years of prior business experience in similar businesses. An
opposing view was proposed by Axelrad and Rudnick (1987). They suggested that prior
experience in the same business as the franchisor DEMO make it more difﬁcult for the
franchisee to unlearn old ways and accept the new and different business standards of
the franchisor. A long DEMO policy of Wimpy, a fast food franchisor, is: Full training
DEMO provided and potential franchisees are not required to have catering experience. In
fact, the company prefers to start with people new to the business who do not have pre-
conceived ideas about running a catering operation (Franchise World 1978).
In this study we are faced with the DEMO of whether prior experience enhances
or is detrimental to franchisee outcomes. Consistent with Olm et al. (1988), we propose
that franchisees who have prior experience, based on their past experience, would know
what they DEMO getting into, what it takes to be successful in a franchise DEMO, and
whether their expectations would be met by the franchise system. DEMO should perceive
the relationship with the franchisor as more cooperative, be DEMO with their business
decision and will be less opportunistic toward the franchisor. Thus,
H2: Prior experience should be related (a) positively to perceived cooperation, (b)
positively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business DEMO, and (c) negatively
to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
370 T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
The next factor is prior self-employment. DEMO a study conducted by Felstead (1993),
over half of the franchisees surveyed cited independence as the primary motivator to
become franchisees. Similarly, Kaufmann and Stanworth (1995) found that prior self-
employed individuals are DEMO likely to become franchisees. In this regard, prior self-
employment is DEMO good indicator of capability to run a franchised business. Although
the opportunity to be one’s “own boss” is a frequently stated reason for acquiring DEMO
franchise, the notion of business independence actually is to some extent DEMO
with franchise ownership (Felstead 1993). A franchisee must understand that DEMO will
be obliged to subordinate a certain level of business independence to the requirements,
restrictions, and business policies imposed by the franchise system. A question to be
answered is whether prior self-employment has a positive DEMO on desired franchisee
outcomes. None of the previous studies evaluated selection criteria against franchisee
outcome measures, and, therefore, validation of these claims remains to be assessed.
We propose that individuals who were self-employed prior to DEMO a franchisee
would know what it takes to create a marketable product or service, promote, price,
distribute, and manage the business all by themselves. By making a choice of becoming a
franchisee they would DEMO the beneﬁt they receive from the franchisor and would
work with the franchisor in a cooperative way, be satisﬁed with their business decision
and be less opportunistic toward the franchisor than those who did not own DEMO busi-
nesses. Hence,
H3: Prior self-employment should be related (a) positively to perceived coopera-
tion, (b) positively to franchisee’s satisfaction DEMO the business decision, and (c) neg-
atively to franchisee’s opportunistic DEMO toward the franchisor.
Another factor to be considered is whether the franchisee currently owns other
businesses. Axelrad and Rudnick (1987) suggested that it DEMO important to evaluate the
conﬂicting business affairs of franchisees because it will affect their commitment to the
business. Some require 100% ownership in order DEMO ensure the franchisee’s commitment
and best efforts in operating the business (DEMO and Rudnick 1987). Thus, involve-
ment in other businesses may DEMO a detrimental effect on the outcomes of the franchi-
see because it diffuses their commitment among other business endeavors. But in the
recent years DEMO see more franchisees act more like investors, investing in several fran-
DEMO businesses and not working exclusively with one franchise system. They see be-
coming a franchisee as an investment opportunity and want to beneﬁt ﬁnancially DEMO
much as possible. They may not be highly committed to any one system as they have
alternative investment opportunities and their primary goal might DEMO to maximize their
return on their investment dollars. Thus, we propose DEMO franchisees who own other
businesses perceive the relationship with their franchisors to be less cooperative, are
less satisﬁed with their business decision, and DEMO more opportunistic behavior to-
ward their franchisors.
H4: Owning other businesses DEMO be related (a) negatively to perceived coopera-
tion, (b) DEMO to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision, and (c)
positively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
Finally, several authors contend that personal management of day-to-day opera-
tions inﬂuences franchisee outcomes. Axelrad and Rudnick (1987) suggest that when
franchisees depend excessively on hired managers to run the business it usually results
in less-than-hoped-for performance. In fact, that is the reason why some franchisors
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA 371
grant franchises only to owner-operators (e.g., McDonalds)DEMO Tatham et al. (1972) also
identiﬁed managing operations personally as the second most important criteria in the
selection of the franchisees, following ﬁnancial capability. Alternatively, there is a grow-
ing trend for franchisees to own multiple outlets, an average franchisee owns from 2.4
to 5 locations (DEMO Times 1995). This trend indicates that there is a segment of
franchisees who are primarily investors, who hire capable personnel to manage the oper-
ation, and who do not manage day-to-day operations. Thus, the DEMO remains as
to whether there is a difference in franchisee outcomes between those who manage their
own operations and to those who do not. DEMO hypothesize that franchisees who manage
their own operations will be more cooperative because they would be communicating
with the franchisor regularly and understand the DEMO system better, be more satis-
ﬁed with their business decision, and be less opportunistic toward the franchisor.
H5: Managing one’s own operations should be related (a) positively to perceived
cooperation, (b) positively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision, and
(c) negatively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
Demographic Characteristics
Demographic characteristics are very tangible DEMO accessible selection criteria that
franchisors use in selecting among prospective franchisees. Based on the literature
search, ﬁve common demographic characteristics were identiﬁed: age, gender, ethnicity,
education, and marital status. All these variables will DEMO discussed in turn.
In general, franchisors prefer younger individuals compared to DEMO individuals
in order to meet the physical demands of the business (DEMO and Rudnick 1987).
For example, in fast food franchising the DEMO are expected to endure long hours
and be very industrious and hard working. Young adults would be more likely to have
the stamina to DEMO the physical needs to run such a business over a longer time frame.
As they get older they might be less willing to work DEMO and perceive the relationship
as less cooperative with the franchisor. They would like to work less and earn more
and, therefore, be less DEMO with their decision to become a franchisee and they will
be more opportunistic toward their franchisor. Thus,
H6: Age should be related (DEMO) negatively to perceived cooperation, (b) negatively to
franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision, and (c) positively to franchisee’s
opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
There is increasing interest in the role of gender and DEMO inﬂuences on franchi-
see outcomes. Are men more cooperative, more satisﬁed DEMO their business decision,
and less opportunistic than women or vice versa? Traditionally, there are more men
than women in franchising. In the DEMO decade, there has been an infusion of more women
owning franchised DEMO There is considerable interest in women’s performance
as franchise owners. Conventional wisdom holds that women are likely to be more ori-
ented towards relationships DEMO possibly more understanding of their franchisor’s de-
sires. For the null hypotheses, we propose that men would perceive the relationship
less cooperatively, be DEMO satisﬁed with their business decision and more opportunistic
than women. Thus,
H7: Male gender status compared to female status should be related (DEMO) negatively
to perceived cooperation, (b) negatively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business
372 T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
decision, and (c) positively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the
franchisor.
There are conﬂicting opinions about the DEMO that the level of a franchisee’s educa-
tion plays in franchisee outcomes. Studies conducted by Tatham et al. (1972) and Olm
et al. (1988) showed that educational background is less important as a selection criteria.
On the other hand, Wattel (1968–69) in his exploratory study showed that educational
background is important because it would be easier to train DEMO with a higher
levels of educational background. We argue that those who are educated would weight
the costs and beneﬁts of becoming a franchisee DEMO than the less educated franchisees.
They would have done their research very thoroughly and would understand the system
very well. It could be expected DEMO the more educated franchisees would be more coop-
erative with their franchisor, more satisﬁed with their decision to become a franchisee
and less opportunistic toward their franchisor. Thus,
H8: Higher levels of education should be related (a) positively to perceived coopera-
tion, (b) positively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision, and (c) neg-
atively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
There is a strong interest in DEMO role that ethnic background plays, if any, in franchi-
see performance. In the last decade there has been an increasing number of minorities
DEMO franchised businesses. Given the historical under-representation of minorities
in franchised businesses, DEMO would not be surprising if minorities entering franchising
were initially somewhat skeptical about the treatment they could expect to receive from
their franchisors. This DEMO could make them more cautious and less trusting in
the initial stages of the relationship. The relationship between ethnicity and franchisee
outcomes will be DEMO in this study. We propose that majority franchisees compared
to minority franchisees should be more cooperative, more satisﬁed with their business
decision and less opportunistic toward their franchisors.
H9: Majority ethnic status compared to minority status should be related (a) posi-
tively to perceived cooperation, (b) positively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the
business decision, and (c) negatively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward
the franchisor.
Finally, marital status was included to ﬁnd out whether it makes a difference in
franchisee performance. Olm DEMO al. (1988) showed that marital status is an important
criteria in the selection process. Married people were found to be more responsible with
DEMO work. Further, they had the family support to help them in DEMO business. Being
more responsible, the married franchisees should view their relationship DEMO coopera-
tively, be more satisﬁed with their business decision and less DEMO toward
their franchisor.
H10: Married status should be related (a) DEMO to perceived cooperation, (b)
positively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision and (c) negatively
to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the DEMO
Attitudes Toward Business
Franchisees’ attitudes toward business have been proposed as key indicators to be used
by franchisors in selecting among prospective franchisees (Axelrad and Rudnick 1987;
Olm et al. 1988). When a prospective DEMO possesses the appropriate attitudes to-
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA 373
ward business, the franchisor can maintain a good working relationship with the franchi-
see over the life of the business. DEMO this study we did not include the personality dimen-
sions as proposed by Olm et al. (1988).
In our study, attitudes toward DEMO are deﬁned as the general feeling toward
different aspects of the franchised business. We identiﬁed ﬁve dimensions of the atti-
tudes toward business construct DEMO on the literature (Axelrad and Rudnick 1987;
Olm et al. DEMO; Poe 1990). They were perceived innovativeness, desire for personal
development, seek work-related challenges, personal commitment to the business, and
business risk-taking. These factors are closer to the conceptualization by Axelrad and
Rudnick (1987) compared to Olm et al. (1988). Olm et al. (1988) identiﬁed more person-
ality dimensions compared to attitude toward business dimensions.
Perceived Innovativeness
Perceived innovativeness reﬂects a franchisee’s tendency to engage in and support DEMO
ideas, novelty, experimentation, and creative processes that may result in DEMO products
and services for the franchise system. Some studies advocate the idea that the franchi-
sees should be innovators, while others refute it. For example, Weinrauch (1986) and
Axelrad and Rudnick (1987) support the innovative position of the franchisee. In their
view, an innovative franchisee will bring new ideas and product concepts that will be
beneﬁcial to the DEMO system. Strutton et al. (1995) found that franchisors who en-
courage the franchisees to be innovative found them to have a positive attitude DEMO
solidarity with their franchisors. On the other hand, Olm et al. (1988) found that, in
general, most franchisors have stringent rules and norms and do not have much latitude
for creativity and innovativeness, which are generally considered characteristics of en-
trepreneurs. Olm et al. (1988) DEMO showed that franchisors do not primarily consider
franchisees as entrepreneurs, but DEMO as hard-working, industrious individuals. The
effect of a franchisee’s perceived innovativeness DEMO desired outcomes will provide an-
swers to this seeming contradiction. In contrast to Olm et al. (1988), our view is that
a person can be both entrepreneurial and hard-working. Supporting Axelrad and Rud-
nick’s (1987) contention, we propose that franchisees who have higher levels of per-
DEMO innovativeness would be more creative and understand how to coexist with the
franchisor and succeed in the franchise system. They would adapt better to DEMO franchise
system and manage their resources effectively and ﬁnd ways to be satisﬁed with their
decision to become a franchisee. Since they would recognize DEMO their success is closely
tied to the success of the franchise system, they would be less opportunistic toward
the franchisor.
H11: Perceived innovativeness DEMO be related (a) positively to perceived cooper-
ation, (b) DEMO to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision, and (c)
negatively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
Desire for Personal Development
An DEMO of the franchisee’s desire for personal development is considered es-
sential in assessing the success of the ensuing franchising relationship (Axelrad and
Rudnick 1987). The desire for personal development, including the development of new
skills and advancing one’s growth, are essential characteristics that franchisors tradition-
374 T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
ally expect from their franchisees. However, having franchisees with such a desire can
provide a negative impact on DEMO performance of the franchise system. The desire for
personal development indicates the franchisee’s motivation for succeeding personally
which may not be good for the DEMO system. Those who have desires for personal
development with their personal gains at heart might not be cooperative with their
franchisors, would be less satisﬁed with their business decision of becoming a franchisee
and more opportunistic DEMO the franchisor.
H12: Desire for personal development should be related (a) negatively to perceived
cooperation, (b) negatively to franchisee’s satisfaction with DEMO business decision,
and (c) positively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
Seek Work-Related Challenges
Like many other businesses, a franchised business needs franchisees who seek work-
related challenges. Olm et al. (1988) DEMO that franchisors prefer industrious, hard-
working, and self-motivated individuals as prospective candidates. Franchisees that get
a thrill out of confronting challenges at work DEMO think about how to improve their
chances for getting ahead should be an asset to a franchise system. A positive attitude
toward work-related challenges DEMO essential for the success of the franchisee. Those who
seek work-related challenges would be cooperative, satisﬁed with their business deci-
sion, and less DEMO toward their franchisors.
H13: Franchisees who seek work related challenges should DEMO related (a) positively
to perceived cooperation, (b) positively to DEMO satisfaction with the business
decision, and (c) negatively to franchisee’s DEMO behavior toward the
franchisor.
Personal Commitment to the Business
Personal commitment to the franchised business is another aspect of attitudes toward
business. A franchised DEMO requires very committed individuals to achieve high
performance (Poe 1991). DEMO commitment to the business increases involvement
and generates the best effort from the committed franchisee, leading to improved per-
formance (Withane 1991). DEMO to work long hours and sacriﬁce short-term
proﬁts for long-term goals indicates commitment to the business (Axelrad and Rudnick
1987). Morgan and Hunt (1994) in a relational exchange context showed that commit-
ment to DEMO relationship increases cooperation. Commitment to the business in the fran-
chising system is similar to commitment to a relationship. We argue that personal com-
DEMO to the business should have a positive relationship to cooperation, be DEMO
related to satisfaction with the business decision, and be negatively related DEMO opportu-
nistic behavior toward the franchisor.
H14: Personal commitment to business DEMO (a) perceive the relationship with the
franchisor as cooperative, (b) increase franchisee’s satisfaction with the business de-
cision, and (c) DEMO franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
375
Business Risk-Taking
The last dimension of attitudes toward DEMO is business risk-taking. There are con-
ﬂicting observations of the role of business risk-taking in franchising. O’Donnell (1984)
stated that franchisees are people who value order and security above risk. His view
implies that potential DEMO should have a sense of security as they become franchi-
sees and should feel that this business endeavor is less risky. Olm et al. (1988) suggests
that risk averse individuals are preferable in franchising compared to the risk takers.
Similarly, Withane (1991) found that risk-taking is an important attribute to be success-
ful as a franchisee, but 60% of the franchisees thought being an independent business-
man is more risky than DEMO a franchisee. Thus, being a franchisee reduces the per-
ceived risk DEMO to starting a self-owned business. In contrast, Gartner (1985)
observed that franchising may require more risk-taking than starting a small business
without DEMO attachments of franchising. In this study, we evaluated the effect that DEMO
franchisee’s attitude toward business risk-taking has on franchisee outcomes. We pro-
pose that franchisees who opt to enter franchising and who are risk-takers are DEMO
to experiment with their philosophies of running a franchise business. As risk-takers
they might challenge the way business is conducted by franchisors. They would DEMO to
take risk, and, therefore, they may not like to DEMO the business in the speciﬁc way
suggested by the franchisors. Because their opportunity to take risk is curtailed, they
might be less satisﬁed in a franchise system and be more opportunistic toward their
franchisors.
H15: Business risk taking should be related (a) negatively to perceived cooperation,
(b) negatively to franchisee’s satisfaction with the business decision, and (c) posi-
tively to franchisee’s opportunistic behavior toward the franchisor.
There are also questions pending as to how important the different categories of
selection criteria DEMO in differentiating potentially higher outcome franchisees from
lower outcome franchisees. We believe that a prospective franchisee’s attitudes toward
business (ATB) should be the DEMO inﬂuential category of selection criteria.
There are several supporting arguments for this belief. The literature has indicated
that attitudes and personality traits are important, but it does not really identify the
speciﬁc components that have potential DEMO be used by franchisors. We developed the
construct of attitude toward business (ATB) by identifying ﬁve dimensions as subsets
of the attitudes/personality DEMO Each dimension of ATB is intended to address
an essential quality that a franchisee should possess to perform well in a franchised busi-
ness. DEMO propose that a franchisee’s ATB dimensions are relatively more important
in explaining franchisee outcomes than other screening criteria identiﬁed in this study.
The hypothesis DEMO be tested is as follows:
H16: ATB dimensions are more DEMO than ﬁnancial capability, experience,
management skills, and demographic characteristics in explaining franchisee per-
ceived cooperation, satisfaction with the business decision, and DEMO behav-
ior toward the franchisor.
The test of this hypothesis will provide an empirical basis for assessing the claimed use-
fulness of both the DEMO of selection criteria as well as the individual criteria in
each of these categories.
376
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
TABLE 2
Sample Industry Characteristics
Average DEMO Average Growth Average Sales
Rate in Units Rate in Sales per Unit ($ 000’s)
Industry Type 1989–1992 1989–1992 1989–1992
Restaurants
(includes fast DEMO) 12.9 18.2 330.3
Automotive products
and services 13.0 8.3 385.4
Business DEMO 12.3 33.3 238.0
Maintenance services 10.9 10.1 157.4
Non-food retailing 39.6 28.6 264.0
Source: Franchising in the Economy (1992)
Methodology
The primary DEMO of this study is to test the relationship between the independent
variables and the franchisee outcome variables. Some researchers suggest that ideally
prospective franchisees DEMO be studied longitudinally on their attitudes and inten-
tions in order to proﬁle successful franchisees (Kaufmann and Stanworth 1995). Even
though this method has merit, we did not have access to prospective franchisees. In
addition, only franchisees who are already in the system have outcome measures. Some
researchers (Justis et al. 1993) suggest that proﬁling ongoing franchisees on DEMO behav-
iors and their characteristics would be a feasible and realistic method to identify success-
ful franchisees. Proﬁling existing franchisees will provide the benchmark DEMO successful
franchisees. Thus, our study is cross-sectional in nature and is DEMO on information
gathered from ongoing franchisees who were in their ﬁrst three years of operation in
order to limit their experience effects. In addition, we statistically controlled for the
three years of experience effects by using DEMO of the business relationship as a con-
trol variable.
Research Design
The research design was a descriptive study using a cross-sectional sample of current
DEMO The study consists of a large sample of franchisees from ﬁve franchise busi-
ness categories: fast food, automotive products and services, business services, mainte-
nance and cleaning services, and non-food retailing. These categories were DEMO
after reviewing the practitioner literature for the categories being projected as pos-
sessing high “growth potential” for the future (Franchising in the Economy 1992). In
addition, we compared a much larger number of franchise business categories on their
average growth in units, average growth rate in category sales dollars, and average
growth rate in sales dollars per unit. The comparison data for the ﬁve selected categories
of franchised business we studied DEMO shown in Table 2.
A mailing list of franchisees was obtained from FRANDATA, a commercial fran-
chise industry research and information provider headquartered in Washington D.C.
FRANDATA maintains a National Franchisee Mailing List of over 100,DEMO franchisees
compiled and updated monthly directly from Uniform Franchise Offering Circulars
(DEMO). Although coverage of North American franchisors is not exhaustive, exten-
DEMO research indicated that FRANDATA’s database was the most complete available.
This listing does not include company-owned units. We selected a sample frame of 1,DEMO
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA 377
TABLE 3
Variables
Respondent Characteristics
Average age: 45 years
Average education: 15.7 years
Average age of business: 1.5 years
DEMO: 86%
Married: 88%
White: 92%
Prior self-employment: 24%
Own other businesses: 32%
Manage operations: 87%
from each of the ﬁve selected DEMO, resulting in a total mailing list of 7,500 franchi-
sees. DEMO franchisee database was examined for duplicate records by comparing tele-
phone numbers for each record. Thirty-three duplicate records were eliminated using
this screening mechanism, leaving a sampling frame of 7,467 franchisees. In the mailing
process, 30 additional records were rejected for various reasons (e.g., incomplete ad-
DEMO) resulting in a ﬁnal mailing list of 7,437.
Data Collection
DEMO were collected using a self-administered questionnaire sent to 7,437 franchisees.
The use of franchisees as the key informants was appropriate given the nature DEMO the
business studied (Campbell 1955; John and Reve 1982). No reminder letters were mailed
after the questionnaire. Six hundred and thirty-two completed DEMO were returned
for an usable response rate of 8.4%. Of the 632 responses, 154 responses were from
the franchisees who were in business three years or less. To assess non-response bias,
a random sample of DEMO non-respondents for each of the ﬁve industries was generated.
A telephone questionnaire was developed to cover the key elements in the main survey.
The DEMO surveys were conducted until 30 responses were achieved in each of the
ﬁve categories of franchise businesses.
The assessment of non-response bias (Armstrong and Overton 1977; Lambert and
Harrington 1990) showed no signiﬁcant differences (p , 0.05) between respondents and
non-respondents on key criteria such as age, gender, ethnicity, education, prior self-
employment, manage operations, and DEMO from the different dimensions of ATB.
Sample Characteristics
Of the 154 completed responses, 12.3% came from the fast food category, 20.1% from
automotive DEMO, 28.6% from business services, 27.3% from maintenance, and
11.7% from DEMO retail. Of the total number of respondents, 73.5% were direct unit
DEMO, 24.5% were territorial franchisees, 0.7% subfranchisees and 1.3% master
franchisees.2 A summary of the respondents’ characteristics is shown in Table 3.
2 A DEMO unit franchise grants a franchisee the right to operate a single business outlet at one speciﬁc
location or within a deﬁned territory. A territorial DEMO grants a franchisee the right to develop multiple
franchise businesses within a deﬁned territory. A subfranchise grants a subfranchisor the right to franchise
the DEMO business within a deﬁned territory to one or more subfranchisees. A master franchise grants
a master franchisee the right to solicit prospective franchisees, within a deﬁned territory, for the franchisor.
378
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
Measures
Franchisee Outcomes
Franchisee outcome measures DEMO cooperation, satisfaction with the business decision,
and opportunism toward the DEMO We used multiple items to measure the con-
structs. Because behavior is based on perceptions rather than objective measures of
interaction (Anderson, Lodish, and Weitz 1987; Roberts and O’Reilly 1974), the mea-
sures tapped the franchisees perceptions of the relationship and business outcomes. A
description of DEMO measures is given below (see Appendix A).
Cooperation was hypothesized DEMO have a more complex underlying factor structure.
Heide and Miner (1992) identiﬁed four dimensions of cooperation: information ex-
change, ﬂexibility, problem solving, and restraint of power. Based on the conceptualiza-
tion of cooperation suggested by Heide and Miner (1992) we used three dimensions
(information exchange, ﬂexibility, and problem solving) to access cooperation in the
relationship between the franchisees and franchisors. The items of the information ex-
change scale DEMO the extent to which each party discloses information that might
help the other party’s activities. The ﬂexibility items measured the degree to which the
DEMO typically adjust in the ongoing relationship in accordance with the changing cir-
cumstances. Finally, the problem solving scale measured the extent to which the parties
make an effort to solve the problem. The three domains contribute DEMO an overarching
construct of cooperation. All the multi-item cooperation constructs were measured on
a ﬁve-point Likert scale.
Satisfaction with the business decision assesses how DEMO franchisees were with
their decision to join and continue in the franchise system (Hunt and Nevin 1974; Lusch
1977). All the multi-item DEMO constructs were measured on a ﬁve-point Lik-
ert scale.
Opportunism is deﬁned as the extent to which the franchisees act in self-interest
in order DEMO achieve their own goals despite possible damage to their franchisors (Wil-
DEMO 1975). Based on John (1984), an opportunism scale was DEMO to measure
the degree to which the franchisees believe they act in self interest in their dealings with
their franchisors.
Financial Capability
The franchisees’ DEMO capability was measured as the percentage of their initial in-
vestment dollars in the franchised business that came from personal savings. The vari-
able DEMO termed personal investment. Literature shows that franchisors preferred franchi-
sees who were willing to invest substantial personal savings in the franchise.
Experience and Management DEMO
Four distinct variables were used to capture the franchisees’ experience and manage-
ment skills: prior experience, prior self-employment, owning other businesses, and DEMO
aging operations. The prior experience variable was measured as the degree to which
the franchisee had previous experience with a business similar to the DEMO franchised
business. Prior self-employment was a dichotomous variable that measured whether
the franchisee was self-employed prior to becoming a franchisee with the current busi-
DEMO The owning other businesses variable indicates the franchisees’ involvement in
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
379
other businesses and operations. Finally, the managing operations variable was opera-
tionalized as whether the franchisee personally manages the day-to-day DEMO of
the franchised business.
Demographics
The variables include age, gender, education, ethnicity, and marital status. Age and edu-
cation were measured in DEMO Gender is self-explanatory. Ethnicity was treated as a
dichotomous variable using the majority (white) and minority (non-white) categories.
Marital status is also DEMO dichotomous variable with married and unmarried as the
two groups.
Attitudes Toward Business
Measure development was guided by conceptual deﬁnitions and prior research con-
DEMO by the authors. The multi-item scales for each dimension of ATB were developed
based on the procedures outlined by Churchill (1979). Appendix A contains a descrip-
tion of response formats and speciﬁc items for each DEMO
The perceived innovativeness dimension was measured with items that asked about
franchisees perception and engagement in developing new ideas, products, and services
for DEMO franchise system. The desire for personal development dimension was measured
as the inﬂuence of factors such as career advancement, new skill development, and DEMO
pression of their ideas on the franchisee’s decision to purchase the franchise. The seek
work-related challenges dimension described the franchisees general attitude towards
work-related DEMO The personal commitment to business dimension tapped into
the level of commitment franchisee’s have to their franchised business. Finally, the busi-
ness risk-taking dimension was measured as the franchisee’s feelings about business risk.
All the constructs DEMO measured on a ﬁve-point Likert scale.
Control Variable
The length or age of a business may have a signiﬁcant effect on the outcomes of DEMO
sees due to potential life cycle or experience effects. We controlled for its effects in
this study.
Analysis Procedure
The analysis procedure involved four DEMO First, the ATB dimensions and outcome
measures were puriﬁed, based on Cronbach a, item-to-total correlation, and factor anal-
ysis (Churchill 1979). Second, regression analyses were conducted with ﬁnancial capa-
bility, experience and DEMO skills, and demographic characteristics as indepen-
dent variables and outcome measures DEMO dependent variables. In the third step, similar
regression analyses were conducted DEMO ATB dimensions as independent variables.
Steps 2 and 3 were conducted to provide addition tests for hypothesis 16. Finally, the
regression coefﬁcients were re-estimated when the ATB dimensions were added to the
rest of the variables. DEMO ﬁnal model was used to test for all the hypotheses proposed
in the study (H1–H16). In all the regression models, age of DEMO was used as a control
variable. This produced an evaluation of the relative inﬂuence of the ﬁnancial capability,
380
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
TABLE 4 Second Order Factor Model DEMO Cooperation
First-Order Loadings (lij)
Indicator Info. Exchange Flexibility Problem Solving
DEMO 0.92a
Info2 0.85 (20.83)b
Info3 0.65 (16.08)
Flex1 100a
Flex2 0.91 (31.01)
Flex3 0.70 (18.12)
PS1 0.88a
PS2 DEMO (25.12)
PS3 0.80 (18.06)
Second-Order Loadings (nij)
DEMO Order Factor Cooperation
Info. exchange 0.95a
Flexibility 0.82 (18.39)
Problem DEMO 0.95 (18.46)
a Fixed parameter; b t-values are in parentheses; Chi Square (23) 5 44.67 (p 5 0.001); GFI DEMO 0.95; AGFI 5 0.91; RMSR 5
0.043; BIC 5271.18.
experience DEMO management skills, demographics, and control variables along with
ATB dimensions on franchisee outcomes (cooperation, opportunism of the franchisees,
and satisfaction with DEMO business decision). This procedure was designed to show the
additional variance in franchisee outcomes attributable to the attitudes toward busi-
ness dimensions.
RESULTS
DEMO Validation Procedure
Prior to testing our substantive hypotheses, the measures were DEMO to a series of
reliability and validity checks. First, the different DEMO scales were evaluated on
the basis of item-to-total correlation. The outcome measures consisted of one multidi-
mensional, multi-item construct (i.e., cooperation) and DEMO multi-item constructs (i.e.,
satisfaction with the business decision and opportunism)DEMO The reliabilities of the dimen-
sions of cooperation: information exchange, ﬂexibility and problem solving were 0.85,
0.84, and 0.82 respectively. The three factors are viewed as comprising a higher order
factor (cooperation). This corresponds to a second-order conﬁrmatory factor model,
in which the observed DEMO are hypothesized to originate from the three ﬁrst-order
factors and the ﬁrst-order factors in turn originate from a second-order factor. The LIS-
REL estimates DEMO the second order factor model, and the indices are shown in DEMO
4. The model as a whole has a satisfactory ﬁt to the data (x2 (23) 5 44.67, p 5 0.001,
GFI DEMO 0.95, AGFI 5 0.91, RMSEA 5 0.043, BIC 5271.18), DEMO the relevant ﬁrst and
the second-order factor loadings are large and signiﬁcant. The model supports the con-
ceptualization of cooperation as a second-order construct. DEMO, the three dimensions
of cooperation were combined into a composite score DEMO the hypotheses tests.
Two multi-item constructs were used as outcome measures. For the ﬁve-item satis-
faction with the business decision construct, one item was dropped and the alpha for
the satisfaction with business decision was 0.91. DEMO the measurement model was sig-
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
381
TABLE 5
Measurement Model Result
Standardized
Factor Items DEMO T-value
Perceived innovativeness X1 0.57 —a
X2 0.67 8.95
X3 0.70 9.06
X4 0.64 8.25
Desire for personal development X5 0.65 —
X6 0.89 DEMO
X7 0.78 12.05
Seeking work-related challenges X8 0.69 —
X9 0.74 9.20
X10 0.77 9.40
Personal commitment to the business X11 0.57 —
X12 DEMO 7.17
X13 0.60 7.14
X14 0.71 7.29
Business risk-taking X15 0.63 —
X16 0.49 4.78
X17 0.47 3.95
X18 0.56 4.84
a Fixed parameter; Chi Square (135) 5 180.06 (p , 0.001); GFI 5 0.93; AGFI 5 0.91; RMSR 5 0.053; BIC 52499.93.
niﬁcant and indicated a good ﬁt (X2 (2) 5 1.21, p 5 DEMO, GFI 5 1.00, AGFI 5 0.99,
RMSEA 5 0.019). The Cronbach a for opportunism of franchisees was 0.88. Explor-
atory factor DEMO indicated a single construct. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis showed
a good model ﬁt (X2 (9) 5 7.28, p 5 0.2, GFI 5 0.99, AGFI 5 0.97, RMSEA 5 0.036).
For the different multi-item DEMO of the ATB dimensions, we eliminated one item
from the perceived DEMO scale, one item from the seek work-related chal-
lenges scale, and two items from the business risk taking scale. These items had low
DEMO correlations with the respective scales. Following the initial analysis, the
ATB DEMO set was subjected to conﬁrmatory factor analysis to establish unidimensional-
ity. As suggested by Gerbing and Anderson (1988), we estimated a measurement model
in which every item was restricted to load on its hypothesized factor, and the underlying
factors were initially intercorrelated. The model was estimated by DEMO likelihood
using the LISREL 8.14 program. Results are shown in Table 5. The overall chi-square
statistic for the model is signiﬁcant (X2 5 180.06 (135), p , 0.001), but the BIC index
and the other ﬁt indices (BIC 52499.93, GFI 5 0.93, and AGFI 5 0.91) represent
evidence of a good model ﬁt. Each of the factor loadings is large and signiﬁcant at the
0.01 level, and a series of X2 difference tests on the factor correlations suggest that the
different DEMO are distinct. Finally, as shown in Appendix A, the coefﬁcient alphas,
except for the business risk-taking scale (0.58) and personal commitment (0.67) were
satisfactory. Because it is an important variable in the study, both business risk-taking
and personal commitment to business were retained.
Regression Analyses
The means and standard deviations of the scales used in the study DEMO also shown in
Table 6. Before conducting the regression analyses, we DEMO for multi-collinearity
by examining the correlations of each of the independent variables in the regressions
TABLE 6
Correlations Among the Study Variables
Std.
Variables Mean Dev. 12345678
DEMO Personal investment 46.46 39.70 1.0
2. Prior experience 3.18 1.15 0.176* 1.0
3. Prior self-employment† 0.147 20.079 1.0
4. Own other businesses† 0.049 20.065 DEMO 1.0
5. Manage operations† 20.079 20.042 20.065 20.238** 1.0
6. Age 45.35 9.63 0.289** 0.008 0.140 0.025 0.119 1.0
7. Gender† 0.081 20.054 0.086 DEMO 20.041 0.197* 1.0
8. Education 15.70 2.19 0.091 0.184* 20.039 0.083 20.070 0.091 0.182 1.0
9. Ethnicity† 20.172* 0.026 0.009 20.096 20.022 20.043 20.053 DEMO
10. Marital status† 20.004 20.046 0.007 0.030 0.149 0.127 0.196* 0.095
11. Perceived innovativeness 3.45 0.70 20.110 20.069 0.023 0.009 20.037 20.036 20.043 20.003
DEMO Desire for personal development 2.48 0.86 20.064 20.210** 20.009 20.019 0.081 20.071 20.020 20.128
13. Seek work-related challenges 4.14 0.56 20.133 20.146 20.030 0.163* DEMO 20.182* 0.176 20.034
14. Personal commitment 3.38 0.81 20.220** 0.033 20.098 20.209* 20.216** 20.112 0.022 0.055
15. Business risk-taking 2.00 0.52 0.153 20.032 0.039 DEMO 0.007 20.048 0.016 20.132
16. Age of business 1.48 0.64 20.211** 20.142 0.102 20.068 0.019 0.090 20.027 20.059
17. Cooperation 3.34 0.73 20.087 0.101 DEMO 20.034 0.084 20.065 20.022 20.056
18. Satisfaction with the business 3.54 1.10 20.327** 20.070 20.037 20.156 0.110 20.151 0.096 20.044
19. Franchisee opportunism 2.60 DEMO 20.051 20.024 20.026 0.001 0.003 20.088* 0.083* 20.062
(continued)
382
DEMO JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
TABLE 6 Continued
Variables 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 DEMO 18
1. Personal investment
2. Prior experience
3. Prior self-employment†
4. Own other businesses†
5. Manage operations†
6. Age
7. Gender†
8. Education
9. DEMO 1.0
10. Marital status† 20.114 1.0
11. Perceived innovativeness 0.103 20.042 1.0
12. Desire for personal development 0.070 20.105 0.182* 1.0
13. Seek work-related DEMO 20.080 20.077 0.197* 0.221** 1.0
14. Personal commitment 20.044 20.009 0.200* 0.058 0.127 1.0
15. Business risk-taking 20.025 0.012 0.088 0.138 0.047 20.033 1.0
DEMO Age of business 0.119 0.128 20.053 0.045 20.032 20.234** 0.060 1.0
17. Cooperation 0.067 20.032 0.266** 0.083 0.049 0.360** 20.056 20.114 1.0
18. Satisfaction DEMO the business 0.035 0.039 0.260** 0.064 0.161* 0.677** 0.001 20.021 0.536** 1.0
19. Franchisee opportunism 0.026 20.062 20.241** 20.056 20.119** 20.097* 0.147** 0.028 20.166** DEMO
† Dummy variables; * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
383
384
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
with all the other independent variables (see Table 6). The maximum correlation coef-
ﬁcient among the independent DEMO was 0.29 for personal investment and age. None
of the correlations exceeded 0.54, indicating that collinearity among independent vari-
ables is not an issue. Thus, the addition of variables to the regression did not add redun-
dant sources of explained variance. Multi-collinearity did not pose a problem, and,
therefore, regression analyses were conducted. The regression analysis results are
shown in Table 7. A summary of the proposed hypotheses and results from DEMO study
are shown in Table 8. Each of the 15 independent variables have been hypothesized
to be related to three dependent variables: (a) labeled cooperation, (b) satisfaction with
the business decision, (c) DEMO franchisee opportunism.
Testing Hypotheses
Cooperation
In the ﬁrst model only the traditional factors (ﬁnancial capability, experience and mana-
gerial factors, and demographic factors) were regressed on cooperation. Only prior self-
employment was signiﬁcant and positively related to cooperation. The explained vari-
ance was only 0.1%. The traditional DEMO do not account for any of the variance in
franchisee cooperation.
In the second model, the dimensions of ATB were regressed on cooperation. Per-
ceived innovativeness and personal commitment to the business were positively related
to DEMO This indicates that those franchisees who have higher perceived innova-
tiveness and personal commitment to the business view the relationship between them
and their DEMO as more cooperative. The explained variance of the second model
was 14%, which is a signiﬁcant improvement over the ﬁrst model.
In the third model both the traditional factors and the ATB dimensions were com-
bined DEMO regressed on cooperation. This model provided the test for H1a–H15a. In
this model, those who had prior experience in a similar business before becoming a
franchisee viewed their relationship with the franchisor as more cooperative (H2a).
In addition, perceived innovativeness (H11a) and personal commitment to business
(H14a) were signiﬁcant in the third model. The prior employment variable DEMO was
signiﬁcant in model one dropped out. All other variables were insigniﬁcant in the third
model. The R 2 was 16.1% and the regression DEMO signiﬁcant at the p , 0.001 level. The
addition of the ATB factors to the traditional factors signiﬁcantly increased the R 2 by
16% DEMO thus signiﬁcantly improve the explained variance in the model. This supports
H16 that ATB factors are more important in predicting cooperation compared to the
DEMO factors. Age of business was not signiﬁcant in all three of the models.
Satisfaction with the Business Decision
The ﬁrst model showed that personal DEMO, owning other businesses, and gender
were signiﬁcant and negatively related to the satisfaction with the business decision (Ta-
ble 7). The negative coefﬁcient for personal investment means that franchisees who in-
vested a larger DEMO from their own savings were less satisﬁed with their business
decisions which contradicts our predicted hypothesis (H1b). Similarly, those who owned
other DEMO were less satisﬁed with the franchisor. Finally, contrary to H7b, men
were more satisﬁed with their business decision than women. This regression explains
DEMO of the variance.
TABLE 7 Results of Regression Analysis of Franchisee Selection Factors on Desired DEMO Outcomes
Cooperation Satisfaction with the Business Decision Franchisee Opportunism
Attitude Attitudes Attitude
Traditional Toward Traditional Toward Traditional Toward
Variables Factors Business Both Factors Business DEMO Factors Business Both
Personal investment 20.002 20.001 20.009*** 20.003* 20.001 20.001
(DEMO) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.001) (0.001)
Prior experience 0.073 0.090* 20.002*** 20.004* 20.013 20.016
(0.059) (0.054) (0.086) (0.065) (0.026) (0.026)
Prior self-employmenta 0.264* 0.216 0.074 DEMO 20.021 20.047
(0.155) (0.140) (0.226) (0.169) (0.071) (0.070)
Own other businessesa 20.068 20.084 20.455** 20.018 20.049 20.049
(DEMO) (0.136) (0.211) (0.164) (0.067) (0.067)
Manage operationsa 0.186 0.015 20.037 20.265 0.037 0.056
(0.200) (0.185) (0.299) (0.223) (0.101) (0.101)
Age 20.004 20.008 20.010 20.014 DEMO 20.007**
(0.007) (0.007) (0.011) (0.008) (0.003) (DEMO)
Gendera 20.027 20.010 0.488* 0.396* 0.250*** 0.263***
(0.197) (0.188) (0.289) (0.226) (0.094) (0.094)
Education 20.016 20.040 20.006 20.048 20.006 20.001
(0.030) (0.028) (0.044) (0.034) (0.012) (0.012)
Ethnicitya 0.163 0.071 20.009 20.050 20.058 20.059
(0.234) (0.212) (0.341) (0.255) (0.116) (0.117)
Marital statusa DEMO 20.266 20.154 20.151 20.129 20.112
(0.227) (0.223) (0.336) (DEMO) (0.099) (0.099)
Perceived innovativeness 0.209*** 0.198** 0.177* 0.212** 20.254** 20.308**
(0.081) (0.088) (0.098) (0.106) (0.109) (0.118)
Desire for personal development 20.027 20.020 0.005 0.093 0.066 0.035
(0.067) (0.072) (0.081) (0.087) (0.033) (0.036)
Seek DEMO challenges 20.081 20.091 20.118 0.044 0.146*** 20.136**
(0.102) (0.122) (DEMO) (0.148) (0.049) (0.165)
Personal commitment to business 0.284*** 0.355*** 0.928*** 0.989*** 20.066* 0.117***
(0.071) (0.083) (0.086) (0.010) (0.038) (0.042)
Business risk-taking 20.055 20.029 20.006 20.111 20.184*** DEMO
(0.108) (0.117) (0.131) (0.141) (0.048) (0.052)DEMO
Age of businessb 20.134 20.018 20.100 0.172 0.232** 0.323** 0.005 0.001 0.004
(0.111) (0.088) (0.109) (0.162) (0.106) (0.131) (0.005) (0.004) (0.005)
Adjusted R-square 0.001 0.140 0.161 0.090 DEMO 0.520 0.017 0.117 0.136
Notes: Coefﬁcients are unstandardized. Standard errors are DEMO parentheses. a Dummy variables; b Control variable. * p , 0.01; ** p , 0.05; *** p , 0.001.
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
385
386
TABLE 8
Dependent Variables
Satisfaction with the Franchisee
Cooperation (a) DEMO Decision (b) Opportunism (c)
Independent Variables Proposed Results Proposed DEMO Proposed Results
Financial
Personal investment (H1)
Experience and managerial factors
DEMO experience (H2)
Prior self-employment (H3)
Own other businesses (DEMO)
Manage operations (H5)
Demographic factors
Age (H6)
Gender (H7)
Education (H8)
Ethnicity (H9)
Marital status (DEMO)
Attitude toward business
Perceived innovativeness (H11)
Desire for personal DEMO (H12)
Seek work related challenges (H13)
Personal commitment to business (H14)
Business risk taking (H15)
a Signiﬁcant at DEMO; b signiﬁcant at 0.05; c signiﬁcant at 0.01; * change DEMO sign from the hypothesized direction and statisti-
cally signiﬁcant.
When the ATB dimensions were regressed on satisfaction with the business deci-
sion, two independent variables were signiﬁcant: perceived innovativeness and personal
commitment to the business. Age of business was also signiﬁcant and positively related
to the dependent variable. DEMO the signiﬁcant variables were positively related to the
dependent variable (Table DEMO). The explained variance (R 2) for this model was 47.8%
and the regression was signiﬁcant at the p , 0.001 level.
In DEMO ﬁnal model, the ATB dimensions were added to the predictors in DEMO ﬁrst
model. In the third model, including the ATB dimensions with DEMO traditional factors
provided the test for H1b–H15b. This model yielded a substantial increase in R 2 over the
ﬁrst model (9% vs. 52%). All the variables that were signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst two regression
models DEMO signiﬁcant in the third model, except the “owning other businesses” vari-
DEMO which dropped out. The directions of the relationships that were signiﬁcant were
consistent across all the models except personal investment, where the direction of the
relationship was contradictory to the predicted hypothesis (H1b). The other hypotheses
that were supported were H8b, H11b, and H14b. The signiﬁcant DEMO in ex-
plained variance of the third model compared to ﬁrst model supported H16. All other
variables were insigniﬁcant in the third model.
T. DEMO AND J.R. NEVIN
Table of Proposed Relationships and Results
12 1 2 2 2
11c 11 2 2
11 1 1 2 2
22 DEMO 2 1 2
11 1 2 2 1
22 2 2 1 2b*
22 2 1c* 11a
12 1 2 2 2
11 1 DEMO 2 2
12 1 2 2 2
11b 11b 22b
22 2 1 1 1
12 1 1 2 2b
11a 11a 22a
22 DEMO 2 1 1a
Franchisee Opportunism
In the third set of models, DEMO opportunism toward their franchisors was the
dependent variable. Among the traditional factors in the ﬁrst model, age was negatively
related and gender was positively related to the dependent variable. This means that
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
387
those franchisees who are older are less opportunistic DEMO the franchisor than those
who are younger, and men were found DEMO be more opportunistic toward their franchisors
than women. The variance explained by the model was only 1.7%.
When ATB dimensions were regressed on franchisee DEMO in the second
model, perceived innovativeness, seeking work-related challenges, and DEMO com-
mitment to the business were negatively related to franchisee opportunism, DEMO business
risk taking was positively related to franchisee opportunism. Those who perceive them-
selves as risk takers tend to be more opportunistic with the DEMO compared to those
who do not. The R 2 for the model was 11.7%.
In model three, when the ATB dimensions were added to the traditional factors
and regressed on franchisee opportunism, all the variables that were signiﬁcant in the
ﬁrst two models remained signiﬁcant in the third DEMO This model tested for hypothe-
ses H1c–H15c. The hypotheses that were supported were H6c, H7c, H11c, H13c, H14c,
and H15c. The DEMO variance was 13.6% and the regression was signiﬁcant at the
p , 0.001 level. Age of business did not have any signiﬁcant impact on DEMO dependent
variable in all the models.
DISCUSSION
Our study makes valuable contributions to the theory and practice of franchisee selec-
tion. This is the DEMO study that relates widely advocated selection criteria used by
franchisors in the selection of potential franchisees to outcome measures that are de-
sired by DEMO and suggested by agency theory. Furthermore, this study illustrates
the use DEMO prudent selection criteria as an input control strategy. It is clear that choosing
and implementing relevant selection criteria is of paramount importance for the DEMO
sor and the franchising system as a whole. This study shows that franchisee selection
criteria can explain a signiﬁcant portion of the variance in DEMO outcomes. These
selection criteria explain a high of 52% of the variance for satisfaction with the business
decision to a low of 13.6% of DEMO variance for franchisee opportunism. These results
substantiate our hypotheses that the selection criteria used in the study do explain sig-
niﬁcant variance in the DEMO variables. In addition, these results indicate that
franchisors should be able DEMO identify and select franchisees who are more likely to per-
ceive the relationship with franchisors to be more cooperative, to be more satisﬁed with
their business decision, and to behave less opportunistically by using these or similar
selection criteria. Franchisees with desirable characteristics can lower the agency costs
DEMO the franchisor in the form of less safeguarding and monitoring costs. Thus, controlling
the quality of the franchisees using appropriate selection criteria can improve the efﬁ-
ciency of the contractual relationship for the franchisor.
This study DEMO shows that franchisees’ ATB is an important construct to be used
in the selection process. ATB dimensions explained more variance in the dependent
variables DEMO traditional factors, and, therefore, our second hypothesis was substanti-
ated. DEMO the ﬁve dimensions used in the analyses, perceived innovativeness and personal
DEMO to the business were consistently signiﬁcant across all the models while
desire for personal development was insigniﬁcant in all the models. Wattel (1968–69)
concluded in his article that franchisors have been looking for industrious, hard-working
individuals and neglecting the individuals with creativity and innovation. It is important
DEMO franchisors should seriously consider franchisees with higher perceived innova-
tiveness. Strutton et al (1995) showed that when franchisors encourage franchisees to
388
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
be innovative the franchisees tend to DEMO the relationship as more cooperative. Most
franchisees are highly involved in the operations of their business and know about the
basics of their own DEMO more than the franchisors do (Ralston 1989). In addition,
DEMO franchisees can resolve their problems by creative means. Franchisors can
beneﬁt from these franchisees.
Personal commitment to business is an extremely important variable that DEMO a pos-
itive effect on the franchisee outcome variables. Franchisees who are dedicated to their
business view the relationship as more cooperative. From the DEMO perspective
his/her network of units as a system compete with other networks of franchised units.
When a franchisee views their franchise system as DEMO cooperative group, then they will
be likely to add to the DEMO and performance of the entire franchise system.
It is an interesting result that those franchisees who seek challenges at work were
found to be DEMO opportunistic with their franchisors. An interpretation would be that
franchisees who do not seek challenges at work can be opportunistic in their behavior
in DEMO to seek beneﬁts from the franchisor. Opportunistic behavior can be an easier
solution for the franchisees than taking up challenges at work.
Business risk-taking DEMO was found to have no effect on cooperation and satis-
faction with the business decision, but, interestingly, it has a signiﬁcant positive effect
on franchisee opportunism. Franchisees who perceive themselves to be risk-takers
seems to DEMO opportunistic also. We deﬁned risk-takers as those who gamble in their
decisions without investing in more information seeking efforts. Franchisors should
make every effort DEMO recruit only franchisees who take calculated risk and not gamblers.
We can also infer from the results that most of the traditional factors were DEMO
to have little or no inﬂuence over the desired outcomes investigated in this study. In
the ﬁnancial capability category, personal investment was negatively related to satisfac-
tion with business decisions. This ﬁnding means that those franchisees DEMO have in-
vested a greater proportion from their personal savings are less satisﬁed with their busi-
ness decision to invest in franchising. This could DEMO occur because these
franchisees might have higher expectations from their business relationships with
the franchisor.
Prior experience had a signiﬁcant positive effect on the DEMO of perceived cooper-
ation in the relationship with the franchisor. It could be that franchisees who have prior
experience with a similar business know DEMO about what it takes to run a business.
They may really appreciate the support provided by the franchisor and thus view the
relationship with DEMO franchisor to be more cooperative. Other criteria such as prior
self-employment, DEMO other businesses, and personally managing day-to-day opera-
tions do not contribute DEMO the perceived outcomes of the franchisees. This result is inter-
esting because the franchising literature suggests that those who were self-employed
prior to becoming DEMO tend to be a better choice. It also fails to support the
conventional wisdom that franchisees who manage the day-to-day operations of the
franchise DEMO have higher outcome levels.
In the demographics category, age, education, DEMO, and marital status have
no effect on the outcomes. A debated DEMO in franchising is whether to select a more
educated or a less educated franchisee prospect. This study indicates that education is
not really related DEMO the outcomes of franchisees. Age and gender have a signiﬁcant
effect on franchisee’s opportunism. The interpretation is franchisees who are older are
less opportunistic DEMO younger franchisees. Similarly, men are more opportunistic than
women. In addition, gender also has a signiﬁcant positive effect on satisfaction with the
business DEMO It seems that men are more satisﬁed than women. Franchisors should
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
389
give consideration to the importance of the outcome DEMO and act accordingly in
their choice of the franchisees.
Finally, age DEMO business, which is used as a control variable, has an interesting rela-
tionship with the outcome measures. Age of business has no impact DEMO cooperation or
opportunism of the franchisees but has a positive effect on satisfaction with the business.
This ﬁnding illustrates that franchisees with older businesses DEMO more satisﬁed with
their business. Even though the number of years in business has been restricted to three
years, there is some life cycle effect in the relationship between the franchisee and
the franchisor.
MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
DEMO study shows the importance of using certain selection criteria as a key input control
strategy for franchisors. Controlling the input by selectively choosing individuals DEMO
on a set of tested selection criteria can improve the short and long-term outcomes of
the franchisees and thereby reduce the agency costs. This DEMO shows that a franchisee’s
attitudes toward business may serve as good indicators of franchisee outcomes. Speciﬁ-
cally, selecting individuals who have a high score on perceived innovativeness, and a
high personal commitment to the business would likely enhance their outcomes in the
franchise system.
These empirical ﬁndings provide DEMO support for the use of selection crite-
ria to screen prospective franchisees based on their likely outcomes. Franchisors who
either do not use formal DEMO criteria or use only the conventional selection criteria
can expect to improve their selection process through the use of prospective franchisees’
attitudes towards business. DEMO would be wise to benchmark their existing fran-
chisees on outcomes and identify critical selection criteria that lead to superior out-
comes. Franchisors should DEMO use those identiﬁed selection criteria in recruiting and
selecting new franchisees.
This study indicates that a franchisee’s attitudes toward business are more impor-
tant DEMO predicting desired outcomes than traditional selection factors typically used by
franchisors. A recent article on hiring the right employees to care for the customers,DEMO
claims that employers should screen prospective employees on their attitudes rather
than their skills (The Economist 1997). It seems that attitudes can seldom be taught,
but skills can be instilled after hiring the employee. DEMO ﬁndings support that attitudes
are very important and that an assessment of prospective franchisees should incorporate
appropriate attitude measures.
The methodology used in this DEMO could be employed by the franchisors to evalu-
ate their prospective franchisees. Franchisors can also validate the aggregate ﬁndings
in this study by using DEMO measures to study their existing franchisees. In this way,
franchisors can tailor their selection criteria to their experiences within their own fran-
chise DEMO The use of effective franchisee screening criteria should improve the suc-
cess rate of new franchisees and lessen the long-term dependence on monitoring as DEMO
means of controlling franchisee behavior.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
We caution readers that there are several constraints to the generalizability of these
results. First, we investigated the selection criteria using ongoing franchisees from ﬁve
of the DEMO franchise business categories. Thus, this sample frame obviously does not
390
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
include franchisees who were already out DEMO business. There is therefore a bias in the
sample frame used in the study. It is also important to recognize that the measures devel-
DEMO were relevant also to prospective franchisees. Some might argue that there is an
experience effect that could inﬂuence the attitudes and performance of the DEMO
We tried to remove the experience effect by limiting the study to only franchisees who
are in business three years or less and by DEMO controlling for the experience effect statis-
tically in the models by controlling for the age of business. In addition, ATB variables
were found to be extremely stable over the age of business. This does not negate DEMO
fact that this study’s ﬁndings need to be validated using prospective franchisees in a
longitudinal study. The measures used in this study could be DEMO modiﬁed to evaluate
the prospective franchisees. But given the importance of the topic and the dearth of
studies linking the selection criteria and franchisee DEMO, this study is an impor-
tant ﬁrst step toward a fruitful DEMO Second, even though the outcome measures were
all measured from the DEMO perspective, the outcomes have signiﬁcant impor-
tance to the franchisors. Finally, the measures for personal commitment and risk had
relatively low reliability, with as of 0.67 and 0.58 respectively. Better measures may
affect the nature DEMO the strength of these ﬁndings.
In this study, only a limited DEMO of selection criteria were tested for a relation-
ship with the franchisee outcome measures. Future studies should include other relevant
criteria that might be DEMO in explaining franchisee outcomes. For example, ATB
dimensions are only one DEMO of the attitudes/personality of an individual franchisee.
Other potential attitudinal and personality factors should be explored in an effort to
improve explanatory power. DEMO remain as to how the prospective franchisee’s
entrepreneurial inclination and ability to win respect from others would inﬂuence fran-
chisee performance.
We operationalized ﬁnancial DEMO as the proportion of the initial investment
dollars which came from the franchisee’s own personal savings. Other possible sources
of investment are: credit or bank loans and funds from family and friends. These differ-
ent types DEMO investment may have different effects on the franchisee’s performance.
The results from this study show that franchisees with a higher score on risk taking
DEMO more opportunistic with their franchisors. This topic deserves further exploration.
We operationalized risk taking behavior similar to gambling. Risk-taking can also be
deﬁned as DEMO more in the business. Agency theory suggests the franchisees who
take more risk by investing more in the business can reduce the agency costs DEMO the
franchisor (Brickley and Dark 1987). This operationalization of risk DEMO to be fur-
ther explored.
Finally, male and female franchisees had DEMO levels of opportunism toward
their franchisors and satisfaction with the business decision. The reason why this oc-
curred is unclear. Do the different genders DEMO different expectations for themselves,
or tolerance ranges for their franchisor’s behavior? These are some of the interesting
questions that can be investigated in future research.
REFERENCES
Achorl, R.S. 1996. The franchise as a network organization. Society of Franchising Proceedings
II. In Ann Dugan, ed. Honolulu: Society DEMO Franchising.
Anderson, E., Lodish, L., and Weitz, B. 1987. DEMO of continuity in conventional indus-
trial channels. Journal of Marketing Research 24(February):85–97.
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
391
Armstrong, J.S. and Overton, T.S. 1977. Estimating DEMO bias in mail surveys. Journal
of Marketing Research 14(August):396–403.
DEMO, N.D. and Rudnick, L.G. 1987. Franchising: A Planning and Sales DEMO Guide.
Chicago: Commerce Clearing House Inc.
Bergen, M., Dutta, S., and Walker, O.C. Jr. 1992. Agency relationships in marketing: A review
of the implications and applications of agency and related theories. Journal of DEMO
ing 56(July):1–24.
Brickley, J.A. and Dark, F.H. 1987. DEMO choice of organizational form: The case of franchising.
Journal of Financial DEMO 18:401–420.
Campbell, D.T. 1955. The informant in qualitative research. American DEMO of Sociology
60:339–342.
Churchill, G.A. Jr. 1979. A paradigm for DEMO better measures of marketing constructs.
Journal of Marketing Research 16(February):DEMO
The Economist. 1997. Service with a smile: How to get your DEMO to care about their custom-
ers? (July 12th):55.
Edens, F.N., Self, D.R., and Grider D.R. Jr. 1976. Franchisors describe ideal franchisee. Journal
of Small Business Management (July):39–47.
Eisenhardt, K.M. 1985. Control: Organizational and economic approaches. Management Sci-
ences 31(2):134–149.
DEMO, A. 1993. The Corporate Paradox. London: Routledge.
Franchise Times, October DEMO:39.
Franchise World, July/October 1978:14
Franchising in the Economy DEMO 1992. Chicago: Arthur Anderson & Co.
Gartner, W. 1985. Entrepreneur or self-made. Business (May):55.
Gassenheimer, J.B., Baucus, D.B., and DEMO, M.S. 1996. Cooperative arrangement among en-
trepreneurs: An analysis of opportunism and communication in franchise structures. Jour-
nal of Business Research 36:67–79.
DEMO, D.W. and Anderson, J.C. 1988. An update paradigm for scale development incorporat-
ing unidimensionality and its assessment. Journal of Marketing Research 25(May):186–92.
Heide, J.B. and Miner, A.S. 1992. The shadow of the DEMO: Effects of anticipated interaction
and frequency of contact on buyer-seller cooperation. DEMO of Management Jour-
nal 35(2):265–291.
Hing, N. (1995)DEMO Franchisee satisfaction: Contributors and consequences. Journal of Small Busi-
ness Management DEMO(2):12–25.
Hunt, S.D. and Nevin, J.R. 1974. Power in DEMO channel of distribution: Sources and consequences.
Journal of Marketing Research 11(DEMO):186–93.
John, G. 1984. An empirical examination of some antecedents of opportunism in a marketing
channel. Journal of Marketing Research 21(August):278–289.
John, G. and Reve, T. 1982. The reliability and validity of DEMO informant data from dyadic relation-
ships in marketing channels. Journal of Marketing Research 19(November):517–524.
Justis, R. and Judd, R. 1989. Franchising. Cincinnati: South-Western Publishing Co.
Justis, R.T., Olsen, O.E., and Chan, P. 1993. Using marketing research to enhance franchisee/
franchisor relationships. Journal of Small Business Management 31(2):121–127.
Kaufmann, P.J. and Stanworth, J. 1995. The decision to purchase a franchise: A study of prospec-
tive franchisees. Journal of Small Business Management 33(October):22–33.
Lambert, DEMO and Harrington, T.C. 1990. Measuring non-response bias in customer service mail
DEMO Journal of Business Logistics 11(2):5–25.
Lewis, C.M. and Lambert, D.M. 1991. A model of channel member performance, dependence,
and DEMO Journal of Retailing 67(2):205–225.
Lusch, R.F. 1977. Franchisee satisfaction: Causes and consequences. International Journal of
Physical Distribution 7(February):128–140.
392
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
Morgan, R. and Hunt, S. DEMO, The commitment-trust theory of relationship marketing. Journal
of Marketing 58(July):20–38.
Norton, S.W. 1988. An empirical look at franchising as an organizational form. Journal of Busi-
ness 61(2):197–218.
Olm, K.W., Eddy, G.G., and Adaniya, A.R. 1988. Selecting franchisee prospects. Society of Fran-
chising Proceedings II. San Francisco: Society of Franchising.
Owen, T. 1989. DEMO for future growth, Small Business Report 14(2):30–34.
O’Donnell, DEMO 1984. Franchising: No entrepreneurs need to apply. Forbes (Dec. 3):DEMO
Poe, R. 1990. Take the franchise test: Seven traits of the perfect franchisee. Success 37(8):62–66.
Poe, R. 1991. Self-reliance: Sacriﬁce and persistence lead to franchise success. Success 38
(10):63–69.
Ralston, J. 1989. Franchisees who think big. Venture 11(3):55–57.
Roberts, DEMO and O’Reilly, C. 1974. Failure in upward communication in organizations: Three
possible culprits. Academy of Management Journal 17(June):205–215.
Rubin, P. DEMO The theory of the ﬁrm and the structure of the franchise contract. Journal of
Law and Economics 21(April):223–233.
Stern, R.L. and DEMO, R. 1991. Franchise hell. Forbes (Sept. 2):152–153.
Strutton, D., Pelton, L.E., and Lumpkin, J.R. 1995. Psychological climate in franchising DEMO chan-
nels and franchisor-franchisee solidarity. Journal of Business Research 34(October):DEMO
Tatham, R., Douglass, R., and Bush, R.F. 1972. An DEMO of decision criteria in franchisor/
franchisee selection processes. Journal of Retailing 48(1):16–21, 94.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1991. Franchise Opportunities DEMO Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Wattel, H. 1968–69. Are franchisors realistic and successful in their selection of franchisees? Jour-
nal of Retailing 44(4):54–68.
Weinrauch, D. 1986. Franchising an established business. Journal DEMO Small Business Manage-
ment 24(3):1–7.
Whittemore, M. 1994. Less a parent more a partner. Nation’s Business 82(3):49–57.
Williamson, DEMO 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New York:
DEMO Press.
Williamson, O.E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press.
Withane, S. 1991. Franchising and franchisee behavior: An DEMO of opinions, personal
characteristics, and motives of Canadian franchisee entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Busi-
ness Management 29(1):22–29.
APPENDIX A
MEASURES
Attitudes Toward Business (ATB) Dimensions
A. Perceived Innovativeness Items: a5 0.73
(DEMO items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly Disagree–Strongly Agree”)
1. Franchisees should provide leadership in new product development
2. The success of my franchise DEMO on constantly improving our products/services
3. Franchisees should provide leadership in new operating procedure development.
4. In my franchise, we emphasize the promotion of new innovative products/services.
B. Desire for Personal Development Items: a5 0.78
(3 items, 4-point Likert Scale, “No Inﬂuence–Extensive Inﬂuence”)
How much inﬂuence each of the following personal goals had on your decision DEMO
purchase this franchise:
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
393
1. To advance my career
2. To develop DEMO skills
3. To express interests
C. Seek Work-Related Challenges Items: a5 DEMO
(3 items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly Disagree–Strongly Agree”)
1. DEMO look for challenges at work.
2. I think a lot about how to improve my chances for getting ahead.
3. I get a thrill DEMO of confronting challenges at work.
D. Personal Commitment to the Business Items: a5 0.67
(4 items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly Disagree—Strongly Agree”)DEMO
1. I have to work long hours, but I don’t mind DEMO it helps the franchise.
2. This franchise is the most important thing in my life right now.
3. A failure to make proﬁt next DEMO wouldn’t decrease my excitement about
this franchise.
4. I am very committed to this franchise.
E. Business Risk-Taking Items: a5 0.58
(4 items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly Disagree—Strongly Agree”)
1. My business strategy is characterized by a strong tendency to undertake high-
risk projects.
2. A DEMO should only take risks in areas that it knows well. (R)DEMO
3. Research is important before making a risky decision. (R)
DEMO I am a gambler—it is impossible to plan for the future.
Financial Capability
1. Personal Investment Item:
Percent of your initial investment dollars DEMO came from personal savings
Experience and Management Skills
1. Prior Experience
Experience in similar business before buying this franchise
(1 item, 4-point Likert DEMO, No experience–Extensive experience)
2. Prior Self-Employment
Were you self-employed? No 5 0, Yes 5 1.
3. Own Other Businesses
Are you engaged in other business ventures in addition to this franchised business?
No DEMO 0, Yes 5 1.
4. Manage Operations
Do you manage day DEMO day operations? No 5 0, Yes 5 1.
Demographics
1. Age
In what year were you born?
2. Gender
What is your DEMO? Female 5 0, Male 5 1.
394
T. JAMBULINGAM AND J.R. NEVIN
3. Education
Excluding kindergarten, how many years of formal education have you completed?
4. Ethnicity
Which ethnic DEMO do you consider yourself a member of?
(American Indian or DEMO Native, Asian or Paciﬁc Islander, Black, Hispanic,
White, Other)
Majority (White) 5 1, Minority (All other groups) 5 0.
5. Marital Status
What is your current marital status? Unmarried 5 0, Married 5 1.
Franchisee Relationship and Business Outcome Measures
I. Cooperation Items: Overall a5 0.92
(10 items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly DEMO Agree”)
A. Information Exchange: a5 0.85
1. Exchange of information DEMO this relationship takes place frequently and in-
formally and not only according to prespeciﬁed agreement.
2. In our relationship, it is expected that any information that might help the
other parrty will be provided to them.
DEMO In this relationship, it is expected that parties will provide conﬁdential DEMO
mation if it can help the other party.
B. Flexibility: a5 DEMO
1. Flexibility in response to requests for changes is a characteristics of our rela-
tionship.
2. The ability to make adjustments in order to DEMO with changing circum-
stances is a characteristic of our relationship.
3. My franchisor and I are open to modifying our agreements if unexpected
events DEMO
C. Problem Solving: a5 0.82
1. When problems occur, I can easily ﬁnd a mutually agreeable solution with
my franchisor.
2. My franchisor DEMO makes an honest attempt to work out problems be-
tween us.
3. My franchisor is very unwilling to settle disputes with me (R)
4. Disagreements with my franchisor are usually solved by one-sided, “take
it or leave it” solutions proposed by the franchisor (R)
II. Franchisee Opportunism: a5 0.88
(7 items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly Disagree–Strongly DEMO)
1. I sometimes alter facts slightly in order to gain the cooperation of my franchisor
2. I sometimes explicitly promise to do things DEMO by my franchisor without
actually doing them later.
3. I sometimes withhold information that would help my franchisor to run his
business.
4. I DEMO not always share information in a timely manner with my franchisor.
5. I sometimes make vague promises to my franchisor that I later ignore.
DEMO I sometimes purposely withhold information that would put me in a bad light.
7. I sometimes tell my franchisor what I think he wants DEMO hear instead of telling
him the truth.
FRANCHISEE SELECTION CRITERIA
395
III. Satisfaction with the Business Decision Items: a5 0.91
(4 items, 5-point Likert Scale, “Strongly Disagree–Strongly Agree”)
1. I made the right decision when I invested in this franchise.
2. DEMO I had it to do over again, I would still purchase DEMO franchise.
3. If my franchise agreement was up for renewal today, DEMO have no hesitation
about renewing it.
4. I plan to renew my franchise agreement when it next expires.{1g42fwefx}